THE Fullness and Freeness OF GODS GRACE IN CHRIST DECLARED. Namely, How God
Orders and appoints Men to their final ends; some to Honor, some to Dishonor to
Eternity. The Second Part.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, for John Clark and Miles Mitchel, and are
to be sold at their shops in Mercers Chapel, and in Westminster Hall, 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THis Treatise, The First Part was printed. 1642.
being the Second Part of Gods Free and Full Grace and favor to miserable man.
In this Second Part is handled this point, What is Gods final End for which he
made both Men and Angels, together with all things in Heaven and in Earth
subservient to them, their use and benefit; and also, that in pursuance of his
final End, he does Order and appoint both men and Angels to their Final Ends,
according to their Works, good or bad, some for Honor, some for Dishonor to
Eternity; and it is granted on all sides, that God does order and appoint them
thereunto. But all the Question and Controversy is, how he does order and
appoint them thereunto, Wherefore I have endeavored to help where most need is,
for then and there help is most seasonable, and whereas my former Treatise is
something obscure by reason of the depth and height of the point there handled;
namely, Election and Reprobation, and that in both Treatises; I deny personal
Election and personal Reprobation without respect to Faith or Works, good or
bad: and this way goes Reverend Calvin and others. Also I deny any Election of
any man or men personally to Eternal life, infallibly upon Gods foresight of
their perseverance in Faith and Works to the End, as that Reverend man Arminius
and others, for the Truth in sacred Scripture falls between both these two
mistakes, yet to the Learned and Intelligent Reader that has his mind and wits
exercised in Divine Mysteries, it is not obscure; for before I printed that
First Part, I presented my Manuscript to three Grave, Reverend, and godly
Divines to have their judgments upon it; namely, Dr. Twist, Dr. Gouge, and Mr.
Gataker, and they all understood it clearly with much ease, for one of them
said unto me, that you in that Treatise say all that we do, but stay not there,
but say a great deal more; my Answer was, because you say not enough to the
depth of the fall of man in the first Adam, nor to the raising of the World,
and all mankind by the second Adam; therefore I must say more then you, and
the height and depth of this point in this manner handled, is it that makes it
obscure to some that will not studiously take pains to understand it, but in
this second part I have brought it as low and plain as I can to the
Understanding of all men, as the nature of the point will admit; and Gentle
Reader, I wish thee as much good in reading it, as I have had in studying and
writing it, Farewell,

Thine in Jesus Christ, FRANCIS DUKE.

The Contents of the several Chapters in the ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. I. IN this Chapter by way of Introduction, two things are premised,
first in what sense known unto God are all his works; secondly, what is Gods
final end for which he made all things, that is both men and Angels, together
with all his works subservient to them, and their use. page 1 CHAP. II. In this
Chapter is proved that God made seven means to accomplish his final end; six
whereof are briefly handled in this Chapter, p 7 CHAP. III. In this Chapter is
briefly handled the fall of man by way of Introduction to that which follows,
p. 12 CHAP. IV. In this Chapter is proved, That God gave being to the seventh
means to carry on and accomplish his final end. p. 15 CHAP. V. In this Chapter
is proved the manifold Wisdom of God in six particulars, in pursuance of his
final end, p. 20 CHAP. VI. In which is opened the second Branch propounded,
That as Adams unrighteousness in its guilt and punishment by God imputatively
in the feign Mass was extended unto all mankind, even so in that fallen Mass the
righteousness of the seed of the woman was by God imputatively extended to all
wankind to justification of life, that is, to put them in a posture in which
they may receive his said gift of life eternal, or to be either as is said. p.
31. CHAP. VII. In this Chapter is handled the first ingredient to make up the
said posture, namely, that immediately upon the said universal imputation; God
by the Spirit of Christ did put or infuse an internal disposedness naturally in
all mankind toward himself hereditarily to descend through all Generations, p.
36 CHAP. VIII. In this Chapter is handled the second ingredient to make up the
said posture, That is, the Spirit of Christ strives with the spirits of all men
in the world universally to depress the seed of Original Sin in them, and to
preserve and increase the said disposedness to God in them, p. 42 CHAP. IX. In
this Chapter is handled the third and last ingredients which makes up the said
posture; namely, that God immediately upon the fall of man gave a rule suitable
to all men to work and operate by, in reference to his final end upon all men,
p. 54 CHAP. X. In which is proved that the Spirit of Christ strived with the
spirits of Noah's posterity which were confounded and scattered at Babel in
their succeeding Generations, to preserve them in a narrow way to eternal life.
p. 59 CHAP. XI. In which is handled the third particular in the said Rule,
namely, to let all men see how suitable this Rule is to them. p. 70 CHAP. XII.
In which is handled the sixth Branch of the manifold wisdom of God formerly
propounded in the fifth Chapter, namely, the Execution of Gods final End upon
all men, some to honor, and some to dishonor, by the said Tenor of the
Gospel, according to their works, good or bad, to men without the Church, and
to men within the Church visible, yea and the invisible members of Christ. p.
78 CHAP. XIII. In which is proved, how God ordained and executed his final end
upon all the Angels to their final ends for ever, according to their works,
some to honor, some to dishonor. p. 37 CHAP. XIV. Containing some useful
Observations and Answers to Questions for further clearing the precedent
Premises.
CHAP. I. In this Chapter by way of Introduction two things are premised, First
in what sense known to God are all his Works; Secondly what is Gods final End,
for which he made all things, that is both Men and Angels, and all his Works
subordinate to them and their use.
IT is affirmed in the Text, Acts 15.18.
That from the beginning of the World God knows all his Works; Now all Gods
Works whatsoever as his, had a threefold beginning, and may be comprehended in
three particulars;

First the Angels, and the Heaven of Heavens their own habitation.

Secondly, This inferior World, Man's Habitation, and his preservation.

Thirdly, This Worlds restoration by redemption. And these three comprehend all
the Works of God, and every one had a threefold beginning known to God: as
concerning the first, namely, Angels, it will be handled in the thirteenth
Chapter.

Secondly this inferior World, and Man its principal part, had a threefold
beginning; First from its original Fountain, Gods own Essence its potential and
virtual productive cause; and so this World in all its parts, Man the chief,
was in God; Heb. 7.9, 10.
as Levy was when he was not, but in Abraham's loins potentially: And as that
virtue was in Christ which healed the woman of the bloody Issue before it was
extended to her health; and as a Rose is in its root in Winter, when it is not
existent; so this World in all its parts, had its first beginning in Gods
Essence, its potentiall, virtual, and productive cause; and therefore this
beginning must needs be known to God, it being so in himself.

The second beginning of the world, not in time, but in the order of Nature,
was the second step of God to all his Works, namely the Council of his own
Will; for the Text says, He works all things after the Council of his own
Will, Ephesians. 1.11.
and so the world was framed in all its parts before it was created; and so
known to God in this beginning, it being also in himself.

The third beginning of the World was, when God reduced the said potency and
council as he purposed in himself, Genesis i. to verse last.
to the production of the Creation in all its parts, by his Creative word, as
appears in Genesis.

Secondly, Gods work of Redemption and Restoration of the World by Christ,
when the Creation in all its parts in Adams transgression deservedly fell into
corruption, vanity, and bondage, but not to its depth, because God immediately
did interpose the imputation of Adams unrighteousness upon the whole world in
all its parts, Psalm. 145.9. Romans 5.18.
with the imputative satisfactory righteousness of Christ, the second Adam, and
so extended his tender mercies over all his works in this inferior world, Romans
8. from 18 to 24.
and so put the whole creation into a posture of traveling from that bondage
of corruption unto now, until the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; for
this travel arises not from its own will or natural instinct, but by God who
has subdued it by Christ's aforesaid righteousness; and this work of God had a
threefold beginning as well as the Creation; for it is manifest by the Oracles
of God, that Christ the seed of the woman was from Gods potency and his
council, as is employed in that he was fore. ordained to be the Redeemer in time
before the world was; and it is also employed that then God looked upon man as
in the fallen Mass in Adams loins, as under blame, unholy, 2 Timothy 1.9.
and an object not lovely: For says the Text, He chose us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in
love, so that he saved us and called us with one holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given to us
through Jesus Christ before the world was, 1 Pet. 1.10.
which God that cannot lie has promised before the world began; Prove. 8.22,
23, 24.
Therefore the great work of the worlds restoration, had the aforesaid
threefold beginning, and is and was so known from the beginning to God: 2 Timothy
1.9.
and from the premises thus proved, it clearly follows, that not only the
innumerable number of men and Angels were known to God before they or the world
did exist, Tit. 1.2.
but also all their arbitrary motions, operations, and contingent workings, and
all contingent events were known to God, as certain and not contingent to him,
Heb. 1.2.
as that the Angels would apostate from their own habitation and tempt man, and
that man also would apostate from his first estate, and that from two
particulars: First from man's remissness to Gods word and rule: Secondly from
the natural liberty of his will, implanted in him by God, which consists in
this, to choose and refuse all objects as it likes, or as it likes them not.

From this ground it is that man in his innocence might or might not sin, and
so the ground how God permitted sin to be both in men and Angels, and the
ground of all contingency in their operations, events and contingencies: And
therefore when God would make a means to carry on his final end unchangeably,
he past by that contingent faculties in men and Angels, and pitched only upon
the seed of the woman personally God Man, ordained thereunto before the world,
as we see, and as will appear in its due place. Now the ground why God knows
all his works, as is proved, is this also; not only because he made all, but
also the whole Creation, with the innumerable company of men and Angels
together, with their contingent events in all their works, with all
circumstances amounts but to a finite thing or things, Romans 4.17.
and therefore to the infinite God are as nothing for him to know, who calls
things that are not, as if they were, who discerns the thoughts and intents
of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight;
Heb. 4.12, 13.
but all things are open and naked to his eyes; and says the Text, All the
Nations are as a drop of the bucket, and counted as the small dust of the
balance, he takes up the Isles as a very small thing, all Nations are before
him as nothing, and they are counted unto him less then nothing and vanity. And
therefore it was all one to God to know all things when they were not, as now
when they are, and are as nothing to him so much; for the first thing premised,
namely, In what sense known to God are all his works from the beginning of the
world.

The second thing premised is this, What Gods final end is for which he made
all things, namely both men and Angels, and all his creative works subservient
to them and their use; In brief, it is no more then this, that which is and
shall be upon men and Angels executed last, that was in creating all things by
God, in order of nature intended first, and that was his final end, whatsoever
it was. But more particular this is his final end, namely that he will make
both men and Angels by their use of all that he has endued them with, vessels
of honor, or vessels of dishonor to eternity, according to their works, good
or bad, by his rule made suitable to them. But as concerning men, I must
premise one thing before I come to the point, That is, all mankind departing
this world in infancy, or the like, are considered by God under another
capacity, for which I refer the Reader to my former Treatise of Free Grace,
Page 36. to 39 and 44. John 6.39. Rev. 10.6.
printed 1642. to the pages in the Margent.

But as concerning mankind, so to be made to honor and dishonor, as is
affirmed, the Scripture affirms its last execution and final consummation shall
be at the last day, Rev. 20.12, 13
that is after that day when time shall be no more, as now it is, in which day
the Text affirms, all the dead shall be raised and judged every man according
to his works, 2 Cor. 5.10.
for says another Text, We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done in his body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil; and that this shall
be executed last, it further appears by the words of our Savior, who says of
himself, When the Son of Man shall come and all his holy Angels with him, then
he shall sit upon the Throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all
Nations, Mat. 25.31, 32. to 46.
and he shall sever them as a shepherd divides the sheep from the Goats. And
he having instanced in one particular of works good and bad, as comprehending
the nature and kind of all their works, concludes all, namely, That the wicked
shall go into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life everlasting.
So much for the second thing premised, namely what Gods final end is, for which
he made or created all things, namely both men and Angels, and all his works
subservient unto them and their use; the further enlargement of this point will
fall in the following Chapters in its full proof, and what Gods suitable rule
to man is: Hence observe, that the moving cause why God created all his works,
was this final end, it being the ultimate end of all his glories centuring in
himself; for which he made all things; yea the wicked for the day of evil,
because they all attempt to assume his glory, not to him, but to themselves,
which he will not give unto another, as will appear more in its due place.

CHAP. II. In which is made known a sevenfold means to Gods foresaid final end,
whereof six are handled in this Chapter.
THe which End in order of Nature in Gods intention was first, and in execution
last, and the means in Gods intention in order of nature last, but in execution
first; Therefore the first thing that God did, he gave being to means for his
final end, and they primarily were seven, some more remote and general, and
some more near and more particular.

The first means more remote and general, was this inferior world, as included
in its remotest matter, which God did make out of no preexistent matter, as
Heb. 11.3. and says another Text, The earth was without form, and void, Heb.
11.3.
and darkness was upon the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters;
and yet the first verse names it by the name of heaven and earth; and the
ground of it is this, because that confused lump was the preexistent matter of
heaven and earth, and all things else; and the ground of that is this, because
the spirit of God by its moving filled it with an intrinsical vigorous
disposedness to be whatsoever God by his Creative Will and Word would command
it to be: Rev. 4.11.
Wherefore when he commanded light out of that darkness, Genesis 1, 2, 3.
it presently was; then says the Text, God said, Let there be light, and it
was so.

Then God commanded a Firmament to be in the midst of the waters, and the
waters to be separated from the waters, that is, the water under the Firmament,
from the waters that were above the Firmament, and God called the Firmament
Heaven, verse 6, 7, 8. Then he commanded the waters to one place, and so the
earth to be for use as now it is, verse 9, 10.

Then he commanded the life and being of all vegitable creatures, and it was
so, verse 11, 12. Then he commanded to be the Sun, Moon, and Stars in their
orderly course and warbling influence to fall on the earth, and for signs and
seasons, and succession of days and nights, and it was so, verse 14. to 19.

Then he commanded the innumerable number of all sensative creatures, to live
and move and have their being, from verse 20. to 25.

Thus God gave being to the first means more remote and general to his final
end.

Then God gave being to a second means more near and more particular, the
principal part of the Creation: Namely, man, whose personal existency was in a
twofold nature, the one sensible, the other an intellectual spirit, or rational
soul: The first was his elementary body of earth for a time a lifeless trunk,
but God staid not there, for says the Text, And breathed in his nostrils the
breath of life, Genesis 2.7.
and man became a living soul.

And because he was a principal part, the whole did terminate in his
nutrimental support, some to feed, some to cloth, the air to imbreath, and the
earth to bear, and the sweet influence and aspects of the heavenly bodies to
his delight.

Again, because the chief part therein God put the whole to depend on his
operations, not for his being, but for its well or woe; and therefore the whole
creation together with himself, fell into the aforesaid vanity, bondage and
corruption; and man thus made, was Gods second means, for man must first be,
and so supported to be, before he could be to honor or dishonor to Gods
foresaid final end.

Again, man's reasonable soul being of an immortal nature, and so of an
everlasting duration, was therefore a third means suitable to Gods final end,
that is, to be to honor or dishonor to eternity, which could not be; if he
were not of an everlasting duration.

From this ground it is that man's dead body shall be raised and spirituallized;
therefore when some men denied the immortality of their souls, and consequently
the everlasting duration thereof, our Lord proved to them the truth thereof:
Have you not read what was spoken unto you of God, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living: Affirmatively inferring to them that those three men
then were, and now are living, though their bodies are dead and turned to dust.
Mat. 22.31, 32.
Again God having endued man's reasonable soul with two natural faculties, his
understanding and will, the understanding its natural property to look to
truth, as really such, or as it appears so to be, and to judge, and accordingly
so to operate the whole man: and to the will, Two things are natural to it, the
one is, that it does follow a good, as the eye does follow the light, that is
the true good, or as it appears so to be, the other is to nil and will, that is
to choose and refuse all objects as it likes, or as it likes them not; and so
from this understanding and will, man from his own council and voluntary
choice, terminates all his works; wherefore it is a righteous thing in God to
judge man according to his own works, good or bad; and therefore God made these
twofold faculties, a fourth means to his said final end: Again God implanted in
man's internal knowable power in his first estate, the Law of Nature, that was
naturally to love God above all, and his neighbor as himself, arising in man
also by Gods demonstrating his truth and goodness to man in the whole frame of
nature; in all, through all and above all, and so man was internally disposed
to work aright to any rule that God should make suitable to him, and therefore
this Law of Nature was a fifth means to Gods said final end; for says the
Text, Col. 3.10. Genesis 1.27.
Man was renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him; but for
a further enlargement of this Law of Nature, I refer the Reader to the first
Chapter of my former Treatise. Again a sixth means to the said final end, is,
that before the fall God instituted a rule suitable to man, I say instituted by
Gods own word of truth, namely, not to eat of the fruit of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil upon pain of death, and here man's will might nil the
evil of sin, and the evil of punishment; and here man's understanding might
adhere to truth, that is, the truth of God, Genesis 2.9 17.
and here his will might choose a good, that is, the good of obeying Gods
command, and also the good of eternal life, employed in that word, Knowledge of
good, and also in the name of that Tree of life. So thus by this rule God
ordained to make man in the estate of innocence, a vessel of honor or
dishonor to eternity, according to his works, good or bad, and so we are come
to Gods final end, for which he made all things; I now should come to the
seventh means, but I must first in brief touch upon the fall of man, by way of
Introduction, and so come unto it in the fourth Chapter.

CHAP. III. In this Chapter is brifly touched Man's fall by way of Introduction
to the seventh means to Gods final End.
THe fall of man was from God in his truth, the chiefest good to the Apostate
Angels lies: and so to the deepest evil, for by this he lost all relation to
God, but to live, move and be, as have the Devils and damned, and became one
with the Apostate Angels, not in their angelical nature, but their diabolical
nature, and deserved damnation to eternity; for men and Angels became Devils,
not by loss or change of their essence or natures, but by change of their
intentions and operations from Gods rules of truth, John 8.44.
to their own lies.

But I must in a word premise one thing before I go any further; that is, God
in Scripture names the innumerable company of Apostate Angels, as if they were
all but one; as by the name of Devil, a Liar, a destroyer, that evil one, and
so forth; and the ground is no more but this, because they are all one in
intentions and operations, in their designs against Gods glory in this final
end.

Therefore when they saw or understood by Gods instituted Rule to man, that he
had thus laid the Platform of his Glory in his final end to eternity, Mar. 5.9.
1 John 3.8.
then they laid their Platform how to confound and frustrate Gods final end in
reference to his glory, in one particular branch, and that from a twofold
ground. First that branch was this, Rev, 12.9.
they envied man as being but a part of this inferior world, a sensative
creature, that he should be put in a posture by his operations to Gods rule,
and so in a possibility to rise to that glory which primitively was their own.

The second ground, because God justly for their sin rejected them from that
glory, and so stood reserved in Chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the
great day; therefore they attempted to spoil God of his glory, and as their end
led them to their means, so their means leads us to see that this was their
end; for because they knew man in respect of his body was a sensitive creature,
and therefore they were to man invisible, wherefore their first means was a
visible creature and subtly disposed; says the Text, Genesis 3.4.
Now the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field.

Their second means was the Serpents tongue, Number. 22.28.30
by actuating it as the good Angel did the Asses tongue, so to convey their
minds in speaking to the woman in that speech and language which God had made
natural and familiar to man; for the Text says, He said to the woman, yea has
God indeed said, ye shall not eat, and so forth.

Their third means was to wave the man in this business, because most strong,
Genesis 3.14. 1 Timothy 2.14.
and to pitch upon the woman, the weaker vessel, and so to compass the man by
her, the more unperceived by him.

Again, because the woman replied to the Serpent, Gods word from his instituted
rule; namely, that God has said, Ye shall not eat, and so forth. And by this
they did perceive that two things did interrupt and endanger their design: The
first was Gods word by his instituted rule; the second was the woman's credit or
belief, that she did or might give to it, because by the natural liberty of her
will, she might choose Gods word, and refuse theirs.

Therefore they betook themselves to a fourth means of their own; namely a Lie,
or Lies to prevent that danger of their desired end, wherefore by the Serpent
to the woman they said, Ye shall not die at all, implying unto her, there was
no truth in those words concerning their dying if they did eat of the forbidden
fruit, for God does know, in the day that ye shall eat thereof, that your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil, implying Gods
rule obeyed was the only thing that kept her from aspiring to so great a
happiness, therefore God is an imposter to you, and not to be believed, but
disobeyed for your own good upon these Lies; Genesis 3.6.
the woman looked on the Tree the more wishly; for the Text says, When the
woman saw the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant for the eyes,
and a Tree to be desired to make one wise, she hereupon wil'd the Devils lies,
and nil'd Gods truth, believing to operate to his instituted rule; for the Text
says, She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband
with her, and he did eat: Thus the Apostate Angels by their four means
accomplished their end, by frustrating Gods final End, in one main branch, as
they supposed, in the loss of his glory, and to his dishonor for ever, by
nulling his truth, in that all mankind together with themselves, might fall
into eternal misery, and so not one ever should aspire to eternal happiness
that glory over theirs: For in Adam all die, that is, eternally vessels of
dishonor. But for the further enlargement of the fall of man, I refer the
Reader to the third Chapter of my former Treatise; but now in this particle of
time when man fell, and the world with him, then God gave being to the seventh
means to carry on his final End, by the assent of humane nature, to eternal
glory, in his manifold wisdom, to the rebounding of his glory to all eternity,
notwithstanding what was done by the Apostate Angels, as will appear in the
next Chapter and Chapters following.

CHAP. IV. In this Chapter is proved that God gave being to the seventh means
to accomplish his final end.
IN this case, as is said, God passed by Men and Angels, because this means is
not man only, nor God only, but personally God Man, that is, the second in the
one God assumed, not the person of any man, but the nature of every man, as it
was said the seed of the woman. And this person by this personal union, was
made the the seventh means in the beginning of time, namely in that instant of
time in which the whole frame of Nature fell, by its principal part, as is
described, Genesis 3.15.
for then says God, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed, affirmatively concluding he shall break thy head; Luke
1.70.
so that this seventh means was then known by name, that is, the seed of the
woman. And thus God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the world
began; and accordingly when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his son made of a woman, and so forth. And because the Text
says, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, he tells us that himself was the
sole efficient of this means, for woman's seed was but the subject matter, and
no formal cause, nor man any efficiency in it, but God only and alone according
to his word to the Serpent; I will, and so forth. Wherefore when an Angel said
unto Mary, Luke 1.31, 32, 33, 34, 35.
Lo thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a son; Then said Mary unto the
Angel, How can this be, seeing I know not man? The Angel then tells her how,
saying, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high
shall overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
Heb. 1.4, 5, 6.
shall be called the Son of God. From this ground the Text says, Who shall
declare his generation? implying none but God himself, he being so much better
then the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name then
they; For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, thou art my son, this
day have I begotten thee. Again, when he brings in his first begotten into
the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him.





Secondly, The first begotten in priority of time, for he was the first born of
man from the dead fall of Adam, in that word of God when he threatened
destruction to the design of apostate Angels by woman's seed; and so the first
begotten from the dead fall of the whole frame of Nature, this was intimated by
God when he instituted the earths first fruits to be his, and of the beasts
which first opened the womb, to be his, and the firstborn of man to be his,
implying that Christ was the only firstborn from the dead of every creature in
an universal relation, and that he was the seventh means to destroy all the
apostate Angels foresaid means; and so to carry on Gods final end is clear. For
this purpose says the Text, was the Son of God manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil; and our Lord himself says, For this end was I
born, 1 Epist. Ioh. 3.8
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the
truth. The which truth may be considered negatively or affirmatively.

Negatively thus, That God never did, Ioh, 18.37.
nor now does intend glory to himself by man's operations, good or bad
everlastingly, but according to his rules made suitable to man.

Or affirmatively thus, That God really intended and still does, to return
glory to himself for ever by man's operations, good or bad, according to his
rule suitable to man, that is some to honor, and some to dishonor, according
to their works to all eternity; and not as the apostate Angels lyingly
affirmed, that God really intended neither; for we see they denied man should
die at all; and for life, God intended no such thing to us in our first
parents, as precedently is proved: Consequently it must follow from their lies,
as our Familistical Ranters affirm, that all shall be alike, that is, none
saved nor damned. John 8.44.
As the Scriptures affirm; But these filthy dreamers are the children of their
Father the Devil, whose works they will do. But for the further enlargement
how our Lord did witness the truth, and what that righteousness of his is which
is imputed to the world in general and to man believing the truth more special;
I refer the Reader to the eighth Chapter of my former Treatise, to the which
the fourth Chapter in the same Book will give much light.

Because the Text says, Observe.
God sent his Son in the fullness of time: Hence observe what is employed in
those words; namely, That it was full time then for God to send him, and for him
to com; because by that time the apostate Angels had not only seduc d Noa's
posterity by apostasy from that posture God put them in by Christ, to
Heathenish Idolatry universally, as in due place will appear, and also what that
posture was which they left, Romans 10, 11, 12
but also seduced Abraham's seed in the like apostasy, excepting some very few
of both sorts, by which Gods final end became almost as it was in the fall of
Adam: Psalm. 2.3,
Therefore when the Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, as
says the Text, to see if there were any that would understand and seek God; he
concludes all are gone out of the way, and so forth; but when the time was come
that by the just judgment of God, he shut up all men in unbelief, it was to
this end, that he might have mercy upon all, to be put into the said posture
and way of peace, in pursuance of his said final end. Romans 11.32.33
This was the insearchable depth of Gods wisdom, that Paul so much adored and
admired.

Again, although the Text says, Observe.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son: Observe the moving
cause why God sent his Son, was not his love to the world primarily, but in
love to himself in this said final end; wherefore when the Text said, God so
loved the world that he sent his Son, it comes with this proviso, That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life;
otherwise not; for that is implied.

Again observe, although man's efficiency was wholly excluded in producing
Christ, Genesis 2.22, 23.
yet nevertheless he was verily the Son of Man, as he calls himself: First
because woman was produced out of man, and so flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, and he of the woman's seed. Therefore the Son of Man, also his Mother
the Virgin was produced by generation of man and woman in the course of nature,
and he of her, and so the Son of Abraham and the Son of David, and so
forth. Mat. 1.2.6.


CHAP. V. In which is laid down how in this seventh means God does carry on and
accomplish his final end.
IN this Point falls in the manfold wisdom of God; but I will pitch only upon
six principal Branches thereof, as first, When man became with the apostate
Angels one, in deserved misery to eternity, and also one in their diabolical
nature, as is proved then in that point of time: In the seed of the woman God
elected the fallen mass of mankind out of that state, into a posture in which
all mankind may receive the said gift of life attained by Christ the second
Adam, which they lost in Adam, or be either Vessels of honor or dishonor to
eternity, according to their works, good or bad.

The second Branch, Romans 5.18.
That as Adams unrighteousness in the fall by one offense in its guilt and
punishment by God was imputed to all mankind, even so the one righteousness of
the seed of the woman the second Adam by Gods gift imputatively came upon all
man kind and so put al men by mercy in a posture in which they might receive
the said gift of life, or to be either, as is said.

The third Branch, That immediately upon the said Election and Imputation by
the Spirit of Christ, God put an internal disposedness into all mankind to
descend hereditarily in their natural generations, disposing them to operations
according to the said posture.

The fourth Branch, immediately upon the said Election and Imputation, the same
Spirit of Christ began to strive, and still so does with the spirits of all men
to keep them in that posture, in all ages, and in all places of the world.

The fifth branch, immediately upon that Election and Imputation, God in mercy
gave a rule suitable to all mankind in the state they are in by that Election,
to direct their operations proceeding from their internal disposedness to
receive the said gift of life, and to avoid the contrary death.

The sixth Branch, That according to the operations of all men, good or bad,
God by that suitable rule makes them vessels of honor or dishonor to
eternity: So that thus by this seventh means Gods final end is carried on, and
accomplished eternally to his glory in the said branch, notwithstanding what
was done by the apostate Angels: In man's fall, or ever fince, according to that
God said unto the Serpent, He shall break thy head. Of these six branches in
their order; First in the Election of the fallen mass of mankind out of that
state into the said posture, which is the first branch proposed, the foundation
of this universal election, was laid in the humane nature of Christ, the seed
of the woman; I will put enmity, says God, between thy seed and her seed,
clearly implying that humane nature, as such, woman's offspring was elected out
of that fallen Mass into the said posture in Christ, but not the nature of
Angels, but left to sink deeper in their fallen estate and design, by the power
of Christ the woman's seed; for says God, He shall break thy head; and the
Apostle affirms the same, He chose us in him, says he, before the foundation
of the world; and it implies in the Text as before is noted, Man's Election was
out of the fallen mass, that is, as unholy and under blame, and not loved as in
our selves; and therefore he says, He chose us in him that we should be holy
and without blame before him in love. Ephesians. 1.1.4.
And the Apostle Peter points out, that our Election was to the said posture,
when he says, Elect according to the fore-knowledg of God the Father, unto
sanctification of the spirit, through obedience and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2.


This word Us in the Text, He chose us, in its full drift and scope, is to be
understood in a twofold sense, that is, restrictively and universally,

Restrictively thus, He chose us, that is, us among mankind, which believingly
operate according to our rule and posture, as all were elected unto to receive
eternal life by Christ's own righteousness imputed, so that he chose us into the
possession of that eternal life in belief; and so this word Us, comprehends all
Believers, only as such to whom the Epistle was sent.

Secondly, This word Us is to be understood, Us Men, that is, Humane Nature, as
such; and so it comprehends all mankind universally, as chosen out of the
fallen mass into the said posture when the fallen nature of Angels were left to
sink deeper into their diabolical nature and damnation, as is proved.

But if it be questioned what that posture is, to which all mankind was
elected unto out of the fallen Mass.

Answer, It is no more but this, namely, A disposedness to operate to receive
the said gift of life; and to make up this meet disposedness, there goes a
threefold ingredient.

First, as is said, immediately upon the said Election and Imputation by the
Spirit of Christ, God put an internal disposedness into all mankind,
hereditarily to descend in their natural generations, disposing them in
operation according to the said posture, which falls to be handled in the third
Branch of the manifold wisdom of God propounded.

Secondly, immediately upon the said election and imputation, the same Spirit
of Christ began to strive, and still so does with the spirits of all men, to
keep them in that posture in all ages, and in all places of the world, which is
to be handled in the fourth Branch propounded.

Thirdly, immediately up on that election and imputation God gave a rule
suitable to all mankind in that state they are in by that election, to direct
their operations to receive the said gift of of life, and to avoid the contrary
death which falls to be handled in the fifth branch propounded; the which
threeing redients make up the said posture.

And from this posture it is that most men in the world before they can come to
receive Gods gifts of justifying faith, Iona 2.8.
do apostate to lying vanities, so forsaking their own mercies; Thus did Cain
and the old world before the Flood, for which God brought in the Flood. Thus
did Noah's posterity after the Flood, apostate to lying vanities, by building
the City of Babel, and a Tower therein to reach the Heavens, for which God
confounded and scattered them. Thus did Terah in Shems Family, Abraham's Father,
apostate to Idols, and so became a Den of Devils.

But when all Families of the earth was thus sinking, Ios 24.2, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 16.
from 3. to 15.
as vessels of dishonor eternally for ought themselves can do, from which
condition that aforesaid election out of Adams fall, relieved man into the said
posture, yet nevertheless then in that point of time, in pursuance of his final
end, God takes hold of the universal nature of man, and preserves it from
sinking; for he not only commanded Abraham to depart from his Country and
kindred, and from his father Terah's house, but with reference to that very
time, says the Text, Verily he takes not hold on the nature of Angels, but of
the seed of Abraham he takes hold. These words lead us to a fourfold Querie.

First, why Abraham is named more in this business then any other man?

Secondly, Why Abraham is named in reference to the seed of man, as in his
loins, he being Terah's son?

Thirdly, Heb. 2.16.
Why was not Abraham's person assumed in personal union with the second in the
one God, he being thus named by way of eminency in the Text?

4 Why this word he takes hold as to the nature of Angels is spoken
negatively, and to the common nature of man affirmatively, both being in the
fall, one in apostasy, as is proved; nay now all Nations of men were in a
relapst apostasy to them, we see, and as will more appear in due place?

For Answer unto the first Querie, Genesis 12.1.
Why Abraham is named more in this business then any other man; It was because
when all the Families of the earth did apostate at Babel except Semes,
wherefore in his Family the Oracle of Christ was only resident, and because
Abraham's father Terah was the first in that Family that did apostate from this
posture to Idols, and became a den of Devils, Abraham being his son, was
therefore named rather then any other man, implying man's misery is Gods
opportunity; for in the Mount will the Lord be seen, as to all mankind in the
fallen mass he was.

Answer to the second Question, Why Abraham is named in reference to the seed
of man in his loins, he being Terah's son; the meaning is, no more but this,
the proper subject of election is not only man as corrupt, but as universally
corrupt: Therefore God names the common seed of man in the loins of one of
this idolatrous brood, the fittest Emblem of the continued act of God in
Election of man out of the fallen mass, as in Adams loins, and therefore the
seed of Abraham is named in the Text.

Answer to the third Query, Why was not Abraham's person assumed into personal
union with the second in the one God, he being thus named by way of eminency in
the Text? Answer, If Abraham's person, or any man's else, had been assumed to the
second in the one God, it would have pointed out a personal election and
rejection of mankind, and therefore to remove that, he assumed not the person
of any man, but the nature of every man, and so elected humane natures fallen
mass out of that estate into the said posture, either to honor or dishonor
for ever, as is proved.

Answer to the fourth Query, Why this word he takes Hold, as to the nature of
Angels, is spoke negatively, and to the common nature of man affirmatively,
both being in the fall one in Apostasy; nay now all Nations of men were relapst
in Apostasy as we are? Answer, The meaning is no more then this, When men
universally do apostate from the said posture so sinking unto destruction, then
sometimes in this case in pursuance of his final end, God as a continued act to
the nature of Angels, lets the nature of Angels sink lower and lower into
destruction, and as a continued act, takes hold of the nature of man to stay
it from sinking; and therefore the Text speaks negatively to them, and
affirmatively to man; for first he takes hold of the nature of man by promise,
into personal union with the second in the one God, when the seed of the woman
was first named, and in these words to Abraham, In thy seed shall all Nations
be blessed; God says not of seeds, as of many, but as of one, that is Christ,
says the Text; and here he takes not hold of the nature of Angels; but here
we see he takes hold of the seed of Abraham in Christ's person.

Again, the extent of this taking hold reaches all Nations, for God did not
only take hold of the humane nature into the person of Christ, as is said, but
also takes hold of a seed of humane nature in a national extent at that time
by promise in Abraham's loins, in the seed to be when they were not, and to
this end to be a means to return the blessing of Christ upon humane nature over
all Nations, that is, to return them to the aforesaid posture in which they
might receive the said gift of eternal life, and all comprehended in these
words to Abraham; I will make of thee a great Nation, and thou shall be a
blessing, in thee shall all the Families of the earth be blessed: that is, that
now lie under a curse in my wrath in Heathenism: And here again God takes not
hold of the nature of Angels, but in the election of this one Nation in
Abraham's loins, of the seed of Abraham he takes hold as a continued act of the
universal election of Adams fallen mass.

But if you ask me what was that wrath they lie under, and how all Nations but
one became Heathens; I answer, It was when Jehovah looked down from heaven upon
the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God,
and saw that they were all gone out of the way, and all corrupt and abominable,
which made God wrath with them, under which wrath they then lay.

If you ask me when this was, God came down to see.

I answer, It was when Jehovah came down to see the City of Babel and the
Tower, that the offspring of Noah was building in the Plain of Shinor, for then
and there he confounded their Language, and so scattered them upon the face of
all the earth to walk in their own ways, and so they all became Heathens,
excepting a very few, until by virtue of the said continued Act of a twofold
laying hold of the seed of Abraham, they were put into that posture in which
they might receive the said gift of eternal life; wherefore says the Apostle,
The Scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through faith,
Preach the Gospel before unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Nations be
blessed.

Hence observe, Observe.
that in the said taking hold of this Nation in Abraham's loins or seed, God not
only elected that Nation to be as a part of the whole nature of man; but as
such to be Christ's visible Church and Spouse, I say the nature of man as such,
but not Angels nature as such, nor elected he this Nation upon his foresight
of their faith or believing operations, Esa 44.1. Psalm. 147.20.
but to be put in the said posture in which they might believe, and in
believing operations receive the said gift of eternal life; Romans 3.2. Hos.
2.19.20.
For unto them was committed the Oracles of God, when denied to all Nations;
wherefore says God to this Nation, I will marry thee unto me for ever, and so
forth, Romans 11.29.30.
in pursuance of my final end, for that is implied; and in this sense the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. From this ground God did call the
Gentiles to the said posture, and so will the Jews that now lay in their
apostasy; and I say in this sense the gifts and callings of God are without
repentance to mankind, with respect to his said final end.

Romans 9.5.
The third was this, as says our Lord, Salvation is of the Jews, John 4.22.
because the Oracles that were committed to them, was from them derived, being
the light of eternal peace to all Nations that then sat in darkness or shades
of death.

Esa. 43.25. Esa. 48 9.11. Ezekiel. 36.29, 30.31.
Not for your sakes do I these things, says the Lord God, be it known unto
you, O House of Israel: So Samuel tells them, saying, The Lord will not forsake
his people for his great names sake, 1 Samuel 12. c. 22.
because it has pleased him to make you his people.

Again, Observe.
Observe that the visibility of Christ's Church is in the flesh or bodily part
of man, or in bodily operations, which, as says our Lord, profits little;
therefore let all men within the visible Churches of Christ, Tim. 1.4.8.
take heed they perish not in making the visibility of their profession, their
religion; but to be sure to make eternal life as obtained by Christ, and so
Christ their Religion in their Intellectual spirit, and in truth according to
the Scriptures; for the quintescence of true Religion is invisible; because as
God and Christ the object is invisible, so the intellectual acts of man's belief
or credit, he gives to God, and acts of love are invisible, Romans 2.28.29.
whose praise is of God, and not of men, that cannot see invisibly, or
invisible things.

CHAP. VI. In which is opened the second Branch propounded, That as Adams
unrighteousness in its guilt and punishment by God imputatively in the fallen
Mass was extended unto all mankind, even so in that fallen Mass the
righteousness of the seed of the woman was by God imputatively extended to all
mankind to justification of life, that is, to put them in a posture in which
they may receive his said gift of life eternal, or to be either as is said.
FOr proof of this Point, the Scripture says, Ioh, 1.29.
Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, Romans 5.18. Heb. 2.9. 1 Ion 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.22.
even so the free gift of the righteousness of one, came upon all men to
justification of life. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world.

Again, men from their believing operations in Scripture speaks the same, for
say they, We see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels for
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste of death for every man, and he is the propitiation for our sins,
and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world; and we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: And as in Adam all died,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive, that is, to the said posture in
which they might receive life as well as to receive judgment according to
their works, good or evil.

Again, the same men say also, that all things are of God who has reconciled
us to himself in Jesus Christ, and has given unto us, that is, Us Apostles,
and those that succeed us in the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, and not imputing their
trespasses unto them. And then the Apostle demonstrates a reason of this
reconciliation of all mankind into the said posture; namely, because God has
made Christ to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

But sin inherently was not in him, nor actually committed by him; for the Text
says, He knew no sin; and himself says, Satan has nothing in me: therefore
he was only imputatively made sin for us; and contrarily we were imputatively
only made the righteousness of God in him to justification and acceptance into
the said posture to a right reception of the said gift of eternal life, in
pursuance of Gods said final end: Therefore as by one man's offense death
reigned by one, much more they, namely, believers which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus
Christ. Thus all mankind were put into the said posture by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness.

Again, if the whole frame of nature was put into a posture by Christ's
righteousness imputed, in opposition to the unrighteousness imputed of Adam, as
is proved, and so travelleth until now from the bondage of corruption, to be
partakers of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, then much more did the
force of the imputation of that righteousness put the principal part of the
frame of Nature, namely, man into the said posture of reception of eternal life.

Hence observe that the imputed guilt and punishment of Adams one offense, and
the imputed gift of Christ's one righteousness were both of one universal extent
to the whole Creation, and so to all mankind, the principal part thereof; for
even as one extended judgment to condemnation upon all, Genesis 12.1.
even so we see the other removed the guilt and punishment thereof, that is, of
Adams one offense; so as never man perished for it, that is, for Adams one
offense once committed; for it came, as says the Text, upon all men to
justification of life, as is proved.

Again, observe, That in this universal justification in the Point of remission
of the said guilt and punishment, so far as to put all men into a capacity to
the said posture: I say, Hence observe, That man's faith or belief was of no use
in this justification, for we see it came upon all men when it was neither
thought on, nor sought by them, even when God said, Adam, Where art thou?
Seeking to save that which was lost in the seed of the woman, by breaking the
Serpents head, as is proved.

Again, Though in point of remission of the guilt and punishment of Adams one
offense, so far as to put man into a capacity to the said posture, his faith
was of no use; but observe, that as that righteousness is a gift which brought
in it the said life, so also in this point, man's belief of this truth is now of
use; namely, as an instrumental qualification in point of reception of that
gift; for as it is a gift, so it must be received; for as the imputative gift
gives man right unto eternal life, so his reception of it gives him possession
of that gift from this ground; It is said, He that believes has eternal life;
but he that receives it not, has it not, and therefore abides in death,
because he has not believed in the only begotten Son of God.

Again, Observe therefore when the Scripture affirms man is justified by faith,
it is because by his belief he received this justification, as is opened in
this Point of Eternal life; for then he has the end of what did precede his
reception thereof; namely, of the remission of Adams one offense, and the said
capacity to the said posture, because he has so received that gift of eternal
life.

Again, If this gift of righteousness thus came upon all men to justification,
as is described, hence observe; That to ascribe justification to a man's Faith
or Belief, is to arrogate to man that which is not his, because we see it is in
the said gift of righteousness; and also this does derogate from Gods glory in
that gift of life, as also from the glory of Christ who obtained it by his
righteousness, as well as the remission of the guilt and punishment of Adams
one offense, and the said capacity to that posture in which by faith, he may
receive the said gift of life, as precedently is proved, and as will further
appear in due place.

Again, If the said gift of life came upon all men, as is proved: Hence
observe, That when the Apostle says, Abraham was justified by faith, he means
as faith is an instrumental qualification submitting to this righteousness of
God by receiving it by belief of the Doctrine in Christ, as in opposition to a
supposed Doctrine of Works to attain eternal life, maintained by the children
of Abraham in the flesh, but not his children after the faith, in this Doctrine
of Christ, as clearly appears in the drift and scope of the third and fourth
Chapter to the Romans.

Again, If this gift of righteousness so came upon all men to justification,
and that before faith; it justifies as in pardon of Adams one offense, and so
brought all mankind into the said capacity and posture, and this gift of life
to them, then certainly God never ordained nor instituted man's faith or belief
for his justification, that is, for acceptance to pardon of his sin, and life
eternal, but it only comes upon man in his gift of this one righteousness, as
is described; but for what this one righteousness is, I refer the Reader to my
former Treatise, in page 113.

CHAP. VII. In which is handled the third Branch of the manifold Wisdom of God
propounded, and the first Ingredient in the said posture; namely, that
immediately upon the said Election and Imputation, God did by the Spirit of
Christ put, or infuse an internal disposedness into all mankind, hereditarily
to descend in their natural generations, and so in a capacity to the said
posture in which man may receive Gods said gift of eternal life.
TO this end, immediately after the fall of Adam, God dissolved the total amity
of Will and operations, which was between man and the Apostate Angels, for God
no sooner willed it, but immediately he did it by saying to the Serpent, I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.15.
man's productive root, for that is employed; but the foundation of it, and the
derivation of an internal disposedness in all mankind to the said posture, was
laid in the seed of the woman, namely, in Humane Nature in the person of
Christ, who only made way to it by breaking the Serpents head; for as Adam in
his fall deservedly brought a total internal darkness as well as death upon all
men, so Christ the second Adam deservedly, John 1.4.9.
is life and light in himself; for as says the Text, In it was life, and that
life was the light of men, this was the true light which lights every man
that comes into the world. Thus the Spirit of Christ does write his Law in the
hearts of all mankind, Romans 2.14.
as a continued Act in their natural generation; from this only ground it is
that all mankind do by nature the things contained in Christ's Law; which, as
says the Text, shows the effect of the Law written in their hearts; if
written, then it must needs be, God writ it by Christ's Spirit, there being no
middle state between perfection before his fall, and a total devastation of
righteousness and holiness in his fall.

Again, If the effect of Christ's Law be in the hearts of all mankind, and
disposes them naturally to do the same things, as says the Text; consequently
this is a disposedness to amity with God; and consequently this is a
disposednesse to enmity to the apostate Angels design in all mankind,
according as God said, I will put enmity between thee and the woman: from this
light of Christ in every man it is, that their consciences do accuse and
excuse, as the Candle of the Lord in every man's breast, which he has thus set
up.

Again, We find in men that are apostate from the said posture to Idols, by
custom or the acquired habits, dead in sins and trespasses to that posture to
receive the said gift of life; yet we find in them the remainders of this light
of Christ; I do not mean so much remaining only among the best of the Heathens,
who by a patient well-doing did seek honor and glory, immortality, and eternal
life, as in the aforesaid Text, Romans 2. but as for instance, those Idolaters
mentioned in Jonah, as appears in two particulars; First they did believe that
God is, although remotely: And secondly that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him, although they do it with much confusion; and the like in the Ninivites;
but first in the Mariners, they referr their cause by lot to God to determine
a point of difficulty; implying, they did believe, though remotely, yet truly,
that God is; and conceiving the second, they prayed him not to lay innocent
blood to them; implying, they did believe he is a rewarder of those that seek
him.

So likewise the King of Ninnive, he did believe God, as says the Text, that
is, That God is, as well as his threatenings, to be true by Jonah. And as for
the second, That he is a rewarder of them that seek him, is clear also, because
he did seek him upon this reason, saying, Who knows whether God will be
entreated to turn away from his first wrath. If thus much amity toward God be
in such men as these, certainly some remainders of enmity to Satan, and amity
to God, is in all mankind: Hence it follows without all contradiction, that the
precedent premises are true, That Christ is the true light which lights
every man which comes into the world: Hence it is that our Lord said unto such
men, or that man which by custom in sin, has turned that light into darkness,
as we see here these men had done, saying, If the light which is in thee be
darkness, how great is that darkness?

Again, The force of this internal light and Law of Christ demonstrates it self
to be his Law by this particular in all mankind, that is, as Christ himself is
Gods only Seat of mercy, or mercies seat to the world; so all mankind in their
distress invocate God to take off their misery under the notion of mercy; so
cannot the apostate Angels invocate God under the notion of mercy or pity, and
the ground of it is this, as they have no internal princple by Christ, as here
we see all mankind has, therefore they have no internal disposedness to seek
relief from him under the notion of mercy: and from this ground it is, that
their consciences cannot excuse them, as men's can do.



would give them more, even to the gift of faith, rightly to receive the said
gift of life; and thus, if the Son make them free, they are free indeed,
rightly to choose good, and to refuse evil; for where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is Liberty.



Adams Covenant, but good and evil.

Therefore in the depth of that darkness, Christ enlightneth by his Spirit, the
intellectual spirits of all mankind, so far as attendency to adhere to truth,
and to the true good, as such, which includes a vertual tendency to love God
above all, and its neighbor as it self: Therefore the Will by the assistance
of Christ's Spirit, may be terminated to one thing to which it has thus a
natural tendency; as in the Saints, when they in the third degree of belief are
Fathers in the faith, Rev. 3.10, 11, 12. Romans 8. from 35 to 39. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20
2 Timothy, 2.12, 13 Acts 10.34, 35 See my former Treatise; p. 108 131, 132, 133.
and from page 134 to 140.
then God so terminates their wills to himself, vertually at least, that nothing
shall be able to separate them from him, nor he from them: and the grounds why
God will so terminate the Will to the Saints that improve their measure under
manifold trials, is this, He loves to glorify his Justice in the distribution
of his mercy by the Gospels Tenor: so on the contrary, to the Saints which
totally backslide before they come to the third degree of Faith, so far as to
make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; he by the justice of the same
rule of mercy, does make that final, which they have made total; for God is no
respecter of persons.

The ground why this internal disposedness is Christ's Law, is not only because
it is infused by Christ's Spirit, as is proved; but also the whole government of
all mankind in relation to eternal life and death, Acts 7.53. Gal. 3.19.
is only and alone in his power since the fall, and therefore he gives all Laws
external or internal, and he adjudges men for transgressing those Laws. This
was that which was figured at Mount Sinai, when God gave all those Laws to that
one Nation, as a part of the whole of mankind, he then gave all those Laws by
an Angel into the hand of a Mediator, the which Mediator was Christ in the
truth, but Moses in the Type, who administered those Laws to the people.

Hence observe, That all mankind in their native production and succeeding
generations, are not conceived and born dead in sins and in trespasses, nor
children of wrath; for by reason of the said universal election, and universal
imputation of Christ's own righteousness, all mankind are conceived and born in
the favor and mercy of God by Christ, notwithstanding the bitter seed of
original sin in their natural production; for we see it is reduced to be but a
seed by the said internal disposedness, and so are in a capacity to receive the
said gift of life; for the whole need not the Physician, but the sick, since
Original corruption is an evil privitive and positive.

CHAP. VIII. In which is handled the fourth Branch of the manifold wisdom of
God, precedently propounded, and being the second ingredient to make up the
said posture; namely, that the Spirit of Christ striveth with the spirits of
all men in the world, to preserve and increase the said internal disposedness,
consequently to depress the force of the seed of original sin, so to bring and
to keep men in the said posture in which they might receive Gods gift of
eternal life.
THis Spirit of Christ thus began to strive immediately upon the fall, and upon
the said universal election, and universal imputation in these words, Adam,
Where art thou? so seeking to save what was lost, and so forth. Genesis 4.4.5.


Again, Thus Christ's Spirit strived with the spirits of Cain and Abel: To Abel
in an approbation and confirmation of his operations in this posture, to
continue to receive and hold fast the said gift of life; for says the Text,
God had respect unto Abel, and to his offering; and the reason is, Heb. 11.4.
because it was by belief Abel offered a more acceptable offering then Cain.

Again, the same with Cains spirit; for when he began to go on in nourishing
the seed of original sin to the acquired habits therein, so to extinguish the
light of Christ in him, then the same spirit of Christ strived with his spirit
to suppress the one, and to cherish and increase the other; for in respect to
the one, God gave him no respect but to his discontent and discouragement; but
in respect to the other, he encourages him to go on in his posture, as Abel
his brother, saying, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? implying
most certainly, Thou shall as well as he.

Now the ground why this Spirit is the Spirit of Christ, that thus strives with
the spirits of all mankind, as with these two men it did; is this, Because ever
since the fallen Mass of mankind, Christ immediately entered, as the firstborn
of every creature in an universal relation to the whole world, in pursuance of
Gods said final end, and thereupon according to his own saying, All things that
the Father has are mine; and so says he, The Spirit shall take of mine; that
is, not only to comfort the faithful in this world, John 16.8, 9, 10, 11.
but also to reprove the world of sin, that is, to the same end as to Cain; and
says the Text, When he shall come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment: Of sin, because they believe not in me; Of
righteousness, because I go to my Father; Of judgment, because the Prince of
this world is judged.

And according to this, the said Spirit of Christ thus strives with the spirits
of all men, as to Cain and Abel, and so to the worlds end, that is, to depress
the one, and increase the other, as is said, to bring them into the said
posture, and to preserve them therein; and it clearly appears, that it so did
strive with man, during the first world; for says God, When their Apostasy did
abound, my Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3.
for that he also is flesh.

Whereupon God limited the time of the striving of Christ's Spirit with them
from time to come, Genesis 7.1.
to one hundred and twenty years, and no longer; 1 Pet. 3.18, 19 20.
and as this Spirit striveth with Abels spirit to preserve him and establish
him in the said posture: consequently so did it with all the righteous in the
generations precedent, and to the end of that world, even until there was but
one righteous man left, saying unto them, Thee have I seen righteous before me
in this generation, so establishing and confirming his mind in the said
posture,; so that thus the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits of the men
of that world, both good and bad, when once thelong patience of God waited in
the days of Noah, for to return and keep them in the said posture to receive
his gift of life in the said righteousness of the seed of the woman.

Again, In the next world thus the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits of
all men, to preserve the one, and to depress the other, as is said, and that by
the Ministry of Christ, by Noah to his own posterity, who, says the Text, 2
Pet. 2.5.8.
was a Preacher of righteousness, Genesis 9.28.
the which righteousness that he preached to their spirits was twofold; The
first was manifested to them by the Sacrifices he offered unto God, which
figured unto them the satisfactory righteousness of the seed of the woman
imputatively, Genesis 8.21, 22
bringing to them the said gift of eternal life, and also further manifested,
in that God smelled a savor of rest, and from thence ratifying to them and
their generations, the good of this world, and that to come, in reference to
keep them in the said posture in their succeeding generations: Ephesians. 5.2.
and to this end Noah their Father lived thus with them three hundred and fifty
years after the Flood.

The second righteousness which he preached, was the rectitude of his
operations, which is sanctification; and this he preached to his posterity by
his posture in the right reception of Gods gift of eternal life, by the manner
of his sacrificing and building an Altar unto Jehovah, and by making choice of
Beasts, in refusing unclean, and taking clean, Genesis 8.20.21.
and also by his building the Ark according to the commandment of God, all
being fruits of his operations, according to faith in his said posture. Heb.
11.4.7.8.
So much for the second righteousness, namely, Sanctification, which he
preached, and also for the first righteousness which came upon all men for
justification of life.

Again, Likewise the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits of Shems
Family-Church: for Noah's three hundred and fifty years, a Preacher of
righteousness after the Flood extended within two years of the birth of
Abraham, as Learned Broughton observes in his Consent of Scriptures.

Again, When this Family began to Apostate from the said posture to Idols, as
appears in Terah the Father of Abraham, and were become corrupt and abominable,
not knowing the way of peace, like to those who were confounded and scattered
at Babel; then it is employed, that God precedently had strived with their
spirits; for now he began to put an end to the striving of the Spirit of Christ
with the spirit of Shems Family, in that God commanded Abraham to depart from
his Kindred, and from his Fathers house, to this end, to raise a Nation out of
his loins, to carry on Gods said final end, and so leave that Family to
themselves.

Again, When that one Nation was existent, and did spring out of Abraham's seed
in number as the sands on the Seashore, or as the Stars in Heaven, then the
same Spirit of Christ strived with their spirits also, in the succeeding
generations to preserve and increase the one, and to depress the other, to
bring them into the said posture in which they might receive the said gift of
life, as says Nehemiah unto God, Neh. 9.20, 30.
Thou gave them thy good Spirit to instruct them; Hagg. 2.5.
and says God to them, According to my Covenant with you when I came out of
Egypt, so my Spirit remains with you: And Nehemiah says also, Yea many years
did thou bear with them, and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in thy
Prophets; but for their gain saying this Spirit so striving with them all the
day-long in their generations, God put a period to this striving of Christ's
Spirit, so denying them the gift of faith to believe, that they might not
receive his said gift of eternal life; and therefore says the Text, excepting
to some few of them, Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work a
work in your days, Esa. 49.6. Luke 19.41, 42 Hab. 1.5. Acts 13.41.
which ye shall in no wise believe, although a man declare it unto you. Hence
it is our Savior said, If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes.

Again, under the Gospel, now it is unvailed of Moses vail, and that the
visible Churches of Christ stand constituted, not as Family-Churches only, as
to the days of Moses, nor constituted a visible Church, as was that one
Nation, a part of Humane Nature, as such, were they good or bad; but now under
the Gospel constituted of Believers, as such, according to the judgment of
harity: And thus the Spirit of Christ also strived with the spirits of men in
the visible Churches, as well as unto the men of the world, to cherish and
increase one, and to depress the other, to keep them in the said posture in a
right reception of the gift of life: Hence says the Spirit of Christ to the
Church of Smerna, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the
Crown of Life. Thus the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits of men in the
Church of Sardis, Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold
fast and repent; If thou therefore wilt not watch, Rev. 2.10.
I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know the hour when I will
come upon thee. Rev. 3.11.
And so likewise to the Church of Philadelphia, Christ's Spirit striveth with
their spirits, Rev. 1.4.
Behold I come shortly, hold that which thou have, let no man take away thy
Crown: And this Point is apparent, for the seven Epistles were sent to the
seven Churches. So much for the Spirit of Christ striving with the spirits of
men in the visible Churches under the Gospel.

Again, Not only with the visible, but the same Spirit strives with the spirits
of the invisible Members of Christ's mystical body, to preserve and increase
their internal and spiritual graces, and to depress the power of original sin
in them, as in others, to keep them in the said posture and right reception of
the said gift of eternal life; for says the Text to the said visible Churches,
Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; these
words four times repeated, implies, That in these visible Churches there were
some whose spirits did hear and understand what the Spirit spoke.

And thus the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits of the eleven Apostles,
Mark 16.14.
which were invisible Members, Judas being dead; for the Text says, He
appeared unto the eleven and upbraided them with their unbelief at another
time: Thus strives his Spirit with theirs, saying, As the Father has loved me,
so have I loved you, continue in my love, John 15.9, 10.
if ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love.

Another time thus the Spirit strived with theirs, Oh faithless and perverse
generation, Mark 17.17.
how long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you: At another time
thus the Spirit strived with the spirit of Nathaniel to establish him, Because
I said I saw thee under the Fig Tree, John 1.50.
Believe thou? Thou shall see greater things then these.

Is is so, that Christ's Spirit thus strives with the spirits of all sorts of
men in the world? Hence observe, That all those who have not yet received the
gift of Faith, nor the gift of eternal Life, and so do fall into eternal death,
shall be left without excuse in their own consciences to eternity; because it
will witness to them that God would have given them both, but they refused, and
if they had received it, then their salvation was of God, because attained by
his Son, given by himself: As also, Christ's Spirit thus striving with their
spirits, and therefore it will also witness that their destruction is of
themselves; and so Gods most sweet righteousness in this administration will
shine to his glory in their ruin to eternity.

Again, Is it so, that Christ's Spirit thus strives with all men to cherish and
increase the said light of Christ in them, and to depress the seed of the
Serpent in them, and that they are thus internally meetly disposed toward the
said posture: Hence observe, it must needs follow, that all men which become
totally dead in sins and in trespasses to that posture, so as that they cannot
change or alter their operations thereunto, no more then the Black Moor can
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots; I say, Hence observe, That all men
that are thus dead in sins and in trespasses in the world, it arises not from
the seed of original sin, but as an occasion, and only from their custom in sin
and wickedness, unto the acquired habits therein, as the cause, for it is
custom in any thing that brings another nature.

Again, Is it so, that the Spirit of Christ strives with the spirits of all men
to preserve and repress, as is proved; Hence observe, That when God by Christ's
Spirit is pleased to inliven the spirits of some men to the said posture, which
were dead in sin and in trespasses, and leaves other some in the same condition
so to perish: I say, hence observe, That God in this case neither inlivens the
one, nor leaves the other from love or hatred to either of them personally
considered, but out of love to himself in pursuance of his final end; for thus
he took up the Jews when they lay polluted in their blood, being Terah's
Idolatrous brood, and said they should live, that is, in this posture that they
might receive his gift of life; and that not for their sakes, but for his own
names sake; and thus he had mercy upon some of the Gentiles in the fullness of
time, that were dead in sins and in trespasses, that they might live in this
posture; and thus the Jews which have been dead in sins and in trespasses this
sixteen hundred years, this Spirit of Christ will inliven their dead spirits,
that so they shall or may receive the said gift of life again; for in this
sense the gifts and callings of God to mankind are without repentance, that is,
to call men, and thus to give them, as is said, in pursuance of his said final
end.

Again, Is it so, that the Spirit of Christ strives with the spirits of all
sorts of men in the world, to preserve and increase the one, and to suppress
the other, as is proved. Hence observe, That all men which as yet have not the
gift of faith, are to be careful that they are faithful in that little they
have received, but especially not to resist this Spirit striving with their
spirits, as we see did Cain, the old world. Noah's posterity at Babel, as did
Shems in Terah's, and Israel Gods Elect the offspring of Abraham, lest God
denying them the gift of faith, and so his gift of life; For then in seeing
they shall not see, and in understanding they shall not understand, and shall
never truly nor rightly be able to see the things which do belong to their
eternal peace.

Again, Is it so, That this Spirit of Christ's thus strives with all men of the
world, and also with all men in the visible Churches of Christ, and also with
the invisible Members, as is proved; then let them which think they have the
true Spirit of faith in God, and love to God and their neighbor, kindled in
their breasts by this Spirit of Christ's, beware they quench not the Spirits
flame of love and firm faith by inordinate cares and love of this worlds
profits or pleasurable lusts, lest they having begun in the Spirit, do end in
the flesh, and reap corruption.

Again, Is it so that the Spirit of Christ thus strives and effects in the
hearts of the invisible Members of Christ's true faith and love, and other
graces, Then hence observe, That although in attaining eternal life they can do
nothing, but in that Christ alone does all; and also that in the gift of
internal light of Christ, and in the gift of faith, and in the gift of other
graces and in the increase and grouth of them, the invisible members of Christ
are merely passive in all this; yet hence observe, That by the same spirit of
faith and love, they are enabled to keep their hearts with care and diligence;
so that no man or power shall take away their Crown of comfort, and hope of
glory; First, because in the said gifts they have received the spirit of love,
of power, and of a sound mind in some degree, therefore they are able so to
do. A second Reason is this, The Spirit of Christ is at hand when they so put
forth that power they have, not only to assist them to keep their hearts in
these endeavors, but also to add that wherein they are merely passive, as I
said before, namely, to add the increase of all these graces they have, and so
they grow from strength to strength in Sion; and therefore they may, and are
able to keep their hearts as is said. And therefore says our Lord, As I say
unto all men, so I say unto you, Watch lest ye enter into temptation.

The Reason why I call the third in the one God, or the third Person in
Trinity, the Spirit of Christ, is this, Because that as all that the Father
has, is Christ's, in pursuance of this said final end; so Christ by the third
in the one Jehovah, in Gods merciful voice in the Creation, and most
eminently, and most properly by the voice of the Gospel in the tongue of man to
man, by the Ministry of this Spirit, does strive with the spirits of all men to
depress the mind of the Devil in them, and to implant the similitude of the
mind of Christ in them, which is man's sanctification in order to the Fathers
will, to a right receiving of his said righteousness imputed to their eternal
life, or to be either, as is proved.

CHAP. IX. In which is handled the fifth branch of the manifold wisdom of God
precedently propounded, and the last ingredients which makes up the said
posture, namely, that God by the seed of the woman immediately after the fall,
gave a rule suitable to all men to work or operate by, in reference to his said
final end.
THis Point divides it self into three parts, two whereof are handled in this
Chapter, the third in the next.

The first declares unto all men who it is that Governs them by this Rule, for
a Governor is employed.

The second is to let all men see what this Rule is.

The third is, that all men may see how suitable this rule is unto them. Of
these in their order.

As for the first, Certainly he that restores all mankind out of the fallen
mass of death, into the said posture, to receive the said gift of life, he it
is that governs man by his own Rule; and therefore says man, believing truth,
To us a Child is born, and to us a Son is given, and the Government shall be
laid upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Councellor,
and the mighty God, and so forth. And says the Lord himself, Esa. 9.6.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth; and then goes on governing
all men in this Government by his Apostles, by the said suitable rule; Mat.
28.18, 19.
For he commanded them, saying, Mar. 16.16.
Go ye therefore into all the world, and Preach the Gospel to every creature;
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that will not
believe shall be damned. From this ground it is, that the Father judges no
man, because he commits all judgment to the Son. John 5.22.
So much for the first Point.

Secondly, That all men may see what this Rule is; And in a word, it is no more
but this, namely, The Tenor of the Gospel; and that is a Rule of Justice and
Mercy; for the Gospel it self is one thing, and its Tenor is another; and the
Gospel it self is no more but this, Gods highest mercy manifested by Christ to
man, to relieve him out of his deepest misery: First employed immediately upon
the fall, Genesis 3.15. Luke 2.10, 11.
when God said unto the Serpent, The seed of the woman shall bruise thy head.
Secondly, In the fullness of time, when the Angel said, Behold I bring you glad
tidings of great joy that shall be unto all people; that is, That unto you is
born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: and
the Gospels Tenor is no more but this as is said, A Rule of Justice and Mercy
for all men to work by, and not a Rule of Justice only, as was that to Adam in
his innocence before the fall, in pursuance of Gods said final end.

For proof of this Point, the Oracles of God manifested it, first in Cain and
Abel; to Cain, although his operations were not well according to this rule,
yet the mercy of it appeared to him after he had not done well, in this, That
God interrogatively promised him acceptance, saying, If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted; implying most certainly, Thou shall, as is Abel thy
brother. And in the next words appears the justice of this rule, If thou do
not well, sin lies at the door.

And as concerning Abel, because his operations were according to his posture,
the justice of this rule appeared to him, in that God approved thereof, and the
mercy of this rule, because it admitted acceptance of him, although unperfect
in the perfect operations of another man, as appears by his sacrifices, which
employed the imputative righteousness of Christ; for says the Text, Genesis 4.4.
Abel offered unto God a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain; by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, Heb. 11.4.
God testifying of his gift, and so the same tenor of mercy and justice all
along down the old world to the Flood, the mercy of it, when the wickedness of
man is great on the earth by Apostasy from the said posture, and all
ungodlyness; yet the mercy of this rule gave them time to repent and turn to
the said posture to receive the said gift of life, namely, one hundred and
twenty years, in which time the long-sufferings of God waited in the days of
Noah, so also the justice of this rule of mercy brought in the flood upon the
world of ungodly, and to Noah its justice and mercy were also both extended, as
unto Abel, because he kept to the said posture in a constant reception of the
said gift of life, for by faith he being warned of God of things which were not
yet seen, moved with reverence, prepared the Ark to the saving of his household,
through which Ark he condemned the world, and so was made heir of the
righteousness which is by faith; and the same tenor was also extended to Noah's
posterity after the flood, and none other: for as this justice scattered them
from the Land of Shinor for their Apostasy from the said posture, upon the face
of all the earth, as is proved, so the mercy of this rule followed them
eighteen hundred years under that wrath of God, and none other, as in the tenth
Chapter following will appear, and as in the seventh Chapter of my former
Treatise is proved; and this same Tenor, and none other was extended to the
said Nation elect in the loins or seed of Abraham, the mercy of it was figured
in the Pot of Manna, and the Rod that budded, and the two Tables of the Moral
Law, as jointly enclosed in the Ark, and so a figure of the perfection of the
satisfactory righteousness of Christ imputed to the world, and therefore God
named it his Mercies Seat, and so he spoke from thence to that Nation as a part
of all mankind, and the justice of this Tenor was figured to that Nation, In my
former Treatise p. 70.
in the manner of the delivery of the Gospel into the vail of Moses, as in
fire, in smoke, in earthquake, yet it was the justice of this merciful Tenor,
because it was delivered on that Mount from God by an Angel into the hand of a
Mediator, namely, Moses in the type, which was Christ in the truth; and
therefore it is said, the Law came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus
Christ. That is, the grace and truth of all contained in those Laws, came by
Jesus Christ, and so made up a Gospel of glad tidings to that people, and all
Nations: From this ground they had a daily sacrifice for sin in their
generations, and this Tenor more clearly appears to that Nation; for God having
styled them the house of Israel, he thus faith unto them, If the wicked will
turn from his sins that he has committed, Ezekiel. 18.20, 24.29.30.
he shall surely live; there is the mercy of this Tenor, If the wicked turn
not, the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself: there is the justice
of this Tenor.

Again, This same Tenor, and none other now, is when the Gospel is unvailed,
nor never shall to the worlds end; for all men stand bound to their believing
operations in their said posture, to receive the said gift of life, or to
perish, as witnesses our Lord in the forecited Text to the Apostles; Go ye
into all the world and Preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believes
and is baptized shall be saved: There is the mercy of the Gospels Tenor, He
that will not believe shall be damned: There is the justice of its Tenor.

CHAP. X. In which is proved that the Spirit of Christ strived with the spirits
of Noah's posterity which were confounded and scattered at Babel in their
succeeding Generations, to preserve them in a narrow way to eternal life.
THis Point devides it self into three parts; First, that they had the truth of
God to direct them to that way.

Secondly, That that truth was the truth of God to them in the seed of the
woman, Christ the Lord.

Thirdly, 1 Romans 18.25, 26, 28.
That by this truth some of the best of them did attain eternal life, although
the generality refused it, and so perished: Of these in their order.

First, That the truth of God they had is clear in Romans 1. and the 18. because
the Spirit of Christ by Paul charge them with, with holding the truth in
unrighteousness, and with turning that truth into a lie, and so forsaking the
Creator which is blessed for ever, Amen, as verse the 25. And for this cause
God delivered them up from Christ's Spirit, striving with their spirits to vile
affections, verse 26. And the reason thereof is further amplified in the 28
verse, namely, as they regarded not to acknowledge God in that truth they had,
even so God delivered them up to a reprobate mind; therefore this truth of God
the Heathens or Gentiles had, although confounded and scattered at Babel from
the residence of the Gospel, and its Tenor with them.

Secondly, That this truth was the truth of God to them by the seed of the
woman, Christ the Lord is clear also; and it was twofold, the one external, and
the other internal: The external truth was manifested and showed to them by
Christ the Lord, by the whole creation, he being the only firstborn of every
creature, as the second Adam from the dead fall of Adam, for so he opened the
womb of the whole creation in its tendency and travel from the bondage of
corruption, it then fell in to be partakers of the glorious liberties of the
Sons of God, and that this travel of the Creation is a continued act by the
force of Christ, as aforesaid, is clear; for the Text says, It travelleth
until now; yet here note by the way, That the continuation of the good things
in Nature in the Creation, is not simply from Nature, by virtue of the
Creation, as such, for that was lost in the fall, as is employed in the Text;
because it says, The Creation is not subject unto vanity willingly, that is,
by its own natural instinct, but by reason of God who caused the Creation to
depend, first upon the operations of the first Adam; and then upon the second
Adams, as is employed in the Text, namely, by reason of him who has subdued the
same in hope, from whence the earnest expectation of the Creature or Creation
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God: Yet again, note this by the
way, That although the Creation by man's fall lost its blessedness to its self
and to man, yet it lost not its being no more then the Apostate Angels or
damned men, which detain their being to eternity, for the being of all things
is grounded on Gods essence only, and never depended on either Adams
operations; and because the Creation thus travels by the force of Gods favor
in Christ; it was the ground why the Psalmist sweetly sings that Jehovah is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works; and if tender mercy
be over all, then misery was first over all, for misery is mercies most proper
object; to which mercy is extended from the premises, thus proved, Psalm. 145.9.
follows this conclusion.

That the Voice, Language, or Speech of the whole Creation of good from God to
man in all its force and effects by all creatures ever since Christ, was the
firstborn in the promise to break the Serpents head, is the general voice of
gladtidings of God to man, by Jesus Christ's satisfactory righteousness imputed;
for we see its tendency and dependancy to blessedness hangs only upon that;
so that in a word, the whole Creation in general is the voice of the Gospel;
and that is the reason why in the New Testament and the Old, the voice of the
Gospel Preached by men is brought in, in a sense, speaking one and the same
thing to mankind; yet note that it is with this difference, The one a general
and remote voice, and the other the more distinct and particular, as by
Writings in the Oracles of God, and by the speech and language of man to man by
the word Preached; and thus David brings them in jointly, saying, The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament show his handy works, day unto day
utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge, there is no Speech nor
Language where their voice is not heard, their loyne is gone forth throughout
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world, in them he has set
a Tabernacle for the Son, and so forth: and then he joyneth the Gospel
thereunto in these words, Psalm. 19. from verse 1 to 8. Note, The Creation began
thus, to preach Christ from its first step into this travel from the bondage of
corruption, to be partakers of the glorious liberties of the Sons of God: and
when that first step began, you may see in my former Treatise, page the 35.
The Law of God is perfect, converting the soul, the Testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple, the Statutes of the Lord are right,
and rejoice the heart, and so forth. And Paul speaking of the Preaching of the
Gospel, concludes, Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and
then having spoken of Jews and Grecians in the 12 verse, concluding, That be
that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him; and then puts the
Question in the 18 verse, saying, But I demand, Have they not heard? meaning
the Grecians or Heathens as well as the Jews: and then he answers the question,
namely, That the Gospel was heard by them in the said words of the Psalms, No
doubt their sound went out throughout all the earth, and their words into the
end of the world; implying, That both voices ought to be heard, and being
rightly heard, they both breed vertually in the heart of man, faith in Christ;
Romans 10.12, 17, 18.
yet with this difference, the one implicit and more weak, because its voice
is but general and remote, the other more clear and strong, because his voice
is more clear and near to the spirit of a man. So much for the external truth
of God in Christ, by which Christ's Spirit strived with their spirits to direct
them in that narrow way to eternal life.

Secondly, The internal truth of God in Christ by which the Spirit of Christ
strived with the spirits of the said confounded and scattered offspring of Noah
at Babel, in a word, is no more but this, namely, The remainder of the said
internal Law and light of Christ in their hearts for, as is proved, they were
excluded the residence of the Gospel with them, as is employed in the Text, Romans
2. it says, Romans 2.14.15.
The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the
Law, and are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in
their hearts: And this Law in the hearts of them all, if they had submitted to
this inward striving of of the Spirit of Christ with their spirits, and not
detained it in unrighteousness, as they did, it would have produced the
circumcision of the hearts of them all; which is the true rectitude of the
mind, or sanctification, as it did to some of them which did in that little
they had, seek to do well, and so it was effected in them, namely,
Circumcision, which is by nature, says the Text, verse 27. and in the 29
verse, To be circumcision of the heart and spirit, whose praise is not of men,
but of God. So much for the internal truth of God in Christ to direct the
Heathens in the narrow way to life.

But the Question may be, What life that was that the best of those Heathens
did attain unto?

I answer, Neither more nor less, but the same eternal life which the believing
Jews received by operations in Gods gift of Christ's imputative righteousness,
as appears in the sixth verse, God will render every man according to his
works, that is, To them which through a patient welldoing, Romans 2.6.7, 10.
seek for honor and glory, immortality, everlasting life; and in the tenth
verse, To every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor and praise, to
the Jew first, and to the Grecian; for there is no respect of persons with God,
for to this has our Lord Christ made his promise, They that seek shall find,
and to him that knocks it shall be opened: From this ground it was that the
Apostles were not ashamed to Preach the Gospel in Heathenish Rome to believers;
his first reason is, Because it is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian

His second Reason is, Because by it the righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith, that is, from faith implicit, as most weak to faith more
strong and expressive, as formerly is proved.

His third Reason is, Because the wrath of God is revealed from heaven upon all
unrighteousness of men which withhold the truth in unrighteousness, for as much
as that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for says he, God has
showed it unto them, namely, by the Creation and the Gospel, Romans 1.19.
as aforesaid; for that is here employed.

The first Reason why the Spirit of God thus strives with the spirits of these
Heathens and all men else, may be this, although it be all alike unto God in
respect of his final end, whether the most or least number of men be made
vessels of honor or dishonor unto eternity, so all be either one or the
other, because by his merciful and just proceedings in the suitable rule, his
glory in a most sweet righteousness shines forth eternally in either to his
praise; and yet nevertheless in respect to man, it being his Creature, Acts 17.
from 25. to 29.
his offsprings and generation, which as, says the Text, he has made of one
blood, and under the aforesaid universal election; yet in this respect God
would rather man would as he should and might according to this rule, and
Christ's Spirit striving with his spirit, return by his operation into the said
posture, to receive the said gift of life, and be blessed for ever: As I live,
says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18.27.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his ways and live; when the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that
he has committed, Ezekiel. 33.11.
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.

The second Reason why the Spirit of Christ thus strives with the spirits of
these Heathens and all men, is, because the Apostate Angels do universally
endeavor by their temptations, lies, and delusions, to keep all mankind from
receiving the said gift of life, and therefore do endeavor not only to
extinguish the Preaching of the Gospel, but also to extinguish and turn the
internal light of Christ in all men into darkness, and if they could possible
draw all men into eternal darkness; and their main end in all this is, that God
might not have any glory in man's felicity to eternity; and therefore to repel
this their design in that particular branch, it is that the Spirit of Christ
thus strives with all men, and for this end we see the seed of the woman was
elected to be Christ the Lord, and second Adam; and for this end God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever by believing
operations will receive the said gift of life, shall not perish but have
everlasting life; for therefore we see God elected the fallen Mass of mankind
out of that despicable estate into the said posture, as is proved; and also
therefore we see that God elected one Nation to be, and to be in the said
posture to carry on his said final end, as it respected this particular branch,
not for their sakes, but for his own names sake: and likewise we see to carry
on this said final end in this particular branch, He has mercy upon whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, when by their acquired habits in
sin against the said posture, they are all alike dead in sin and trespasses, I
say not in love or hatred to any of these men personally considered, but only
in love to himself, in the prosecution of this branch of his said final end, as
is proved, that he called the Gentiles to this posture, but denied it at that
time to the Jews, and so on this sixteen hundred years, and that in pursuance
of the said branch, will call them to this posture again, by which they may
receive the said gift of life; and this is the ground why he precedently made
so many glorious promises of calling the Gentiles, and also of the Jews
according to his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and from this cause
only they are beloved for their Fathers sakes, as is proved; and therefore it
is that the Spirit of Christ thus strived with the spirits of these Heathens
and all men else, as is proved.

The third Reason may be this, Because the more men are brought by the striving
of Christ's Spirit with their spirits to believing operations in this posture by
the reception of this gift of life in point of justification, the more fruit of
righteousness abounds also in their sanctification in a redundancy to Gods
glory against the Apostate Angels said design; and therefore it is that the
Spirit of Christ thus strives, as with these Heathens, so with all men.

The first Use is for Information, That if the Spirit of Christ thus strives
with the spirits of all mankind to bring them to, and to keep them in this
posture. Hence we learn two things; First, That the striving of this Spirit to
all mankind, as is proved, is the universal favor of God in Jesus Christ to
all men in the world. The second is this, That those amongst men which by
believing operations, rightly receive the said gift of righteousness, shall
muchmore receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, and
shall reign in life by one, namely, Jesus Christ, that as sin had reigned unto
death, even so might grace reign through righteousness Romans 5.19.
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ.

The second use is this, That God will never revoke that pardon of the guilt
and punishment, namely, eternal death due to all mankind for Adams one offense;
First because of his said gift of life which came upon all men unto
justification in the imputative righteousness of Christ, as is proved; for, for
this end he gave the Spirit of Christ thus to strive with the spirits of all
men from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof, that they might
receive the said gift of life; therefore the pardon of the said guilt and
punishment due to all mankind for Adams one offense, stands irrevocable to
eternity, -- for ever since the fall this is the condemnation, now this light
of life is come into the world, because men love darkness rather then light.

The third Use God is irrevocable in this Point also, namely, To give to any
man the possession of eternal life in this world by belief, and the fruition in
the next world, which is constant in his believing operations in the said
posture, according to the striving of Christ's Spirit with his spirit; for says
our Lord, He that endures to the end, shall be saved.

In the fourth place this informs us also, That if any man be by God dispossessed
of his eternal life in this world, and so in the next, it must needs follow, he
quenches this Spirit of Christ, which thus by belief gave him possession of it
here, and so would have done there, had he not persisted in quenching, and also
in resisting the said Spirit, by following lying vanities, and so forsaking his
own mercies, as did Demas, and the seven Churches of Asia, till God removed the
Candlestick from them, and left them in darkness, and Demas to embrace this
present world.

Is it so, That the Gospel and the Universe of this Creation has a tendency,
and bends jointly as one in man's universal good, and vertually to breed in him
the faith of God in Jesus Christ, as is proved.

Then hence observe, That those that stand in an universal relation to men, at
the Stern of Magistracy as Gods, stand bound universally to further the good of
man, not of this life only, but of that which is to come; namely, to set up in
their Territories and Dominions, in all convenient places, the Preaching of the
Gospel, to beget the belief of God in Jesus Christ in the minds of men.

CHAP. XI. In which is handled the third particular in the said Rule, namely,
to let all men see how suitabble this Rule is to them.
THe suitableness whereof is opened in nine particulars; as first, It has its
Institution in Gods word of truth, and the natural property of the
understanding of all men, being, as is proved, to follow truth as such, or as
it appears to be such: wherefore we see the Apostate Angels came to our first
Parents in the appearance of truth, therefore it is universally suitable to all
mankind in this respect.

Secondly, This rule tenders to man, not only a good to be received by his
operations according to it, but also his sweetest and chiefest good; namely, to
enjoy God in belief of the truth in this life, and according to truth, to
eternity in the next; and so this rule is suitable to man's will, whose natural
property is to follow good, or as it appears so to be, as the natural property
of the eye is to follow the light; wherefore the Apostate Angels came to us in
our first parents, as is proved in appearance of a good; wherefore this rule is
universally suitable to all men in this respect.

Thirdly, ever since the fall of Adam, God in his word requires no man by his
workings to attain eternal life for himself or others, but only by his workings
in the said posture to receive eternal life, attained only by the Lord Christ,
and given imputatively by God himself; therefore this rule is universally
suitable to all men, none excepted but Christ himself.

Fourthly, Because the natural liberty of man's will consists in this, namely,
to choose and refuse all objects, as it likes them, or as it likes them not, as
is proved. And because this rule tenders a twofold object to will or nill, that
is, to choose or refuse; namely, good or evil, that is, eternal life or death
for it to choose or refuse; therefore it is universally suitable to all in this
respect, none excepted.

Fifthly, because this just and merciful rule admits mercy to man after he
has not done well, according to his said posture, man being ever since the
fall imperfect; therefore this rule is suitable universally to all men, none
excepted but Christ the Lord.

Sixthly, Because it is propper to all men which propound to themselves an end
in their workings, to ground those workings and operations upon their own
belief or faith of a good to be attained and attainable, as do Merchants which
send or go by Sea or Land for wealth, or the like, or upon their own belief of
some evil or danger, as did these Mariners, which to avoid the danger of death
by their operations, cast the wheat out of the Ship into the Sea; and therefore
because this rule requires man's own belief of Gods truth and the said good, and
to avoid the contrary evil, to be the ground of all their operations in the
said posture, He that believes shall be saved, he that will not believe shall
be damned, as is proved: Wherefore because this Rule requires all men thus to
make their own belief, as is said, the ground of their operations in this
posture; therefore this rule is universally suitable to all men, none excepted
but men that are dead in sins and trespasses by acquired habits herein, or
sots, idiots, mad men, or the like: From this ground it is that our Lord says,
This is the work of God, That ye believe, and so forth; and from this ground it
is, that Abraham's believing operations in this posture, Romans 4.4.
was so much respected, as opposed to men that made their own works, as works
in this posture, to be the ground only of their acceptance with God to eternal
life; and from this ground, namely, That man makes his own belief of Gods
truth, and the said good to be the ground of his operations in this said
posture it is, that faith is so highly extolled in Scriptures by the Spirit of
Christ; for in so doing they render unto God the sole glory of all his truth
and goodness revealed in the seed of the woman, Christ the Lord, and his
imputed righteousness, and Gods gift of life therein.

Seventhly, Because man's reasonable soul or spirit is of an everlasting
duration, and never to be extinct, and man's body when raised a spiritual body,
so to be also; and because this rule tenders to man an estate of well and woe,
of an everlasting duration, and that all things else under the Sun, are only
suitable to his moldring body, and to a change, as also is it; therefore this
rule is universally suitable to all men in this respect, none excepted.

Eighthly, Because this rule not only admits man to do well after he has done
evil, as is said; but when he so returns, admits pardon of the guilt and
punishment due to him for his sin or sins, as is proved; therefore this rule is
suitable to all men capable to operate to this rule, Christ only excepted, in
whom was no sin.

Ninthly, Because God has given an impression and dictate of the effect of
this rule, as it respects its execution in reference to his final end, in the
minds of all men naturally; namely, that he will render unto all men according
to their works; and from this ground it is, that the consciences of all men do
either excuse or accuse them, according to their own works, good or bad, the
which is the dictate of this rule, and Gods said final end, as is said;
therefore this rule is universally suitable to all men, none excepted.

From the Premises thus proved arises these following Observations; First,
That this Gospel, as carrying along in it this Tenor, a just and a merciful
rule is it which all mankind are under to work by, in relation to their eternal
state, and none other, as is proved: Hence says the Apostle, The Gospel was
Preached unto us as to them, meaning to us in the last days as to the Jews,
and unto all in former ages before them; wherefore not any of mankind since the
fall ever was, or now is, nor never shall be under a Covenant of works,
properly so called, the Lord Christ only excepted; therefore it is a mistake to
affirm that all men which are not true believers, are under a Covenant of
works, and wrath of God, and out of the grace and favor of God in Christ: For
we see proved at large, that the favor of God in Christ pardoned to all
mankind eternal death due to them for Adams one offense, and that every man is
born with the internal light of Christ in him, and has reduced the total
nature of sin to a seed, and also God has given the Spirit of Christ to strive
with the spirits of all men, to keep that seed of original sin from the
acquired habits, if men will be faithful in their little, and to increase the
internal light of Christ in them, and to bring them to, and to keep them into
the said posture, that they may receive his gift of life in Christ: therefore
it must needs follow that the former Doctrine is a great mistake.

Secondly, Is it so, That this Rule, the Gospel Tenor, is the only and alone
suitable rule for all men to work in reference to their eternal happiness: Then
hence observe. If any man desires or expects union with God in point of
blessedness, it must only be by his works in the said posture, because only by
the reception of the said gift of life wrapped up in Christ's righteousness
imputed, man comes to God the fountain of life; for so Christ is only the way,
the truth and the life; therefore those fantastic men which dream of an union
with the Divine Essence, have an union indeed, but not in their sense; for only
this union they have, namely, That they live, and move, and have their being in
God, as have all creatures, as such, and so have the Apostate Angels, and the
damned in hell, but not that union which they dream of; namely, an Union in the
Divine Essence, essencially the same nature, and therefore as they reject all
Ordinances, so their operations in this posture, according to the said suitable
rule; and yet the Text which affirms we are partakers of the Divine Nature,
shows wherein it consists, namely, by operations and workings according to this
rule, to suppress the effects of the seed of original sin; for says the Text,
We are partakers of the Divine Nature, in that we fly the corruptions that are
in the world through lusts, and this sin and lusts we came to know by the Law,
that is, the Gospel, which was once under a vail; for says the Apostle, I had
not not known sin, except the Law had said, thou shall not lust: Now the ground
of this blasphemous error is this, These men fancy to themselves, that the
Creation is eternal, that is, without beginning or end, and themselves being a
part thereof, are therefore eternal, yea God himself, all which is contrary to
the testimonies of the sacred Oracles of God; for it positively affirms the
world had a beginning, it shall have an end, and God will according to his
sacred Oracles, as he shakes the wicked out of the corners of the earth, as
Iobe speaks, so will he shake and make these men vessels of dishonor in
torments to eternity, according to the justice of this rule of mercy which they
now despise, and he will laugh when their fear comes, to their destruction, if
they return not in to the work of the said posture in time; therefore let all
men beware of these men's fancies, and what God says in his word, we must
believe it, or else do worse; for the Scripture speaks in this tone to man from
God, Thus says the Lord, as did the Prophets in old time, implying, what God
says in his word, we must believe it, and so rest; and if we believe the Lord
and his Prophets, we shall surely prosper.

Again, thirdly, Is it so, That this is the only rule suitable to all men, as
is proved; hence observe, This Rule points us unto a twofold righteousness, The
first is the rectitude of man's internal intentions, and external operations, by
the force of which man rightly receives the said gift of life, and this
righteousness is called in Scripeure, Sanctification. The second righteousness
is this, When man by the said rectitude has believingly received Gods gifts of
Christ's righteousness imputed; and because in that righteousness is included
life eternal, Romans 4.
and acceptance with God, therefore this righteousness so received, is called
our justification; Therefore let no man presume to be acceptable with God for
his own operations in the said posture that is for works, as works, as did the
Jews before mentioned; for if we do, it is true, we may rejoice in our selves,
but not in God, no more then could Abraham if he had been of this opinion, as
the Apostle affirms.

Fourthly, Is it so, That God makes all men good or bad, according to their
works, vessels of honor or dishonor, as is proved, and as will more appear in
the next Chapter: Then hence observe, That the absolute power and sovereign
pleasure of the infinite God, in reducing the reasonable creature to its final
end to eternity, as the Potter makes one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor of the same lump, he does it only and alone by this rule, so suitable
to all man kind, according to their works, and not by a decree of reprobation
personally considered upon man, as is rendered by reverend Calvin in these
words, Not man's undeservings is the cause of man's reprobations, but the will of
God to reprobate; the which Point the Scripture speaks not, and we see it
proved, that thus to shape men as is thus described, is Gods final end, beyond
which there is none, for, Calvin's instications in the Margent p. 462.
for this end he made all things for his glory, as we see proved; he made the
whole world and all its parts for this, and he ordained and elected the Lord
Christ the seed of the woman, to carry on and accomplish this his final end, as
is proved.

CHAP. XII. In which is handled the sixth Branch of the manifold wisdom of God
formerly propounded in the fifth Chapter, namely, the Executiou of Gods final
End upon all men, some to honor, and some to dishonor, by the said Tenor of
the Gospel, according to their works, good or bad, to men without the Church,
and to men within the Church visible, yea and the invisible members of Christ.
ANd first, Cain was the first man without the Church, from the time he
departed from Adams Family, the first visible Family-Church of Christ in the
world; and in reference to this Point, Genesis 4.14.16.
the Text says, Cain went forth from the presence of Jehovah; and says Cain
to him, From thy face shall I be hid; and says the Text, Cain was of that
wicked one, and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? The Text answers,
Because his own works were evil and his brothers righteous; wherefore the
Spirit of Christ by Jude, 2 Epist. Joh. 3.12. Jude, ver. 7.
concludes the execution of the justice of the said Rule upon Cain, as upon
Balaam and Corah, and so a vessel of dishonor for ever; consequently thus God
executed his final end upon those of the old world, who were without the
Church, 2 Pet. 2.5.
that is, which were not of the Family-Churches of the first ten Fathers before
the Flood; for the Text says, God spared not the old world, and brought in the
Flood upon the world of ungodly; and the like execution after the Flood on men
without the Church, namely, Noah's posterity, Romans 2.11, 12.
when they became Heathens upon their confounding and scattering at Babel; for
of them the Text says, As many as have sinned without Law, shall perish
without Law, and God will render to every man according to his deeds:
Consequently thus this execution does and shall proceed upon men without the
Church to the worlds end. So much for those without the Church.

Secondly, concerning the visible Church, God declared this execution
impartially unto Cain when he was a member of the visible Church, when he said
unto him, If thou do well, Shall thou not be accepted: meaning, as is Abel
thy brother; implying, Yea, most certainly thou shall; But if thou do not
well, sin lies at thy door: And accordingly the justice and mercy of this Rule
was executed upon Abel; for because his operations were Right in belief, Heb
11.4.
therefore according to the justice of this Rule, God rewarded his labor of
love by mercy, receiving him into glory in the imputed righteousness of his
Son; both which is employed in the Text, which says, By faith Abel offered unto
God a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain, and obtained witness that he was
righteous, consequently thus the Lord proceeded in execution in the Families of
the ten Fathers before the Flood; and it is employed Genesis the fixth, in that
he took special notice of their degeneration from their operations to him in
their posture to amity with the world, in that the Text says, The Sons of God
saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and took them wives of all which
they chose; for thus did God when there was but one Family-Church of Christ's
left, and that was Noah's; for says God to him, Come thou and thy house into
the Ark, for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation, that is,
Thee only; for that is employed. Again, this execution proceeded thus upon the
Family-Churches of Christ after the Flood, as is employed in the eleventh of
Genesis: For there, all that did apostate at Babel, and were scattered from
being a visible Church of Christ, their names are wholly left out in the
Genealogy of Noah in that Chapter, implying this execution had cut them off,
and left them in the vanity of their minds to perish, excepting some few of
them, which did seek honor and glory in that narrow way to eternal life, as
before is proved; but the contrary it implies, the mercy of this rule was
executed upon Shems Family-Church of Christ, Genesis 11.10. to verse last.
which kept to this posture, and so were preserved to be vessels of honor, as
is employed in this, that Shems Family their names are all upon Record, their
births, their lives, their deaths, written as it were in the book of life.

Again, thus this impartial execution proceeded upon the next visible Church
which sprang out of Terah's idolatrous brood, namely elect in Abraham's seed,
then unborn, to be a visible national Church of Christ, as before is proved;
and of this Church the Text does say, Although the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand on the Seas shore, a remnant shall be saved, for God will
finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness, that is, according to this
righteous rule of justice and mercy; and therefore when the generality of that
people did degenerate by undervaluing the righteousness of Christ, which as to
us, so to them was the righteousness of God, in which was included life and
glory for them by overvaluation of their own works and operations in that
posture they were in, by this they brought on the execution of the justice of
the said rule of mercy, as is employed in the Text, which says, They sought it
not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, and they stumbled at that
stone, they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God; and thus they fell by degrees under the execution of Gods said final
end, this sixteen hundred years, and now are to this day no visible Church of
Christ.

Again, the next visible Churches of Christ to this, were those under the New
Testament, and were chosen and elected into those Churches by a new way, as
never none was before, that is, only of believers, according to the judgment
of charity, and not mixed of believers and undbelievers, as it was in the said
Family-Churches from the beginning, now as in the Jewish Churches to the times
of the Gospel, and the said admittance into the Church as believers only under
the Gospel unvailed, is employed in the words of our Lord in his great
Commission: Rev. 2.12. Rev. 2.7. And as more may appear at large in c. 2, 3.
He that believes and is baptized, that is, he that believes and is received
into the Church by Baptism, is in the Ark of salvation: and God executes his
final end by the said just and merciful rule as before; some to honor, some
to dishonor, according to their works to eternity, as appears in those
Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, in that the Lord Christ takes special
notice of their good works and their bad; to their good works in the said
posture, he makes gracious promises and encouragements, as that he will give
them a Crown of life, and so forth; and for their several evil works, many
grievous threatenings, among the rest, to remove their Candlestick of light and
life in him, and so to leave them in darkness, as vessels of dishonor for
ever, that is, to be no Churches of his.

Again, thus God executes his final end by the justice and mercy of the Gospels
Tenor upon the invisible members of Christ's mystical body, according to their
works, good or bad, some to honor, some to dishonor for ever; for Paul
speaking of these men as of himself, says, We walk by faith, and not by sight;
implying, they were the invisible members of Christ, which walk not by sight
only, as do those which are only visible members: Wherefore we labor, says
he, being present or absent, we may be accepted of him. And in the next words
he gives a reason why they do so, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
namely, We must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad; and in reference to this point, says God himself,
When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness and commits
iniquity, and dies in them, for his iniquity that he has done shall he die; 2
Cor. 5.9, 10.
and therefore says God unto the Prophet, Thou Son of man, say unto the
children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver
him in the day of his transgression, and for the wickedness of the wicked, he
shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his wickedness, neither
shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness, in the day that he
sins: Ezekiel. 18.26.
And in reference to this point, to these invisible members, Ezekiel. 33.12.
the Apostle says, Know ye not that ye are the Temples of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you; if any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall
God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, let no man
deceive himself, and so forth.

Again, in reference to this Point the Lord Christ himself speaks to his eleven
Apostles which were invisible members; also for John 13.10, 11. when he had
said, Ye are clean, but not all, for he knew who should betray him, therefore
he said, says the Text, Ye are not all clean; but when Judas was gone forth
from them, verse 30. then in the fifteenth Chapter and third verse; Now, says
he unto them, ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you, that
is, your hearts are purified by belief and love to me; thereupon says he,
Abide in me, and I in you, as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except
it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Joh. 13.10, 11.30.
Joh. 15.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10.
And says he, I am the Vine, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit; and yet in the next words he tells them, Their evil
works will bring them to be vessels of dishonor for ever, saying, If a man
abide not in me; he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather
them and cast them into the fire, and they are burnt; implying, And so shall
you, if ye abide not in me: But on the contrary, If they rightly operate in the
said posture, they shall be vessels of honor for ever; saying, If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you, herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, so
shall ye be my Disciples; that is, ye shall continue so for ever; for they were
his Disciples before: And says he, If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide
in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments and abide in his love,
that as I abide for ever in his love, so shall you, if ye keep my Commandments,
or otherwise not; for that is employed. Thus we see that God executes his final
end upon the invisible members of Christ, some to honor, and some to
dishonor, as to all men else.

Again, That the full consummation and final execution of this final end shall
fall in at the great day, Jude 6. Joh. 11.24.
as Jude calls it, and the day of the resurrection, as Marcha calls it; And then
the Sea and the Grave shall render up their dead, and then shall every man,
says the Text, Rev. 20.13. John 5.19.
be judged according to his works, and shall come forth, they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he
shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd his sheep from the goats,
and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left; then
shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
Mat. 25.33, 34 41, 46.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world; then
shall he say also unto them on his left hand, Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and these shall go into everlasting
punishment, but the righterous into life everlasting: So upon this last and
final execution of Gods final end, then comes the end, when Christ shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down
all Rule, and all Authority and Power, that is, all Authority, Rule and Power,
raised in a world of ungodly men by the Apostate Angels delusive lies and
temptations against the truth of Gods said final end in the foresaid particular
branch; for till then Christ must reign, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 28.
as it is in the next words, until he has put down all enemies under his
feet, implying, and no longer in this Government, by his Spirit striving in the
Gospel and its Tenor, a just and merciful Rule, as is employed in the 28 verse,
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son himself be subject
unto him that did put all things under him: yet it is one thing that this
Administration, Heb. 1.6. Psalm. 45.6.
as such, shall cease for ever, as we see it shall, and another thing that the
personal union in Christ God-Man shall cease, for that shall never be, for so he
is and ever shall be above the Angels, and they shall worship him for ever, as it
is written, Thy Throne is for ever O God, and so forth, and let all the Angels
of God worship him, and so shall he be worshipped of all the glorified Saints for
ever; for if by the Angels, much more by them, notwithstanding he is their
head, and they members of his triumphant body, yet he as head and members,
shall, as is said before, be subject to God the Father in this respect, for as
there was a time when Christ should have the pre-eminence in all things for the
prosecution of his Fathers final end; so now that end being attained, and time
shall be no more. Now God must have the preheminency to all eteruity.

CHAP. XIII. In which is proved, how God ordained and executed his final end
upon all the Angels to their final ends for ever, according to their works,
some to honor, some to dishonor.
IN the prosecution of this Point, I will briefly touch these six particulars,
First, That some of them God elected; secondly, That some of them he rejected;
Thirdly lay down the ground of that rejection; Fourthly, That they transgressed
Gods Law; Fifthly, lay down what that Law was; Sixthly, I will lay down the
ground why God elected the other Angels, and to what they were elected more
then they had together with the rest before any fell; of these in their order.

First, The Text affirms that some of them are elected, 1 Timothy 5.21.
as appears by Paul's charging Timothy before the Elect Angels: therefore some
of them are elected.

Secondly, The others were rejected from the good that the other were elected
to, to an evil equivolent contrarily; for the Text affirms, That God cast them
down to hell, that is, when the rest remained in heaven, and delivered them,
says the Text, into Chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment; and Jude
says, Iud. v. 6.
God has reserved them in an everlasting Chain under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day; and our Lord says, For them is prepared
everlasting fire, therefore these Angels stand rejected by God for ever from
the said good, to the contrary evil.

Thirdly, The ground of that rejection is named in the forecited Texts;
namely, sin; for the Text says, God spared not the Angels that sinned; also
Jude says, those Angels kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation; and our Lord points out the same: For when he had said the Devil
was a murderer from the beginning, he also says, and abode not in the truth;
therefore the ground of their rejection was sin. Joh. 8.44.


Fourthly, if they sinned, as we see it is proved, this must needs follow, 1
Ep. Joh. 3, 4. Romans 5, 13.
a law they had, which they transgressed; For, as says the Text, sin is not
imputed where there is no Law: and our Lord himself implies, They stood bound
by a Law to worship God their maker as they are his crreatures; therefore said
he to the Devil, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve; and therefore a Law they had, for it is propper to God
only to be without Law, Luke 4.8.
who is without limits in his essence, and therefore so in his operations.

Fifthly, in a word, the Law they had and transgressed, was no more but this,
namely, The Law of Nature, that is, their nature and existency which they had
received from their maker, bound them, and by an innate principle called upon
them by their operations in flames of burning love in all their strength to
worship and serve him, so to return him the sole glory of all that they had
received from him; for from this ground our Lord alleged the same Law that
God gave to man against them, because they were his creatures, as well as man,
saying, It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve; and we all know Gods Law written in man's heart, and in Gods Law, is
one and the same thing in kind, yet with this difference in man imperfect,
otherwise man could not do the things by nature contained in the Law, having
not the Law, as before is proved.

Sixthly, The ground why, and to what God elected them that stood, to more then
what they had together with the rest, before they fell, was this: Job 4.18.
Before the fall they were all alike unstable in that estate, according to that
in Job, he found not steadfastness in his Angels; the reason is because of the
contingent events that might arise to them all, being included in the natural
liberty of their will, from whence they all alike might refuse or choose to give
their maker his glory due unto him, or might choose or refuse to assume his
glory unto themselves, because the natural liberty of the will in Men and
Angels, consists in this as is said, namely, to choose or refuse all objects, as
it likes, or as it likes them not: therefore their estate stood all alike
contingent for the future to stand in it, or to fall from it: Therefore because
these Angels did voluntarily refuse to assume Gods glory to themselves, and did
choose to render the sole glory of all they had, to him in all their strength;
therefore this was the ground why God elected them, for as certainly as God
rejected the others for rejecting his glory due unto him, as is proved, so
certainly he elected these Angels to an establishment in their choice, namely,
so to render him glory to eternity, as a reward of their labor of love;
consequently to be blessed to eternity, because they might refuse so to do, as
did the others: Thus God did render to all the Angels according to their works,
good or bad, some to honor, some to dishonor, and so accomplished his final
end on them all to eternity.

And because this final execution has thus passed upon them all, it follows,
That as the rejected Angels can never will to render glory to God, as once they
might before they abused it, because by the justice of that execution, God does
deny them any influence or efflux from him to them, to convey or continue any
good in them more then to be, that they may eternally be, to be eternally
miserable; so on the contrary by the same execution there flows a continual
influence from God to the elect Angels, to keep and support them in the said
choice, to render him his sole glory to eternity, which indeed is their
blessedness for ever: for the service of God is perfect freedom to men and
Angels.



I answer, it is true, and so it is in this case, because he was moved to work
all things, not according to their works, but after the council of his own
will, as he purposed in himself, that is, to propound this his final end, and
all the means suitable to accomplish it, from whence issued forth the Creation
of men and Angels in their natural liberty of their will; that so the events of
the operations of men and Angels might be contingent, that from thence might
arise their works, good and bad, and accordingly to be elected or rejected,
some to honor, some to dishonor; therefore the moving cause was and is in God
himself, to carry on and accomplish his final end by his own means, as is
described. Hence we may inform our selves aright of two things.



Secondly; We may hence inform our selves that God made not the heaven of
heavens for Angels sakes, although it be their own habitation, nor this world
for man's sake, although it be with all therein related to man's use and good; I
say he made it not for man's sake, but all for his own names sake, in reference
to his final end; and it must needs be so, for we see it proved, he respects no
man's person more then another in pursuance of this his final end, be they men
without the Church, or be they men within the Church, Saints by calling, or
Saints indeed; and in truth such, if they abide not so, are by God judged
impartially, some to honor, and some to dishonor, as are all sorts of men, for
he made all for himself, yea the wicked for the day of evil; wherefore God is
most righteous in all this, not only because he wills it, but also because he
wills it thus to men and Angels, by the said suitable rules, and not according
to the forementioned mistake of many reverend, learned, and godly men.



was no middle thing; therefore because they would have been eternity it self,
eternity in punishment is their just reward.

Again I answer, If the case of men and Angels in the Point of Eternal
Reprobation had been this, Jer. 18. from v. 1. to 10.
that not man's undeservings had been the cause of reprobation, but only the
will of God to reprobate without respect to their sins, Page 65. to the last
clause, and from p. 71. to p. 77.
there had been some ground for this objection; but because God thus proceeds,
as is said, only according to their works to the said suitable rules; therefore
it is most just and righteous: But as for the aforesaid mistake of Reverend
Divines, being grounded principally upon the ninth to the Romans; therefore I
refer the Reader to the Exposition of the ninth to the Romans in my
forementioned Treatise, to the pages in the margent.



those men and Angels which in those endowments they have received from him,
and work contrary to him in his Rule made suitable to them, as is described, he
will make them vessels of dishonor to eternity irrevocable, and so none has
resisted his will: Therefore let all men submit to his will, if they will not
perish by following their own will.



Gods will might be subordinate to our will and lusts, and what is that? but he
must forsooth make men and Angels, not for his own sake and glory, but for
their sakes and glory; and what is that, but to be God, 2 Timothy 3.13. Luke 4.29.
Mar. 4.39. Mar. 6.49. Job 38.12, 13. 2 King. 20.11. Mat. 15.13.
which is the fancy of our Familists, as well as their father the Devil, being
puffed up, his Will, will they do, by fancying a Deity in themselves, calling
themselves Christ, and the like, which if they be, why do they not as he did;
When the Jews led him to the edg of the Hill on which the City was built, to
destroy him, he passed away from them, and could not be detained of them; but
so did not one of those Familists, although he strived with them that carried
him to prison, for his fancy was of no force, for to prison he was carried: and
if they be Christ, why do they not walk upon the waters, and command the seas
and winds that they may obey them, as did Christ; or if they be God, why do
they not cause the light to take hold of the corners of the earth every
morning, and cause the Sun to go back so many degrees, as pleases them; and if
they be God, why do they not shake the wicked out of the corners of the earth;
and then they shall shake out themselves, and so the world shall be well rid of
them: But however, that which our Lord says, shall stand firm, Let them alone,
every plant which my Father has not planted, shall be plucked up by the roots,
which will be soon enough to their eternal woe, if they return not by those
means which God has put into their hands by the said assistance of Christ's
Spirit to receive his said gift of eternal life obtained by himself.

CHAP. XIV. Containing some useful Observations and Answers to Questions for
further clearing the precedent Premises.
ANd whereas it appears from proof, that God has passed upon man a fivefold
Election and Rejection in prosecution of his final end in respect to their
eternal estate.

The first being out of the fallen Mass; from being one with Devils into the said
posture.

The second being a continued act of the former by electing and rejecting two
Nations, the one to be Christ's visible Church, the other not, being but
vertually in the loins of two babes, their being but individually in their
mothers womb unborn.

A third being when God electeth and rejects men which by their acquired
habits in sin, are both alike dead in relation to Christ, for then we see he
chooses to inliven the minds of some, and denies it to the others, as he did to
us Gentiles, and denied it to the Jews at that time.

A fourth election and rejection being that execution of Christ by the visible
Churches on earth, choosing or receiving into the Churches men which according
to the judgment of charity are believers, and rejecting or refusing men which
cannot be judged in charity to be believers, for in this case, Mat. 22.3.14.
although many are called by the Gospel, yet few are chosen, because few
believe.

A fifth being the consummation of the precedent elections and rejections in the
final execution of his said end at the day of judgment, by making all men
vessels of honor or dishonor to eternity, according to their works, good or
bad; and as for any other elections or rejections upon man in relation to their
final estate to eternity, the Scripture speaks it not.

And from the Premises thus proved, it appears there is no personal election
of any man from Gods foresight of their faith or works, nor any personal
election or rejection, merely personal without respect to works, good or evil,
but only after the council of his own will, as he purposed in himself, that is,
to finish his said final end by those seven means formerly proved, under which
falls in the fivefold elections and rejections, and none other.

But if it be objected, If there be not an election personal in any of the
twofold respects, then by reason of the natural liberty of man's will, Gods
glory of his grace in Jesus Christ to eternity, stands contingent, may fail and
fall, and come to nothing.

I answer, and deny that the stress and weight of the glory of Gods grace in
Christ any way depends upon the natural liberty of man's will, but the stress
and weight thereof relies upon an infallible means, namely, the foresaid
seventh means, It shall bruise thy head, that is, infallibly; and from this
ground this seventh means was by the depth of Gods wisdom composed, personally
God-Man; and therefore the stress of Gods glory by Christ, depended not upon
the natural liberty of Christ's humane will, but upon his personal operations;
and accordingly in that person the fallen humane nature of man, ascended the
heavenly glory above the Angels; and so the Apostate Angels chief design in
the said branch was destroyed, if no more of the fallen nature of man had
ascended the Angels glory

Secondly, I answer, The stress and weight thereof depends not upon the natural
liberty of man's will, because so much of the fallen nature of man which departs
this life in infancy, or the like, ascends the heavenly glory also,
notwithstanding the seed of original sin that is in them, because the
imputation of Christ's righteousness upon the world, did interpose the
imputation of Adams unrighteousness upon the world, and so is the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world, as is proved.

Thirdly, I answer, the stress and weight of the glory of Gods grace in Christ
in man, having the use of his understanding, depends not upon the natural
liberty of his will; but the stress thereof depends upon the Spirit of
Christ, striving with man's spirit in the Gospel; for if those men perish by the
abuse of the natural liberty of their wills, quenching and resisting this
Spirit, so striving that they put away this eternal life, yet nevertheless God
has the glory of his grace in Christ in their destruction, because no man since
the fall is condemned by a Law of works properly such, but by the justice of
the Law of grace in Jesus Christ, namely, the Gospel Tenor, or Rule of mercy
and justice, as before is proved: From this ground the Ministers of the Gospel
are the sweet savor unto God in Jesus Christ in them that perish.

Fourthly, I answer, The glory of Gods grace depends not upon the natural
liberty of man's will, but upon the universal favor of God to man in Christ;
for had those that are perished been faithful in the said little which he in
Christ has given them, then he would have given them more and more, even to
his gift of faith rightly to receive Christ; and in that faith have given them
three degrees, that is, from babes to young men, and Fathers in Christ; and in
the last degree, he would have confirmed them in that union and communion with
himself by Christ; that nothing should be able to separate them from him, nor
him from them, in that blessed union and communion: And because God was thus
real toward them, the glory of his grace redounds eternally to his praise; for
it must follow, that their destruction is of themselves, therefore the glory of
Gods grace stands stable to eternity in Christ, notwithstanding the liberty of
man's will, and its contingent events.

And for conclusion, take these following Observations.

First, In regard God created the natural liberty of man's will, purposly to be
one means to his said final end, that from the contingency of its events, men's
works might be good or bad, so to be rendered vessels of honor or dishonor to
eternity; therefore that opinion of both those personal elections, and that of
personal rejection falling point blank to cross this means, or to make it of no
use, must needs be a great mistake.

Secondly, hence observe, That although the Spirit of Christ strives, as is
said, with the spirits of all men in all places of the world, that it takes up
his dwelling place only in the heart or spirit of man when he is a right
believer, and not before.





Secondly, I answer, This Temple also was a figure that God would take up his
dwelling place in the hearts of true believers only; and in a word, this
dwelling in the Temple, and in Christ himself, and in the hearts of his
members, is no more but this, his abiding residence in a manifestation of
himself in a peculiar presence of his love and favor, as in the Temple more
then in any peculiar place in all the world, and most eminently in Christ's
humane body, more then in any created nature, as is proved, and his dwelling in
the hearts of believers, is a secret and silent manifestation of himself to
their minds, and is so restrained to them, as it once was to the Temple at
Jerusalem, and therefore the Text says to believers, if they destroy this
Temple in themselves, God will destroy them.

Again, Observe that Gods dwelling place as personally considered, is only in
the humane Nature of Christ; therefore Christ alone is personally Gods Elect
for this end: so to be the said seventh means, therefore to affirm that any
part of humane Nature, besides that in his person, is personally Gods Elect to
eternal life, is a great mistake.

The Reason why God thus dwells in the hearts of no men else in all the world,
is this; because they are Regenerated only, and their belief or faith the
principal part thereof, is that, by which Christ dwells in their hearts, as
says the Text, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, so that the truly
sanctified mind is Christ's only habitation of all mankind.

A Second Reason why Christ thus dwells only in the hearts of Believers by
Faith, is this; because where this Sanctification or Holiness is not, there is
no proper place for him to manifest himself there, as is said; for all men else
that are, by being faithful in their little, are but coming toward Christ or
God, by the said striving of his Spirit; that so, he might give them Faith, but
yet having it not, there is no dwelling place for him, and for all sorts of men
in the world besides, they are dead in sins, and in trespasses, their Light
being turned into Darkness; and therefore the children of the Devil, and then
what fellowship has Christ with Belial?



Mark. 6.5, 6.
by his Doctrine upon their spirits. For the Text implies, it was because of
their unbelief; that is, of what they might have believed from that light which
formerly they had received, as we see proved by those heathens which had not
the Oracles of God, yet being faithful in their little, by the assistance of
Christ's Spirit striving with their spirits, were brought to Circumcision of the
heart, which as says the Text, is by Nature, and were saved, as is proved.

The ground why Christ's Spirit can do no great works to such men as is said is
this, he will not cross the orderly means to his fathers final end, namely not
to force the Will of man, for then the nature of the Will is destroyed,
consequently the Reasonable Soul annihilated, which must not be in respect of
Gods final end, for so God should destroy that means purposely made by himself,
that man might be made to honor or dishonor, as is proved, and therefore Noah
by the spirit of prophecy in his prayer to God concerning the Calling of the
Gentiles into the said posture, does rightly point at the manner of Christ's
Spirit striving with man's spirit, saying, God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem, that is not only by a moral persuasion in the voice of the
Gospel, but also by the Spirit of Christ, the rectitude of the Understanding
and the Will rightly to operate, to receive the said gift of Christ's
Righteousness and life in it, and thus always God proceeds with the spirits of
men ordinarily in all the world, Romans 10.20.
except in case of Restoration of the World from one universal Apostasy, then
as is proved, Act. 2.17.
God is found of them that sought him not, as in the Call of the Gentiles, and
pouring out the imbreathing of his Spirit, as it were compelling the Gentiles
into the said posture by a more cleerer manifestation to their minds in the
Gospel being unvailed then ever the Jews had, but still this must be remembered,
that this extraordinary Cause is in prosecution of his final end, against the
Apostate Angels design against the said particular Branch and therefore not for
man's sake, but for his own Names sake; for to this end, he gives to some a
greater emminency of Gifts and Graces throughout all Ages and Generations of
men as to Moses, Abraham, Daniel, and David, and the seventy Disciples, and the
Apostles, and so forth; but in an ordinary course God proceeds with men to give
them more Faith, and so of every Grace according as they are faithful in their
little, and not otherwise.





to speak truth, all Rules and Operations, and Ordinances to us are useless and
void.

Matthew. 5.30.
so likewise from the same divine Essence there went virtue to the woman of a
bloody Issue, for the Text says, He knew there was virtue gone from him, and
it gave her health, and her Nature was not the Divine Nature of God; so
likewise in the shadow of the Apostles bodies God was pleased to put forth
himself by virtue flowing from himself to the cure of many diseased people as
they went in the streets; yet the peoples bodies that were cured, and the
shadow of the Apostles bodies, and the virtue that flowed from God, and Gods
own Essence were all distinct things in their several Natures and Kinds; even
so, when God gave being to the Reasonable Soul, by breathing into man's
Nostrils, the breath of lives his own Divine Nature, Genesis 2.7.
and that Creative power, another thing by which he was pleased to put forth to
the production of man's Reasonable Soul, and as formerly is proved; the Essence
of God is one thing; and that Radical virtue or potency is another thing in its
Effects; so when he was pleased to reduce that virtue and potency to act
creatively, that was another thing; from which thing it is, that the Creature
is the Offspring of God, from whom it sprang, and in whom it continually is,
and cannot be otherwise, Act. 17.18.
he being Infinite: In him we live, move, and have our being; but for the
manner how we live; move, and have our being; is known to God alone, and not
perceived by us; but because Gods Word has said it, we must believe it.

Again, 1 Cor. 6.17.
for the next Text, that Believers are one spirit with the Lord: The Text
refers it only to Believers, and not to all man kind; as the drift of your
opinion point at: for the words are these, But he that is joined or cleaves to
the Lord is one spirit with him, and is apposed to those that did join or
cleave in their minds, as well as with their bodies to Harlots, yet these men
and women were not one spirit Essentially, but Individually still they were
twain, so on the contrary, true Blievers are of one spirit in pure Affections,
cleaving to God and Christ; yet nevertheless the Divine Essence of God is one
thing, and still their bodies and souls are two distinct Natures, so the scope
of this Text is directly against your opinion.

Again, for the next Text, in regard it refers Believers to Gods precious
Promises, and Faith, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
and Love, and Virtue, and Knowledge, to flee the Corruptions that are in the
World through Lusts, and that by these they are partakers of the Divine Nature,
they all employ the use of their operations, as flowing from their Natural
Faculties to the said suitable Rule, by the assistance of the Spirit of Christ;
therefore the scope of this Text also, is against your Opinion.

Again, the other Texts, Christ in you the hope of Glory, the drift of it is no
more but this, Colos. 1.23, 27.
That Christ dwells in Believers hearts by Faith and Love, from whence they
live in hope of a full fruition and glory with him for ever in the next Life.
But as for your blaspeamous Error, If you be the Divine Nature Essentially, it
fully injoys it self infinitely; therefore your Error is Contrary to the Nature
of Hope, therefore the drift of this Text is also against you.

Again, Whereas you allege the Texts of Scripture, and the like, it is only
an Introduction to draw men's minds from believing the sacred Scriptures to be
Gods Word, to believe that the only true Scriptures is the Divine Essence,
essentially in themselves, and so to believe a lie; for what man can believe
that is in his right mind, that himself is God or Christ; and yet cannot walk
upon the Sea as Christ did: nor deliver himself out of the hand of his enemies,
and not render himself into their hands till he pleased, as did the Lord Jesus
Christ when his hour was come, nor cause the Sun to go back so many degrees as
pleases themselves as God did.

Again, for Conclusion take this one Observation more from the precedent
premises: Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13.
Namely, that there is a threefold ground why God made a Law that Infants as
such, should be members of Christ's visible Church, and so under the use of
Ordinances in the Church.

The first is this, because the whole Humane Nature, as such God Elected in the
person of Christ the seed of the Woman in the fallen Mass out of that fall into a
capacity of the said posture in which they might if they lived to the use of
Reason by belief, receive in the gift of Righteousness Eternal Life as is
proved, and this Election is the first ground of their right to be Members of
Christ's visible Church, and so the first ground why God gave that Law, Hence it
is that Christ says, Matthew. 19.14.
suffer little children and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the
Kingdom of heaven.

A Second Ground is this, If the whole creation have a right of relation to
Christ by Virtue of his Righteousness imputed, as interposing the
unrighteousness of Adams imputed, and by it travels until now, as is proved.
Then much more has Humane Nature as such a right of relation to be Christ's
visible Church, and this was the second ground of that Law why Infants should
be members, the which Law was never repealed.

A third Ground was this, Because as is proved, all mankind dying in Infancy
or the like, ascended to Heaven, and there are Members of the Church
Triumphant, therefore much more have they a right to the Church Militant, and
all Churches and Ordinances here upon Earth, the which right can never be lost,
except they live to be able to act unbelieving Operations, and so put away
their right, as did Esaw, judging themselves unworthy of Eternal Life, and this
is a third Ground of that Law, whereby Infants are instituted Members of the
Visible Church of Christ.

FINIS.

