Downright Dick of the West:
OR, The Plow-Mans Ramble to LONDON, To see my Lord Mayor and the rest of the
Vine Volk of the City; with what happened while he there remained.

Tune of, The Country Farmer.
This may be Printed. R. P.



I Pray now attend and give ear to the jest,
A Countryman he came late from the West,
for he had a mind to see my Lord Mayor,
And other fine Folk which it seems lodged there:
Then up to the City at length he did range,
Where seeing brave Gallants, in rich golden fringe
But he above all did admire and strange
To zee the fine folk at the Royal Exchange.
The Countryman amazed did stand,
And looking about with his Whip in his hand,
Then come a fine fellow, a Don of the Town,
And called him Bumpkin and Country Clown,
And asked him how he dare to presume,
To Lag here and Loiter, thus fill up the Room,
Amongst these gay Ladies in Silk and Perfume,
Be gone and pack off, or the stacks is your doom.
I pray who are you? then the Plowman replied,
That does so scornfully here me deride,
Fine-fellow, said he, seeing you are unkind,
In short I shall tell you a piece of my mind,
I came now to see my Lord Fayor his good grace
I fear not the angry frowns of your face,
As long as I list, I will stay in this place,
Or on your Gay Coat I will lay a long Lace.
For why said the Plowman, I care not a figg,
For all your high words, and your looking so big,
This gallant was then in a passion indeed,
And thus in a fury began to proceed,
As making a proffer to give him a kick,
The Plow-men perceiving him just in the nick,
He told him his name it was resolute Dick,
Then up with his lash, and he gave him a lick.
O then this fine Fellow began for to roar,
Then presently came in twenty and more,
Who asked the Plowman, how dare he to d^'t,
Since he was a person of worthy repute:
He first did abuse me in calling me Clown,
I could not forbear, but I gave him a frown;
Why should those fine fellows run Husband men down,
You cannot live without us in city or town.
Nay Plowman, i would have you well understand,
That we have both Silver and Gold at command,
Rich chains and choice jewels, with diamonds and rings,
With plenty of spices, and other fine things:
Of many Rich Coffers we carry the Keys,
We have such Estates that we live at our ease,
We eat and we drink and we walk where we please,
Then what do you think of such fellows as these?
For all your rich Jewels, you starving may dye,
If we do not bring in a daily supply,
We plow and we sow, and we harrow and mow,
We have both the Milk, and the Honey you know:
We never are without a good pudding and sowse,
Then what need you Londoners make such a touze,
If we did not labor you could not keep house,
You gallants would soon sh -- as small as a Mouse.
Both Linen and Woollen what e're we will wear,
We have of our own by industrious care,
We daily delight in much pleasure and mirth,
And always receive the first fruit of the Earth:
To flout us I think you were something too bold,
You Would starve if you fed upon Silver or Gold,
We have corn, cattle and sheep in our Fold,
With rich beans and bacon, eat hold belly hold.
The Londoners presently laughing outright,
For in his discourse they had taken delight,
They said it was true, and they did him commend,
And thus the whole quarrel was soon at an end:
The Plowman they freely began to extal,
He soon got the favor of great men and small,
And thus there debate did immediately fall,
The Plowman in wit was too hard for them all.
FINIS.

