The double right of Scottish Kings to England Continued upward to the present
Reign.
Malcome. 3 Margaret
Edward slain in Anwick Duncan. Maud Queen of England Edgar David. 1 Henry.
Maud Countese of Anguss David Earl of Hunting John last Earl of Chester A^la
Lady Hastings. Henry Lord Hastings John Hastings Competit
Maud died a virgin. Isabell Lady Bruise Bernard Lord of Coningto Robert Bruce.
Edward slain in Ireland Thomas put to death by K E 1 Alexander put to death
Nigell. put to death by Ed. 1 Robert. 1 David. 2 Margaret Countess of
Sutherland Mariory Steward James slain with his brother Robert. 2 Eufame Lady
Douglas David Earl of Stracho^ Walter Earl of Athole (...) Robert Steward
(...) Robert Graham

A daughter married John Dubeir E of Athole Robert. 3 David Duke of Rothsay
James. 1 Margaret Queen of France Alexander borne with James 2 Jane Countes of
Austria Eleanor Duches of Austria James 2 Alexander Duke of Albany Alexander
Bishope of Murray John Duke of Albany
John Earl of Mare James. 3 Alexander Duke of Rothsay James. 4 James L. of
Murray a natural sone Alexander Bishope of St. Andre^ James died at on years
age A daughter died presently after birth James. 5 James died ye same day ^^
Arthur Mary. JAMES ye SIXTH. Robert died without issue. Henry Frederick died
young Charles afterward King. Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia Charles. 1 Charles Died
young Charles afterward King by ye Name of Charles the 2d. James afterward King
by ye Name of James the 2d Charles 2 James. 2 Charles Died without Issue James
Died without Issue Isabel Died without Issue Charles Died without Issue
Catharin Died without Issue Henrietta Died withot. Issue Anna Princese of
Denmark Mary Princese of Orange Mary. 2. Edgar Died without Issue Charles Died
without Issue

Henry died without Issue Anna died without Issue
Mary Wife to the Prince of Orange William. 2. Henritha Married to the Duke of
Orleance
Elizabeth died without Issue
Margaret died without Issue Mary died without Issue Sophia died without Issue

Arthur died at 8 days old
Arthur died an infant Alexander died an infant
John Earl of Mar
A daughter died before marriage Mary married the Lord Boyd Gregan Countese of
Cassels. James Earl of Arraine

Mary Lady C^pver Anabella Isabell Duchese of Britain Francis Lady Albert
Margaret Duchese of Britain Mary married Vicou^t Rob^^

A Daughter
Elizabet married. L. John Lio^is Alexander Earl of Buchan Alexander a natural
sone James Kenedy Bishop of St. Andrews Duncan Steward John Earl of Bu^hqua
Robert Duke of Albany Robert Steward Mordo Duke of Albany Alexander James died
in Ireland Walter Steward
Mardok slain at Hallidon

John slain at Hallido^ Alan slain in Battal
Maud died in infancy Jane Sutherland John heir apparent



Margare Countese of Galloway Dornidilla Ballial. John. 1 Edward 1



Malcome. 4 Margaret Duches of Britain Alice married Pinkney Henry Pinkney
Robert Pinkney Competit


William. 1 Henry slain by his Uncle Marion married Eustace Vessy William de
Vessy William de Vesey Competitor

Isabell Lady Rosse William Lord Rosse Robert Lord Rosse William Lord Rosse
Competitor


Adama married Patrick Dunbar Patrick Earl of March Patrick Patrick Competitor


Eufana married to Will Say William Say Martha married to Mundevill Roger
Mundevill Competit.


Alexander. 2 Alexander 3 Alexander died at 20 years David died young Margaret
Queen of Denmark Margaret heir of Scot and Norwa



Adhama Countese of Holland Florence Earl of Holland William Earl of Holland
Florence Competitor Patrik Geletry Competitor




Mary Countese of Bollign ALexander. 1 Edmond a Monk in England




