The DAMSELS Tragedy: OR, True Love in Distress.
Being an account of a young Man, who Slighting a young Maiden who had fixed
her love upon him, did thereby cause her to end her days in Despair by a
dreadful Dose of Poison.

To the Tune of, Charon, etc.
This may be Printed, R. P.





YOu Loyal Lovers attend to my D^tty,
which with a sorrowful heart I raise,
It Is of a Damsel, the more is the pity,
who with strong Poison did end her days:
Fair Elinor this Lass was named,
John the cause of all her Woe,
Sighing she said, though I here may be blamed,
No body knows what I undergo!
In my soft Breast is a secret Fire,
which by the power of Love increased,
Nothing but Death is my earnest desire,
hoping there by I shall be releast:
For I have lost my dearest Jewel,
this to my Grief, alas! I know,
My dearest Johnny, O why now so Cruel!
you little think what I undergo.
Here do I languish, by you unlamented,
now my poor innocent heart's betrayed,
How can you any way here be contented,
when you have ruined a harmless Maid?
To me you have been most false-hearted,
proving my final overthrow,
Since from my presence you have departed,
No body knows what I undergo!
Every Vein in my heart now does tingle,
while I in sorrow am left alone,
Many sad Sighs with my Tears I mingle,
while to the world here I make my moan:
O that I might but once behold him,
then would it Expiate my Woe,
But in my arms I shall never infold him,
No body knows what I undergo!
down from her eyes the tears flowed like a fountain
being surrounded with Care and Grief,
And though her sorrows she still was recanting,
there was no Creature to yield Relief:
Many a bitter Sigh she giving,
while her poor heart was sunk full low,
Said she, I here am a weary of Living,
No body knows what I undergo.
In her strange Fancy ran many a Notion,
before the passion of Love was past,
At length it was to prepare a sad Pation,
the which bereaved her of Life at last:
Then as in Torments she lay Dying,
being oppressed with Grief and Woe,
Wringing her hands like a Lover, and crying,
No body knows what I undergo.
Farewell, farewell, to my dearest for ever,
I must submit to the hand of Fate,
If that you here would afford me your pity,
now you would find it is far too late:
Then with those words she did Expire,
saying, to Dye I am afraid,
All her Relations and Friends that was nigh her,
wept for to hear the sad moan she made.
Here have I given a perfect Relation,
of a young Damsel that Died you hear,
Through her false Lovers Dissimulation,
who can forbear now to shed a Tear?
True Love abused it is such a Trial,
that there is few through it can Wade,
Therefore O young men, now learn to be Loyal,
think of the Sorrowful End she made.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Back, at the Black Boy on London Bridge, near the Drawbridge.


