Dolly and Molly: OR, The Two Country Damsels Fortunes at London.
Dolly and Molly came up to the Town
To try their fortune, wandering up and down:
At length both marched together to a Ball,
There Moll a Gallant got Doll none at all:
But Doll atlast in town was richly married,
Moll got a Clap and shamefully miscarried.
To an Excellent New Playhouse Tune, Or, Bacon and Beans.
With Allowance,





Dolly and Molly are new come to Town
Doll has got nothing, but Moll a silk Gown:
Dolly was handsome though pev^sh and coy
But Molly was buxome and free to enjoy.
Dolly and Molly they went to White Hall,
Dolly got nothing but Molly got all:
Dolly she scorned to have a Gallant,
But Molly had all things that Dolly did want.
As Dolly and Molly were walking near the Court,
A youngster did Dolly began for to sport;
But she put him of with a pish and a fie,
Saying, Lord Sir be civil, else from you i will fly.
When Dolly refused him, to Molly he went,
For one of the two to enjoy he was bent:
He asked her a question which made her to smile,
Then a kiss and a Guiny did Molly beguile.
He took her aside and he pleased her so well,
That Molly consented with him for to dwell,
There Is nothing on earth that is to Molly denied,
Her humor to please, and to pomper her pride.
He gave her fine clothes and all things of the best,
Because that her dilicate body be pressed,
Her Country speech did so heighten his charms,
That Molly could seldom rest out of his arms.




Now Mally is rich and Dolly is poor,
But Dolly is honest though Mally a Whore:
Doll said 'twas a pleasure to be modest and coy
But Moll swore 'twas pleasanter to enjoy,
Quoth Mally to Dolly i would have the be wise,
You Will never get any thing if you are nice:
Observe but what state I do live in, and then
You Will surely learn to be kinder to men.
Oh Dolly the pleasures of love art so sweet,
When with equal desires together we meet:
that nothing on earth can compare with that bliss,
Besides it is an honor to becall'd a fine Miss.
Thus Molly tempts Dolly to go to the sport,
And about her brave Gallants begin to resort:
For Doll^ was handsome in Country gray,
And was far more tempting then those that were gay
Says Dolly to Molly 'twixt anger and scorn,
Oh Molly you will wish you had never been born:
Those immodest pleasures which you so commend,
Will bring you to sorrow and shame in the end
Thus Molly and Dolly could never agree,
Mally had Gallants more then two or three,
She traded with all that had silver and gold
Till at leangth like a town Miss she grew bawdy and bold
'Twas Dolly's good luck a place for to get,
To wait on a Lady whose fortune was great
Accounting it better a servant to be,
Then a Lady of pleasure of the highest degree,
This Dolly was pretty and clenly and neat
Her body well shapt not to small nor too great
Her Mistress she pleased and behaved her self well,
That Dolly most happily with her did dwell.
Now Dolly is got into all peoples favor,
and many young Shopkeepers strive for to have her:
But Doll put him of with a modest reply:
Saying Sirs I am resolved a Maiden to dye.
But at last the coy Virgin was struck with loves dart
Little Cupid has wounded poor Dolly to the heart
For one of these youngsters so closely did ply,
That Dolly no longer knew how to deny.
Then married they were having all friends consent
And happilly love to each others content:
She proves a kind Wife, and a good Husband he,
Then what greater blessing on earth can there be:
But Molly dispis'd her and called her young slut
Saying, Dolly there is more ways then one to go to it
I Will take my delight with the blades of the times:
Such pleasures as those without doubt are no crimes
But a little while after such was her mishap,
Poor Molly had got a most desperate Clap,
Her galiants forsook her and left her forlorn,
Crying out, you foul Whore we your company scorn.
Now Molly's disstressed, and the pain must endure,
She flies to a Quack her distemper to cure:
But Dolly lives bravely, and her I commend,
For honesty always will thrive in
The End.

Printed for P. Brook by, at the Golden-ball, in West-smithfield.


