ELEGY On the Much to be Lamented Death of the Right Honorable, ALEXANDER
Lord REATH, One of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and Exchequer,
etc. Departed this Life, March 21 School.
IT seems the Heavens begins to frown, the World draws near an end
When Wisdom drops down to the Grave, that did this Land defend;
Great A'banie, go mourn a while, my Quil is droping Tears,
Thou lost not such a Friend I trow, no not this Hundred years;
Now Wisdom, Charity and Love, put on your ragged Gown,
There is a Jewel very rich, this day, fallen from your Crown!
The Voice of Poor, like Echo cries, making a doleful Sonnet,
Until the Council find a Head, that well can fill his Bonnet.
His Wisdom lay in Silence long, until it got a Vent,
Like precious Ointment gave a Smell, the King than for him sent:
And gave him places Honorable, he did Deserve them All,
In future Ages for to come, will be Chrononical.
Dame Nature has been very bold, that Framed him at first,
The Motto of his Emblem was, GOD says, Be Good and Just;
And when he came into the World he was endu'd with Grace,
Than Reason did take hold thereon, and sat in Natures place:
Virtue sent him to her Garden, to see what Flower he would pull,
There he pulled Grace, like Aarons Rod, that buded ever still:
Then Virtue fell in Love with him, 'cause he had chosen the best,
She says to Honor, follow him, he is my Real Guest.
When Virtue saw that Honor went, and followed at his back,
Wisdom cries aloud, I will run with Truth, to be his Cloak:
And that will serve him all his Life, what e're he can need,
But I Will defy the Universe to take from it one Thread:
As Solomon did Wisdom choice, for to obey GOD's Will;
So I resolved to follow him, and will do ever still.
The Ark was of a curious Bulk, but was not very much.
Yet it contained the World great, yea and the Holy Church.
King David was but a little Man, Sober, but not Machia,
Yet Wisdom found him out a way, to kill the Great Golia.
His Virtuous Person and its Worth, before Others to discrive,
For Virtue, Wisdom, Parts, and Grace, there is few like him alive:
His Wisdom like the Jordans Flood o'reflow'd, refresht the Land,
His Council great as Oracles, but none could it withstand.
He spoke in council like to Job, with out all kind of fear,
Gray Hairs rose up, and gave him praise, his Wisdom did admire.
His Worthy Noble Family, even from their very Youth,
The whole Track of their Life has been to Suffer for the Truth:
Till Phoebus rose with mighty heat, in all his Radiant Beams,
They Sailed the Goulf, against the Tide, came to the Crystal Streams.
Now thy Successor Leven Great, he is a Man Beloved
In Council, State, and Mighty War, the King has him approved;
He did behave himself so well abroad by Sea and Land,
Which made the King put him in Trust, Hye Keeper of SCOTLAND.
Though now L: Reath lies in this Tomb, according to GODS Will,
His Name and Fame continue shall in future Ages still.
You Seraphims and Cherabims, Salute him with a Bless,
He Is gone from Earth to Heavens Glor, that truly Honored was,
Ten Thousand Ages yet to come, is but to him one day.
That Beatiphick Vision great, he will enjoy for aye.
As One of the Saints, all clade in White, upon Mount Zion Hill,
Through Ages of Eternity the Lamb will follow still.
Tho Friends should make the Rivers run with Tears that is shed below,
He will not rise for all their Cries, till the last Trumpet blow.

