PROLOGUE TO THE KING AND QUEEN, At the Opening of their THEATER.
Spoken by Mr. Batterton: Written by Mr. Dryden.
Since Faction ebbs, and Rogues grow out of Fashion,
Their penny-Scribes take care to inform the Nation,
How well men thrive in this or that Plantation.
How Pensilvania's Air agrees with Quakers,
And Carolina's with Associators:
Both even too good for Madmen and for Traitors.
Truth is, our Land with Saints is so run over,
And every Age produces such a store,
That now there is need of two New-Englands more.
What Is this, you will say, to Us and our Vocation?
Only thus much, that we have left our Station,
And made this Theater our new Plantation.
The Factious Natives never could agree;
But aiming, as they called it, to be Free,
Those Playhouse Whiggs ^et up for Property.
Some say they no Obedience paid of late;
But would new Fears and Jealousies create;
Till topsi-turvy they had turned the State.
Plain Sense, without the Tallent of Foretelling,
Might guess 'twou'd end in downright knocks and quelling:
For seldom comes there better of Rebelling.
When Men will, needlessly, their Freedom barter
For Lawless Power, sometimes they catch a Tartar:
(There Is a damned word that rhimes to this called Charter.)
But, since the Victory with Us remains,
You shall be called to Twelve in all our Gains:
(If you will not think us saucy for our pains.)
Old Men shall have good old Plays to delight 'em:
And you fair Ladies and Gallants that slight 'em,
We'll treat with good new Plays; if our new Wits can writ'em.
We'll take no blundring Verse, no fustian Tumor,
No dribling Love, from this or that Presumer:
No dull fat Fool shamm'd on the Stage for humor.
For, faith, some of them such vile stuff have made,
As none but Fools or Fairies ever Played;
But 't was, as Shopmen say, to force a Trade.
We Have given you Tragedies, all Sense defying:
And singing men, in woeful Meter dying;
This it is when heavy Lubbers will be flying.
All these disasters we well hope to weather;
We bring you none of our old Lumber hither:
Whigg Poets and Whigg Sheriffs may hang together.
EPILOGUE.
NEW Ministers, when first they get in ^^^ce,
Must have a care to Please; and that is our Case:
Some Laws for public Welfare we ^esign,
If You, the Power supreme will please to join:
There are a sort of Pratlers in the Pit,
Who either have, or who pretend to Wit:
These noisie Sirs so loud their parts rehearse,
That often the Play is silenced by the Farce:
Let such be dumb, this Penal^^^ to shun,
Each to be thought my Lady (...)est Son.
But stay, methinks some Viz(...) Masque I see,
Cast out her Lure from the mi(...)llery:
About her all the fluttering Sparks ^^e ranged;
The Noise continues though the Scene is changed:
Now growling, sputtring, wauling, such a clutter,
^
Fine Love no doubt, but ever two days are over ye,
The Surgeon will be told a woeful story.
Let Vizard Masque her naked Face expose,
On pain of being thought to want a Nose:
Then for your Laqueys, and your Train beside,
(By what ever Name or Title dignified)
They roar so loud, you would think behind the Stairs
Tom Dove, and all the Brotherhood of Bears:
They Are grown a Nuisance, beyond all Disasters,
We Have none so great but their unpaying Masters.
We beg you, Sirs, to beg your Men, that they
Would please to give you leave to hear the Play.
Next, in the Playhouse spare your precious Lives;
Think, like good Christians, on your Bearns and Wives:
Think on your Souls; but by your lugging forth,
It seems you know how little they are Worth:
If none of these will move the Warlike Mind,
Think on the helpless Whore you leave behind!
We beg you last, our Scene-room to forbear,
And leave our Goods and Chattels to our Care:
Alas, our Women are but washy Toys,
And wholly taken up in Stage employs:
Poor willing Tits they are: but yet I doubt
This double Duty soon will wear 'em out.
Then you are watched besides, with jealous care;
What if my Lady's Page should find you there?
My Lady knows t'a tittle what there is in ye;
No passing your guilt Shilling for a Guiney.
Thus, Gentlemen, we have summed up in short,
Our Grievances, from Country, Town and Court;
Which humbly we submit to your good pleasure;
But first vote Money, then Redress at leisure.
FINIS.

