The Discontented Plowman.
This man was troubled in his mind,
Because his love did prove to him unkind;
But now, she has granted his desire,
And quenched his lovesick heart which was on fire
To the Tune of, True Love rewarded, Or, Flora Farewell.




MY dearest Love why art thou so unkind,
As to forsake me now, and leave me behind,
That am tormented in my mind.
Because my Love does prove to me unkind.
I wonder she should prove so unkind to me,
That have been so constant unto she,
Ever since that we did fall in love,
I faithful unto her did prove.
I never kept other maids company,
Nor shall do till the day I dye,
^^d rather to be racked to death she shall find,
(...)n ever for to change my mind.
For three year we in love did live,
Before that she did prove unkind,
(...)ach other we our troth did give,
But now my love has changed her mind,
I am a Plowman by my trade,
And that will hold when other fade,
Beside I have fifty pound a year,
For to maintain my only dear,
If that so be that I was poor,
Then might she bate me therefore,
But seeing that I have means in store,
One would think she should love me the more.
And seeing that means it will not do,
Nor love yet melt her stony heart,
I must bear all patiently.
Though for a while I feel the smart.
The Young-mans praise of his Love.
And I will show you the reason why,
Her person I so much adore,
Because she is the Phoenix of the world,
Which makes me love her still the more.




HEr eyes does like the Diamond shine,
Which does pierce this sick heart of mine;
And her hair is like the threads of gold,
Which is both lovely to behold.
Her cheeks are like the Roses red,
Laid down with pure white and blew,
Her person is most lovely to behold,
These words I spoke are very true.
Her teeth are like the I very white,
And her breath is sweeter then Musc^di^e,
Her lips that are bath soft and fine,
I wish they were inclin^d with mine.
Her breasts like two Pillows lie,
More brighter then white Ivory,
Which makes me love her continually,
And so I shall do till the day I dye.
Her fingers they are long and small,
Her body is both proper and tall,
Her legs and feet are so complete,
And in every part most meet.
And now I have set forth her praise,
No more then what is her due in every ways,
And if she comes not to ease my misery,
Then for the love of her I shall dye.
The Maids kind reply to the young man.
HOld up thy head my dearest love,
I am coming to ease thy misery,
The reason I did unconstant prove,
It was but to try thy constancy.
When thou did walk the streets too and fro,
Thou said I was so strange I would not thee know,
It was but they constancy for to prove,
And try whether or no thou did me love.
I know it is three year and above,
Since we together did fall in love,
The vows and promises made between thee and I.
I will keep them until I die.
Thou say thou art a Plowman brave,
I am likewise a Dary-maid,
And for thy means thou have in store,
Thy love I value ten times more.
And now my love thou know my mind,
when we are married prove not to me unkind,
And therefore now without delay,
Let us appoint our wedding day.
The Young-mans Conclusion.
Ten thousand thanks I give to thee my dear,
That thou art come my love sick heart to ch^ar,
I Will be to thee both loving and kind,
Nothing but death shall change my mind.
And now my dear to end ^^ll sorrow,
Our wedding day shall be to morrow,
Thy bride-men on thee shall attend,
and lead thee to the Church both hand in hand.
The bells shall ring and music play,
For to pass the time away,
And when that day in mirth is spent,
The night we will pass away with much content.
Young maidens wherever you be,
Come take this council now of me,
To them that you do vow to love,
Look to it, and see that you do constant prove.
As by this copy you may see.
Though for a while she did try his constancy,
Now they do live in love and unity,
And I wish them many years of joy.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, I. Wright, and I, Clarke.


