The Dorset-shire DAMOSEL: OR, Young NANCY at her last Prayer.
Containing her earnest request to Ralph the Miller, to be satisfied whether he
would have her or no: Concluding with his kind Answer.

To the Tune of, Fond Boy, etc. Or, Love's a sweet Passion, etc.




In Dorset-shire lived a young Miller by Trade,
Who had courted sweet Nancy an innocence Maid,
Full a Twelvemonth, or more he had kept her in hand;
She went to him at last that she might understand
What he meant by his fooling and serving her so,
Prithee tell me, quoth she, if you will have me or no?
When first you come to me, How kind was you then?
You would give me sweet Kisses a hundred and ten,
Nay, and told me that you did my Beauty adore,
Yet you have not been with me this two Months or more;
Therefore pray now resolve me before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
When ever I came with my Grist to your Mill
You would always be kissing and courting me still,
I could never be at rest and at quiet for you;
I appeal to you Conference if this be not true;
Therefore pray now resolve me before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
I Bought you a Cravat to go to a Feast,
One that cost Half-a-crown, or two Shillings at least,
And besides that I gave you thee Eiss of good Linen
For to make you a Shirt, of my Mother's own Spinning;
Therefore prithee resolve me before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
There Is Roger would have me, and calls me his Dear;
He has got an Estate of ten Shillings a Year,
Besides forty good Shillings and five in a Purse,
Therefore don't spoil my Fortune and hinder me thus,
But he pleased to resolve me before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
You told me last Easter you would make me, your Bride,
Wherefore new Knots and Favors I strait did provide,
Yet you never came a near me till now June the third;
Every honest Man would be as good as his Word:
But I prithee resolve me before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
You solemnly swore when I fat on your knee
That you then had a love and a kindness for me,
And if so, What Is the reason I am not your Bride?
Faith these lingering Bargins I near could abide;
Let me now be resolved before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
It Is very well known I am just in my Prime,
And to have a kind Husband I think it high time;
If at Michaelmas last the good deed had been done,
I might had before now a young Daughter or Son;
Pray resolve me this Question before I do go,
Whether you do intend for to have me or no?
The Young Man's Answer.

SWeet Nancy, my Promise I do not forget,
But I am not resolved to be Married as yet;
The devouring Sword now is reigning you see,
And if I to the Wars should be forted from thee;
Then thy grief, care and sorrow will daily increase,
Therefore prithee Love stay till a flourishing Peace.
Believe me, I swear by the Powers above,
That I never will leave thee for any new Love,
My desires is that thou will patiently wait,
Till the Land is restored to a prosperous State;
If I live but till then thou shall be my sweet Bride,
For I love none in all the whole Nation beside.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street


