The Disloyal Favorite OR, The unfortunate Statesman.
Who seeks by fond desire for to Climb
May chance to catch a fall before his time
For Fortune is as fickle, as the Wind,
To him that bears a proud ambious mind.
Tune of, Sawny will never be my Love again.


TOmmy was a Lord of high renown,
And he was Raised from a low degree,
He had-Command over every Town;
there was never a one so great as he:
But he like an ungrateful wretch,
did set his Conscience on the Stretch,
And now is afraid of Squire Ketch,
For Tommy will never be beloved again.
When he was Young and a lively Lad,
he had strange Projects in his Pate,
He thought that Honor was to be had,
and that it was fine to be high in State:
Which made him up to the Court to come
to try his Friends, both all and some,
He got them to swallow a Sugar Plumb.
But Tommy will never be beloved again.
He took delight, to be made a Knight
for that he counted a lucky stepp.
Thought he if I, can rise so high
perhaps the next time I may leap,
Such fancy's harbored in his dressed,
that he could hardly take his rest,
Since that Ambition was his guest,
But Tommy will never be beloved again.
He came to be, both High and Great
and Lord it over all the rest,
His betters sat on a lower seat,
whilst he was placed with the best:
Which made him so with Honor swell,
where his breech hung, he could not tell,
He thought that all things happened well,
But Tommy will never be beloved again.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.


What he could ask, was granted straight,
or any thing he did require
He like a Suitor need not wait,
for he had all at his desire,
Brade stately buildings and good Ground,
with pleasant Groves to walk a round,
Besides Ten hundred thousand Pound.
But Tommy will never be beloved again.
O was not Tommy a very Fooll,
that he could not contented be,
When Riches thus did upon him roll,
but he must greater strive to be:
By means which were so indirect.
that no ones power could him Protect,
But all good-men did him reject
For Tommy will never be beloved again.
He Silks and Sattins might a worn,
and rid in Pomp most sumptuously,
Though now he is become a scorn,
to persons all, of each degree:
It Is wished that he had died at Nurse,
and never lived to bear the Purse,
Which made the Nation fare the worse.
For Tommy will never be beloved again.
Whilst be was great and high in power,
his friends he highly did advance.
But now he has cause to curse the hour
that ever he was concerned with France.
He studied mischief and what not
and was (some say) concerned in the Plot,
Which may at last, make him go tot'h Pot.
For Tommy will never be beloved again.
Now from the top of Honors great,
poor Tommy he is headlong cast,
He now has time his brains to beat,
for fear he come to be nub'd at last,
His friends do daily from him shrink,
although he used to give them chink,
Like Polecats they begin now to stink.
For Tommy will never be beloved again.
Alack poor Tommy pity 'twas,
that ever thou lived to see this day,
Thy golden days are gone and past,
and thou art feft to sing welladay.
If thou do live to be great again,
be sure from Treachery refrain,
For Honor is apt to take a stain.
And Tommy will never be beloved again.
Thus have you heard great Tommy's Case,
and how he was a man of power.
But yet I would not take his place,
although it were in a spacious Tower.
For Justice is so brave a thing,
who wrongs his country and his King,
will hardly escape without a swing.
And Tommy will never be beloved again.
Then let all Loyal Subjects pray
that God our Sovereign still may bless,
and so preserve him night and day,
in health and all true happiness:
That Justice may take place with those
who are their King and country's foes
and will not Triachery disclose.
Though Tommy shall never be beloved again.
London Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passinger, and W. Whitwood.


