Doctor WILD's Squibs Returned; Or, Observations on his Counterfeit Thanks.
HOw now my Wild? of Modesty forsook?
Has Liberty thy Reason Planet-strook?
Good Manners, that grown scarce too? has thy Zeal
Devoured all Civility at a Meal?
Does none remain? is Wild turned Hector too?
Making the Stars of Heaven and Earth to bow
Under thy Whipcord? or, have thou Beadle hight?
To lash Star-students coming in thy sight,
Because they are but Men, and do not know,
Kings Hearts as well as God that made them so?
Old Merlin's Genius haunts thee, or thy Crown
Could never be so grossly overgrown
With dull Stupidity. Is there no mean
Between the Doubtful, and the Epicoene?
Must men be Fools or Witches? cannot Medics know
Approaching Ills, but just the hour too?
How Stars incline, for Mortals is enough;
What Fates compel, none but the Gods above
Can well declare; we'll not presumptuous be:
To know in part, is Man's Felicity.
Yet, should Astrologers write all they know,
They would be then reputed Wild, as thou;
It Is Treason, Wild, to touch Great things too near
But Madmen of such Crimes stand not in fear.
Thy croaking humor is returned I see,
Behold Phanatick Thanks for Liberty!
Sure Mercury at thy Birth was in the Ram,
In hostile ray of Mars, and thence it came,
That thou did thus disgorge thy troubled breast
Which all the friendly Stars would have at rest.
Some Opiate I advise thee for thy Health;
Thy feav'rish Brain consumes thy spirits wealth.
Bless thee from Madness, Wild! thy heat appears
So strong against Bishops, 'thath increast my fears.
But hark thee, Wild! what shall I fancy thee?
A Theologue, or Spawn of Poetry?
If a Divine, such Gravity should appear,
As should be charming to each Heart, Eye, Ear;
Such Olive Branches from thy Pen should spring
As should beget a Love from every thing;
Such blessed breathings from the sacred Quire,
As kindle in all hearers Holy fire;
Good Order then in Churches thou would approve,
Not gibe at Bishops, but invoke their Love.
But ah! my Wild, no such persuading Theme
Art thou possessed of, (scarsely in a dream)
You Are the Phanaticks Poet, and do rant
As high among them, as the best can cant;
Singing of Thousand Quakers, that will fight,
As loyally as angry Wild does write.
Thus utt'ring Squibs and Crackers, to provoke
Some trifling Sheet to match thy smoke with smoke.
No son of Saturn is my Wild I see,
For then in private shades he would quiet be;
Nor fruit of Jove, for Jove is Juvans Pater,
And helps, by's nourishing rays, our Alma Matter;
Protects the Reverend Clergy, and maintains
Religions rights against Phanatick Brains:
Bright Phoebus knows him not, for Princes shine
From his fair Beams; Wild's spots endarken him.
The beauteous Cynthia in him claims no part,
She Is a mere stranger to the Poets Art:
Besides, she is apt to change; would Wild were so!
That he from -- might good Churchman grow.
To call him Son of Venus I not dare;
And Hermes, nobly placed, will not care
To own a Riming railer; it is hot Mars,
Ill dignified, begets Wild's Metre-wars:
He should be placed too with Dragons tail,
By the poisonous raptures that so fills his sail.
Then Son of Thunder, Religious Boanerges,
(Great Second unto Pious Doctor Burgess)
Not Priest, but Minister, or Poetaster!
Whose halting doggrelrimes come from him faster
Than Holy Sermons; cease thy Canting strain,
Give ease a little to thy tired Brain;
No more abuse Grave Prelates, least the curse
Of Schism, Heresy, or some what worse,
So closely cling unto thee, that thy Prayers
Missing Heavens Blessing, stand in need of theirs.
They are the Moysesses which daily do
Sit in the gap to save such Souls as you.
Is It Crime in them that you the Laws oppose,
And must your obstinate stomach haulk at those?
You Would be thought Loyal, and yet Prelates sting;
None hate the Clergy that ere loved the King.
But durst VVild be as bold with Majesty,
As with the Bishops Holy Hierarchy;
He would as briskly vomit forth his Gall,
(As now against Bishops) against ye Monarchs all.
So VVild farewell, thy person, parts I love;
But mourn thy Principles no better prove.
London, Printed for J. R. Anno Dom. 1672.


