THE RARITIES OF TURKEY, GATHERED By one that was sold seven times a Slave in
the Turkish Empire, AND Now exposed to view for the benefit of his Native
Country:

LONDON Printed for the Author 1661.

To the Right Reverend and Illustrious, CARDINAL de MONTE.
THE horrible fierce Discordances, and intestine Civil Wars of Christian
Princes, had reduced me (most noble Cardinal) to this condition, That being
despoyl'd and plundered of all Estate, bound in Chains, and haled through the
Mountainous and dangerous Passages of Thracia and lesser Asia, dragged about
from place to place, like horse unto a Market, I became seven times sold to the
sundry and toylesome sorts of rustic labors; where under an heavy Turkish rod,
and sharper provocations, in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, exposed
to all openness of Airs, I was compelled to attend the feeding Sheep, Goats,
and all other sorts of Cattle, and oftentimes to exercise their discipline of
war. For prevention therefore of a lasting misery, I endeavored an escape; and
wandering up and down, guided by the Northern Pole, sustaining Life with
Acorns, wild herbs, and their bitter roots, sodden with a little salt, I spent
my time in solitariness, amidst even ravening Beasts; till at length, having
fastened together some few Timber pieces with cords and wythes, I ventured to
pass the Hellespontick Sea; but was retaken, and brought back again unto my
Master; where tied both hands and feet, and prostrated on the ground, I was
most cruelly and severely scourged and threshed; and after, for the space of
thirteen years, tossed and tumbled on the waves of a sad and adverse fortune
under the Turkish Government. I endured and suffered many miseries, calamities,
afflictions, and persecutions for my Religions sake.

But when I had found by sad exprience, that the former more compendious way
through Thrace, could not free me from their Tyranny, and grievous Slavery, I
resolved to steer another course by observation of the Southern Pole, to pass
the Deserts and perilous places of Caramania and Syria: and so through many
and various difficulties, I at length arrived in the holy Land, and was
received by the Brethren of Saint Francis of Jerusalem inhabiting Mount Sion:
from whence, after the refreshment of a year, as a man revived from death, (by
God's Almighty providence) and as snatched from the claws of the hellish
Dragon, and freed from those cruel tortures, I returned home amongst my
Christian Friends, a true witness of the Turkish cruelties; that they with due
repentance for their sins and errors, might learn to avoid like crucifyings and
tortures; and likewise understand what high degree of hate those men deserve,
whose foul ambitions stop and hinder the employment of Christian swords from
destructing and abolishing that Satanick-Turkish Government, which may (by
God's assistance) be the only preventor of our future miseries; and which has
been long-since, and prophetically spoken of, both by Christians and Infidels.

Therefore having finished a large perambulation of the holy Land, and visited
good part there of the West, and described rudely the Tragedy of their
cruelties, together with other circumstances of that Government, all which I
gathered from daily conversation, experience, and long practice in Courts and
Camps of the Turkish Emperor; and what more I could ever learn from
ratiocinations with wise and experienced men, or by reading, I committed still
to memory, and at several times and stations, remitted them to writing, and
made them after public; which diverse learned and sober persons translated into
their several Idiomes: which when I found, and perceived they might prove
necessary, or somewhat useful, and favorably accepted by the Reader, I
recollected them, and bound them up into this little bundel, and have dedicated
the whole unto your Grace, the best of Patrons, printed in this famous City,
Rome, receptacle of all Natoins, to be difpersed to all Friends and Strangers.

Do you therefore by the example of our Savior Christ, who preferred the poor
Widows mite, before the gifts of Princes, and with that purchased the
inheritance of immortality, favorably and in good part accept of this poor
oblation, from

Your Graces most devoted Servant, Bartholomeus Georgie viz, Pilgrim.

THE PILGRIM TO HIS Christian READER.
I Once had fixed my intentions, (worthy Reader) that these my poor endeavors
should come abroad (for your utility and pleasure) in a far comlier habit,
clothed with augmentation of Arguments, and more p^ed Expressions: but my
poverty, and nakedness of necessary Implements, diverted all such thoughts, and
stopped my undertaking such a labor; wanting besides both time and place of fit
retiredness for studious desires.

Sumptuous and smooth Garments, or Men well moneyed, have only entrance into
Princes Palaces, and great Men's Gates; that if n^w Homer should even himself
otherwise appear, a rude and surly Porter thrusts him out of doors. And I
confess in conscience, in this degenerate Age, men take more pleasure, spend
more thoughts and money in sculpture, picture, hawking, hunting, and worser
things, unnecessary, then in due observance of our Savior Christ's exemplary
divine moralities, then in the service and advancement of their Laws and
Country, or relieving wants of distressed poor or Pilgrims, Do y^u not so,
(good Christian Reader;) but first in all humility, and reverence, obey, and
worship your Great God, Creator, and Redeemer; next, be more careful to supply
the needy and poor-Man, who is a Temple of Christ, an Habitation of the Holy
Ghost: then, not only love and study the prosperity of your Country, (which
God exacts above all private interests) but love all good Supporters of your
just Laws and liberties, and all true Patriots therein. And if you shall
receive by this my pains, the least of delectation, impute it not to your
well-wishing PILGRIM, but the benignity and liberality of his noble PATRONS and
BENEFACTORS: and where you find Him pass the limits of Sobriety or Modesty, or
to come short and flat in Elecution, let your great prudence and humanity
correct Him; and be pleased to consider Him, to have spent the ablest and best
portion of his time and Age, in rude and rustic servitudes, under the Turkish
Nation, and not in application to liberal Arts and Sciences.

Farwell.
The TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
HE that desires to move compassion or suchlike affections in others, must
have some sympathy and natural inclination thereto himself. The perusal of this
small Treatise, brought sadness to my thoughts, and tears into my eyes, even to
a fellow-feeling of the bitter and disastrous condition of Christian Captives.
What heart so flinty, as to forbear lamenting for them? The rigid old opinion
of some Stoics, who fancied and taught not be grieved at any event, Not to be
dist^rbed with dolency at any accident befalls mortality, is a doctrine no way
suitable to Christianity. All man must be resigned, surrendered, unmanned, and
quite put off, if affections be taken from him. The sense and tenderness
whereof, wrought me to this Translation: and remembered thereby, to praise and
glorify our good and gracious God, who has preserved us from such calamities;
and likewise hoping to increase the number of relenting minds, and charitable
dispositions. My poverty and weak capacity, could find no other means to be
instrumental for them. Thick and dark clouds have eclipsed the warmth and
comfort of the Sun from me: but, Be you merciful, as your heavenly Father is
merciful.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. 12. 23. for and paid, read are paid. 14. 16. put out Troy-weight.
28. 5. for teh, read the. 44. 8. Passengers, read Passages. 79. 1. do kill,
read do not kill. 102. 14. for their fenars, read their defenc^. 117. 21. for
drunk, read drink. 123. 8. for Rocks, read Rocks.

Of the Rites and Ceremonies of the TURKS.
CHAP. I.
Of their Oratories.
THe fabrics of their Churches are sufficiently large and sumptuous, and
called by the name of Meschites: in which I never could perceive any sort of
fancies or imageries (for Idolatry is held by them the worst of abominations)
but only these, or one of these inscriptions following, in the Arabic
Language, There is no God but one, and Mahomet his Prophet; or, One Creator and
Prophets equal: or, None is strong as God. Then there is seen a great abundance
of burning Lamps, the whole Church whited, the Pavement covered with
Mattresses, and on them the Ornaments of Tapestries. Near the Church, is
erected a Tower of great height, to the top whereof the Priest ascends before
the time of Prayers, and with a loud voice, his ears stopped with his fingers,
he thrice proclaims these words; God, True, One: which Clamor or Outcry (for
they have no Bells) being heard, the Nobility, and all unbusied persons, repair
to Church, as bound to that devotion. Afterward the said Priest descending,
prays with them; (and then they turn their faces toward Mecha:) And this he is
tied to do by his Office, five times day and night. But whosoever comes to
these Prayers, must wash his hands, his feet, and privities, and his head
thrice sprinkled with water, and these words pronounced: Glory to my God. Then,
their shoes put off, and left at the Church-door, they enter in, some
barefooted, others having new Shoes or Socks, and so tenderly touch the
ground. Women come not into Churches, as being not excis'd, and for fear of
disturbing men's devotions; but meet apart in severed places, altogether shut
off from eyes and ears of men; and more seldom frequent their Churches, except
in time of Passover, or Easter, and on Fridays; which days, from Mahomet's
Traditions, for distinction and imitation, they almost respect as much as Jews
their Sabbaths, or Christians the Lords day. They pray from nine a clock at
night till twelve; and in their praying, their bodies are ever in great motion
and agitation, wherewith they marvelously afflict themselves, with loud cryings
and fierce ejaculations; so as oftentimes, their strengths and spirits failing,
they sink unto the ground; and if it happen, any of them conceive her self with
child, she then assures her self, that pregnancy proceeds from favor of the
Holy Spirit; and when delivered, the Infants born are called, Sons, or Souls of
the Holy Ghost. This has been related to me from their Handmaids; for I, nor
ever any man else, were present at that spectacle. At men's devotions I have
been often present with my Master; whose customs are in manner following: in
their prayers they never take off (their Turbants) coverings of their heads,
but with the tops of their fingers gently touch them, in token of taking them
off; they fall upon their knees and often kiss the ground: they hold it for
great wickedness, to have a Christian present at their mysteries; for they
believe their Churches (as they say) to be polluted by men unwashed; and that
Christians use not such Lavatories. Every Church in Turkey has a peculiar place
for Baths and washings, with lodgings for a Priest. Now here the Priest ascends
his Pulpit (reads a piece of the Alcoran, and sometimes expounds it) and there
preaches about two hours; his Sermon ended, two boys come up to him, who
pronounce their prayers singing with responsals; which Songs being ended, the
Priest with the whole People in a low voice, beating upon their sides, repeat
these words, There is but one God; which for the space of half an hour they do,
and so depart. But this manner of Prayers and Ceremonies of Preaching and
singing, are not done every day, unless in time of Lent, Festivals, some
Sundays; and most observe the Fridayes for religious worship.

Of their Lent.
THey keep their Lent by fasting one Month and one Week every Year; but not
always the same: for if this Year they fast out January, the next they fast
out February, and keep on that course; so as in twelve Years space, they
dedicate to God (in lieu of tenths) one Year and twelve Weeks. Travelers and
sick Persons are excused from present fastings; but are enjoined to supply it,
by fasting so many days at other times. When they fast, all that Day they
taste nothing, not so much as Bread or Water; then the Stars appearing, it is
lawful for them to eat of all things which are not strangled, or Hoggs-flesh,
which they esteem as carrion, most unclean. Their Lent being past, they observe
Easter for three days, with great solemnity, anointing the Nails of their Feet
and Fingers with an Oil which they call Chna, which maker those Nails to shine
like Gold; and with the same, they sometimes stain or color the Hoofs and Tails
of Horses. This Tincture holds very long, and can hardly be wiped away; so, as
until new Nails thrust out the old, they still retain that dye: but Nails of
the Hand, by frequent washing, abate in time. Women do not only anoint the
Nails, but their whole Hands and Feet also with that Oil.

Of their Circumcision.
THey Circumcise not on the eighth day, as the Jews do, but when the newborn
arrive at the age of seven or eight years, and be of perfect speech: the
mystery whereof, is from the words of confession required before circumcision,
which are some of those sentences aforementioned in their Churches, which they
repeat, and give assent thereto, by holding up the Thumb of the Right Hand.
The Youth is not for this mystery brought unto their church, but is circumcised
in his Parents House. I have been often present at this solemnity, which is
performed in manner following: first, the friends are all invited to a feast,
sufficiently furnished with all sorts of delicate flesh, lawful for them to
eat; and almost everywhere, especially amongst the wealthier sort, an Ox is
killed, bowelled, and flawed; in the body whereof, they include a Sheep; and in
that Sheep, a Hen; and in her, an Egg; all which are entirely roasted
together, for the solemnity and splendour of that day. Then in their Feast and
time of Supper, the Boy that is to be circumcised, is brought to a Physician
skilful in that Art, who fixing between a pair of pinchers the foreskin of his
privy Member, to prevent all fear in the Boy, he tells him, that the next
day he will circumcise him, and so departs; but presently feigning to have
omitted something appertaining to this preparation, on a sudden he cuteth off
the foreskin, applying thereunto a little salt and bombace; and then he is
called a Musselman, that is, one circumcised. Yet their Names are given the day
of their Nativity, not Circumcision. After continuance of this Feast for three
days, the Boy with great pomp and solemnity is accompanied to the Bathes; and
being returned to his House, he is brought before the Guests, and by them
presented with gifts prepared for him; some give Silver, Silken Vestments;
some, Silver Cups; others, Money; and sometimes, Horse. Women present him
likewise, some, with Shirts, Handkerchers, and such like, according to the
several pleasures and abilities of the Guests. Women are not circumcised, only
they confess the aforesaid words, and so made Musselmen. And if any Christian
voluntarily confess a Faith in Mahomes, and suffers Circumcision, (which often
happens, by the heavy yoke and burden of their Tribute) this Man is led
through all the Streets and open places of the City, to the great joy and
honor of the people, with acclamations and ringing of Bells: him also they
present with gifts, and after free him from all Tribute. For covetousness of
this profit, many Greeks and Albanes become circumcised. But if any be forced
thereto, as he that shall strike or otherwise disgrace a Musselman, or
blaspheme Mahomet, (as it befell a certain Grecian Bishop which I did see) that
man is circumcised, and has nothing presented to him, yet shall be freed from
Tribute as others circumcised.

Of their Priests.
THeir great Musty (as the Pope among Catholics) cannot err, and is the
highest Minister of all Religious and Lay Persons: an Officer of great power
and trust: his conclusions and sentences in State and Church Affairs, are
irrevocable; and his person held in most esteem and reverence next the
Emperor: his habit most in green, being Mahomet's color. There is small
difference between their other Priests and Laymen, nor much from the
Governors of Ceremonies (such as our Bishops are) neither is much learning
required from them: it is sufficient, if they can read the ALCORAN and MUSSAPH;
yet they that can interpret on the Text, are esteemed most learned, because the
Traditions of Mahomet are written in the Arabic, not vulgar Turkish Character;
and they hold it for most detestable, to have them interpreted in the vulgar
Language. These Priests and Governors are elected by the People; but their
rewards are stipends for their labors, and paid by the King. They have Wives,
and Habits like Seculars: and if their stipends be not sufficient to maintain
the number of their Children, they otherwise supply themselves by Handicrafts,
and Trades, or what else befits a Freeman; as teaching Schools, transcribing
Books, etc. I never could see amongst them any Printers; but Paper is there
very well made. Some make profit one way, some another, as Tailors,
Shooe-makers, etc.

Of their Monks.
THey have likewise Monks of several Orders; but chiefly of these three: the
first have no propriety in any thing, they go almost wholly naked, saving their
privities covered with a Sheep's skin, and in cold weather they use the like to
cover their backs; their sides, their feet and hands, are never covered. They
beg alms as well of Christians as Turks; and, For God's sake. These Monks
having eaten an Herb called Maslach, are possessed with a kind of fury and
madness; they cut and wound their breasts cross and overthwart, and so their
arms, dissembling all trouble or pain; then clap on their heads, hands, and
breasts, the sponge or mushrooms of old Trees light burning, and not remove them
till they are reduced to ashes. Another Order I have seen, who go with their
privy part bored through, and a Ring included of the weight of three pound
Troy-weight; and this to preserve chastity. The third Order is rarely seen
abroad; but remain both day and night in Churches, where within some little
Angles they have small Cabins, no shoes, vestments; or coverings of the head,
wearing nothing but one shirt; their exercise is fasts and prayers, that God
would reveal things future to them. With this sort of Monks, the King of Turks
usually consults, when he intends a motion or expedition to War.

Their reverence to Mahomet's Traditions.
THey give so much respect to Mahomet's Traditions and Statutes, that, not
only they never blaspheme GOD or his Prophet; (which amongst us sometime
happens) but if they find the least leaf or scrowl thereof, lying on the
ground, they take it up and often kiss it, and place it on some shelves or
chinks of walls; affirming it a sin, to suffer that wherein the Name of God,
and Laws of Mahomet are written, to be trodden under foot. And no man dares to
sell the Alcoran, and other writings of their Law, to any Christian, or any
other differing in Religion or Faith with them, lest they should be trodden on,
or touched with unclean hands: and whosoever should so do, is severely
punished. And in this regard they may be styled far more reverent then
Christians.

Of their Schools.
THey have places for Instruction, and Teachers both of Men and Women: in
several Towns, Men, the Boys; and Women, the Girls: some teach Astronomy,
Physic; and some, the Art of Poetry; which when they do, they speak out with
loud voice; and moving their hands unto their sides, they pronounce their
meanings. They understand no artificial Music; but frame verses to certain
rules, which consist of eleven sillables. The hotness of the Clymate, and often
sicknesses, makes most inclined to Physic, wherein they have some small
knowledge. They learn Astronomy, to be thought able to tell fortunes. Printing
is supplied by a number of writing Priests; and perhaps neglected (as all
learning is) to maintain the peoples ignorance, and keep them off from search
into the gross absurdities of their constrained Religion.

Of Marriages.
THey marry without Vows or Oaths, take Wives without portions, and for the
most part buy them; contrary to the Roman custom, where the Son in law was
bought with Money to take a Daughter. This married Woman carries nothing with
her for use or ornament, which she is not forced to redeem or purchase from her
Parents. Evil manners or sterility, are causes of Divorces; for which there is
a peculiar Judge. They permit their bondmen or purchased servants to marry;
but the issue of them are all born slaves. The Alcoran persuades marriage, as
pleasing God and Man; and it allows plurality of Wives and Concubines, as many
as Man pleases. The Turk amongst his (whereof he has above five hundred in
his Seraglio's) names her for his Wife or Sultana, by whom he has his
first-begotten Son. All their Wives are used with equality of respect, in diet,
clothes, returns, and what concerns them; and are most obedient to their
Husbands. They nurse their own Children, and bear them on their Shoulders, not
in their Arms: no men, but Eunuchs, are suffered to be with them, not their own
Sons, if above twelve years of age: they never go abroad, but accompanied with
only Women.

Of Strangers.
PIlgrims of several Nations travel to visit holy places, which the Turk
possesses; as Mecha and Medinum, (as Christians, Jerusalem) where they say
Mahomet was buried; but this is done as well for gain and profit, as for
devotion or Religions sake. And there having seen a gilded Shoo hanging from
the roof of the Church, and bought such fine linen and cloth as they please,
they return home with great advantage; some carrying about the Streets, water,
from thence, in glasses, for devotions sake, and freely give it to any that are
thirsty; others, do the like for profit. And if any one of them happen to die
in this Pilgrimage, by what occasion soever, although he never arrive near
Mecha, yet he has the estimation, and shall be placed in the rank of Pilgrims.

Miracles done by Mahomet at Mecha, which, they say, he still does in these
times.
I Know not whether I should call them Miracles, or rather Monstrous toys,
written in their book called Mehemedine, wherein they are persuaded, that when
Mecha was a building, GOD, by the prayers of Mahomet, commanded diverse
mountains to bring their stone to the Fabric of that Church, every Hill his
tenth: and when diverse Mountains had brought their portions, and Mecha built
and perfectly completed, a certain Hill called Araphat, and some other more
remote, coming thither with their tenths somewhat too late, and finding Mecha
built, and no use of their stones, they began most bitterly to weep; which when
Mahomet perceived Hills so distressed, and understood the cause, he said unto
them, Be of good cheer, weep not, but store your tenths up in a place which I
shall show you; and whosoever shall not pray upon your stones, his pilgrimage
shall be unprofitable and unaccepted. And after so doing, Mahomet struck the
stones with his foot, and there issued out Water, not useful to drink; and
imposed a name, and called it, A water of purification, whereof every Pilgrim
carries at his return, some portions thereof in vessels; and whenever any die,
the vestures wherewith the body is to be covered, are sprinkled with this
water, for remission of their sins. And they further affirm, That no man can
come to Mecha, whose visit is not known to Mahomet, who reveals the persons to
the Keepers there (all Eunuchs:) and if a Pilgrim come, a Ravisher, or wicked
Man, a Christian, or any of Religion different from theirs; these said Keepers
forbid him entrance into Mecha. But the body of Mahomet is not there, as some
affirm, but only an imaginary form in the Wall of the Church, expressing the
lineament of a body, which is often kissed; and so they return home again. Such
lying follies, for miracles, these Infidels are possessed with, concerning
Mahomet; and diverse others, so ridiculous, as I omit for modesties sake: yet
must advise the Reader, if he please, to interrogate any Turk therein, and he
will find I have spoke nothing but mere Truth.

Of their Alms.
THe Alcoran obliges men to Alms, as meritorious, and much pleasing God; and
says, The contrary comes from the Devil. They have Hospitals for poor
travelers, built by the Wills and Legacies of their Kings; where they have
meat in different manners: some allow Rice with flesh, others prepare Wheat
Bread, and Water to drink; but for rest or Lodgings, there is no place allowed:
yet there are some few public receptacles, where they are received without
charge, or other bedding than Straw or Hay; but they repose under a good Roof.

Of their Sacrifice.
THeir Offerings or Oblations are for the most part upon promise or vows, in
sicknesses or other dangers; and then they kill an Ox or a Sheep, according to
abilities; and promise to sacrifice it in some certain place. This Offering is
not burnt, or placed on an Altar, after the custom of the Jews; but the beast
being killed, the skin, head, and feet, and a fourth part of the flesh, is
given to the Priest; another part, to the poor; a third, to neighbors; and the
remainder they keep for themselves and friends to rejoice withal. Neither are
they tied to perform these vows, unless they escape the disease or danger for
which they intended them: all things with them being conditional; I give you,
if you give me. And the like is observed by the Greeks, Armenians, and other
Asiatick people, even of the Christian Faith.

Of their Wills and Legacies.
IF any of their Musselmen make a Will, their Legacies are given before Friends
or Neighbors; and they are commonly for cutting Watercourse, for conveying
Springs from some remote places, to Hospitals, Churches, or dry habitations;
and that for Piety sake, and their souls benefit. Others give money to free
bondmen out of thraldom. But Women for the most part (as most superstitious)
bequeath their gifts to Soldiers, for a certain slaughter of Christians, which
they conceive to be greatly beneficial for their Souls. The Legacies of their
Kings are for the building of Hospitals, Churches; and so likewise are those of
eminent and great personages.

Ceremonies of the Dead.
When any of their Musselmen die, men take the Funeral-care of men, and women
of women. They wash the departed body very clean, and wrap it in fine linen;
then they carry it out of Town, into some remote place, (for they hold it
sinful to bury in their Churches.) first, Friends of the deceased and Priests
meet and go in progress, certain Monks bearing wax Candles; then follow some of
their Priests singing till they come to the Grave, shaking their heads, and
often turning round, fall down with giddiness, as in a trance. The better sort
have their Graves lined with Boards at bottom and at sides, and covered with
Boards, on which they throw the Earth, and strowe sometimes the seeds of
Flowers thereon. Great Men and Bassa's have peculiar Chapels for themselves
and Kindred. The poor are buried by highways, or in open-field. If the
deceased be of poor ability, there is then money gathered for satisfaction of
labor for those religious Men, which is offered in the Streets.

Of the edifice of a Sepulcher, called Tulbe.
OVer this stately Tomb, (being Prince-like) there is erected a goodly Temple,
wherein their Kings are buried in the City with great magnificence. Both rich
and meaner, have an Altar built of such an height, as Beasts cannot annoy or
pollute it with any foulness: thither with lamentations and weepings they often
return; and spread upon the monument sacrifices of meats, bread, flesh, cheese,
eggs, milk. This Solemnity or Funeral-Supper continues for nine days after the
parties burial, (according to the Heathen manner) for the soul of teh departed:
and it is left to be eaten by the Poor, by Ants, or Fowls of the Air. They say,
It equally pleases God, to give alms to Beasts that want, as men, when they
are given for God's sake. I have seen many buy birds in cages at good values,
only to set them at liberty, and see them fly away; others, throw Bread into
Rivers for Fishes, and that for the love of God, saying, That such charity
toward the needy, does obtain a great reward from Heaven.

Concerning War.
THe Turks have all one Emperor or King of the Race of Ottoman; who has next
to himself in Authority two Sangiachs, or Viceroys, chief Governors, the one
of Europe, the other of Asia; and these have under them Lieutenants of lesser
quality, who command the ordinary Soldiery; and if they fail, being called to
any expedition, are presently punished with death. He has others always
following him; as Counselors, Guardians of his body, ever near him;
chamberlains, chancellors, and exactors of tribute, for moneys and young
people; with certain numbers of light horse, messengers, and diverse others that
continually follow the court. His greatest strength is in his Slaves; Children
(for the most part) torn from Christian Parents, with Tribute-Children bred and
educated in several Seraglio's, Captives taken in War, and Renegado's. Of
these, some are trained up, and serve on horse; who have a double stipend to
the Foot, and always ready at command, in stables keeping four hundred horse
together. The great body of Foot-Souldiery are the Janissaries, all commanded by
a Chief, called their Aga, a person of mighty trust, and like importance; who
has under him diverse inferior Commanders, and have Seraglio's apart. Of
these, and Auxiliary Forces, the Turk can draw three hundred thousand to the
Field. A great part of these Janissaries attend the Court, Ambassadors houses,
and protect all Christian Inhabitants and Travelers, for rewards; and are
faithful in those employments. Their Standard in the Field, is an Horse-Tail
tied upon a pole; an Emblem of their first barbarity and rudeness. His strength
at Sea is not considerable, consisting most in Galleys, and those not equal to
some Italian Princes; nor has he many, for want of Slaves, whom he imployes
more for Land-services. The best of Shipping, is under the Bassa's of Algier
and Tunis, whom he manageth with much policy; sometime as Rebels, and sometime
as good Subjects, to his best advantage against Christians: for if they
complain of loss, the Turk then says, He cannot rule them. If the other do the
like, he will take treble damages.

The Condition of Neblemen.
THere is not any of those great Personages that possess by right of
inheritance any Province, City or real Estate, to derive unto his Children or
Successors, without consent of the King. If any of their Dukes or Princes
desire possessions, it must be with this condition; the value of the Place or
Territory is first considered, and the Revenues thereof, whereby the Turk
apportioneth what number of Soldiers that can annually maintain: then the Lord
is enjoined always to keep in readiness that number, for any his commands; and
in default, his head is lost: nothing can excuse his presence in any commanded
place, but known want of health and sickness. And whenever it please the Turk
to ease him of this benefit, it is at his liberty; but if not deprived, he
enjoyes it during life: after death, if his Successors will observe the fame
conditions, they are often admitted; if not, it is then disposed to others. And
if it happen, any one of these great ones have occasion to speak unto their
King, with eyes fixed on the ground, they dare not look him in the face.

Of Bassa's, who may be called Counselors, Chancellors, or Secretaries.
THese for the most part are all Eunuchs, castrated when Youths, and bred in
Seraglio's, for attendants on the Turkish Concubines: and of later years, some
of them (as I was informed, being a Slave to a great Man in Constantinople) are
cut so close the body, that they often die by the incision; and if live, they
ever after use small pipes for discharging their water: such is their cruel
jealousy, introduced (as 'twas said) by an Emperor that perceived a Gelding
leap a Mare. These Bassa's are of greatest esteem with the Turk, next to the
Sangiachs; and they are almost all that are preferred to that dignity; Children
of Christian Parents, violently taken from them: and none of them, although he
has to Wife a Daughter of a Turk, (as Hurstan Bassa had) can enjoy a Parish,
Castle, or Village by inheritance; but if he be promoted to any dignity or
possessions, he enjoyes it till his death, or so long as the Turk pleases.
Each Bassa has a Court of Justice in the Province he commands, from whence
appeals are to the King, or great Mufty; whose sentence is concluding and
immovable.

The obedience of Turks to the King.
NOne of their Janissaries or great Captains have license to wear Swords or
other Arms within the Cities, unless the King go forth his Palace, for Devotion
sake or Hunting. And where there are Magistrates or Governors of Towns,
Porters carry with them staves or clubs; and finding any quarrellings or
offerings at injuries, they presently punish them with those instruments; and
no man speaking to them, dares look them in the face; but falling on the earth,
kiss their feet, with eyes to the ground, and speak as to themselves. And
whenever they send forth Messengers with Letters to Governors, Cities, or
Provinces, whose horse grows faint by journeying, this Messenger has full
authority to dis-horse whom ere he meets; and meeting none, he turns into the
next Town or Village, and repairs to the chief Officer; and if he presently
provides him not an horse, he is hanged before his door: and for this cause,
many make use of asses, rather then keep horse. And when this Messenger shall
come to whom he was sent, he is most honorably received, his Letters kissed
with great humility, and their Contents answered with incredible celerity and
quick dispatch. No Princes dare contradict one syllable therein. None dare (as
here) rebel; all men live in such awful fear and trembling: Tortures and
present death depending on his will.

The Turkish strength, how diminished.
THe Emperor distributes in some equality all Provinces to his Noblemen; but
with condition, that such a Soldiery shall be continually maintained by him
with the Revenues of that Province, both in time of Peace and War. A Soldier
killed, is not loss to him, unless the Province likewise be lost: as for
example, The Turk has now four hundred Soldiers, whereof one hundred is
maintained by Hungary; now if he lose Hungary, those Soldiers are lost: if he
lose no Province, he loses nothing; for he can raise more in their rooms; as
Church Officers, or benefits, easily find in vancancies Successors.

The condition of Chazilars.
THese are stout Soldiers, and excellently versed in military affairs, who in
their first encounters break their Lances, without other Armor, then a Sword,
Lance, and Target, using it as we do with Coat of Fence and Helmet; the Lance
being broke, they use the Sword, and fight valiantly, always aiming at the
head or hands, and think it ignominious to thurst at their adversary, or an
horse, with point of Sword. These Men spend all their lives and hopes under the
protection of a Goddess, Fortune; having a Proverb with them, What is written,
will befall them; that is, What that Goddess has printed on the head at each
Man's Nativity, cannot be possibly avoided, though he were preserved in a
Castle unexpugnable. The actions of these men are writ in verses, and sung by
all Men; that others stirried up by like praise and honor, might, with like
audacity, advance against an Enemy, courageously and valiantly: and, for each
victory of these Men, their stipends are doubled; and, are obliged attendance
on their King, on horseback, with Lances, Swords, and Iron Clubs: some, have
Targets; some, none; and are paid as well in Peace as War.

The order of their Foot.
THeir first are Bow-men, with Arrows, Bows, and Javelins; they are
distinguished from Janissaries by coverings of the head. The second is of
Janissaries, who instead of Bows, have Guns, with short Hatchets: all these are
gathered from amongst Christians living under Tribute, by force snatched from
their Friends being young, circumcised, and educated as aforesaid. These fight
most valiantly against Christians, yet have but slender stipends for their
maintenance; some four, five, or six Aspers a day; of which, sixty make a Crown
English. And these are prohibited on pain of death, to come on horseback,
unless sick. There are some few likewise, sons of Turks, made Janissaries. There
is a third order, whom they call Azaplars, whose stipends determine with the
War, and are all sons of Turks. These use a longer Lance, with Swords, and red
hats or bonnets, or other colored cloth, with crooked angles like half Moons;
and so distinguished by Arms and Habit, from the other orders. There is a
fourth of the Grecian sect, who have no other stipend, then freedom from paying
Tributes and Tenths. They commonly attend the Turks horse of pleasure, keeping
them at their own charge, and well managing them for war.

Of the Turks Pavilions.
WHen the King removes from Constantinople, to any Expedition of War, he
carries with him double Tents, that when one is planted this day, the other is
carried to the next station, ready to receive him the day following: the number
and magnitude of these Pavilions is such, that afar off they seem no less then
Cities: round about the King's Pavilion, are the Tents of Princes and great
Men, encompassing his in circle. Then the horsemen of Arms, two or three
together, have their Tent: the footmen have the like for discipline sake, and
to keep them from cold Air. When the body of the Army moves, Yeomen footmen
clear the ways, and here and there make heaps of stone, or piles of wood, for
ease and direction of the passage; so as even in darkness of the night they can
hardly err. The Army moves at midnight, and till midday following marches.
The King rides between two Bassa's talking with him, before whom marches some
of the order of Janissaries on horseback, bearing lighted Candles in time of
night. Certain Captains follow them with iron Clubs round pointed, who keep off
men from sight of the King a good large distance: amongst these, are numbers of
the King's Guard; and amongst them, a Chariot of Women and Boys, fitted for
use of the Turk and his Nobility. These great Men, go some before, some follow
these Captains with great multitudes of Soldiers, horse and foot, and all
conditions; some for stipend, some for plunder; but all men.

Their carriages of Beasts.
THen follow a multitude of Camels, Mules, Horse, and sometime Elephants laden
with Victuals, Pavilions, and all necessaries for military uses; and where the
Turk pitcheth his Tent, there every one, according to his condition, (as in a
City) sets up his habitation; Boothes for Tailors, Bakers, Butchers, Sutlers,
and all sorts of Victuallers: some sell dainty flesh, and fowls; and when fresh
meat cannot be had, then what is brought upon their Beasts, they expose to
sale; biscuit, dry meats, cheese, curds, and milk. All Turks are generally most
patient in suffering hunger, thirst, and cold. They seldom lodge in Towns, but
field it in their Tents, near water-springs, Rivers, or Meadows, taking more
care of their cattle then themselves; content with little and course diet,
curds mingled with water, bread with milk, sometime biscuit: master and servant
eat together. They keep deep silence in the night; they neglect stirring after
fugitives, for fear of raising clamours; which are forbid upon great mulcts and
punishments: but when they go to rest, or rise to march, all with an unanimous
noise, cry out, Allah, Allah, Allohu, that is, O God, thrice repeated.

Of justice exercised in War.
THere is so much severity in military discipline, that no Soldier dares
unjustly seize on any thing of another; for if he do, he dies without mercy.
They have amongst them certain Guardians, Defenders of all Passengers from
Soldiers violence, with Boys of eight or ten years old, carrying bread, eggs,
fruit, oats, and suchlike things to sell. These Guardians are bound to free
and preserve all Orchards, Gardens, Closes, they pass by; so far, that they
themselves dare not touch an Apple, Pear, or Grape, or any suchlike thing,
without the owners license; otherwise they lose their heads. When I was present
in the Turkish Army in an Expedition against the Persian, I saw a great
Commanders head, with horse and servants, all three cut off, because that horse
had been found grazing in another man's pasture unsatisfied for.

Celebrations of a Turkish victory.
WHen a Conquest is declared, the Cities straight throw themselves into all
delights and joyings. At entrance of night, for good auspice of the solemnity,
Torches, Wax-candles, Lamps, Firebrarnds, Fireworks, and all things that give
light, are everywhere disposed of throughout the City; with Garpets, costly
Hangings, Tapestry, and Silken, Silver, and Gold Vestments, their houses all
are covered, but especially that way, by which the Emperor enters. The
chiefest triumph is made in Constantinople, his conftant residence, unless
occasioned by war into some other Region. And he is bound by Law at every three
years end, to undertake some expedition into Christian Territories, for
advancing or defending his own Kingdom. I verily believe, and do confess, for
those days he celebrates for Victory, no Mortal eye, (nay, not the Moon or
Sun) did ere behold a spectacle more glorious and resplendent, for order,
number, silence, richness, state, and magnificence in all kinds. It is
impossible for only man to be exalted to a loftier degree of sublimation, then
this Pagan when triumphful.

Of their hunting and hawking.
NO Nation under the Sun delights so much in hunting, as does the Turkish;
they will follow game through rocky, steepy, craggy mountains, and that, on
horseback, taking diversities of Beasts; but if any chance to be killed, or
suffocated by dogs or chase, they never eat thereof, nor any Christian that
lives in those Regions: and if they kill wild Boars, they give them to the
next inhabiting Christians, Musselmen being forbidden to feed on Hogs flesh.
The Turk has multitudes of Faulkoners (above thousands) in constant wages
through his Empire. Their Hawks both long and short winged very hardy. The like
charge he is at, for all sorts of dogs: nothing can move in The Air, or stir on
Land, that shall not be encountered, and seized on. These charges, with the
Soldiery, Officers, Seraglio's, and Court-attendances, are in a manner
infinite; and yet supplied more by casualities then Revenues constant: for he
commands all men's fortunes at his pleasure, and is the general Heir of all that
by nature die, or violence.

Of Artificers and Hu^bandmen.
THe Country People with their Servants plow their Lands, and pay the Tenths of
all increase unto the King. Artificers maintain themselves by Trades: who live
in idleness, consume in hunger. They eagerly pursue all sorts of
Merchandizings; traveling the lesser Asia, Arabia, Egypt, and States of the
Venetians. They have their Baths in every City, where in solemn manner they
wash themselves. When they make Water, they wash that part; and the like, when
they ease their bodies. The like is done by Women, who have handmaids
following them, with Vessels filled with Water; and when they bathe, they
anoint themselves with such an unguent, that within the space of half an hour,
roots off all hair from parts anointed. Men and Women do the same; not
suffering hair to increase: and this is done twice or thrice each month,
especially when they frequent the Church; otherwise, (as violators of sacred
places) they are burnt with fire. They have diverse sorts of Artificers;
Tailors, Shoe-makers, Gold and Silver-Smiths, and for all sorts of Metals;
Painters, Carpenters, Stone-cutters; but not of such wits and exquisite
inventions, as in our parts.

Of Justice among Citizens.
THey have one Judge as well of Christians as Turks, but always chosen from
amongst the Musselmen) to administer equal right to all men. If any kill
another, he suffers death: if steal or violently takes from another, he is
hanged; as it happened to a Janizary, who drunk milk of a poor Woman's, brought
to sell, and paid not for it; and accused before the Judge, denied the fact;
whereupon, being strerched up by cords at his feet, and about his middle, he
forth with vomited the milk, and was immediately by the Judge commanded to be
strangled: this happened: in my presence at Damasco, when I traveled from
Armenia to Jerusalem. If any commit adultery, the Man is cast into strict
Prison; yet after diverse months may be redeemed: the Woman is carried about the
streets riding on an Ass, beaten naked with whips, stones thrown at her, and a
Bull's pizzle tied about her Neck. He that gives a blow, is cut cross the face,
and led about the streets for terror. All suits have this good piece of
Justice, that right or wrong they last not above three days. Their differences
are few, because they buy and sell for ready Money; their chiefest wealth
consisting in it: for few have Lands or Revenues, but who command the
Soldiery: but generally the Turk 's Law and Equity is in his Sword, and both
opppressed and stifled with Fear and Bribery, two potent and prevailing Agents.
To spoil, to rob, to kill, to murder, upon design of interest, he says, It Is
Justice; devastation and destruction of whole Provinces and Kingdoms, he
calls, Peace. And if in ought he advise with Counsel or the great Mufty, it is
not for substance, but formality of justice, as well assured from gainsaying
an opposition.

Of Husbandry.
BOth Christians and Musselmen manure and till their Grounds, Vineyards, and
Pastures, and have like Fruits and Corn to ours; Wheat, Millet, Barley, Oats,
winter-Wheat, Pease, Beans, and all kinds of Pulse, and Rice in abundance;
Linen, and Cotton wools, more then these Nations; Vineyards like ours; but use
their Grapes in different manner; where we make Wine, the Turk has a kind of
Honey with them; so medicining their Grapes, that both in taste and color they
appear always fresh: other Fruits they have in great plenty; Melons,
Cucumbers, Pumpions: replenish well their Fields and Gardens in their seasons:
Nuts, Pears, Apples, Peaches of all sorts, Apricocks, Chestnuts, Figs, Lemons,
Oringes, Cherries, and suchlike, at small rates; but not in equal plenty in
all Kingdoms: and there are some within the Turks Dominion, as Cappadocia, and
less Armenia, where, in regard of cold, they have no suchlike Frutages.

Of diversity of Cattle.
THey have Shepherds, (whom they call Sobanlars) always living in solitary
places, and every Month remove their stations; they neither have possessions or
houses, other then their Tents, and Cattle; as Camels, Mules, Horse, Cows,
Oxen, Sheep, and Goats; whom they feed, make Cheese and Butter; shear the
Wool, and so make Cloaks, Mantles, and Tapestry, which they sell, and supply
thereby their Families with Corn and necessaries. All these Shepherds pay the
King tenths of all annual increase; and ^ll Christians further pay Tribute,
that live under the Turkish Government, for every Male, one Crown yearly; and,
that which is most cruel, their sons unmaried, are taken forcibly from them
every fifth year, when their Tents are visited.

Of Houses.
THey have no great magnificence of buildings; most of them are of bricks, but
differing; some are burned in Furnaces, some dried by the Sun. Their houses are
contiguous, like ours in Europe; but in Natolia, they are flat tabled without
elevation; from whence by Gutters, Pipes, and Channels, Rainwater flows down to
them. The houses low; none above two stories, and meanly furnished, if not
poorly.

Of their Garments.
THeir Vestments are made of Wool, Flax, and spun Silk, sufficiently
magnificent. They use a Garment (which is called Chaucan) straight, full of
plaits, and of length even to their ankles; abhorring breeches, as too much
directing to, and expressing privities. Their shirts or smocks are dyed in
color Violet. Their heads are covered with great rolls of Callico, or
suchlike stuff, wound about in fashion of Pyramids; which they call Turbants.
Women of quality go always with their faces veiled; which are never seen of
strangers, or in public places. Their shoes are high, with strong soles, for
longer service both of men and women. Some say that Mahomet had a bald or
scalded head, which he covered with white linen rolled up, as their Turbants,
from thence derived, and still continued, for they never alter fashions. They
wear long beards, as tokens of their freedom, all Slaves being shaved. No great
difference in habit between rich and poor; but in the stuffes. They are
religiously cleanly, and never seen to unburden nature, but always after wash.

Of Viands.
THey use, as we, bread white and course, which they sprinkle with certain
seeds before it is baked, and yields a great sweetness to the eater; which
with us is only used in Granada, and about Sivilia in Spain. They use much art
and sauces in their Cookeries: but ordinary food is pulse of Rice, so thickened,
that it must be parted with the hands: they feed on all flesh but Hoggs. There
are no Taverns or Innes allowed; yet in the streets, diverse sorts of victuals
are sold, and all things necessary for man's sustenance.

Of their Beverage.
THey have three sorts of drinks: the first made with Sugar and Honey mingled
with Water. The second of Raisins, the stones taken out, and boiled in Water,
whereto they add some Rose Water, and a little perfect Honey; and this is to be
sold in most parts through Turkey; for it is sweet, and puffs up the belly. The
third is made of a Fruit (called Pechmez) into Must, and has a kind of
Honey-taste and color with it; this, mingled with Water, is given to their
Servants. The Houses where they sell, are frequented as Osteries in Italy, or
Taverns with us. Turks for the most part drink only Water; they are not
suffered to buy or swallow Wines; and who happens to be accused, and proved to
have drunken thereof, his testimony in all occasions and actions in invalid:
and yet in private Christian houses, they do not abstain.

Of their manner of eating.
WHen they go to Dinner, they first strew Mattresses on the floor, and spread
upon them Carpets or Pillows; some sit on the bare ground. Their Tables are
made of skins, and plaited, to be drawn open more or less, like to a budget.
They neither sit, as we do, nor lie along on elbowes, as the ancients; but like
a cross of Burgondy, with legs infolded, they sit Taylor-wise. They always
Pray before they eat, then eat greedily and hastily, but with deep silence; and
in that time their Wives secluded from them. Menservants after twelve years
age, are never suffered to co-habitate in houses where Women are; but under
such age, they go about the houses, serving their Master's occasions. Captive
women have never liberty to go abroad, unless their Mistresses or Ladies go to
Vineyards, Graves of Friends departed, Baths, or Gardens out of Town (which
they often do) for recreation sake; and otherwise are kept strict at work in
houses, not suffered to converse with other captive Servants; as shall be more
at large declared in the following Chapter. Their dishes are commonly placed at
such distance one over another, as 'twere on Pillars, that each man may make
choice of three, which pleases best. They eat three times a day; but quick
therein, unless at a Feast, where they sit all day.

CHAP. II. Of the afflictions of Captives, and Christians under the Turkish
Tribute.
WHen the King of Turks makes Expeditions against Christians, amongst diverse
sorts of Merchants, there always follow him on Camels, a mighty number of Buyers
or Scorcers of Children or Men, who in hope of getting Slaves, carry with them
bundles of long Ropes, wherewith they easily tie together fifty or sixty men.
These traders purchase of the Soldiery or Freebooters, whomsoever the Sword
has not devoured; which is granted them, upon condition that the King may have
the tenth of what is traffick'd for, the rest unto themselves to sell. Nor is
there any Merchandise so profitable amongst them, nor so frequent; as anciently
among the Romans, who called things fairly bought, their proper Goods and
Rights, as just as that of Slaves.

How the Turks employ their slaves.
THe youth and aged of both Sexes, whom Chance by tenths appropriates to the
Turk, he thus disposes; the elder in years he sells for Husbandmen, who yet
are rarely or cheap bought; for they seldom escape the Sword; their age making
them less vendible. Young men and Maidens, they confine them in Seraglio's,
there to be instructed in useful Arts for future times. But first, they must
deny their Faith in Christ, and then be circumcifed. And thus initiated in
their Ceremonies, they diligently examine their physiognomies, and the several
lineaments of their bodies, and then the whole composure; and according to
conceived strength, forwardness of wit, and dispositions, they are destinated
to learn Laws of the Country, or discipline of Wars; and in the mean time are
allowed a daily stipend of two or three Aspers, sixty whereof make five
shillings, which they conceive a liberal sufficiency for diet and clothing,
until they are fitted for employments. In the elements of War, they thus are
trained, according to each strength: they first have given them a light bow;
skill and strength increasing, they have a greater and a heavier; so by degrees
they are fitted for expedition. They have Instructors, severe Exactors of their
daily Exercises; and whenever they err much from the mark, so often are they
cruelly whipped with scourges. These are enrolled in the order of Bow-men.
Others are instructed and made fit for Janissaries, who have appointed Masters
and Teachers every day to fight, two together with Cudgels. Others (an horrid
thing) who have more lovely faces, are so close cut, that nothing like Man is
left them; and this not done without great and eminent danger to life: and if
the party escape death, his health is for no other use, but their most wicked
lusts; and after youth's grown aged, they are put to the offices of Eunuchs, to
attend on Ladies, Concubines, Horses, Mules, and some Kitchin-imployments.

The condition of Virgins and other Women.
SUch as are of extraordinary beauty, comeliness, or composition of body, are
chosen out for Concubines; mean and indifferent Faces, are appointed Matrons,
handmaids; amongst whose offices some are so filthy, and so loathsome, as were
before (though somewhat uncivilly) related. Others are set to women's work, as
spinning, carding, weaving. It is free for none of them to profess the
Christian Faith, or hope of liberty during life. There is some content in hope,
but these have none.

How private Turks use Prisoners.
HItherto has been spoken how the Kings use Captives; now how private men
their Prisoners newly taken: first, they threaten them with all sorts of
meancing sharp words, promises, and allurements to entice them to Circumcision;
which if yielded to, they are treated somewhat more courteously; but then all
hope of ever returning to their Country is clean cut off; and whosoever
endeavors it, burning is his appointed punishment. Such as are thought more
firm and less fugitive, are admitted to their Masters Military employments, and
can only be made free, when age has made them useless; and then he is rather
turned off, then remitted orderly; or when the Master by hurt in War, or danger
of death, bequeaths him liberty. They are permitted marriage; but their
Children are disposed at the Master's pleasure; which makes the more
understanding sort utterly abhor marriage. They who refuse Circumcision, are
miserably and unhumanely treated; of which I have had the experience of
thirteen years sufferings: nor can I express in words the great calamities of
such people.

How Christians ignorant in mechanic Arts are used.
THe condition of such unskilful men is wretched. Those whose toil brings
profit, are only in reputation with them: and therefore learned Men, Priests,
and Noble men, who have lived in retiredness and pleasures, when they fall into
the hands of Turks, are of all most miserable; the Merchant or Manscourser
bestows no cost on them, as scant vendible; they walk with naked head and feet,
and often their whole bodies; no new clothes succeed, the old worn out; they
are hurried through Mountains, Rocks, from place to place, Winter and Summer,
and have no end thereof till death, or that they find a foolish Purchaser,
that (they think) buys ill Merchandise; but no man is so happy, or esteemed
amongst them, for Age, Art or Beauty, that they being sick will leave behind
them. First, they are whipped to go on; if they cannot do that, then they are
put on horseback; and there not able to sit upright, their bellies are tied on
horseback, no otherwise then a sack of Corn or Cloak-bag; if he die, he is
stripped of all clothes, and thrown into the next ditch, to be devoured by dogs
and vultures.

How Prisoners newly taken are used.
THey do not only bind them in endless chains, but, in their journey, also
manacle their hands; they march the distance of a large pace one from another,
that mutually they do no hurt; and tie their hands, lest with stones they
mischief do their Masters: that when sometimes they lead great multitudes, as
ten times five hundred chained together, the strength of whom, if hands at
liberty to throw stones, might much annoy them. At night when they rest, their
feet are likewise chained, and exposed to all injuries of weather. The
condition of Women is a little more humane; they who have strength of limbs,
are driven on foot; those more tender, are set on horses; such as are infirm
and cannot ride, are put in baskets or ripiers, as we use geese. Afterward
their condition is sadder; either they are included in strong Turrets, or
forced to endure the wicked lusts of their Merchants. Where still they are, is
ever heard vast and hideous howlings of both sexes, suffering violations from
them; neither does the age of leaven or six years, defend them from those
vicious actions: a people incomparable wicked, both against nature, and before
libidinous.

How used that are exposed to sale.
AT the break of day they are brought to Market, like droves of sheep, or herds
of goats: Merchants appear, prizes are set; if the prisoner be liked, his
clothes are stripped off, he is viewed by the buyer, all members suveyed, tried
and thoroughly searched for faults in joints or arteries; if he please not, then
returned to the owner* and this is done until he find a purchaser. When
bought, he is carried to some heavy servitude, to plow, keep sheep; omiting
baser Offices. They endure there many unheard examples of calamities: I have
seen men tied together with yokes, to draw the plow. Maidens are severely
forced to perpetual labors; separated from the sight of men, nor are they
suffered speech or conference with other Servants. If any man be taken Prisoner
with wife and children, him some great person willingly purchases, to be
employed in his Country House, in Tillage, Vineyards, Meadows, Pastures; and
Children born of them, are all his Slaves: and if they persevere in Christian
Faith, a certain time is allotted them to servitude, and then made free; their
Children notwithstanding continue Slaves at the Master's will, and employed
where he pleases; for they have no certain nor enrolled Estates of Lands, and
so no assured seats of residence. If after making free, they desire to return
to their Country, they have Letters Patents given for their Journey. But to
such as abjure the Christian Religion, no certain time of bondage is prescribed
them, nor right of return; all hopes of their liberty, totally depends upon the
Master's pleasure: and when they have got freedom, they pay the Tenths, as
other Turks, but freed from other Taxes with which Christians are burdened.

Of Captives made Shepherds.
THe Husband -- man has an hard and sad condition, but the Shepherd far more
grievous; they always live in solitariness night and day, covered only with
the roof of heaven. The Master and the Wife have some small Tents; no shelter
for the Shepherd, unless at spare times compelled to work on Tapestry or
Carpets. Every month they change their Pastures, and drive their flocks from
one Mountain to another. Some Masters that have more humanity, now and then
give small rewards, which the Servant keeps as his proper Goods, and preserves,
to bear the charge of a return to his Country, if ever he get liberty; but
these largesses are seldom done, and then, but as a miserable enticement to
servitude, thinking thereby to withdraw their hopes of shifting from them. To
such as deny Christ, and are circumcised, knowing they dare not run away, no
like indulgence offered.

Escapes of prisoners out of Europe.
European Slaves may more easily escape, then those sold into transmaritime
Regions; they pass Rivers only, that may be swimmed over; others, with great
difficulty must pass the Hellespont. Such as intend escapes, usually attempt it
in Harvest season, to hide themselves in Fields of Corn, and by it live. The
Nights they Travel; the Day lie close, in Corn, Woods, or Marshes; and rather
choose to be devoured by Wolves, then brought back to their Tyger-Masters.

Out of lesser Asia.
WHo fly from thence, repair to the Hellespontick Sea, between Callipolis, and
those Towers of Sestos and Abidos, now called by the Turks, Bogaz Aser, that
is, Castles on the mouth of the Sea, where the Waters are straight and narrow;
hither they come with Saws and Ropes, cut Timber Trees, and tie them fast
together, to serve and save themselves for shipping; carrying nothing with them
but salt. If Wind and Fortune favor, in three or four hours they are wafted
over; if otherwise, they perish in the Sea, or reforc'd again upon the Coast of
Asia; if safely pass, they then betake themselves to the Mountains, and by
inspection of the Pole and the Star Boots, they tend their way Northward; and
sustain themselves with Acorns and Herbs sod in salt. If many fly together in
society, sometimes in Night, they set upon the Shepherds, and what they find
of Victuals take from them; sometime they kill, and are sometime killed, or
taken, and returned to their old Masters and Drudgeries: but the several
dangers of traveling, consumes more then escape, by shipwreck, the enemies
sword, wild beasts, and starving hunger.

The punishment of Fugitives.
SOme are hanged up by the heels, and most cruelly scourged; and if commit
murder, the soles of his feet are all slashed into furrows, and salt stuffed
in. Some have great iron Chains, fastened on their necks, and forced to wear
them day and night, and as long as the Master pleases.

The charity of Greeks and Armenians to Captives.
DEath, and confiscation of all sorts of Goods, is inflicted on those who
undertake, procure, or assist Captives in their flight, or running away; yet
notwithstanding both Greeks and Armenians cease not to entertain them, being
Christians, to hide them, and in disguises to conduct them unto shippings of
the Venetians or other Christians, and freely give them good provisions and all
things necessary for their journeys; nor do they spare or omit any kind of
piety toward them; for they confess to have had heard the like experience from
Christians charity, when as they travel for conscience sake to Rome or
Compostella.

The Incantation of Turks against Fugitives.
THey have certain kind of Charms, which they think can draw them off from
flying. The name of the Slave is written in a Schedule of Paper, which is hung
up in his Tent or House: then with vengeable and horrible Curses, his head is
charged and threatened, conceiving this by the Devil's help, the Fugitive will
be affrighted with meeting of Lions and Dragons in his Journey, or that the
Seas or Rivers will swallow him, the heavens will grow dark, and these
astonishments will bring him back again.

The memory of Christ by degrees lost in former Christian Provinces.
THere is some memory yet left of the expugnation of Constantinople, the
Kingdoms of Greece, Albania, Valachia, and Servia, now reduced to Provinces.
These, for a long time, constantly retained the Christian Faith, but their
Children have forgot it; and there will come to pass a full oblivion of Christ.
And likely it is to fall out so in Croatia, Hungary, and Sclavonia, which are
now additaments and adjuncts to the Turkish Empire.

The condition of the conquered.
When a Province is subdued and taken, all sorts of Goods moveable and
immovable are given away for spoil. They totally extirpate the whole
Nobility; but especially the Princely Issue. And when they took John the King's
Son of Hungary, and favored him with life, it was on good advice, that if
Hungary were lost again, they might employ and involve him into any new
encumbrances; and when the Province should be in a quiet and calm condition,
then to dispatch him: for in such respects, the Turk regards neither Kindred,
Father or Brother; he spares none. And if they do kill and murder not all
Church and Clergymen they take; yet they expose them to all scorn, nakedness
and beggary, despoyling them of all their Fortunes, Goods, and Dignities. Their
Bells, their Organs, and other Instruments and Ornaments of Churches, Chapels,
and Devotions, they raven and tear from the Temples, profaning them with
consecration to their Mahomet; leaving only the most miserable and wretched
Chapels to the Christians, wherein they are forbid public Prayers, and may
pray seemingly in silence: which Chapels, when either Earthquake, Fire.
Tempest, or Age destroy, they must in no sort re-edifie. Preaching or reading
parts of the Scripture is utterly forbidden. It is a sin to admit a Christian
to any public Office, to wear, have Arms or habit like a Turk: or else to use
the recreations of cheerfulness, as Pageants, Plays, or Dancings. If they
injure Christ or you, with bitter or contumacious words, you must be silent,
and endure it. If you speak ought against their professed Religion. you are
forced to circumcision; and but to whisper again Mahomet, Fire and Brimstone
follows. If a Christian on horseback pass by a Musselman, (that is, one
initiated in the Turkish Faith) he must, on necessity, light from his horse,
and bowing down his head worship him; which if omitted, he straight is knocked
down with clubs.

The condition of Priests and Friars under Tribute.
THey are held the worst of Men, and are esteemed by Turks the very Sacrilege
and Scandal of God and Mankind. They have no benefit from Churches. Upon some
festival days, a little bread is given them by poor Women, and not on other
days. They get their livelihood by carrying Wood; their custom being, to cut
down sticks in Woods, lade them on Asses; and with this Merchandise, they cry
about the Streets, Wood to be sold.

The Tribute of Christians.
THey pay a part of all increase, not only of Corn and Cattle, but even
Mechanics pay it out of all their profits. And then they pay another subsidy,
for every single man through a Family, each head a Crown. If Parents refuse
this Tribute, their Children are taken from them, and made Slaves. Others are
bound in Chains, and beg from door to door to pay this Crown; which if they
cannot this way procure, they are cast into perpetual Prison; and when all
Duties are performed, it is yet lawful for the Turk to choose the best amongst
his Children, whom he circumciseth, and removes from all approach or sight of
Parents, and breeds him for his Wars, never to return to Friends; and so a
child easily forgets both Christ, his Parents, and his Kindred; that after, if
he chance in company with them, he shall not know them. No Man can express by
Words, the Lamentations, Cries, Tears and grievous sighs, at this distraction
of Children. The Father to see his Son (educated in the fear of Christ) torn
from him, and made an Instrument of Satan, to oppose Christ: hurried from his
Mother, to live perpetually with strangers, leaving whatsoever is dear in
blood, pleasing in society, or loving in familiarity, with an everlasting
dereliction: after listed in the ranks of those the Greeks call Fatherless and
Motherless; yet many of these although they have denied Christ, carry about
them the Gospel of St. John, (In the beginning was the word, etc. in Greek or
the Arabic tongue) as an amulet or preservative in their Armpits; and with
great desire they expect the Christian Sword (according to some Turkish
prophesies) should revenge and free them from those great afflictions and
persecutions; and that if Christians do it not, whatever is the cause, or with
what minds soever hindered; all very ill deserve of Christian Religion.

CHAP. III. A Narration of a dispute with a TURK.
AFter I had traveled with much labor and many dangers the better parts of
the world, and seen many pleasant Towns and Countries, as Socrates, Plato, and
other Philosophers had diligently done; at length I arrived at the famous City
of Hungary, Varadinum, where by chance I met one Dervis Gsielebi, a skilful man
in the Laws of Mahomet; who having dispatched his business with the Governor,
he very much desired conference with some Christian about Religion on either
side. This motion of his being published by an Interpreter, and none for diverse
days appearing to encounter him, in defense of the Christian cause, though
many religious persons were in that Town, (struck mute and speechless at the
courage of one Ethnic Infidel) who seemed to me like Israelites, that durst
not adventure on one uncircumcised Goliath, provoking them. This I perceiving,
and grieving in my spirit, that in such plenty of Clerks and learned men, none
was so well armed with Truth, as durst (though by Interpreters) reprove the
insolence of such an Heathen; And fearing that so wicked and detestable a
silence, in so good a Cause, with so bad a Man, would betray the Truth, and
render our Savior Jesus Christ's Opinion with him more ignominious; I my self,
though never called to Ecclesiastical Function, undertook the charge of arguing
this point of Piety with him; and so a prefixed day was agreed on between us:
when multitudes of people of each Religion, came Spectators of the event. The
place was in a Monastery of Franciscans; the day, Whitson-Sunday, day of
Pentecost; where he moved to me first this Question: Where God had his being,
before the Heavens and Earth, and therein all things else were created? Which
Question, though it seemed to me not much pertinent to our purpose, yet lest he
should imagine us ignorant of our great God's universal presence, I said, He
then was in his own being. But when that seemed to him somewhat obscure, and
that he did not sufficiently understand it, I then told him, He was where he
now is. Which he understanding, denied in the general, and said, Not so; but
that he then was in a bright cloud. Which, when he earnestly affirmed, I quoted
Genesis; (for they also read the books of Moses and the Prophets) and said, If
God were in a Cloud, before the Foundation of Heaven and Earth, then that Cloud
must be created before them both: and upon further argument on this point,
being at last convicted, he would dispute no further in it; but gave me leave
to propound some Question to him; and for solemnity of that days sake, I
thought fit to say something thereof; and finding these words (In the name of
God, his mercies, and the Spirit of them) in their Alcoran, in the Arabian
Tongue and Character, I desired him to read them: The mystery of the holy
Trinity. Which when he had considered, and wondered at, he said, Christian, from
whence had you this? for in the beginning of all our actions, we Musselmen use
these three words, and prefix them to every Chapter of our Alcoran; when we sit
down to eat, when we go to prayers, when we wash our hands, or other parts of
our bodies, these words we first pronounce; and these actions finished, we
sprinkle our heads with water, and repeat these words, In the Name of God, his
Mercies, and the Spirit of them. When thus he had confessed the Truth, I
desired to understand from him what he meant by the word Mercies: who replied,
He understood it literally, without other signification. Then I applied my self
to the mystical Interpretation, and divided it according to Truth into three
Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and showed them written in
the Arabic tongue. And when he saw I had mentioned the Son of God, he
questioned, How God could have a Son? since according to their Law and Doctrine
of Mahomet, God had neither Wife nor Child. To whom I answered, according to
my weak understanding and capacity; We Christians call God the Father, for his
Creatures sake, being the first creating Cause, and sole Preserver of all
created, who was for ever in the same Essence he now is in, and will be for
Eternity; and is the first Person in the Trinity. We believe the Son, (who by
Mahemet in the Arabic phrase is called Rahman, and signifies Mercies, so
changed by him) to be likewise God, not according to flesh (for God is a
Spirit) born of a Woman; but of the Essence and substance of God Omnipotent,
begotten by God the Father, to put away the sins of the World, and so took
humane flesh, by the Holy Virgin Mary, suffered for us, died, and was buried,
and according to the sayings of the Prophets arose again the third day, and
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father, there to
judge the quick and the dead, to render immortal happiness to those that have
faith in him, and to the unfaithful everlasting punishment.

I then presented him a Crucifix, and said, Behold this now, and see if Mahomet
did unworthily call the Son of the eternal God by Name of Mercies, when with
Arms thus stretched forth, he calls poor sinners to his embraces, saying, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and art burdened with sins, and I will refresh
you. And to render him more capable of the Trinity, I pointed to the Sun,
saying, You have a fair similitude here: as there is but one Sun, that has
form, heat and light; so there is but one God the Father, who has Son, and the
Holy Spirit, which you call Ru^ahim, consisting of three Persons equally of one
substance, and from Eternity coexisting.

This comparison wrought in him a belief in God the Father, his only begotten
Son, and the Holy Ghost; a Trinity in Unity. And when he had heard my weak
discourses of God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, he much
admired, with saying, O God, O God; I, nor any of our Sect, could ever imagine,
you had such good thoughts of God; for we conceive you live in darkness of
understanding: but by your relation, it seems you have great apprehensions of
him; and believe well, if you did not neglect our great Prophet of God,
Mahomet. I said, What shall we do with the toys and dreams of Mahomet? for
besides Baptism and the mystery of the Trinity, which were had from Christians,
we know the Alcoran contains naught that tends to Truth. Then I alleged to him
the fancies and silly trifles of Mahomet's two Angels called Arot and Marot,
whom Mahomet says, That God did send from Heaven, to minister justice unto
mortal men, commanding them to forbid drinking of wine, and unlawful mixtures
with women, and to show the ways to heaven to no man. These Angels
transgressing Divine Commandment, were defiled, deceived, and made drunk by a
Woman, and showed to Mahomet the way to heaven; whom, when God saw there, he
asked the Angels standing by, who it was that came in that shape thither? And
the Angels telling him it was by the error of Arot and Marot; he turned the
Woman into a Star, and sent those Angels chained into a well, to be punished
everlastingly. Diverse like ridiculous stories I related, as that of the Beast
Baraile, who could speak as man, who carried Mahomet to heaven, where himself
confesses to have seen great Angels with many heads, and those speaking many
Languages in diverse Tongues; which is sufficiently foolish, and unworthy the
name of a Prophet; but said, I knew not whether oppressed with Wine, in sleep
he dreamed to have seen such miracles, or monstrosities in his imaginations.
And therefore when he inserts such follies in his Alcoran, he deserves nor the
Title of a Prophet from any reasonable man.

Having heard this, somewhat abashed, he arose, and would argue no further: but
led me into the Temple, and showed me certain Images carved in wood; and asked
me, If we did worship those silmilitudes of men, or adore them? I answered, No;
think not we worship the stones or timber wherein these figures are engraved;
they are used and respected only as records and remembrances to men's minds of
the passions and sufferings of our Savior Jesus Christ, for the redemption of
our transgressions: and we worship our true God in mind and Spirit, remembered
by that Crucifix; neither are you denied the like remembrances of your great
Princes, and famous men, nor we of holy Saints; but it is to give God thanks for
their examples of holiness, and our prayers to imitate their charity and
pieties.

In these discoursings, he spies some dogs walking in the Church, and doing
something against an Altar, (an evil custom, and to be condemned by all) and
asked whether it was lawful for Beasts to enter our Churches? and blushing with
shame, not knowing how to defend this negligence of Christian Pastors, I told
him, It was neither lawful nor seemly; and desired him to conceive it a mere
negligence of Officers.

When he heard this, he commended it very much, and desired me to instruct him
in our Savior's Prayer, which I gave him after, in the Arabian Dialect.

CHAP. IV. A Lamentation for loss of Christians destroyed.
AFflicted with an infinite and incredible sorrow (most high and mighty
Monarchs and Governors of Christian Commonwealths) to see the sad condition,
and most miserable being of our Brethren under the Turkish slavery; whereof
some seduced from the bosom of our Church to heretical unhappiness; others
with civil and hostise sword, slain, murdered, and cast to devouring Beasts;
others made captive to perpetual servitude, and most cruelly afflicted. They
all by me in lamentable sobs and groanings complain, O monstrous, mischievous
ambition of ill men, and wicked covetousness of ruling! How many equal souls
consecrated to God's Divine Worship, have you betrayed to Death and to the
Devil? How many Principalities and Kingdoms of great Kings, and all sorts of
Nobility, have you destroyed? How many walls of stately Towns have you
demolished? How many sumptuous Palaces and strong stately Castles have you
levelled with the ground? How many lawful Owners have you dejected from eminent
Estates and quiet Conditions, and banished to perpetual disconsolations?

And although I intend not to write the acts of Princes, but to delineate the
calamities and tragedies of Captives, I cannot forbear remembrance of that
abominable discord of the Earl of Scrvia, a potent and proud Prince, who
agreeing (a shameful foul example of a vicious ambition) with the Bassa of
Bosnia, (his neighbour-Enemy) and having many Castles and strong holds upon the
Turkish Confines, even to the River Savus, (which divides Illyria from Croatia)
and defended all those Provinces which lie between that River and the River
Dravus, from Turkish violences and incursions: This Earl or Lord of Servia,
falling into variance and some petty controversies with the Nobility of
Sclavonia, made friendship with the said Bassa, and joining their Armies both
together, invaded the Sclavonians, partly at difference between themselves, and
partly impotent; wholly destroys them and their Province with fire and sword,
ruining their Towns and Castles, some by violence and force, some by craft and
treachery, (customary with wicked men and Turks) and so totally vanquished and
conquered them. And after a few Months had passed, this Bassa beholding the
Earl's rich Provinces, and neighboring with his, he took or made occasions to
invade him, whom at length he killed; and so reduced all his Territories under
the Turkish Government. Thus this seditious Atheist, Traitor to his Country and
his Brethren, most ignominiously lost his life: for such are the Turk's rewards
to whomsoever by craft, policy, or villainous fraud, he can lay hold on or
ensnare. The like was done with some Noblemen of Hungary, whom they reduced to
miserable captivity.

Wherefore (most Christian Monarchs) the cruelties of this Tyrant, ought with
all industry and vigilance, be both feared and prevented; lest considering your
fair Provinces, and viewing them with a fascinating eye, he find you
disagreeing, and thereby infeebled, he assault you on all sides, not only
Candia, Calabria, Malta, and Sicily, but even Italy, France, Spain, and
Germany; and prove an universal scourge and terror to all Christendom. They
are wise, who by others harms prevent their own: you are concerned, when your
neighbors house is fired. But not to trouble you in this kind, I recommend to
you, most prudent Governors, the correction and amendment of this great error,
and return to the deplorable calamities and afflictions our Brethren suffer
under the yoke of Tribute in the Turk's Dominions, where some with chains about
their necks, are dragged through sharp and spiny parts of Thracia and lesser
Asia, with naked feet, in thirst and hunger: and if by labor of long journeys,
diseases, or other griefs they die (as often happens to men of Quality and bred
in ease) are hurled stripped in the next ditch, (though not half dead) to the
care of ravenous fowls; others, that is, young people of either sex, endure
perforce the filthy lusts of their buyers and their fenars, with hideous cries
and howlings of violated and vitiated people; the age of six years not
defending them: others ignorant in husbandry or Mechanic Arts, and literated
men (who are least saleable) are for long time driven from Town to Town, from
street to street; and being once sold, compelled with clubs and scourges to
learn Trades and daily employments in base businesses and grievous pains:
others of more robustious strength, are made slaves to Galleys, tied by the
legs with chains, and most miserably tortured; whose sad calamities the power
of humane wit cannot express in words. And if these poor unfortunate souls,
could have foreknown that miserable being, they would rarther have chosen a
thousand deaths. If pains of life and death were ever commix'd together; yea,
if to live long and many days, and die every hour, were ever extant, it is in
Turkey: Egyptian servitude, Babylonian banishment, Assyriack captivity, Roman
destruction, are toys and trifles to these calamities. People, who live as it
were in the fiery Furnace of the Chaldean Hur, and crying up to heaven with
sighs and groans, O Lord, how long! arise and forsake us not in the end: and
when oppressed and grieved beyond all hope, they turn their eyes again on their
own Countries, likewise in captivity; yet wish themselves rather slaves there,
then where they are: their prayers are not for liberty, but change of place;
and for that cause, indifferent for death or life, they turn Fugitives; and
some leaving their flocks in deserts, their Oxen at plow, expose themselves to
devoration; some murdering their Masters and their Children; some burning
their houses in revenge; some run away, hiding themselves in Caves and hollow
Trees, with fearful wants and dangers; which I here forbear, having given the
Reader some taste thereof before. And now they turn their cries to you all
Christian Monarchs and Governors of Commonwealths:

Imploring and beseeching the Pope of Rome, who should be Father of our
Country, and all sorts of men belonging to Christ his holy Church, That they
uniting all sects of men in peace and concord, would labor to suppress this
common enemy, and restore their Brethren unto liberty.

Imploring and beseeching the Emperor and all Imperial Princes, Dukes, Cities,
and Nobilities, to cool their hot Calentures of ambition, and avarice of
neighbors rights, and set apart domestic quarrels, and call together and
unite their strengths against so cruel an Usurper, and hostile Enemy, and
labor to defend their present, or else recover their lost Territories: and
then be assured, the circumspection of the Spanish Soldiery, the warlike
fierceness of the Belgicke Provinces, the quick prudence of the Italian wits,
the robustiousness and stoutness of the Germans, will be easily persuaded by
the King of Romans, against this universal Enemy; remembering you withal, No
Crown sits so gloriously on an Emperor or Princes head, as that which bears
a true Title of the Peoples safety and lawful Liberties.

Imploring and beseeching the most Christian King of France, to employ his
helping and heroic Arms, in safeguard (according to his Title) of his
Christian Brethrens liberties, and his own from Turkish Tyranny.

Imploring and beseeching the most mighty and potent Kings of England, Poland,
Denmark, Swedeland, with all Republics, Cities, and Corporations Christian, to
unite, and join in one, their strengths and powers in war against this
cankered common Enemy of their Religion, Crowns and Dignities.

Imploring and beseeching, all sorts of Powers and Authorities spiritual and
temporal, to employ their diligence, and show the worthiness of their callings,
by correction and amendment of wicked and dissolute loose livers, by whom God's
wrath is kindled against us; and to reduce them to holy Rules of Christian
Exercises, in living justly, soberly and religiously, and so render God a true
account of Stewardship, and prevent the miseries have befallen others drowsy
and sleeping inadvertencies.

Imploring and beseeching both young and old, of all sects and conditions,
godly Christians religious and secular, beloved Fathers, dear Brethren,
respected Friends, Neighbors, and Companions, That you all, with humble face
and countenance, pure and sincere hearts and hands, devout minds, mournful
voices, and weeping eyes, condole, grieve, and lament the miseries, the
calamities of Turkish captives; and call unto the Lord of Hosts with violence
in pity to his people, to avert his anger, and not to give them up to the
perpetual rebuke of this wicked Infidel, most cruel Enemy of Christian Religion
and Liberty; but to inspire the minds of Christian Kings and Governors, with
light of his holy Spirit, to reduce them all to unity and concord, against this
ravenous and insatiable Dragon; and grant others such success, that these
wretched captives, their Christian Brethren, may be restored to liberty in the
worship and adoration of their God, our Christ, and only serve him, who is for
ever blessed; that at length the Christian World may be refreshed and eased
from such perpetual slavery.

CHAP. V. An Exhortation against the TURK.
I Have often marvelled with my self, most mighty Monarchs, when I considered
the adva^tages which promise Christians victories against the Turk; and yet
inso many years they attempted none, or failed. We have Jesus Christ our God,
who in one only night destroyed the host of Sennacherib; who drowned Pharaoh;
who with a maiden hand of Judith, struck off the head of H^l^phernes; and, to
be (...) a God, whose will is victory. Con^^ary to which, they have a Mahomet,
a wicked man of life and conversation, in death, yet hanging in his Sepulcher
without Resurrection: so as there is as much difference between them, as is
between an ever living Son of an ever living God, and a putrid carcass of a son
of a mortal man; that if we diligently examine the nature of each Power and
Authority, it would apear like dead men, superiors in strength to living. Now
in abilities of bodies, capacities, and gifts of understanding, we exceed them;
which are good strengths and fortifications against an enemy: and yet we are
still defeated. Who is more hardy then the Hungarian? more stout and robustious
then the German? more quick and nimble then the Frenchmen? more grave and solid
then the Spaniard? more cautelous and prudent then the Italian? more valiant
and daring then the English? forbearing other Nations, the endowments of whose
minds, are better or at least equal. All these abilities seem able singly to
get a victory, or at least well to forward it. Courage often without much
force, generosity of mind, wisdom, forecast, ambition of honor, and policy,
often subdues an Enemy; yet notwithstanding, wretches as we are, amongst so many
victorious attributes, we get no victories. Then if we consider the easy
preparation and great furnitures of all sorts of arms, we shall appear far to
exceed the Turk. Guns of all sorts have bin our own inventions, and the diverse
kinds of complete harnesses for horse and foot. The Turks, Persians Subjects,
naked, or half so, march forth to war: they have bows, we guns; that is, fire
and thunder: they have arrows, which hardly pierce an Armor; we Cannons, which
Rocks cannot withstand: and yet now some Mussel-men have Guns and Gunners; but
few, and unskilful.

Now I pray, what other kind of people use they most in Expeditions? Scythians
and Thracians, who have no Italian or Spanish Spirits, only a kind of
inhumane fierceness, ignorance and stolidity: to these are added Grecians, lost
men with ease and laziness; Asians, corrupt with luxury; Egyptians, no less in
mind then bodies, feebled; Arabians, bloodless, thin, and parboyl'd with the
Sun. Who could imagine such-kinde of Soldiery should subdue the great
advantages and abilities of those fore named Nations? yet (be it spoken with
grief) our Christians by these are overcome, and mastered into servitude, and
our great Captains are forced to bear arms against us, who were born and bred
by Ancestors to liberty: and in the mean season, the Turk laughs at us, and the
Jew rejoices.

Now if I shall consider the Laws and Institutions of Nations, we shall be
found abundantly superior in that respect: for, what is more righteous and
divine then the Decalogue and holy Gospel, written by God's own Finger and his
Spirit? what more regular then the Canon Law? more just and equal then the
civil Law? Whereas the Turks live by Direction and Dictates of the Alcoran; a
book of stuff as foolish, as full of vanity; a book of sport and mirth, if pity
for the seduced did not allay it; though now spread abroad too much, and
handled amongst Christians; so as it may be truly feared, we shall learn other
Laws, or shortly lose our own, and turn Turks in our minds and approbations,
sooner then in our bodies to their Dominion. What is then the cause, having so
many prerogatives of hopeful war, we are always beaten? why are our Ensigns
adorned with Crucifixes, fearful formerly to infidels and devils, now trampled
on and frighted? I shall tell you in few words, and truth, We have a God most
great, most good; but alienated from us so far, that according to the Prophets
saying, We scarce are to be named his people: for why should Christ remain with
us, whom we have rent and torn in far more pieces, then the Soldiers did his
Garment, by our hideous Sects, Schisms and Heresies? Besides his Name, what of
him is dear unto us? The very Plow man these times is impudent and factious,
the Citizen fraudulent and avaritious, the Magistrate seeks retributions and
rewards, the Nobility is riotous and lazy, the Gentry contentious and proud;
the Soldier, beyond his pay and spoil, craves nothing from the war; let
Scepters fall as they will, he is no less grievous to friends and companions,
then Enemies. Churchmen besides pomp ecclesiastical, have little of the
Church; not sanctity, not piety, and some not fitting erudition; seeking their
own, not Christ's advancement; that we may say with the Prophet, All have
declined the ways of God, and are unprofitable; there is none that does good,
not, even one. Why should we marvel then that Christ is not our Friend? We
therefore go to war without a God, and what is more calamitous, with God our
adversary. We carry Bibles and Crucifixes with us, but the crucified by his
favor converseth with our enemies; our actions therefore perish, and are
involved in losses And when one Nation fights against the Turk, another is
employed in civil wars, calling to his aid, Pagans, Schismatics or Heretics,
more eagerly to oppose Christ; others tend their home-affairs, to indulge
themselves in ease and voluptuousness. The soldier sets not forth for Christ,
but money; which failing, soon deserts the field, and turns home back again.
What have we then from those rich Attributes and Eulogies of Germany, France,
England, Spain, and Italy, when the Soldier neglects both God and Honor, and
goes to war, as to market, a brothel-house, or stews, to exercise all rapine,
spoil, and lewdness? We have good laws, but evil manners; good furniture of
arms, but wicked dispositions: it is our glory to fight among our selves; and
if we prove coward to enemies, there follows little shame or punishment. When
do we see a Soldier quitting Colors or disbanding, severely handled? which
crimes were anciently capital; and whole Legions have been decimated and tyth'd
for less offenses. We therefore march with men few in numbers, and those
corrupt in manners, against millions of men well disciplined; for Tu^ks leave
their vices in their houses, from whence we carry ours. In their Pavilions and
Tents, no deliciousness; arms only, and necessary provisions: in Christians,
all sorts of Table-delicates, luxury and riotousness; and commonly, as many
light lascivious Women, as Men. What wonder then if they conquer who are
preserved by sobriety, parsimony, diligence, fidelity, and obedience? Let them
perish then, who lose a field to get a prey; who are oftener found amongst
whores, and drunk, then in good actions: but it is the fault and error of
Supe^iors, when Subjects are not kept in due observance; which if Christians
were, we could not be inferior to Turks. And yet a greater fault, behold,
Princes themselves, while they contend in mutual quarrels, are causes why they
cannot muster equal forces against the Turk; for whilst they fight and combat
for some little Town or other, after grievous strife, conflictation and
exhaustion of men and treasure, they grow weak, impoverished and heartless.
What brave actions might those streams of Christian blood have done, which
civil wars most impiously have drawn out, emptied, and dried up? But it is too
late to mourn in complaints: Asia and Africa are lost; Greece, extinguished;
Hungary, desperately sick; Illyria and Sclavonia, joined to the Turk; Austria,
much enfeebled; and this plague much threatens Germany, and Christianity
universal; and that so far, that no great Prince or Monarch ought to be secure,
or think himself so free, but that he may be forced to defend his own, without
invasion of his neighbors Territories, whether it please or not; unless they
will become of Princes, Servants; of Freemen, Slaves, detained in perpetual
chains, or slain and murdered, that their Subjects may want Captains and good
Leaders.

Now, most mighty Monarchs and high Governors, for God's cause, banish from
amongst you all discord and ambitious tyrannies (which are the Devils
instruments to maintain oppressions and impieties, thereby to prolong Gods
wrath upon you) and restore to each proprietor his due rights and privileges;
and then, as Rivers having free course, haste all smoothly to the sea, and make
one mighty body; so your strengths united in the bond of peace, would startle,
astonish and drown this great Tyrant Turk: which blessing on bended knees, I
humbly pray for, and recommend unto the God of Peace. And being reconciled
among your selves, if you would say as Moses said to Joshua, Choose you a man,
and go and fight with Amalek; If you would reduce your selves to this peace and
concord, (which is only hopeful) and put your helping hands and powers, toward
so greatly honorable, so blessed, so necessary and profitable a war against
the Turk; who can imagine, but that ye should at least equal the number of his
Soldiery, if not far exceed them? He is now swelled up to the very height of
Tyranny, and has there remained so for diverse years, as if expecting, as if
waiting an attempt. All full Seas have their ebbings, all ripe fruits are
quickly shaken down; there wants nothing to this general and glorious work of
Christian Princes, but God's blessing, unanimity, and an Heroic courage, brave
and masculine. For the Emperor can with easiness, raise, arm and muster 50000
horse, and 100000 foot; the like may hopefully be expected from France, from
Spain, and Italy; the yet remaining parts of Hungary, and Illyria, with the
Provinces under the King of Romans, will raise and maintain 60000. These
Christian Forces may make 400000 horse and foot, besides, the Maritime great
assistances of England, Denmark, united Provinces, Venetians, Portugals, and
Swedes, and all other Christian Commonwealths, who, if once unanimous, and
freed from jealousies, and petty, wretched, wilful home-contentions, the
Turkish power could no more resist ye, then Darius, Alexander; Xerxes,
Themistocles; or Antiochus, Judas Macchabeus: and having gotten but one
victory, and once passed the Danube toward Constantinople, God being pleased,
and our lives amended, these enemies of our faith would easily be trodden down.
All Greece and Thrace, (where yet great part retain the law of Christ) expect
with greediness the Christian Sword, and readily would revolt upon such
occasion, and manfully assault and fight against those Lords and Masters, that
have so cruelly afflicted them: which circumstance alone, would much hasten, if
not perfect a speedy victory.

I would to God, and wish heartily, most Christian Monarchs, That your civil,
fruitless, home-contentions, would permit and suffer you seriously to consider,
and calmly to examine these offered motions; you then would find all men's
wills and arms concur with yours; no age, no sex, no conditions of men would
leave your Ensigns: Each Turk would have his Executioner at home, his Traitor
in his Tent, and fugitive in the field. All Christians amongst them have
contemptuous opinions of their arms, and know them only fitted for light
Skirmishes, and Pickerings; who, if their noise, like shoals of clamouring
Rocks, affright you not, they fly. And whenever it shall please God to root
out from amongst us these perpetual Enemies of his faith, and send them to
their old lurking holes and caves, and corners in Bythinia, by the Christian
Sword, (according to some of their own Prophecies) or else to reduce them to
the bosom of our Catholic Church; no man can doubt, but in short time the
Emperor will be seated in his chair at Constantinople, and invested in his
Imperial Roman Territories; The King of Romans re-established, and recover
Hungary, and Thrace; France, lesser Asia; England, part of Egypt; Spain, part
of Africa; Italy, all Shores and Banks of the Mediterranean Seas; and last, the
Pope, as a great Pastor of the Christian Church, will be extolled and magnified
for such an union.

These are the apprehensions of all Christian captives under the Turkish
Tribute, and even Turks themselves, who have knowledge and long acquaintance in
military affairs. And this my self have learned by thirteen years experience,
The Turk is valiant against a flying, and flying against a valiant Enemy; when
therefore he by nature is fugitive, impiety flies without pursuit. Let God
arise and scatter all his Enemies: let those that hate his Doctrine, avoid his
presence: let them like smoke vanish, and melt like wax against the fire: so
may all Infidels perish, before the face of God and his holy Church, that there
may be but one Flock, and one Pastor, Jesus Christ the righteous. Which grant,
Oh ever blessed Trinity and Unity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost.

Amen.
Contents.
OF Oratories. page 1. Lent. page 6. Circumcision. page 8. Priests. page 11.
Monks. page 13. Reverence to Mahomet's Traditions. page 15. Schools. page 16.
Contracts of Marriage. page 17. Of Strangers. page 19. Miracles at Mecha. page
20. Of Alms. page 23. Sacrifices. page 24. Wills and Legacies. page 25.
Ceremonies of the dead. page 26. Of a Sepulcher called Tulbe. page 27.
Concerning War. page 29. Condition of Noblemen. page 31. Bassa's and
Counselors. page 33. The obedience of Turks to their King. page 34. How
strength diminished. page 36. Of Chazalars. page 37. Order of foot. page 38.
Pavilions of Turks. page 40. Carriage of Beasts. page 42. Justice in war. page
44. Celebration of Turkish Victories. page 45. Of hunting. page 46. Artificers
and Husbandmen. page 48. Justice amongst Citizens. page 49. Husbandry. page 51.
Diversity of Cattle. page 53. Of Houses. page 54. Garments. Ibid. Of Viands.
page 56. Drinks. page 57. Manner of eating. page 58.
CHAP. II.
Afflictions of Captives. page 60. Employment of slaves. page 61. Women and
Virgins. page 64. Private Prisoners. page 65. Artless Prisoners. page 66.
Prisoners newly taken. page 68. Exposed to sale. page 69. Shepherds. page 71.
Fugitives out of Europe. page 73. From Asia. Ibid. Their punishment. page 75.
Armenians charity. Ibid. Incantations of Turks. page, 76. Memory of Christ lost.
page 77. Condition of the conquered. page 78. Priest and Friars. page 81.
Tribute. page 82.
CHAP. III.
Narration of a dispute. page 85.
CHAP. IV.
Lamentation. page 97.
CHAP. V.
An Exhortation. page 109.
FINIS.

