The Dorset-shire Lovers:
OR, THE Honest innocent Wooing between John the Farmer and his Sweetheart
Joan, as they happened to meet one Morning in the midst of a green Meadow.

To the Tune of, The Scotch H^ymakers.
Licensed according to Order.





Passing through a Meadow, young John did Joany meet,
Like the youthful Queen of May in her Summer's Robes complete,
With a Congue to the ground, he replied, Since I have found
So fit a season, it is but reason our Comforts should be crowned,
Long I have loved thee I must confess.
But never could find a time, Love, my kindness to express,
For sure it is well known, my Heart is thine alone,
I Will never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
John I fear you flatter as many more has done,
For young Bat^helors we see after many Damsels run,
I by true experience find, that they waver with the Wind,
New change of Faces and Embraces pleases best their Mind,
Therefore I pray you now let me go;
But Johnny he replied, I will never serve thee so,
For sure it is well known, my Heart is thine alone,
I Will never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
Love thou shall be Married, and be a virtuous Bride,
And I Will give thee Gloves and Rings with twenty things beside,
For the pleasures of the night, shall my dearest Love delight,
Then sit down by me, don't deny me, for thy Beauty bright
I do admire and ever shall,
Till now I he'r beheld one so proper, straight and talk
Since we are here al ne, the truth I will make known,
I Will never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
If you will believe me, in troth, I am too young,
Therefore tempt me now no more with your deluding Tongue;
O your kissing, John, forbear, least you draw me in a snare,
Your talk of Weding and of Beding makes me blush, I swear,
What if my Mother should chance to know,
That in the silent Mead I was kissed and courted so?
Queth Johnny, It is all one, to her I Would make it known,
I Will never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
John, why will you Marry now while the Times are hard,
Should we be poor and needy, pray, whom will us regard?
We must think upon that state, now before it is too late,
For should we Marry, and Miscarry, then will our Grief be great,
Therefore I Would have you yet longer stay;
But Johnny he replied, He would Wed without delay,
Quoth he, It is well known, my Heart is thine alone,
I Will never, never, sover, sever from my loving Joan.
Never fear to venture, or in the least be sad,
For my Gransir died of late and left me all he had,
There Is a Farm, which now I keep, with a herd and flock of Sheep,
With other Treasure out of measure, thou shall Comforts reap,
For I Will maintain thee gallant and gay,
Therefore, my Dearest, now let us appoint our Wedding Day,
To join our Hearts in one, for thou art mine alone,
I Will never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
Thou shall mind the Dairy, and I the happy farm,
I will keep thee Men and Maids, I hope that is no harm,
Thou shall feed on roast and bo^l'd, and I Will get my Dear with Child,
Which will be Pleasure out of measure. Joan at this she smiled,
For she delighted in living well,
Therefore, said she, Sweet John, now the naked truth to tell,
If you will be mine alone, and join our Hearts in one,
I Will never, never, sever, sever, but be thy sweet Joan.
There is none I honor above my true Love John,
On my Conscience, thou will prove a right honest Man;
We'll be Married, let me see, about Thursday next, that we
Without delaying, foolish staying never pleases me,
Now I admire the charming Bliss;
These Johnny he replied, with a tender loving kiss,
It Is thee I love alone, our He arts we'll join in one,
And never, never, sever, sever from my loving Joan.
London: Printed for P. Brookshy, at the Golden-ball, in Pye-corner.


