AN EXTEMPORE SERMON, Preached upon MALT, by way of Caution to Good Fellows; at
the Request of Two Scholars, by a Lover of ALE, out of a Hallow TREE.
Why should the DRUNKARD strive his Acts to Smother. Drink runs but from one
Hog shead to another,

Beloved. Let me Crave your reverent attention, for I am a little Man, come at
a short warning, to Preach a short Sermon, upon a small Subject, to a thin
Congregation; in an unworthy Pulpit.

Beloved. My Text it is Malt.

Now I cannot divide it into Sentences because it is none, nor into Words, it
being but one; not into Syllables, because (upon the whole matter) 'ris but a
Monosyllable: Therefore I must (and necessity inforces me) divide it into
Letters; which I find in my text four, M, A, L, T, M, (my Beloved) is Moral. A,
is Allegorical; L, is Literal, and T, is Theologwal.


The Moral is well set forth, to teach you Drunkards good manners, wherefor M,
my Masters, A, all of you, L, listen, T, to my Text.

The Allegorical, is, when one thing is spoken of, and another thing is meant;
the thing spoken of, is Malt; the thing meant is the Oil of Malt; Strong Beer;
which you Rusticks make M, Meat, A, Apparel, L, Liberty and T, Treasure.

The Literal, is according to the Letter, M, Much, A, Ale, L, Little, T,
Thrift, much Ale, little Thrift.

The Theological, is according to the Effects that it works which I find in my
Text, to be of two kinds; First in this World, Secondly, in the World to come.

In this World the effects which it works, are in some M, Murder; in others, A,
Adultery; in some, L, Looseness of Life; in others, T, Treason

The effects which it works in the World to come are, M, Misery; A, Anguish;
L, Lamentation; and T, Torment.

Wherefore my first Use shall be, a Use of Exhortation, M, Masters A, All of
you; L, Leave; T, Tippling; or else by way of Commination; M, my Masters; A, All
of you; L, look for; T, Torment. And so much shall suffice for this Time and
Text. Only ( by way of Caution) take this.

That a Drunkard is the annoyance of modesty, the trouble of Civility, the
spoil of Wealth, the destruction of Reason, the Brewers Agent, the Ale houses
Benefactor, the Beggars Companion, the Constables trouble, his Wifes woe, his
Childrens sorrow, his Neighbors scoff, his own Shame, a Walking SwillTub, a
Picture of a Beast, and a Monster of a man.

Say well, and do well, end Both with a Letter,
Say well is good; but do well is better.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1691.


