A DISPLAY Of the Headpiece and Codpiece VALOR Of the most renowned Colonel
Robert Jermy, late of Bafield in the County of Norfolk, Esquire, with his Son
Captain Toll by his side, now on their way for New England.
Or the Lively description of a dead-hearted fellow,
to the Tune of a Turd, or the Blacksmith.
DID you never hear of the baby of Mars,
That charged Tom Fox's wife with his Tars,
For his valor lies all in his Arse.
Which needs must be very strong.
A Sanctified Colonel in beaten Buff,
With a Scarlet Jump * that is Cudgel proof,
And his Son Cudgeld by Mr. Armiger at Wells in Norfolk, November 4. 1654. ran
away six miles at Crowland Se^ge, and near looked behind him.
Crowland Coward of the self same stuff,
Who got the wench big with young. Probatum est.
He Is a journey man Soldier to the States Army,
And it is in his terms; when you fight you must spare me,
So runs the Commission of Colonel Jermy,
If I be informed true.
Upon a mock Larme he is sure in the Van,
Where he takes none, and does no more hurt then he can,
He Is a pitiful Soldier though a Cruel man,
Let Us give the Devil his due.
To Sacrifice to his fears and his pride,
He caused a He caused Parson Cooper to be hanged by Judge Jermy for fear he
should beat him.
Church-Champion be murdered and tried
By the Judge of his name, and the rope on his side.
It Is pity they ever were parted.
Yet you cannot but say 'twas very well meant,
When he went to the house of Parliament,
In Love to his Country before he was sent
In a Coach when he might have been Carted.
He corrupted twenty free Burghers at Risen to give their votes for him in the
last election for Parliament.
You must always take the good will for the deed,
Though at Risen he had not the suck to speed,
Yet some other place may have very great need,
If the Devil release but his hire.
So dear was his love that he purchased a throng,
He hired 100 men to come with him from Lyn with Swords and Guns, for fear
Master Howard and his two men should beat him.
Of Sea men in Lice and Lungs very strong,
Sure he will be some body ere it be long,
If he be not laid in the Mire.
How the Sailors did hollow and throw up their hats,
And the men with wide mouths that use to cry Sprats,
But the brave Spark of Arndel made them look like drowned Rats,
Mr. Howard gave him a box on the ear with the back of his hand, and he fell to
the ground with fear.
When he humbled Tom Toll for his Sin.
That high born Hero had Cudgel'd their Swords,
Had they not almost expit'd at his words,
But the whole design was not worth two half turds,
Gustice Cremar, Gustice Peddar, and Gustice Life.
Though you throw the three Jus^ices in.
In his last good service he took the City
By an Order from the mistaken Committee,
Where he escaped a scouring the more was the pity,
For 'twas foul when you have said what you can.
He took the City of Norwich when the Gates were open and (...) opp^sition.
He marched into Gates with an hundred more,
O brave! he never did the like before,
For he used to sneak in at the (...) ^oxes ^ack d^^^.
back door,
As becomes a right modest man.
When they entered the Town, they beleagur^d the Mayor.
And with wonderful Courage they stormed the Chair,
But they soon were all foul, and ran very fair,
As if they would been bred for the Course,
The Be ls were rung backward which alarmed the City who came in and had beat
him if he had not run away upon the noise of it.
For the Bells were rung backward as he says his prayers,
And his head went forward with his haste down the Stairs,
Like a man of dispatch in the State Affairs,
Thank Fortune it was no worse.
It Is much to be wondered he should leave the Rump,
Though his love to that end has received a Law Frump,
But that is his God what ever is trump,
Yet his Spirit now was blind.
Had the Rump but once fizled 'twas the strongest side,
But a Fart has so routed his Troop in their pride,
Though infallible Jermys Chaplin that prays and swears, and fights and lies
for him in ordinary.
Butler was his guide,
That they are both blown down the wind.
Yet that would be thought a true Let us show our selves true English men is
his usual saying.
English man,
Let him make true Latin if he can,
Yet learned men's lives this Rascal will scan,
And when he has done it deny it.
This is Jeremy's forlorn when brave Jack appear.
He has little of wit, and less of fear,
And swears for his Colonel by the year,
And when he is in he will ply it.
When the Nation was Jaded with a He that drunk so much Asses milk as without
the Par^iaments mercy, he is like to be a fool for ever.
Quaker,
This Jippoe for-sooth was a great undertaker,
And amongst other Trades a Justice maker,
2 Gustices in Norfolk.
Brewer, Tirrell, and Gaffer Life
Were made and Created by his stinking breath,
To sit on the Bench upon life and death,
We'd as good have had a Turd in our Teeth
Without any further strife.
I thought this Colonel would fail,
Master Armiger has the exemplification of a verdict in a box wherein Jermys
baudery with Foxes wife is set forth.
When he was upon his Cod piece bail,
He got such a flap with a Fox Tail,
As more at large in your Box Sir.
But now if we may believe Common Fame.
At present they say he is fled for the same,
How poorly this fellow has played his game,
But let him not escape without knocks Sir.
Yet he is such a Coward that I dare say
He neither dares fight nor yet run away,
And yet he would be glad to stand at a stay,
If he might but have his Quietus.
For tell him his baseness but once to his face
You Are sure enough he dies on the place,
If he hangs not himself upon this disgrace,
It Is One to a Thousand he will beat us.
(...) W. V ^ ^ G. B. W. ^.


