portrait of Thomas, Earl of Strafford The Discontented CONFERENCE BETWIXT The
two great ASSOCIATES, THOMAS Late Earl of STRAFFORD, AND WILLIAM Archbishop
of CANTERBVRY. portrait of William, Archbishop of Canterbury
Straff. GOD save your Grace: How do you do?

Cant. My Lord, I thank you, well as you.

Straff. I have not seen your Grace of late
So full of mirth, may't auspicate
Some good event, and such as we
May by it find our liberty;
The Proverb him unwise does hold,
Who loves his setters, though of gold.

Cant. Last night (my Lord) some nobler dream
Then did to sanguine, choler, phlegm,
Or unto melancholy owe
It Is birth, did on my fancy grow:
Me thought I was in Oxford, where
Lord Chancellours name and power I bear;
What showts Saint JOHN'S there to me gave,
My gladed cares yet ringing have;
I heard their laboring joys, and throng
Of praises both in prose and song.
And as, me-thought, from thence I came
To Lambeth, I still heard the same
So loud, that Echo from Whitehall
Returned them to my Lambeths wall.

Straff. In such a dream, O who would keep
A noise to break your Graces sleep!
And though dreams err, yet may this be
To you a happy prophecy,
And such a one as may prove true,
And fair unto my self, as you,
For so by one compact of wit,
Our Counsels were together knit
So close, so even they did go
To work the Commonweal it is woe,
We cannot well our selves define
What plot was yours, or which was mine,
They were each others Inmates, twins
That vi'd which most should number sins;
Both slept, both waked at once, and whether
They lost or won, both played together.

Cant. My Lord, you rage. Straf. You cannot call
Truth a disease, or rage at all:
Truth neither can, nor will deceive you.

Cant. Farewell my Lord, for I must leave you.

Straf. Yet stay a while, and give to me
Once more your Benedicitee;
I must confess I did begin
To chide, but now forget my spleen.

Cant. It does increase my joy, and sure
The joy may well your praise procure:
How think you? Would this Kingdom flout,
To hear we two were falling out?
Come, be your self; relate at length
What armed Recusants, what new strength
May come from Ireland, to relieve
Our dying faction. Straf. Never grieve.
My settled Soul; I do not know
That root on which one hope might grow;
But in conclusion there must be
A rope for you, an axe for me.

Cant. Was this your well grounded guess
Of our increasing happiness?
Ends thus your boasting, that you could
Get money, men, or what you would,
To curb the insolency of those
That were, or would become our foes?
False Straffords Earl. Straf. Stop there, your Grace
His tongue does trot too round a pace;
Look, look abroad, can you now see
No Patent, no Monopolee;
Are all your projects, all your fine
Devices sick as Medium wine?
Can now no more Lauds, lawless might,
The Parson from the Pulpit fright,
The Subject from the Kingdom? What
Could ruin do which you did not?

Cant. There Is something yet undone, it is true,
But shortly to be done to you:
Each Guard you have (for it is the will
Of Fate to have you guarded still)
Shall serve the Minister of your doom,
Your Executioner, not your Groom:
Your head that masterd so much art,
Ere long shall from your shoulders part;
Your blood your scarlet must new dye,
Your Spurs fall off, your Ermines fly,
And of so great, so feared a Name,
Scarce left a man that loves your Fame.

Straf. So, so, (my Lord) my heart is glad
I own that grief your Grace can mad;
Your Head, no doubt, is grown the lighter
Since dis-invested of the Miter;
It was too proud a weight, and known
To nurse bad thoughts, it is better gone.
The Shepherds on their Sheephooks laugh,
And do upbraid your Crosier staff;
No more, your now deaf Chaplains hark
What hour shall speak you Patriarch.

Cant. Farewell, farewell, your Time calls on,
Speak thoughts more sanctifide, or none;
It Is you must lead the way, and I
Shall follow after by and by.

Straf. My life's short knarled thread does stand,
Expecting Fates impartial hand:
Heaven has my thoughts, (my Lord) yet stay,
Shall we nere meet again? Cant. We may.
There Is room enough in Heaven for two
Have more transgrest then I or you:
But I what place and time forbear
To name, it is GOD knows when and where.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year, of our Prelates fear, 1641.


