A DIVINE POEM OF CHRIST'S FULLNESS AND A Christians Happiness.
CHRIST'S all-sufficient Fullness, and his free
Dispencing of the Fruits of Life's blessed Tree,
In every part of Scripture so are spread,
That in each Book and Page they may be read.
We read of things, and persons of esteem,
Yet speaks the Spirit not so much of them,
As All^gorizeth of another fame;
Means them but on the by, at Christ they aim;
They all to Him, as to their Center run,
And at him point, as Sunbeams to the Sun:
Whom Earth as yet unworthy was to view,
And God unwilling all at once to show,
Being so rich a jewel, therefore He
In Shadows wrapped him in obscurity;
But in due time his Son shone forth, Heaven then,
Nor Earth could cloud him from the Sons of men.
All, of this potent Prince, but Shadows were,
Vanished, when he in Person did appear:
As Stars extinguished their borrowed light,
When as this Sun of Justice shone so bright.
This Universe, and all it does produce,
Which are the chiefest things of note and use,
As He them made, and does them all sustain,
But for him had not been, could not remain:
So All their service freely do present,
Him to illustrate, in each Continent,
And are as Gems, t'embroider and adorn
The Robes and rich Apparel by Him worn.
The choicest things, do serve to shadow forth
Parcels and pieces of his peerless worth:
Thus Heaven and Earth, with all their Fullness, are
But mere Idea's of a Piece so rare.
The Author, Orderer, Actor, Owner, He
Is of the first Creation shown to be:
From the same Womb, the second likewise brake,
Of which we shall a brief Description make.
Christ in the Prophecies was promised,
By Metaphors most lively figured;
Types Heralds were, they wore his Coat and Crest,
But now He Is Come, and really expressed.
The Woman's Seed shall break the Serpents Head,
Christ's peaceful Government over all shall spread;
These Promises, with many more, foretell
What power should in the great MESSIAH dwell.
Gods Promises are an exhaustless Mine,
Where in the glories of his Goodness shine.
A Garden full of Flowers of fragrant smell,
And Herbs whose Virtues Earth cannot parallel.
Such is their power, that wounded Souls they heal;
And to all Penitents their Pardon seal.
They are the product of Heavens boundless Love;
Firm as Earth's Basis, or the Poles above.
CHRIST is the only firm Foundation,
The living Bread, the Door, chief Cornerstone:
From Him pure streams of living Water run,
He Is the true Light, bright Day Star, glorious Sun.
He Is Judah's Lion, who by strength o'recame;
He Is both a Shepherd, and a spotless Lamb;
Who once, for all, became a Sacrifice:
Perfections Self, thus Justice satisfies!
Whose matchless Merits, Grace and Mercy bring
To Sion's Saints, which make her Mourners sing.
The Sacrifices real Types were made
Of Christ's free Death, which past, they all did fade:
Moses, Melchizedech and David, they
His Person, and his Offices pourtray.
His Titles Nominal, as Truth record,
Are God, Emmanuel, Jesus Christ our Lord;
He Is our high Priest, arch Prophet, King of Kings,
Who Truth, Peace, Mercy, and Protection brings.
Christ for his Saints to God does mediate,
And thus their Judge becomes their Advocate.
Christ's He is all in all to us, if we
By Faith and Love to Him united be.
He is our Wisdom, gives us heavenly Light;
He is our Justice, hence is Heaven our right:
He is our Holiness, gives grace and power,
And our Redemption, brings us to the Tower
Of Safety, Heaven, whose perfect Happiness
Man's heart can never conceive, or tongue express.
Then all, our little all, to CHRIST let us give,
Deny our Selves, and to Him only Live.
FINIS.
London, Printed for John Andrews at the white Lion near Pye-Corner, 1660.


