Dies Nefastus; OR A SERMON Preached on the Public FAST Day, FOR THE Cruel
Murder Of Our Late SOVEREIGN, Upon that unfortunate day January 30.

By Andrew Dominick, D. D. and Rector of Stratfieldsay in Hampshire

LONDON, Printed by Tho Child, and Leon, Parry, 1662.

To the Worshipful Matthew VVren Esquire, one of the Secretaries unto the Lord
Chancellor, and one of the Worthy Members of this present Parliament.
SIR,
ALthough it may seem a presumption in me, to present so small and poor a
thing unto the world under your Name, yet I have sufficient reasons, to
Justify my self as to others therein; that albeit you have shown your self a
Master in History, as also in a fluencie, and comptnesse of Language, and
style, making all things firm, and uncontroleable even to your adversary: so
that it was reported abroad (even then in those days) that sure you had (which
is well nigh a miracle in writing) converted him unto a righter Judgment. Yet
s^eing this small piece is a kind of History, though, if there be any truth
in me, but of few hours; composed merely, as you may see, out of a sad memory
of things past, and is merely historical; it being methought (considering the
duty of the day) ^he best argument could possibly be used, to any that had the
least show of ingenuitie, to bring them to a hearty mourning, sorrow, and
repentance, to hear again what evils have been done in these unfortunate times
past; though I wanted some small helps even for this, to do those honorable
persons, and others, right in naming them in particular, who ever suffered in
the Cause. But it being (as I was saying) a matter of history, besides the
particular application to the present occasion, to whom should I present it,
but as in the Schools they use to do their exercise, even to him that is the
very Master of the Science? and besides, I have other Obligations, you being
the head of that loyal, and persecuted Family, next to your Right Reverend Aged
Father, the learned Lord Bishop of Ely, that great Confessor of the Church of
England. I having (as I was saying) been obliged to the other line of your
Family many years since, by the greatest indearments that a Sober man can
fancy: how can I but be offering my respects, in tendering some signification
of my observance unto you? Against what else may be said, I have only this to
answer in General, That Parents are wont to love their weakest Children most,
and to seek for them the best favor they can get, it may be so perhaps with
me, for I Will assure you, I have not been altogether idle, and could prove it
too, were it not for some trouble I find in this; by something able of it self
to stand alone. But if, most worthy Sir, you can pardon this present Boldness
of mine; you shall add to the other Obligations in my account; and I shall be
bound to pray for your Happiness, and remain

Your humble Servant, Andrew Dominick.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
GOod Christian Reader,
Understand that in this my Sermon, it was not my aim to perstring the truly
godly, but only those Counterfeits, that brought on things to that wicked
pass; I do not mean the truly godly, I did disclaim that, as you may see in
the Sermon, for many such I found about me, to my comfort, in the days of my
trouble, who showed their Loyalty even therein, that notwithstanding I was in
the last persecution accused for my services done the late King, yet did those
help me what they could, and some of them professed in private, That there were
indeed many who professed much, but could do no good, but hurt. These were
grave, sober, godly people, and (for ought I could ever perceive) loyal in
their hearts to their King, and such there are therefore, and God forbid that
I, or any one should make godliness the Mark to know who were, or are
disloyal: a grace which includes far better things, and by which I am
persuaded we may escape (through Gods mercy) any the like evils again, let not
then Religion, or Godliness fare the worse, for having been abused, only
warily distinguish for the future, try every spirit, study the peace of the
Church and State; pray for it, and seek it charitably, and God bless thy
endeavor, Amen, Amen.

DIES NEFASTUS. OR A Sermon Preached on the Public Fast Day, for the Cruel
Murder of our late SOVEREIGN.
PSALM. 22.12, 13. Many Bulls have compassed me: strong Bulls of Bashan have
beset me round. They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a
roaring Lion. I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint.


IN the 2 Corinthians. 12. chap. 10. verse. we read of St. Paul, that he took
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake, and with the same great mind seemed He to be
endowed, for whom we mourn this day; That Royal Person, and Great Prince, how
meekly, how patiently did he take it to conflict with the greatest affronts and
calamities in the world; but God is most potent and can uphold his Servants,
(in spite of Satan and all he can inspire, to molest, provoke, and exasperate
his Servants) that in their Trials and Sufferings, neither the Devil himself,
nor all his Instruments, shall be ^ble with their unjustest doings to provoke
his Beloved, and dear Servants, and Children unto any less approved passage in
words or gesture, in all their Sufferings; which thing, among all that ever
suffered (next to our Savior himself) it is conceived (by all comparisons) none
more perfectly, exactly, and clearly manifested, than our most Gracious and
blessed Prince of sweetest Memory, now in Heaven; of which perhaps I may speak
more in the handling of this Text.

Many Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as ravening am a roaring Lion. I am poured
out like water, and all my bones are out of joint.

In which words we have a great danger declared, (observe) even that most Holy
King and Prophet was in, which sorely troubled him. Violent and unreasonable
people, and many of them too, Many Bulls of Bashan have compassed me; And this
was no small trouble if we consider, 1. Their Hostility; the malevolency of
those wicked Enemies, which the Holy Ghost expresses here by those Savage and
Ravening Creatures, wild Bulls, and hungry Lions, such were those who could
find in their hearts to pursue our Holy and Innocent David, whom nothing could
satisfy (they were so wickedly resolved) but his dearest Life, end, most
precious Blood, that so having slain (as it is in the parable) the Lord of the
Vineyard, they might rise and take possession. Pers^cution, you know, may be
carried on, either mode cruento, or i^cruento, they were too well versed in
both kinds, speaking like him in the Book of Wisdom, chapter 2.19, 20. verses. Let
us examine him with despitefullnesse, and let us condemn hims with a shameful
death. Here I could speak of the Apostles, and other Saints believing in
Christ, how some of them were beheaded, and others crucified, others hanged on
a tree, others killed with the swords; most sad stories, all yet even to be
paralleld by these times in our memory. Eusebius tells us of a persecution
under those monsters of Men, Dioclesian, and Maximinian, wherein 17000
Christians were slain with the sword V. D Johan. Pappas in Epist Hist. Eccles.
And an other tells of 900000. in the space of 30. years, from 1550. to 1580.
in the Low Countries, England Italy, and Spain, that were miserably butchered,
for the Religion we now profess D. Saccus 2 part post Doni. 8. Tr.
. But what is this to the cruelties our eyes have seen, or might have seen, in
a lesser space, both of ground, and time? Oh how many thousands (beloved?) yea,
who is able to number them that went to wrack by the means of that unnatural
Rebellion of late years amongst us? Nay men of principallest quality, and best
fashion amongst us Here think upon the Nobles, Knights, and Gent.
. Nay, our dearl highly honored and beloved King compassed by those Bulls of
Bashan, and destroyed in open sight, at his own Doors, his poor loyal people
sighing, and helpless Spectators. O horrid and unheard of cruelty! O bloody
Catalines! Could no blood satisfy, after so many noble streams your cruel
hands had made, but the blood of your Sovereign? what vipers? what tigers? what
bulls of Bashan were these? certainly David could not more bitterly entitle his
malicious enemies, then we may justly those of the late King, many are the
adversaries which rose up against him may Israel now say, many are the
adversaries, and they fought against me with cruel hatred may Israel also say,
and who were those adversaries that rose up so violently against David? not
strangers, but his own Subjects, his own vassalls, and servants, this
aggravated the matter; had it been a stranger (as he said elsewhere) he could
have borne it with much more patience, but our late Sovereign was afflicted by
his own people, insolently handled, by rebels most barbarously murdered; yet
bore it with unheard of patience, sweetly counselling and advising as if he had
been not so much to die by them, as for them; Oh beloved, let us bewail that
wicked fact, let us lament that ever Englishman should prove so unnatural, so
cruel, so inhumane as to rise up against his own, own own natural Prince. What
a disgrace by that barbarous fact, did those vipers bring upon the Nation? it is
storied of vipers, that grown to maturity in their dams belly, they gnaw a
hole, and so those serpents come forth into the world; just so did those
Rebels of old, grown up to some strength gnaw a hole through the bowels of
those that bred them, and destroyed the Patrem Patriae, and had well nigh
murdered their Country; beloved, for this should we mourn this day, for this
lament, abhorring all thought of the least refreshment; For know ye not that a
great prince fell in Israel this day, let us therefore mourn, let us express
and show our sadness before God and man; and let this be Dies Nefastus, an
unlucky day, a day of darkness for ever, a day of blackness and gloominess; let
no joy or gladness be heard in our streets; but rather paleness in our faces,
and sorrow perceived in our hearts on this day for ever. Let us also by prayers
and godly readings humble our minds at the footstool of Divine Majesty, that he
may be entreated concerning the blood of our gracious Sovereign, that some of
the chief actors having been hung up before the Lord, the kingdom may be
guiltless before the Lord for ever, Oh hear us we beseech thee O Lord, and make
not inquisition upon the guiltless for blood, but let the blood of those which
spilt that most precious blood, satisfy thy sore displeasure for shedding of
that blood.

Austin tells us, de Civit. 26. there sha^^ be ^owards the end of the world
such Persecutions as never was, and truly such days had we (within these few
years past) when those Bulls of Bashan were got loose, what swarms then of
Locusts and Caterpillars were every where, upon every green thing.

Zozomen and Theodoret tell us, That the Persecutions were not always with
present death, to hang, or shoot them forthwith, but sometimes to macerate them
first in Prisons, and to afflict them there with expectation of death, more
intolerable then death it self. So was the Church afflicted in the Primitive
times, and when those Bulls of Bashan were loose, (who ever escaped) the Clergy
ever went to wrack; in the Primitive Persecution, John the Baptist was
B^headed, Peter and John we read were Imprisoned, Acts 4.3. S^. Peter and
Andrew were Crucified, St. Bartholomew Skinned alive, St. Luke Hanged, Ignatius
cast to Lions, the Prophet Michael fed with bread and water, others spoiled of
their Goods and Estates, and sent away into Banishment. But with us many
thousands of the poor Commonalty were sold into perpetual sl^very, to Dig
under ground in Mines, all the days of their Lives: Many were deprived, Zozom.
says often times, of their civil Honors, and the Churches in many places shut
up, the Ministers proscribed, and turned out, Church Revenues scamled amongst
needy and bankrupt people, to encourage others, such like, to rise up and
accuse their Godly Ministers; and now I beseech you does not this seem like the
History of our times, saving that we had something yet worse, which grew out of
these ev^s, and that was the damnable mask of Religion and Godliness, then
which there can be nothing more desirable, when true and sincere; For it is
not my thoughts (I bless God for it) to speak, or hint the least in way of
discountenancing of true Religion and Godliness, or to discourage or balke any
in the sincere practice thereof, no it were better I profess^ that my tongue
should cleave to the roof of my mouth. No, (my beloved Brethren) go on I
beseech you in all Sincerity, and Truth, both to profess, and practice also,
not in words only, but in deeds also, f^r there is nothing more beneficial,
nothing more comfortable in the end, then to be able to say with the Holy
Father, Egredere mea anima, go forth my soul, go forth with cheerfulness to
meet thy gracious Lord, whom thou have (through his grace) served so many
years; Then nothing is more desirable then Religion, but then I mean to note
it also that nothing is more mischievous, when feigned, and counterfeited, and
what was more frequent? 't was that great Mask the prime Contrivers of our
Ruin walked in themselves, and it was that they loved to see their Imps to
imitate them in, so that if the common'st So it was with my self.
Strumpet (in fame) could but scruple at the word Temple, or Church, or Altar,
she was Godly enough to accuse her Minister for a Scandalous Person. Oh the
Hypocrisy of those times, that Religion and Godliness it self should be so
abused, to be made the Stalking-horse for Sacrilege, Robbery, and Theft, and
that the exquisiteness of Villainy should grow to that strength, as to infect
the World for many years after, if it be not lustily observed by us, and the
World made sometimes ashamed. Quis tulerit Gracchos? Juven^^. Satyr. 10.
said the Poet, who is able with tolerable patience to see men such
proficients in Villainy, that they can shift the Scene, and be Knaves on both
sides, grow as confident with whom they have new^y insinuated, to do mischief
by them, as ever they did, or threatened heretofore by the contrary. These be
pure youths indeed, and would be uncased a little to appear in their own
colors, these be those Bulls of Bashan that can breed disquiets, and through
all bounds of Law and Right, pasture upon men at their pleasure: Certainly
David's Persecution was very great, but our David's much more, it we consider the
Hostility of it, either to Himself, Church, or Loyal people; or if we consider
the Plurality thereof, David complained of many Bulls, 'twas not any one that
could have compassed him, but they were many, he speaks of many, of all his
Persecutors, Many Bulls of Bashan, yea strong Bulls compassed me; so it is
usually; the State is like a Ship, and the unruly Multitude like the Sea, which
if by any means a leake be sprung, will pour in, to the endangering of all;
After David was opposed with an Army, the very abjects could shake their heads
at him, and many troubles followed one upon another; so beloved, when our
bewailed King was compassed on every side, how did the mischiefs on every hand
increase the Reverend Fathers pulled down, and Canting false Prophets set up,
petty Tyrants, like young sprouts, started up every where out of the great root
of Tyranny above, many but (to domineer over their Clergy, and have of his
livelihood as they pleased) had their ways they gloried in, to do him mischief
at pleasure, and if Aristotle's rule in moral Philosophy be true, Quicquid per
amicos, aliqualiter per nos, that what we do by friends, we may be said to do
(in some sort) our selves, then were some, and of such fashion too, as ought to
have scorned such things, no honester then they should be, and yet beloved
these were not half the evils of those days, which came upon us, without all
question, through the untimely loss of our gracious Sovereign; then did they
slander and reproach the footsteps of the Lords Anointed, then was the
Orthodox faith exploded, the gravest Ministers proscribed, and many of the
Rabble yet, for the contempt was poured out on Church men, can scarce yet
entertain a just respect; but the servant is not above his Lord, there were who
said Christ had a devil, Joh. 8.48. and in the time of Constantine the
Emperor, the truly Orthodox were called of the Arrians, Homousians, Theod.
lib. 1.4. Austin was called of the Palagians a Manichee, and as Ruffin, lib.
1.17. Athenatius was called a Conjurer, that they might deprive him of his
Bishopric; nay they Excommunicated the most Orthodox party, and denied them
Christian burial when they were dead. Lord whither will not the petulant rage,
and madness of men carry them, when once let loose? Government is a precious
thing, that distinguishes us from beasts, and makes us to live like men, nay
like honest and good men; which, if let loose, our late times show what beasts
men will become, Bulls of Bashan, and ravening Lions; the holy Ghost thinks fit
expressions to intimate their purposes, and practices, that once set themselves
against Law and Supreme authority. The Leaders and instigators unto that evil
are in Gods account, and all reason shows in a Commonweal, as wild Bulls, and
ravening Lions, drawing a world of evils after them, if not timely prevented,
and discreetly avoided by all. For as Laws are the proper fences, and bounds
of our properties, and rights: so is the Sovereign power the shelter, and
preservation of the Law: As therefore is the loss of Law, such is the utimely
destroying of the rightful Sovereign, which must needs draw after it (as we
not many years since w^^fully experienced) multitude of evils. So that we may
this day weep for our selves, as Christ told the people of the Jews, Weep not
for me, but weep for your selves, that God may avert the judgment due unto
this land, for that most horrid and wicked fact committed on this day. Weep ye
that so much i^nocencie, uprightness, and justice should fall, by such guilty,
and treacherous hands. Neither may ye wonder (Beloved) that God would let loose
those bulls of Bashan, upon his David, upon so good a King; his best Servants
ate fittest to make greatest Champions, as ablest through greatest graces, to
stand out most nobly in the causes of God; And beside Christ himself went this
way to heaven, and it behooves those who are mostly his members, to be made
most conformable unto him, and was not Christ betrayed too and sold, and are
there not many who have betrayed him over again in his members, an have gone,
like Judas, unto the persecutors and said, What will ye give me, and I will
deliver him unto you? And now, beloved, Observe again who is it in the text that
says, have compassed me, me; was it not David? Holy David, a King, and a
Prophet, a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13, 14, 16, 13. to whom was
promised the blessing, Acts 13.23. who spoke by the holy Ghost; yet so it was,
that God suffers him to be in that manner compassed with Bulls and Lions, Many
Bulls have compassed me, strong Bulls of Bashan beset me round about.

Whence we may observe, That the afflictions of good men, are notes rather of
love, then displeasure of the Almighty, for whom the Lord loves, he
afflicts: and so he does the wicked too, but in a different manner, and to a
different end, they find not that comfort in it, nor that amendment by it, as
do Gods Servants; wicked men are seldom the better for any cross, or at best of
no long continuance: It Is true, it is said of Ahab, See thou not how Ahab
humbles himself? But yet a little after we read him threatening, and scouling
at Gods Prophet for telling him the truth; but gracious hearts are highly every
way improved by troubles, Before I was afflicted, I went astray, says David,
but now I have kept thy word; So then afflictions as they are arguments in Gods
Servants of more goodness: so are they of more love, and therefore are they to
be the more condoled, and lamented in their sufferings, by how much their
translation hence (what way soever) may be for their own joy, and comfort
above, but our misery in their loss, or manner of loss here below. Then I lay
you down this doctrine, That it is most meet (according to command) that we
mourn this day for the untimely death of our late King, for I may say with
David, 2 Samuel 3.38. Know ye not that a great Prince fell on this day in Israel?
Nay I have to observe farther, That the Church of God may be sometimes deprived
of such heads, as would have been very much for her behoof to have retained:
for what greater Prince then Joshua for whom God fought, at whose prayer the
Sun, and Moon stood still, unto whom God sent an Auxiliarie of Hail from
heaven, to vanquish his enemies, Josh. 20. for whose sake the water of Jordan
gave place fox him to go over, yet this Joshua was taken away, and the people
of God lost so good a Prince, which would have been in all likelihood, much for
their behoof, to have k^pt. What shall I say of David, of Abraham, and Sampson,
they are all dead; and which is more yet, Aliquando tristi aliqua morte
extinguuntur, they are sometimes taken off with untimely, and to be extremely
lamented deaths: and yet very good Kings too. As for example, Josias whose
heart was tender, and trembled at the word of God, and rent his clothes, 2
Kings 22.11. of whom it is said 2 Kings 23.25. That there was no King before or
after him that turned so his heart to the Lord his God; yet was he untimely
sl^in at Megiddo, and by an uncircumcised hand of Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt:
Wherefore (beloved) let it not suggest evil thoughts of God, or our Prince unto
us, that this happened as on this day, God has his reasons for it, and he would
humble us, we had sinned questionless, and therefore God suffered us to be
robbed of so great riches we had in our late King, that we might be punished in
the loss, let us not then presume any evil of him, for otherwise must we
suspect evil of good Josias, whom the Scripture highly commends, and yet so
untimely slain; Let us then mourn for our sins and that will please God I am
sure. Let us lament, and say with the Prophet Jeremiah in the 5th of his
Lamentations, verse. 16. The Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we
have sinned. And as at the 40 verse, Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again unto the Lord; Let us lift up our hearts and hands unto God in the
heavens; We were deeply wounded through our Sovereign, but he Co^nelius me
evasit said the Tyrant Nero. Tacit.
escaped through the loss of him, lay groaning under heavy oppressions, due
punishments for our sins: But now it has pleased Almighty God (blessed be his
holy name) to restore again (as much as may be) our gracious and desired
Sovereign, in his beloved Son, our present and good King, the best of Princes.
But let us not forget the duty of this day, to weep, to mourn, to be
afflicted, to lament the fall of our former dear Sovereign, and to be able to
say with the Prophet, Lamentations the 3. v. 48. Mine eyes runs down with
rivers of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people. And with the
Prophet, Let us wish for a fountain of tears, to weep day and night for the
slain. O let us mourn this day, as it is said of Joseph, and his brethren, for
his Father Israel, that they mourned with a very great and sore lamentation,
that even those Canaanites amongst us may say, This is a very grievous mourning
to the Loyalists. And let us (beloved) give thanks to God for our Dear
Sovereign that now is, who (as out of the Ashes of that Phoenix,) happily is
returned to reign again his Father over us, and to deliver us from innumerable
evils, and to restore us all the blessings of peace, for which the Lord bless
him, as Solomon prays for himself, with wisdom and prudence: And the Lord
bless him moreover (as he added unto his Solomon's desire) with riches and
honor, and the Lord be with him in his going forth, and coming in.

And let it repent us in particular this day, let it repent us of our Sins, let
us resolve upon amendment of (...), and let us not consecrate such days to
Bacchus, and delights, but to God, let not those miscreants gather
encouragement from their It Is said of Satan, be can turn himself into an Angel
of Light.
Devilish holiness for that any of us seem to have none, but let us all be as
really religious, as they would seem to be: let us endeavor to grow in faith,
and all spiritual graces, and be constant in hope, and persevere in obedience,
and be Zealous in good works, which make for the Worship, and Glory of God.

And the Lord grant we may induce him by our prayers this day, to turn away his
wrath and just displeasure from us. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

