DVX REDVX: OR, Londons Thanksgiving.
Being a Panegyric on the most Happy Return of His Royal Highness JAMES Duke
of York, Lord High Admiral of England, September. 19. 1672.

Returned and Safe! Let the glad Realm Rejoice,
Till Rocks, and Mountains, Echo all our Joys.
The purling Streams would else our Mirth forestall,
And make their murmurs much more Musical.
Thrice Welcome (Mighty Prince!) Let the Bells ring,
And all the People Jo-paean Sing.
We owe not here to Faggots, Pitch, or Tar,
Our Hearts enflamed with Love, Best Bonfires are;
Since our Great JAMES is to St. Jamesses come;
Welcome as the blessed day, that brought him Home:
A Day than which a Happier never was known,
Save that which brought our Sovereign to his Throne.
A Day, to Loyal Hearts of special Note,
Brought the Great JAMES home in a Pleasure-boat.
Welfare those gentle, those auspicious Gales,
For Albions sake swelled his Tryumphant Sails.
Welfare brisk Tides, welfare those active Rowers,
Winged with desire, and Joy Feathered their Oars.
The Tower Salutes him with one Broadside more,
Re-minding Thousands he Received before.
Upon his Stern the Crimson Ensign stood,
A Flag was double-dy'd with Belgick-Blood.
The very Sea Trembled to see him there,
And Neptune hid his wavy Head for fear.
His Presence did the Sea-Gods so Confound,
That not a Tryton durst a Trumpet Sound.
What should He more pursue his prostrate Foes?
He staid till there was nothing to Oppose;
Save Petty Privateers, slinckt out of Size:
Let Idle Emp'rours spend their hours on Flies.
Some deemed him Dead, his Conduct being to these
As Dark as Midnight, and as Deep as Seas.
What is it, that Bulk of Baseness Satisfies?
Who, though they See Him, dare not trust their Eyes.
For, dazzled with an Object so Supreme,
Their Envy would be Blind, that it might Dream.
This Juncto, by a Coffee-House contrive,
Have Thousands Killed (thank God) are still Alive:
And they, to Base and Dis-ingenious Ends,
Bewail their Enemies, and Bewitch their Friends.
For since aside Wallingford-House is stepped
In Coffee-house, Committee of Safety's kept.
Who by the Turks Black Drink, for ought I see,
Are become no less Infidels than He.
A Sect of Schismatics that would have that,
Ask 'um at present, and they know not what.
Defend us Heaven! the World's a troublous Sea,
Where every Puppy would a Pilot be.
Far, far be it from Inferiors to Enquire:
Suffice it, they Sit Happy, and Admire.
FINIS.
London, Printed by T. M. for Richard Head, 1672.


