Dux bonis omnibus appellans. THE Swans Welcome To His Royal Highness The DUKE.
OR, Some Remarks upon that Note-worthy Passage, mentioned in the True
Domestic Intelligence, Dated October. 14. 1679. concerning a Company of Swans,
more than ordinary gathered together, at his Royal Highnes's Landing.
I Hope my Flagellum Mercurii Antiducalis has given the World some
satisfaction, as to my Day-Fatality, so much carp'd at by Romes Packet,
September. 5.) as also by the Touch of the Times: I shall only say, That even
the pure sincere Cloak-party themselves have taken notice of the Fatality of
Days; (for page 367. of the Memoires of the Lives and Actions of James and
William Dukes of Hamilton, says, That the Rout of Duke Hamilton 's Army was
received with great joy by the Kirk-Party in Scotland, who Religiously
observed, That the Division of the Duke's Army (which was its ruin) was upon
the 17. of August, which was the day on which the Covenant was made, thence
called by some, St. Covenants Day.

But to my present matter.

I conclude my Decastish, in the Fatality, with this English Version,

Great Duke, rejoice in this your day of Birth;
And may such Omens still increase your mirth.
Since which Composition (which was Anno 1677.) some kind Omens have befallen
his R. H. as the 3. of March's Delications, with (though derided by the Time
Toucher) St. Felix day, (29 Day) observed by the Publisher of the Royal
Effigies, and since recited by me in my late Flagellum.

And St. Lucie's day, memorably observed by the two eminent Brethren St.
Marshes, in the Birth of Henry le Grand, King of France, sufficiently excuse,
allow, and protect; the words are these, He was born the 13 October. St. Lucies
day, as if by a good Augury to be the Light and Ornament of the Princes of his
time: A Day remarkable for the Winter Solstice, and esteemed the most happy
point of all Nativities. Thus they.

2. The accident of the Swans accosting the Duke at his Landing.

That Birds, some are Male-ominous, some Bene-ominous, (ill or well boding)
Authors give many instances, and I am able my self to particularise; I will
only mention three or four.

Charles (from his stature called the Little, a man of admirable Courage and
Conduct) King of Jerusalem and Hungaria, and many other Provinces, had at his
Coronation several ill Omens; amongst many others, a multitude of Crows seated
themselves upon the Royal Palace; and immediately after his Coronation, he was
traitorously and miserably massacred. See the fore-recited Authors, in their
Genealogick History of the House of France.

Ovid, lib. 5. of his Metam. in his story of Ascalaphus, terms the Owl, Ignavus
Bubo dirum mortalibus Omen. Lib. 6. he calls it, Prophanus Bubo; and says, It
sat upon the Bride-bed of Tereus and Progne, fore-boding the unluckiness of
the Marriage. And * Portents of Caesar's.
lib. 15. he terms it, Stygius Bubo.

Tristia mill locis Stygius sedit omnia Bubo. Look the Book of Martyrs, ( sub.
H. 5.) and you find the Pourtraict of the Council of Constance, and the
ill-ominous Owl that appeared there, prodigiously presaging the Deposition of
Pope John 24. But see Camerarius, p. 244. who elegantly relates the story, and
highly praises the excellent Qualifications of the Pope.

Mellificium Historicum says, Two Eagles sat upon the Palace-top a whole day,
when Alexander the Great was born, which the Soothsayers averred to portend
the double Empire of Europe and Asia.

But let us see what Authors say of the candid Swan; all esteem him for a
Bird-Royal, and oftentimes in Coats and Crests, we meet him either Crowned, or
Coronally Collar'd: And he was the Badge of several great English Princes, of
which, anon.

Mr. Guillim (but indeed Dr. Barkham, as Mr. Fuller avers in his Worthies)
says, He is a Bird of great Beauty, and Strength also; and this is reported of
him, That he uses not his strength to prey or tyrannize over any other Fowl,
but only to be revenged of such as offer him wrong; in which case, says
Aristotle, he often vanquishes the Eagle.

Pierius says, He signifies purity of mind; nay, Apollo himself.

Now in ancient time he was consecrated to Apollo, Apollo signifying nothing
else but the Sun, which is Oculus and Lusae Mundi, Genesis 1.16, 17, 18. Apollo is
sometimes called Liber Pater, a Liberal Father, (the Latin word bears that
sense as well as others) and that is confirmed, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Astrologers termed
him, Rex Planetarum, and says, He gives Rule, Riches, and Honor, (is
Significator of Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc.) The Swan is the Bird of the
Sun, and also of his Royal Highness.

Martianus says, Shipmen take it for good luck, if in peril of Shipwreck they
meet Swans. I hope the attendance of these Swans (the matter in hand) forebodes
his R. H. happy deliverance from all his stormy, tempestuous, vexatious
troubles.

Let us see what brave Princes have used this happy Bird (commended by St.
Ambrose) for their Cognizance.

First, Edward 3. (a brave Prince as ever was, and concerned in the Auspicious
Fate of 14 October.) used it a Tournament, being embroidered on his Shield and
Surcoats with this Motto.

Hay, hay, the With Swan, Mr. Ashmole his Gartel, 185.

By Gods Soul I am thy Man.
2. Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, used it continually. John Gower,
that famous Poet, much bewails the murder of that excellent Prince; Cygnus de
cord Benignus, oftentimes giving him the Epithet of Swan. See Weaver, 638.

A Swan, with a Coronet about his Neck, was one of the Supporters to King Hen.
4. (as Mr. Sandford in his Genesis History, 258.) A Prince of singular Valor and
Clemency; for he refused not the Duels with Tho. Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, (see
Stow, anno 1378.) And secondly, He pardoned Owen Glendowrdy, that had so
damnably plagued him; (see Stow, anno 1401, 1402. Bis. 1403, 1404, 1405, etc.)
at the request only of David Holbeach Esquire that was but a Servant of his own,
and formerly Acquaintance of the said Owens, (ibid. 1404.

Certainly he was an admirable Prince, by that wise and honest Advice he gave
his Son upon his Death bed, (as R. Brook, p. 27.) viz. to minister the Laws
indifferently, to ease the oppressed, to beware of Flatterers, not to defer
Justice, nor to be sparing of Mercy. Punish (quoth he) the Oppressors of thy
People, so shall thou obtain favor of God, and love of thy Subjects, who
whilst they have wealth, so long shall thou have obedience, but being made poor
by Oppressions, will be ever ready for Rebellion. But let me not forget, that
before he came to be King, the Swan was his Badge, and was imbroider'd upon his
Caparisons, when he entered the List aforesaid, against the famous Duke his
Adversary, (as a Mss. given to the Heralds Office, by Sir William Dugd. Garter.

The Seat of Cicely Nevill, Duchess of York, (a little Woman, but famous among
our Writers for her great Spirit) was suppotted by a Swan; (see Mr. Sandford
Laur. Herate, p. 352.) She was Mother to Edw. 4. and Rich. 3. as also to
George, Duke of Clarence, (Princes of great Valor and Wit.) She saw first her
Husband and third Son slain: Secondly, She saw the two Princes her
Grandchildren, murdered by their own Uncle, and her Son: Thirdly, She saw her
said Son also slain. Yet bearing all these Grievances with a most even and
invincible mind, she lived to the 11th. of Hen. 7. admirably making good --
Mala sunt superanda ferendo.

And such as these were the Princes of the Swan.

There was an Order of Knighthood of the Swan in Cleveland, (as says Savine)
who also affirms, the Princes of that House, have ever born that beautiful and
generous Bird for their Devise, Crest and Supporters.

I need make but little Comment upon what has been said. I have hinted before
the generous Nature of the Swan, being like that of the heroic Lion; and he
cannot but be the Duke's Bird. My advice is,

Desistant Ranae torvum irritare Leonem.
The Lion is by nature kind, though bold,
If that the Beasts themselves in duty hold.
Cygnus de Cord Benignus. Ovid, lib. 2. tells us, That Cycnus, King of
Liguria, grieving for his Kinsman Phaeton, was turned into a Swan, a Royal Bird
then. And he describes his Nature thus,

Stagna petit, patulosque lacus, ignemque perosus.
Quae colat elegit contraria flumina flammis.
Rivers and spreading lakes are his delight,
Which are to flames and fires quite opposite.
This Great Duke has been Lord High Admiral of Arragon, and also of England,
(Maximus Marinus Maria petens) has had great Command upon the vast Lake of the
World, ( viz. the Sea.)

He has been Immensi Tremor Oceani, Ashm. p. 119.
(as Sir Tho. Higgens, in his Excellent Ode, which henceforth I shall call
Swan-Song, (imitating Leland.)

And as to that damned Reflection, imposed upon the World by a late Knave, (
September. 5. Rome's Packet) this Poet, by a divine praevious inspiration, long
since has foretold the contrary. And the divine Providence will in due time,
(as in the case of Joseph and Susanna) confound the Faces of impudent and
seditious Detractors.

A latter Motto (of King Charles of Blessed Memory) as upon his Royal
Pourtraicture in his Book, and in several Churches may appear, was Clariore
Tenebris.

Even so his most Illustrious Son, etenebrosis Calumniarum Cimmeriis,
clarissimus, purissimus, ac Columba innocentissimus (ad instar Cygni
candidissimus) olim orietur.

Out of the black and dark Sullies of ignominious Calumniations he shall arise,
clear as the Sun, innocent as the Dove, white as the candid Swan.

In my Flagellum Mercurii Antiducalis, I mentioned the evil Spirit that we read
of, Judges 9. And I now add, his R. H. condition at present is like the Kingly
David's (so much celebrated by the excellent Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi) 1 Samuel
chap. 30. verse. 6. The people, etc. But he comforts himself in the Lord his
God, Acquiescat and videbit salutem Domini, Isa. 52.10.

Flebile principium melior fortuna sequetur. Ovid, lib. 7. fab. 10.
Since I had finished this, I heard of the Artillery's solemn and cordial
Invitation to his R. H. to congratulate his happy Return. -- The Duke was
ushered into the World with Medals, intimating the very Circumstance -- Mill
Cohortes, (see Mr. Sandford, p. 562.)

Neither am I now such an impertinent Wizzard, as Rome's Packet, Sept. 5. would
make me; for I aver'd the Duke's Return would be accompanied with Joy and
Feasting.

And it seems the Artillery Cohort begins it.

Great Duke, Thee safely home returned we see,
Feastings and gladsom Healths intended be.
The Military Band make first their fair Address,
The Senators and Citizens must do no less.
Their Swans have shown them what they ought to do,
They are Apollo's Birds, their love is true.
In my Fatality, I would have mentioned the good Omen of the Medal and Motto,
(for I have it in my Notes) but I was afraid the capricious, malicious,
Anti-Monarchical Crew, would have made malevolent Reflections upon it, as
tending to a standing Army, and gladiatory Government.

But providentially the suspicious Invitation intervening, I become bold and
daring to publish it.

FINIS.

