WORK for COOPER, OR A Bone for the Doctor to pick; Being an ANSWER to a
Scurrilous Pamphlet, Entitled, The ASS beaten for Bawling.
To Dr. Edm. Cooper.
TO you Sir, cause you're of those Shallow-brains,
That prize a Gem, below two Barley grains,
That like the Dunghill Cock, rather confine
Your Spirits to a Jakes, then seek a Mine,
Who breath naught else but an opinion Nursed
By Eccho's then your selves far more accursed.
Degenerate Race! does Vice find Pleaders then,
England breed those will Vindicate a Sin?
Is Piety? Is all Religion fled,
Swearing and Drunkenness come in their stead?
And can their Advocates for them too be?
Sad World! But pray Sir who gave you your Fee?
We know you use to take it, and perhaps
Promise the Ctre, but breed an After-lapse;
'Thas been the Empericks Trade: but how you veil
Your Plot? how cunningly you seem to Rail
Against Smectymnuus, that you might Excuse
Two horrid Sins, God and your Self abuse.
An Easy Judgment might have led you Sir,
To have understood the Ass without this stir;
But now I find he has more Wit then You,
Indeed I Have known Asses been Doctors too.
Had not your Violent love too ill restrained
Your Sense: You might have found that he declaimed
Not against Things but Vices: Church and State
I know he Honors, 'twas his Zealous hate
To Wickedness, that gained him your ill will,
Oh may be gain it and increase it still.
But Sir to clear that Judgment is so weak,
It Understands not what an Ass does speak.
Pray let me tell you, and it is what I know,
The Church of England does to such men owe,
Such men as writ that Ass: whose Pious souls,
Although they cannot digest your full brim'd boules,
Nor Thunder out your Ranting Oaths, yet be
As Faithful to the Church, the Liturgy,
Honors the Bishops and the Hierarchy,
Pray-they in truth may the Churches Fathers be.
And tell me Sir if you would count him rather,
Of a loved Child, the more Indulgent Father,
Who gives his ill inclining Son a Free
Swinge in Vice, till he kiss^ the Gallow-tree:
Or he gives due Correction, who though less
Loving he seems, yet leads to Happiness.
But Mr. Doctor since you have showed your wit,
And cause you are come in Print think you have hitt
On a fine Cunning pretty Nibling strain,
Pray give me leave to tell you somethings plain:
First, you are an Ass; but that I think you know,
And therefore let the World know so much too,
Else thus much Ignorance you had nee're betrayed,
Nor publicly your Folly had displayed.
There Is something worse behind which I should tell,
But may conceal it, since it is seen so well,
Yet it shall out, for I Will never be a Slave
To my own thoughts, I think too you're a knave:
Or else you do belly your self, for he
That pleads for Vice, smells rank of Knavery.
But Sir, in some part we may you excuse,
For whilst men bestially themselves abuse
By Gorging, till they Belch it up again,
The advance your trade, and thus you plead for gain.
In sum, Sir, know the time will one day come,
The Ass may freely speak when Balaam's dumb.
Such Balaam's as your self, by wealth made bold,
Who strangely hording up your heaps of gold,
Grow proud, imperious, scurrilous, and then
Count poverty a crime in virtuous men.
God save King Charles, and keep him from their Claws,
Who pray for him, His Man (...) Declarations against Vic^^^, d^^^^^bed and
p^^phane persons, against which the Author of Balaams Ass only declaims,
though more particularly against those vices in the Ministry, as in them more
Odious.
yet plead against his Laws.
John Dauncey.

