THE DUTCH GAZETTE: OR, The Sheet of Wildfire, that Fired the DUTCH FLEET.
I Will tell ye not of Etna's Flames, nor Troy's,
That long ago has filled the World with noise:
Nor of Romances, nor of Histories,
Done Ages long before, whose Obsequies
Were sung by Laureate Pens; that which I tell,
The Stories of the World cannot parallel.
Rupert I sing, Duke Albemarle, and Homes,
And of the rest, that sent those to their homes,
Whose Pride and Envy, Hell it self ('it was such)
Cannot match, would you know who I mean, the Dutch.
Who had a Hundred sixty Ships, and more,
Of Merchantmen, lay sleeping on their Shore,
And never dreamt of danger, till we came,
And took them napping; Ask but Amsterdam,
Who stood Spectators there, and saw their Sails
Transformed to Sheets of Wildfire, and those Gales
That use to swell and spread abroad their 'tire,
Serve now as Bellows to set all on fire.
For Guinnae some, others for Russia bound,
Scarce one worth less than Fifteen thousand Pound.
Did you never see the Winged Troop, that flies
From Flower to Flower, until their laden thighs
Force a retreat? Did you never see them strive,
Which should go richest laden to his Hive?
Just so each Soldier, in a pl^nteous measure,
Has made his Cabb'n, a Cabinet of Treasure.
Silks, Hollands, Silver-spoons, Plate, Cloth of Gold,
All had their choice to take what e're they would.
These are the Dutch, that did but the other day
Make Bonefires over their Land for Victory, --
But never thought of seeing This by Sea. --
Where Helm and Rudder, Top, Top-sayl, and all,
Within few hours to Dust and Ashes fall.
Had but Will. Lilly seen this Blazing Comet,
I Will lay my life it had portended Somewhat
Of strange event, as he would have made appear
In his Prognostication for next Year.
They Will block the Seas up, why then so they shall,
No fitter Heads than theirs to do it withal;
Where they may lay'um together, and counsel take,
How many Bonefires they had best to make.
Now will I loose the Pinion of my Quill,
And dictate to my Muse a Word at will;
That Fame it self, that Herald (and not I)
Shall show the Blazon of our Victory.
At which the World distracted stands with fear,
And will not believe but that the Gods were there.
Great MONK so thundered, that 'twas hard to say
Whether 'twas He, or Fate, that got the Day.
Smith sent such Thunderbolts as never were madey
By Vulcan, since he first wrought of his Trade;
Who gazed, but durst not come within a Shot,
For fear his other Leg had gone to Pott.
'Twas Smith, whose Sword so often quenched in Blood,
Returned so hard, as not to be withstood.:
Steel to the Hilt; this Proverb has he got,
He never strikes stroke until the Iron's hot.
Had Goffe, Ben. Johnson, or had Shakespeare been --
Spectators there, such Acts they should have seen, --
As they never acted in an English Scean: --
These fought with Blows, they only clash'd in Words;
They fought with Foyls, but these with naked Swords.
Here should they have seen an angry Sea their Stage,
Covered with rolling Billows, Foam and Rage;
Now sunk to Hell, anon with Pride so high,
As if it gave defiance to the Sky.
There should they have seen retiring Rooms of War,
Such Rooms as far excells Romes Theater:
A Ghastful Scean, not Thebes, but Thetis Womb,
Wherein the Actors did themselves intomb.
Here dives a Corpse, there struggles one half dead;
Here sinks a Trunk cut shorter by the Head;
Here one 'twixt hope and fear thinks it is a dream;
And there another strives against the stream;
Here dive a hundred Dutch into their Graves;
There dye as many 'mbracing of the Waves;
Here one turmoyls, and there another strives,
Yet scarce two in a hundred save their lives.
Such Music as they had, had but Troy known,
'Twould quickly 've made the Grecians fled their Town.
Had poor Ulysses heard but one broadside,
'T had made him quake, and been afraid to ride
The Grecian Horse, his wood'n Bucephalus
Had been transformed into a Pegasus.
Had Monk but Thundered at proud Babels Wall,
Babels proud Battlements had got a fall:
Had the Great Collossus stood where he discharges,
He Would veyl'd his Bonnet to our Boanarges.
The Egyptian Pyramid (whose massy Tower,
The Jaws of Time could never yet devour)
When he discharges, its proud Marbles must
Lay down their palsy Heads within the Dust.
Great Conquerours, could I your Worth indite,
The World unworthy were of what I Would wtite.
Your steely Soldiers too, I dare but name,
For fear I over-charge the Trump of Fame,
That caused the World proverbially to say,
THEY fought like Englishmen, and wonn the Day.
Return, Great Conquerours, live Men of Mirror,
Englands chief Glory, but the Duchess Terror.
Who have a Tromp too, but the World's to blame,
If e're they take Him for the Trump of Fame.
Finis.
Licensed Aug. 20. Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, in
Shooe-Lane, 1666.


