Advice to the Ladies of LONDON, In the Choice of their Husbands.
To an Excellent new Court Tune.
This may be Printed, R.P.



LAdies of London both wealthy and fair,
whom every Town Fop is pursuing,
Still of your Persons and Purses take care
the greatest deceit lies in Wooing:
From the first rank of the bonny brisk sparks
their Vices I here will discover
Down to the basest mechanic Degree
that so you may choose out your Lover.
First for the Courtier look to his Estate
before he to far be proceeding,
He of Court Favors and Places will prate,
and settlements make of his Breeding:
Nor wear the yoke of dull Country Clown,
although they are fat in their Purses;
Brush you with Brissles and toping full Fowls.
make Love to their Dogs and their Horses.
But above all, the rank Citizen hate;
the Court or the Country choose rather;
Would you have a Blockhead that gets an Estate
by Sins of the Cuckold his Father?
The ^raking Clown intreaging does mar,
the Prentices husting and ranting,
Cit* puts on his Sword, when without Temple Bar
and goes to Whitehall a Gallanting.






Let no spruce Officer keep you in awe,
the Sword is a thing Transitory;
Nor be blown up by the Lungs of the Law,
a World has been cheated before you:
Soon you will find your Captain grow bold
and then 'twill be hard to get from him,
But if the Lawyer touch your Copyhold
the Devil can never bring you from him.
Fly like the Plague from the huffing brave Boys
that Court you with many Bravadoes,
Tyr'ing your senses with Bumbast and Noise
and Stories brought from the Barbados:
And besides, ever the Doctor, that Fool,
who seeking to mend your Condition,
Tickles your Pulse, peeps in your Close-stool,
then sets up a famous Physician.
Choose not a spark that has known the Town,
who makes it his Practice to Bully,
You Would better take up with a Country Clown
he will make an officious Cully;
You with a word may his Passion appease
and make him a Cuckold at leisure;
Give him but money to live at his ease,
you may follow Intregues at your Pleasure.
Neither admire much a Man that is will(...)
if e're you intend to deceive him,
He cunning Plots and Intreagues will
and trap you, e're you shall perceive h(...)
Therefore beware that he never disclose
your Tricks, if he does he will slight
He Will keep a gay Mistress under your nos(...)
if it be but on purpose to spite you.
But if you would thrive, and grow wealthy a(...)
then marry a doting old Sinner;
What if you view there Old Time in hi(...)
you will by that bargain be winner;
You may have lusty Gallants good store,
if you can produce but the Guinea,
And those young Coxcombs your Face w(...)
if this don't please, Old Nick is in y(...)
LONDON: Printed for J. Back, at the Black Boy, Drawbridge on London Bridge.


