The Dutch Damnified: OR, The Butter-Boxes Bob'd.
Being a brief and true account how Sir Robert Holme, Sir Phillip Howard, and
Sir William Jennings, with Eleven Companies of Foot, Five Fireships, and some
Ketches, and Boats, Burnt and Destroyed near a Hundred and Sixty Sail of Dutch
Ships in the Uly. As also they Burnt the rich Town of Brandaris, in the Icland
of Schelling, consisting of above A Thousand Houses, Richly Furnished, with
Goods of extraordinary value. Our Seamen and Soldiers returning Richly laden
with their Enemies Spoil, being sufficiently rewarded for their Noble
enterprise, and all this performed (by Gods Providence) with the loss of Ten
Men on our side.

The Tune is, A Fig For France, and Holland too, etc.




R^n^ Bells for joy, let none be sad,
For now we have news will make you glad
(...) make you blithe and merry too,
^o s^^ how the Dutch are forced to bow:
Their brags and boasts will not prevail,
We Will teach them for to lowre their Sail.
Then Hogan Mogans b'ware your Pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
We paid you home in July last,
And soundly did your sides bumbast,
If that you had not swiftly run,
You surely had been quite undone:
But now we landed on your shore,
And found the way to make you poor.
Then Hogan Mogans b'ware your Pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
For all your idle vain excuses,
E're long we shall pull up your Sluices,
Our men have found the way to land
As you by this will understand:
It will be but a bitter Pill,
When such sad news your hearts do fill.
Then Hogan Mogans b'ware your Pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
You in your Harbors lurk for fear,
Not thinking such bad news to hear,
We scorn to come and steal your Sheep,
And then like Thieves away to creep:
Your Towns to Burn, and Ships to fire
Is work that Englishmen desire.
Then Hogan Mogans b'ware your Pates,
For now we shall make you distressed states.


SIr Robert Holmes that Valiant Knight,
Had orders upon Tuesday night,
The Uly Icland for to burn,
And quite destroy't ere be return:
Sir Philip Howard did him assist,
Sir William Jennings he did his best.
Then Hogan Mogans curse your Fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
They chose eleven hundred men,
To pull the Dutch out of their Den,
With Fireships, Ketches, Boats and Hoyes
Well manned with lusty English Boys:
With joyful hearts they leave the Fleet,
And sail away their Foes to meet.
Then Hogan Mogan curse your Fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
At length they spied without all fail
One hundred and seventy Sail.
Of Merchant Ships which anchored were,
In Uly road, being void of fear,
Sir Robert Holmes he thought it meet,
With Fireships to destroy that Fleet.
Then Hogan Mogans 'ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
So hotly they pursued the game,
That straight the fleet was on a flame,
Some Frigates which the rest did guard,
Just like their Neighbors so they fared;
Our men most furiously were bent,
And burnt them down incontinent.
Then Hogan Mogans 'ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
This being done away we haste,
The Schelling Island for to waste,
And there we fright our Cowardly foes,
And land our men where none oppose.
Then up we martch into the Isle,
Our crafty foes for to beguile.
Then Hogan Mogans ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
When they heard of our coming nigh,
Away they fled, all that could fly,
And left their goods and all the rest,
To be disposed as we thought best.
The bravest Town in all that place,
We burnt quite down, and did deface.
Then Hogan Mogans beware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
Our men had plunder there good store,
To make them rich, they will never be poor,
They brought away great store of plate,
And now they quaff their cups in state;
Their Cabbins are like Goldsmiths shops,
God send us many such like crops.
Then Hogan Mogans curse your fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
Their trugtaild' Frows were in a maze,
To see their town all on a blaze,
They wept and waild, and wrung their jaws,
And cursed their States, which was the cause,
May all that is enemies to our King,
Be brought to such like banqueting.
Then Hogan Mogans curse your Fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States*
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. wright.

With Allowance.


