The Lord of DUNDEE's Speech to his Soldiers before the late Battle in
SCOTLAND, and his LETTER to King JAMES after the VICTORY.
July 27th, 1689. GENTLEMEN,
YOU are come hither to Day to Fight, and that in the best of Causes; for it is
the Battle of your King, of your Religion, and of your Country, against the
Foulest of Usurpations and Rebellions; Having therefore so good a Cause in your
hands, I doubt not but it will Inspire you with an equal Courage to maintain
it; For there is no Proportion betwixt Loyalty and Treason, nor should there be
any between the Valor of good Subjects and Traitors. Remember that to Day
begins the Fate of your King, your Religion, and your Country. Behave your
selves therefore like true Scotch-Men, and let us Redeem by this Action the
Credit of our Nation, that is laid low by the Treachery and Cowardice of some
of our Contrymen; In which I Ask nothing of you that you shall not see me do
before you; And if any of us shall happen to fall upon this Occasion, we shall
have the Comfort of Dying in our Duty, and as becomes true Men of Honor and
Conscience; And such of us as shall Outlive and Win the Battle, shall have the
Reward of a Gracious King, and the Praise of all Good Men. In God's Name then,
let us go on, and let this be your Word, King James, and the Church of
Scotland; which God long Preserve:

The Lord of DUNDEE' s LETTER to King JAMES after the VICTORY.
SIR,
IT has pleased God to give your Forces a great Victory over the Rebels, in
which 3 Fourths of them are fallen under the Weight of our Swords. I might say
much of the Action if I had not had the Honor to Command in it; But out of
5000 Men, which was the best Computation I could make of the Rebels, it is
certain there cannot have escaped us above 1200; and of our Body that Consisted
of near 6000 Men, we have not lost full out 900. This Absolute Victory made us
Masters of the Field and the Enemy's Baggage, which I gave to your Soldiers,
who to do them all Right, both Officers and Common-Men, Highlanders,
Lowlanders, and Irish, behaved themselves with an equal Gallantry to what I
ever saw in the hottest Battles Fought abroad by Disciplined Armies, and this
Mackay's old Soldiers felt in this Occasion. I cannot now Sir be more
particular, but take leave to Assure your Majesty, the Kingdom is generally
disposed to your Service, and impatiently waits your Coming, and this Success
will bring in the rest of the Nobility and Gentry, having had all their
Assurances for it, except the Notorious Rebels; And therefore Sir, for God's
Sake hasten to us, though it be but with such another Detachment of your Irish
Forces as you sent us before, especially of Horse and Dragoons, and you will
Crown our beginnings with a Complete Success, and Your Self with an Entire
Possession of Your Ancient and Hereditary Kingdom of Scotland.

My Wounds forbid me to Enlarge to Your Majesty at this time, though they tell
me, they are not Mortal; However Sir, I beseech Your Majesty to believe that I
shall Live and Die Entirely

Yours, DVNDEE.
July, 28, 1689.
FINIS.

