The Scotch Lasses Constancy OR Jenny's Lamentation for the loss of Jockey: Who
for her sake was Unfortunately Killed by SAWNEY in a Duel.
Being a most pleasant New Song,
to a New Tune.


Two Bonny Lads were Sawny and Jockey,
But Jockey was Lowed and Sawny unlucky;
Yet Sawny was tall, well-favour'd and witty,
But I's in my heart thought Jockey more pretty:
For when he viewed me su'd me, wooed me,
Never was Lad so like to undo me,
(...), and almost died,
(...) would gang and come no mere to me.
Jockey would Love, but he would not marry,
(...) was afraid that I should miscarry;
(...) cunning tongue with Wit as so gilded,
(...) my heart would have yielded:
Daily he pressed me, blessed me, kissed me,
Lost was the hour methought when he mist me
Crying denying, and sighing I wooed him.
And mickle ado I had to get from him.
But unlucky fate robbed me of my Jewel,
For Sawney would make him fight in a Duel;
Then down in a dale with Cyprus surrounded,
Oh! there in my sight poor Jockey was wounded;
But when he thrilled him, felled him, killed him,
Who can express my grief that beheld him;
Raging I tore my hair to bind him,
And vowed and swore I Would never stay behind him
I'se shrieked and I'se cried, wa'es me so unhappy,
For I'se now have lost mine nene sweet Jockey,
Sawny I cursed and bid him to fly me,
I vowed and I swore he should never come nigh me:
But I Would spite him, hate him, fight him,
And never again would Jenny like him:
Though he did sigh and almost dye,
He cried fie on me, cause I did slight him.
And from me I'se bid him straightway be ganging,
When with arms across, and head down hanging;
Whilst that my poor Jockey was a dying,
He to the VVoods then departed sighing:
And his breath wanted, panted, fainted,
Whilst that for him many tears were not scanted:
I'se beat my breast, and my grief expressed,
Wae's me that Death my joy had suppressed.
At which my Jockey a little reviving,
And with his death as it were he lay then striving,
Opened his eyes and looked upon me:
And faintly sighed, Ah! Death has undone me:
Jenny my Honey, I'se must part from thee,
But when I Am dead, sure there is none will wrong thee,
I did love thee, and that did move me,
To Fight, that so a man I'se might prove me.
But ah cruel Fate to death I am wounded,
Oh! and with that again he sounded;
Whilst for to dress his wound I applied me,
But wae alas his life was denied me,
Death had appaul'd him, gaul'd him, thrall'd him,
So that he died with grief I beheld him;
And left poor Jenny all a mourning,
And cruel Sawny cursing and scorning.
From Jockies cold Lips I often stole kisses,
The which whilst he lived were still my blisses:
A thousand times I did sob, sigh it;
And mickle ado I'se had to be quiet:
For as I eyed him, spied him, plied him,
Never a thought could then pass beside him:
I'se bann the Fates that Life denying,
Had robbed me of Jockey, and long I sat sighing.
Till I'se at last with Cyprus crowned him,
And with my Tears; I'se almost had drowned him
The Turtles about us then came flying,
And mourning coo'd to seem a sighing:
I'se viewed him, ru'd him, with Flowers strewn him
And with my love to the last persu'd him:
Resolving that I'se not stay behind him,
But sighing, do, and seek for to find him.
FINIS,
Printed for P. Brooksby in Pyecorner.


