Deaths Triumph Dashed: or, an Elegy On that Faithful Servant of God Master
JAMES JANEWAY, Minister of the Gospel, who Resting from his most Zealous and
Profitable Labors, fell asleep in the Lord the 12th of this Instant, March
1673/4.
HOw! JANEWAY Dead! spare, Lord! oh spare thy Rod,
'Twill else too soon complete our Icabod;
If thus thou snatch the Pastors, who shall keep
From Romish Wolves thy precious trembling Sheep?
If Night be coming, whither may they stray,
When such sure Watchmen are removed away?
We lost, alas! one JANEWAY before,
Oh! when shall we have Two such JANEWAYS more?
Men, whom Heaven framed, and sent on purpose hither,
To win, and bring whole Crowds of Converts thither!
Death's now grown Rigid, and intends't should seem,
To make our Teachers all Conform to him.
E're we can dry our Big-swell'd eyes for one,
Tidings surprise us, That Another Gone.
Hush then Elegiacks! It Is in vain you come,
Slight Sorrows Roar, but mighty Griefs are Dumb.
Behold! our troubled Hemisphere has lost
Another Star, whose brightness might almost
Vie Luster with the Sun, whose Heaven-bred Rays
Shot forth such Flames at Darkness, that our days
Unsoil'd with shades, might hope to overthrow
Hells Gates, and make another Heaven below.
But now our Sky is darkened, this bright Star
Being Ravished hence, our fainting Isreal's Carr
Has lost its nimblest Wheels; we change our Light
For gloomy Clouds, and loose our Day in Night.
That Star's removed, whose clear enlightened Head
Gilt every Eye with Flame, and often led
The wandering Wise Men of the world, to see
The Sacred object of a bended Knee.
For by his zealous conduct we addressed
To view a CHRIST New born in every Breast.
This was both his employment and delight,
Oh! how (like Son of Thunder) would he fright
A stubborn Sinner! and an Earthquake raise
In guilty minds, reflecting on their ways.
But then (not for to break the Bruised Reed)
Like Son of Consolation, he would proceed
With Sovereign Remedies of Gospel-Balm
To heal the wounds, and such Soul-Tempests calm.
-- Thus, would he woe, and plead for God, and then
Prove no less Orator to him for men;
As in the early morn a sprightly Lark
Springs from some Turf, making the Heavens her mark,
Shoots up her self through Clouds, higher and higher,
As if she would bear a part in the Angels Quire:
So would he rise in Prayer, till in a trice
His Soul became a Bird of Paradise.
If our dull faint Devotions, prayers be,
We must acknowledge his an Ecstasy.
Knowledge (the depth of whose unbounded main,
Has been the wrack of many a curious brain,
And from her yet unreconciled School,
Has filled us with so many Learned Fools)
Had Tutored him with rules that could not err,
And taught him how to know himself and her.
Furnishing his large soul in height of measure,
Like a rich Storehouse of divinest Treasure,
From whence, as from a Sacred Spring did flow
Fresh Oracles, to let his Hearers know
A way to Glory, and to let them see
That way to Glory, was to walk, as He;
-- Thus laboring as Heavens Agent here below
For others good; His wasted Spirits flow:
His Mortal Life he freely spent, that we
Might gain a Life of Immortality.
Still Preaching, VVriting, every way he tryes
To Court the World from endless miseries.
Admonishes the Old, instructs the Young,
And teaches Children to speak Sions Tongue.
But now his painful labors all are over,
Methinks I see him welcomed at Heaven's door,
By Crowds of Saints, sent there by him before.
-- Hush then you Sighs! forbear you flowing Tears,
You storms and showrs of Nature, stop your Ears.
Let us no more with broken groveling numbers
Disturb his Rest, now rocked in sacred slumbers.
Complaints are vain, subscribe to Heaven's will,
When God speaks, it is Man's duty to be still.
He Is Dead! let us imitate his Life, that we
Dying like him may Live Eternally.
And Glorify that God, whose dying Breath,
Made Man, whom Death had Conquered, Conquer Death.
The Grave's our Common, and our truest Home,
A House of Clay best fits a Guest of Loam.
Death's but the good man's sleep, for as our eyes
We close each night at Bed, in hope to Rise;
So should we Dye, for when the Trump does blow,
We shall as easily awake we know.
And as we after sleep, our Bodies find
More fresh in strength, and cheerfully inclined;
So after Death, our Flesh scattered and dried,
Shall rise Immortal and more purified.
This is our Port, this is Sins perfect Cure,
Till Lodged within a Grave, there is none secure.
AN EPITAPH.
ASk you why so many a Tear
Bursts forth? I Will tell you in your Ear,
Compel me not to speak aloud,
Death would then grow too too proud;
Eyes that cannot vent a Tear,
Forbear to ask, you may not hear.
Gentle Hearts that overflow,
Have only Privilege to know.
In these Sacred Ashes then
Know, Reader! that a man of men
Lies covered, and Eternal Glory
Makes dear mention of his story.
Nature when she gave him birth,
Opened her Treasures to the Earth:
Put forth the quintessence of merit,
Quickened with a higher spirit.
Rare was his Life, his latest breath
Saw, and scorned, and Conquered Death.
Thankless Reader! never more
Urge a why thus tears runs over;
When you saw so high a Tide,
You might have known JANEWAY died.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1674.


