The CALL to the RACES At New Market.
To the Tune of, To Horse, Brave Boys.
Licensed according to Order.

I.
TO Horse brave boys to New Market to horse,
you will lose the Match by longer delaying,
The Gelding just now was led over the Coast,
I think the Devils in you for staying,
Run and endeavor to bubble the sporters,
Bets may be recovered lost at the Groom-Porters;
follow, follow, follow, led down by the ditch,
Then take the Odds, and then you will be rich,
For I will have Brown-Bay if Blew-Bonnet Ride,
I Will hold a Thousand pound on his side Sir,
Dragon could scower it, but Dragon is old,
He cannot endure it, he cannot he will not,
now run it as lately he could,
Age, age has hindr'd his speed Sir,
Now, now, now see they come on,
see, see, the Horse leads the way,
Full three lengths before at the turn of the land,
Five Hundred pound upon the Brown-Bay,
But a Pox of the Devil I fear we have lost,
The Dog the Blew-Bonnet, has run it,
(a Murrain light on it)
the wrong side the Post,
Odds-Bobs was ever such fortune.
II.
Make have, make have, to New Market away,
you idly leave your sport by delaying,
The Race will be run ever the heat of the day,
we shall loose all our betts by our staying,
Run, Run, and freely your Guineas now venture
Upon the Brisk Brown-Bay, when ever she do'sentor
Follow, Follow, follow on this side the Ditch,
And take most odds if you will be rich,
As for me i will have Sorrel, if Blew-Bonnet ride,
And lay you fifty pound on his side, Sir,
Sorrel runs swiftest since Dragons grown old,
You Will find by and by that he cannot endure it,
nor run it as lately he could
Years, Years does hinder his speed, Sir,
Now, now, now see they come on,
see Sorrel still leads the way,
A full furlong before at the Turn of the land,
Five Hundred pound it is that gets the Day.
But fie on that Jockey, I fear I have lost.
With ease he had won it, had won it, if he had but run it,
On this side the Post,
No Man had ever such fortune.
III.
To Horse, we must not of Fortune complain,
nor loose our time in Jockeys dispraising,
The Geldings are galloping over the plain,
while we stand idle prating and gazing,
Run and attempt to retrive all our losses,
And never stand railing at fortune and crosses,
Follow, Follow, follow, I Will lead on this side,
And see if I can once be a guide,
It Is the Brown-Bay I fancy she trouls it apace,
I Will hold an hundred on the Race, Sir,
Dragon does scour it, but Brown-Bay's before,
And holds it, and holds it, and wins it and wins it
He runs it, so merrily over,
I Will hold you now five hundred pound more.
But now were undone and our Guineas are lost,
The Rogue the Blew-Bonnet, ha run it,
(a Vengeance light on it)
the wrong side the post,
I never had such ill fortune.
FINIS.
Printed for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible: in Pye-Corner.


