NEW SONGS SUNG IN The Fool's Preferment, OR, THE Three DUKES of Dunstable.

In the SAVOY: Printed by E. Jones, for Jos. Knight and Fran. Saunders, at the
Blue Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand, 1688.

A Song sung in the First Act.
^ I Sighed, and I pined, I sighed, and I pined, was constant, was constant,
and kind, to a Jilt that laugh -- 'd at my Pains; though my Pas -- sion never
cooled, I found I was fooled, for all my a -- bun -- dance of Brains; though my
Pa -- sion never ^ cooled, I found I was fooled, for all my a -- bun -- dance
of Brains: But now I Am a Thing, as grea -- t as a King, so blessed is the Head
that is ad -- dle; the dull empty Pate, soonest comes to be great, Fate dotes
on a Fool in the Cradle.

Mr. Henry Purcell.

A Song sung in the First Act.
^ There Is nothing so fa -- tal as Woman, to hur -- ry a Man to his Grave; you
may Think, you may Plot, you may Sigh like a Sot, she u -- ses you more like a
Slave: But a Bottle, although it be common, the Cheats of the Fair will undo ^
do; it will drive from your Head, the Delights of the Bed, he that is Drunk, is
not a -- able to Woo.

Mr. Henry Purcell.

A Song sung in the Third Act, by Mr. Monfort.
^ FLed is my Love, for e -- ver, for e -- ver, e -- ver, gone! O -- h, mighty
Loss! E -- ter -- nal Sor -- row, E -- ter -- nal Sorrow! Yet prithee Strephon,
why should mourn? For if thy Ce -- lia ^ wont re -- turn, to her thou shall
go, to her thou shall go to mor -- row; to her thou shall go, to her thou shall
go to morrow.

Mr. Henry Purcell.

(...)
^ IT IS Death alone, it is Death a -- lone, can give me Ease, for all the mighty
Pain, for all the mighty Pain, I Have felt; in his cold Tomb my Heart shall e --
ver freeze, since hers could ne -- ver, ne -- ver mel -- t; since hers could ne
-- ver, ne -- ver mel -- t, could ne -- ver melt.

Mr. H. Purcell.

A Song sung in the Third Act.
^ I Will mount to you blue Coe -- lum, to shun those Female Gypsies, I Will play
at Bowls with Sun and Moon, and scare you, scare you, scare you with E -- clip
-- ses; and scare you, scare you, scare you with E -- clip -- ses. Mr. Henry
Purcell.

A Song sung in the Fourth Act.
^ I Will sail up -- on the Dog Star, I Will sail up -- on the Dog Star, and then
pursue the Morning, and then pursue, and then pursue the Morning; -- I Will chase
the Moon 'till it be Noon, I Will chase the Moon 'till it be Noon, but I Will make,
I Will make her leave her Horning. ^ I Will climb the fro -- sty Mountain, I Will
climb the srosty Mountain, and there I Will coin the Weather; I Will tea -- r the
Rain -- bow from the Sky, I Will tea -- r the Rain -- bow from the Sky, and tie,
and tie both ends to -- ge -- there. The Stars pluck from their Orbs too, the
Stars pluck from their Orbs too, and ^ crowd them in my Budget; and whether I Am
a roa -- ring Boy, a roa -- ring Boy, let all --, let all the Nation judge it.

A Song sung in the Fourth Act.
A Dialogue by Jockey and Jenny.
Jockey. ^ JEnny, gin you can love, and have resolved you will try me; sil --
ly Scruples remove, and do no lon -- ger de -- ny me:

By thy bonny Black Eye,
I swear nean other can move me;
Then if still you deny,
You never, never did love me.

Jenny. ^ Jockey, how can you mistake, that know full well when you woo me; My
poor Heart does so ache, it throbs as it would come through me!

How can you be my Friend,
That thus are bent to my Ruin?
All the Love you pretend
Is only for my Undoing

Jockey. Who can tell by what Art
This Chiming Nothing, called Honor,
Charms my Jenny's soft Heart,
When Love and Jockey has won her?

Jenny It Is a Toy in the Head,
And Muckle Woe there is about it;
Yet I Would rather be dead,
Than live in Scandal without it.

But if you will love me, and Wed;
And guard my Honor from Harms too;
Jockey I Will take to my Bed,
And fold him close in my Arms too.
Jockey Talk not of Wedding, dear Sweet,
For I must have Chains that are softer;
I m of a Northerly Breed,
And never shall love thee well after.

CHORUS: Bass and Treble, Then since ill Fortune intends,
Our Amity shall be no dearer;
Still let us kiss and be friends,
And sigh we shall never come nearer.

A Song sung in the Fifth Act, by Mr. Monfort
^ IF thou will give me back my Love, for e -- ver I Will A -- door thee; and for
the fa -- vour, mighty Jove, with Souls from Heaven shall store thee: To the
Queen of Shades, she shall advance, and all shall wait up -- on her; ^ Kings
shall A -- door nor Countenance, and Ple be her Page of Ho -- nour.

Mr. Henry Purcell.

FINIS.

