Dulcedo ex Acerbis. Sound DOCTRINE from the ERRORS Contained in Mr. Keith's
Sermons AND APOLOGIES. The Second EDITION.

ZACH. 13. 4.And it shall come to pass in the days of true Christians, that the
Prophets shall be ashamed of their Visions: Nor shall they wear any more a
rough Garment, (a black Cloak, a broad Hat, a short Cravat, and Fryar's Hoods)
to deceive. By a Member of the Church of England. ODMT.

1. THS Paper having fully made out and demonstrated in its former Edition,
that Mr. Keith does labor under several mistakes; and understands neither
Scripture nor Divinity, nor the ground of Salvation, to wit, Regeneration by
the Power from on High, which is the Spiritual word in the Heart; not the
outward; I was in hope he would, since he is so apt to turn and forsake his old
Errors, have given Glory to God, and showed by some public Act, or Recantation
Sermon, that he is really ashamed of his Visions, and his Zeal for a Doctrine
exploded, and proved just oppoute to that of the Apostles. But Luscis Lux
oculis nocuit, it is Darkness which the World is in love with. Joh. 3. 19. In
vain I expected such Man as Mr. Keith, who runs from the Light within, should
so soon stop his carreer and freely return to it: He is too far gone from it;
and it is to be feared, as shall be showed more at large; he is become one of
those that rebel against the Light because they do not know it. Joh. 24. 13.
and seek for the praise of Men more than for that comes from God. Joh. 5. 44.
12. 42, 43. Therefore seeing no great hopes (though he be always Learning) of his
coming to the Truth. 2 Timothy 3. 7. and seeing that far from it, he goes on
unconcerned, Preaching another Gospel than the Apostles Preached; setting up
the outward Word above the Light and guidance of God's Spirit within Man,
ascribing the second Birth, or the Regeneration, against the positive words of
Christ, Joh. 3. 5. to the outward word; and like they that Christ speaks of,
Matthew. 23. 15. and the Horse in the white Robe, Revel. 6. 2. Conquering and to
Conquer; and bragging of his Success (the unjust Man knows no Shame, Zeph. 3.
5. and is very confident Prove. 14. 16.) I will, though no Quaker nor admirer of
Quakerism, smite this scorner of the Light, that the simple may beware and come
to understanding. Chapter 19. 25. and go on as well as he in Printing a second
time; and bear witness to the Light once more before great and small, though the
Great Men rage with him, Jerem. 5. 5. that Truth may triumph at last, and that
neither Mr. Keith's nor the Quakers Opinions may have the better of it. Devant
les Rois and Grands Siegneurs dis monde
Ton temoignage, O Dieu, jannonceray
Sans que jamais vergongne me confonde.
Psalm. 119. 46.

2. I thought that between both the Quakers and the Churchmen some Answer might
have been framed, and that the Spiritual Men, or the Children of the Light
would have appeared for Truth, and had Discretion enough to put Mr. Keith to
Shame. Judge. 18 7. and so waited for their words, as Elibu, Job 32. 7, 11. but
in vain; for when I had waited whilst they searched out what to say, and behold
none answered nor convinced Mr. Keith V. 12. being as wise as he is, because
they think they are wise, Joh. 9. 41. Jerem. 8. 8, 9, I was forced at last to
take the business in hand, and to show my Opinion in the behalf of the Truth.
There is a Spirit in Man; and (without being Quaker Enthusiast or Fanatic) it
is, by Mr. Keith's leave, the inspiration of God gives understanding for that,
Job 32. 8, 17.

3. To make good my charge against Mr. Keith, I have need of no more than what
he says page 6. of his Farewell or Abjuration Sermon. That Faith is wrought in
us by means of the written word: That is to say, by the Doctrine of Christ
Crucified as it is Preached to us. For as the Scriptures say, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word (the Text says the word of God, Romans 10. 17.
which last Word he takes away Revel. 22. 19. the better to put his blind
Construction upon the Simple, and to show the wiser Sort what a faithful
Minister of God's Word he is become) And that Word, continues he, is the
outward Word in the Mouth of the Preachers; as it follows, V. 14. (whereas this
same V. 14 going before the words which he cites from the 17th. it should be as
it preceeds, but to say as it follows, makes the consequence he draws look
better and more plausible.) And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And
hence the Word even the Doctrinal Word, is called the Incorruptible Seed, of
which true Believers are Regenerated and Born again, according to, 1 Pet. 1.
23. These are Mr. Keith's own words; and what he, and, as it seems, his Party
call sound Doctrine.

4. But that is not the Doctrine of the true Church of England; for it is not
that of Christ, nor of St. Peter himself; for his very Words themselves show
plainly that this is false. His Words in the said place are, being Born again,
not of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which Lives,
and Abides for Ever. From which any man that reads, may see that the Word
meant here, is the Word of God Himself; and that it being God's Word, and such
Word as is Living and Abiding for Ever, it is not the outward word in the Mouth
of the Preachers; for that is the Preacher's word; and is not living, but dead,
nay a Letter that kills. 2 Cor. 3. 6. or at least that leaves one dead, in
the state it finds one in; Endures but for a while in the hearts of some
hearers. Math. 13. 21. Was not from the beginning, and therefore will have an
end. 1 Cor. 13. 8. Serving but till the Inward arise and shine in the heart. 2
Pet. 1. 19. And in fine, is not that which works true Faith in the Saints,
nor which they are Born again and Regenerated of: seeing some have Believed,
(as the Wise Men of the East) and were Regenerated; (as Cornelius) without it:
the Spirit (which is the thing that Regenerates the Saints John 3. 5.) falling
upon him and those many Friends he had with him; Act. 10. 24, 27. as soon as
ever Peter had begun to speak to them, V. 44. that is, before they had heard
half of the Doctrine of Christ, and of all the Mysteries Mr. Keith enumerates
at the foot of page 10. and by which he says Faith comes: which they knew and
believed without doubt nevertheless; the Spirit teaching all things without
hearing them Preached. Joh. 14 26.

5. And common Sense shows the same. For it shows, that since this Word, which
Mr. Keith argues for, cannot give so much as one Sense, viz. Hearing to the
Body, much less can it give it all the Senses, or the whole Life; and much less
beget the Soul, or give it its Life again; nor that which comes from Hearing or
Understanding, viz. Faith. And if for reading of Words, or for hearing them
Preached, Men had Faith wrought in them, and were regenerated, it would follow,
that all those which heard Christ preach, believed: and that none of those, who
hear, Sermons, and read the Scripture, are unregenerated: and that all may be
saved at the same cheap, easy rate, that Papists hope to be so; that is, for
hearing Mass said, and some few Ave Mary's cried about them when they die. And
Mr. Keith has ill Luck to have met with so few Men that believe a he tells us,
Page 12. of his Reasons, among so many Hearers; for he reckons in that Place no
more than 40 Persons brought over by his Preaching, from Quakery to his Church.

6. So that the Word in the Mouth, being not that which begets, and works
Faith in the Soul; it remains, that the inward spiritual Word in the Heart and
Soul, is that which does it; being quick and powerful, and sharper than any
Sword, piercing to the very Soul and inward Thoughts of the Heart. Hebr. 4. 12.
(as Peter showed it to be in the Case of Ananias, and of Sapphira his Wife,
Act. 5. 3, 9.) to work powerfully there, and stir up all the Powers of the Soul
and the Body. And this Word being Spirit and Life, as Christ himself says.
Joh. 6. 63. and a Spirit that gives life and quickneth. 2 Cor. 3. 6. it is
therefore the only Word that lives and begets the Soul again; and it is, on
this Account of being a Spiritual and a penetrating Word, represented by a
Sword coming from the Mouth of Christ. Rev. 1. 16. and with some known by the
Name of the Sword of the Spirit. Ephesians. 6. 17. And as it is that which was from
the beginning with God; Joh. 1. 2. it is also that alone which abides for ever.

7. The word of Faith which St. Paul and the Apostles preached, and by which
they begat Souls, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Jam. 1. 18. was inward and spiritual in the
heart, Romans 10. 8. and a Spirit: for they were the Ministers of the Spirit that
gives Life, and not of the dead Letter, or outward word, that kills. 2 Cor. 3
6. Ministering to that Spirit which Christ himself ministers, Gal. 3. 5. that
thereby Men might serve God in newness of the Spirit, and no more in the
oldness of the Letter of Scripture. Romans 7. 6. of the Doctrine of Baptisms, of
Repentance from dead works and other fundamentals, (as Mr. Keith does call
them, and recommend page 10.) of the Christian Religion, or of the Doctrine of
Christ, which St. Paul exhorts to leave. Hebr. 6. 1, 2. and Mr. Keith to stick
to. And they preached the Gospel, which is the Power of God, Romans 1. 16. and
which being a Spirit, they begat Souls again by. 1 Cor. 4. 15. This Power being
the same as the Power from on high, which is the Holy Spirit, Luke 24. 49. Act.
1 5, 8. and which regenerates Souls, Joh. 3. 5. So that the Word they preached,
being Power and Spirit, it is not the empty Word in the Mouth of Mr. Keith:
which they begat, or became Fathers in God to Souls with: but the inward
spiritual powerful Word in the Heart of good Men, which they stirred up and set
a working by that which they received of Christ, and which his Sheep heard
therefore speaking through their Heart and Mouth. John 10. 3, 5.

8. If the Protestants become Fathers in God by preaching the written outward
Word, why may not the Popish Priests be so too by their Preaching? But if
Preachers become such by Preaching and Ministering the spiritual Word of Truth,
Pray to whom Fathers in God, and whose Ministers are they that stand for
another Word, and countenance its Preaching? It is strange Fathers in God
should beget, they know not how, nor by what; and if they know, should keep
their Trades to themselves, and should not let Mr. Keith, who has deserved it
so well at their hands, know the Knack on it! I am afraid Mr. Keith will never
spoil a Bishop, but always remain a Tool.

Quaere. Pray, Mr. Preacher, what is Religion now adays? Answ. It is nothing
but Acting the Story of Christ: and a Cloak with as many Facings as Parties or
Sects, for the Sophisters of each to carry on their Designs; and for every
Party to act their Nonsense under impudently to the face of those that know
better things, as the silly Papists did their Mass in King James his time. Poor
King, to take his Priestcraft for a Religious Worship, and to be thus put upon
in his most weighty Concern, by dull Souls, more confined and less knowing than
himself. But though Kings pay dear for it, and have paid so ever since the time
of Jereboam, who became a sad Example of God's Justice upon such. 1 Kings 13.
34. Yet no Calves, no King prevails in the Mouth of their Profets and of their
Politicians: who must have some Calvish Priests. Chapter 12. 31. to preach a
Calvish Worship, that is, fit for Calves only, and for making of Men Calves,
that they may lead them like Calves: and will prevail to the End, whilst Kings
learn nothing from them of God judging in the Earth: Psalm. 58. 11. and
disposing of Kingdoms: giving them to whom he will, and setting up over them
even the Basest of Men. Dan. 4. 17. The Kings that knew God themselves, not
only served him themselves, but preached and reformed their Priests and Clergy
themselves. 1. King. 8. 12, 14. 2 King. 23. 2. 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. Psalm. 51. 13.
119. 46. but all they that know him not, give their Power to the Beast. Rev.
17. 13. Kings might serve God by Proxy, if they had none of that Word in the
Heart which all Men have, and could give God an account by their Priests and
Favorites.

9. It is the Spirit gives life, quickneth. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Joh. 6. 63. creates,
forms, reforms, and upholds all things living. Genesis 1. 2. Psalm. 33. 6. 104. 30.
and that begets Souls therefore. Without it all things lie dead, and return to
their Nothing. verse. 29. Jam. 2. 26. and he is the conveyer of Life unto all
Creatures: The hand and the arm of God. Joh. 12. 38. whereby he makes all his
Works. From him the First Man Adam received his Breath of Lives. Genesis 2. 7.
that is, both of the Divine and of the Natural Life; (for note that the Hebrew
Word is Chajim in the Plural, not Chajah, as it should be to signify Breath of
Life.) And as Adam received the Life of his Soul from him, so from him we must
get it again, and be born of it; not from the material Word, or dead Letter of
Scripture. God's Kingdom, or Salvation, as St. Paul says, is through it. Romans
14. 17. then we must be born again of it. Joh. 3. 5. and be born of God, and of
this spiritual Seed, to have it remain in us. 1 John 3. 9. and have the Kingdom
of God or life eternal in us. Luke 17. 21. The Seed it self which the Flesh is
born and begotten of, is a Spirit abstracted from the Soul and the Body of
Parents, which are but Men: Much more then that of the Soul regenerated of God,
who is only a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits. Joh. 4. 24. Hebr. 12. 9. ought
to be a Spiritual, and not a Material Thing: such as is the outward Word, which
Mr. Keith sows about in Sermons and in Papers; which Booksellers and Printers
catch at so nimbly, and put Impune upon the World.

10. Now Christ himself is the word. Joh. 1. 1, 14. in the Heart and in the
Mouth. Romans 10. 9. and being that same Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. by which God
made all, Joh. 1. 2, 3. (the World and all Things therein. Hebr. 1. 2.) and
which upholdeth all things, v. 3. and gives them their Light and Life. Joh. 8.
12. 14. 6. it is he that begets Souls; and he is the same also as the Spirit or
Power which has been showed to do it. Jesus being the same Word as Paul spoke
of, v. 8. of Chap. 10. of Romans and the same Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. as Paul
says the Gospel is, Romans 1. 16. And the Lord is that Spirit, which Paul was
Minister of, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 16. and when the Holy Ghost comes it is Christ that
comes Himself. Joh. 14. 16, 18. And upon the whole Matter, Christ being the
Word of God that was from the Beginning, Chap. 1. 2. and by whom all things
were made, and Emmanuel, God in us, Matthew. 1. 23. dwelling in us for ever,
according to his Promise Joh. 14 17. except we be Reprobates. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and
the Holy Ghost himself; he is the Word in the Heart that abides for ever; and
of whom St. Peter meant the Faithful are born again. Being upon this account
called the second Adam, that is, the second Father, or Begetter of Mankind: and
the Bridegroom, infusing his spiritual Seed in Man, and impregnating his Soul;
which becomes his Mother thereby; and by the same means he becomes the Son of
Man, and is formed within Man. Gal. 4. 19. And in short, Christ and the Word
and the Spirit are all one,

11. And he is called the word (in Greek (...), or Reason) because he is
Wisdom, Light and Understanding, in God, in the World, and in the Soul. In God,
he is the Wisdom and the Power, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Will and Act: For God having no
Organs, as Mouth or Hands, his word is the thing it self that is done by his
Power and Wisdom; and having no other Will than his Power and his Act, because
Voluntas, says one, Consilio nascitur, and there is nothing but Sight, no
thinking nor consulting at all, in the most Wise God; his Wisdom, Power, Will,
Act, are all one, that is, his Word. In the World he is the Light, Joh. 8. 12.
and the Spirit that moved in the deep to form the Light Genesis 1. 2. and which
the Wise and Pulcher ordo Mundi proceeds from. And in the Soul, he is both the
Light of Nature in all, and the Light of Grace, that is, the Understanding in
some, being natural in all; granted to all at their Birth by the prerogative of
their Essence or nature above other Animals; enlightening every Man that comes
into the World. Joh. 1. 9 This is what they call Reason: And supernatural in
the regenerated, granted them of Grace again by the gift of the Spirit upon
their Birth of Water: And this is properly that which they call Understanding.
I say, he is called the word, because he is Light Understanding and Wisdom in
us, as well as in God. Quicquid in nobis videt and audit, verbum Dei. That
Light, and that faculty whereby we see and perceive, and hear and understand
things, is the Word of God in us, that is, Christ and his Spirit. Understanding
comes from Christ, 1 John 5. 20. and he is the Light of Men. Joh. 1. 4, 9. and
from the Spirit he sends. Chapter 16. 17. to Guide Men into all Truth, V. 13. to
teach all things. Chapter 14. 26. and to search even the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2. 10. understanding comes likewise. Understanding is the word in the Heart.
The Light whereby the Mind concei^^ in the Heart, and sends forth the Spirit
thence into the Mouth, is the Wo^^ not the combined Syllables, nor the sound
which the Air makes in the Thr^^^ and in the Mouth. The Heart conceives from
the Light that rises there the flash at every pullation, and sends it into the
Head, whence returning to the Heart, it is sent with the Spirit that issues
out of the Flash into the Tongue to move it; the Tongue moving beats the Air in
the Throat and in the Mouth; according to those Organs which articulates its
sound, and forms the out spoken word; and speaks forth the conception. So that
the Light, the Spirit, and the Conceit or notion is the (...) or the word: That
which the vulgar call Words, being nothing but vo ces, an articulated Noise,
and a combination of diverse Sounds or Syllables, by the Spirit from the Heart;
and neither the thing conceived, nor the Spirit expressing, or speaking it
forth themselves.

12. To conclude, Understanding, Reason and Light in the Soul is from the
Spirit of Christ, the word of God, Christ himself; of whom we are born again,
and who works Faith in us. From him, and from his Spirit the hearing of Faith
proceeds. For Understanding, as was said before, proceeds from them, and
hearing in the Scriptures signifies Understanding; as in that place where
Christ says, he that has Ears to hear let him hear, etc And Faith is one of
the Gifts and Effects of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 9. No Faith without Conversion,
and no Conversion without Understanding. Matthew. 13. 15. By Hearing we Believe,
Turn or Convert, and what we understand not we neither do nor believe.
Intelligere ipsum credere est, by your leave, Mr. Keith, and Madam Rome. No
implicit Faith avails. When God opens our Hearts or gives us Understanding,
we believe as Lydia, Act. 16. 14. and confess with our Mouth, Romans 10. 9. and
come and show our Deeds; as Zacheus, Luke 19. 8, 9. and those which burned
their Learned Books, did. Act. 19. 18, 19. and Faith is dead without Deeds,
Jam. 2. 26. So that to have Faith we must Understand in the first place, and so
have Understanding; and the light of Christ's Spirit, or Christ himself within
us. All which, if we can obtain from the outward word Preached, Mr. Keith is in
the right, but then Christ died in vain; for he died to get us the effect of
the Promise, which is the Holy Spirit, Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4, 5. from which
Understanding comes.

13. Therefore since we must have Christ as a Spirit within us to Understand
and Believe; we must know him not only without us in that Body that died upon
the Cross, to fulfill all Righteousness, and reconcile us to God, Romans 5. 10.
that thereby having access V. 2. Hebr. 4. 16. we might obtain his good Gift, to
wit, the Holy Spirit. Matthew. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13. but within us in Spirit, since
he cannot enter in and dwell there in Flesh and Blood; though he should work the
Miracle of the Transubstantiation; and Mr. Keith should plead for an outward
Christ, or a Christ without us, as hard again as he does in his Reasons about
the 26th page. Henceforth we know Christ no more, says St. Paul. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
after the Flesh. And as a Spiritual Christ, forming the Kingdom of God by his
Spirit Romans 14. 17. within us. Luke 17. 21. Especially seeing that he is
glorified again with the Glory which he had before his Incarnation. Joh. 17. 5.
and sits in that Majesty which belongs to God alone, Hebr. 1. 3. Rev. 3. 21.
and into which Flesh and Blood cannot pretend to enter. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Christ
being to die but once. Romans 6. 9. Hebr. 9 28. took our Flesh and Blood once to
bear our Sins in it, and now having done with it, he appears the second time
without Sin to Salvation, (and therefore in the Spirit; Salvation or God's
Kingdom being in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.) to them that look for him so;
and are no more concerned with his Flesh or his Body since he comes in the
Spirit, that is, since his Ascension and Glorification Joh. 7. 39. Touch me
not, says he himself. Joh. 20. 17. that is, be not concerned with me whilst in
Flesh and Blood; because I am not as yet ascended and Glorified, and cannot yet
give you Gifts, Ephesians. 4. 8. viz. the Gifts of the Spirit, (of which see, 1 Cor.
12.) or come to you in Spirit; the Holy Ghost being not given till after the
time of his Ascension on High, Joh. 7. 39. he being not till after ready to
answer the end of his coming in the Flesh, to wit; to bring upon them the
Promise of the Father, or the Gift of the Spirit; the shedding of which Spirit
was the fulfilling of that same Promise as has been said, Luke 24. 49. Act. 1.
4, 5. 2. 17, 23. Touch me not, know me no more, therefore in the Flesh, says
he; for when I come to you a second time to save you, to answer expectation,
and the end of my coming; it shall not be in the Flesh which I have died in,
but in quite another form, to wit, that of a Spirit capable to comfort you, or
to give you Strength and Life. Joh. 14. 18, 28. in a more Spiritual from than
at my Resurrection and my Transfiguration; when my gross Body of Flesh it self
Shined like the Sun. Matthew. 17. 2. and passed through Doors and Walls. Joh. 20.
19, 26.

14. And mistake me not, Reader, I do not mean that Christ in putting off Flesh
and Blood, has put off Humanity, that is the Human Nature; for then he were no
more Christ, that is to say, God and Man; a Concrete of both Natures, or the
Human nature Anointed with the Divine. But he remains Christ, or God and Man,
to Eternity. For God's works are Eternal; He being the most Wise God, whose
Purpose and Power stands: Nothing but the Devils works (the corruption and
defects introduced in the World) being to be destroyed. And we must know
Christ, as Christ, or as God and Man; that is, as a thing distinct from God, or
as a Person distinct from the Trinity it self; to obtain Eternal Life: or else
he had never said, that it is Life Eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he sends. John 3. 17. Distinguishing Christ from God; as a Person
subsisting besides and apart from God. But this, I say, that Christ has put
off his Flesh and Blood, as being Accidental, and not at all Essential to Man
or Humanity: For the first Father Adam was not Created with it, but fell in it
by his Lust; (which by Attraction drew in the Elements that took hold of him,
and Transmuted him; made of Isch; (a shining Man, such as he was) an Adam; that
is, a Man over-cast with dark clouds, from Ad, a mist) and so got this
Monstrous Shape. And if it were Essential to Man, or Human Nature, God would
never destroy it; as he will certainly do, 1 Cor. 6 13. to deliver the Faithful
from the Body of this Death, and its restraint and bondage, into the glorious
liberty of God's Children. Romans 7. 24. 8. 21. 23. Man shall put it off himself,
to rise with a Spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 44. and Angelical Body. Luke 20. 36. that
shall Shine forth as the Sun; Matthew. 13. 43. as it did before the Fall, when
Adam was as yet Isch; or shining, from Esch, fire. So that Christ as King of
Men; possessing Eminently, all the Perfections to which Human Nature can
pretend, has put off that which makes Isch Adam; a dark beastly man,
contemptible and miserable. Isa. 53. 3. Romans 7. 24. And his State and Condition
ought not to be supposed, since his Glorification, worse than that of Man
himself.

15. But to clear another Riddle; that is, how the Anointed, or the Christ, or
Messiah is the same Quatenus God, with the Anointing Spirit, I must do a bold
thing, which Reverend Mr. Keith will doubtless Bless himself at; that is,
Contradict his Church, and Athanasius his Creed: show that Athanasius and his
Church are mistaken; one in rendering by Person, the Greek word Hypostasis; and
(...) by Substance, and the other in Saying, not confounding the Persons, nor
dividing the Substance. For the Substance of the Three in the Godhead is the
same, and is to be confounded; and their Essence or Nature, or their (...)
diverse, so ought to be divided: And the word Hypostasis, which they render by
Person, does signify a Substance, and can bear no other Sense; a Substance
being that which Substat accidentibus: which is the very meaning and
signification of the word Hipostasis, ab (...) and (...) Substo and Substituor;
the Hypostasis being the Subjectum, or the Ground of the Three in the Godhead.
And (...) is Essence, as being the Participle of the Verb Esse in Greek.

16. Then to make Persons in God is absurd and impious; there being no such
thing as Persons in the Godhead: for a Person is a thing that Subsisteth of it
self, without any dependence even of that very thing it is a Relative to; as a
Son can well Subsist although his Father be dead. But here in the Trinity, the
Father does not Subsist without the Son and Spirit; nay and is not before them:
Beginning but with the Son, being but a Relative Property to God the Son; there
being in the Godhead, that is in the Unity and the still Eternity, no such
thing as Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost known: all Three being, as part of the
Generation of God, Included within the Bounds of this Denomination; to wit, of
the Nasciture or Generation of God: the Father being not known more than the
Son or Spirit, without Nature, or before the Generation of God, or his
Manifestation: though at him this Nasciture or Generation Beings. Natura, quasi
dicas Nascitura, La naissance, the Nativity of God, Respectu Creaturae, or God
bringing forth himself to a Generation, or a Manifestation; to Communicate
himself, or his good, without himself to some things besides himself. So that
Nature, is only God himself Manifested; and his Motion to Nature, is his
Generation. And as he moved himself as by three Steps or Degrees in this his
Generation, he Manifests himself under three Appearances, Forms Natures or
Essences, of Fire, Light and Spirit, or Father Son and Spirit; which though the
Trinity be from Eternity in God, or Coeternal to God, that is to the Unity, the
Generation of God being from Eternity, are not known, as I said, before God
moved himself to Nature without himself; but were hid in God himself, and
brought to pass in himself before his outward Nature, or his manifestation; the
Godhead in Unity, as it is without Nature, being but a dark Abyss. And these
three appearances or distinct forms and degrees of Gods manifestation, are
called Father, and Son, and Spirit: Father, because the Godhead or Unity is the
ground, the stock, the Womb that brings forth out of its deep the Light, its
first Born or Son, and only begotten Son; called Son by the Hebrews, on the
very same account as their Language calls a Spark, the Son of the burning Coal:
Son, because he does come forth like a Spark out of the Coal, by breaking and
shining forth out of the dark lump or deep, 2 Cor. 4. 6. And thirdly, they are
called by the name of the Spirit, because the same Unity does not only show it
self, or make it self manifest in the Light, or by the Son; but makes it self
to be felt, and communicates its good in the form of a Spirit, or Beams flowing
from the Light; nothing in Nature being so fit to diffuse convey and
communicate the good as the Light and its efflux; the Influences whereof are
the Holy Ghost in God; and in the World, the Spirit which makes what we call
the Air, by vapourising Water, or turning it to vapor.

17. Quaere. What is a Spirit? Answer. It is a Substance as imperceptible as
God himself to natural Men, whose knowledge goes no higher than sense and
intelligece 1 Cor. 2. 14. The thing that is, and exists, Exodus 3. 14. (for it
is the same as God, who is but a pure Spirit. Joh. 4. 24.) the substance of
substances that actuates all substance, and gives it form and Essence. In God
alone, and the Soul (to wit, regenerated) it is simple, immaterial, but in this
World, where it was at first mixed with the Water, its concrete and material,
and has the three dimensions that all other concretes have, and is that which
raises up the Water into vapors. Out of it and of Water comes all material
Substance or Matter; for out of both, this material World was made, Genesis 1. 2.
2 Pet. 3. 5. All things, says Lucretius, are come from their spiritual and
their invisible State, to a visibility and a palpability. By its joining to
Water, which it inspissates to Oil, then concocts into a Salt, Earth and Body
comes to be: Corporification and Terrification, being one and the same thing.
And by its separation and freedom from its vehicle, whilst it is clearing it
self of the Vapor that holds it; (for it leaves it not wholly; not a spark of
pure Spirit being suffered in the World, for then it would inflame it) fire and
the destruction of things compacted by it, (for ejus open totum cum toto
compactum est) are still made and come to pass. From the Spirit all increase,
and decrease or corruption of material things, proceed. From the Spirit as
Spirit, their Multiplication; Multiplication being but a flux or extension of
the first central Spirit infused into the deep, and a propagation made a
traduce of the same: and from it as a fire, Quateuus become fire, their
decrease and corruption, that is, the separation of that which was compacted.
In fine, the stock of all things, of God and of the Creature, being Spirit, and
all things coming from a spiritual invisible and unknown state into
materiality, Ken, perceptibility, all things agree in substance; and as God is
a Spirit, and Spirit is the substance and stock of the Deity, the three in the
Deity, which we call the Trinity, agree into this one thing, and are but one in
substance, not so in Form or Essence.

18. And the Truth is, the Scripture speaking of Persons no where, there is no
reason wherefore we should set up this Notion, and make of Hypostasis, (which
is the stock and substance) the things dependent of it, viz. the form or the
Persons; though I am not ignorant that the Schools make of the form what I make
of substance, to wit, The most Essential and Principal part of things. But
Christians who learn of Christ, being anointed by him with that which teaches
all things. Joh. 14. 26. 1 John 2. 27. or else they were not Christians; for a
Christian signifies one that is anointed; ought not to take upon tick from the
Schools and the Heathen, their Theosophick Notions; nor such as is or may be
the occasion of Errors; but from Nature and Scripture, and the Etymology of
words if they have any; as here of Hypostasis ab and (...); which is by no
Greek Author made use of to signify an individual Person. And the Scriptures
speak only of Three, or a Trinity, which bear Record in the World, or make
known the Deity; which three things agree in one, and are One and the same
Thing. 1 John 5. 7. in the stock or the substance, but diverse in the Essence.
The Nature or the Essence of the Light being diverse from that of the dark fire,
which is the Father of it; and from that of the Spirit, or beams that flow out
of both; as is that of the Spirit different from that of both the Light and
Fire likewise.

19. And that it is so, to wit, that these three appearances being diverse in
Essence, are the same in the substance, or one and the same Spirit; and so,
that the Holy Ghost and Christ, as the Light of God, and the second Appearance
of the Three in the Godhead, are but One and the same Thing, St. John says,
there be three things in Earth bear Record of it, the Spirit, Water and Blood;
which last, is but a concrete of Water and of Spirit, digested and concocted in
the Animal Bodies: and I say, that all things in the whole World witness it;
the World it self, Man and Beast, Minerals and Vegetables. All things being
more or less, Secundum modum suum, after the Image of God; God being every
where semper sibi similis; and manifesting himself in all things, such as he
is, in Trinity like himself.

20. First, in the whole World it self, where God is made manifest by Fire
Light and Spirit; We see first an influence from the Sun and from the Stars,
into sublunary things, and a refluence from them back again into the Sun and
the Stars, to supply them and feed their Fire and Flame. Any Man that has but
sense, and warms himself in the Sun, and will hold his hand over a burning
stick or Candle may feel this Flux and Reflux. This influence in the Sun, in
the Air, and in the Flame of the stick, is a Spirit, moving always from the Sun
into the Air and all things, and from them to any Flame; and chiefly toward
the Sun which is the great Sea of Flames, and as having need of more supply
attracts most of it. There, in the Orb of the Sun, or in the space of the
Flame where it meets and concentreth, it forms the Fire and Light; and flowing
out of that space into the Air, (whence it came) in the form of Beams and
Smoke, (which makes the spots of the Sun) it returns to a Spirit; and by this
Circulation makes the Gold Chain of Homer, that tyeth the Earth to Heaven, and
keeps the Earth from falling to pieces, as Poets say. Now, this spirit is the
same in the Air or in the Deep; in the Flame or in the Sun; as out of the Sun
and Flame; whilst it flows toward the flame, as whilst it is in the flame, and
when it comes out of it: only varying it self into the several forms of fire,
light and spirit; and putting on diverse shapes. But these things being too
high, or however too crabbed for common Capacities, and for those Vertuosi
Prove. 24. 7. who feed upon foolishness, Chap. 15. 14. I will bring them in here
by way of Annotation, We may learn from the Scriptures, if we cannot see
Nature, that there was a dark Abyss, and in the Center of it the Spirit of God
working, and moving it self upwards toward the Circumference. Genesis 1. 2. and
not upon the Surface, as the Modern translate it. For God produced the World
and all things out of Himself, and therefore is the Center of all things; from
which all things flow to the Circumference. Now, when this Spirit had thus
moved it self for a while, or the space of the first Night (which we suppose of
12 Hours, for the World was created about the first Equinoxe) and had met and
gathered in sufficient quantity to supply the space of it, about the bounds and
Limits which God has set to this World, stopping there, it concentred; and by
this Concentration, which was the Word, fiat Lux; (for God's Word is His Power,
Act and Will, as I said) it broke out into a Light, or shined out of Darkness,
2 Cor. 4. 6. as the Lightning does yet now out of the thick and dark Clouds,
and became the Light it self. But before it concentred, whilst it was yet in
Motion, or moving, it was Fire. The Fire being nothing but the Spirit in
Motion; and moving toward its end, which is the same as the End of Nature, to
wit, The Light, or the Manifestation: The Light being, says St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.
13. the only Thing manifest, that is to say, the same thing as God's
Manifestation. (St. Paul' s Words are; All that is manifest is Light, and not
all that which makes manifest, as they do misconstrue it) the only diffusive
Thing, and fit to communicate, or to manifest the Good. And we never see any
Heat or Fire produced but by Motion of Spirits; as by filing in Iron, rubbing
in Wood (viz. two Sticks of Wood together) fermentation in Liquors in moist
Herbs, and in wet Hay. From Fire, when it attains the Light and the liberty
(after flying confertim, and meeting and gathering together into some space) it
turns to a Blaze or Flame; when it has dissipated the Darkness, or dark
Vehicle of Smoke which it raises with; and brought both Extremes, that is,
both it self and the Water, to a Harmonious Temper; For it is the Harmony and
Anatical mixture of the two great Contraries, to wit: Fire and Water, that by
the Concentration of one, and Dissipation of the other, form the Light.
Amicitia contrariorum and dissimilium commixtio Lumen constituunt, illustratum
ab actu Dei; That is by his Word, which concentred in a point the Spirit that
ascended. That the Light is produced by Concentration appears from small Eyes
which see better than full and prominent ones: And from the burning Glasses
that make it by concentring again the diffused Beams, and reflecting them upon
some Combustible Matter, whose Moisture is not so much bound up as is that in
Metals; and so lays more exposed to the Action of those Beams, than that in the
burning Glass. And by the just Proportion of Fire and of Water, appears, from
that no Fire can burn or produce a Flame, when no Air, which is full of moist
Vapors, can come to it; or where the Moisture abounds, and the Spirit is not
able to dissipate the Vapor, and to dry up the Moisture. This same Spirit, I
say, having obtained its end, (the Light, and the Liberty from the Bounds of
the Vapor which it had elevated) and continuing its Course or Motion out of
the space, where the Flame or the Light shines, turns again to a Spirit, flows
out in the Form of Beams, which any Body may feel; and by expanding again in
ampliorem Autam then the space the Flame was in, becomes again invisible: but,
as conveying with it the Impression of the Light, of a more beneficent and
vivifying Nature than at first when it reflowed, and moved toward the Sun. And
those Beams are but the same in Substance as the Light is; or as it was in the
light, and when it moved to it: being the same in Substance, not in Form and
Consistence, in the Light as out of it; the Substance being not new, nor
changed from what it was centrally, or in it self; but putting on diverse
Shapes, or the three Faces of three several Phoenomenons; or appearing in the
Form of Fire, Light and Spirit; all three different from that of the Spirit in
the deep, considered as not moving, or as yet in the Center of the Deep; or as
in God in the still Eternity, before he moved himself: and distinct from each
other: The Light, as I have said, being of a gentle, meek, comforting, and
refreshing, and vivifying Nature; whereas that of the Spirit (whilst it moves
toward the light, and is deprived of it) is to be a dark Fire, consuming and
causing Woe; cold and sharp, austere and fierce, like that of a corroding bitter
Frost in a dark Night; of Lapis infernalis, the Gangrene, Aqua fortis, and of
Ignis Gehennae, that gnaws, corrodes, stings and shutes, like the Worm that
never dies, and a sore Boil not yet ripe, and makes one die Raving mad. The
Fire of Hell is cold and burning without shining; as appears from that Christ
says, it causes gnashing of Teeth, and is in outer Darkness. Matthew. 8. 12.

21. Next in the little World, Man. Respice, says Trismegiste, when thou will
conceive something of God as Father of all, Quid tibi accidat generare volenti.
First, when a Man is in Love, he becomes pensive and dark, from his Lust that
obscures him; for Lust being attractive and binding; (the astringent or
attractive quality coming only from the Lust or the longing in nature, as may
be seen in Acids, which coagulate, because they are of an esurine or desirous
quality, whence Corporification or Terrification comes; and whence the Earth,
as having most of this bodyfying or astringent quality, draws the needle in the
Compass, and by attracting of it, causes its variation Eastward in the
Northern Seas, as being there, on that side, larger than toward the West; and
Westward, beyond the Line, upon the Coast of Brazil; the Earth being larger
there on that side, than in Africa.) I say, that Lust being astringent or
attractive, draws or attracts together, and condenseth in the Mind the
Spiritual Idea of the Thing lusted after, and fills up the Mind with it, which
becomes adumbrated or darkened as the Sunshine by the interposition of that
which casts a shadow: at the same time, the Spirits moving in the darkened deep
toward the Parts and Organs proper to Generation, kindle and make in that
party the Dark state of the Father of the Light, and gathering in sufficient
quantity, break out by concentration, when the Parts can hold no more, and can
hold out no longer, into a Light, Flash or Flame; fit Lux: The Son or the Seed
comes forth with Delight and Joy, a sign that the Son is Born. The Pulchrum and
the Bonum, to be good and delightful, being the Nature Essence and Property of
the Light. The Pleasure in begetting is a relick of the Light, and the Good of
Paradise. Col. 1. 12. Then this same Son, Flash or Seed, turning to Spirit
again, becomes a thin Breath or Steam, that steams from that place or part
which the Flash did break out in, into that Cell of the Womb where the
Conception is made; leaving behind it the Sperm or the gross part of the Seed;
for it comes out afterward, which is a demonstration it went not in with the
steam; for that Cell shuts close upon it, and does not open again till the time
of bringing forth. In the Womb that same steam is, by the binding quality of
the Spirit of the Male, coagulated like Cheese, Job. 10. 20. and becomes the
Fruit or Son, though it was the Son before, as soon as the Flesh appeared: For it
is the Son as soon as it becomes Prolifick, not because it is in the Womb, the
Womb receiving it not, and yielding no Fruit or Son, except it be such before
it steams or comes into it: And it becomes Prolifick in the Falsh when both the
Male and Female Flash together, and when the Spirits of both Join and Unite in
the Flash: So that it becomes the Son from that very place in Man where the
Flash or Light is made, whilst it is yet in the Man. (Note, that the Male and
Female in that act make but one Man) before it gets in the Womb. All the while
this last Spirit which gives life unto the Son, and is become his Spirit, being
the same as moved in the Deep of the Parents, and brake out into a Flash, and
in the form of a steam got in the Cell of the Womb. The same, whilst in the
Father, moving to Generation, as whilst flashing, steaming out, and getting
into the Womb; and at, whilst animating, and vivifying the Son. Thus remaining
Father Son and Spirit at the same time, and always the same Spirit in
substance, and the same thing, though passing through three diverse Steps Degrees
and Forms or States.

Man being not wholly made and formed out of this World, but partly from above
it, has an Image of God more than all other worldly things, to wit, the
Understanding and the Will, and the Courage or Power to act and do: which three
are actuated, rectifyed and reformed by one and the same Spirit, to wit; by the
Comforter or the Power from on High, that gives Understanding and Strength to
know and act by, enlightening and directing those three Faculties in Man: The
Understanding to Know, the Will to Choose or refuse, and the Power to perform
and reduce into Practice that thing, the Understanding knows and discerns to be
good, and the Will chooses for such. As the Faculties in Man, so in God the
Attributes, not only the Trinity, but his Omnipotency and All Sufficiency,
Eternity, etc. come from one Central Spirit, and the same Might and Power,
exerting it self like Beams, reflected several ways.

And lastly, in Plants, and Stones, Minerals and Vegetables, we may observe the
same thing. First a Potential Fire and Might mixed with Water, whence their
Body comes to be: for both Stones and Minerals yield this fire by striking, and
Plants by fermentation: which Might, Fire or Spirit produces in that Body a
Sap, a Marrow or Oil which is their Light and virtue; the Chemists call it
Essence, and those Oils Essential Oils: And thirdly they yield a Smell and
Taste, which is the Spirit resulting from the two first, and by which they
Spring, and grow and yield their Fruit or Virtue, which last, is not different
from the first, that gives them life, and forms their Sap and Body. It appears
from rotten Apples which smell strongest when they are a rotting or corrupting,
and from Sweet smelling Flowers, that yield no Essential Oil when they have
lost their Odor; that this smell is their Virtue, and the same as gave them
life, and made them to grow and Spring, since they decay and perish as soon as
they have lost it. When you hold your hand over the Flame of a Stick or Candle,
you feel the Beams or Spirit coming from the Flame or Light, which came first
into the Flame from the dark lump of the stick, or of the Fat or Tallow, and
gave the Stick or Tallow both its body and its life; and so is the very same in
the Stick and in the Flame, as you feel warming your hand, going from the light
or flame into the Air, whence it came, into the Sap of the Tree, and into the
stick and Flame, making a Flux and Reflux of one and the same Spirit, from all
things into the Air, and the Sun, and other Flames, and from the Sun back again
into the Air, and all things upon Earth, to give them life, and so an Eternal
Chain, a perpetual Motion, and Circulation of life.


for the Learned sort of People: and go on with the main Point in Hand,
concluding from thence that; as we see in the World, and in all other Beings,
the fire light and spirit to be the same in substance, and one and the same
spirit: so it is in God likewise, but eminently, that is, in a more sublime
manner, as (for Illustration sake) is felt in the Peace and Joy, and burning of
the Conscience, when after a long conflict of grief, horror and despair (called
the fiery Trial, 1 Pet. 4. 12.) Light breaks out in the dark Soul, and it has
Light and gladness. Esth. 8. 16. God, being a pure Spirit, free from Passion,
and all that the Spirit is subject to both in Man and in the World: (where
being mixed with Water (for there is not an Atome of it unmixt in the World, or
it would soon inflame it, and reduce it to Ashes) it becomes Corporeal, and
has the three Dimensions, except in the Soul of Man, which is not all of this
World) and not only a spirit, but the spirit of Spirits, that actuates all
Spirits, and is their Form and their Soul; does act most transcendently, and is
not confined to the same Laws, Order and Rules, as created Spirits are in
propagating themselves. Neither do I suppose that the heat of the fire was
manifested in God, as it is now in the Sun; for God, as God, is the Good, mere
Love, Light, Joy, and Delight, inwhom there is no darkness, fierceness or
austerity. 1 John 1. 5. 4. 16. and in him therefore is no fire and heat
perceptible anger and austerity; but in the Creature only, when it departs from
the Light and the Love of Paradise. But the Scripture teaching us that God is
an angry God, and a consuming fire; we may believe that in God is the root of
the fire, serving as the Gall in Man, and Acids in sweet Liquors, to exacuate
the Light and Love of his blessed State; Love and Light being the State in
which God aquiesceth. Matthew. 13. 17. Being not properly God in the Father and
Spirit, but in the Light of the Son, in whom he is well pleased. And St. John
says, that the World (being the Image of God, as well as Man and his Soul)
represents the Trinity; or bears witness by three things, which all Men may see
therein, in one and the same subject (to wit: in the first Spirit infused into
the Deep) of the Trinity in God: for he says they bear witness to the Father,
to the Word, and to the Holy Spirit, which is the whole Trinity; and Paul
says, that by the World and the Things which are therein, we may not only find
out, but clearly see the Godhead. Romans 1. 20. that is, God in Unity in the
still Eternity, and all the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. such as is the
Trinity. And I believe we may, for I see it my self.

21. And I see through the World, not only the Trinity, but the Coeternity of
the three Appearances: that, as no Light can exist and subsist without Fire,
and neither without the Air: So in God there is no Son, nor Father without
Spirit, nor no Spirit without Light, but all three appear at once, from the
very beginning of God's Manifestation. Joh. 1. 2. And I see there likewise the
Generation of God; God generating himself, and being generated, and introducing
himself by his Beams and his Efflux, at first into the Great World, next into
the little World, and thirdly, (when both were fallen, depraved and corrupted)
into the Seed of a Maid; there to supply the Office of the Spirit in Man's Seed,
and to beget the Man God, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of all things from
Corruption, Romans 8. 21, 23. And fourthly and lastly, by the Mediation or the
Mean of that Man God, into the Soul of all those that look for him in Spirit,
Hebr. 9. 28. and know him spiritually, 1 Cor. 2. 24. 11. 29. Secundum modum
tamen recipientis in each, that is, as every one does evacuate himself, or set
himself in order, or prepare himself for it. Act. 13. 48. But most
superlatively in his third introduction; his Efflux, the Holy Ghost which
Christ was Conceived by, bringing with him at that time all the might of the
Father, and the virtue of the Light; the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in
Christ bodily, Col. 2. 9. he having not received the Holy Ghost by Measure.
Joh. 3. 34. And if thou had my Spectacles, which I cannot lend thee, (Science
is the Gift of God, not of Man, nor of the Schools) thou would see and
believe it also as well as I, without the help of Scripture; for thou would
understand it, and to understand, is to believe, Intelligere, ipsum credere est.

22. And thou would see and believe therefore that the Son of Man, as the Son
and Light of God, is the same as Gods Spirit, and comes with the Holy Ghost,
bringing with him in his Wings, or the Efflux of his Light, Health and Life, or
Salvation, Mal. 4. 2. being the same in substance: and being not a Person or
subject distinct from them. But that as the Son of Man or Emmanuel, God in Man,
or as the Human Nature anointed with the Divine; he is as much a Person
subsisting a part from God, though in an undivided manner) as the Church from
him, and as the Beams from the Sun) as Man and the World it self. And thou
would see how he is the First Born of the Creature, or of the whole Creation.
Col. 1. 15. (not of every Creature, for that Translation is false) the only
begotten Son of God, and dwelling in God the Father, and God in him: Joh. 1. 1.
14. 11. and how he is one with God. Chapter 10. 30. and not only one with him, but
the most Bright Glorious and Excellent of the three Essences of the Godhead;
(the Light or Oil of gladness which he is anointed with Chapter 1. 9, 14. Hebr. 1.
9.) And yet less than the Father, who Quatenus the Godhead is greater than the
Person of Christ, or of God and Man. Joh. 14. 28. In fine, how as God and Man,
he becomes the Son of Man; not only of one Virgin, but of all the Virgin Souls
that will make themselves Virgins, or dis-impregnate themselves of the Lusts
and Affections they are filled with from their Youth, Matthew. 24. 19. till
Christ is formed in them. Gal. 4. 19. that is, before their new Birth of Water
and of Spirit: And the Head, and the Spring Head, and the Fountain of Mankind.
Ephesians. 1. 22. Col. 1. 18. (instead of the first Adam,) where all the Sons of Adam
must re-enter and die in, become as dead as Water. Romans 6. 4. and as one Water
with him, that they may be born again of him and of his Spirit, and as the
Brooks of the Spring, become partakers of his Nature, and his Righteousness.
And as such, that is, as Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. he
deserves, though but a Man, or however God and Man; that every Knee of Things
both in Heaven and in Earth should bow and fall at his Name. Phil. 2. 10.

23. I thought fit to enlarge upon this Particular; (1.) Because it is the
Subject of many Controversies, easily reconcilable, if Men made use of Reason,
or of the Light of Nature in studying Divinity, and reading of the Scriptures;
and did not make the Scriptures to speak as their Opinion; I mean, did not
rather endeavor to make Scripture say the same thing as they say, than examine
what they say by that which the Scriptures say; yet no better composed than by
procuring an Act of Parliament against those which they call the Socinians.
(2.) Secondly, because Mankind is grown so blind and supine in Matters of
Religion, that not only the Scripture, and the Thing it contains, specified
by Mr. Keith, page 10. of his Sermon, are to him a mere Parable, which he
neither understands, Mark 4. 11. nor endeavors to do it; having got this
strange Notion, that they are too high for him; that St. Paul is mistaken, and
Mr. Keith in the right: St. Paul in saying, that the invisible things of God
may be known and understood by the works of Creation, and even without
Scripture, for he speaks of the Heathen, who have it not to peruse; and so
clearly too, adds he, that they are without Excuse, who do not know God
thereby. Romans 1. 20. and Mr. Keith, in saying, that all those things cannot be
understood but by Scripture; and that they consider God as a great way from His
works; whereas he is their Virtue and Spirit of Life Himself; and that same
Word of Power within them, that upholds them. Heb. 1. 3. (3.) Thirdly, because
many Books of Mr. Keith and others (to which this is an Answer) tend more than
ever before toward the establishing of a sufficiency of Scripture Revelation,
and an implicit knowledge of God by the outward Word, and a School Divinity;
and to null the Light within, that is, the inward Teachings of God's Spirit in
the Soul; and God's Knowledge by Nature. Whereas Men are by St. Paul, Romans 1.
20. and the Prophet Isaiah, 5. 12. blamed for not regarding the Works of God in
Nature; the Knowledge of God by it being more plain and easy. Prove. 14. 6. than
his knowledge by Scripture; Nature being Properly God himself manifested.
Natural Philosophy is Divinity it self: which has ceased amongst Men, since
the Schools and the Schoolmen, leaving Nature and Scripture, have taught it by
so many Distinctions, Definitions, and other Oppositions and vain Terms of
their Science, falsely so called, says Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 20. that Men being
confounded, know not what to make of them, nor how to learn by their Means. Non
est in intellectu quod non fuit in Sensu, is one of their own Notions; yet they
will teach to know God by cramp Words and vain Bablings, without the Light of
Nature. Since Printing, Men, leaving off the use of their own Reason, think to
steal from other Men the Word and Knowledge of God. Jer. 23. 30. and their
Study being now to set up vast Libraries to look upon and read in; it is no
wonder if they missing the Reasons of Things, gather from Reading only Scraps
of other Men's Notions; and fill their Heads with a Heap of in-coherent Why
msies, from which they cannot deduce a Natural Consequence, and so build on
wild Conceits, a new Christian Religion, and a new Philosophy, which has no
ground in Nature. (4.) And lastly, because the End and Design of this Paper is
not so much to refute, or to destroy and pull down the Building of Mr. Keith,
as to build up in its room such work as may abide. 1 Cor. 3. 14. all things
being to be done for Edification, and the good of the Neighbor. Romans 15. 2.

24. And to conclude my Answer and Remarks on the Mistakes of Mr. Keith in this
Point, to wit: of the Means of Faith and of Regeneration, by what means they
are wrought and brought to pass in the Soul; I say, if Faith be one of the
Operations, Gifts and Effects of God's Spirit, as St. Paul teaches it is, 1
Cor. 12. 9. it follows, that it is not wrought by the outward Word, but by the
Spirit Himself; and that the Word and Spirit being both Agents of it, may be
thought one and the same. Faith comes by Understanding. Romans 10. 17. and
Understanding comes from the Inspiration of God, or his Spirit within us. Job
32. 8. that guides us into all Truth. Job. 16. 13. Therefore Faith is effected
by the Light of that Spirit opening the Heart, and the Eyes, as to Lydia. Acts
16. 14. and Agar. Genesis 21. 19. the three Wisemen of the East, Matthew. 2. 2.
Cornelius and others, Act. 10. 44. to understand and believe, and not by the
outward Word. Before time in Israel, the Prophets that is to say, knew Him were
called Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9. because they saw God, that is to say, knew Him by
His works. 1 Kings. 17. 1. But now the Case is altered, according to Mr. Keith,
and that for the worse besides, against what he says himself of a better
Covenant to Believers, page 9. and the many Promises of God's Spirit to
Christians, who are now but bare Hearers, and that not of God Himself; but of
Men and of their Word. If Faith be wrought in Man but by the Doctrine of
Christ, as it is preached to him; the Faith of them that believe that which Mr.
Keith preaches is erroneous and false, as by what I have showed, it does
already appear.

25. Mr. Keith having thus said, that it is the outward Word which begets the
Saints again, and that works Faith in them, concludes in the 9th Page, that
the written Word therefore is not only the complete and the adequate Rule of
our Faith and Practice, but that the Precepts thereof are of far larger extent
than those writ in Man's heart, without, or before man has the Scripture
Revelation: proving it by a Passage which makes nothing for him. Psalm. 119.
96. David's meaning in that Place, being not of the outward or written Word of
God; for the Law and the Prophets, which make up the written Word, were not
extant in his time; there being not yet extant more than the Books of Joshua,
Judges, and the Pentateuch: but of the Law written in his Heart, and of that
word, which he kept hid in his Heart, v 11. and which he desires God by no
means to hide from him, v. 19. but to enlarge or open his heart wide V. 32. to
contain it. V. 18. 33, 34.

26. To which my Answer is, first, that the Spirit which writes the Law, and
Precepts of God in the Heart of Believers, teaches and searches all things,
even the deep things of God, not revealed in Scripture, Joh. 14. 26. 1 Cor. 2.
10. And guides into all Truth. Joh. 16. 13. Therefore the Law written by it in
the Heart of Men, is of a larger extent than all that the Written or Preached
Word can suggest. Secondly, that Peter says, 2 Epist. 1. 19. that the Word of
Prophecy, or the Law and the Prophets (which was all the written word was
extant in Peter's time) is but until the day dawn, and the Day or Morning Star,
(which is Christ the inward word, Ap. 22. 16.) arise and shine in the Heart. It
is no more at thy word, as some said to their Preacher, the Samaritain Woman.
Joh. 4. 42. that we have Faith or Believe; but because we our selves have heard
Christ, and know from him that he is really the Christ, and the Savior of the
World. Which shows that the inward word goes beyond all the Scriptures and
Scripture Revelation. And thirdly, that Christ himself by these words; I have
yet many things to say to you, which you cannot as yet bear before the Holy
Ghost comes; but when he comes to guide you into the Truth of all things, he
will suggest them to you; nay, and show you things to come. Joh. 16. 12, 13.
(which last things, viz. things to come, the Scripture declares no where but
Enigmatically, as in the Revelations) shows us, since he had as yet many things
to say to us, and does refer us for them to the Light and the guidance of God's
Spirit, when he comes, that all that he had to say is not contained in
Scripture, and that the Light comes from it, is not so great and so full as
that of the Inward Word. And since what he had to say, is as Necessary to Life
as what he had said except we suppose and grant that he might speak idle words,
that shall not stand but pass away, Matthew. 24. 35. and has condemned himself. Chapter
12. 36. the Scripture does not contain all that is necessary for life, and for
Salvation; and so is not the complete rule of Faith, and of Practice. St. Paul
to show that he did not take the word he preached for the complete rule of
Faith, nor for a sufficient Revelation of the things to be known and believed,
refers those he preached to for the Truth of what he preached, to the
Revelation of God by the word in them. Phil. 2. 15. as being that which God
speaks to the Saints by since Christ's time. Hebr. 1. 2. St. John also by
saying that the World would not contain the Books might be written of all that
Christ did. Chapter 21. 25. and Taught Act. 1. 1. shows that the written Word does
not contain all the Laws and Doctrine and Works of Christ, which he did for an
example. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Pet. 2. 21. that its Laws are not so full as those writ
in the Mind and Heart by the Inward Word; and that it is not therefore the
complete Rule of Conscience.

27. Mr. Keith in his Wisdom, being conscious of this Truth (for he had
formerly taught Immediate. Revel. page 96. that he that seeks for the Light in
the writtin outward Word and for Life, or to get Life, or be Born again by it,
seeks the living among the dead; the Light being not therein but in Christ, the
Inward Word) adds to this Doctrine of his, page 9. and 11. that the Knowledge
and the Faith of the Mysteries and things revealed in the Scriptures, (which he
relates page 10.) are given us by the Word Preached and heard outwardly, with
the illumination and working of the Spirit, or Word of God inwardly: And would
not have any think (Retract. p. 12.) that he relinquisheth God's inward
Revelation, and teachings by his Spirit. Joining here both the inward and
outward word together, as necessary for Faith and the right understanding of
the Scriptures, etc. but ascribing Faith before wholly to the outward Word.
Thus affirming in one place that which he will not confess, but denies in the
other, and confounding both at last, I mean both the inward and outward Word,
to confound and surprise the unwary; and to leave some holes open for himself
to evade at. For if both necessary for understanding and Faith, why does he lay
such stress upon the outward elsewhere, saying it is the complete and adequate
Rule of Faith? And what has this Learned Man disputed for all the while?

28. The Truth is, that both these words do very well together, being the two
witnesses that do testify of Christ. Joh. 5. 39. 15. 26, 27. and in the Mouth
of which two, every word which we read in the one is confirmed, Chapter 8. 17. But
the outward word alone is far from being capable of guiding into the Truth of
what it says or relates, of convincing, and being the full rule of the
Conscience. Being but like a Parable, or dark to natural Men. Mark 4. 11. 1
Cor. 2. 14. who (witness all the errors of so many Christian Sects) cannot find
the Truth by it: and imperfect of it self, teaching no where (for instance)
what are the fiery Trial, and those Sufferings of Christ, St. Peter makes
mention of, 1 Ep. 4. 12. and how God has brought himself into Nature, and into
Man and the World: What death Adam died of on the day he Transgressed. Genesis 2.
17. what was the Sin of Angels, and many other such things. Besides, as I have
showed by several instances, it is not well translated, nor divided in Verses,
making two Verses of one; as of the 15. and 16. of the 2d of Romans, which
ought to be but one Verse. And over and above this, it is contradictory;
containing contradictions by no means reconcilable: Such as between, Act. 9.
V. 7. where it is said, that the Men which were with Paul heard the voice that
spoke with him; and, Act. 22. 9. which says, that they heard it not: And above
a hundred such, which I have collected, not to pick holes in Scripture, for
they do rather confirm the Truth of it in the main, than blast its Authority;
for it shows that its Penmen did not combine together to make a formal story,
or they had agreed better: And why should I be more offended at Christ as God,
for so many faults and lies put upon him in that word, and made by the
Transcribers; than for all the Sufferings put upon him in his Flesh, Matthew. 11.
6. I see him through them all, believing no more in him at the word in the
Scriptures; but because I know him, and could as well as others demonstrate him
to the Jews, if there were no more Scriptures left to prove him in the World.
Though they serve me still to do what I do here with them, viz. to confirm and to
prove to those that make use of them; the Doctrine and the Notions the inward
word suggests me.

29. The way for a Man to know the Will and Doctrine of God, and direct his
ways by it according to Gods own Word; is not so much to peruse and to study
the Scriptures, as to do the Will of Christ, Joh. 7. 17. that Will or Law which
the Light of Nature shows and dictates; and to follow, and to work what it
suggests to be good, as many Wise Heathens did. Act. 10. 2. For any Man that
does so is acceptable to God V. 35. and God loves him, and meets him, and makes
himself and his Will known or manifest to him. Esa. 64. 5. Joh. 14. 21, 23.
Whilst the Readers of the Word remain in their Ignorance and Sin; are not
justified by the Sufferings of Christ, Romans 2. 13. nor perconsequent by him
made Wiser or enlightened: as appears from all those Sects who keep their false
Opinions, though they have read, and peruse, and hear the Scriptures Preached.
The Will of God is, says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. our Sanctification, or that we
should become good; for God has no other will but that good should take place
of, and overcome the Evil. Rom 12. 21. which Will every Man knows by his Light
without Scripture. A better Rule than Scripture to know the Will of God by, is
to learn what our Will and Lust and desire is, and to do nothing of it, but to
do, or endeavor to do, that which we would not, Chapter 7. 20. and to War and
Fight always against our fleshly Mind, V. 23. Chapter 8. 7. and to carry if we can,
that Captivity Captive by the strength of Gods Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. which he
gives more willingly to them that ask him in Faith, than a Father or Mother do
good things to their Children, Matthew. 7. 11. Luke 11. 13.

30. The Scripture is positive that the Holy Ghost teaches all things, guides
into all Truth (both Natural and Divine; for the Word of Christ is all, and
Christ himself Excepts none) searches the deep things of God, and shows even
things to come to such as are born of it: becoming (...), a discerning Faculty,
in the Soul that receives it. 1 John 5. 20. So that the Disciples of Christ
have no need to go to learn of any other Master, School, or University than of
Christ, and his Spirit in their Heart, the inward Word. Matthew. 23. 8. By him
being taught of God. Joh. 6. 45. Hebr. 8. 11. all Wisdom and all Knowledge.
Col. 1. 9. And it has been fully proved in the Eternal Gospel (of which a
Messenger took near 1500 Copies) that the Holy Ghost is still given to all the
Faithful; and that in the same manner and measure as formerly to the Primitive
Christians, when they believe equally; that is, go from faith to faith, follow
Christ under the Cross in the Regeneration or second Birth of Water, in a true
resignation of their own will to God's will, as much as those Christians did.
For man must be born of it (the Spirit) to be saved. Joh. 3. 5. and as
Salvation it self consists in Righteousness through the gift of that Spirit;
Romans 14. 17. all they that will be saved must have it and receive it to work
righteousness by it; and become righteous, and shine in Glory, or be saved.
Matthew. 13. 43. The gift and receipt of it is the fulfilling of the Promise made
to Man through Christ. Luke. 24. 49. Act. 1. 4, 5. 2. 17. and this same Promise
of it being made to all Mankind, it belongs to all Mankind, to us, and our
Children, and to as many as God shall ever call, and believe. v. 39. and so all
men may have it, and not only what they now call its ordinary gift; but also
all the other called extraordinary, of Healing, Tongues, Prophecy, Wisdom,
casting out Devils, and other Signs and Miracles; if they will believe in
Christ, and take the right way and means fit to get and obtain it, which are
dying to their will, and becoming like Water, that they may be born of it: for
according to St. Mark 16. 17. Christ says positively so. And St. Peter
confirms it. Act. 10. 47. 11. 15. 15. 8. by saying that God gave it to the
Gentiles that believed, not only (...) and (...), but (...), secundum modum
nostrum says he, in the same measure as it fell on us at first. And the
Scriptures say the same, teaching that all the Churches of Samaria. Act. 8. 12,
16, 17. Antioch, Chapter 13, 12. Galatia Gal. 3. 2, 3, 5. Corinthus. 1 Cor 6. 11.
19. Rome 8. 11. and Thessalonica, 2 Thessalonians 2. 13. (Not only the Apostles, and
the 120, who were all with one accord. Act. 1. 14, 15. filled with the Holy
Ghost. Chapter 2. 4.) received the holy Ghost in the same way and measure as those
first believers did, Chapter 10. 46. 19. 6. Gal. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 7. God putting no
difference between them that purify their hearts by their Faith, and Us, says
St. Peter of himself and the other Apostles. Act. 15. 9. but giving them the
Spirit even as to us at first, in witness that their Faith was as strong and
great as ours. Thus giving it to all men: and sealing all that believe with
that Spirit of Promise. Ephesians. 4. 30. and with a Portion equal to that of the
Apostles, when they believe equally; and never permitting it to cease amongst
Believers, except they cease to believe. Hence the reason why it has ceased
amongst us is plain.

31. I must here by the by take notice of these two things; first, that Mr.
Keith tending to debase the inward word, and to extol the outward by ascribing
it the Title and Property of the first, calls this a Revelation, which is a
giving of Sight, or taking off of a Vail, to make one see and perceive the
Things lay hid under it; and herein he shows his End and Mistake at the same
time; for sight, as it has been showed, Hearing and Understanding, come not
from the outward Word; and the Scripture it self is but a Parable or Enigme, to
him that has not the Key that lets into God's Kingdom. Mark 4. 11. to wit, the
Holy Spirit. Joh. 3. 5. like the Philosophers Books of the Philosophers Stone,
where none but the Sons of Art find out the hidden Secret: and like the
Revelation of St. John concerning Christ; which, though the Revelation of Christ,
and of many things are come to pass already. Rev. 1. 1. since they were to be
shortly after they were written, yet is understood of none but such as the Lamb
of God opens the Seals of it for, Chapter 5. 5, 6. all Revelation, or Light
belonging to the Spirits, which be sends in all the Earth. If Mr. Keith, by
turning Churchman had got the new Name, and the Manna promised. Rev. 2. 17. or
were what he says he is, that is, further enlightened (he says so, page 14.)
he would understand better what a Revelation is.

32. Secondly, to the same end, he makes of the Light within, (which I have
declared in the 116. to be natural in all, and supernatural in the Regenerated)
but one part of what it is, that is, the same, and no more than the Light of
Nature is: saying in the 9th page, That the utmost extent that this Light
within goes to without Illumination, and the light of the Scripture, is no
more than the Righteousness of the Moral law, and terms of the first Covenant,
do and live: and arguing against it, as taking it for granted that the Quakers
make of it the same as he does himself, and allow no distinction between it and
the other. (This he says, page 11.) whereas the first Covenant, and the
Righteousness of it could never be fulfilled by all the Wit and Power comes
from the Light of Nature without that by Grace in Christ. And the Quakers
Practice shows that this is but a Cavil: For they not only pretend to more
Light than all men have before they are enlightened; that is to say, to more
than any Man has from Nature, [but think that they are the People, Joh 12. 2.
which has engrossed Wisdom and God's Spirit to themselves:] and teach that all
men must come to their Light to be saved. Whereby it appears they make of their
Light within much more than of the Light of Nature; and than Mr. Keith would
make us believe they take it for. What their own Light really is, I will not
determine. But it is a great Mistake to allow no more to that which they call
the Light within than to the Light of Nature; For the Point is not whether the
Light they actually have be that they pretend to have; but if that Light which
they call by the Name of Light within be that which they say it is; viz. above
the outward Word. And what is the falsity, or the right, or the wrong of their
Pretenses to Truth, and to us, more than is that of so many other Sects, which
we take no Notice of; that we should be concerned against it for Mr. Keith? But
his End is not so much the detecting of Errors and Lies, as to make a Noise to
be taken notice of; so any thing serves his Turn to build a Quarrel upon: a
great Part of his Sermon, being all upon himself, having so little of his Text,
that except he and his Church be the Text he preached upon, we may very well
call it a Text without a Sermon; a Sermon without a Text; whereof the
Application is to be made from Matthew. 19. 27. Such is this worthy Divine's good
Conversation in Christ!

33. Should he not as a Divine, have treated, exprosesso, of a good
Conversation; What St. Peter means by it; and that it ought to be as in the
presence of God, like that of the old Seers or Believers, Elijah, 1 Kings 17.
1. Enoch. Genesis 5. 24. Noah, Chapter 6. 9. and others; Heavenly or in Heaven. Phil.
3. 20. and not upon Earthly things. V. 19. as becomes the Gospel, Chapter 1. 27.
which forbids Preachers to go from one Sect to another, or from a Poor Benefice
or Parish to a better, but to be contented with what such Sect can afford. Luke
10. 7. and bids them to bear the Cross. Matthew. 10. 38. or to put their Will and
Mind in the Sufferings of Christ, not into Honor and Praise, Joh. 5. 44. and
to Fight, and help others to stand, Fight and overcome the Nations, Rev. 2. 26.
that is, those Lusts rise and War in their Members. Jam. 4. 1. and carry the
Soul Captive; and to put off the old Man, that they may put on the New, and
become a New Creature. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Nothing but the new Creature, and the
Regeneration, which makes such, avail in Christ. Gal. 6. 15. and to Fight and
overcome, to Sanctify, Purify, and evacuate by Faith the Heart of all that
fills it, is, says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. the Will of God; what he requires of
us, and would have Preachers to teach: Avoiding foolish Questions which gender
nothing but Strifes. 2 Timothy 2. 23. yet of all this, very little or nothing in
Keith's Sermons, but disputes and contention (which Create a Confusion and
every evil Work. Jam. 3. 16.) for outward Ceremonies, and about the outward
word Regenerating of Souls; to wit, of such an outward and superficial new
Birth, as is that which Mr. Keith is acquainted with of late. What will avail
his Hearers and others at the last day to know his Learned Reasons, for a set
form of Prayers, and all the Formalities of the now Church of England?

34. Surely a Man may serve God, work Righteousness, overcome and be
regenerated, without changing or turning or going from Sect to Sect; and
thereby be accepted with God, as Cornelius. Act. 10. 35. and so be of the true
Church, and of the true Religion in any Sect or Nation. And I am full persuaded
Mr. Keith had done as well in point of Conversation to stay amongst the
Quakers, or amongst those other Sects which he was a Member of before he turned
Quaker; And to let his Light so shine amongst them that they might see and
imitate his good Works. Matthew. 5. 16. as to plead for Baalim, that is, for the
Lords Bishops, and the dead and outward word against the Living Spirit; which
they maintain has ceased since the Primitive Christians as Dr. Hicks his
Sermon at St. Marys in Oxford, and the Vicar of Westham's before My Lord of
London, Printed with approbation of Superiors; show they do; as to Print, page
10 and 11. that the Word or Light within, whatsoever worth or force they may
ascribe unto it, does not teach the Mystery of the Incarnation, for instance,
to the Wise men, without the help of Scripture; and as to curry favor with
Men, in hope of getting an equivalent to that which makes the Priests Heart
glad. Judge. 18. 18. 20. for St. Paul did not do so when he Preached the Spirit,
2 Cor. 3. 6. and has left him a Warrant for Preaching quite otherwise Gal. 1.
8. Pray, if it be not lawful for the Members of your Church to rejoyn
themselves to Rome; because it enjoins many gross errors in its Worship, as you
allege in your third Sermon, page 25. is it not lawful for those who see the
same in your Church, to keep where and as they are?

25. If an enlightened Conscience be the only good Conscience (for he makes
Light, page 6. the best ingredient of it) it seems he has himself had no good
Conscience hitherto, before this last Turn of his; for he was not enlightened
till then, as he confesses, page 14. where he says, but now with a good
Conscience being farther (I bless God) enlightened, I have declared for, and
joined in Communion with her, the Church of England. And I see not which way he
can pretend otherwise; for in a Treatise of his, called Help in time of need,
in the 54. page he says, the word of command from the Lord which filled me
with Heavenly Joy and Comfort, came to me the 30th day of the 10th Month called
December, saying, show to the People of Scotland, several particulars seen
there, which he now unsaith: And in 78, 79. pages of the same, he says
further, and now whether ye will hear or whether ye will forbear, I declare
unto you in the Name, in the Power, and in the Authority of the Living God,
that the day (that is the coming of the Lord in the Spirit) is of a Truth broke
up amongst us, (Quakers) and ye shall look till your Eyes fail you, and rot
within their holes, e're ever you see another day or appearance of Jesus
Christ, than what we the People of God, called Quakers, do wittness of, come.
Which is a Lie in the name of the Lord with a vengeance, if he be now in the
right; for he now concradicts this, and a Man cannot tell Lies, and in the name
of the Lord, and yet have a good Conscience. Also in his Book, called, Immed.
Revelation, page 136. he says, that upon this hinge, of denying the teachings
and rule of the inward word, which he now denies himself, depends the Theology
and the Clergy of that Church he now patrocinates for, making it a Lie
therefore by his unsaying it now; and thus by his destroying of what he had
before built, makes himself a Transgressor, a Man of no good Conscience, Gal.
2. 18. to get himself such name as the Builders in Babel aimed at, and have
obtained. Genesis 11. 4. of Builders; by destroying the building of other Sects;
and of Hunters and Drivers of other Nations or Sects. Chapter 10. 9, 10. But what
did their Policy and their Cunning amount to? First they were, as all Sects
are, confounded in their Language, in Doctrine and Opinion; understood not each
other, then were scattered abroad, and at last came to nothing. And so will Mr.
Keith do. His building of Stubble and Hay, for the Lucre of Honor and
Applause, and earthly things; will prove at last nothing but a glorying in his
own shame. 1 Cor. 3. 12. Phil. 3. 19. The great Drivers of the World and their
Wisdom come to naught 1 Cor. 2. 6. He that speaks lies shall perish. Prove. 19.
9. Woe be to them, Mr. Keith, by whom such Offenses come! Matthew. 18. 7.

36. If none but enlightened men, such as have a good measure of true Knowledge
(page 6.) have a good Conscience indeed, the World is in a sad Pickle, for
those Men being the same as the Regenerated, for no Man is Enlightened but by
being Born again of Water and of Spirit; they are as scarce in the World as the
Saints who go from it to the Deserts and Mountains Heb. 11. 38. at which rate a
good Conscience is scarce to be found in it. But by his leave, if a Man,
whether Heathen or Christian, has like St. Paul, Act. 24. 16. A Conscience
void of Offense toward God and toward Men, according to the Light he has in
him; that is to say, if his Light within does not accuse him, his Conscience
excuses him, Romans 2. 15. and he has a good Conscience. It is strange that Mr.
Keith should come to any new Light, and a good Conscience therewith, by
opposing of that Light, and turning from those own it to those who deny the
same! And that he having begun by the way of the Spirit, should think to be
made perfect, against St. Paul's Opinion, Gal. 3. 3. by the Flesh; a carnal
Mind, Lip-labor, Formalities, and carnal Ordinances, which cannot make Man
perfect as concerning the Conscience. Hebr. 9. 10. Perfection or Salvation
which is in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17. being not got by those means! But they
that are of the World mind the World, and end with it: and say any thing for
it. And thus having confessed and come over to the Church of England, he shows
his deeds. Act. 18. 19.

37. Mr. Keith, to crown his works of lessening the Inward word, reckons for
an Advantage accruing by the Outward that Christians, by having it, enjoy the
same Privilege which was granted to the Jews, to have the Oracles of God, and
the exceeding great and precious Promises, which he quotes St. Peter for, 2 Ep.
1. 4. though his meaning in that place being, not of the Promise, but of the
Effect of it, to wit of the Holy Ghost, and of escaping by it the pollutions of
the World, to partake of the Divine Nature, and become Holy; is nothing to the
purpose. And the Jews received it not, Hebr. 11. 39. because it was not given
but since Christ was glorified. Joh. 7. 39. and ascended to Heaven. Ephesians. 4. 8.
And in all former Ages the Mysteries known by Christ were not yet made known to
Man. Chapter 3. 4, 5. as in these last days where God speaks to us by his Son.
Hebr. 1. 2. So that Christians who enjoy the effect of the Promise; and who may
have God himself speaking in them by his Son; have a greater Privilege, and
not the same as the Jews. And if they had but the same outward word, and God's
Oracles from between the Cherubims, what signifies the promise, Isai. 54. 13.
Hebr. 8. 10, 11. of being all taught of God, so that they should no more need
to be taught of other Men; of being made Priests to God, Rev. 5. 10. to be able
to teach themselves, and to keep knowledge themselves. Mal. 2. 7. and to have
the Law of God written in their own Hearts. If that Law in the Heart were as he
teaches, page 12. but the bare transcript of that written in the Scriptures;
and the Spirit served but to soften the Heart of Man, the Heart would receive
no more than that word it self contains; whereas it can receive more, for a Man
may know all things; and those other things not yet revealed in the Scriptures,
which Christ left to the Spirit. Joh. 14. 26. 16. 12, 13. and the Spirit
searches all, Cor. 2. 10. even Mr. Keith himself. V. 15. and prophecyeth this
of him, Mr. Keith is Mr. Keith, and will be Mr. Keith still.

38. Other things of the same stamp as these might be collected out of the
three said Sermons and Reasons of Mr. Keith, and remarks made upon them: as
upon all that he says about a formal worship, outward shows, Ceremonies, and
all the Rites of his Church. But having been refuted by other in all Ages, I
think it not worth while to trouble the Reader with them; and these few things
sufficing to show how much the Quakers have lost by losing of him, and what a
purchase he is like to prove to the other side; I will only add here with St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 8. that bodily Exercise profits little. And that since the
time of Christ, God being to be served and worshipped in Spirit. Joh. 4. 24.
and neither in this Mountain nor yet at Jerusalem. V. 21. that is neither in
this Sect nor in that Sect, Church or Temple, but any where in Spirit, in the
Heart, in the Closet, Matthew. 6. 7. between the Soul and her Spouse; it were
much to be wished that Mother Church would set up for a Spiritual Worship; and
that every Christian setting it up for himself, would cease to heap to himself
Teachers (whose Business it is, to turn away from the Truth, those Men that
have itching Ears) and to give heed to any of those seduceing Spirits, who
speak in Hypocrisy against Spiritual Worship. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 4. 3. God
dwells no more in Temples or in Churches made with hands. Act. 7. 48. 17. 24.
And will have a Spiritual Priesthood, a Kingdom of Priests. Exodus 19. 6. Such
as the first Christians were. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Anointed with the Spirit; that being
conform to him, or Spiritual as he is; they may walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25.
and serve him in the Newness of the Spirit that gives Life, and no more in the
oldness of the Letter, that Kills. Romans 7. 6. 2 Cor. 3. 6. O House of Jacob,
come ye, and let us live in Spirit, and walk in the Light of God. Isa. 2. 5.
Spiritualizing of Men is the true way to Greatness for Preachers and Believers:
and what Mr. Keith should do if he would be Great indeed. Matthew. 5. 19. But
what he will never do, till he become in earnest one of the Children of Light.
Except our Righteousness exceed that of the Clergy, the Ancient and Modern
Scribes (for Christ spoke this for all times, Mark. 13. 37. and so meant it of
the Scribes or Clergymen of all times) we shall in no case, Enter into the
Kingdom of God. Matthew 5. 20. Woe be to us if we don't Exceed them! and whilst we
stand seeking the Law at their Mouth, and waiting for their Oracles, instead of
passing from them, as the Spouse in the Canticles! 3. 4.

39. And truly they that argue against Spiritual Worship for the blind
Ceremonies and Rites of the Jewish Church (which had not yet the Spirit Joh. 7.
39. Heb. 11. 39. what ever Keith may argue for it in his two Sermons in
Bottolph-lane, May, the 12th) are no Ministers of Christ; whose work is to set
Men free from the Pedagogy, and the Yoke and the Bondage of Carnal Ordinances
Gal. 4. 24. and bring them to Perfection. Heb. 6. 1, 2. And the State of
Liberty. Romans 8. 21. But of Antichrist only, who resists the Spirit that he
may set up the Calves, and all the Works of the Flesh, which come in with their
Worship; and bring Man from Perfection and the Spirituality, to a Carnal state
again; and to the Jewish, Heathenish, and Popish Idolatry. For it is one of the
Works of his Father the Divil Joh. 8. 44. which Christ is come to destroy. 1 John 3. 8. to bring down Spiritual things from their spirituality to their
materiality; to a crust and an outside; that he may vail and cover from Men
their inward Substance; and make Man, whose Soul and mind is already by the
fall too much turned outwardly and running on outward things, acquiesce in
their outside, shells, shadows and coverings; and to remain as he is in the
state he was born in, like the Colt of a wild Ass. Joh 11. 12. a Beast that
never attempts to rise up to Light and Life. O how happy were Mankind if they
had no such Priests! Or if he were not by them compelled to become a Beast!
Bestiae sint bestiae sed sinant bestiae hominem homo esse.

40. Mr. Keith has justified himself enough before Men; but God when he
judges Men, will show whether he be Wise. Dan. 12. 3. This I will say for him,
he is as wise as he was when of the Presbyterian or Quaker Church or Party; but
that a good Bishopric would much Clarify his Head; or make of him a Virum
Clariorem than he is; the Mitre, which is shaped like the flames it betokens
Act. 2. 3. having a strange Energy from its configuration, in brightning of
obscure heads. And I will lay with him that, for all the Enlightening he has
newly received by becoming a Churchman, he cannot give an Account of the
Necessity and Reasons why Christ, being very God of very God, left his Glory
and died: though I have said enough of that here in this Paper, to show him, and
direct him how to find out this Enigme.

FINIS.

