The dying Young Man, and the obdurate Maid,
OR, A strange and wonderful Relation of a Young Man that dyed for love about
the midest of this present June, with the Maids perplexity for loss of her
love, and how likely she is to die for the same cause worthy the view of all
young men and Maids both in Country and City, delightful to all, hurtful to
none.

To the Tune of, Fancies Phoenix.


COme you young men and maidens fair
For unto you I will now declare,
And likewise I will hear unfold,
As true a tale as er^ was told,
Of a young man that often did cry,
Sweet grant me love or else I dye.
Fair Maids I pray you lend an ear,
And you the truth thereof shall hear,
And of these times come take a view,
No damage thereby will ensue,
Admit not your love too often to cry,
Sweet yield Relief or else I dye.

The young man's Complaint. Dear love when first I cast mine eye,
Upon thy feature and beauty
My heart did burn in such a flame,
That I could never quench the same,
And does continue constantly,
Sweet yield Relief or else I dye.

Maids reply. King Sir your mind I will make known,
The less you^r mine the more your own,
For on that side I cannot hear,
Yet thank you kindly for your fear,
No cause at all I can espy,
For to give credit to your cry.

Man. Dear Love thou lodgest in my heart,
And from thence shall never depart,
Dread Cupit has wounded me so,
Then do not prove my mortal fo,
Which forces me inceasantly,
To cry sweet love me or I dye,

Maid. Sweet Sir your suit is all in vain,
Without a cause you do complain,
Young Men I know can counterfeit
And seem to be lovers complete
Us silly Maidens for to try,
But we their actions do defy.

Man. Dear love do not obdurate prove,
But this my woe and grief remove,
And ease me now that am oprest,
So that I may have peace and rest,
For in thy love my heart does fry,
Sweet yield relief or else I die,

Maid. Sir to me you a stranger are,
Then wherefore for me should you care,
Some thing to mitigate your pain,
Come home I will you entertain,
If I may prove the remedy,
You for love shall never dye.

Man. Then receive this kiss my dear,
That I give the in token here,
I love thee dearer then my life,
Intending to make thee my wife
Ten thousand times happy am I,
That thou love me assuredly.

The second part,
To the same Tune




HE kept his time and to her came
But she proved a scornfu^ dame,
Her entertainment was harsh and course
And her reproaches ten times worse,
Farwell deer heart thus did he cry,
It Is for thy love that I must dye.
Straight home he came and went to bed,
Whereupon fancies still he fed,
And for twelve days he there did ly,
In griveous woe and misery,
And ever and anon did cry,
It Is for thy love that I must dye.

Four lines apiece of the four following verses, was found written in his own
Trunck, since his departure.

His Complaint. THy heart is harder far then flint,
And will not suffer Cupits plint,
But vears his Arrows back to Jove,
Hard hearted thou that can not love,
My life is now in Ieoperdy,
It Is for thy love that I must dye.
And when I dye true lovers mourn,
Deck all your heads with witherd corn,
Wear on each hand a sable glove,
To testify I dyed for love,
Proclaim it in the strees and cry,
It Was for her love that I did dye.
Then bear me softly by her door,
And with your mourning breads deplore,
Cry loud look down you gods above,
On her that kills him for her love,
To all the world go testify,
It Was for her love that I did dye.
Last build my Tomb of lovers bones,
Laid round about with marble stones,
My Schoshon being a Venus Dove
To signify I dyed for love,
For whilst I live in flames I fry,
And so farewell lo here I dye.

Imediately in came the Maid,
His Cofin made heart to dread,
And to inquire who there did die,
That within that house did ly,
She being told wept bitterly,
And said I do deserve to dye.
And since that hour continues still,
Beyond any Physicians skill,
Her sorrows daily do increase,
Her burning feavors do not cease,
She frets and grieves unceasantly,
Confessing she deserves to dye.
Young men and maids that love intend,
These lines unto you I commend,
To those that love you prove most true,
And do not change them for a n^w,
Give ear to those that truth does tell,
And so I bid you all farwell.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White-Lyon near Py-Corner.


