A DECLARATION OF THE Lord General and his Council of Officers; Showing the
Grounds and Reasons for the Dissolution of the late PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed by Hen. Hills, and Tho. Brewster, Printers to the ARMY: And
by special Order Reprinted at Dublin, by Will. Bladen, 1653.

A Declaration of the Lord General and his Council of Officers.
OUR Intention is not to give an account at this time, of the grounds which
first moved us to take up Arms, and engage our lives and all that was dear unto
us in this cause; nor to mind in this Declaration the various Dispensations
through which Divine Providence has led us, or the witness the Lord has born,
and the many signal testimonies of acceptance, which he has given to the
sincere endeavors of his unworthie servants, whilst they were contesting with
the many and great difficulties as well in the Wars, as other transactions in
the three Nations: being necessitated, for the defense of the same cause they
first asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions, the same being
evident by former Declarations published on that behalf.

After it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland,
but so marvellously to appear for his People at Worster, that those Nations
were reduced to a great degree of Peace, and England to perfect quiet, and
thereby the Parliament had opportunity to give the People the harvest of all
their labor, blood, and treasure, and to settle a due liberty both in
reference to Civil and Spiritual things, whereunto they were obliged by their
duty, their engagements, as also the great and wonderful things which God had
wrought for them, it was matter of much grief to the good and well affected of
the Land, to observe the little progress which was made therein, who thereupon
applied to the Army, expecting redress by their means: notwithstanding which,
the Army being unwilling to meddle with the Civil Authority, in matters so
properly appertaining to it, it was agreed, That his Excellency and Officers
of the Army, which were members of Parl. should be desired to move the
Parliament to proceed vigorously in reforming what was amiss in Government, and
to the settling of the Commonwealth (...) a foundation of Justice and
Righteousness, which having done we hoped that the Parliament would seasonably
have answered our expectation: but finding (to our grief) delays therein, we
renewed our desires in an humble Petition to them, which was Presented in
August last, and although they at that time signifying their good acceptance
thereof returned he thanks, and referred the particulars thereof to a Committee
of the House, yet no confiderable effect was produced, nor any such progress
made, as might implie their real intentions to accomplish what was Petitioned
for: but on the contrary there more and more appeared amongst them an Aversion
to the things themselves, with much bitterness and opposition to the people of
God, and his Spirit acting in them, which grew so prevalent, that those Persons
of Honor and Integrity amongst them, who had eminently appeared for God and
the Public good, both before and throughout this War, were rendered of no
further use in Parliament, than by meeting with a corrupt Party to give them
countenance to carry on their ends; and for effecting the desire they had of
perpetuating themselves in the Supreme Government. For which purpose the said
Party long opposed, and frequently declared themselves against having a new
Representative: and when they saw themselves necessitated to take that Bill
into Consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the House with
Persons of the same spirit and temper, thereby to perpetuate their own fitting.
Which intention diverse of the activest amongst them did manifest, laboring to
persuade others to a consent therein: And the better to effect this, diverse
Petitions preparing from several Counties for the continuance of this
Parliament, were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what fitting means and remedy might
be applied to prevent the same: But such endeavors proving altogether
ineffectual; it became most evident to the Army, as they doubt not it also is
to all considering Persons, that this Parliament through the corruption of
some, the jealousy of others, the (...) attendance and negligence of many
(...) answer those ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation, expected
from them: But that this Cause which the Lord has so greatly blessed, and bore
witness to, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees be wholly
lost, and (...), liberties, and comforts of his People delivered into their
Enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest People of this
Nation, as well as by the Army, and Wisdom and Direction being sought from the
Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen so much of the
power and presence of God going along with us, to consider of some more
effectual means to secure the Cause, which the good People of this
Commonwealth had been so long engaged in, and to establish Righteousness and
Peace in these Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, and agreed upon, That the
Supreme Authority should be by the Parliament devolved upon known Persons, men
fearing God, and of approved integrity, and the Government of the
Commonwealth committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful way to
encourage and countenance all Gods People, Reform the Law, and administer
Justice impartially: hoping thereby the People might forget Monarchy, and
understanding their true interest in the Election of successive Parliaments,
may have the Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this
glorious Cause, or necessitating to keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about Twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
Conference, with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and justness
of our Proposals on that behalf: and did evidence than those, and not the Act
under their Consideration, would most probably bring forth something answerable
to that Work, the foundation whereof, God himself has laid, and is now
carrying on in the World.

The which notwithstanding found no acceptance, but instead thereof, it was
offered, That the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being
that from which We might reasonably expect all good things. And this being
vehemently insisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions; That nor
any love to Representative, but the making use thereof, to recruite, and so to
perpetuate themselves, was their aim.

They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, That neither the Nation,
the honest Interest, nor We our selves, would be deluded by such dealings: They
did agree to meet again the next day in the afternoon for mutual satisfaction,
it being consented to by the Members present, that Endeavors should be used,
that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament, that might exclude
or frustrate the Proposals before mentioned.

Notwithstanding this, the next morning the Parliament did make more haste than
usual, in carrying on their said Act, being helped on there in by some of the
Persons engaged to us the night before, none of them which were then present
endeavoring to oppose the same; and being ready to put the main Question for
consummating the said Act, whereby out aforesaid Proposals would have been
rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full Debate in
Parliament obstructed.

For preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences, which must upon
the grounds aforesaid, have ensued, and whereby at one blow the interest of all
honest men, and of this glorious Cause, had been endangered to be laid in the
dust, and these Nations imbroyled in new Troubles, at a time when our Enemies
abroad are watching all advantages against us, and some of them actually
engaged in War with us; We have been necessitated, though with much
reluctancie, to put an end to this Parliament; which yet We have done (we hope)
out of an honest heart; prefering this Cause above our names, lives, families
or interest how dear soever, with clear intentions, and real purposes of heart,
To call to the Government Persons of approved Fidelity and Honesty:
believing, That as none wise will expect to gather Grapes of Thorns, so Good
men will hope, That it Persons so qualified, be chosen, the fruits of a Just
and Righteous Reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will (by the blessing
of God) be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good hearts,
who have been panting after these things.

Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justify our
selves, by aspersing others, and raking into the MisGovernment of Affairs; but
we shall conclude with this. That as we have been led by Necessity and
Providence, to act as We have done, even beyond and above our own thoughts and
desires, so We shall and do, in that of this great Work which is behind, put
our selves wholly upon the Lord for a blessing; professing we look not to stand
one day without his support, much less to bring to pass any of the things
mentioned and desired, with out his assistance: And therefore do solemnly
desire and expect, That all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their
own destruction, should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to
follow their business with peaceable spirits; wherein, We promise them
Protection by his assistance.

And for those who profess their fear and love (...) the Name of God, that
seeing, in a great measure for their sakes, and for Righteousness sake, We have
taken our lives in our hands, to do these things, they would be instant with
the Lord day and night in Our behalf that We may obtain grace from him. And
seeing We have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least
dishonor thereunto, which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the
whole Profession of Godliness.

We beseech them also to live in all humility, meekness, righteousness, and
love one toward another, and toward all men, that so they may put to silence
the ignorance of the foolish, who falsely accuse them: and to know, That the
late great and glorious dispensations, where in the Lord has so wonderfully
appeared in bringing forth these things, by the travel and blood of his
Children, ought to oblige them so to walk in the wisdom and love of Christ, as
may cause others to honor their holy Profession, because they see Christ to be
in them of a truth.

We do further purpose before it be long more particularly to show the Grounds
of our Proceedings, and the Reasons of this late great. Action and Change,
which in this we have but hinted at.

And we do lastly Declare, That all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Committees, and Commissioners, and all other Civil Officers,
and Public Ministers whatsoever, within this Commonwealth, or any parts
thereof, do proceed in their respective Places and Offices: and all Persons
whatsoever, are to give Obedience to them as fully as when the Parliament was
sitting.

WHITE HALL, the 22 of April, 1653. Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment
of his Excellency the Lord General, and his Council of Officers. William
Malyn, Secret.

IRELAND.
By the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England for the Affairs of Ireland.
THe Declaration before going, coming to our knowledge, We hold it our duty to
Publish the same unto all who are entrusted with the Mannagement of Public
Affairs in this Country, and to mind them that it is now their duty (more
than ordinary) notwithstanding the present Alteration, to Act carefully and
industriousie in their several Charges, and diligently to discharge their
respective Trust; that the Common Enemy may not have Advantage from hence to
work new Disturbance against the Public Peace and Welfare: And that such as
are in the service of the Commonwealth in this Land, must expect to be called
to a strict account for their neglect herein. And in regard the present posture
of Affairs are such, as extraordinarily concern the Interest and Welfare of all
good People, We hold it our duty earnestly to exhort them unto a special
servent wrestling with the Lord, by humble Prayer and Supplication for Wisdom
and Strength unto those his Servants, on whom the Burden and Care of
preserving the Commonwealth in Peace, and settling the same in Rightousness,
does principally lie. For which end, We do appoint Wednesday the fourth of
May next, and that Day seven-night being the eleventh of May, to be set apart
for solemn seeking the face of the Lord by all his People in Ireland on that
behalf.

Dated at Dublin 29 of April, 1653. Charles Fleetwood Edm. Ludlow. Miles Corbe^
Io. Jones.


ORdered, That Mr Bladen Printer, do Print the Declaration from his Excellency
the Lord General, and his Counsel of Officers, together with this Order.

Charles Fleetwood. Edm. Ludlow. Miles Corbe^ Io. Jones.



