Anno Regni GULIELMI ET MARIAE, REGIS and REGINAE Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, SECUNDO. On the Twentieth Day of May, Anno Dom. 1690. In the
Second Year of Their Majesty's Reign, this ACT Passed the Royal Assent.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Printed at London, and Re-painted at Edinburgh by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Anno Dom. 1690.

Anno Secundo GVLIELMI and MARIAE, An Act for the Exercise of the Government by
Her Majesty during His Majesty's Absence.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in the first Year of Their Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and
Settling the Succession of the Crown, It is amongst other things Enacted,
Establ^shed and Declared, That the Crown and Regal Government of the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, shall be and
continue to Their said Maj^sties, and the Survivor of them during Their Lives,
and the Life of the Survivor of them, and that the Entire, Perfect and Full
Exercise of the Regal Power and Government, be only in, and Executed by His
Majesty, in the Names of both Their Majesty's, during Their joint Lives;

And whereas the King's most Excellent Majesty has Resolved to make a Royal
Voyage, and go in Person into Ireland, for the Speedy and Effectual Reducing of
that Kingdom to its due Obedience to Their Majesty's, and has likewise
Declared His Pleasure, to have the Administration of the Government in the
Hands of the Queens most Excellent Majesty, during His absence out of this
Kingdom.

Be it Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that
whenever, and as often as it shall happen that His said Majesty shall be
absent out of this Realm of England, It shall and may be Lawful for the Queens
Majesty to Exercise and Administer the Regal Power and Government of the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the
Plantations and Territories thereunto belonging, in the Names of both their
Majesty's for such time only, during Their joint Lives, as His said Majesty
shall be Absent, or continue out of this Realm of England; any thing in the
said Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall be taken or construed to
Exclud or Debar His Majesty during such His Absence out of this Realm, from the
Exercise or Administration of any Act or Acts of Regal Power or Government
within this Realm, the Kingdom of Ireland or any other Their Majesty's
Dominions whatsover; But that all and every such Act and Acts shall be as good
and effectual, as if His Majesty was within this Realm, and shall not be
Contradicted or Controlled but by His Majesty only; And neither the Passing of
this Act nor His Majesty's Royal Voyage or Absence out of this Realm, shall be
any way taken or construed to Dissolve this present Parliament, or Avoid or
Determine any Commission or Commissions, which have been or shall be Granted by
His or their Majesty's; Nor to Avoid any other Act or Acts of Government,
Executed by His Majesty.

Provided always, That as often as His Majestys, shall return into this Kingdom
of England, the sole Administeration of the Regal Power and Government thereof,
and all the dominions, Territories and Plantations thereunto belonging or
annexed, shall be in His Majesty only, as if this Act had never been made.

FINIS.

