The Deluded Lasses Lamentation: OR, The False Youth's Unkindness to his
Beloved Mistress.
To the Tune of Is she gone, let her go.
Licensed according to Order.





IS she gone? let her go, I do not care,
Though she has a dainty thing, I had my share:
She has more Land than I by one whole Acre,
I have plowed in her Ground, who will may take her.
Did not you promise me when you lay by me,
That you would Marry me, can you deny me?
If I did promise thee, 'twas but to try thee,
Bring in your Witness, for now I defy thee.
Did not you swear by the Powers above,
That you would Marry if I Would grant you love?
Of all fair Lasses I thought thee bonniest,
And would have married thee had thou kept honest.
'Twas your deluding Tongue made me miscarry,
Because you promised with me for to marry,
Had not you yielded so soon to lie by me,
Then to have Married I had not denied thee.




I never lay with Man, except it were you,
Not thinking you would have proved so untrue:
If to lie by me thou then had refused,
Then I thy Person sure never had abused.
You with the Art of a vigorous Lover,
Told me you pleasure and joys could discover;
But your false pleasure did last but a moment,
And for that pleasure I suffer more Torment.
Sweet fair charming Beauty you then had in store,
Had Virtue been added, there needed no more;
But if you had not been as willing as I,
You had not yielded with me for to lie.
Your promise made me to let ye lie by me,
I thought you constant, and could not deny thee;
But had I known the Intent of your Passion,
Thus for to grieve there had been no occasion.
Thou fond and foolish Girl, leave thy lamenting
When thou art wiser then I Will be Relenting;
When thou again art a Virgin I Will Wed thee,
And then with License I boldly may Bed thee.
You pleasure take to rail at my Misfortune,
Whilst my poor heart does ache to think of parti^^,
But since that you are resolved to fly me,
I hope no other Lass ever will lie by thee.
Farewell thou perjured Youth, false and deceitful,
I never thought you would have proved so ungrateful
First by deluding Words thus to deceive me,
Having obtained your ends, scornfully leave me.
Do but remember now when you came to me,
Every solemn Vow made to undo me;
By your alluring Charms I was invited,
You for my present Harms may be required.
Being the worst of Men, first to Defile me,
And this no sooner done, but straight revile me;
From which I perfectly now do discover,
You were no more at best, but a false Lover.
Let Lasses young and fair, that hears this Story,
Of a false Lover be ware, blast not your Glory;
For many young men will strive to deceive you,
And when they have their Will, streightway will leave you.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, I. Back.


