NISI DOMINVS FRVSTRA

blazon of city of Edinburgh
ACT Against Profaness.
Edinburgh, the 9. of August 1693.
THe which day, the Lord Provost, Baillies, Council and Deacons of Crafts,
Ordinar and Extraordinar, being conveened in Council, considering, that the
Profanation of the Lords Day, excessive drinking and drukenness, profane
Swearing and Cursing, and other Immoralities, are discharged by several Acts of
Parliament, under certain Penalties therein contained, and particularly, that
by the 3d Act of the sixth Parliament of King James the sixth; It is Statute
and Ordained, that there be no Mercats holden, nor handle-labouring, or working
used on the Sabbath Day, or passing to Alehouses or Taverns, or selling of
Meat or Drink; or wilful remaining from their Paroch-Church in time of Sermon,
under the respective penalties contained in the said Act: which Act is ratified
by the first Act of the thirteenth Parliament, and by the sixth Act of the
fourteenth Parliament of the said King James, as also particularly mentioned in
the eighteenth Act of the first Session of the first Parliament of King Charles
the second, whereby all former Acts made for Observation of the Sabbath Day are
ratified, and all keeping of Mercats, or using any sort of Merchandise on the
said day, and all other profanation thereof, is expressly discharged, under the
Penalty of Ten pounds Scots at least; And if the Party Offender be not able
to pay the Penalty foresaid, then to be examplary punished in his Body
according to the merit of his Fault: Likeas, by the Act, Ja. 6. Parl. 22. cap.
20. It is Statute, that persons convict of Drukenness, and haunting of Taverns
and Alehouses after Ten of the Clock at Night, or any time of the day, except
the time of Travel, or for refreshment, pay for the first Fault Three pounds
Scots, or be put in Jogs or Goal six hours: For the second five pounds, or be
put in Jogs or Goal twelve hours: And for the Third Ten pounds, or to be put in
Stocks or Goal tw(...) ^ours. And if they thereafter transgress, to be put in
Goal till they find Caution for their better Behavior. And that by the (...)
Parl. 1. Sess. 1. Cap. 19. All former Acts against Drunkenness are ratified.
And it is further Statute, that who drink to excess (...), the Noblemen twenty
pounds, the Barron twenty Merks, the Gentleman, Heretor or Burgess ten Merks,
the Yeoman for (...)ng, and the Servant twenty shilling toties quoties, and the
Minister the fifth part of his Stipend, and that those unable to pay be
punished in their Persons; Both which Acts are again ratified, Chapter 2d. Parl.
2d. Sess. 3d. Act 22. Likeas, by the Act and Mary, Parl. 5. Cap. 16. Profain
Swearing of abominable Oaths and detestable Execrations is forbid, under the
particular pains therein (...) pressed, which pains arising gradually, for the
repeated Transgressions do at length end in Banishment, or imprisonment for
year and day; Which Act, is by the Act. Ja. 6. Parl. 7. Cap. 103, ratified with
an Augmentation of the pains. And it is further Statute, that Magistrates to
Burgh and Landwart, appoint Censores in public Mercats and Fairs, with power
to exact the said pains, and that Householders dilate Offenders within their
House, under the pain to be esteemed as Offenders themselves. And the said Acts
against profain Swearing and Cursing are again ratified, Chapter 2. Parl. 1. Sess.
1. Act 19. Whereby it is further Statute, that who shall Blasphame, Swear or
Curse shall pay, the Noblemen twenty Pounds, the Barron twenty Merks, the
Gentleman, Heretor or Burgess ten Merks, the Yeamen forty shilling, the
Servant twenty shilling toties quoties, and the Minister the fifth part of his
Stipend, and the persons insolvent to be punished in their persons, which Acts
are of new ratified, Chapter 2d. Par. 2d. Sess. 3d. Cap. 22. All which Acts are
again ratified and revived by the 40 Act of the 4. Sess. of this current
Parliament, and Ordained to be put to strict Execution with all diligence:
Notwithstanding of all which Acts, and the most holy and express Law of God,
the Foundation thereof, and the many Promises and Threatenings contained in his
Word, for the establishing the same, Yet it is most manifest, and cannot be
enough regreted, that the aforesaid Transgressions and Excess do every where
abound, to the Dishonor of God, and the Reproach of the Protestant Religion.
Therefore the Lord Provost, Baillies, and Council of this Burgh, do hereby
declare, that they will be careful to see the foresaid Acts of Parliament
strictly observed, and the Pains thereof exacted, and execute within all their
Bounds and Suburbs, without Exception; And for the better Observance of the
foresaids Acts, made against the profanation of the Lords Day, they strictly
prohibit and discharge, all Persons whatsoever within this City or Suburbs
thereof to Brew, or to work any other handle-work, or labor on the Lords Day,
or to be found on the Streets standing or walking idly, or to go in Company,
or vage to the Castle-hill, public Yards or Fields on that day, at any time
thereof; And discharge all persons to go to Alehouses or Taverns, for Eating
or Drinking the time of Sermon, or unseasonably or unnecessarly at any time on
the Lords Day; And all Keepers of Taverns and Alehouses to sell any time of
the said day to the said Persons, any Meat or Dri^^ to be eaten or drunken
otherwise than as above expressed as also all persons to bring in Water from the
Wells to Houses on that day, in greater Quantities then single Pints;
Certifying all such persons who shall contraveen their presents, as also all
Parents and Masters, who shall not restrain their Children, Apprentices, and
Servants, that they shall be fined in Ten pounds Scots for every such Deed of
Contravention; And if the Party offender be not able to pay the Penalty
foresaid, then He or She shall be examplary punished in his or her Body,
according to the Merit of the Fault. And appoints this Act to be printed and
published, that none may pretend ignorance.

Extracted by AENEAS MCLEOD.
GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most Excellent
Majesty's. 1699.


