A Declaration of the Lords and Commons for the repayment of 40000 li. (out of
the first moneys raised upon the weekly Assessement) which the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London have engaged themselves forthwith to advance for the supply
of the Army under the command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex.
Die Mercurii, 5. April, 1643.
WHereas it was Ordained and declared upon the last day of February, 1642. by
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that all persons who had or
should lend any moneys toward the speedy making up of the sum of threescore
thousand pounds then desired, for the supply of the Army, should be repayed the
same with consideration for the forbearance thereof, after the rate of eight
pounds per Cent. out of the first moneys to be raised out of the weekly
Assessements by virtue of the late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament. And
whereas the said sum not being fully advanced, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, upon the motion and desires of diverse Members of both Houses of
Parliament, did cheerfully and unanimously consent to engage themselves for
forty thousand pounds, to be advanced forthwith for the supply of the said Army
raised by the Parliament, under the Command of his Excellency the Earl of
Essex, which is, and is understood and taken to be a very acceptable service,
especially at this time, and tends very much to the preservation of Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, and the safety of the Parliament City, and Kingdom; It
is thereupon ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that as well the money already lent toward the said threescore
thousand pounds, as also the said forty thousand pounds now to be advanced as
aforesaid, shall be repaid with consideration for the forbearance thereof,
after eight pounds per Cent. out of the first moneys to be raised on the said
weekly Assessements. And for their further security and encouragement, it is
likewise ordained and declared, that the weekly Assessements to be collected in
London and the Liberties, shall be paid to Sir John Wollaston Knight, John
Warner, John Towse, and Thomas Andrews, Aldermen, Treasurers in Guild Hall
London; who are hereby directed and appointed to repay the sums already lent
and to be advanced as aforesaid, according to the intent of this and the said
recited Ordinance. And that the said Treasurers shall not issue or pay forth
any part of the said moneys, to be raised on the said Assessements, for any
other purpose, until the said sums lent and to be lent, and advanced, be
fully satisfied with interest, as aforesaid; excepting only such moneys as are
appointed for the use of the City, which is to be issued out by them, according
to the said Ordinance made for the weekly Assessements.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentor.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning
23000 li. lately lent by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of London, to be
repaid out of the Debts and Rents of Houses gathered by the Collectors.
Die Sabbathi, 6. Maii, 1643.
WHereas upon a motion made by a Committee of Lords and Commons, in the name of
both Houses of Parliament, for the sum of threescore thousand pounds to be
advanced by the Citizens of London for supply of the necessities of the Army,
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and diverse of the Commons of the said City by virtue
of an Ordinance of the 28. of February last did advance 23000 li. or
thereabouts, which by another Ordinance of the 5. of April was to be repaid
together with 40000 li. more, or thereabouts, lent and advanced by the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen alone, with consideration for the forbearance thereof after
the rate of 8. per centum per annum for the same, out of the first moneys to be
raised by the weekly Assessement in the City of London and Liberties thereof.

And whereas the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, are contented that the
first three and twenty thousand pounds that shall be repaid out of the weekly
Assessements, shall be set apart to be forthwith sent to the Army to supply the
present pressing necessities thereof, and to be repaid the same after the said
40000 li. with the forbearance thereof, as aforesaid, is fully satisfied: And
whereas the Commons of London, in Common Counsel assembled, have undertaken to
do their utmost endeavor to advance and lend 17000 li. to be forthwith also
sent unto the Army, to be repaid with the 23000 li. as aforesaid.

All which advance of moneys is understood and taken to be a very acceptable
service, and tends very much to the preservation of Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and the safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom. It is
therefore ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that as well the said 23000 li. as also such other moneys as shall
be advanced as aforesaid, shall be repaid with consideration for the
forbearance thereof, after the rate as aforesaid, out of the first moneys to be
raised upon the weekly Assessement, to be collected in London and Liberties,
after the 40000 li. lent and advanced by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen is fully
satisfied as aforesaid, and out of the first money collected or to be collected
out of the weekly Assessements in the City of Westminister, the Borough of
Southwark, the several Parishes in the weekly Bills, and in the rest of the
County of Middlesex, as also in the Counties of Hertford, Essex and Suffolk, as
also out of the first moneys that shall be raised out of the Assessements of
such persons throughout the Kingdom (not above the twentieth part of their
estate, or the fifth part of their Annual revenue) as have not contributed upon
the Propositions of both Houses, or not proportionably to their Estates,
according to an Ordinance of the (...) of May: And for their further security
and encouragement, it is likewise ordained by the Lords and Commons aforesaid,
that as well Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, Treasurer of the Army, as also Sir
John Wollaston Knight, John Warner, John Towse, and Thomas Andrews, Aldermen
of the City of London, appointed Treasurers for the receipt of the said moneys
respectively, shall repay the said several sums as aforesaid, and shall not
issue the said moneys to any other purpose whatsoever, until the same shall be
fully satisfied as aforesaid. And it is further ordained, that such sums of
money as were advanced and not repaid, according to an Ordinance of the 29. of
November last, shall be repaid out of such moneys as are or shall be raised by
virtue of several Ordinances passed in and about the said November, for
assessing of such persons within the City of London and Liberties thereof (not
above the 20. part of their estates) as have not contributed upon the
Propositions of hoth Houses, or not proportionably to their estates, as also
out of such moneys as shall be raised by virtue of the aforesaid Ordinance of
the (...) of May aforesaid.


