DEFIANCE TO THE DUTCH.
Robbed of our Rights? and, By such Water-Rats?
We Will doff their Heads, if they will not doff their Hats.
Affront too Hogan-Mogan to endure!
It Is time to BOX these Butterboxes sure.
If they the Flagg's, undoubted Right, deny us;
Who will not Strike to us, must be stricken by us.
A Crew of Bores and Sooterkins, that know
Themselves, they to Our Blood and Valor owe!
Did We for this knock off their Spanish-Fetters,
To make 'um able to abuse their Betters?
If at this rate they Rave, I think it is good
Not to omit the Spring, but Let 'um Blood.
Rouse then Heroic Britains; it is not Words,
But Wounds, must Work with Leather-Apron-Lords.
They Are Deaf, and must be Talked withal; alas!
With Words of Iron spoke by Mouths of Brass.
I hope we shall to purpose the next Bout
Cure 'um, as we did Opdam, of the Gout.
And, when in the bottom of the Sea they come,
They Will have enough of Mare Liberum.
Our Brandisht steel, though now they seem so Tall,
Shall make 'um Lower than Low Countries Fall.
But they will ere long come to themselves you will see,
When we in earnest are at Snick a Snee:
When once the Bores perceive our Swords are drawn.
And we Converting are those Bores to Brawn.
Methinks the Ruin of their Belgick-Banners
(Last Fight, almost as Ragged as their Manners)
Might have Persuaded 'um to better things,
Than be so Saucy with the best of Kings.
Is it of Wealth they are so Proud become?
CHARLES has a Waine I hope to fetch it home;
And with it Pay Himself His Just Arrears
Of Fishing-Tribute for this Hundred years.
That we may say, as all the Store comes in,
The Dutch, alas, have but our Factors been:
They Fathom Sea and Land; We, when we please,
Have both the Indies brought to our Own Seas.
For Rich and Proud they bring in Ships by Shoules;
And then we Humble them to save their Souls.
'Pox of their Pictures; if we had 'um here
We Would find 'um Frames at Tyburne, or elsewhere.
The next they DRAW, be it their Admiralls
Transpeciated, into Fynnes, and Scales:
Or, which should do as well, DRAW, if they please,
Opdam, with the Seven Sinking Provinces;
Or DRAW their Captains from the Conquering Maine,
First Beaten Home, then beaten Back again.
Lastly, Remember, to prevent all Laughter,
Drawing goes First, but Hanging Follows after:
And after this so JUST, though FATAL Strife,
Draw their dead Bores again unto the LIFE.
If then, Lampooning thus be their Undoing,
Who pities them that Purchase their own Ruin?
Who will hereafter trust their Treacheries,
Unless they leave their Heads for Hostages?
For, as before of Women has been said,
Believe 'um not, nay, though ye think 'um dead.
The Dutch are Stubborn, and will yield no FRUIT,
Till, like the Wallnut-Tree, ye Beat 'um to it.
L. Orat. Injurias and non redditas Causam hujusce
Esse belli audisse videor.
With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for T. W. 1672.


