The Humble DESIRES and PROPOSITIONS For a safe and well-grounded PEACE, Agreed
upon by the mutual Advice and Consent of the PARLIAMETS of both Kingdoms,
United by Solemn League and Covenant.

Presented unto His Majesty at Oxford the 24. of November. last, by Committees
from both Houses of Parliament, and Commissioners from the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Together with an Order and several Votes of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, the 4. and 8. of this present October. 1645. for Delinquents to
compound according to the said Propositions, and to come in to the Parliament
before December next ensuing.

ORdered ( upon the Question) by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Propositions sent to His Majesty for a safe and well-grounded Peace, be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Essynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com

London, Printed for Edward Hushand, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 13. 1645.

WE Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects Assembled in the Parliaments of both Your
Kingdoms, from the sense of that Duty We owe unto Your Majesty, and of the deep
Sufferings and many Miseries under which Your People of all Your Kingdoms lie
bleeding in this unnatural War: After long and serious Consultation about the
best ways and means of their Preservation, and for settling Your Majesty's
Throne, and Your Subjects in Peace and Security; Have with common consent
resolved upon these Propositions, which we do humbly tender unto Your Majesty.

The Humble Desires and Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace, agreed
upon by the mutual advice and consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
united by Solemn League and Covenant, To be presented to His Majesty.
I.THat by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations and Proclamations against both or either of the Houses of the
Parliament of England; and the late Convention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament, or Conventions in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and proceedings, or against any for adhering unto them; and all
Indictments, Outlaries and Attainders against any for the said Causes, be
Declared Null, suppressed and forbidden; and that this be publicly intimated
in all Parish Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and all other places
needful.

II. That His Majesty according to the Laudable Example of His Royal Father of
happy Memory, may be pleased to Swear and Sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for injoyning the taking thereof by all the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms; And the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both
Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such penalties
as by mutual advice of both Kingdoms shall be agreed upon.

III. That the Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans and Subdeans,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons and Prebendaries, and all Chanters,
Chancellors, Treasurers, Subtreasurers, Succentors and Sacrists, and all Vicars
Chorall, and Choristers, Old-Vicars and New Vicars of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, and all other their under Officers, out of the Church of
England and Dominion of Wales, and out of the Church of Ireland, with such
Alterations concerning the Estates of Prelates, as shall agree with the Articles
of the late Treaty, of the Date at Edinburgh 29. November. 1643. and joint
Declaration of both Kingdoms.

IV. That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

V. That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant, be settled by Act
of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses shall agree upon, after
Consultation had with the Assembly of Divines: And forasmuch as both Kingdoms
are mutually obliged by the same Covenant to endeavor the nearest Conjunction
and Uniformity in matters of Religion; that such Unity and Uniformity in
Religion according to the Covenant, as after Consultation had with the Divines
of both Kingdoms now Assembled, shall be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of
the Parliament of England, and by the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be
confirmed by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively.

VI. That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and
Popish Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws: and for the
better discovering and speedy conviction of Recusants; An Oath be established
by Act of Parliament to be administered to them, wherein they shall abjure and
renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all other
Popish Superstitions and Errors: And refusing the said Oath, being tendered in
such manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient
Conviction in Law of Recusancy.

VII. An Act of Parliament for Education of the Children of Papists, by
Protestants in the Protestant Religion.

VIII. An Act for the true Leavy of the penalties against them, which penalties
to be Leavied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on,
wherein to be provided that His Majesty shall have no loss.

IX. That an Act be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly Executed,
and a stricter course taken to prevent the saying or hearing of Mass in the
Court, or any other part of this Kingdom.

X. The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the four last preceding
Propositions, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there shall think fit.

XI. That the King shall give His Royal assent to an Act for the due
Observation of the Lord's Day.

And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches and Chapels,
in and about the Worship of God, etc. and for the better advancement of the
Preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts of this Kingdom.

And to the Bill against the injoning of Pluralities of Benefices by Spiritual
persons, and Non Residency.

And to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, for
the Reforming and Regulating of both Universities, of the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester and AEton.

And to an Act in like manner to be agreed upon for the suppression of
Interludes and Stage plays, this Act to be perpetual.

And to an Act for the taking of the Accounts of the Kingdom.

And to an Act to be made for relief of sick and maimed soldiers, and of poor
widows and children of soldiers.

And to such Act, or Acts for raising of Moneys for the payment and satisfying
of the public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other public uses, as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament.

And to an Act or Acts of Parliament, for taking away the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer Seisins, and Oustre le Maines;
and all other charges incident or arising for or by reason of Wardship, Livery,
Primer, Seisin, or Oustre le Maine; And for the taking away of all Tenures by
Homage, and all Fines, Licenses, Seizures and Pardons for Alienation, and all
other charges incident thereunto, and for turning of all Tenures by Knights
service, either of His Majesty or others, or by Knights service or Soccage in
capite of His Majesty into free and common Soccage; And that His Majesty will
please to accept in Recompense hereof, One hundred thousand pounds per Annum.

And give assurance of His consenting in the Parliament of Scotland, to an Act
ratifying the Acts of the Convention of the Estates of Scotland, called by the
Council and Conservators of Peace, and the Commissioners for the common
Burdens, and assembled the 22. day of June, 1643. and several times continued
since in such manner, and with such additions and other Acts, as the Estates
convened in this present Parliament shall think convenient.

XII. That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively,
for confirmation of the Treaties passed betwixt the two Kingdoms, viz. The
large Treaty, the late Treaty for the coming of the Scots Army into England,
and the settling of the Garrison of Berwick, of the 29. of November. 1643. and
the Treaty concerning Ireland, of the 6. of August, 1642. with all other
Ordinances and proceedings passed betwixt the two Kingdoms, in pursuance of the
said Treaties.

XIII. That an Act of Parliament be passed to make void the Cessation of
Ireland, and all Treaties with the Rebels without consent of both Houses of
Parliament; and to settle the prosecution of the War of Ireland in both
Houses of Parliament, to be managed by the joint advice of both Kingdoms, and
the King to assist, and to do no Act to discountenance or molest them therein.

XIV. That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively,
for establishing the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, bearing Date the 30.
of January, 1643. in England, and 1644. in Scotland, with the Qualifications
ensuing:

1. THat the persons who shall expect no Pardon, be only these following:
Rupert and Maurice, Count Palatines of the Rhine, James Earl of Derby, John
Earl of Bristoll, William Earl of Newcastle, Francis Lord Cottington, John Lord
Paulet, George Lord Digby, Edward Lord Littleton, William Laud Archbishop of
Canterbury, Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, Sir Robert Heath Knight, Doctor
Bramhall Bishop of Derry, Sir John Byron Knight, Sir William Widdrington,
Colonel George Goring, Henry Iermyn Esquire Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Francis
Doddington, Mr. Endymion Porter, Sir George Ratcliffe, Sir Marmaduke Langdale,
Sir John Hotham, Capt. John Hotham his son, Sir Henry Vaughan, Sir Francis
Windebank, Sir Richard Greenvile, Mr. Edward Hide, Sir John Marley, Sir
Nicholas Coal, and Sir Thomas Riddell junior, Col: (...) Ware, Sir John
Strangewayes, Sir John Colepeper, Sir Richard Floyde, John Bodevile Esquire Mr.
David Ienkins, Sir George Strode, Sir Alexander Carew, (...) Marquess of
Huntley, Earl of Montrosse, Earl of Niddisdaill, Earl of Traquair, Earl of
Carnwath, Vicount of Aboyne, Lord Ogilby, Lord Rae, Lord Harris, Lodowick
Lindsey sometime Earl of Crawford, Patrick Ruthven sometime Earl of Forth,
James King sometims Lord Itham, Irwing younger of Drunim, Gordon younger of
Gight, Lesley of Auchintoule, Sir Robert Spottiswood of Dunipace, Colonel John
Cockran, Mr. John Maxwell sometime pretended Bishop of Rosse, Mr. Walter
Balcanquell; And all such others as being processed by the Estates for Treason,
shall be condemned before the Act of Oblivion be passed.

2. All Papists and Popish Recusants, who have been, now are, or shall be
actually in Arms, or voluntarily assisting against the Parliaments or Estates
of either Kingdom.

3. All persons who have had any hand in the plotting, designing or assisting
the Rebellion of Ireland.

4. That Humphrey Bennet Esquire Sir Edward Ford. Sir John Penruddock, Sir George
Vaughan, Sir John Weld, Sir Robert Lee, Sir John Pate, John Ackland, Edmund
Windham, Esquires; Sir John Fitzherbert, Sir Edward Laurence, Sir Ralph Dutton,
Henry Lingen Esquire Sir William Russell of Worcestershire, Tho: Lee of Adlington
Esquire Sir John Girlington, Sir Paul Neale, Sir William Thorold, Sir Edward
Hussy, Sir Thomas Liddell senior, Sir Phillip Musgrave, Sir John Digby of Not:
Sir Henry Fletcher, Sir Richard Minshall, Laurence Halsteed, John Denham,
Esquires; Sir Edmund Fortescue, Peter Saint Hill Esquire Sir Thomas Tildesley, Sir
Henry Grisfith, Michael Wharton Esquire, Sir Henry Spiller, Sir George Benyon,
Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir Edward Walgrave, Sir Edward Bishop, Sir Robert Owsley,
Sir John Many, Lo: Cholmeley, Sir Thomas Aston, Sir Lewis Dives, Sir Peter
Osborte, Samuel Thorneton Esquire, Sir John Lucas, Io: Blaney Esquire Sir Thomas
Chedle, Sir Nicho: Kemishe, and Hugh Lloyde Esquire, And all such of the
Scottish Nation, as have concurred in the Votes at Oxford, against the Kingdom
of Scotland and their proceedings, or have sworn or subscribed the Declaration
against the Convention and Covenant, And all such as have assisted the
Rebellion in the North, or the invasion in the South of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, or the late invasion made there by the Irish and their Adherents.

And that the Members of either House of Parliament, who have not only
deserted the Parliament, but have also voted both Kingdoms Traitors, may be
removed from his Majesty's Counsels; and be restrained from coming within the
verge of the Court, and that they may not without the advice and consent of
both Kingdoms bear any Office or have any Employment concerning the State or
Commonwealth; And also that the Members of either House of Parliament, who have
deserted the Parliament and adhered to the Enemies thereof, and have not
rendered themselves before the last of October 1644. May be removed from his
Majesty's Councels, and be restrained from coming within the Verge of the
Court, and that they may not without the Advice and consent of both Houses of
Parliament bear any Office or have any Employment concerning the State or
Commonwealth: And in case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of
High Treason, and incapable of any pardon by his Majesty, And their Estates to
be disposed as both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the
Parliament in Scotland respectively shall think fit.

5. That by Act of Parliament all Judges and Officers toward the Law (Common
and Civil) who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the enemies
thereof, be made incapable of any place of Judicature or Office toward the Law
(Common or Civil) And that all Sergeants, Counselors, and Attorneys (Doctors,
Advocates and Proctors) of the Law (Common or Civil) who have deserted the
Parliament and adhered to the Enemies thereof, be made incapable of any
practice in the Law (Common or Civil) either in public or in private, And
that they, and likewise all Bishops, Clergymen, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, who have deserted the Parliament and adhered to the Enemies thereof,
shall not be capable of any preferment or Employment in Church or Common
wealth, without the advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament.

6. The Persons of all others to be free of all personal Censure,
notwithstanding any Actor thing done in or concerning this War, they taking the
Covenant.

7. The Estates of those persons excepted in the first three preceding
qualifications, to pay public debts and damages.

8. A third part on full value of the Estates of the persons made incapable of
any Employment as aforesaid, to be employed for the payment of the public
debts and damages, according to the Declaration.

9. And likewise a tenth part of the Estates of all other Delinquents within
the joint Declaration, And in Case the Estates and proportions aforementioned,
shall not suffice for the payment of the public Engagements, whereunto they
are only to be employed, that then a new proportion may be appointed by the
joint advice of both Kingdoms, providing it exceed not the one moiety of the
Estates of the persons made incapable as aforesaid, and that it exceed not a
sixth part of the Estates of the other Delinquents.

10. That the persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers and others of the
Kingdom of England, who in Land or Goods be not worth 200 l. sterling, And the
persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers and other of the Kingdom of
Scotland who in Land or Goods be not worth 100 l. sterling be at liberty and
discharged.

11. That an Act be passed whereby the debts of the Kingdom, and the persons of
Delinquents, and the value of their Estates may be known: And which Act shall
appoint in what manner the confiscations and proportions before mentioned may
be leavied and applied to the discharge of the said Engagements.

XV. That by Act of Parliament the Subjects of the Kingdom of England may be
appointed to be Armed, Trained and Disciplined in such manner as both Houses
shall think fit.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, in such manner as the Estates of
Parliament there shall think fit.

XVI. That an Act of Parliament be passed for the settling of the Admiralty and
Forces at Sea, and for the raising of such moneys for the maintenance of the
said Forces, and of the Navy, as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, in such manner as the Estates of
Parliament there shall think fit.

XVII. An Act for the settling of all Forces by Sea and Land, in Commissioners,
to be nominated by both Houses of Parliament, of persons of known integrity,
and such as both Kingdoms may Confide in for their faithfulness to Religion
and Peace of the Kingdoms; and (...) of the House of Commons, who shall be
removed or altered from time to time as both Houses shall think fit: And when
any shall die, others to be nominated in their places by the said Houses, which
Commissioners shall have power,

1. First, to suppress any forces raised without Authority of both Houses of
Parliament, or in the Intervals of Parliament, without consent of the said
Commissioners, to the disturbance of the Public Peace of the Kingdoms, And to
suppress any Foreign Forces, that shall invade this Kingdom, And that it
shall be High Treason in any who shall leavie any Force without such Authority
or consent, to the disturbance of the public Peace of the Kingdoms. Any
Commission under the great Seal or other Warrant to the contrary
notwithstanding; and they to be incapable of any pardon from his Majesty, and
their Estates to be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.

2. To preserve the Peace now to be settled, and to prevent all disturbances of
the public peace, that may arise by occasion of the late troubles.

So for the Kingdom of Scotland.

3. To have power to send part of themselves, so as they exceed not a third
part, or be not under the number of (...) to reside in the Kingdom of
Scotland, to assist and vote as single persons, with the Commissioners of
Scotland, in those matters wherein the Kingdom of Scotland is only concerned.

So for the Kingdom of Scotland.

4. That the Commissioners of both Kingdoms may meet as a joint Commit as
they shall see cause, or send part of themselves, as aforesaid, to do as
follows:

1. To preserve the Peace betwixt the Kingdoms and the King, and every one of
them. 2. To prevent the violation of the Articles of Peace, as aforesaid, or
any troubles arising in the Kingdoms, by breach of the said Articles, and to
hear and determine all differences that may occasion the same according to the
Treaty, And to do further according as they shall respectively receive
instructions from both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of
Parliament in Scotland, And in the Intervalls of Parliament from the
Commissioners for the preservati-of the public Peace. 3. To raise and join
the Forces of both Kingdoms to resist all Foreign Invasion, And to suppress
any Forces raised within any of the Kingdoms, to the disturbance of the public
Peace of the Kingdoms, by any Authority under the great Seal or other Warrant
whatsoever without consent of both Houses of Parliament in England, And the
Estates of the Parliament in Scotland, or the said Commissioners of that
Kingdom whereof they are Subjects, And that in those cases of joint
concernment to both Kingdoms, the Commissioners to be directed, to be there
all, or such part as aforesaid, to act and direct as joint Commissioners of
both Kingdoms. 4. To order the War of Ireland, according to the Ordinance of
the 11. of April, and to Order the Militia, and conserve the Peace of the
Kingdom of Ireland.
XVIII. That His Majesty give his Assent to what the two Kingdoms shall agree
upon, in prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet
finished.

XIX. That by Act of Parliament all Peers made since the day that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, deserted the Parliament, and
that the said Great Seal was surreptitiously conveyed away from the Parliament,
being the 21. day of May, 1642. and who shall be hereafter made, shall not sit
or vote in the Parliament of England* without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. And that all Honor and Title conferred on any, without consent of
both Houses of Parliament, since the 20. day of May, 1642. being the day that
both Houses declared, That the King, seduced by evil Counsel, intended to raise
War against the Parliament, be declared null and void.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland; those being excepted, whose Patents were
passed the Great Seal before the fourth of June, 1644.

XX. That by Act of Parliament, the Deputy, or chief Governor, or other
Governors of Ireland, be nominated by both Houses of Parliament; or, in the
Intervals of Parliament, by the Commissioners; to continue during the pleasure
of the said Houses; or, in the Intervals of Parliament, during the pleasure of
the aforementioned Commissioners, to be approved or disallowed by both Houses
at their next Sitting. And that the Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer,
Commissioners of the Great Seal or Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
Chancellor of the Exchequer and Duchy, Secretary of State, Judges of both
Benches, and of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, be
nominated by both Houses of Parliament, to continue Quam diu been se gesserint;
and, in the Intervals of Parliament, by the aforementioned Commissioners; to be
approved or disallowed by both Houses, at their next Sitting.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, adding the Justice General, and in such
manner as the Estates in Parliament there shall think fit.

XXI. That by Act of Parliament the Education of Your Majesty's Children, and
the Children of Your Heirs and Successors, be in the true Protestant Religion;
and that their Tutors and Governors be of known Integrity, and be chosen by
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, or, in the Intervals of Parliament, by the
aforenamed Commissioners; to be approved or disallowed by both Parliaments, at
their next Sitting: And that, if they be Male, they be married to such only as
are of the true Protestant Religion; if they be Female, they may not be married
but with the Advice and Consent of both Parliaments, or, in the Intervals of
Parliaments, by their Commissioners.

XXII. That Your Majesty will give Your Royal Assent to such ways and means
as the Parliaments of both Kingdoms shall think fitting, for the uniting of the
Protestants Princes, and for the entire Restitution and Reestablishment of
Charles Lodowick Prince Elector Palatine, his Heirs and Successors, to his
Electorall Dignity, Rights and Dominions. Provided, that this extend not to
Prince Rupert, or Prince Maurice, or the Children of either of them, who have
been the Instruments of so much Bloodshed and Mischief against both Kingdoms.

XXIII. That by Act of Parliament the concluding of Peace or War with Foreign
Princes and States, be with Advice and Consent of both Parliaments, or in the
Intervals of Parliaments, by their Commissioners.

XXIV. That an Act of Oblivion be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
respectively, relative to the Qualifications in the Proposition aforesaid,
concerning the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, with the exception of all
Murderers, Thieves, and other Offenders, not having relation to the War.

XXV. That the Members of both Houses of Parliament, or others, who have,
during this Parliament, been put out of any place or Office, Pension or
Benefit, for adhering to the Parliament, may either be restored thereunto, or
otherwise have recompense for the same, upon the humble desire of both Houses
of Parliament.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland.

XXVI. That the Armies may be disbanded at such time, and in such manner, as
shall be agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, or such as shall be
authorized by them to that effect.

That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the charters,
customs, liberties and Franchises of the city of London, notwithstanding any
Nonuser, Misuser, or Abuser.

That the Militia of the city of London may be in the Ordering and Government
of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled, or such
as they shall from time to time appoint; whereof the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs
for the time being to be three. And that the Militia of the Parishes without
London and the Liberties, within the weekly Bills of Mortality, may be under
the command of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council of the
said city, to be ordered in such manner as shall be agreed on and appointed by
both Houses of Parliament.

That the Tower of London may be in the Government of the city of London and
the chief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time be nominated and
removable by the Common Council.

That the citizens or forces of London; shall not be drawn out of the city into
any other parts of the Kingdom, without their own consent; and that the drawing
of their forces into other parts of the Kingdom in these distracted times, may
not be drawn into example for the future.

And for prevention of Inconveniences which may happen by the long
intermission of Common-Councels, It is desired that there may be an Act, That
all Bylaws and Ordinances already made, or hereafter to be made, by the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Counsel assembled, touching the Calling,
Continuing, Directing and Regulating the same, shall be as effectual in Law,
to all intents and purposes, as if the same were particularly enacted by the
Authority of Parliament; and that the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in
Common Counsel, may add to, or repeal the said Ordinances from time to time,
as they shall see cause.

That such other Propositions as shall be made for the city, for their further
safety, welfare and Government, and shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, may be Granted and Confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Now therefore we humbly beseech your Majesty to grant these Propositions which
are presented for the Peace and Public good of Your Kingdoms. And as we
therein, according to our Trust and Duty, have regard to The Glory of GOD, The
quiet and Welfare of Your people, So shall we really endeavor, That Your
Majesty may live in the Splendour and Glory of Your Royal Progenitors, and
which beseems Your Royal Place and Dignity.

Die Sabbathi, 4. Octobr. 1645.
Resolved upon the Question,
THat the Rule by which the Committees shall proceed with such as come in to
compound for their Delinquency, shall be according to the respective
proportions set down in the Propositions of both Kingdoms, formerly sent to His
Majesty for a safe and well-grounded Peace.

Resolved etc.

That this favor of the proportions set down in the Propositions to be held
with such as compound for their Delinquencies, shall be extended to none other
but to such as shall come in between this and the first of December next.

H: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii, 8. Octobr. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all such Delinquents as
shall come in and submit themselves to the Parliament, in pursuance of the
Order of this House of the 4. of this instant October, shall within twenty four
hours after their coming within the Lines of Communication, present themselves
to Mr. Speaker, to be sent by him to make their compositions with the Committee
authorized thereunto.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


