Englands Joy in a Lawful Triumph. Bold Phanaticks now make room
CHARLES the Second's coming home.

As it was voted in the House on May Day last 1660.
To the Tune of, Packingtons Pound.
King Charles, born May 29. 1630.

Duke James, born October. 13. 1633.

Henry Duke of Gloucester, the third Son.

The Lady Mary, born Nov. 4. 1631

The Lady Elizabeth, born December. 19. 1635.

The Lady Anne, born March 17. 1636.



HOld up thy head England, and now show thy face
That eighteen years has held it down with disgrace
Thy comforts are coming, then cheer up thy looks
Thy hopes, like thy gates, are quite off of the hooks
Thy blessings draw near
Thy joy does appear
With much expedition thy King will be here
May all the rich pleasures that ever were reckoned
Attend on the Person of King Charles the second.
The Bride and the Bridegroom did never so greet
As the King and his People together will meet,
Though some are against it, it is very well known
That those that be for it are twenty for one,
Who with them will bring
Allegiance and sing
with voices of Loyalty, God save the King,
May all, etc.
There Is none are against it, but what are partakers
With Jesuits, Jews, Anaba^tists and Quakers,
But he (like a Lion th^t's roused from his den)
Will pull down the pride of Fifth-Monarchy Men,
The Preaching-house-hanters
With all their Inchanters
The proud Independents, the Brownists and Ranters
With all the v^le Sectaries that can be reckoned
We hope will be routed by King Charles the second.
The benefits which will acrew to this Land
Are more than we suddenly can understand
There Is no man of merit, in Arts or in Trade
But if he endeavor may quickly be made,
Our Trade will increase
And so will our peace
And this will give many poor prisoners release
May all the rich pleasures that ever were reckoned
Attend on the Person of King Charles the second.
Then aged Paul's, steeple still hold up thy head
For under thy roof shall Gods Service be read
And there shall be set up the Communion Table
Then they shall be hanged up that made it a stable
And have no reprieves
For good men it grieves
That Gods house of prayer should be a den of thieves
May all, etc.
The Law and the Gospel shall freely be taught
Which lately unto the Barebone has been brought
Our Doctrine and Worship shall flourish again
In spite of the pride of Schismatical men
Good Learning and we
Shall always agree
The two Universities cherished shall be
Then may all the blessings that ever were reckoned
Be attributed unto King Charles the second.
Our mirth and good company shall not be checked
By such as do nickname themselves the Elect
But we will be merry, and spend an odd teaster
At Christmas, at Whits^ntide, Shrovetide and Easter
We Will play our old pranks
Rejoice and give thanks
And those that oppose we will cripple their shanks
May all the rich pleasures that ever were reckoned
Attend on the Person of King Charles the second.
Our Exchange shall be filled with Merchants from far
It Is better to deal in good Traffic than war
With all Neighbor Nations we will shake hands in peace
By that means our treasure and trade will increase
With France and with Spain
We Will make leagues again
We thank them for succouring our Sovereign
May all, etc.
Our shipping in safety shall sale on the Seas
To Italy, Naples or what Port they please
Then riches from every Country they will bring
To profit the people, and pleasure the King
Much good we shall reap
And treasure up-heap
Good White Wind and Clarret, and Sack will be cheap
Then we will drink healths till they cannot be reckoned
To Gloucester, to York, and to King Charles the second.
Our Pot, Pipe and Organ shall then be divided
And into the holy Cathedrals be guided
Our Quiristers small, and our tall singing men
Shall joyfully chant to the Organ again
The Surplice so torn
Shall newly be worn
And all the fair Rites that the Church do adorn
Twice twenty times more than can rightly be reckoned
To the honor of God, and for King Charles the second.
The banished Nobility then shall return
Who long time in disconsolation did mourn
And when they are well settled like right Noble men
Good housekeeping will be in fashion again
The poor that will wait
Without at the gate
Shall have their benevolence at a good rate
May all, and.
Our Taxes will grow less and less, I suppose
For we have been very much troubled with those
Excise-men (I hope too) in time will go down
It Is they are the torment of Country and Town,
The Magistrates then
Shall be honest men
The Parson shall challenge his tythe-pig again
May all, etc.
We shall be the joyfullest Nation on earth
When once the King comes home to complete our mirth
We shall be the envy of Nations unknown
When King Charles the second is fixed in his Throne,
The Triumphs that then
Shall be among men
Will prove a good Subject for every good pen
May all, etc.
Now God send him with expedition I pray
For every good subject does long for the day
The bells shall ring out, and the Conduits run wine,
The bonfires shall blaze till our faces do shine
And as the sparks fly
Like Stars in the sky,
Lord succor, preserve him, and guide him, we will cry
May all the rich blessings that ever were reckoned
Attend on the presence of King Charles the second.
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. G. on Snow-hill. Entered according to Order.


