Tuesday the Fifteenth of April, 1656. AT THE COUNCIL AT WHITE HALL.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That for the
Relief of Debitors, who are willing to satisfy their just Debts, and for the
moderating of the rigor of Comprysings, and the severity of proceedings by
Creditors against Debitors in Scotland; Every Debtor of Scotland who shall
give in a List of his just Debts by himself, Tutor, or Curator, to the
Commissioners for Administration of Justice to the People in Scotland, and
shall make Oath before them that he is not able to satisfy the same either by
Money or other personal Estate, and shall declare that he has Lands, (...)
Estate, and that he is willing that so much of his Lands, Tithes, or other real
Estate shall be set out and allotted, as by indifferent persons to be appointed
by the said Commissioners for Administration of Justice, for valuation of
Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate in every County upon Oath shall be found
sufficient to satisfy every Creditor his just Debt, Principal, Interest,
together with necessary charges and expenses, as the same shall be allowed by
the said Commissioners, and according to the priority of diligence of the
respective Creditors; And shall likewise declare, that according to the
appointment of the said Commissioners, he will legally convey and assure the
said Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate, so to be set out and allotted unto
his respective Creditors, as aforesaid.

That in such cases, and to such persons, (as well Principals as Cautioners
respectively) the said Commissioners are hereby empowered to grant Suspensions
for a convenient time, not exceeding One year, after the Date hereof, and to do
all things requisite to the putting the Premises into effectual execution.
Provided always, that every such Debtor, Principal or Cautioner shall do and
execute all things requisite for the perfecting the Premises at his or their
charges and expenses respectively, and that the Lands, Tithes, or other real
Estate thus to be conveyed, shall be completely settled within One full year
next after the granting of the said Suspension; otherwise, all benefit claimed,
or intended by these Presents, shall be null and void to the said person, or
persons, as if the same had never been granted; unless the said Commissioners
for Administration of Justice shall find, that such failer has not been
occasioned directly, or indirectly, by the Debitors.

Provided also, that these Presents shall not be of force to stay any Execution
of any of the said Creditors against the personal or movable Estate of any of
the said Debitors, wheresoever it can be found at any time before the perfect
conveyance and settlement of the Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate, as
aforesaid; nor shall it hinder any whose Principal Debts amount not to above
the sum of One thousand Marks Scots money, to have liberty to proceed to
execution against the Person of the said Debtor, Principal or Cautioner, as
well as against his or their personal or movable Estate, or at their election
to have the benefit of these Presents, and to come in with other Creditors. It
is also hereby Declared and Ordered, That all Comprysings that have been laid
and deduced against any Debitors since the First of May, 1652. shall be
satisfied as other Debts, out of the Debitors Lands, Tithes, or other real
Estate, as aforesaid, as well for the Principal Sums and Interest, as necessary
Expenses bestowed by the Compryser in the deducing the Comprysing, and
obtaining Infeftments of the Superiors; and being thus satisfied, the said
Comprysing shall be ipso facto void and null.

Provided always, where the Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate of the
Debtor, Principal, and Cautioner is not sufficient to pay all his Creditors,
that then the said Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate shall be equally
divided, pro rata portione, between all the said Creditors, allowing only to
such of them who have the Prior Diligence, their said Proportion respectively,
in such place as they shall require it, and the necessary charges they have
been at in obtaining the said Diligences; Excepting out of these Presents all
Comprysings, whereof the Legals are expired before the Date hereof; And also
all Comprysings which have been laid and deduced before the First of May, 1652.
and all final Transactions and Agreements made betwixt Creditors and Debitors,
and all Rights given upon any such Transaction and Agreement.

It is also hereby Declared, That the Lands, Tithes, or other real Estates of
the Debtor, which are nearest the usual dwelling of the Creditor, and which
lie contiguous in the Low-Lands; or in case he have none, or not sufficient in
the Low-Lands, then such of his Lands, Tithes, or other real Estate as lie
nearest to the Low-Lands, shall be first set out and conveyed, as aforesaid;
unless the Creditor shall desire to have the same in the High-Lands.

Provided also, That no Debtor who shall not seek the benefit of these
Presents within one year after the Date hereof, shall ever thereafter be
admitted to the same.

Ordered by his Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, That the Council
in Scotland do cause this Matter to be published by Proclamation in Scotland.

W. JESSOP, Cl. of the Council.

Thursday the 22. of Man. 1656. At his Highness Council in EDINBURGH,
ORdered, That his Highness, and the Councils Order, of the 15. of April, 1656
for the Relief of Debitors who are willing to satisfy their just Debts, and
for the moderating the Rigor of Comprysings, and the severity of Proceedings by
Creditors against Debitors in Scotland, be forthwith Proclaimed and Printed.

EMANUEL DOVVNING, Cl. of the Council.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts-Close, over against the
Trone-Church 1656


