A SERIOUS REVIEW OF SOME PRINCIPLES OF THE QUAKERS.

Wherein ERROR is Discovered, and TRUTH Defended.

By P. E.

VERITAS. VINCET TANDEM



Printed in the Year, 1655.

A SERIOUS REVIEW OF SOME PRINCIPLES OF THE QUAKERS.
I Do not at this time write, because I would maintain Truth in maintaining any
Sect, knowing that there be many, in this age, who do own, in their judgment,
many parts of Truth, or several sound Principles of Religion, as it were by
piese-meal, who, notwithstanding in many more things, if not in the most, do
err. And therefore, as one having ceased from man, being dead to all Sects, I
do, I say, I do at this time only vindicate Truth for it self, without all
relation to the upholding of any Sect whatsoever, but in so far as they do own
any part of the Truth. Having premised these few lines, I shall lay down
several Principles of the Quakers, and, as I propound them, shall refute them:
yet shall I speak of none of them but of such as be most known, that they may
not have it to say that I do wrest their words and do belie them.

I. That man, as a creature, is not equal with God, but as he is joined to the
Lord, being one Spirit with him.

This is the Doctrine of Geo. Fox, as witnesses Ja. Nailer, in answer to the
Book called, The Perfect Pharisee, page 4. whose words be these, viz. -- I was
in the hearing of four Justices of the Peace, where he was asked (meaning Geo.
Fox) whether he spoke this of G. Fox. as he was a creature? i.e. that G. Fox
was equal with God. To which he answered, I deny, G. Fox, he is dust and must
to dust, but I and my Father are one: and he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit. -- At which the Justices were satisfied that he spoke of the Spirit of
Christ in him, and thereupon did acquit him. A subtle Answ. to an ill stated
Question: for I do observe in it much of the depths of Satan, whereby the
Justices were outwitted. No wonder: for in stating the Question they gave him a
great deal of advantage. It does necessarly imply that there was something in
Geo. Fox which was increated, not a creature but a Creator. Otherwise to what
purpose did they propound the Question thus? Whether or not (in saying that he
was equal with God) did he speak this of Geo. Fox as he was a creature? even
as if G. Fox had been any other thing then a creature. In this I desire that
these things may be observed. First, that neither Fox nor Nailer do deny
absolutely that Geo. Fox should say that he was equal with God: they deny not
these words, only Geo. Fox shifts the Justices with his sense thereof as is
abovewritten. Secondly, I desire any serious sober man whatsoever to consider,
and I leave it with him to judge (take it in the best sense) if any man can
call these the words of truth and soberness, for Geo. Fox to say that he was
equal with God. I appeal him if ever any Scripture-Saint said so excepting
Jesus Christ, who was both God and Man. Thirdly, I desire George Fox to tell me
what he means by that, viz. I and my Father are one, and, he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit. Either he understands it concerning a substantial
or a mystical oneness betwixt God and man. If a substantial, then it is as
much as if George had said that the very substance and essence of God is in him
and one with him. Which being so, then without dispute there is something
increated in him; and so equal with God. Howsoever the Scriptures which he
alleges will not bear him out therein. Not the former: for it only speaks
of CHRIST, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. In which Chapter the Lord
Christ labors to prove his equality with God. But will Geo. Fox make
application of that Scripture to himself? he does so by comparing it with Joh.
17.21, 23. Now take notice how he confounds Christ's onenes with God, and Saints
onenes with him. And seeing he puts no difference betwixt them, but makes
application of that same very Scripture to himself, whereby Christ assents his
equality with God; It follows by inevitable consequence, that the man
understands Saints to be equal with God: Which is also evident from his own
confession. For though he denies G. Fox, as a creature, to be equal with God,
yet he does not deny it in respect of the Spirit of Christ in him: Whereupon he
evaded the Justices of the Peace, as is above-written. Notwithstanding that,
yet is it clear that Saints onenes with God, is nothing else but like the
Husbands onenes with the Wife, or the Wifes with the Husband: as is most
evident from that other Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.17. he makes use of, -- He that is
joined to the Lord is one spirit. Would George compare this with the latter
part of v. 16. -- For two (says he) shall be one flesh. He would needs alter
his mind? for the Apostle in these words alludes to that onenes which is
betwixt man and wife, spoken of, Genesis 2.24. Mat. 19.5, 6. Mar. 10.7, 8. Ephesians.
5.26. And so compares the onens of the Saints with God, in respect of one
Spirit, with that onenes which is betwixt Man and Wife. But who can say, that
the onenes betwixt Man and Wife is substantial, and not mystical? Will any
say, that because the Scripture does call them one, even one flesh, they do
make up but one substance? Is it not evident notwithstanding this onenes, that
they be different and distinct substances? So then, seeing the Scripture
likeneth the onenes of Saints with God, thereto, may not I justly say, that as
God and Saints are one, I say as they are one, so they are really and
substantially distinct one from another? And that the substance and essence of
God is not united to the creature? But if at last George shall say, that the
oneness with God is only mystical and vertuall, i. e. in respect of Gods
acting and working in Saints, by the power of that same spirit that is in
himself, bringing them into a comformity to it self) then has he nothing for
himself to say, but must needs, in every respect without all exception, deny
himself to be equal with God, whether he consider himself as G. Fox, or as
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ in him: For so even his Sanctification, and
the Spirit of Christ in him, are nothing else, but created things. And I desire
George not to think this strange Doctrine: For does not the Scripture
comprehend all that is of God in Saints, under the notion of the New Creature?
2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. And if it be a creature, then is it not increated, but
created. But if George be tenacious, I desire him to tell me, What of God? What
of the Spirit of Christ? did ever be experience beside that which is the
New Creature in him. Or rather I desire him to show me where the Scripture does
contradistinguish the one from the other. Yea, the Scripture does call all the
works or appearances of God in the creature, a new man, implying that as is
man, so it is a created thing. And therefore it is said to be created after
God, in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. So then George should
not understand the Spirit of Christ to be any other ways in Saints, but in
respect of the fruits thereof, Gal. 5.22, 23. or in respect of the power and
operation thereof, Ephesians. 3.7. 2 Timothy 1.7. The Scripture does no where say that
God dwells Bodily in any, but in Christ, Col. 2.9. I confess the Scripture
does speak of Gods and Christ's being in Saints, in respect of the fruits of the
Spirit; viz. faith, Ephesians. 3.17. hope, Col. 1.27. love, 1 John 4.16. confession,
v. 15. and obedience, chapter 3.24. Upon which account Saints very justly may be
said to partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. in so far as they do partake
of the fruits of the Spirit, and are acted by the power of the Divine Nature.
But who will say that there is not a substantial difference betwixt the tree,
and its fruit? The Sun, and its heat? Will you say that he that has the fruit
of the tree, has the substance of the tree? Or that the substance of the Sun
is in a man, because he is made hot by the virtue of it? So no man has reason
to say that the Spirit substantially is in the creature, because it partakes of
the fruits thereof, or that God in his substance and essence is in the
creature, as being united to it, because he acts in it by his Divine power.

Secondly, That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.

I shall not say that Nayler does positively say so. Yet I shall leave it with
any impartial man to judge, whether it be not most apparent, yea, or not, that
this is their Doctrine, at least his, these things being considered: (1.)
Because in his answer to the Book called the Perfect Pharisee, page 6. he sets
it down as a part of the charge against the Quakers, wherewith five of the
Chief Priests dwelling beside New Castle did charge them, as he says: And in
his answer thereto, he neither positively denies it, nor confesses it: But in
stead of denying it, he charge them of pleading for sin, to keep the soul at
a distance from God. (2.) In other things he is very plain, positively denying
those things wherewith he, and his are charged. Which make me say, that either
he deals subtly in the matter, or else that the charge against him and the
rest, is true: Otherwise, what may be his reason of not denying this charge,
as well as other things that he and his are charged with? Put it on this issue,
and I charge him (if there be any singleness of heart in him) on the behalf of
the Truth, as in the presence of God, that error may be discovered, and Truth
manifested; either to affirm or deny the foresaid charge, viz. That the soul is
a part of the Divine Essence, and not deal deceitfully in shifting the point.
(3.) He backs his answer to the charge with this Scripture, -- He that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. O the depths of Satan! If
there be any spiritual or impartial man, let him judge now, if this Scripture
be not brought with a purpose to deceive. Can any man say, that this is brought
by him to make it appear that he denies the soul to be of the Divine Essence?
Considering how that not only the words thereof taken as they ly, without
farther consideration, import the just contrary, but also G. Fox made use of
the same in proving himself to be equal with God, in respect of the Spirit of
Christ in him. But if he positively confess that the soul of man is a part of
the Divine Essence, then I leave it with you to judge, who know not the depths
of Satan as they do, if these gross and blasphemous absurdities will not
follow thereupon. First, That the Divine Essence is subject to changes as is
the soul of man, it being of the same nature and substance. Secondly, That as
is the soul of man, so a part of the Divine Nature is subject to be lossed.
Thirdly, That as the soul, so a part of the Divine Essence shall be damned and
tormented for ever. Beside many other horrid absurdities, contrary to the
Scriptures, which may make any ear to tingle.

Thirdly, That Christ is in all men, even in the most vile among men.

This is their common Doctrine: And therefore says Nayler, -- If Christ be not
in the most vile in the world, there to see the hearts, thoughts, and intents,
how shall he judge every one according to their thoughts, etc. -- Answer to the
Perfect Pharisee, page 7. To prove this he alleges, Joh. 1.9. That was the
true light, that lights every man that comes into the world. Poor creature,
he is much mistaken in this: He erreth not knowing the Scriptures. The
Scripture does expound this two ways, First, In respect of the spirit of man:
The spirit of man [is] the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts
of the belly, Prove. 20.27. Whence it is evident that the spirit of man is not
only the Lords lamp light or candle, but also that which searches the most
secret and hidden thoughts of man. According to that, 1 Cor. 2.11. For what man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? -- And
thus the Lord Christ may very fitly be said to enlighten every soul that comes
into the world, in so much as that he creats in every one that comes into the
world a spirit, which is his candle: For all things were created by him, and by
him do consist, Col. 1.16, 17. compared with Joh. 1.3. So then by the spirit
that is in man, he does search the thoughts and intents of the heart, it being
his candle. I hope James Nayler will not understand by this spirit any other
but that which is natural, common to good and bad, and not that which is
divine and supernatural: For the Apostle expressly, positively, and distinctly
contradistinguisheth the one from the other, I mean the spirit of man from the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. Secondly, In respect of that which by God is
written in the heart of every man that comes into the world. For when the
Gentiles who have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law are a Law unto themselves; Which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another, Romans 2.14.15.
Whence may be observed, that God has put a natural light in every man's heart
and conscience, by which they are not only accused in not doing, and excused in
doing that which is contained in the Law, but also thereby are enacted to do
the thing therein contained. Hence it is, that Paul in Romans 1.28. says, that
persons not willing to retain this knowledge, and to improve it, were given up
to fulfill their own lusts, bringing upon themselves ruin and destruction.
Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. And thus it is that the candle of the wicked is put out,
Job 21.14, 15, 17. Prove. 13.9. chapter 24.20. Now as all things are created, and
kept in being by Christ, so every one that comes into the world through
Christ, is enlightened with this natural light. Hence you may see how true,
and in what sense it is true, that Christ lights every one that comes into
the world. But what is all this to prove that Christ is in every man that
comes into the world? The Scripture denies Christ to be in the reprobate: --
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobats, 2 Cor. 13.5. Thus reprobates are excepted from having of Christ in
them: And good reason for it too. First, because those in whom Christ is, are
dead because of sin, Romans 8.10. But reprobates, wicked and ungodly men, are
dead in sins and trespasses. Secondly, because those that have not the Spirit
of Christ, are not Christ's, Romans 8.9. And those that have not the Spirit of
Christ, have not Christ: for he is the Spirit, 2 Cor. 17. But who can say that
wicked and ungodly men, reprobate to every good word and work, that they are
Christ's? and consequently that the Spirit of Christ is in them. Thirdly, The
Spirit is life, because of righteousness in whom Christ is, Romans 8.10. and in
such there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. But who can say so of men of reprobate
minds? Fourthly, The Scripture does say that Christ is in the creature, in
respect of the faith and hope of glory that is in it, Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 1.27. But
who will say that there is any such thing in the vilest of men. Fifthly,
Persons in a carnal state are said to be without Christ, without hope, and
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. How then can it be said that Christ is in
any in such a condition?

Fourthly, That some persons are come up out of the fall.

So says Nailer. And this we witness, and all witness it who are come up out
of the fall. Ans. to Perf. Phar. page 6. I desire James to deal singly with me
in this, what he means by the fall. Either he understands the first fall in
Adam, or else such fallings as Saints are liable to. If the former, then it
necessarily follows that Saints may, and do recover themselves to that state
of perfection without sin in which Adam was created, Eccles. 7.29. God has
made man upright, (or) pefect, -- But since Adams fall, the Scripture concludes
the best of men under sin, 1 Kin. 8.46. 2 Chr. 6.36. Psalm. 130.3. Eccles. 7.20.
Gal. 3.22. Jam. 3.2. Joh. 1.8, 10. Nevertheless I do own a perfection (of
which I shall not speak now) though not without sin. Of which Paul speaks,
owning himself in one sense to be perfect, Phil. 3.15. and denying it in
another, v. 12. The latter cannot be the thing that James intends, for wicked
men never knew what it is to fall so, seeing they never knew what it is to
stand before such a fall be: And so they never lived nor were in such a fall.
But he speaks with relation to wicked men's living in the fall, which must needs
be understood in relation to that fall in Adam: for in him both good and bad
did fall. But it is evident from 12. page and Answ. to 10. Posit. that James
does maintain a perfection without sin: For as there he does not deny it, being
charged therewith as an error, so (as is said already) he maintains a coming
up out of the fall: And beside this, he charges those as pleaders for sin, who
maintain that there is no perfection without sin in this life, whereas the
Scripture in the places above cited is most clear therein, as any man may read
and observe at his leisure: I might appeal to any man's reading thereof.

Fifthly, No imperfect thing can be reconciled to God.

So says Nayler. -- That no imperfect thing can be reconciled to God, is plain
in Scripture. Answ. To Perf. Phar. page 9. Though this be not so gross as the
rest, yet it is as strange and unreasonable as any of them: For in reason the
contrary is true; viz. That no perfect thing can be reconciled to God. And that
because as a thing is perfect it needs no reconciliation, even as the whole
needs no Physician, and where no Law is, there is no transgression. A
reconciliation does necessarily presuppose enimity and discord; which is never
without offense either on the one part or on the other. Now it cannot be said
that a perfect thing, as it is perfect, is guilty of any offense; and so cannot
be at enimity with God, as it is perfect: And consequently in such a case,
there is no place for reconciliation, as being that which it needs not. Will
you say that two persons who were never discorded, and never did offend one
another are reconciled? No verily: But on the contrary, that such are
reconciled one to another, who formerly because of offense, on the one part or
other, discorded, and now are agreed. So that reconciliation is among enemies,
and not among friends, betwixt the party offending, and the party offended. The
party offending is man, on whose part the offense is, and the Party offended,
is God, because of sin on man's part: And being sinful, offensive, and
imperfect, Christ reconciles him to God, according to that, Romans 5.10. For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. --
This reconciliation is, as we were enemies, as we stood in need of a Mediator,
of a Reconciler, of a Dayes-man. And so the object of this reconciliatory
grace, is we enemies, without Christ, without hope, and without God in the
world; and so imperfect. But being reconciled, we are perfected through his
grace, being complete in him, Col. 2.10. For the Lord Christ reconciles
enemies, even such as be imperfect, that he may present them perfect before
God, without spot and wrinkle, Col. 1.21, 22. Therefore I conclude that that
which is imperfect can be reconciled to God, and is plain in Scripture.

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ is the only light, and no other light besides him
for salvation.

So says Nayler, -- Jesus Christ is the only light, and there is none besides
him to guide to salvation. -- Answ. to Perfect Pharisee, page 12. Where also he
says, that this light -- needs no outward light, and discovery. Thus he
affirms that Christ is so the light to salvation, as if it did exclude all
other light besides. But I would have this poor blind creature to observe, that
the Scripture calls Christ the light, (i. e. by way of eminency) Joh. 1.8, 9.
and it self a light, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Pet. 1.19. as being subordinate to the
light. And thus the one does not exclude, but include the other.

Seventhly, That Adam in the state of innocence was not under the Covenant of
Works.

Because that some Priests in, and about Newcastle, said, and wrote, that Adam
in his innocent state was under the Covenant of Works. Therefore Nayler checks
them: Giving this as a reason, Because (says he) the Law wherein is the
Covenant of Works was added after, because of the transgression. Ans. to Perf.
Phar. page 10. But they poor creatures (as all of them are) being as ignorant,
or rather more then he, in propounding the thing loosely, give him much
advantage in the matter. But to vindicate the truth, I shall offer this
distinction. It can not be said, that Adam in the state of innocence was under
the Covenant of Works, as being under a Law: For where no Law is, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. Yea, and the Law is not for the righteous, but for
the rebellious, 1 Timothy 1.9. And so in this sense it is true (as Nayler has
minded) that the Law was added because of transgression, Gal. 3.10.
Notwithstanding, Adam was under a Law from within, i. e. he was subject to the
Law within him, he himself being a Law to himself: For God having made him
perfect, Eccl. 7.29. put the Law in its eminency and perfection in him, which
in the relicts and tincture thereof is in all men by nature, Romans 2.14, 15.
being a Law to themselves, do the things cont^^^^d in the Law. And the Lord, to
make him the more sensible of this Law within him, did not altogether leave him
void of a Law from without, in commanding him to eat of all the trees in the
Garden, excepting that of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Which
through covetousness, the root of all evil (a breach of the 10th. Command) he
brake, in coveting the fruit of the Tree, and being desirous to be like God: In
doing of which, he lived, and transgressing of which, he died. Whence it is
evident, that in a right sense Adam was under the Covenant of Works.

Eighthly, That the Scripture is not the Word of God.

So says Nailer. Now if the Scriptures be the Word which had their beginning
since all were made, and did not become flesh, then there are two Words of God.
Now prove that in Scripture; Or that the letter is called the Word in plain
words, and the Apostle calls what he wrote a Declaration, 1 John 1.3. Ans. to
Perf. Phar. pa. 15. where he also says that Christ is the Word. In answer to
which, I shall desire this man with me to observe, that the Scripture does no
where call Christ the Word, though it be so translated. The Scriptures that
speak of this are in Joh. 1.1. 1 John 5.7. Rev. 19.13. Where Christ (as it is
in the Greek) is called, (...). Which ought to be rendered, The Reason: for I
have not only found it so accented, (in the correctest Greek Copy that, to my
knowledge, is extant in these times) as it imports such a signification, but
likewise it is more then evident that Christ very pertinently and justly may be
called, the Reason. And that because he is the very cause, ground and reason of
all Gods actings and manifestations toward the creature. If it should be asked,
What is the reason of Gods electing us? The answer is, Christ is the reason
thereof, Ephesians. 1.4. Or what is the reason why we are redeemed? Ans. Christ is
the reason thereof, Ephesians. 1.7. Or what is the reason why all things are created,
conserved and kept in being, enemies, yea and all things are reconciled to God?
Ans. Christ is the reason thereof, Col. 1.13. to 21. Romans 5.10 In a word, he is
to us, all, in all. And therefore the Cause, the Ground, the Reason of all
things to us. Moreover, is it not more agreeable to the nature of Christ, I
say, to the nature of Christ, to be called the Reason, than the Word? Reason is
a substantial thing, having words as its fruits. Look seriously upon the words
as they are in themselves, and you will find the (...) more pertinent and
significant to express the natu^ (...) other. Yea John, having called Christ,
(...), (...) things were made through him, and without him w^ (...) made that
was made, Joh. 1.4. Clearly implying him (...) of all things, why they are
created and kept in being. (...) that God is well pleased in him, Matthew. 3.17.
as find (...) him, why God is well pleased in him. And thus it is that (...)
enough of reason in him, why all things should be for him, and (...) him: for
in him is all fullness, and in him dwells the fullness (...) Godhead bodily,
Col. 1.19. chapter 2.9. And thus, as Christ is the ^son, we may therein clearly
see, what God in Christ is. And when (...) Nailer says, at least, avoucheth
that, from plain Scripture, it can^ be proved, that the Scripture is the Word
of God. Give me leave t^ say, he is mistaken: for says Peter, The Word of the
Lord endures for ever: and that is the Word which by the Gospel is preached
unto you, 1 Pet. 1.25. I deny not but Christ is preached by the Gospel:
nevertheless Christ is preached by words, in the preaching of the Gospel: for
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Which
words are the prophecy of the Scripture, v. 19, 20. And so this Prophecy of the
Scripture, being that which was preached by the Apostles to the Saints of old,
it must needs be the Word of God, seeing that is called the Word of God which
the Apostles preached to them. Again, I may say truly that those poor
creatures do err, not knowing the Scriptures: for through their ignorance they
do confound things that differ. Their conceit is, that in this place by the
Word is understood Christ, because elsewhere he is called the Word, according
to our common Translations. Give me leave to tell them, that there is a great
difference bewixt (...), as it is in this of Peter, and (...), as it is in the
places above cited: For as the one does properly signify the Reason, so the
other does properly signify the Word. Neither can they produce me one
Scripture where Christ is called (...), as I can produce concerning the words
of the Gospel, namely, Joh. 6.63. It may be they will call this College
stuffe^ But truly I must needs say, that in this I do speak pure Scripture, as
it was written by the Apostles: whereas they implicitly speak no more but
other men's translations. But I admire why they say that the Scripture (...) ^f
God, seeing it is not only given by Divine (...) 16. of no private
interpretation, the holy men (...) ^^en it, as it was spoken in them by God, 2
Pet. 1. (...) it is called the foundation of the Prophets, and A^ (...) 20. as
being the ground of our faith. Which made (...) ^at he hoped and trusted in the
Word of the Lord, Psalm. (...) 130.5. Thus it is plain in the Scripture, that
the Scri^ (...) only a Declaration of the will of God, but also the Word (...)

(...) ^hly, That it is not lawful to call any single person any thing but
(...), or Thee.

(...) ^his is known by all, to be one of their principles, as is evident from
(...) their deportments. And for this they say, that all the Saints in
Scripture did write and speak so in all their writings and speakings to single
persons, and no otherwise. But I may say, that they need not put such a
stresse upon this, as if it were some absolute distinguishing character of
Saints, to speak, and write so: For this is also most sure, that all carnal
men we read of in the Scriptures, in speaking, and in writing, whether to
Saints, or to one another, did speak and write so to single persons, as any man
may observe in reading the Scriptures. The reason of it is at hand: Because the
Hebrew and the Greek (in which the Scriptures were first written) are regular
Languages observing the propriety and rigor of construction: And therefore to
have spoken or written to single persons, but in the Singular Number, it had
been barbarous and non-sensicall. Hence it is that all Epistles in Latin among
very Heathens to single persons of whatsover rank is so. Whereas the propriety
of our Language is of a larger latitude: So that those words which are
translated Thou, or Thee, might very well have been rendered You. And had it
been done so, I question much if any of those poor creatures should have had
the wit to put any difference in the matter. Besides, do they not know that
Mary called Christ Sir, or Lord? not knowing but he had been the Gardener, Joh
20.15. She was one of Christ's Disciples at this time: and they themselves
pretend to no more. Yea, it is said that she loved much, because much was
forgiven her: A greater testimony and approbation then is either seen or read
of them. Moreover, John in writing to, and of one, calls her the Elect Lady,
which may be also translated the Elect Mistress. Whence I observe, that it is
lawful to call a man Sir, (...) Lady, or Mistress. How often do we read (...)
great men, call them Lord, King, and such like. (...) most excellent
Theophilus, and Paul most powerfu^ (...) ^slated) most noble Festus. And
therefore I may jus^ (...) lawful to speak otherwise to single persons then as
is (...) ^stome of the Quakers, in saying thou, or thee.

As for their quaking and trembling, I shall only spe^ (...) by the way, owning
quaking and trembling in a Scripture (...) is, Psalm. 119.120. Isa. 66.2. Hab.
3.16. Phil. 2.12. and (...) other Scriptures beside, of which possibly I could
speak as m^ (...) more then they, in my experience, though I cannot endure to
(...) public theater thereof, as they do.

Tenthly, That it is not lawful to salute any by lifting the Cap, (...) bowing
the Body.

This likewise is publicly known to be one of their principles, which is not
only against Scripture practice, but also Scripture precept. That it is
commanded, See 1 Pet. 3 8. -- Be courteous, which is not courtesy by way of
charity properly so taken (as one of themselves did once insinuate to me) but
courtesy by way of humanity and civilitie: For the word in the Greek does
import no less then courtesy as it is commonly taken and given among men.
Beside, the same Apostle exhorts them to charity in a command distinct from
this, 1 Pet. 4.8, 9. But will nothing please them? unless both commands be
one. Besides, the Lord Christ exhorts and commands his Disciples in sending
them forth to Preach, to salute every house they came into, Matthew. 10.12 The
word in the Greek does import such a salutation as is commonly used among men:
And therefore heathen Writers do make use of the same word to express the same
thing. And consequently this salutation must needs speak something else then
their speaking of peace to any house they entered into: though Nayler will have
it otherwise. Yea the Lord Christ will have his Disciples not only to salute
their brethren, but their enemies also, Matthew. 5.47. where the word in the
Greek is one and the same with that of Matthew. 10.12. Whereby Jesus Christ not
only cautions his Disciples of partiality in their salutations (as Nailer
himself says) but likewise will have them to salute both friends and foes: For
in the foregoing verses, he exhorts them to love their (...) toward them, as in
blessing them, praying (...) good; and so among the rest, in saluting them.
(...) could they have manifested their love in this mat^ (...) their friends
more then their enemies? Again, if (...) ^d Nailer does) that Christ only
forbids partiality (...) and does not allow the ordinary salutation among men;
(...) as justly say that the meaning of these words in the fore^ (...) ye love
them who love you, what reward have ye, is (...) Christ's cautioning his
Disciples of partiality in their love, (...) allowing them to love, whether
those that hated them, or (...) at loved them? I leave it with any rational
man to consider (...) ^ner the one does not follow as well as the other: And as
for (...) ^ture practice, it is most frequent in the Scriptures. So Abraham
^wed twice on end to the Children of Heth, Genesis 23.7, 12. Of the ^owing and
obeisance of others we read also, as of Jacob, Genesis 23.3. Moses, Exodus 18.7.
David, 1 Samuel 20.41. Abigael, 1 Samuel 25.41. and several others that might be
named. O! but says Nailer, this was their sin, even as Joseph's swearing by the
life of Pharaoh, and David's faining himself mad before Achish: For it crosses
a command of God which inhibites a bowing down to the creature, Exodus 34.7.
Deuteronomy. 5.9. But truly he is very far mistaken: For these Scriptures do only
forbid a bowing down to the creature to worship it as God, as is most clear in
the Text. And so it rests upon him to prove that bowing to the creature by way
of courtesy and civil respect, is a worshipping of the creature as God. And
whereas he alleges it to have been the sin of these Saints abovewritten, and
of others to have done so, it is sooner said thou proved. I desire him to let
me see in all the Scripture one sin so frequently acted by Saints, as this is,
if it may be called a sin. Not Joseph's swearing by the life of Pharaoh, nor
David's faining himself mad before Achish: He cannot show me that either the one
or the other is acted again and again by Saints in the Scripture, as bowing to
the creature is. So that not only their practice, but also the frequently
thereof does abundantly plead for the lawfulness of it.

Now to conclude the whole matter in few words (having but little time to spend
in the business, being confined to a few lines) I do conclude them to be the
Man of Sin, of which the Scripture spea^^^

(...)
