AN ORDINANCE AND DECLARATION Of the LORDS and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

For the assessing of all such as have not contributed upon the propositions of
both Houses of Parliament, for raising of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and
Arms, for defense of the King, Kingdom, and Parliament, or have not
contributed proportionably according to their Estates.

With an Explanation of the former Ordinance, declaring, That if any Person so
assessed, shall within 6 or 12 days (after notice thereof) pay in the Money to
the Treasurers in Guild Hall, they shall give acquittances for the same, as
usual, to be repaied upon the public Faith. But if they refuse to pay, the
collectors shall have power to distreine their goods, imprison their persons,
and the families of such disaffected Persons shall no longer remain within,
the City of London.

Likewise an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for the better provision
of Victuals, and other necessaries for the Army, and for payment and
satisfaction to be made for the same.

Die Martis, 29 November. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that these Ordinances
be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



December, 1. Printed for I. Wright in the Old-Bailey. 1642.

An Ordinance and Declaration Of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
WHereas the King seduced by wicked Counsel has raised an Army, and levied
War against the Parliament, and great number of Forces are daily raised under
the commands of Papists and other ill-affected persons, by Commissions from his
Majesty; And whereas diverse Delinquents are protected from public Justice by
his Majesty's. Army, and sundry outrages and rapines are daily committed by the
Soldiers of the said Army, who have no respect to the Laws of God or the
Land, but burn and plunder the Houses, and seize and destroy the persons and
goods of diverse His Majesty's good Subjects; And whereas for the maintenance of
the said Army diverse assessements are made upon several Counties, an^ His
Majesty's Subjects are compelled by the soldiers to pay the same; which sa^d
army if it should continue, wou^d soon ruin and w^ste the whole Kingdom, and
overthrow Religion, Law, and Liberty. For suppressing of which said army and
ill-affected persons there is no probable way under God, but by the armv raised
by au^hority of the Parliament; which said army so raised cannot be maintained
without great sums of Money, yet for raising such sums by reason of his
Majesty's withdrawing himself from the advice of the Parliament, there can be
no Act of Parliament passed with his Majesty's assent, albeit there is great
Justice that the said Moneys should be raised: The Lords and Commons in
Parliament, having taken the same into their serious consideration, and knowing
that the said army so raised by them, has been hitherto for the most part
maintained by the voluntary contribution of diverse well affected persons, who
have freely contributed according to their abilities.

But considering there are diverse others within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and also within the Borough of
Southwarke, that have not contributed at all toward the maintenance of the
said army, or if they have, yet not ^nswerable to their Estates, who
notwithstanding receive benefit and protection by the same army as well as any
others, and therefore its most just that they should as well as others be
charged to contribute to the maintenance thereof.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by authority thereof; That Isaac Pennington Lord Mayor of the City of London,
Sir John Wollaston Knight and Alderman, Alderman Towes, Alderman Warner,
Alderman Andrews, Alderman Chambers, Alderman Fowkes, Sir Thomas Soham Knight
and Alderman, Samuel Vassell, John Venn, Morris Thompson, and Richard VVarrin,
Citizens, or any four of them, shall hereby have power and authority to
nominate, and appoint in every Ward within the City of London, six such persons
as they, or any four of them, shall think fit, which said six, so nominated,
or any four of them, shall hereby have power to enquire of any that shall
remain, or be within the said several Wards that have not contributed upon
the Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the raising of Money,
Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and arms, for defense of the King and both Houses of
Parliament, and also of such as are able men, that have contributed, yet not
according to their Estates and abilities. And the said six persons so nominated
or any four of them within their several and respective wards and limits,
shall have power to assesse such person or persons, as are of ability and have
not contributed, and also such as have contributed, yet not according to their
ability, to pay such sum or sums of Money according to their Estates, as the
said Assessors or any four of them shall think fit and re^sonable, so as the
same exceed not the twentieth part of their Estates, and to nominate and
appoint fit persons for the collection thereof. And if any person so assessed
shall refuse to pay the money assessed upon him, it shall be lawful to and for
the said Assessors and Collectors, or any of them to leavy the said sum so
assessed by way of distress and sale of the goods of the person so assessed,
and refusing; And if any person so distrained shall make resistance, It shall
be lawful to and for the respective Assessors and Collectors or any of them,
to call to their assistance any the Trained bands of the said City of London or
any other his Majesty's Subjects, who are hereby required to be ayding and
assisting to the said Assessors and Collectors in the premises; And it is
hereby further ordained, that the respective Burgesses of Westminster and
Southwark, together with the several Committees appointed for the
subscriptions of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen and arms within the said City
and Borough shall respectively have power hereby to nominate Sessors for the
same City and Borough, in such manner as the Lord Major, etc. has for the City
of London, and the said Assessors or any four of them to name collectors as
aforesaid; Which said Assessors and Collectors shall have the same power
respectively within their respective limits, as those to be nominated within
the said City of London have hereby limit^ed to them. And for the Suburbs of
London and Westminster,the respective Knights of the Shires where the said
Suburbs are shall have hereby the like power to name Assessors, and they so
named, or any four of them, and the Collectors by them to be nominated, or any
of them within their respective limits, shall have the like power respectively
as the Assessors and Collectors for London have by virtue of this Ordinance.
And be it ordained that the sums so assessed and levied as aforesaid shall be
paid in at Guild Hall London, to the hands of Sir John Wollastone, Knight, John
Warner, John Towes, and Thomas Andrews Aldermen, or any two of them; And the
Assessors and Collectors to be nominated by virtue hereof shall weekly report
to the Commit of the House, of Commons, for the propositions aforesaid, what
sums of money have bin assessed, and what sums have bin levied weekly
according to the purport hereof, And the said moneys so levied and paid in
shall be issued forth in such sort as the other moneys raised upon the
propositions aforesaid, and not otherwise.

Die Martis, 29. November. 1642.
Whereas a late Ordinance is passed by both Houses of Parliament, for the
Reasons therein declared, for the assessing of all such persons within the
Cities of London and westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, with the Borough
of Southwark, as have not contributed upon the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament, for raising of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for
defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, or have not contributed
proportionably to their estates and abilities. And whereas it is thought fit
that some additions be made for further explanation and better execution of the
said Ordinance: Be it further Ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons
assembled Parliament, that such persons as shall be assessed by the respective
Assessors in the said Ordinance appointed, and shall within six days next
after notice given to them, or left at their several houses within the said
Cities, Suburbs, or Borough, pay in the one moity of the said sums of Money
so assessed, and within twelve days after the said notice given as aforesaid,
the other moity thereof, unto the Treasurers of Money and Plate in Guild Hall
London, or unto the Collectors appointed by the said Ordinance, respectively to
receive the same, that then the said Treasurers, or Collectors, shall give
Acquittances for the same, as has been done to such who have lent Moneys or
Plate, upon the Propositions of both Houses as aforsaid. And the said Moneys so
paid to the said Treasurers, or to the said several Collectors, shall be
repayd upon the Public Fath, as al other Moneys lent upon the said
Propositions of both Houses. And as for those who shall so far discover their
disaffection, as not to bring in the several sums of Money so assessed upon
them to the persons before appointed, within the times limited, that then their
goods shall be distrained and sold according to the said Ordinance. And if no
sufficient Distress be found, that then the said Collectors shall respectively
have power to enquire of any sum or sums of Money due, or to be due unto
them respectively so assessed form any person or persons for any Rents, Tithes,
Goods, or Debts, or for any other things or cause whatsoever. And the said
respective Collectors shall have power by virtue of this Ordinance, to receive
all or any part of the said sums due, or to be due unto them or any of them
so assessed, until the full value of the sum or sums so assessed, and the
charges in levying and recovering of the same shall be received and satisfied.
And the said respective Collectors shall have further power to compound for any
of the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, due unto the said person so
assessed respectively as aforesaid, with any person or persons by whom the said
Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, are, or shall be owing, as also to give full
and ample discharge for the Money by them so received, upon composition or
otherwise, which discharges shall be good and effectual to all intents and
purposes. And if the sum or sums of Money so assessed cannot be levied by
any of these means or ways, then the persons so respectively assessed, shall
be imprisoned in such places of this Kingdom, and for so long time as the
Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations, shall appoint and order:
And the families of all such persons so imprisoned, shall no longer remain
within the Cities of London, and Westminster, the Suburbs and the Counties
adjacent.

And be it further Ordained, that all and every the Assessors and Collectors of
the said several sums, shall have the protection of both Houses of
Parliament, for their indemnity in this service, and receive such reasonable
allowances for their pains taken and charges disbursed, or to be disbursed
therein, as the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Money and other
necessaries for the Army, raised by the Parliament, shall apportion and appoint.

An Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for the better Provision of
Victuals, and other Necessaries for the Army, and for payment and satisfaction
to be made for such provisions.
Die Martis, 29 November. 1642.
IT is Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That Committees shall be
named in all Counties, to take Care for Provisions of Victuals for the Army
raised by the Parliament, as likewise for the taking up of Horses for service
in the Field, Dragooners, and Draught-Horses, as likewise for borrowing of
Money or Plate to supply the Army. Which Committees, or any two or more of
them, shall have power and authority, to value all kind of Provisions both for
Men and Horse, all kind of Horse for service, or otherwise, which shall be
voluntarily offered to be lent upon the Public Faith, or likewise to receive
any Money or Plate to be lent as before; and that upon Certificate of any two
of such Committees, the same Provisions of Horses, Money, and Plate, and the
value thereof shall be entered by the Treasurer of the Propositions, and shall
be repayed to the party from whom the same was received, with like
Consideration as other Money lent.

And in case the Owners of such Provisions, Money, Plate, and Horses, shall
refuse or neglect to bring in the same upon public Faith, for the use of the
Army, for the better preventing the spoil and embezeling of such Provisions of
Money, Plate, and Horses, by the disorder of the Soldiers, and that they may
not come into the hands of the Enemies: It is further Ordered, that the
Committees aforementioned, or any two of them, be hereby authorized and
enabled to send for such Provisions, Money, Plate, and Horses, and take the
same into their Custody and to set an indifferent Value and Rate upon them:
Which Value they shall certify to the Treasurers for the Propositions, to be
repayd at such time, and in such manner, as shall be Ordered by both Houses of
Parliament. It is likewise Ordered, That the said Committees of the several
and respective Counties shall meet and consult with the Committees of the
adjacent and neighbor Counties, unto the place or places where the said Army
or any part thereof shall pass and remain, concerning the Receiving,
Procuring, Valuing, and Disposing of such Provisions, Horses, Money, and Plate.
And if they cannot conveniently meet, that then it shall be lawful for any
two, or more of the Committee, to execute the several Services above mentioned
in the adjoining Counties, as well as in the County wherein he is named a
Committee; and that such Certificates as they shall make of any Provisions,
Horses, Money, or Plate, shall be as effectual for the Securities of the
Parties, as if the same were received and taken within the County for which
he or they are named Committees. And the said Committees, or any two, or more
of them, shall cause the said Provisions to be delivered to the Commissarie for
the Victuals, or to his Deputy, and such other Officers of the Army, who may
be charged with the same upon their Account, and shall certify the Treasurer
of the Army, or his Deputy that so Defalcation of the Value thereof may be
made out of the Pay of such Officers and Soldiers as shall receive the same.
And the said Committee shall likewise cause all such Money and Plate to be
delivered unto the Treasurer of the Army, or his Deputy, who shall take Care,
to convey the Plate unto the Treasurer for the Propositions, and shall be
charged with all such Money upon his Account as with other Money received from
them.

FINIS.

