J R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God to call to his mercy our late Sovereign
Lord King Charles the Second of Blessed Memory, by whose Decease, the Imperial
Crowns of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, are solely and rightfully come
to the High and Mighty Prince James, Duke of York and Albany, His said late
Majesty's only Brother and Heir. We therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
of this Realm, being here Assisted with those of His late Majesty's Privy
Council, with numb^rs of other Principal Gentlemen of quality with the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, do now hereby with one full Voice and
Consent of Tongue and Heart, Publish and Proclaim, That the High and Mighty
Prince James the second, is now by the Death of our late Sovereign of Happy
Memory, become our only Lawful, Lineal, and Rightful Liege Lord, James the
Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To whom we do acknowledge all Faith and constant
Obedience, with all hearty and humble Affection: Beseeching God by whom Kings
do Reign, to Bless the Royal King James the Second with long and happy years to
Reign over us.

GOD save King JAMES the Second W. Cant. Guilford C. S. Rochester P. Halyfax C.
P. S. Norfolk Somerset Albemarle Beaufort Shrewsbury Kent Huntingdon Pembroke
Salisbury Bridgwater Westmorland Manchester Peterborow Chesterfield Sunderland
Scarsdale Clarendon Bathe Craven Ailesbury Litchfield Feversham Nottingham
Berkeley Morray Middleton Fauconberg Newport Weymouth Lumley Clifford H. London
N. Durham Tho. Roffens North and G(...) W. Maynard Cornwallis Arundell
Godolphin Drummond J. Ernle Tho. Chicheley L. Jenkins.


London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1684.

Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, anno DOM. 1685.


