The Address of the honorable the House of Commons: presented to His Majesty
on Thursday the 25 day of April, 1689. with His Majesty's Answer thereunto.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty, the Humble Address of the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, most humbly lay before your Majesty our earnest Desire,
That Your Majesty would be pleased to take into Your most serious
Consideration, the Destructive Methods taken of late years by the French King,
against the Trade, Quiet, and Interest of this Your Kingdom, and particularly
the present Invasion of the Kingdom of Ireland, and Supporting Your Majesty's
Rebellious Subjects there.

Not doubting in the least, but that through Your Majesty's Wisdom, the
Alliances already made, with such as may hereafter be Concluded on this
Occasion by Your Majesty, may be effectual to Reduce the French King to such a
Condition, that it may not be in his power hereafter to Violate the Peace of
Christendom, nor prejudice the Trade and Prosperity of this Your Majesty's
Kingdom.

To this End, We most humbly beseech Your Majesty to rest assured upon this our
Solemn and Hearty Promise and Engagement, That when Your Majesty shall think
fit to enter into a War against the French King, we will give Your Majesty such
Assistance in a Parliamentary way, as may enable Your Majest (under that
Protection and Blessing God Almighty has ever afforded you) to Support and go
through with the same.

William R.

I Receive this Address as a Mark of the Confidence you have in Me, which I
take very kindly, and shall endeavor by all My Actions to Confirm you in it.

I Assure you, that My Own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline Me to
Engage in a War, that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense.

But in the present Case. I look upon the War so much already Declared in
effect by France against England, that it is not so properly an Act of Choice,
as an Inevitable necessity in Our own Defense.

I shall only tell you, that as I have ventured My Life, and all that is Dear
to Me, to Rescue this Nation from what it suffered, I am ready still to do the
same, in Order to the preserving it from all its Enemies; And as I do not doubt
of such an Assistance from you, as shall be suitable to your Advice to Me, to
Declare War against a Powerful Enemy, so you may Rely upon Me, that no part of
that which you shall give for the carrying it on with Success, shall be
Diverted by Me to any other Use.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


