THE ANSWER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS TO The Citisens of Londons Petition for
Peace: Wherein they declare their Resolution concerning the same Likewise their
Propositions to the Knights Gentry, and Trained Bands of the county of Essex,
Concerning the Proceedings in this city, and the Affairs of the whole KINGDOM.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parliment, that these
Particulars be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Decmeb 20. London, printed for Richard West. 1642.

THE RESOLVTION OF THE LORDS aad COMMONS In this present PARLIAMENT Concerning
the Citisens of Londons petition for peace.
THe Honorable Houses of Parliament, having taken into serious consideration
the late petition of the Cittisens of London, wherein they most earnestly
desire an accommodation of Peace, between his Majesty and both houses, but in
such away, that they do not care if it be with the loss of their Religion and
Liberties.

But his Majesty's great Counsel, the Worthies of Israel, out of their pious
and Religious care to the public Good, having ever since the first time of
their fitting, labored by all possible means that might be to settle this
Kingdom in a happy and glorious Union: and has also ever since the beginning
of these present distractions in this Kingdom, both by their humble Petitions
and Messages to His Majesty, most earnestly desired a Peace and Union, and that
these differences which are now in dissent betwixt his Miiesty and both houses,
might be composed and brought to a full-period, so that it is to be admired at,
that these Citisens which has now petitioned for peace, should presume so
far, knowing that the Honorable houses of Parliament has oftentimes
petitioned to His Majesty for the same.

And therefore to satisfy the Desires of all the aforenamed persons, both
houses have have thought fit and meet to declare this their full will and
pleasure unto them, viz.

THat whereas diverse of the aforesaid persons have framed a petition for Peace,
and presented it to the House of Commons, most earnestly desiring an answer of
the same, after some time spent in debate thereof, the house returned this
answer, That ever since their first sitting it has always bin their care to
preserve the peace of this Kingdom, and that they have and do still labor
after peace by all possible means, so as the same might be obtained in a safe
and honorable way, but to have a peace without securing of our Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, and without bringing Traitors and Delinquents to
punishment, which are and have bin the only causers of this war, there can be
no war so perilious and grievous as such a peace.

The Parliaments propositions to the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty of the
County of Essex.
WHereas it does appear to the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that
his Majesty has sent out diverse Commissions for the levying of more Forces, to
the great hazard of Religion: but for preventing of these designs, the
Honorable Court of Parliament have agreed that these following propositions
shall be forthwith printed, and sent down to the County of Essex, viz.

I.

II. is raised or provided for the fomenting or maintaining any such unnatural
and unlawful war against the Parl. and Kingdom.

III. Essex, and shall fight with, kill and slay all such as shall oppose you.

IV. professed papists have bin invited to rise and take up Arms.

A true and brief Relation of the late woeful battle fought upon Sunday last
in the fore noon by Prince Rupert and Col. Brown.
PRrince Rupert having information of the last great Overthrow given to the L.
Grandison at Winchester, he was much perplexed in mind, taking a great and
solemn Oath to be revenged upon the said Col. Brown, but he failed of his
design; for although upon Sunday last he advanced near to C, Brown with about
3000. horse, giving him battle; yet such was the wisdom and policy of C.
Brown and Sir W. Waller, that dividing their army in two divisions* being in
number about 1200. horse and Dragoons, they charged the Prince with such a
desperate and violent charge, that there fell near upon 500. of the Princes
soldiers to the ground, and after 3. hours fight, News came that Ser j. Major
Skippen were coming, which caused the enemy to leave the field.

FINIS.

