A use of Exhortation TO THE LONDON APPRENTICES OR, A second Message after
their PETITION.
Young Men where are you now; what fast asleep?
What in a Dream? or do you keep
Close to the fireside, because it is cold?
Or (as your Masters say) must you be told
Over and over; What are you blind?
Besotted quite, or do you fear the wind?
Or has the Gun-men plunged you into fears?
Or are you frighted with their Bendileers?
Why gaze you thus? like men distracted,
Looking at one another, and nothing acted:
Crying a Lion lurketh in the way,
When as it is but a Lobster, whom (men say)
Turn him but over and over he will turn to you;
Then turn for shame, O sluggards, least you rue
When it is too late, be wise betimes,
Me thinks the Countries valor should ring chimes:
Unless you stop your ears, you cannot but hear,
How EXITER and CORNWALL banish fear;
They help for you, to better your condition,
They hazard All, to fulfill your Petition;
Yet you will not help your selves, I blush to see
Such petty places venture more then We.
Then Prentices, awake, awake, for shame,
Be faint no more, all cowardice disclaim;
Disband feamality, let courage be your Portion,
In such a case, Vallour's the best Devotion.
Petitions will not do, fare means are slighted,
You are compelled, at least, much more invited,
To do the Work your selves, then since it is so,
Show your selves men, about the business go:
Time is a precious thing, forbear delay,
Whilst the Sun shines, he sure to make your Hay.
Fear not Cornation-coats, they are but men,
They Would rather eat then fight; not one in ten,
But ( like self-seeking Rascals) are so evil,
For Six pence more they would List unto the Devil,
Then Blades revive, thus far I dare aspire,
You may your selves accomplish your desire:
The Day's your own, and such is your condition,
Your selves may quickly grant your own Petition
Till these things come to pass, till this We see,
Serve Jacobs Prentiship, you shall not be Free.
Till Men have noble hearts, till Youths grow bold,
Till Men do one another good uphold,
Till Valor springs, till courage does increase,
Till Wrong have Right, expect no settled Peace:
Here Is Arguments enough, if you be wise,
Reduce your Honor, though you lose your Eyes,
Uphold your Trade, maintain the Good Old Cause,
Un-coat the Lobsters, take away their claws.
Take this for all, I have no more to say,
I am the guide to put you in the way;
Here Is the right Path, hang him that goes astray.
FINIS.
J.E. App*

OXFORD, Printed for Carolus Adolphus.


