A DECLARATION OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, TOUCHING A LATE BREACH of their
Privileges; And for the Vindication thereof, and of diverse Members of the said
House.
WHereas the Chambers, Studies, and Trunks, of Master Denzill Hollis, Sir
Arthur Haslerigg, Master John Pym, Master John Hampden, and Master William
Strode Esquires, Members of the House of Commons, upon Monday, the 3. of this
instant January, by color of His Majesty's Warrant have been sealed up by Sir
William Killigrew, and Sir William Flemen, and others, which is not only
against the Privilege of Parliament, but the Common Liberty of every Subject:
Which said Members afterward, the same day were under the like color, by
Sergeant Francis, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary to all
former Presidents demanded of the Speaker sitting in the House of Commons, to
be delivered unto him, that he might Arrest them of high Treason. And whereas,
afterward the next day His Majesty in His Royal Person, came to the said
House attended with a great multitude of men armed in warlike manner, with
Halberts, Swords, and Pistols, who came up to the very door of the House, and
placed themselves there, and in other places, and passages near to the said
House, to the great terror and disturbance of the Members then sitting; and
according to their duty in a peaceable, and orderly manner, treating of the
great affairs of England, and Ireland. And his Majesty having placed himself
in the Speakers Chair, demanded of them the persons of the said Members to be
delivered unto him, which is a high Breach of the Rights, and Privileges of
Parliament, and Inconsistent with the Liberties, and Freedom thereof. And
whereas afterward his Majesty did issue forth several Warrants to diverse
Officers, under his own hand, for the apprehension of the Persons of the said
Members, which by Law he cannot do; there being not all this time, any Legal
charge or accusation, or due Process of Law issued against them, nor any
pretense of charge made known to that House; all which are against the
Fundamental Liberties of the Subject, and the Rights of Parliament. Whereupon
we are necessitated, according to our duty, to declare; And we do hereby
declare, that if any Person shall Arrest M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M.
Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, or any of them, or any other Member of
Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant issuing out from the King
only, is guilty of the Breach of the Liberties of the Subject, and of the
Privilege of Parliament, and a public enemy to the Commonwealth. And that
the Arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or of any other Member of
Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a legal Proceeding against
them, and without consent of that House, whereof such Person is a Member, is
against the Liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of Privilege of Parliament;
And the Person which shall Arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of
the Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the Commonwealth.
Notwithstanding all which we think fit, further to declare that we are so far
from any endeavors to protect any of our Members, that shall be in due manner
prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament for Treason, or any other misdemeanors, That none shall be more
ready and willing then we our selves, to bring them to a speedy, and due
trial, being sensible that it equally imports us, as well to see justice done
against them that are Criminous, as to defend the just Rights and Liberties of
the Subjects, and Parliament of England.

And whereas upon several examinations taken the 7. day of this instant
January, before the Committee appointed by the House of Commons, to sit in
London, it did fully appear, that many soldiers, Papists, and others, to the
number of about 500. came with His Majesty on Tuesday last, to the said House
of Commons, armed with Swords, Pistols, and other weapons; and diverse of them
pressed to the door of the said House, thrust away the door Keepers, and placed
themselves, between the said door and the ordinary attendants of hs Majesty;
holding up their Swords, and some holding up their Pistols ready cocked near
the said door; and saying, I am a good Marksman, I can hit right I warrant you,
and they not suffering the said door, according to the custom of Parliament to
be shut, but said they would have the door open, and if any opposition were
against them, they made no question, but they should make their party good, and
that they would maintain their party; and when several Members of the House
of Commons were coming into the House, their attendants desiring that Room
might be made for them, some of the said Soldiers answered, A Pox of God
confound them, and others said, A Pox take the House of Commons, let them come
and be hanged, what a do is here with the House of Commons, and some of the
said Soldiers did likewise violently assault, and by force disarm some of the
Attendants, and servants of the Members of the House of Commons, waiting in the
Room next the said House, and upon the Kings return out of the said House, many
of them by wicked oath^* and otherwise, expressed much discontent, that some
Members of the said House, for whom they came were not there, and others of
them ^^id, when comes the word, and no word being given at his Majesty's coming
out, they cried a lane, a lane; afterward some of them being demanded, what
they thought the said company intended to have done, answered, That
questionless in the posture they were set, if the word had been given, they
should have fallen upon the House of Commons, and have cut all their throats.
Upon all which we are of opinion, that it is sufficiently proved, that the
coming of the said Soldiers, Papists, and others with his Majesty to the
House of Commons on Tuesday last, being the fourth of this instant January, in
the manner aforesaid, was to take away some of the Members of the said House;
and if they should have found opposition, or denial, then to have fallen upon
the said House in an hostile manner, And we do hereby declare that the same was
a traitorous design against the King and Parliament. And whereas the said M.
Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, upon report of
the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists, and others in the warlike and
hostile manner, aforesaid, did with the approbation of the House absent
themselves from the service of the House, for avoiding the great, and many
inconveniences, which otherwise apparently might have happened: Since which time
a printed paper in the form of a Proclamation, bearing date the sixth day of
this instant January, has issued out for the apprehending, and imprisoning of
them, Therein suggesting that through the conscience of their own guilt, they
were absent and fled, not willing to submit themselver to Justice; We do
further declare that the said printed paper is false, scandalous and illegal,
and that notwithstanding the said printed paper, or any Warrant issued out, or
any other matter; yet appearing against them or any of them, they may and ought
to attend the service of the said House of Commons, and the several Committees
now on foot. And that it is lawful for all persons whatsoever to lodge,
harbor or converse with them, or any of them; And whosoever shall be
questioned for the same, shall be under the protection and privilege of
Parliament.

And we do further declare, That the publishing of several Articles purporting
a form of a charge of high Treason against the Lord Kimbolton, one of the
Members of the Lords House, and against the said M. Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, by Sir William Killigrew, Sir
William Flemen, and others in the Innes of Court, and elsewhere in the Kings
Name, was a high Breach of the Privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to
his Majesty and his Government: A seditious Act manifestly tending to the
subversion of the Peace of the Kingdom, and an injury, and dishonor to the
said Members, there being no legal charge or accusation against them.

That the Privileges of Parliament, and the liberties of the Subject so
violated and broken, cannot be fully and sufficiently vindicated, unless his
Majesty will be graciously pleased, to discover the names of those persons, who
advised his Majesty to issue out Warrants, for the Sealing of the Chambers and
Studies of the said Members, to send a Sergeant at Arms to the House of
Commons, to demand their said Members, to issue out several Warrants under his
Majesty's own hand, to apprehend the said Members. His Majesty's coming
thither, in his own Royal Person. The publishing of the said Articles, and
printed Paper in the form of a Proclamation against the said Members, in such
manner as is before declared; To the end that such persons may receive condign
punishment.

And this House does further declare, That all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or dislike, between the
King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
combination or agreement, to be ayding, or assisting, to any such council or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any the
things above mentioned; And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
House of Parliament: Or the Speaker of either of the said Houses respectively,
and disclaim it, are declared public enemies of the State and Peace of this
Kingdom, and shall be inquired of, and proceeded against accordingly.

Die Lunae 17. Januarii. 1641. It is this day ordered, By the Commons Assembled
in Parliament, that this Declaration shall be forthwith published in Print.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. Do. Com.



London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.


