AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT FOR Advancing by
way of loan, the sum of forty thousand pounds, for payment of Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX ARMY.

October the 15. 1645. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed by T.W. for Edw. H^sband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
1645.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for advancing
by way of Loan, the sum of Forty thousand pounds, etc.
13. October, 1645.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, finding the many Battles,
Sieges and other service performed by the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the necessary recruiting and supplying thereof at so great a
distance has occasioned a far greater expense, then was at first conceived,
And also the great Advantages, which through the blessing of God, the
Commonwealth has received by the unwearied endeavors of the said Army; Do
hold it necessary, that a Considerable sum of Money be forthwith advanced
for the supply of the said Army, and defraying of the charges incident
thereunto, Have Ordained, and do hereby Ordain by authority of Parliament,
that the sum of forty thousand pounds shall be forthwith advanced by way of
Loan for the intents and purposes aforesaid, by, and on such persons of
ability as shall voluntarily, or by Assessment lend the same on the Security,
and Terms hereafter expressed. And in regard many persons of Ability through
disaffection or otherwise have been slow in the like Services tending to the
good and preservation of the Public, It is therefore by the said Lords and
Commons Ordained, for the more speedy and orderly raising of the said sum of
forty thousand pounds. That the Committee appointed by several Acts of Common
Counsel for gathering of the Arrears or any seven or more of them shall be a
Committee to Register and take the Subscriptions of all persons that shall
voluntarily lend and advance moneys as aforesaid, and to assesse such person or
persons as shall not according to their Abilities, voluntarily and
proportionably advance the same. And to Assesse such part of the said sum (as
shall not be voluntarily advanced) on such persons of ability as they shall
think fit, the same to be paid by the persons respectively, as shall so lend
or pay the same unto Sir John WVollaston, and the rest of the Treasurers at
War, appointed by the Ordinance of the 29 of March last, at the place of
Receipts in Guild Hall London.

And be it Ordained by authority aforesaid, That all and every person or
persons, being assessed by virtue hereof, and neglecting or refusing to pay the
said several sums so assessed unto the said Treasurers at War within ten
days after notice given, or left at his or their usual place of abode, or at
the dwelling House or place of abode of any Partner or Factor of the person or
persons so Assessed, inhabiting within, or near the City of London, shall be
by virtue of a Warrant from the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed by the
said Ordinance of Parliament of the 29 of March last past, who (or any five of
them, one thereof being a Peer upon consideration of every such assessment)
are hereby authorized to approve, increase, or moderate every such assessment,
and thereupon to make and give Warrants to such persons as shall be by the
Committee now appointed nominated for that purpose, compelled to pay the same
by distress of the Goods and Chattels of such person or persons so refusing or
neglecting to pay the same, which goods so distreyned shall be sold by such
persons as the said Committee shall appoint for satisfaction of the said
Assessment, and the surplusage, if any be, the said Assessment and Charges
satisfied, be returned to the party distreyned.

And if any person shall neglect, or refuse to pay the sum assessed, until a
Distress be taken for the same then, that every person or persons so
neglecting or refusing as aforesaid, shall pay such reasonable charge for every
such distress, removal, or sale of his, her, or their goods as the said
Committee (of Lords and Commons, or any five of them one thereof being a Peer)
appointed by the Ordinance of the 29 of March 1645. shall allow to be employed
for the better execution of this Ordinance.

And if no sufficient Distress can be had, or taken of the goods of the persons
that shall be Assesed, by virtue of this present Ordinance, then such person or
persons shall be by virtue of a Warrant from the Committee of Lords and Commons
as aforesaid who are hereby authorized to grant the same, be committed to safe
Custody, there to remain until such person or persons shall satisfy the
said sum assessed upon them by virtue hereof, which money so brought into the
Treasurers at War shall be issued forth by Warrant from the said Committee of
Lords and Commons appointed by Ordinance of the 29 of March aforesaid,
excepting what shall be by order of the Committee appointed by this present
Ordinance deducted for payment of persons employed in the execution of this
Ordinance not exceeding three pence in the pound.

And for the better encouragement and securing of such persons as shall advance
the said sum or any part thereof, The Lords and Commons do hereby Ordain
that such person or persons as shall pay or lend any money upon or by virtue of
this Ordinance, and pay the same to the Treasurers at war aforesaid, shall be
repaid the several sums which shall be by them advanced. out of the receipt
of the Excize and new Impost, with interest after the rate of eight pound per
centum, per annum for so long time as they shall forbear the same.

And the Commissioners of Excize and new Impost for the time being, are hereby
authorized and required to pay unto the several Lenders, their Executors and
assigns, at the end of six months, the interest for so much money as shall be
advanced by virtue hereof, and the principal and remainder of the interest
thereof after the rate aforesaid, in due course, order and rank as the same
stands charged upon the said Excise and impost, unto the persons that do
advance the same.

And the rcceipt of the said Treasurers at War or any two of them, one being
an Alderman, the other a Commoner, shall interest and entitle every person or
persons to whom it shall be given, his or their Executors, Administrators or
assigns, into the security and benefit of this present Ordinance with interest
aforesaid.

And it is further Ordained that no Ordinance nor assignement, not past in the
said receipt of the Excise before an Ordinance of the second of September last,
for the payment of fifty thousand pounds in course, for the service of the Army
under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall preceede this Ordinance; But
that it shall be paid in its course from that time accordingly and the
aforementioned receipts of the Treasurers at war, together with the
acquittance of the persons advancing the same, shall be a sufficient warrant
and discharge to the Commissioners of Excise and every of them, for payment of
the said sums to the several persons as aforesaid.

And it is further Ordained that all Majors, Sheriffs, Constables and
Headboroughs and all Officers of the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries within the
said limits, shall be ayding to the said respective Committees, and such as
they shall employ in the execution of this present Ordinance.

And the said respective Committees shall have power to impose upon such
Officers or persons so neglecting their duties therein, such fine or fines as
to them shall seem meet, not exceeding forty shillings for any one offense,
and to cause the same to be leavied by distress and sale of the goods as
aforesaid.

And it is further Ordained that all persons acting in pursuance of this
Ordinance shall be saved harmeles by authority of Parliament.

And that no privileged places shall be exempted from the said assessment.

Provided that such persons as shall make it appear to the said Committee of
Arreares by their Protestation or Oath that he or they are not worth one
thousand pounds, shall not be assessed by this Ordinance.

Provided always that this Ordinance or any clause therein contained shall not
extend to any of the Peers of this Realm, or to the Members of the House of
Commons, or assistant, attendant or Officer of the House of Peers, or Officer
of the House of Commons.

H. Elsynge, Cler.Parl.Dom.Com.

Die Martis 2. September, 1645,
IT is this day Ordained by the lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; that
fifty thousand pounds shall be paid in course for the service of the Army
under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairefax, out of the receipts of the Excise, by
Ordinance of the eleventh of September, 1643, unto the Treasurers at War; and
the receipt of any four of them together with this Ordinance shall be a
sufficient discharge unto the Commissioners of Excize and every of them, for
payment of the said fifty thousand pounds, and Interest for the same after the
rate of eight pounds Per Cent. for so long time as the same shall be unpaid,
before it become due as aforesaid.

H. Elsynge, Cler.Parl. D. Com.

FINIS

