A MESSAGE FROM BOTH HOUSES OF Parliament Sent to YORK to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, the 28. of March 1642.

With his Majesty's Letter to the Lord Keeper, in answer to the same, Dated
March the last. 1642.

Sabbati 2. of April, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that the Message of both Houses to his
Majesty, dated 28. of March, 1642. That the Earl of Warwick might command
this Summers Fleet, in chief under the Lord Admiral: and his Majesty's Answer
thereunto shall be forthwith printed and published.

John Brown, Cler.Parliament.



Printed at London for Andrew Coe. 1642.

May it please Your Majesty,
THE Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having found it
necessary to provide, and set to Sea a strong and powerful Navy for the
defense of this Kingdom against foreign force and the security of your other
dominions, the charge whereof is to be borne by the Commonwealth, and taking
notice of the indisposition of the Lord Admiral, which disables him at this
time for commanding the fleet in his own person, did thereupon recommend unto
his Lordship, the Earl of Warwick (a person of such quality and ability as in
whom they might best confide) to supply his Lordships room for this
employment, and understanding that your Majesty has since signified your
pleasure concerning that command to Sir John Pennington, we do hold it our
duty to represent unto your Majesty, the great danger and mischief the
Commonwealth is like to sustain by such interruption.

And therefore do humbly beseech your Majesty that the person recommended by
both Houses of Parliament for this service, may no longer be detained from it
out of any particular respect to any other person whatsoever.

To our Right trusty and welbeloved Counselor, Edward Lord Littleton, Keeper
of our Great Sea^e of ENGLAND.
RIght trusty and welbeloved Counselor, we greet you well:
we wonder both at the form and matter of that enclosed Paper ye sent Us, (in
the name of both House of Parliament, in yours of the 28. of March) it beng
neither by way of Petition, Declaration, or Leter, and for the matter, We
believe it is the first ti^e that the houses of Parliament have taken upon them
the nomination or recommendatio^ of the chiefsea Commander; but it ads to the
wonder, that Sir John Pennington being already appointed by Us for that
service, upon the recommendation of our Admiral, (which is so well known that
none can be ignorant of it) and no fault so much as alleged against him,
another should be recommended to Us: Therefore Our Resolution upon this point
is, that We will not alter him, whom we have already appointed to command this
years Fleet, whose every way suffeciency is so universally known, the which
We are confident Our Admiral (if there shall be occasion) will make most
evident (against whose Testimony We suppose our Parliament will not except) and
though there were yet none appointed; or the said Sir John (through some
accident) not able to perform the service, yet the men of that Profession, are
so well known to Us, (besides many other Reasons) that (our Admiral ^ccepted
because of his place) Recommendation of that kind, would not be acceptable to
Us.

Given at Our Court at York, the last of March, 1642.
FINIS

