Englands Happiness Restored, OR A CONGRATULATION Upon the Return of his GRACE
James Duke of Monmouth, On Thursday night the 27th of this instant November
1679.
GReat Britai^'s Isle, Commandress of the Flood,
Who have so long the boast of Europe stood.
Happy since Warlike Monmouth long Exile'd,
Is to his Royal Father reconciled:
Dreadful in Arm that Glorious Prnice once more,
Is Landed safe on thy Triumphant shore.
Whom Seas and Wind^ we^e joyful to restore:
On dauncinng Waves the Watery Syreans Sung,
Whilst Auziar Trytons drove his Yatch along.
Striving to haste him, so long wished for home,
His Countries shield and Scourg to Tyrant Rome:
A Prince whose Soul's of Virtues all compiled,
In Camps like Thunder, and in Courts so mild.
That Nature stood amazed when he was given,
To see him made of Kindred Mould to Heaven;
Which sheves him, Caesar's off'pring and the Son,
Of mighty Charles, whose Glories still run on.
And shine like Stars, since first his Reign began,
In spite of Hell or Vile Conspiring Man.
But when Obedient Monmouth left the Land,
In order to his Fathers great Command.
The Throne was Clouded with unusial fear.
And all the Vulgars hopes did disappear:
The Skies in Sable Mourned for his retreat,
Whom Arms and Glory rendered so complete.
Fames darling and the Noblest of his Age;
That Treads the Compass of the Worlds vast Stage,
Whilst smiling Honors Sprinkled on his Brow,
And from htis Soul does Tides of greatness Flow.
Heroic Virtues, his attendants are,
And O fars Fortunes weight on him i War,
His high renown borne on the Wings of Fame.
Has made the Nations starte^ where it came:
Whilst that the God of Battle marked his Eye,
And where it aimed sent fullflush'd Victory.
His dazzling luster awed his proudest Foes,
Whilst round about he Warlike Terror throws:
This is the great Soul Monmouth, he whose Sword;
Such brave Atchevivements dares, and can afford:
Without once Pausing his Heroic Blood,
For his great Father, and his Countries good.
Rejoice then happy land since such brave worth
If need requires will lead thy Armies forth,
Let Rocks be Split, and Waters break their bounds
WhiIst Thundering Peals of joyful Echoes sound,
To see the Royal Father smilling on.
The safe Arival of his Warlike Son:
Now let those cares and fears who late did shroud
Our Sunshine joy be vanished to a Cloud.
That Bells, and Fires, and Thundering Cannons may.
Dcclare the joyful Triumph of the day;
Whilst envious Rome, her hissing Snakes lays by,
And grieves to see successless Treasons die.
And all her proud infernal thoughts expire:
Which she conceived when Monmouth did retire,
That Dragons rage who fain would England spoil.
And stretched on Racks, with flame her Marters broil.
Great Monmouth's Sword, if not his Name can Quel,
And drive those Monsters, lately loosed from Hell:
(And like Pandora's Box, of Evils Hurled;
To Plague the Civil Nations of the World,
Down to the dreadful Place from whence they came,
And make them Plunge into their Primal Flame;
Fate now thy worst, Heroic Monmouth's come,
The hopes of England, and of Christendom:
May his Great Fathers anger never Rise!
Against a Son, that does Obedience Prize,
Verteous and good, beyond what we express.
Noble by Nature, and by Art no less:
Where all these Virtues in a Prince does Crowd;
Let envy Fly before him like a Cloud,
So bright in Honor, and in Arms so Great.
Heaven Gaurds him still from all the storms of Fate:
And fresh blown wonders so transplendent prove;
Whilst still he floats on Tides of strongest love,
May sacred Hollows now suround his Head.
And loud Mouthed Fame through boundless Nations spread,
The joy of Albion, and the happy day.
Since Clouds removed once more her Star-like ray,
Sends out his Glister to the Frozen North:
And great Soul'd Mars, for its defense stands forth.
Who ro^ling through the Globe at length is come,
Laden with Trophies of more Honor home,
Now dreadful Rome, no more thy frowns can fright.
Nor all thy Horrors hatched in shades of Night;
Our Gaurdian Angel in a mortal form,
Will drive thy Thunders back, and quel thy storm,
Though Wirl-winds from thy Yeaning bosom rise.
To wrack the World, and shake the blushing Skies;
We Will stand secure and dare thy utmost Frown:
Whilst Fate her self thy Pride shall tumble down,
Great Monmouth, darling of our British Isle:
Who now repairs once more to make her Smile;
And in Obedience to his Fathers will,
Such pleasing Joys from bleeding hearts distill.
That Transports Triumph upon every brow:
And Sreams of Love through each Meander flow:
Then for great Monmouth, thus restored lets sing.
Long live great Charles our wise and Sacred King,
London Printed by D: M. in the Year, 1679.


