THE ENGLISH ASSOCIATION OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS.
Kensingtoun, April 3. This Day Mr. Speaker, with the House of Commons in a
Body, attended His Majesty, and presented their Association as follows.
WHereas there has been a horrid and detestable Conspiracy, Formed and carried
on by Papists and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France, to
subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberties; We whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, do heartily, sincerely and solemnly profess, testify and declare,
that His present Majesty King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do mutually promise and engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the uttermost of our power, in the Support and Defense of His
Majesty's most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James, and
all his Adherents. And in case His Majesty come to any violent or untimely
Death, (which God forbid) we do hereby further freely and unanimously oblige
our selves to unite, associat, and stand by each other in revenging the same
upon his Enemies, and their Adherents; and in supporting and defending the
Succession of the Crown, according to an Act made in the first Year of the
Reign of King William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act declaring the Rights
and Liberties of the Subject, and settling the Succession of the Crown.

Mr. Sp^aker made a Request to his Majesty, that the said Association, and all
other Associations by the Commons of England be lodged among the Records in the
Tower, to remain as a perpetual Memorial of their Loyalty and Affection to His
Majesty. And His Majesty was graciously pleased to answer to this effect.

GENTLEMEN,
I Take this as a most convincing and most acceptable Evidence of your
Affection, and as you have freely Associated yourselves for Our Common Safety,
I do heartily enter into the same Association, and will be always ready with
you, and the rest of my good Subjects, to venture my Life against all who shall
endeavor to subvert the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England,


His Majesty was pleased likewise to say, That the Association should be lodged
in the Tower, as they desire.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
to His most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


