An excellent New SONG, Called, The Gentleman's Resolution. FOR A Pleasant
Country Life.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^

I.
COme, come, come, come,... let us leave,..
Let us, let us leave the Town, come, come, come, come,
Come, come, come, come, let us leave,..
Let us, let us, let us leave the Town, and in some lovly place
Where Crowds and Noise, where Crowds and Noise
Were never, never, never, never known,
Re-sol -- ve to spend our days,
In pleasant, pleasant Sha -- des,
In pleasant, pleasant Shades upon the Grass
At Night our selves we'll lay,
Our days in harmless sports shall pass,
Our days in harmless sports, in harmless sports shall pass,
Thus time shall sli -- de away.
II.
Call, call, call, call,... call the Coach,..
Call the, call the Coach away, call, call, call, call,
Call, call, call, call,.. call the Coach,..
Call the, call the, call the Coach away, and let us go in time
To Woods and Groves, to Woods and Groves,
Let Us hurry, hurry, hurry, hurry, straight,
Where Charm -- ing Birds do Sing,
Their Tuneful, Tuneful No -- tes,
Their Tuneful, Tuneful Notes does sound each day,
There let us on the Ground
Within each others Arms to lie,
Within each others Arms, each others Arms to lie,
And tumble o -- n the Ground.
III.
What, what, what, what,.. is there in,..
Is there, is therein this Town, what what what what?
What, what, what, what,.. is there in,..
Is there, is there, is there in this Town but lewd Debauchery
We Drink all night, we Drink all night,
And tipple, tipple, tipple, tipple on,
Till Bot -- tles fly about,
Then Whinnyard, Whinnyard's dra -- wn,
Then whinnyard, whinnyard's drawn and one's ran through
This is the Trade of the Town.
Then let us a Country life all live,
Then let us a Country life, a Country life all live
Where Lewdness i -- s not known.
IV.
Come, come, come, come,... let us go,..
Let us, let us go with speed, come, come, come, come,...
Come, come, come, come, let us go,..
Let us, let us, let us go with speed and leave this nasty Town
For wine and Punk, for wine and Punk,
Does ever, ever, ever, ever make
Us Ma -- d by being Drunk,
Then follow, follow Boy -- s,
Then follow, follow Boys, let us go while sound
To Pleasure Night and Day,
Where fresh young Country Maids are found,
Where fresh young Country Maids, young Country May(...) are sound
To pass the ti -- me away.
Printed for Charles Barnet.


