AN ELEGY IN Commemoration of the Right Honorable James Earl of Salisbury, Who
Departed this Life on the (7th) of this Instant June Anno Domini 1683. Mors
Omnibus Communis, etc.
12. June. 1683

CAN Sal'sbury be dead? Can Death Surprise
The Miror of mankind, and from our Eyes;
The Brinie Rivulets not force their way;
Nor sullen grief her last due Tribute pay;
At his sad Mournful Hearse whose high deserts,
Fame's loudest breath to all the world imparts?
What can the Good, the Great, the Just Expect,
On Earth, if Mankind should such worth Neglect?
If black Ingratitude her wings should spread,
To shade the sacred Relicts of the dead
In dark Oblivion Natur's self would groan,
And make the mighty loss to England known;
The loss of one in Arts and Arms Renowned,
With Olive-Branches and with Laurels Crowned.
Famed as his Aucestors, who braving Fate,
Durst prop the Nation in it is falling State,
And almost bore a Tottering Empir's Weight.
For Piety admired; in Councils Grave;
Courteous at home, and in the Field as Brave;
Bounteous to all, that did his Bounty Crave.
Religious Friend, an Enemy to those,
Who were his Princes and his Countries Foes.
The Roman Engines by his prudence foild,
Back on him sought in vain to have recoiled:
His Loyal mind unmoved stood like a Rock,
And unconcerned repelled the raging Shock
Of Boisterous Billows when they went most high
Proof armed with Innocence and Constancy;
He did the worst of dangers still out^vie.
Sure Bucklers those are which can never fail,
But will against the worst of ills prevail;
Strong Forts Impregnable that none can scale.
No force can ravish from a virteous breast,
That inward calmness that secures it is Rest.
Let Tides rise high, and Tempests rufle loud,
Winds fight with Winds, and Cloud, still justle Cloud,
Till all seem Chaos; yet in this Extreme,
He Is undisturbed that holds Truths Golden Mean.
Cecil, that Name long to our Nation known,
Has proved an Ornament to Grace our Throne;
Esteemed a Jewel in the British-Crown,
Polished by Deeds, that purchased high Renown.
But since the World has lost his better part,
His great immortal mind which durst assert,
Unto the last his Kings and Country's Right,
Since that to Heaven has swiftly taken Flight:
On Wings of Cherubs, Centered there in bliss,
Lodged on a Coast full stored with happiness;
Whence cares, and fears, are banished, Peace and Rest
Are the attending constant welcome Guest.
And all is Love, such Love as never can die,
But lives and lasts to all Eternity.
Let Virtue Mourn the loss of him below;
And Charities Dim Eyes with Tears o're-flow.
Let Mournful Cyprus shade each learned brow,
Let all true worth with weighty sorrow bow;
And Sing his Requiems with a doleful sound,
For all of these Death's Shaft, in him, did wound.
EPITAPH
Mourn Reader, for beneath this Marble lies,
(Till the last Trumpet Summons him to rise)
Great Sal'sbury: Nay, stay, it is but his dust,
Heaven with the rest would Earth no longer trust.
His better part's exalted far above,
The reach of Fate those endless joys to prove,
For which he labored in his Pilgrimage,
Whilst here he trod the World's uncertain Stage;
Yet Mourn his loss, for though he joys possess,
We by his death have gained unhappiness.
Wisdom by him her Orator still speak,
And would no other for her Champion take,
Than he whose Virtues kept the world awake.
LONDON Printed for Langly Curtis. 1683.


