AN ELEGY On the Death of Mrs Rebecca Palmer. Daughter of A. P. M. Who died in
the Fifteenth Year of her Age, November 17. 1667.
Here lies the Cask, the Jewel it self is gone:
To be refined more, and shine alone.
The Virgin-Soul that breathed in this dust,
Makes haste to Rest, and take her journey must
To Saints above, and there must Jesus see,
Whom Savior, Bridegroom, Love, and Lord, to be
She chosen had: Whose Call betimes she hears;
Her Ear and Heart inclined: When come to years,
The afflictions of the Saints was made to choose,
Refusing vain delights; nor run with those
Who for a while pleasures of sin enjoy,
Best time mis-spend, and precious Souls destroy;
Hence she repined not at a suffering-state,
Reproach for Christ she knew how to estimate.
She loved his word, and sat at Jesus Feet,
And tell she would, that all his words were sweet.
The Assemblies of the Saints were her delight,
Christ's Voice to hear, and of Him have a sight:
Her Closet-Cries and Tears observed were,
Though she closest retirements sought, with fear,
(As often expressed) of Heart-hypocrisie;
Of which she kept a gracious jealousy.
Her gentle sweet Behavior, Modesty,
Lovely with Natures Ingenuity,
Gave her acceptance with the Saints, won Love
And kindness from them, who her Spirit did prove:
To Parents, tender, cheerful, and content;
Still saying, God will provide, we shall not want:
To fellow-Children, carriage sweet and dear;
To Friends, to All, her Words endearing were.
Example to all youth, helped to deny,
By Cboice, fond triflles, and their vanity.
The sins and troubles which her future Age
Might have exposed her to, which times presage,
Prevented are, b' an early sudden flight
Int' her best Fathers House and Mansion bright:
Her complete Marriage-state with Christ to make,
Scarce staying a farewell of her Friends to take
Leaving a savor here; and Those she left
To Bless and Praise, not sorrow, as if bereft.
Go Heaven-born Soul, soon ripe, till we shall meet
Before the Throne, and sing at Jesus Feet:
Till Dust a fitter Cabinet shall be,
When raised up, for Immortality.
Sic Ebullivit Affectus.

