The Shooe-maker's Triumph:
BEING A Song in Praise of the Gentle-Craft, showing how Royal Princes, Sons of
Kings, Lords, and great Commanders, have been Shooe-makers of old, to the
Honor of this ancient Trade; as it was sung at a General Assembly of
Shooe-makers, on the 25th of October. 1695, being St. Crispin.

To the Tune of, The Evening Ramble, etc.
Written by RICHARD RIGBEY,a Brother of the Craft.


I Sing in the Praise of Shooe-makers,
whose Honor no Person can stain,
In every Age they dare to Engage,
and Victory still they did gain;
No Craft in the World can compare
with Shooe-making, for I declare,
Who reads but the Story, will set forth their Glory,
commending them everywhere,
As Persons of honored Fame and Renown;
Then let not their Glory be trampled down.
Sir Hugh was a Prince and a Lover,
yet learned the Shooe-making Trade,
Which yielded Relief, when Sorrow and Grief,
in Travel, had made him dismayed;
When he of his Love was denied,
he crossed the Ocean so wide,
Returning soon after, then with a King's Daughter
a Glorified Martyr he died.
Thus Shooe-makers have been true Men of Renown,
Then let not their Glory for ever go down.
There Is Crispine, and brave Crispianus,
both Brothers, and Sons to a King,
In Sorrow and Woe, from Court they did go,
when under a Shooe-maker's Wing
Protection and Safety they found,
for 'Prentices straight they were bound;
Disguised like Strangers, from perilous Dangers,
this Harbor of Safety they found:
Thus Princes of honored Fame and Renown,
Has Shooe-makers been, that was Heirs to a Crown.
Young Crispine he won the fair Daughter
of Great Maximinus, for who
Admitted could be, but verily he,
to draw on fair Vrsula's Shoe,
That honored Lady of Fame,
for when to the Palace he came,
He soon was admitted, the Shoes being fitted,
this Royal Young Beautiful Dame
Besought him for Marriage, though Heir to the Crown;
Thus Shooe-makers have been brave Lords of Renown.
His Brother went forth as a Soldier,
well armed, to the Gallican Shore,
Where thousands he killed; they never beheld
such conquering Courage before,
The Work being speedily done,
and the Enemy forced to run;
Their General Gallant, Courageous and Valiant,
was likewise a Shooe-maker's Son:
Thus loaded with honored Fame and Renown,
Then let not brave Shooe-makers Glory go down.
Sir Simon, Lord Mayor of fair London,
he was a Shoemaker by Trade,
Who, while he was Mayor, the Truth to declare,
a Dinner of Fritters he made,
Inviting the 'Prentices all,
who readily came at his Call;
That Day they were merry, with Bowls of Canary,
for he from his Word would not fall:
Thus good Simon Air, of Fame and Renown,
He was a Shoemaker, and Lord of the Town.
Thus Valliant and Noble Shooe-makers
the City and Court did Adorn;
For Deeds they have done, a Shooe-maker's Son,
I tell you, he is a Prince born;
There Is no other Trade in the Land,
had ever such Royal Command,
For Honor and Glory; then read but the Story,
then, then you will soon understand,
That Shooe-makers they have been famed for Renown,
Then let not their Triumph and Honor go down.
Printed for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible in Pye-corner

There is likewise newly Writ and Printed a Book intitul'd, The Shooe-maker's
Glory: or, The Princely History of the Gentle-Cra(...) Showing what Renowned
Princes, Hero's and Worthies have been of the Shooe-maker's Trade, both in this
and other Kingdom (...) likewise why it is called, The Gentle-Craft; and that
they say, A Shooe-maker's Son is a Prince born. To which this Song is add(...)
Price Twopence.


