AN ELEGY On Coronel BLOOD, Notorious for stealing the Crown, etc. Who Dyed
the Twenty Sixth of August, 1680.
30 Aug. 1680.

Thanks ye kind Fates, for your last Favor shown
Of stealing BLOOD, who lately stole the Crown;
We Will not exclaim so much against you since;
As well as BEDLOE, you have fetched him hence,
He who has been a Plague to all Mankind:
And never was to any one a Friend,
Nay to himself such torment was at last,
He wished his Life had long ago been past.
For who can bear, a discontented mind.
Or any Peace with an ill Conscience find,
Through his whole Life, he practiced Villainy
And Loved it though he nothing got thereby;
At first uneasy at the Kings return
With secret Malice his bold heart 'did burn.
Against his Sovereign, and on pretense
He had much wronged his Feigned Innocence;
To IRELAND went, and several ways did try
Rather then he would unrevenged Dye,
To vent his Malice on His MAJESTY.
But finding there all his attempts prove vain,
To ENGLAND forthwith he returns again,
And after some small time, he had Lived here
The first Great thing in which he did appear,
Was rescuing from Justice CAPTAIN MASON,
Whom all the WORLD does know, to have been a base one
The next ill thing he Boldly undertook,
Was Barbarously seizing of a DUKE.
Whom as he since confessed, he did intend
To Hang for Injuries he did pretend:
The DUKE had alone him, though the World does know
His Grace was never to a Good Man a Foe:
Having through all, his many well spent Days;
Served His KING and Country, several ways
And Patiently his troubles underwent,
Finding a sweetness, even in Banishment
And Death, he Patiently would have endured,
The KINGS Restoring could he have secured:
A DUKE, who being by Providence preserved
Has begot Sons; who Valiantly have served.
His MAJESTY, and Great Renown Obtein'd
In many Battles by your Valor Gained,
Great OSSERY, who by his Conduct wise,
Did Often by Stratagems, his Foes surprise
And has as often beat them with his Sword;
Was the Eldest Son, of this most Noble LORD.
But I my HERO almost had forgot,
And the next thing he Engaged in was a PLOT.
To seize the CROWN; and without doubt he who
So Great a Piece of Villainy would do,
When he saw Time, would have attempted too;
His MAJESTY; but failing of the prize,
About the Town he undiscovered lies,
Harbored by some of's fellow Rogues, yet see
How few can escape concernd in Villainy,
In a short time, he apprehended was
And braved His MAJESTY, even to his Face
Yet when one would, have thought he should have had;
Reward for's Villainy; and have been made
Example to all Ages our good King,
Gave him his Life, (who long has strove to bring
Destruction on him,) and did him Restore,
To liberty, thinking he never would more
Do any thing unjust again when lo;
His stiring Spirit, was not contented so,
For he Engages inth' Conspiracy,
To ruin the Honor, Life, and Liberty,
Of a deserving Noble Honest Peer,
And had him brought, unto destruction near
But Divine providence for ever Blessed:
Prevented this, as well as all the Rest
By the coming in of some, that were concerned
Which all your PLOT; into confusion turned,
At last our Famous HERO Coronel BLOOD,
Seeing his Projects all will do no good,
And that Success was to him still denied,
Fell sick with Grief, broke his great Heart and died.
The EPITAPH.
HERE Lies the Man, who boldly has run through,
More Villainies then ever ENGLAND knew;
And nere to any Friend, he had was true,
Here let him then by all unpittied Lie,
And Let Us Rejoice his time was come to Dye.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by J. S. in the Year, 1680.


