AN ELEGY ON His Grace the Illustrious CHARLES STUART, Duke of Richmond and
Lenox, etc. Ambassador Extraordinary to the Crown of Denmark.
IS this the News w^ expected from the Frost?
The Fatal Tidings that Great Richmond's lost:
Behold I how Britains Genius shivering lies,
And trickling Icecles drew from its Eyes;
A sudden Damp has seized its spirits, and all
Our hopes are Frostnipt in's untimely fall:
Did Northern Stars there so severely Reign
Not to be Countercheck'd by Charles his Wayn?
Could not the Sovereign Sta^ so guard his Heart
To gain some little respite from Deaths Datt?
That Aster'isme for those high born and bred
A Monarchs mark on men whose parts h'as red:
'Twas subtly done, Oh Fate I thus to surpriz:
Him out of reach of his Chaste Consorts eyes;
From her Life-breathing Lips had one Kiss come
'T had called him back, and so reverst his Doom:
Grief's sables now surround the gloomy Room,
And Sighs like Incense cloud it with Perfume
From Her sweet breath; whilst her two Panting Breasts,
Like little mournful Birds droop in their Nests:
The Funeral Tapers burn, but with dim Light,
Naught but her Eyes, beneath her Vail, shines bright.
To rugged Charon she makes gentle moan,
Calmely to wast the Dearest Relics home
From cruel De mark's Shore; Hark I how she charms
The Churl, to the Elysium of her Arms,
To bring the twice cold Corpse; That her Sighs may
With Floods of Tears soften his stiffned Clay;
Let none into her presence dare t'Intrude
Once to disturb her graceful solitude:
She needs none of your help, let her alone,
The Turtle by her self loves to bemoan.
She has no leisure yet, to adhere to Fame,
Who must high Stories tell of His Great Name;
For Fame her self must court her lofty Ear,
For a fit time when she is pleased to hear
Her large Discourse of all that he has done,
Since the first Scene of his great part begun.
Yet give me leave, Great Duchess to let fall
The shady Curtain of his Funeral;
And draw in brief to the Worlds wondering Eye
Your Noble Dukes still living Effigy.
He was a Man -- ('s Death! That I could not say
He was a Man) but molded of the Clay
Of Natures purest Mass, fraught with a mind
For his so brittle body too Refined;
And therefore unto Denmark was he sent,
As none more fit, His King to Represent.
Yet would not Death Vail to's High Character,
To show that SVCH, like KINGS still Mortal are:
Though in His Death he has as much to Boast,
As those that seemed at Home to serve him most.
Thus left he all his SERVICES on score
Unsum'd, Denied by Fate, to make them MORE.
FINIS.
Printed for Phillip Brooksby, 1673.


