THE PILGRIMS PORT OR THE Weary Man's Rest in the Grave OPENED And improved in a
Sermon, at the Funeral of the Honorable Ms. Margaret Marwood, Wife to Hen
Marwood Esquire;

Together with a Character of the deceased Gentlewoman; briefly describing the
Tenure of her Life, and manner of her Death.

By Geo. Ewbancke, Chaplain to the Worshipful Geo. Marwood, Esquire;

And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me Write, Blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord; from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, For they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 13.14. Mala mors putanda
non est, quam bona vita praecessit. L^ndon, Printed for Charles Tyus at the
Three Bibles on London Bridge* and for R Lambert in the Minsteryard in York.
^66^.

To the Honorable and truly virtuous, the Lady Wyvel, wife to the much
Honored, and most worthy, Sir Christopher Wyvel of Burton, Baronet.
Madam.
HOw much I am obliged to your Ladyship for that large interest you have been
pleased to let me find in your affections, I could wish the world were not
ignorant; And as a demonstration of my grateful acknowledgment, I humbly
dedicate this Manual to your Honors Patronage; It is the result of a few
pensive hours, set a part for dressing the Hearse, or singing the Dirge of a
deceased friend; I mean for a sad Solemnization of your dear sisters Funeral,
whose name and fame, I am sure, is, and ever will be precious to the memory of
all that had but the least competency of acquaintance with her; so that I hope
the near Relation of this Honorable Personage to you, (which was as close and
conjunct, as either nature or grace could make it) besides that affection and
estimation which my self has plentifully received from you, will apologize for
this intruding boldness, and warrant my adventure of shrowding this paper under
the wings of your Honors protection, there to hatch some luster, and
countenance, that it may pass the Pikes of a censorious world with more
freedom and less affront.

I have in the Sequel of the Sermon endeavored to present your Ladyship with a
compend of her gracious qualifications, and Picture of her choice perfections,
which my eyes have viewed, and memory registered from frequent observance. The
Portraicture is unpolisht, because drawn by a young and unexperienced Artist;
had either my opportunity been larger, or abilities been greater, the piece
should have been finer, somewhat more like the person whom it represents, and
somewhat more fit for your honors perusal, whose pardon it courts. But good
Madam, what is defective or faulty in the composition, let your Ladyship
correct in a Candid construction; and if ever my obligations to your Honor
should end in Ingratitude, may this Inck turn blood to blush my baseness, and
blazon my unworthiness to all spectators.

It may (I imagine) be queried by some carping Critics, what I mean to trouble
the press with this Instance in hand, since it is already like to surfeit with
plenty of better Productions, to whom I render this submissive retort, that it
is not popular Euge that I am seeking, nor the peoples Encomium that I am
Courting; All the world may see, even by the work it self, (which is Rudis
indigestaque moles, an unpollite and homespun piece) that I am not consulting
with my credit, nor wooing the worlds acclamation, by what I write; but for
these and the like reasons I appear in public.

1. That I might accost your Ladyship with some public acknowledgment of these
private civilities, which you have sown and I have reapt, which I could not do
better; then by this Paper present, which properly is a Scholars gift.

2. That I might gratify and be civil to the endeared Husband of the deceased
Saint, whose importunity and reiterated solicitations extorted this from me,
which else had not been published by me.

3. That I might not smother in the ashes of oblivion, those sparks and
Scintillations of grace, those growing and accrewing virtues, which concurred,
and were concentred in this Honorabl^ Gentlewoman; now step^ aside and fallen
asleep; I^ being pity that any thin^ of hers (her unavoydabl^ frailties
excepted, which yet were as few as can b^ imagined) should dy^ with her: but
that thos^ bundles of Cypress, thos^ Garlands of graces which did dress her
closet, an^ deck her person, should come upon the Stage o^ public observance,
t^ win people to wa^^ as she her self walkt^ and to act their parts wit^ no
less exactness then she did, that when their la^^ Exit comes, they man quietly
withdraw, and make that happy conclusion which she made.

There Is an unhappy Proverb amongst us, viz. That a little religion goes a
great way amongst great ones, and though (proh dolor!) it be too true in the
general, yet there is no rule so general, but it admits of some exception; and lo
here is one, her greatness, and her goodness, (like Thamars two twins)
contending for precedence, and contesting for predominancy; yet with so much
order and regularity, that the one was no curb or hinderance but a spur of
furtherance to the other, her virtue advancing her honor, (like David, who the
more he honored God, the more God honored him) and her honor inviting her to
virtue, (according to Paul's expression, the bounty of God leading her to
repentance) thus has she confuted the Proverb, and convinced the world that
greatness is not always out of the road of goodness; but that ( honorabile and
honestum may convenire in uno) To be holy and to be honorable are not so
irreconcilable, but they may be persuaded to dwell in one house, yea to lie in
one bosom; And now Madam, as by my Pen I desire to do right to the memory of
her that is dead; so by my prayers, I will endeavor that the reading of this
may be of use to you that are alive, I pray let your Ladyships life be like
hers, and in death you shall not be divided; you have so fair a copy left you
in the example of this worthy and religious president, that to scrible after it
would cloud your Honor, and eclipse your reputation you have begun well, ride
on most Noble and virtuous Saint; continue sted fast unto death, that none
beguile you of your Crown of life; you are, blessed be God, bottomed well upon
fundamenta^ principles, and have made a considerable progress in the
superstructure o^ Religious practices; you are in your way, like a true
traveller; keep it; you are on your journey to Heaven, tire not till you come
at the end; rest not, till you come at your everlasting rest; take heed that
your morning sun, that looks so smilingly, nay your noontide brightness, that
shines so clearly, (to the great comfort and interior complacency of all that
love your Ladyship) take heed that it overcast not in the conclusion, nor shut
up with winter weather, in the closure of your days: This advice cannot be
impertinet to Christians, whose temptations to Apostasy are so urgent. The good
Lord grant that as he has begun a good work in you, so he would proceed to
perfect it till the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. That he would strike up so
much light in you^ judgment, beget so much heat in your affections, that
neither the power^ of hell, nor the shadow of death may be able to damp or
darken it; do you about Religion, as worldly men do with Riches, against a dear
year, they lay up plenty of Provision for say they, We know not what need we
may have before we die; so the time may come, when your temptations and trials
may be such, that you will make use of all your grace, though you should have a
Benjamins ^ortion, a double quan^ity to what you have. O then get your soul
good Madam) well sto^ed, well fortified, well ^urnished with a full stock ^f
spiritual Ammunition, and with the impenetra^le Armorie of grace, that may
conduct you through all oppositions, ^o the Mansions of Glory, ^here you shall
meet ^ith your friends that ^^e dead in the Lord, Who are non ^missi, sed
Praemissi, n^^ lost, but laid up
(ac^ording to that of David ^oncerning his dead ^ild, I shall go to him,
^^ough he cannot come to ^e,) where (as an improvement of your comfort and
contentment) this merry meeting shall never be sowered more by any sad parting.

Here the Almighty has thought good to exercise you with mixtures o^
providence; as he hat^ mounted you high in honor, and other temporal
concernments, s^ has his Majesty though^ fit to throw you low i^ afflictions,
and to giv^ you a great share in th^^ unpleasing incidences o^ this your
Pilgrimage (...) while almost every annu^^ revolution of your life has been
imbittered b^ some sad instance of a ^ying friend: but bear ^p bravely but a
little ^onger, against the af^righting Surges of these ^ransient sufferings;
cheer ^p but a little, and the ^ndignation of the Lord will be over and gone;
wink but a while, and ^ou shall see a blessed ^hange; for these light
^fflictions which last but a moment, will work for you a ^ar more exceeding and
e^ernal weight of glory.

And now Madam, since ^ou lately heard the pas^ing bell, tolling the mortality
of others in ^our ears, and calling them to a grave, it (...) high time that
your honor and my self should look upon our selves (...) persons concerned in
the Tragedy; death ha^^ made a near approach t^^ your Ladyship, while (...)
has fetched a drop (...) your own blood from you; I am sadly sen^^ble you know
my meaning, and that without pointing at particulars your thoughts will refle^
upon a sad change, vi^ the departure of a dea^ friend, which is no^ dressed for
the brighte^ glory, and invested i^ the highest felicity, an^ ^ut of heaven, as
it were ^alls to you to fit your ^^lf for that time, which (...) all mingle
your bones ^ith that beloved dust ^ats gone to bed before ^ou; and convey your
^^ul to that College of ^horisters above, where ^ou shall sing? victory,
^^ctory, to the Lamb christ for ever.

But my pen has out^^n my purprose, which ^as to have treated your ^adiship
with Lines, not ^eaves. I pray Madam, ^^rdon my prolixity, and ^ith all my
silence and ta^^turnity, in both which I ^ay probably seem faulty; in the
former as speaking too much; In the latter, as speaking nothing, (...) mean
nothing of your perfections, not at all acquainting the world with your vvorth
and accomplishments, which particular I omitted upon a double account.

1. That I might keep my self from coming under a suspicion of flattery.

And secondly, that I might not any way offend your Ladyships modesty, who (I
know) are better pleased to deserve then to hear your ^vvn encomium; therefor
I resolved to turn my raising of you into pray^^g for you, as being ^ore
suitable to my Mi^isterial profession, and ^cceptable to your in^enuous
disposition: ^ow therefore the God ^f all grace be with you, and sanctify all
the ^eans of grace to you, ^hether they come from ^e Pulpit or the Press, ^at
by these, as by con^uits, more light may be ^^nveyed into your head, ^ore heat
into your ^eart, and more fruit ^ay grow up in your ^e, which is the prayer of
him, who desires to be accounted your Ladyships Servant, and persist,

Your Faithful* Orator at the Thron^ of grace, GEO. EVVBANCKE*

A Funeral Sermon PREACHED By Geo. Ewbancke ^^at the Funeral of the Honorable
Mistress Margaret Marwood.
JOB 3.17. -- There the weary be at rest.
IT cannot be improper or impertinent to premise the coherence of the ^ext with
the Context, espe^ially since it is ushered in with the particle (There.)

There the weary be at rest.] Which speaks it relative, as having some
dependence upon and some relation to somewhat going before: I will not go far,
nor fetch too wide and circumferanious a compass, to give you an account of the
connection of the words, Cnnexion.
lest, the porch prove too big for the house, and the premise disproportionable
to the following Discourse: Cast therefore your eye back only to the first
verse of this Chapter, where you shall find the Argument of the whole Section
epitomized and laid down in short; viz. Jobs cursing his day, by many peevish
and passionate expresses of his disturbed and discomposed spirit^ the words are
^hese, and such like, After ^his Job opened his mouth and ^ursed his day; After
this, that is, after the Chaldeans ^ad pillaged him, after that ^he Sabeans had
plundered him, after that his enemies had ^ade a prey of him, and after that his
friends had sat so ^ong by him, and not reach^^g the least dram of succor ^r
assistance to him; and his ^orrows being grown bigger ^^en his spirit, bigger
then he ^as able to bridle or contain, ^e bursts out into this distem^ered
malediction, Cursed (...) the day wherein I was born; and thus his grief got
vent, and thus his sorrow got allay, ^y emptying it self into a sea ^f passion,
and flood of trou^led expression, After this ^e opened his mouth, and cursed.
Touching which curse, you have two things observable, 1. The Object of it, what
he cursed. 2. The Reason of it, why he cursed.


First, The Object, what he fastened his curse upon, it was his Birthday:
Cursed be the day whereon I was born, and the night in which it was said (...)
man child is conceived, let darkness stain it, let a cloud dwel^ for ever upon
it: As if he should say, Let it be obnubilated, let it be annihilated, let it
be obliterated and cashiered out of the Kalende^ of the year, Caryll.
let it lie buried in the ashes of oblivion, let it sink down into silence and
forgetfulness, never to come into mind any more, never to be recorded, never to
be commemorated with those formal Festivities, joys, and freer complacencies,
which such gaudy days have been famous for; and thus Job ( Shimei-ike) goes on
railing and cursing as he goes; he ransacks his memory, and heightens his
invention to the highest pitch of possibility to find words enough wherewith
to brand his birth day, Nigro carbone notavit.
and this to verse. 9.

Secondly, The Reason is rendered in this Chapter, why he cursed, why so madded,
why so exasperated, against his birthday; he is angry, but he would seem to
have wit in his anger; to give you a rational account of his destiny; now the
reason wherewith his defends and legitimates his passion, he records in the
tenth verse, because (says he) it shut not up the door of my Mothers womb,
because I died not from the womb, and gave not up the ghost as soon as I came
out of the belly; see here, if any should take up Job shortly, and chide him
sharply for acting the Satyr, and writing such bitter invectives against his
birth day, he stands up in his own defense, pleading and apologizing most
pithily and pathetically for himself, and saying, that he has reason to rage
as he does, and cause to complain and brand his birthday with a curse, if we
knew but as much as he does: Why Job, what is the cause of thy complaint? why
do thou fret and fume on this fashion? why persistest thou railing at and
recriminating thy birth day? why, because it shut not up my mothers womb,
because I died not from the belly: and this is his Apology for his passion; Now
lest this reason should not abide the test of the judicious, lest it should not
pass the pikes of an unpartial examen, lest it should not pass the Watch of a
censorious world, without being bid stand, lest I say it should be found too
light when it comes to be weighed in the balance of the wise, whiles it might
be retorted thus upon Job, Why, what if thou had seen death as soon as ever
thou tookest life? what if thou had been nailed up in the coffin as soon as
ever thou wast rockt in the cradle? and been carried to the tomb when the
Midwife took thee out of the womb? to prevent this objection, he subjoyns a
reason of his former reason, why it had been to very good purpose that he had
died from the womb, and this reason is the argument of my Text, because then he
should have been at rest; for There ( viz. in the grave) the weary be at rest:
importing thus much, Had my birth been blasted, this misery I am now in, had
not been extant; had I been strangled in the gate of the womb, I had not been
left to the mercy of the wide and wicked world. In a word, had I died from my
nativity, I had not been a man made up of misery, I had not been a a creature
composed of crosses as I am, nor been tossed like a tennice-ball with troops of
troubles as I have been; why? for There the weary be at rest.

Thus much for the Coherence or Connection of the words with the preceding
discourse.

I should now proceed to the Explanation of the terms that are most
considerable in the Text; (...) posi^i^n.
but finding them facil enough to any that is intelligent, or but moderately
judicious; and withal intending in the apt application to insist more at
large, and in that manner as may give light to any thing in the Text, that has
any seeming vail of difficulty or darkness upon it, I shall hereupon wave it at
present, and reserve it till anon.

I will not stand dividing the words and subdividing them into unnecessary
minutula frustula, but break open the trunk, and see what treasure we can spy
at the top, at the first inspection; now at one general view we may make a
discovery

First, Of something presupposed.

Secondly, Of something proposed in the Text.

First, There Is something presupposed or implied, and it is this, or something
of this nature;

That this life is no other then a labyrinth of labors and troubles, like the
middle region of the air, the most natural place of storms and tumults, noyses
and disquiets: such is this life, such is this world, and our peregrination in
it; It is a scene of sorrows, a succession of sufferings, a very seat and
situation of several sadnesses; this is that which is presupposed: for Job
expressing positively that the weary be at rest when dead, intimates and
implies that we are weary and like Noah's dove, can find no rest while alive.

Secondly, There is something proposed, viz. That the grave is that great and
common Inn for all weary travelers at last to lodge in, to repose and rest
their tired limbs in. There the weary be at rest.

These two particulars digested into one Doctrine, make up this bimembred
proposition.

The best that can be said of this life, is this. Its a day of labor and
trouble; and the worst that can be said of death and the grave, is this, Its a
night of rest and repose.

The parts of this Proposition, are two: I will handle them distinctly, and in
order as they stand. I begin with the former. viz. That the best that can be
said of this life, is this, Its a day of labor, a time of tediousness and
trouble; in the managing whereof I shall (Deo adjuvante) prove the Doctrinal,
and press the practical part. In proving the Doctrinal, I proceed thus.

First, (...) and (...)
I will demonstrate it from Scripture, and Experience that it is so.

Secondly, From reason and argument, why it is so.

The first Scripture Testiomny, Scripure proof. I b. 5.7.
you have in Job, 5.7. where its said that man is born to trouble, as sparks
fly upwards; As if he should say, as its natural for sparks of fire to fly up
to the Element of fire so afflictions on men have a kind of natural and
superveening necessity, occasioning them; Hic est locus pull cum et culicum.
as soon as ever man comes into the world, he comes into a world of troubles;
he lanceth into a sea of sorrow and continues floating and fluctuating there,
till death sounds a retreat and call him off, and like a vessel conveys his
carcass to the harbor where the weary be at rest.

A second place you have Genesis 47.9. Few and evil are the days of thy servant,
Genesis 47 9.
O Lord; as our time is very short, so also it is very sharp, the sorrows of
our spirits being like unto ponderous weights which will never give us any
continued ease, till they have pressed us into the grave; for there only we
shall sleep quietly, when these storms shall be blown over, and these fetters
shall be knocked off, and we got under the hatches of an hearse, and entoom'd in
a Sepulcher of silence, till the resurrection; till then we may expect a tot
quot of troubles, a congeries of crosses, and a continuation of afflictive
contingences; which receives light from a third text, Job. 14.1,
Job. 14.1. Man that is born of a woman, is but of few years, and full of
trouble; our years are but few, but our troubles are many; our journey is but
short, but the road is very rugged and uneven; the track very troublesome
tedious and uneasy; and many rubs, lets, and unpleasing remora's we shall meet
with ere we come within the ken of our rest, or can lodge our colors in
Caanan; this the Apostle avoucheth, when he says, Through many tribulations we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven; how many he knew not, only he tells us
that they are many, and so many, that except our sins and Gods mercies, there
is not such plenty of any thing in the World: thus much for Scripture Proof.

But were Scripture silent, Experience.
experience speaks loud enough for this truth, that this world is the stage
whereon men act sundry sad Tragedies, and are the Subjects of many woeful
incidences as one Wave roules after another, so does one woe come in the neck
of another, and one trouble treads upon the heels of another; as a Bear came to
David after a Lion, and after that a Giant, and after him the Philistines; so
every man's own experience may tell him thus much, that when he has fought with
envy, he shall probably be forced to fight with infamy; and when he has done
with infamy, its odds but he shall be called to conflict with sickness; and
when he has ended this skirmish, the next enemy he has to encounter with is
death, which will make an end of him; just like daily laborers we are never
out of work, till we be out of the world.

If you do but run through all orders, rancks and degrees of men, you shall
infallibly find them (hoc morbo laborantes) fast prisoned up in this
predicament.

If you please to express so much charity as to visit an hospital, that map of
misery, oh the objects of Pity, and sad spectacles that you shall see their;
poor Lazars lying in a piteous posture, and mournful prostration, some crying
out of hunger, others complaining for want of clothing; a third sort weeping
over their wounds, and every one condoling one another hardship and misfortune
in the world, in so affecting and melting a manner as might be enough to draw
forth the spectators heart and dissolve it, (out of hand) into pity and
Sympathy.

If you please but to take a Prison-visit sometimes (instead of many fruitless
journies, and needless vagaries, which might be spared) O what bondage and hard
usuage, what hunger and hard beds, what poor treatments and pityful lodgings
you would find there! would not the sighings of Prisoners come before you, as
David said, whose feet are hurt in the stocks, and the irons almost entered
into their souls; this would be a further demonstration and conviction to you,
of the point in hand.

Nay look upon Kings and Conquerours, Princes and great personages, who by
reason of the height of their honors, may seem to be above the reach of the
rod, yet troubles make trial what mettle these men are made of; they have their
evil things no less then other men; how many of them have been deposed and
degraded in the world so far, till they that were not worthy to hold the basin
to them, became as good (I may say as great) as they; Their Servants (to use
Scripture phrase) bearing rule over them, and these subjects taking their rise
from their Sovereigns ruins; and is any grief parallel to this? Nay let us
suppose them still incircled with the honors of the Crown, still surrounded
with the favors of the Court, yet as Solomon says, in the midst of laughter,
the heart is sad, while they are in the center of their Regal dignities, upon
the top of their Royal Magnificences, even then they are compassed about with
griping cares, amazing fears, and affrighting dangers; for just as a man's
condition is great or little, so is the Portion of his trouble proportionable;
all have their share, but great men and the grandees in the world, as they have
the noblest employments, and the choycest enjoyments, so they have the biggest
burdens, the weightiest duties and greatest cares lying upon them here, and
the longest reckoning and heaviest account to make unto God hereafter; thus as
learned Dr. Tailor says, God has mingled Wormwood with their wine, that they
should not be drunk with the pleasures of prosperity; he has bequeathed to
them their quantum of adversities, that they might not mistake earth for
heaven, and the present life for the happiest, whiles their own experience
forces them to set their hands and seals to this unquestionable truth. viz.

That the best that can be said of this life, is, that its a winters day of
labor and trouble.

The reason of the Doctrine is drawn from the equity of the thing; S^ne peccato
non es, sine poena non eris.
he has sinned and violated the Law, and in all reason and equity ought to
smart and suffer the penalty of the Law. Now we have sinned upon a double
account.

First, By Proxy.

Secondly, In person.

1. By Proxy, in our first ^arents, who did represent ^he persons of all
mankind that were after to be born in^o the world; the first sin of Adam was a
sin of a com^on nature, wherein all we ^ere concerned and involved; ^or he in
Paradise was a pub^^que person, Radix and sons humani generis.
standing in our ^^ead, the representative person of all posterity, the root
and original of all the fami^^es of the earth: and as the ^oot is, such must
the branch^s be; and if the spring be ^oysoned, all the Rivers and ^orrents
must be tainted; in (...) word, he was our factour ^r agent; what he did, we
^id; and as he carried himself, ^o were we to be accounted ^f; as a Commanders
actings ^re ascribed to the whole Army, if he make or break (...) Truce, the
Army is adjudged guilty; so Adam the Captaine-General of us all, breaking
Articles, and falsifying his faith with God, we all i^ him, by him, and through
him are entangled in the sam^ transgression, Maur. Bohem.
and consequently exposed to penalty, by virtue of that terror threatening text.
Genesis 2.17.
Genesis 2.17 If ye sin, ye shall suffer.

Secondly, We have sinne^ upon a second account. viz. in person as well as by
roxie^ actually in our selves, not less then originally in our Ancest ours, and
therefore since (we) have offended, it is no more then reasonable that (we)
should be afflicted; Vbi peccatum, ibi p^ccella.
we, deserve all we get (of this nature) and more; so soon as Jonas took
shipping, the ^torme arose, to teach us that if crime be in the front, ^ain
will bring up the rear; ^f our sin go before, in all quity we may expect the
^torme of Gods wrath to ^ollow after: As Jehu re^lyed to Joram (when he ^skt if
it were peace) What ^eace said he, can thou ex^ect, so long as the Whore^omes
of thy Mother Jeze^el are so many? so it stands (...) perpetual law to all
persons, to look for no con^inued tranquillity to ex^ect no dispensation, or
ex^mption from corrections so ^ong as our corruptions are ^o many; its the sin
of man that brings the curse upon the ^on of man; and the daily increase of
man's sin, occasions a daily increase of the curse* the first man that sinned
was Adam, and for his sake God cursed the earth; the second notorious sinner we
read of was Cain, and for his sake and sin, God cursed the earth a^ second
time; and although the Lord does not tell us in express terms, that every
abominable sinner, Cains successor, draws on a new curs^ upon the Creature; yet
tha^ one serves for all, to teach us that as sin grows, so grow^ the curse,
and the multiplication of our sins bring^ with it (if infinite mercy b^ not a
timely prevention) (...) multiplication of sorrows an^ troubles, Conditiosine
qua non.
which are always (if not for, yet) from sin^ so that upon every unpleasin^
instance, and unfortunate accident (call it what you please) you may write that
superscription of the Prophet, Thy ways and thy do^ngs, O man, have procured
thee this.

Thus you have the Doctrinal part proved.

Next comes the practical to be pressed.

Now there are two uses deducible from this Doctrine.

First, That we prepare for troubles before they come.

Secondly, That we profit by them when they are come.

First, Is this life at the best but a day of labors and troubles? then see
what great need we have often, and consequently what considerable care we should
take to provide for afflictions, and to get (...) suffering spirit, an heart
ready fixed to give a free welcom^ to any trial or tentation tha^ Providence
shall expose us to we are not yet past the Re^ Sea, we are not yet out of the
Wilderness, not yet out o^ danger; For whom God loves, he will chasten. Heb
12.6. though he love n t to chasten.
we know not what rods are a making, what storms are rising and what miseries
are a brewing and breeding for us; are we not then nearly concerned, to secure
to our selves suffering spirits, that we may be in a prepared posture at all
times to come at the call of Gods providence, though it should engage us in
some condition of life more sad and dole^ul then death it self? What ^f the sun
thou seeest, the ^omforts thou enjoyest, should ^n the sudden be in a cloud,
and all dark about thee? what if this day Jobs mes^enger should knock at thy
^oors, and tell the that thy Estate is seized on, and given to one that is
thine Enemy; that thy Children were eating and drinking ^n a friends house, and
the Roof fell and crushed them into flatness; how would thou relish, how
could thou welcome such a message as this? what if thou were to step out of
thy present gayities, to be stripped of thy silks and handsome dresses, and called
to put on the beggars coat, how would thy spirit brook such an alteration as
this? what if that mortal message shoud rap at thy chamber door to night, which
took Dives napping, when he never dreamt of it, This night shall thy soul be
sent for, this night shall thy corpse be laid out, thy eyes closed, and thy
chaps be bound up; this night shall thy friends be seen weeping, and the bells
be heard tolling, and the report shall be in the Town and Country, Such a one
is dead and buried; how could thou like such a change as this? if God should
even whilst thou a^t reading these lines, and have this paper in thy hands, say
to thee on the sudden, Man, thine hour is come, read no further, but up and
dye, would thy heart willingly embrace this motion, freely surrender to deaths
summons? Thou can not tell (without a divine revelation from heaven) but thou
may be in prison to morrow, sick, nay stark dead to morrow. God can soon
change the sense of thy health, life or liberty, into the sighings of a
Prisoner, into the groans of a languishing dying creature. Soldiers sometimes
have orders for a sudden March, for a sudden removal from their quarters; and
for ought thou know, it may be thy case before the term of two days be
completed: does it not then behove thee Christian to be always in readiness, to
be always in a suffering frame of spirit! oh then be ready to sacrifice your
Isaac, to lay your head upon the block, to resign life and estate when ever a
command for it shall come from heaven; prepare for suffering times; this is the
first use.

Now there are four things that I would advise every Christian to prepare and
have in store against a day of trouble.

1. A sound Faith. 2. A clear Conscience. 3. Self-denial. 4. A good stock of
Patience.
First, Prepare and prearme thy self with f ith, the want whereof makes a man
to hang the wing, and go heavily under every petty loss and inconsiderable
cross that befalls him; as he that goes through a strong running River, is in
danger to fall and drown, by reason of the dizziness of his brain, unless he
fix his eyes upon the bank on the other side: so shall we fall into some
impatient mood of discontent, or at least into some fainting fit of discomfort,
under our afflictions, unless we can by the eye of faith look farther then the
affliction, and through the cloud espy the refreshing rays, and comforting
beams of Gods favorable countenance, ready to break forth and shine upon us;
If Peter's says had not faild, he had not sunk in the Sea as he did, Mat.
14.30, 31. And if thou had but more of faith, thou would have less of fear,
less of a fretting humor, under any afflicting dolor; for faith (says the
Apostle) is the victory where, with we overcome the world.

1. The World smiling, 2. The World Scouling.
First, The world smiling, with Pomp and pleasures, with riches and honors;
the Eagle eye of a quick-sighted faith can soon see a vacuity and emptyness, an
insufficiency and insatisfactoriness in all these things; they are like painted
grapes, they may please the eye, but cannot appease the appetite; or like nuts;
many clothes are rent in gathering them, and many a tooth broken in cracking
them, but never a belly filled, never a stomac^^ stayed with eating them; every
creature says concerning satisfaction, It is not in me, it is not in me; the
world is not a filling but a flying comfort; and this, faith knows very well;
and therefore like an old bird will not be caught with chaff; faith overcommeth
the world, that it shall not do us any hurt this way, Heb. 11.26.

Secondly, Faith overcommeth the world scouling, viz. with troubles and
dangers, losses and disgraces, persecutions and imprisonments; he that
beleiveth is above the worlds frowning; for faith quenches the violence of
fire, masters the Affliction, as the Author to the Hebrews witnesses, Chap.
11.34. And that either by restraining the force thereof, that it cannot execute
its afflictive faculty upon us, or by steeling our courage with patience, and
conquering our hearts into contentment; and this two ways.

By assuring us 1. That afflictions have an end. 2. That they have a good end.


First, Faith tells and persuades the afflicted patient, that the time is
coming, when he shall see an end of all his troubles. At last came that
seasonable salute to the murmering Jsraelites, The enemies that you have seen
to day, you shall see them no more; and at last came that comfortable call to
Noah, Go forth of the Ark; and if God think good to say to us, enter into the
ark, into this trouble, or that trial, faith will persuade us that he has
another word, viz. Come forth of the Ark, come out of prison, come from off a
sick Bed; for the grievance thou have long laid under, thou shall under-ly it
no more; this is one way whereby faith works the heart to a sweet serene
composure in the most suffering condition; it persuades us that afflictions
have an end; Here we have no continuing City, Heb 13. therefore our afflictions
cannot continue; our Lives here are but short, and therefore the life of our
afflictions cannot be very long; be then content but a little and the scene
will alter; for when the Gold is fined enough, the furnace shall hold it no
longer.

Secondly, Faith persuades the poor patient, that Afflictions have not only
an end, but a good end; therefore said Paul 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction,
which lasts but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. God will ere long turn our water into wine, the storm into a
calm, and our crown of thorns into a crown of glory. First David held his
Shepherds staff, and shortly after his Royal Scepter; Gods children may be
under a cloud, and be put to hard services here, but they may acquiesce in
this, that their light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for them a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; It is reported of Caius Caesar
that when he came to be Emperor, he gave a friend of his that was in Prison
for his sake, a chain of gold, that did equafly weigh as much as his iron
chain did; I deeed here, was a good exchange, even gold for iron, and weight
for weight but God exceeds Caesar, for he gives not measure for measure, and
w^ight for weight but for a light affliction gives a weigh^, an eternal weight
of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17
the smoothness of the end, will make amends for the ruggedness of the way. St.
Basil relates a story of forty Martyrs who being turned out of doors naked in a
cold winters night, to be burnt at the stake the next morning, they comforted
themselvelves with these words, Sharp is the winter, but sweet is Paradise;
painful is the frost, but joyful the fruition that follows; let us but wait
a while, and the Patriarks bosom shall cherish us; let our feet walk upon
frost to night, and fry in the fire to morrow, that we may walk hand in hand
with Angels in Glory. Thus you see their thoughts did not spend themselves upon
the afflictions they endured, but they fastened the eye of their faith upon the
happy result and blessed event thereof, and this bore up their hearts bravely
in the midst of Martyrdoom, and very center of their sufferings. Oh sirs, the
frequent beleiving views of heaven, (would you but keep these fresh and warm
upon your thoughts) would quicken and comfort your spirits in the day of
distress; our horses will carry us more cheerfully in travel when they draw
homeward, where they expect rest; and the patient will quietly endure the
searching of his sores, and lanceing his wounds, when he thinks on the ease
that will follow; All temporal sufferings are nothing to us, so far as we have
a foresight of the eternal recompense, What made the three children so freely
to take up their quarters in the fiery Region, Dan. 3.17.21 but because they
had faith to assure them of deliverance? what moved Moses to choose affliction
with the people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,
but because he was well furnished with faith, whereby he had respect to the
recompense of reward? Heb. 11. What animated and encouraged Job under his
singular trials and fad pressures, but because he had faith to believe a happy
event of all his troubles? viz. that when God had tried him a while, he should
come out of the Furnace like Gold purified and refined, Job. 23.10. Therefore
as Abraham foresaw Christ's day and rejoiced, so could ye but in suffering
times, freequently foresee that day when Christ will give you rest, you would
with Paul be cheerful in tribulations, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. Indeed if we look upon L^zarus on the Dunghill, upon Daniel in
the Dungeon, upon Jeseph in the Prison, and upon the Martyrs burning like
Backcloggs in the fire, what can we judge them but miserable? Medium faci^e
^olenamus, ^um fin^m clare praevidemus.
but if we consider their end, we shall see them with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
in the Kingdom of God, then shall we say, Who will not bear the cross, that
they may wear the Crown? who would not do any thing, suffer any thing, be any
thing, every thing, while they live, that they might have such benefit of and
advantage by their troubles when they dye! and thus faith shows the soul the
recompense and reward that shall be made it for all its troubles and
grievances, and from thence, as from a flower, it distills the spirits and
quintessence of divine comfort, wherewith the Christian is enabled to pass the
Pilgrimage of a wearisome and afflicted life, with much interior satisfaction
and hearty contentation: How sollicitous then should we all be to be well
stored and prearmed with this spiritual provision! would ye lead comfortable
lives? live up then to the height of your faith.

Secondly, Prearme your selves with patience; for now have you need of
patience, says the Apostle, Heb. 10.36. Now in the hour of trial and
tentation, now in the day of trouble and affliction; the carking careful
householders will be sure to hoard up heaps of temporal provision against a dear
year; for say they, we know not what need we may have before we dye; let their
worldly wit teach us heavenly wisdom, even to be as vigorous, strenuous and
provident for gr ce, as they are for goods; for we know not but we may have
need hereafter of all we have, though it were improved into a treble
proportion; be injuring thy self then to bear lesser afflictions with patience,
that thou may be able to grapple with greater, when providence shall please
to call thee to a Trial.

And for the improvement of thy Patience, learn these few lessons beforehand.

First, Into what condition soever Providence shall cast thee, believe it to be
the best, and then thou will never be disguised with discontent, nor
metamorphosed with a spirit of murmuring. Diogenes preferred his Tub before
Alexanders Trophie, his Cynical life, before the others Royalty; he phancyed
his little Cloister best, and so rested satisfied; so if we could but fancy a
little estate, and low condition, to be best for us, as having fewer cares in
it, and a less account following after it, it would be far more eligible and
contenting; Vain men fancy such or such a condition best; they would flaunt in
their Ruffs, and flourish in their bravery, and have all the strings of vanity
strike at once, and hereupon they are vexed if their wills be crossed; But
learn you to subscribe your wills to Gods will, and ever think it best to be at
his finding; God is wise: he knows whether food or Physic would be more proper
to your constitution; whether an empty chest or full estate would consult more
for your safety and convenience; and therefore do but acquiesce in his
allowance, and wise providence, as judging that best, and then the quarrel will
soon be at an end.

Secondly, Value the things of the world according to their own worth; let them
not be too high in thy estimation while thou have them, and they will prove the
less affliction to thee when thou partest with them; Now the best verdict thou
can pass upon them, is that of Solomon's, Eccl. 1.2. Vanity of vanity, vanity
of vanity, all is vanity; you may call them what you please, but Solomon
shows what they are, viz. Vanity; you may call them pleasant vanities, or
profitable vanities, or honest vanities; but David calls them deceitful
vanities, and Jonah calls them lying vanities, and Solomon calls them, Vanity
of vanity; and if you be not come to be of these men's mind, to think that all
is vanity, it is because your own vanity stands in your light, and will not let
you see the vanity of other things; Oh were you but natures Privy-Counsellour,
were you but a little better versed in the vanity of the creature, you would in
all detriments and disappointments that befall you here, say as the Emperor
Galienus said, when report was brought to him that Egypt was lost, What cannot
I live without the flax of Egypt? Contemno minut^los istos deos, modo ^ovem
habeam propitium.
or with that Heroic heathen, I value not any of these petty gods, provided I
have but Jove for my friend, I weigh not any trivial or inconsiderable loss
here, so I may but win Christ and be found in him; would you not overvalue your
earthly comforts when they are with you, you would not over-lament them when
Providence should please to pluck them from you; for whence is it that we
over-grieve the loss of any temporal blessing, but because we either expect
that pleasure from it, which is not, or set that price upon it, which ought
not? this is the second.

Thirdly, Pore not upon your losses, but ponder upon your mercies; as suppose
thou have a child taken away, and this is thy complaint; but let me ask thee a
Question or two; have thou not an Husband or Wife left behind for thy comfort?
have thou not health in thy body, or grace in thy soul? and are not these as
good to thee as ten sons? suppose thy money is gone, thy estate gone; but so
long as thy breath is not gone, thy life not gone, thy God, thy Christ and
heaven not gone, thou art no great loser; Gods dispensations are so Checquer
wrought with blacks and white, that a Christian has never such cause to weep
with one eye, but he has as great cause or greater, to laugh with the other.
Oh then eye not always the blacks, but sometimes give a glance at the whites;
look on the light side of the Lanthorn, and not on the dark side of thy
condition; remember thy comforts, and forget thy crosses, and thy discontent
will disband. Were we but more affected with Gods mercies, we should be less
afflicted with our miseries; this is the third.

Fourthly, Be more troubled for your sins, and you will be less troubled at
your Afflictions; compare thy sins with thy sufferings, and thou will find the
former so far exceed the latter, both in nature, number and measure, that thou will break forth into Ezra's confession, Lord, thou have punished me less then
I have deserved. What would thou have no correction to be laid upon thy back,
who have so much corruption lurking in thy heart? Would thou have nothing of
pain adhearing to thee, who have so much of crime inhearing in thee? Is not thy
holiness imperfect? and would thou have thy happiness entire? do but consider
in cold blood, what wrath, what woe thou deservest, and thou will soon be
contented with what thou feellest; does God correct thee with Scourges? he
might scourge thee with Scorgions; does he call for thy estate, and cast thy
body in prison? he might as well take away thy life, and send thy soul to hell;
does he rob thee of thy coin? he might if he pleased bereave thee of thy
Christ too; In a word, he might Damn thee without any more ado, as well as
whip thee, and heighten thy torment in hell, as well as lessen thy comforts on
earth; for the wages of sin is death, as Paul witnesses, Romans 6.23. Do but
sadly think of this, and this Devil of discontent will not dare to show his
head. Every Malefactor is well content with fineing, when he knows he deserves
hanging, and thankfully acknowledges the mercy of the Judge therein; so would
we, could we but make the case our own.

Fifthly, Consider that discontent does but drive the nail deeper, and make the
cross sit heavier. As a bird in a snare, by fluttering to get out, is yoked the
harder in; or as one in Irons, by struggling and striving to wring them off,
hurts himself more then the Irons do: thus many add to their trouble by their
own folly, and make the burden heavier by their impatience, then ever God made
it by his providence; their greatest grievance ariseing ab intra, from the
discomposure of the spirit within; not ab extra, from the pressure of the
affliction without; like unto certain sick men, who would ever be changing
their beds, yet they never find rest, for that the cause of their grief lies
not in their beds, but in their bodies. I'ts their distemper within that makes
every room they come in, every company they keep, and every condition irksom,
tedious, and uncomfortable; so it is in this case, it is this Malignant vapor,
this peccant humor of discontent in a mansspirit, that imbitters every
accident, puts a sting into every cross, makes every affliction more afflictive
then else it would be.

Sixthly and lastly, Consider, all thy wrongs and hard usages, all thy
afflictions and losses, all thy injuries and indignities, that have, do, or
ever shall betide thee, were designed and intended for thee before time, and
now by the wise and over-ruleing Providence of God are effected and executed
upon thee in time; It is not fortune or chance (in the vulgar construction) it
is not men or Devils, but the Almighty Jehovah that afflicts us, who having
absolute power over us, may dispose of us, either by poverty or plenty, by
sickness or health, by life or death, as best pleases him, 1 Samuel 3.18. The
consideration of this made old Eli hold his peace, when Samuel read him the sad
story of his ruind posterity; It is the Lord, said Eli, let him do what seems
him good; and this one thought kept on foot in our minds, viz. that its Gods
own finger that tempers the cup of affliction for us, may be of Sovereign
power, to cool and allay any impatiency that might either rise in our hearts,
or rage in our tongues, against the instruments of our trouble; this was that
which quieted David's spirit, and made him that he had not a word to say, Psalm.
39.9. I was dumb, said he, and opened not my mouth; why so silent and quiet
under the rod, that there was not one whimper, or whining look to be seen or
heard? he tells us the reason, because thou did it; because God was the
Author, the orderer and disposer of his affliction. If the blow had come from
any other hand, he could not have taken it so silently; but coming from the
hand of God who might dispose of him and deal with him as he pleased, he
contained his tongue in silence, and possessed his heart with patience; The
like we see in Job, when he had the wit to premise, The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken away; he had the grace to conclude, Blessed be the name of
the Lord; Job does not say, The Lord has given, and the Caldeans have taken
away; the Lord has enriched me, and Satan has robbed me; but as if he had never
heard of men or Devil, of fire or wind, he lays all at Gods Threshold, the
Lord has taken away; he falls not out with man or means, he is not angry with
chance or fortune, with stars or constellations; he did not like a child blame
the block he stumbled on, nor like a Country cur snarle and snatch at the stone
thrown, never looking after the thrower, but he saw God as Justice of the
Quorum, giving commission and granting License to his Enemies to sequester him,
and this stoopt his heart into that (not only patient, but) Panegyrical
prostration, blessed be the name of the Lord. A clear view and distinct
apprehension of the hand of God in any affliction, is a Sovereign auxiliarie
to melt our wills, and conquer our hearts into contentment under that
affliction. There was provocation enough in the venomous tongue of vile Shimei,
to ^ave incensed and enraged David's Royal heart against that dead dog;
unkindness, nay cruelty enough in the flinty spirits of the stone-hearted Jews,
against the holy Jesus, to have forced his dispassionate soul (if possible)
into a fit of fury and implacable resolution; The every and downright robbery
enough in the carriage of the Caldeans toward Job, to have stird him up (if
not publicly to prosecute the Law, yet privately) to study revenge; but these
pious persons, by the conscientious practice of the point in hand, and from the
strength of this consideration which I have here commended to your observation,
for the demolishing of discontent, have been converted into contentment, and
melted into patience and pleasedness, in despite of all occasions and
provocations to the contrary; for in all their afflictions they looked beyond
the creature, and pitched upon the Primum Mobile, or principal Agent, God; David
did not so much see Shemei curseing, as God commissioning him to curse; It may
be the Lord has bid him, said he, 2 Samuel 16.10. And our dearest Lord looked
beyond the Governors committing him, the Priests accusing him, Pilates
condemning him, and the mercyless rabble of the Jews crucyfying him; he looked
beyond these, even to the hand of his heavenly Father, composeing this bitter
Potion for him, and reaching it to him; You can do nothing said he, but what my
Father has preordained to be done; and hereupon he resolves on it without
repineing, Shall not I drink the cup which my Father has given me?

Therefore when ever any affront is put upon thee, when any unpleasing
providence or cross accident befalls thee, see something of God in it, as
intending it for the purgation of thy sin, or probation of thy sincerity, or
for some such like end and purpose; say seriously in thy own heart, Certainly
this is from God, and for my good; say with Eli, It is the Lord, and it will
not be hard then to conclude with the same president, Let him do what seems him
good, 1 Samuel 3.18. Nay not only grace but nature may teach us thus much
manners; for what beast do we see though never so savage in it self, which will
not take blows from his keeper, without relucting or repining? and therefore
that man must be much more brutish then his beast, and come a degree short of a
mere animal, that dares struggle when his God strikes, and cry when his maker
corrects; O Christian, when Gods hands lies upon thy back, do thou lay thine
own hand upon thy mouth, according to David's direction, Psa. 46.11. Be still
and know that I am God.

Thirdly, pre-arm your selves with se f-denyal: He that will be my disciple,
said Christ, must deny himself; if we account to have any thing to do with
Christ, we must not have much to do with self; he cannot profess Christ well,
who cannot willingly deny himself for Christ; the setting up of self, was the
first sin of Satan; and must first be cast down in our hearts, if ever Christ
be set up there; Selfishness is the very seed of sin, whereby a man seeks to
please himself, and to advance himself in his own interest, according to his
own wit, and his own will; selfishness is an enemy to suffering (and by
consequence to our conformity with Christ) it consults for ease, pleasure, and
plenty: and if we humor self, if we cocker the flesh, and gratify the lusts
of it, we shall sooner be Courtierts then Christ's Cross-bearers; and sons of
pleasures, rather then mortified Martyrs

Oh then make a daily resignation of thy self up to Gods disposal; labor to
get thy will Martyred, and mastered into a compliance with the will of God.
Then nothing will come amiss to thee, when thy soul by self-denial is so
sweetly disposed for a willing welcome of any trial that can befall thee.

Now to work thy heart to this self-denying fraime, let me commend these two
interrogatories to thy consideration.

First, Has not God denied infinitely more for thee, then ever he required
that thou should deny for him? It may be thou art called to deny thy
relations, to part with a friend, or a child for his sake? and this is thy
sorrow: but has not God freely sacrificed his son, his only son to death, and
that for to bring thee to eternal life? God so loved the world, says St. John
Chap. 3.16. that he gave his only son for its redemption. Though we be less
then the lest of all Gods mercyes, yet he thought not the best too good for us;
for he so loved us, that he parted with his son for us; Ah sirs, here is a sic
without a sicut; this (so loved) speaks the unspeakableness of his love, so
entirely, so admirably, so infinitely, even so as cannot be conceived how; So
dear are children to their parents, that the Prophet puts this Querie, Can a
Mother forget her Child? yet such is Gods love to us, that he seemed to forget
his son, his dear son, his best beloved son, that lay in the bosom of the
Father, and was his delight from all eternity; yet I say, he seemed to forget
this son, that he might remember the better to make us his sons; he denies him
that he might own us; he parts with him for a while, that he and we might
meet for ever; and does not this one instance make the duty of self-denial
appear rational and very reasonable to thee?

Is it thy estate that thou art bid deny; is it part of thy livelihood that
Providence bids thee part with, and make a resignation of, and does this
trouble thee? but tell me, has not the Holy Jesus condescended, and consented
to be turned out of heaven, and be divested of all the glory that he was
possessed of there, to lead a poor, afflicted, derided and persecuted life,
amidst his enemies on earth? did not he quit heaven and the pleasures thereof
for thee? and wilt not thou resign an estate or a few Acres of earth for him
(...) did not he open his veins and let out his blood for thee? and grudgest
thou to open thy bags, and part with thy money for him? O baseness to be
blushed at! O remember but what thy Savior denied for thee; and if there be
any thing of an ingenuous Christian in thee, it will be a Powerful argument, to
persuade thee to deny any thing, every thing for him; and to say with Paul, I
desire to know and enjoy nothing but Christ, and him crucified. Look but up to
the Cross where Christ hung for thy sins, and it will make thee fadge with thy
Cross the more willingly, and underlie it the more resolvedly.

Secondly, To work thy heart to a self-denying frame, let me commend this
Interrogatory to thy consideration; Cannot God compensate thee for what he
calls from thee? cannot he repair thy loss, and crown thee hereafter, with a
reward which shall both in weight and worth superlatively surpass all thy
damages here? will not heaven make amends for all? the Martyrs knew this well,
and that made them covet to carry the Cross, and leap into the flames, and sing
at the stake as they did; the Apostles knew this well, and that made them joy
in tribulations as they did, considering that through them they should enter
into the Kingdom of God. Consider then though you may be losers for Christ,
yet you shall not be losers by Christ; he will requite you either in kind or in
kindness, here or hereafter; you have a Ticket under Christ's own hand, to
ascertaine you of the truth of what I say, Mat. 19.29. He that loses Father or
Mother, Lands or Liberty, Life or Estate, for my sake and the Gospels, shall
receive in this life an hundred fold, not in kind, but in Equivalence, not
Formaliter but Eminenter; not a hundred fathers or a hundred estates, but he
shall have that which is worth as much; he shall enjoy that in God, which all
the creature comforts would be to him, if they were multiplied an hundred
times, and in the world to come everlasting life; so that as Haman said in
another case, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights to
honor; so may I say in this case, Thus shall it be done to Christ's
Cross-bearers, to Christ's fellow sufferers: suppose now Christian thy God
should grant a commission to the enemy to sequester thy estate, to Imprison
thy person, to murder thy fame, and to require thy life too, can it seem
unreasonable to thee quietly to quit them, whilst this truth keeps fresh and
fair in thy memory?

These are the two Queries I would leave with you; the two considerations I
would fain fasten upon you, for the throwing down of this idol of self in you:
Ponder upon them considerately, and practice accordingly, and be selffish if
thou can.

Fourthly, I proceed now to the last praticular, Prearme your selves with a
good conscience; this will be of mavelous use to quicken and comfort your
hearts under the deepest disconsolations you may meet with ere you dye. When
Paul could say, Herein do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of
offense both toward God and man, he soon could draw this inference, I have
learnt in every condition to be content: Its guilt in the Conscience that
breeds disquiet in the heart; If dust or moates get into the eye, they make it
water, and cause a soreness in it; but if the eye be clear, all is prevented;
Thus, if any sin be left in any corner of thy Conscience, thou may expect
that grief and disquiet will follow after; but keep a clear Conscience, and all
is well: let it be first pure, and fear not but it will be peaceable: what
Solomon says of a good stomach, may be said of a good Conscience, To the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet, Prove. 27.7. so to an excusing and
acquitting conscience, every sower sop of Affliction is as a sweet bit of
interior consolation; such a one can draw comfort out of the bitterest drug,
and a health restoring portion out of the deadliest and ranckest poison;
therefore said the Apostles under the most smarting rods of persecution and
imprisonment. Our rejoicing is the Testimony of a good Conscience, Oh keep
Conscience clear, Let innocence be in the foreward, an^ true quie^ and
tranquillity, will be in the reerward. 2 Cor. 1.12
and you shall not want comfort; for a good Conscience is a continual feast,
and he that has it fares well enough, though he has no other food; this man
may be merry without merriment, and make melody in his heart, without music in
his ear, and dine and sup without daintyes. Corn, wine, coin and cattle, (the
worldings delight and darling) is nothing to this, Heb. 3.17, 18.

Thus have I done with the First Inference, in which (...) have showed you

First, that we are to prepare for suffering times.

Secondly, (What) we are to prepare.

I now pass to the second use, As the Ark was lift higher by the waves, ^o the
Christian should grow h^ler by his suffering; therefore said Paul, God corrects
us for our profit, that we should be made partakers of his holyn^s^. Heb. 12.10.
viz. That as it should be our wisdom to prepare for smarting times before
they come, so should it be our conscionable care to profit by them after they
are come. God has said, Romans 8.28. That all things shall work together for our
good; but how shall this be, unless by them we be made more good: Small comfort
can it be to an Army to provide Ammunition against the Enemy, when at last
they are forced to fly, and glad they can get off the field with a whole skin;
and to as little purpose is it for us to be prepared for aflictions at a
distance, if we be impaired by them in the encounter; Perdidisti utilitatem
calamitatis.
Austin cries out against such who grew not better by afflictions; alas (said
he) you have lost the quintessence of this correction, the benefit of the Rod;
certainly there is honey in the most unsavory flower, were we but skilful
Chemists to extract it; there is a blessing in every providence of God, Its
observed that the wal^ut tree, the more its thrasht, the more fruit it bears:
Oh may every child of God prove thus improved by the rod, that albeit as the
Aposile says, no chastenning for the present seem j^yous, yet afterward it
may yield the peaceable fruit of ^ighteousne^^ to him that is exercised thereby.
had we but wisdom to broach the vessel, and draw it forth; Oh let us lay out
our strength more for an improvement by, then for a releaseament from our
troubles; and be more sollicitous for the sanctification of them, then for the
removal of them from us, that we may experience in our selves, what David
observed in himself Psalm. 119.71. Its good for me that I have been afflicted;
Now if you would be reformed and improved by Gods correcting hand upon you or
yours;

First, Something must be done while the rod of affliction lies upon thee.

Secondly, and something must be done when it is taken off you.

The former duty brancheth it self into these two particulars.

First, You must turn your afflictions into prayers.

Secondly, you must turn your afflictions into tears.

First, You are to turn your afflictions into prayers; Call upon me, says God,
in the time of trouble, Psalm 50.15. and Is any afflicted? let him pray, said
James, Chap. 5.13. When God is beating our backs, we should be bowing our
knees; when he is afflicting we should fall to praying; Is any afflicted? let
him pray; contrary to the practice of some, who when God is chastiseing, they
fall a chafeing; when God is correcting, they fall to complaining; like wild
bulls they grow mad by bateing? if crosses or losses rush in upon them, and
their estates begin to waste, they fall to the Isralites language, viz.
Murmuring and repining, and like the Sea in a storm, they foam out their own
shame, and cast up the mire and dirt of their muttering and malcontent
spirits; but Christians are to make another use of their afflictions; for when
God frowns, they should beg most for his smiles; and when he turns his back,
they should sue hardest for his face and refreshing countenance to shine upon
them: never had David penned so many Psalms, nor put up so many pathetick
prayers to God, had not the drawing plasters of affliction sucked them from
him; Never had Daniel persisted panting in his prayers as he did, ( Chap.
9.19.) O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do: O Lord defer not for
thy names sake, had not the esoud of the divine displeasure hung over the City
Jerusalem, which threatened it with some sweeping judgment, verse. 16.17. O what
fluent prayers should issue from us, and what lively stirrings of Spirit should
be within us, when the smarting virg of some afflictive providence lies upon
us! They poured out a prayer, said the Prophet, when thy chastenings were upon
them, whereas our prayers did but drop out before, now they should be poured
out; whereas they ebbed at other times, they should now flow.

Secondly, You are to turn your afflictions into tears, tears of a penitential
Recantation, and cordial contrition, sorrowing in secret for the baseness of
your natures, and badness of your lives, whereby you have dared God to draw his
sword, to bend his bow, and shoot his darts of displeasure at you; suffering
times should be sorrowing and repenting times, teaching us to join with
lamenting Jeremiah in that repentant resolution, Let us search and try our
ways, and turn to the Lord our God. When the Caldeans, the Devil and the
Sabeans were scratching and scrambling for Jobs Cattle, and making a gap in his
outward estate, then was Job a searching his heart, and sorrowing for his sins,
and renewing his repentance, and repairing the breaches in his spiritual
estate; for says the Text, then Job fell down and worshipped, Job. 1.20 When
the good man was informed of those soul-sadding casualties that had surprised
him, how that all the creature comforts he had in the whole world, were dead
and buried in silence, and forgetfulness, hereupon he rent his mantle, shaved
his head, fell down and worshipped; lo Jobs carriage under his affliction;
when Satan urges him to rend Gods name with reproach and cursing, he rends his
heart and habit; when he tempts him to stand up and defy God, Job on the
contrary falls down and worships God; when afflictions send us home to God,
like so many penitent prodigals, with melting eyes, and mourning hearts, for
our unhandsome behavior, and unkind demeanor toward him, then have they a
sweet influence and blessed operation upon us, and are to us what God intended
them, viz. Restoratives to Repentance, and Instruments of Humiliation, Hos.
5.15. Thus much for that which you are to do while the rod lies on you; Now a
word to the latter, which you are to do when it is taken off you, and this I
shall comprise in two particulars.

First, What ever you wished had been done then, let it not lie undone now.

Secondly, What ever you vowed to God that you would do (in case he would
remove the affliction) do not in anywise neglect it, but speedily set about the
doing of it.

First, What you wished had been done, do it; It may be when you were sick
last, and had to your apprehe^sion death in your Chamber by you, bidding you
dress your self for a Funeral, and prepare for dying, it may be then you
wished, Oh that I had been a thousand times more holy, more heavenly, and more
careful to have saved my soul! Oh that I had expended and laid out that money
upon the backs or bowels of the poor, which I lavished out upon my lusts in
jovial revellings, and good fellow meetings! O that I had spent that time in
tears and humiliation, which I lost in sports and recreations! would to God
those many nights and precious hours had been employed and improved in weeping,
watching and praying (for now should I have found the comfort of it in my
conscience in this dying hour) which were woefully wasted and cursedly thrown
away in carding, diceing, drinking, and the like base and unblessed practices!
Oh that I had spent the Sabboths (those filver seasons of grace) in hearing,
meditateing, and taking true pains in duty, which I passed over in vain
jangling, idle courses, and fruitless discourses, quite cross to the end for
which they were given me! it may be Christian, these were thy sad thoughts upon
a sick bed; tell me, were not these thy wishes? were not these thy desires? was
not this the breathing of thy heart? was not this the language of thy soul? if
so, as thou valnest that immortal soul of thine, and hopest to go to heaven,
when they earthly house shall hold thee no longer, let it be thy endeavor to
do what was once thy desire had been done; God has entrusted thee with a new
talent; and beyond thy expectation, brought thee safe from off a sick bed, and
has turned thee asit were into the world again, to try thee whether thou will
make any conscience, that thy deeds now be answerable to thy desires then* or
no; dear heart, pity thy own soul while thou may, and seriously set about
the abandoning of those irregularities, and performing those duties which were
once thy desires that they had been done, that when sickness comes a second
time, it may not find the work undone. O si, O si, O tio si.
And thou in a wishing and woulding posture, as before.

Secondly, What ever act of holiness or religion you vowed or covenanted,
purposed add promised to do, be sure you do it, and in no wise neglect it. It
may be in a fit of sickness you bound your self by promise and vow made to God,
that if he would but add to your days some few more years, as he did to
Hezekiah, and try you with health again, you would reform, repent and grow
good; ah would but God try me with one twelve-moneth longer, and entrust me
with my health again, how speedily would I repent! how heartily would I pray,
and lie night and day in the posture of a true penitent, spreading my condition
before the Lord, till he hear and turn himself and say, Be of good cheer, poor
soul, thy sins are forgiven thee! H ast thou not tied thy self by such like
promises and protestations as these, that thou will break off thy badness
betimes, and never entangle thy conscience in the guilt of thy quondam
corruptions again? If so, the Lord pardon thy perfidious promise-breaking,
covenant breaking, and unfaithful dealing with God (if thou art still a
transgressour) and grant that thy own engagements, thy own covenants may not
condemn thee. Oh Christian, ^et it be thy constant care to ^ischarge thy old
debts, to ^erforme the vows thou ^adest to God in thy af^^iction; let not rich
Jacob Genesis 33.19. forget to pay that poor Jacob promised, ^en. 28 20. be not
niggardly (...) do in health, what thou ^^t bountiful to say in sick^ess; the
Lord pinch thee and me into the remembrance ^f our faith plighted, and ^romise
made to God, that (...) we may reinforce our old ^ows with new resolutions, and
^^ing them at last into act and ^^ecution. Thus have I done ^ith these two
Uses. First, to ^^epare for troubles. Secondly, (...) profit by troubles. I
will ^^d two more.

The first is that of John's, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of
the world.

The second is that of Paul's, Heb. 13.14. Since we have no continuing City
here, let us seek one to come; Since there can no constant comfort be had in
this world, let it be our wisdom to provide some in the next world; since the
earth is a very vale of misery, a wilderness of weariness and woe, take care to
secure heaven, where (as the spirit faith) Rev. 21.4. there is no more death but
life, n^ more mourning but mirth, no more sorrow nor crying, neither shall
there be any pain more, for these things are all passed away. (...) begin with
the former.

First, Is this life at the best but a day of labor and trouble? then be not
in love with the gilded pills, the transient pleasures and uncertain
enjoyments of this fleeting life; be not fond of, nor too much taken with the
fawning smiles of this flattering world: And the rather, because the sweetest
wine has dregs, the clearest day has clouds, the fairest fortune has fears,
the richest estate has cares, and the sweetest, safest, and most eligible
condition you can possibly fancy to our selves (in statu quo nunc) is soured by
several sad instances, proper to that condition; Christ expresses it, Mat. 6.
ult. and we can experience it, Every day has enough of its own evils; every
day brings forth some alteration, some new affliction, some fresh encounter
with one cross or another: man has never one whole day to himself of entire
and uninterrupted quiet, but either something offends him, or nothing pleases
him; even at such a time, and in such particulars as he proposes to himself
most of pleasure, it frequently falls out, that he finds least of satisfaction,
something or other unexpectedly interposing, which prevents the felicity and
frustrates the man's fancy; thus while Jonah was warming his hands as it were at
the ignis fatuus of his own fond conceit, while he was exhilarating and making
himself merry with his groundless confidence in the gourds continuance,
providence had prepared a worm which on the sudden undermined it, that it
witherd, John. 4. Thus Jonahs hopes were laid on an heap, and himself intombed
im a disappointment; the like we see in the parable of the rich Clown in the
Gospel, when he had reapt his crop, enlarged his barns, inned his harvest, and
feasted his carcass, and composing himself to rest, thinking to sing a Requiem
to his soul, and to take a nap of an age long, on the sudden death plucked the
pillow from under his head, and accosted him with this sad salute, hac nocte
stulte, thou fool come thy ways with me, lie no longer upon thy bed of ease,
but up and away to judgment; alas silly man, who would have thought this! who
could have suspected that one so well appointed, so well provided, should have
been so soon unsettled, so quickly dismounted! Oh sirs, take you warning by
these and the like particulars, which God has been so punctual in penning, to
leave them on record for our learning; why should you and I lust after the
things of this life, as they lusted, since we see how strangely they were
cheated, and how miserably they were deluded! why should we be so passionately
in love with sumptuous buildings, Quis sapiens bono considat frag^li?
Ni^larequies terris, surgite viri.
pleasant scituations, gay apparel, delicious fair, a wealthy donative, or
such like low and mean things, which are stuck with thorns, lined with cares,
and faced with fears while they are with us, and for ought we know, by some
intervening accident, by some unseen instance of the divine providence, may
speedily and unexpectedly be fetched away from us, and we be left in the dark,
to take up that lesson of lamentation which Job did (when he looked back upon
his by passed pleasures, and wealth now worn out) Alas what have I had for my
inheritance, but a few months of vanity!

Is this life a day of trouble? then look somewhere else for Rest, even to
heaven which is the souls right resting place; as the needle in the compass is
in continual motion till it point Northwards; and as Noah's Dove found no place
to rest in, till she returned to the Ark; so are our souls in continual motion,
trouble and trepidation, till they point Christ-wards and Heaven-wards, till
they sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to rest and roll themselves in the
everlasting embracements of Jesus; for we find by frequent proof and daily
experiment, that here we have no place to sit down in, but we must r^se as soon
as we are set. Ah how soon is our Comical mirth Metamorphosed into Tragical
mourning, our festival solemnities into funeral obsequies, and our ease,
security and the greatest felicity we can fancy to our selves here, Hic
acquiruntur hic amittuntur res terrenae.
ah how quickly, even in the turn of an hand, or age of a minute is it
converted into tediousness and wearisomeness? how soon does it conclude in a
fevour, an ague or lingering sickness, in an afflicted life or an unexpected
death? all which, with many more may preach to us upon that Text, Up, here is
not thy rest, thou have yet a great journey to go; Oh let us ever be hugging up
our hearts heavenwards, and fending our affections upwards toward the Saints
everlasting rest, toward those Mansions prepared for us above, where felicity
is the condition, eternity the duration, Angels the company, the Lamb the
light, and God the portion and inheritance for ever. Thus much of that which is
presupposed in the Text, viz. That the best that can be said of this life, is,
that's its a day of labors and troubles. Now I proceed to that which is
proposed viz. That the worst that can be said of death or the grave, is, that
its a night of rest and repose.

There the weary be at rest.

As John after the terrible claps of thunder, heard the pleasant voice of
Harpers, Rev. 14.2. So here, after labor comes rest, which latter makes
amends for the former; While here, we are like the Israelites in Exile, at last
comes death like Moses to deliver us; and Moses said, when he came for the
peoples enlargement and deliverance, he would not leave an hoof behind; so
Christian, when thou come to take up thy quarters in the grave, not one
trouble but it will be left behind; this, and this, and this trouble, which now
thou think almost intolerable; and that wound, that woe, which thou art apt
to judge almost incurable, will shake hands with thee, as soon as thou enterest
the continent of a Coffin, never to see thy face more; no more labors of the
body, nor distractions of the mind, no more noise nor stir, but all quiet and
still in the grave whither thou go; there the weary be at rest. The servant
there is not spent with serving, nor wearied with waiting, nor weakened with
working, but sleeps with as much quiet, lies with as much ease, has as much
attendance, and is as much a freeman as his Master; This Job justifies, Chap.
3.19. The servant is free from his Master, and in the 18. verse. he shows the
same in Prisoners; there says he, the Prisoners rest together; here they are
invirond with fears, and beset with frights, while the Baliffs stand sentinel
to catch them in every corner, and to take them at every turn; here they are
continually tossed and tugd, haled and hurried from their house to the Prison,
from the society of their loving relatives, to converse and to communicate with
the crysand sad querela's of poor captives, and men miserable like themselves;
but when death begins to look them in the face; then the year of jubilee, the
day of delivery begins to dawn upon their heads; when they have once paid their
debt to nature, then all their debts are paid; now death is their debt to
nature, and therefore when they have paid that, that is, when they are dead
once, they receive a quietus est in their Spirits, an acquittance that they
have done all, discharged all; therefore he concludes thus; there the
Prisoners rest together.

Now touching this rest, I will proceed first in showing you what it is, and
secondly, what use we are to make of it.

There Is a threefold rest, which Christians enjoy in the grave.

First, A rest from working; there is no tedious employment there.

Secondly, A rest from suffering, there is no calamity to prey upon our
carcasses there.

Thirdly, A rest from sinning, and this is better then all the rest.

First, A rest from working, no riseing up early, no sitting up late, no
toyling the body, nor spending the spirits, no exhausting the moisture, nor
drying up the marrow with hard Labor to get a poor living, but as Job says,
Chap. 3.13 The man shall lie still and be at quiet, as if he were taking a
days, repose upon a feather bed. O the weary nights and weary days, Oh the
tedious times and tyresom hours, that many a poor laboring man meets with
here! Oh the scorching heat, and peirceing cold, that they are forced to feel,
and silently to stoop to; Oh what would they give for a little respite
sometimes! what would they not part with for a perfect rest! now death gives
them their wish, and gratifies them with this felicity they so much long for;
for says the spirit, blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest
from their labors; which place receives further light from that position of
the Preacher, Eccles. 9.10. There Is no work nor device, says he, in the grave
whither thou go, that's a Bedchamber and not a shop, a sleeping room and not
a workhouse.

Secondly, A rest from suffering; no languishing weakness, no sickness nor
faintness can there be found; no more oppression nor imprisonment for the poor
debtor; no more reproaches nor false imputations to be fastened on the painful
Minister; no more losses or hardship incident to the harmless householder; no
more crying and complaining in our streets by comfortless Orphans and
fatherless Children, My Father, my father! But when God has once whipped his
child to bed, he throws by the rod, and lets him rest; therefore says Job in
the words immediately going before my Text, There wicked the cease from
troubling, from afflicting; and he adds in the text, there the weary be at
rest, from being troubled or afflicted; they are now got out of the crowd of
tumults and crosses into the Region of rest and tranquillity; hence could the
Heathen say, that it was the best thing not to be born, not to come into this
world of miseries, and the next best thing (if we do give the world a visit) in
case we be born, to dye quickly, to resign our interest in it, and be gone;
get but once thither Christian, and thou need not fear those bedlam-surges
and affrighting billows of momentany afflictions which are apt to dash upon,
and threaten drowning to the fluctuated and tempest-tossed Vessel of thy
outward man, for the high Lord of heaven and earth, to whom both wind and sea
and all things else owe their allegiance, will silence the Euroclydons, Sponge,
the impetuous waves, and still the rage of all vexations and afflictive
incidences, when he lands his Ark upon Ararat, when he Cradles his Child in the
grave, there to take its rest till the resurrection. This is the second
particular, we shall rest from; viz. all sufferings that like so many
Sergeants, are ready to arrest the body; here lies Job in the Ashes, here lies
Jacob in the Fields, here lies David it the Wilderness, here lies Abraham in
exile, and here lies many of our brethren bleeding and groaning under the heavy
pressures, of poverty, oppression, sickness, and such like afflictions; but at
last comes the year of Jubilee, when all the Prisoners of the Lord are set at
liberty; therefore they are called the Prisoners of hope, Zech. 9.12. because
they may hope to be delivered. The time was when Christ asked the Adultress,
Where are thine accusers? and she replied, They are gone; so the time will be,
when if it should be enquired of thee, Where are thy troubles? thou shall
answer, They are gone; the sun arose and they vanished into a disappearance;
therefore said the Psalmi^t, mark the upright man and behold the just, for the
end of that man is peace; though his beginning may be trouble, yet his end
shall be peace.

Thirdly, A rest from sinning; a rest from doing the druggery of Satan, a rest
from the law of our members, which now warreth against the law of our mind;
this is clear from that Apostolical affirmation, He that is dead is free from
sin; the fount^in and flux of sin is then dried up; all the Conduits of sin are
stopped, and the weapons of unrighteousness broken; when a good man dies, Mort
viri Mors vity.
his sin dies with him; nay before him, it dies in actu, he does not act it; it
dies in affectu, he does not affect it; it dies quoad regunm, it commands him
not; and it dies quoad reatum, it condemns him not; now is the perfect
mortification of sin attained; now is the spreading Leprosy of sin cured; and
is not this good news to a Christians ear? thy Query is now that of Paul's, O
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Now death like a
friend whispers thee in the ear, it will deliver thee; for he that is dead is
freed from sin; for whereas in the whole course of our lives, we are
continually fighting against our inordinate affections, to bring them into
subjection to Christ, death as at one stroke smites them; so as that the body
goes to the grave, and sins not, and the soul is offered up to God in a full and
perfect obedience; Now it is thy wish and most passionate prayer, Christian, Oh
that my sins were all sacrificed, Oh that my lusts lay all buried and
abolished, so as that they might never disquiet my conscience more, never
pollute my heart more, never offend my God more, never grieve the comforter
more. Oh that my corruptions were conquered, that my heart were renewed, that
my life were reformed, that I might never sin more, but might be one wholly
offered up to the Divine disposal, saying with the Psalmist, Lo, I come to do
thy will O my Go^? now wait-but till a dying hour, and thou shall have thy
wish, though thou can not live in the body without sin, yet thou shall lie in
the grave without sin; that rebellious w^ll, that earthly mind, those irregular
affections, that were ever exciting thee to sin, and exposeing thee to
temptation, drawing thee from duty, destracting thee in duty, or disquieting
thee after duty, shall now be left behind; as thy friends may accompany thee to
the grave, but then they turn their backs and leave thee; so these may go with
thee to a deathbed, to the confines of eternity, but they can proceed no
further; comfortably thou m^yest conclude with Paul, Heb. 4.11. he that is
entered into his rest, has ceased from sin.

I proceed now to use, which is two fold.

1. Of Caution. 2. Of Comfort.
First, Is the grave a bed of ease? The^e ^r two Cautions.
is death a night of rest? then mistake not thy resti g place, expect it not in
this life; fancy not that thou shall have any stable or lasting rest, till thy
body rest it self in the Arch of the grave, and thy soul repose it self in the
bosom of Abraham; the first thing the new born infant sees, is sorrow, and the
first thing that he does is weeping, as if the innocent were troubled to think
upon what a shore of troubles he is landing, and ^^to what a sea of labors ^e
is lanching, and thus ^aving as it were took ship^ng, he rides in the storm,
and like a bubble floats up and ^own upon the face of the ^aters, being
resiless and (...) perpetual motion all the ^hile, till he be crushed into
^atness, by the pressure of a ^^gger drop; I mean till he ^e ushered into the
grave by a ^ad of undigested meat, by a ^urthen of a full draught, ^y the
quinsie or stopping of ^is breath, or by some ^^ch like supervening acci^ent;
thus the poor creature ^ins out his time, never see^^g an end of his troubles,
^^ll his troubles see an and of him; therefore the ^aveat I would fasten upon
you, is this, Take heed o^ building Castles in the Air, o^ grounding your
hopes, an^ expectations of a continue^ safety and unshaken security upon the
sandy foundation o^ a temporal and transitor^ life, as the Angel said to the
woman, Why seek ye the living amongst the dead? Luke 24.5.
h^ is not here, he is risen; so man I say to you in this case Why seek ye for
peace in (...) place of conflict, for the song of Sion in Babylon, for re^^ in
a land of labors and troubles? these are reserved for you hereafter, stay for
the ultimate event of all things till the last Exit comes, stay t^ see the
clause of the scene then shall you see a true decision of all controversies;
(...) conclusion and peroration o^ al^ perplexing evils and anxie^^es.

Secondly, Though when ^^e Christian dies, his trou^^es dye with him, and he
^^es immediately to rest; yet ^^ow that the wicked reap no ^^ch benefit by
death; the ^^d of their life is the begin^^ng of their troubles; all ^^eir
merry days are now ^one, all their youthful ^eaks now laid aside, now (...)
their Candle out, now is ^^eir sun set, and nothing left ^^em in all the world,
that ^^n either speak a word of ^ounsel, or administer a ^^llable of comfort to
their ^assing souls; but no sooner ^^ey dye but they drop into ^iving torments.

Quest. But you will object; Is it the soul privilege of t^^ Saints to enjoy
rest after death is it not a favor common (...) all Christians whether re^^ or
pretended, to repose the^ selves in the grave with^^^ any suspicion of a
d^st^^bance?

I answer, It Is confessed th^^ have a kind of rest or rath^^ respite and reprieve
giv^^ them, till the Resurrecti^^ day, but poor rest it is (G^^ knows) for it is

1. Neither Total. 2. Nor Perpetual.
First, It is not Total; (...) this rest of theirs reach^^ not the whole man,
but ^^ly the body, the shell a^^ outside of the man; as (...) the soul, the
kirnel, the qu^^tessence, the marrow, and ^ore excellent part of the ^an, it is
in restless torments, ^^idst a cursed crew of hel^^h executioners, who are
^^nding and tearing the silly ^^retch, in the most tyranni^^l manner
imaginable; ^^erefore its said Luke 16.22, ^^. that no sooner the rich ^^an
dyed, but in hell he ^^^t up his eyes; no sooner his ^^dy was buried in the
earth, ^^t presently his soul was ^^unged into hell, and this (...) the best
comfort a wicked ^^an can expect in a dying ^our, when he feels his body ^^gin
by degrees (like a ^^inous house) to fall down (...) to the valley of death,
and ^^s soul Tennant-like, to be ^^esently turned out of its ^^d habitation;
then may he bespeak it, as the Emperou^ did, Animula blandula v^^gula, poor
fleeting wandrin^ soul, whither art thou going whither art thou journeying the
body may rest a while (a^ a reprieve granted it) in the vault of a grave; but
where is the place of thy rest? the body has a Tomb and a Coffin provided for
it; 2 Cor. 5.1.
but tho^ poor soul, have not whereon t^ lay thy head. Every Child o^ God can
say, I know tha^ when this earthly house of m^ body, shall be dissolved, I have
a building of God, an house eternal in the heavens, to lodge my soul in; But all
tha^ the wicked man can say* when he dies, is, I know^ that when this earthly
house of my body shall be dissolved, I have a stately Tomb, a carved Coffin, a
lasting Mo^ument, to desposit my bones ^work^, I have seen it done alrea^y, or
I have taken order for (...) in my will to have it done; ^his is all such a man
can be ^ure of; when alas, his ^illy soul must lie claspt in ^he claws of the
Devil, as ^he trembling partridge with^n the griping Tallons of ^he ravenous
Falcon.

The wicked man's rest is not Total.

Secondly, it is not perpetual neither; the body shall not abide for ever under
the ^ands of death, but shall come forth like a prisoner out of Jayle, to be
tried for its ^ife, and to abide the sad sentence of an incensed Judge; The sea
shall give up her dea^^ and the grave will give up b^^ dead; All those vile
bodi^^ which have lain Cabinette^ up in silence, shall be hale^ out of the
holes of their supposed security, to be reunite^ to their souls; so that as
bot^ body and soul finned together on earth, so they mu^^ both smart together
in hel^ see to this purpose that conscience stinging, and terrour^ speaking
Text, Rev. 20.12* 13, 14. Oh what a wofu^ greeting? what a sad salutation will
there be twixt these two old friends at that day (...) when each shall remind
other of those privy prancks, and sinful passages formerly committed by them,
and then turn^ about and view those many vials of Gods hottest and heaviest
displeasure, that ^re ready to be charged upon them; then will the body wish
over and over, Oh that I ^ad some cell in the wilderness, some Cave in the
desert, ^o shroud my self from the wrath to come! but in vain; ^or the seed
that is sown will ^ave a time to spring up ^gain, and the body laid in ^he
grave, will rise again; they that have done good, unto ^verlasting life; and
they that have done evil, into ever^asting fire; Thus you have ^een there is a
rest in the grave after death, but the wicked ^ave small cause of comfort from
it; for to them it is neither Total nor Perpe^ual: they must rise again ^s soon
as they are laid, and ^p to judgment, before they be well warm in their beds.
Thus much for Caution, I^ pass now to the use of comfort, which may be
serviceable to the Christian, in three regards.

1. It may be as a Cordia^ to keep up the heart from fainting under any felt
Affliction.

2. It may be as a comfor^ and encouragement against the fear of death, and the
bodies dissolution.

3. It may be as a preservative, to keep us from mourning immoderately for the
death of our friends.

First, Is death and the grave a night of rest? the^ this may mightily allay
an^ lessen the sadness of such a^ have any affliction lying upon them; for thy
affliction O Christian, will soon dye of it self, and so thou shall be eased;
or how ever, thou will dye ere long thy self, Habet ^inem suum, aut finem tuum.
and thus thou shall find cure; When Jesus was in Banishment with Mary and
Joseph, at last the Angel came, and said, They are dead which sought the child's
life: So when the days of our bondage and banishment, scarcity and sickness are
ended, at last tidings will come, that thy troubles are dead; then shall the
righteous look up like Moses when he was passed the sea, and see all their
enemies drowned behind them, and themselves harbored in the grave, where the
weary be at rest. Cheer up then thou Child of God; what though thou should
lie at the mercy of some insulting enemy? what though the day of peace, plenty
and prosperity should begin to thicken, darken, and grow cloudy, and on the
sudden some Whirlwind of persecution should threaten thee with inevitable
ruin? cannot the Almighty still the noise of these waves, and whistle back the
winds into their treasuries; or carry thee out of the storm, by conveying thee
into the Sanctuary of a Sepulcher, and security of a grave? where thou shall be
as a man unconcerned in the tragedy. What though Mordecai lay a while at the
gate, and Mary sit a while under the Table, and what if you underlie a little
the chastenning hand of God? yet in all your inevitable straits, do ye in all
humble observance, and faithful patience, attend the pleasure of divine
providence, and by a holy recumbency, acquiesce in this assurance, that the
evils that you see to day (when once the fatal period approaches) you shall
see them no more; as Christ therefore said to his Disciples, Could ye not watch
with me one hour? so say I to you, Can ye not suffer one hour? one year, one
age; he that is tired, can crawl a little way further; Oh a little way further
Christian, one step more for a Kingdom.

Secondly, Is death at the worst but a night of Rest? then this may animate,
comfort, and encourage all faint-hearted Christians against the fear of dying.
Will the labourer grudge to go to bed when his days-work is done? Or will the
Prisoner be afraid of that man, that shall knock off his fetters, open the
Prison door, and give him his inlargment? and shall the man of God dread death,
which does but come to deliver him out of a miserable life? here thou art a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; one day in pain, another day in
disgrace, one while distorted with Convulsions, another while tormented with
the Gout or Collect, but almost continually called upon to act the part of a
sufferer; and why then are thou afraid of death which comes with an
Acquittance in its hand, for thy discharge and delivery? It is I, said our
Savior (when he saw a panick fear to rise upon their spirits) and therefore be
not afraid; so it is but death that comes in at thy Chamber door, that leaps
up upon thy bed, that draws the Curtains and puts out the Candle of thy life,
to let thee take thy rest the better; It is but death I say, and therefore be
not afraid; even such a death which like Jacobs Cha^iot, (attended by a Convoy
of thine acquaintance) is sent on purpose to carry thy corpse to a grave, where
thy weary bones shall be at rest.

Thirdly, Is death at the worst but a night of rest? then this may comfort us
from mourning immoderately for the death of dear Relations; Are they in rest?
why then should you be restless and unquiet to, hear of their weal? death is
thy friends gain, though thy loss; and can thou grieve and sorrow that he
has changed for the better; take heed, this will argue too much of self-love,
whilst thou deeply lamentest thy loss, but little rejoycest for thy friends
gain; its his gain, I say again, unless it be no gain to be delivered out of a
sinful sickly body, yea a sinful miserable world, and carried to a resting
place, where sin and misery never peept in; and this consideration alone, may
minister matter of exceeding comfort, and incomparable quiet, to the truly
affectionate and indeard Husband, as also to the Noble Allies, and religious
relations of this every way virtuous, and accomplished Gentlewoman; the sad and
mournful lamented instance of this mournful meeting, Oh how this may silence
your sorrow, and make you sighing fly away, to think that she is now at rest,
that that very ^anguishing nature, which but yesterday was as full of ^ain as
it could hold, breath^ng forth the sighs and sad accents of a dying Christian,
Cuius mors (licet amara) minus pan^ quam mora morti^ babuit.
should this day be lodged in ^he tranquillity of that region, where all is
quiet, and on a Calm. And that that pious soul, that unparalled precious
piece, who for eight whole days together lay frying in the furnace of
affliction, having all that time only some few short smileing intermissions,
which did scarce contain time enough to breath in, and to prepare her tacklings
for the next storm, should be now rison from off a sick bed, laid aside her
sad complaints, and ceased her mourning notes, and have her dear Redeemer
taking her by the hand, and showing her the pleasant scituations, the
beautiful buildings, and the heart-ravishing and soul-entrancing joy, that's in
the Kingdom of glory, saying, How likest thou this welcome to heaven! how
approvest thou, dear daughter, of this friendly treatment, of this homely (I
should say heavenly) entertainment? this is thy rest O my Spouse; this must be
the place of thy Habitation for ever.

And can ye walk mournfully, and go about disconsolat ly, whiles this
Consideration keeps fresh upon your spirits? It is our m^^kness, and infirmity
to think of our friends deceased, as Jacob did of Joseph; when he saw his
bloodyed Coat, he presently concluded that some ev ^ had befalne him, some evi^
bea^ had devoured him; while Joseph was in honor all the while, in Pharoahs
court and therefore bid his brethren, Go tell my father of all my honor in
Egypt. Thus when we see the Coats of our deceased friends, when we cast a
ruefull aspect, a sorrowful glance upon the heart-affecting object of their
Hearse, when we see the garments they wore, the company they kept, the places
of retirement they frequented, we are apt to think that death that evil beast
has made an end of them, and that they are not, and so we walk heavily and
live uncomfortably, and yet they all the while, for ought that we know,
advanced to honor, admitted into the Court and Kngdome of heaven; Go rectify
my fathers mistake, said Joseph, and tell him that I am not devoured by some
evil beast, as he conceives; but tell him of all the honor you see me have in
Egypt; And tell my friends, would this dear deceased Gentlewoman say (were
there but a Post or weekly Intelligencer comeing from heaven to the earth, to
tell us the news of that country) Go tell my friends of all the honor and that
height of happyness I have attained to in heaven; signify to them something of
that infallible joy that lies warm upon my heart, the impression where of is so
deep, and savor and relish so sweet, that it will keep fresh and fair upon my
spirit unto everlasting; it is too big a joy to be contained in me; and
therefore it does encircle and contain me; it is too big to enter into the
shallow vessel of my incapacious soul; and therefore I have received an order
to enter into it, according to that text, Well done thou good and faithful
servant, come and enter into thy masters joy; This is the joy (dear friends)
that I enjoy. Now why should your sorrow (Christians) be immoderate, for one
whose joys are infinite? why should you spend your time in days of
humiliation, for one that's celebrating a day of thanks giving, a day which
never knows night, never shall have end; I know you have so much charity for
your never to be forgotten friend as to conquer your soul into assurance that
she is as happy as heaven can make her; at wor^, that her soul is in bliss, and
her body asleep in the grave, till the day dawn, and the trumpet sound, to
awaken it from sleep to salvation; and will he that ^oves his friend, mourn or
be troubled when he bids him good night to lie down in his bed till the next
morning?

Now probably it is your expectation that I should say something, in
commemoration of this Saints sanctity on earth, the better to convince you of
her present felicity in heaven.

Indeed I could cordially wish that the ju^^ praises and deserved encomiums of
this principal piece of divine architecture were published and sweetly sung
forth by some seraphicall tongue, that the Glory of her graces might shine
illustriously like a burning ^amp to give light to posterity, that thereby such
a fire of zeal might be kindled in the hearts of all, that passing through the
the same path of piety which she had done, they may arrive at the same port of
felicity, whereto she is gone; but alas who am I, and what is my Quill, that it
should dare to delineate, or characterize this Choice Christian! I want gifts
to make known her graces, and natural Abilities to blazon forth her spiritual
eminences. I Would rather weep her worth then write it, and choose to mourn over
her grave and lament her death, rather then be that Apeiles that should
undertake to draw her Picture to the life; yet rather then I will wrong her
memory by being mute, and cloud her morning luster in a mist of unpardonable
si^ence, I will take the confidence to present you with an Epitome of her
goodness; you may judge of the Lion ^y the Paw, and guess at the grace of her
person, by (...) glance upon a piece of her Picture.

Indeed should I pen the ^umerous particulars, where^n this dear child of God
(whose person, parts and piety will ever be precious to my memory) has
propounded ^er self imitable, I should be voluminous; but I purpose ^revity,
and therefore leave ^ou to paraphrase, and ex^atiate upon a Theme so large and
sadly copious.

The whole I reduce unto these two general heads.

First, The Tenor of he^ life. Secondly, The manner of her death.
Touching the former, she was eminently pious; and as the latter, she was
transcendently patient; in both, imitable and exemplary. The vanities of this
life did not affect her, she slighted them the extreamities of death and
sadness of a sick bed did not afflict her, she wave^ them, and endured all with
so much Christian quiet and contentment, as if she had been unconcerned in the
accident; In a word, both liveing and dying, she might (...) our copy to write
after, (...) inform us how to live, ^^d to teach us how to dye; ^er speech was
always inoffen^^ve and graceful, her ge^^ure plausible and void of ^ride, her
Garb was rather ^^mely then costly; and ^^ough her Parental Extracti^n might
have wooed her to ^ourtly Magnificence, yet ^id her personal condescenti^n, and
gracious temper and constitution confine or ^ather incline her to a Chistian
^ecency; her judgment was ^s a judex, able to descerne; and her memory was as
an ^ndex, fit to retain those ^assages in Sermons, reading ^r discourseing,
which were worthy her observation; to which I may add, that her practice was a
Praeco to publish to the world, that he^ Conscience run parallel wit^ her
science, having no less (...) proportion of the innocenc^ of the Dove, then of
the wisdom of the Serpent; s^ that that sign then may b^ hung up at her door,
tha^ Epitaph may be written upon her monument, that Encomium may safely be set
upon he^ memory, which our Saviou^ clapped upon Nathaniels head Joh. 1.47.

She was not at all given to foolish talking, unseemly je^ting, and an
Ishmaelitish jeering, (as minion^ of her quali y are) but grave and sober,
her;lip^ dropping grace like an honey comb, forgetful of injuries, slow to
anger, helpful to many, ^ureful i^ none.
Behold an Israelite inde^^ in whom there is (...) guile.

Here Is a pattern for all yo^ ^adies, Gentlewomen and others, here is a
president ^or you to walk by, here is a ^appy for you to write after; ^e was one
of a candid and ^inning disposition; be you (...); she was one of very rare and
Religious qualifications; (...) you so; she was one of an ^^genuous and affable
com^ortment; her look was most ^bligeing, and her modest ^^untenance very
influential upon the spirits of spectators, Benignitate adeo praedita, ut quos
alii potentia, illa clementia vice^it.
(...) melt (and like the glimer^^g sun) to thaw the icie ^earts even of her
enemies ^^to love and compliance, and to make all that had but ^^e least
competency of ac^uaintance with her, to love ^er, whether they would or ^o; she
was a true lover of ^ods Ministers, one that could not endure to hear a^^ thing
ill, and would not at an^ time speak any thing but w^^ of them.

She was continually obsevant of, and passionate^ affectionate to her dear
Hu^band; as before Marriag^ she fitted her choice to h^^ mind; so after she
alw^^ fitted her mind to her choy^^ so that all along there w^^ such a
conformity and constant correspondency betwi^^ this kind couple, this lovi^^
pair, that there was ne^^ seen the least difference (...) the least sign of
Separati^^ between them, till God ma^^ it, till he separated them; (...) then
they were like Jonath^^ and David, who loved ea^^ other as their own soul, 1
Sa^^ 18.1. Or like the t^^ ^ranches in the Prophet Eze^hiels hand, enclosed in
one ^ark, and closing so together that they both made but one ^eece; indeed
there was (al^eit not the least syllable of quarrels) yet contentions be^wixt
them continually, but such as is not only Lawful, ^ut convenient and
commendable in Conjugals; for they ^ontended each who should love other best,
who should admire other most; this was ^he nature of their contentions, and all
the strife that was ever observed betwixt them; to proceed; she was not only
faithful in performing her duty to her Husband, but she was merciful in
exercising her authority over her servants, Aristotelicis, en baci^^nis
argumentis.
moveing them to their charge with persuasion, rather then compulsion (...)
with arguments taken from their convenience, As if sic volo, sic iube^, we will
and command you, were a style to princely for her to use.
rathe^ then from her own authority so much had this ingenuou^ Gentlewoman by
her discree^ and moderate carriage toward them gained upon them, that she
could no sooner express her pleasure, the^ they would be ready to tende^ their
service; and this, not s^ much out of servile submission to her precept, as
from (...) principle of pure affection t^ her person; But her home-concernmens
did not, could not so monopolize, and engross her love, but she would be
letting it out in a large proportion to her worthy and deserving friends and
relations abroad, in such a manor, as that her soul seemed to be rather with
them whom ^t loved, Non ubi animat se^^ ubi amat.
then with her self where it lived; indeed there was so much of indearment on
her part toward them, and so kind a resentment ^hereof on their part toward
^er, so many outward expres^es of their mutual compla^encyes in one another,
Viz. that most Honorable Family of Conyers, Lord ^'arcy and Conyers.
as that I cannot choose but ^ob Eminentiam) term that ^amily, the Family of
Love, and when ever I think there^n, break forth with David, Behold what a good
and pleasant thing it is for friends to live together in love! 133.1. Yet
though this Christians heart ^as bound by a double tie, ^iz. of nature and
grace, to love her friends, yet was it ^ot so confined and cement^d to them,
but it was at liberty to sally forth after God, to seek and find him whom her
soul loved, as appeared from many breathings and long looks she had after God
on her deathbed, testifying by several pithy and pathetick Ejaculations, her
willingness, nay her longing eagerness to bid farewell to her friends, as they
surrounded her bed with bedewed cheeks, and besadded hearts, their bowe^s
yearning and rouling toward, and by dilated hearts and stretched out arms
ready to hang about the neck of their dying sister; yet I say, though she had
as much affection for them, and as much of tru^ love from them as one could
imagine; yet her heart wa^ so engaged for God, that she could freely bid
goodnight to them all, and resign up her interest in them, that she might go
hence to bath her soul in the delicious intimacies and blisful embraces of her
dearest Lord. I desire to be dissolved and to be with my Savior, was heard
come from her more then once.

But in the composition of this rarely qualified and curiously contrived
Christian, there was to my observati^n, three graces which overtopt the rest,
(as Diana did her Nymps) and marvellously beautified and b^spangled the whole
composure.

1. Piety, 2. Humility, and 3. Patience.
First, for Piety (taken in a strict sense, with reference to God) she was
eminent and imitable; it was her custom or rather her conscientious care, to
bath her soul every morning in the sweet and soul-healing streams of the holy
Scripture; to be ever smelling at the flowers that spring there, to be ever
gathering the fruit that grows there, to be ever learning the lessons, and
applying the Promises that are pend there; this was her care while she lived,
Cura suit recte vivere, sicque mori.
and this proved her comfort when she dyed; she was none of the proud Madams of
this age, who stand sacrificeing the precious morn to the Idol in the
looking-glass in painting the face, in plaiting the hair, in new moddeling and
curiously curling that insnaring and bewitching love-lock, as if the dusty
Cobweb of each curle, would be ornament enough to set them off in the sight
both of God and men; she was none of our amatorious Ladies, who study Romances,
and make it their chief (if not only) employment to be well read in the
amorous and lust-provoking Poes, and well skilled in that youth corrupting
study, De art amandi.

But the morning exercise of this choice Christian, was of a nobler nature,
viz. a consulting with the Divine Oracles, the Word of God, a dwelling upon and
delighting in those emanations of a deity, whose original is eternal, whose
worth is unspeakable, whose knowledge is life, and in one word, In uno om^ia.
All; by assiduous use and conscionable practice, it was grown almost natural
to her to breakfast upon the Bible, her hand and heart being so inured to it,
as if she had heard that voice from heaven spurring her to it, Toll lege,
Toll lege, Aug.
Take up and read, take up and read. As all the Rivers run into the main Ocean,
so much of her study run into Scripture-study; which is the Ocean of all true
knowledge and pure wisdom; she would indeed allow to other Authors a
subserviency to divinity, but allow them them a predominancy or precedence she
would never; who can choose now but as it were Canonize her for a Saint, and
clap the Crown of blessedness upon her head, singing her dirge with David,
Blessed are those whose delight is in the Law of the Lord! Psalm. 1. verse. 1.2.

Again as she unlockt the day with praise, Her care was that her outward
calling should not encroach upon her heavenly calling; and therefore she would
lay aside a good part of her time, so communion with God; whatever she
neglectred, her duty to God she du^st not neglect, liketha^ d^vout man, who
when his time for devotion came, what c mpa^y soe^er he was with would take his
leave of them, wi^h this fa^^ excuse, He had a friend that stayed to spe^^ with
him (meaning his God)
she would shut up the night with prayer; often was she praying when others were
playing; often was she taking pains in duty, while others that probably might
censure her for idleness, were fast asleep in their beds; in a word, she was a
constant closet-visiter, a constant worshipper, never forgetting nor omitting
her hours of devotion, in so much, that what is registre^ of Job, Chap. 1.
ver. 5. may be recorded of her, Thus did Jeb continually, and thus did she
continually, and when she had done she fell asleep.

Secondly, Which commendable virtue is very rare in this age, amongst women of
herranck and quality.
Humility was another flower that gave a fragrant smell, and cast a sweet scent
in this Christians Garden; she wore the livery of Lowlyness, and carried the
colors of humility to her dying day, though she had many provocations and
incentives to Pride, as every reflection upon her noble descent and extraction,
her fair fortune and (no way contemptible) conjugal condition, besides her own
personal abilities and qualifications, all which might have served as so many
bellows of Pride; yet this self-denying soul was wondered at for her humility,
and admired for her condescension; she courted not Encomiums, nor cared for
commendations, having a principle within her, which restrained her from hunting
after applause, or from taking too much pleasure in it when offered; though
virtue was legible in her looks, and goodness engraven upon her countenance,
and (I persuade my self) heaven in her heart, yet neither this nor the
recognition of or rumination upon her natural abiliments, or temporal
seize, together with the temptation of the Enemy, could render her
otherwise then a meek, lowly, and condescending Christian; in short, albeit she
was got high in other men's estimations (and yet no higher then her own merits
mounted her) yet ever was she low, very low in her own apprehension and
valuation; her Motto both living and dyeing, being that of Paul's, I am a great
transgressor, a great sinner: she did not say my comforts are small, but O
alas my sins are great, and you are deceived in me friends, if ye think
otherwise of me; I am the least of Saints; this was the highest rate that she
set upon her self, self denying being all the self-seeking that she was guilty
of; neither did she toss the ball from her, with a purpose that others should
tumble it to her again; she did not play the Hypocrite (I am confident) as some
do, who vituperate and vilify themselves, intending nothing thereby but to
have others magnify and admire them the more, but out of the abundance of her
heart, her mouth spoke. And now has God called for this humble soul, and
planted it in an heavenly soil; now has he sent the Messenger of a natural
death, to fetch her to eternal life, as if he would not, or as if he well could
not want her company any longer, according to that place. 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble
your selves on earth, and God will lift you up to heaven.

Nesciv^t irasci.
Thirdly, Patience was another diamond in her Ring another Jewel in her Cabinet,
another grace that she was eminent for, And indeed where you lay humility for
the foundation, contentment will be the superstr^cture; the humble soul judges
it selfworthy of nothing, and hence is content with any thing.
and gloriously refulgent with. I dare say, that man knew her not, that knew
her not a Mirror of patience; he is scarce alive that ever saw her in a
passion* so well had she learned the lesson of Paul's, In every thing to be
content; which way so ever the wind of providence blew, she had dexterity and
skill, that she knew how to guide her Vessel without dashing upon the Rock of
discontent. As to her outward condition, she was indefferent; she could as one
says, be either on the top of Jacobs Ladder, or the bottom, she could sing
either the dirge or the Antheme, Placentia, vel lachryma.
she could be any thing, every thing, that God would have her, without any
cloud in her countenance, or storm and discomposure in her spirit; she might
ride in Triumph with Job for his Jewel of patience, she might be sister to
Moses for meekness and dispassionateness, save in the matter of his inordinate
anger at the Israelites once, when he broke the tables (in a passion) in which
were written the ten commandments; and herein she excelled Moses in meekness;
for as I am credibly informed, she was never once since she came to the use of
Reason, Nec accende' at, nec accende' atur; n e was not provokeing, nor easily
provoked, t^er in ma^^f^sting her clem^ncy, as also her wisd^me.
observed to be guilty of this unreasonable prevarication, viz. passion, in any
great degree, but was ever as dispassionate and gentle as the morning Sun in
Autumn; and what is there that does so much beautyfie, and bespangle a
Christian, and as a spiritual embroydery, does set him off in the eyes of the
world, as patience, tranquillity, and contentment in every condition, For my
part, I know no ornament in Religion, no link in the golden chain of grace,
that does better become a Christian, or glitter and sparkle more in the eye of
God or good men, then this of patience; This is a bridle to the tongue, this is
the enamel of the heart, this is the Phisosophers stone which turns all into
gold it touches; how should every Christian be ambitious to wear such a
sparkling diamond! as Mr. Watson terms it; if there be a heavenly life upon
earth, it is a contented life, and why then not contented man? The Lord teach
thee to contain thy tongue in silence^, and possess thy heart in patience,
that thou may not fall short and come hehind (her) in this grace, who has
got the start, and gone before thee to glory. Thus was she qualified on earth,
and this made God so desirous of her company in Heaven; In a word, her tongue
was never on fire with fury, her heart never rufled with frenzy, her spirit
never flustered with impatience, but as if she had been unconcerned in any
disappointment, or afflictive accident, that befell her, she was ever seen to
be Semper Eadem, unmoved, unchanged, even amidst the greatest changes and most
amazeing alterations; And what she made profession of all her life, she gave a
good proof thereof at death, while she went to the stake without relucting, and
met death as it were in the half way, without complaining; when her cross was
light, she reckoned it in the inventory of her mercyes, and was always thankful
for every interval of ease which God gave her on her deathbed; when her cross
was heavy, and the tide of her torments overflowed her, she took the cup out of
Gods hand on her knees, and was content, know^ng that when her estate was
worser, it was to make her ^etter. As the sheep before the shearer is dumb, so
opened ^he not her mouth, unless it were either to pray or to ^raise; groan she
did, but grudge she did not; mourn ^he might, but murmur she would not; Not one
whine^ng look or distorted countenance, not one impatient word, nor the least
outward expression of any inward passion; but a calm, quiet, well-composed
Christian, to the admiration of all that were about her, even in her sharpest
agony and deepest extremity, as if the quietness and unmovable fixedness of
her dying body, were a liveing emblem of an unmovable quiet mind.

These were the three lilye^ that grew in this Christian^ garden, the tripple
Jewel tha^ decked her Diadem, thoug^ the whole canopy of her conversation, was
bespangle^ and imbroydered with prett^ sparkling stars; albeit he person shined
bright with the image of God upon it, ye^ these were like so many su^ which
strove each which should outshine other, an^ contended for the prehem^nency.

Now as the Tenor of he life deserves to be remembre^ so the manner of her
death may not be forgotten, which was gracious and happy t^ ^^e hight of
wonder. A pious ^^e will conclude with a ^^ecions death. God has ^^^d it,
Precious in the sight (...) the Lord is the death of ^^^s Saints.

First, Such no doubt was ^^rs, considering that a ^^eat part of her life, (as
ap^^ars from what is said of her) ^^as expended in preparation ^^r death, always
in the time (...) her health, gathering ^^wers to refresh her, Scrip^^re
Cordials to comfort ^^er against a dying hour.

Secondly, Considering ^^kewise her willingness to ^^ye, when she came to it;
^^e was willing to dye and (...) at rest; she was willing ^^kewise to live,
though it were in pain; come life, com^ death, she was willing to b^ at the
Divine disposal.

Thirdly, nay considerin^ those many savoury and heavenly speeches, which
d^^stild like Rose Water, from her dying heart. O you m^ friends, you that were
the we^ wishers of this dear one, no^ deceased, (whose worth (...) shall hardly
ever call to min^ without weeping) you I sa^ who were her chief wel-wis^ers
while alive, and now h^ truest mourners when dea^ had ye nothing in the wor^
besides those Christian e^pressions which glided gent^ from her languishing
li^^ when she lay a dying, t^^ comfort you, they were suff^cient to force a
smile into ^our faces, and make your ^earts spiritually merry, when ^^er your
musing* thoughts ^^ance to reflect that way.

I will gather up some few ^f these flowers, Dying speeches, Living comfort.
and com^ose them into a Nosegay for ^ou; peradventure, they ^ay serve you to
smell at, and refresh your spirits in ^n hour of heaviness.

This Religious Gentlewo^an being now fairly set ^own upon her deathbed, and
arrived at the brink of ^he grave, having received ^he sentence of death within
^er, (for she was persuaded ^er hour was at hand) she made it her business to
set her ^amp a burning, to set the wheel of grace a going, to fit and prepare
her soul for heaven, since she pereeive^ that her pilgrimage upon earth was but
short; bu^ before God would consent t^^ land her in her heaven^^ country, he
permitted Sata^^ to toss her to and fro, wit^ the tide of temptation, ti^^ at
length she was ready su^^ cumbere oneri, to give he^ cause as lost, and her
self for a gone woman, a lost an^ undone creature, had no^ the sun seasonably
broak fort^ of the clouds, had not the Lord in the nick of time appe^red to be
her deliverer* The Devil perceiving her tim^ and his time was now bu^ short,
improved the shortness of his time by the sharpness of his temptation,
perceiving the Bird got out of ^is snare, the Lamb out of ^is paw, the Saint
out of ^is clutches, he pursued her ^s the Kings of Canaan did ^he poor
Gibeonites, Joshua, S^^an being impatient of ^isloss, ind av^urs daylyt reco^e
his for^er d^mi^ion.
9. with greater vi^lence and fury ^hen ever, see^ing to regain his prey, and
to recover his ^ost possession, till at last by the pressure of his hideous and
hellish ^emptations, show as driven in^o a deep ditch and fearful fit of
despair, crying out most piteously she was damned, O I am damned, and am
certainly in hell already, and turning her head toward me, said, O Mr Ewbanck,
though my pain in labor and travail was great, yet the torments of hell I find
are ten thousand times greater: Oh hell! hell! thus she continued a competency
of time together, giveing out many rueful expressions of her damned and undone
condition; whereupon I (as aspiritual guide and Physician under God)
endeavored to prescribe a remedy suitable to her disease, (being unwilling to
wound such as God had wounded, and to afflict her whom I saw so much afflicted)
she presently plucked off the Plaster, and would not let it cleave; she would
not apply the salve when proferd her, but refused to be comforted, as Rachel
did, persisting still in her despairing language, and mournful Elegies, that
she was damned, undoubtedly damned; whereupon I ask^ her what were those
inditements that the Devil laid to her charge, what were those sins principally
that were her soul-damning sins, that oppressed her conscience, and occasioned
her distress. She replied, She had been a great sinner, for she had used the
ordinance of prayer negligently, she had often been distracted and disturbed in
duty, by giving a too ready admittance and entertainment to unseasonable, un
suitable thoughts, secular and sinful ^ogitations, during that holy exercise,
and for these, her eyes run down with tears, as lamenting Jeremiahs expression
is.

First, See here the malice of the Devil, who will play ^t small game before
he sit ^ut, and torment her consci^nce with small sins, if he cannot damn her
soul for greater, he could not call her to the Bar and indict her for
Injustice, detraction, or any gross commissions, and therefore he contends to
keep her Conscience on the rack for omissions; nay not so much for omissions of
duty, (for I think he could not justly throw this in he^ dish, or set this upon
he^ score) but for her imperfections in duty; not for the want of sacrifice,
but only for her weakness in sacrificeing: See here what a malignant
mallicious spirit the Devil is, who when he could not formerly tempt to a
neglect of prayer, he now torments her for her defect in prayer; when he could
no^ deny that she served God, ye^ malice makes him callumi^ate and
misinterpret what ^e could not contradict; he ^ain would fasten insincerity
upon her service, and so im^ase the matter, by some ^ight failing in the man^er.

Secondly, Again from that ^gony of conscience, and ^opelesness of heart that
^^e then lay under, and all ^or some unavoydable di^ersions in her devotion,
for ^^me frailties and infirmities ^^at did adhear and cleave to ^^er
performances, I collect ^is caution for your instructi^n, That you take heed of
^^dulging your selves in any ^n or sinful circumstance, ^hile you live, lest it
prove ^ur tormentor when you come to dye. Many you^ men who are active and
ve^turous in their youth, g^^ those bodily bruises a^ ^streins, which they feel
(...) their sorrow in their o^ age: The use I make of it (...) this, if thou
that read the lines, or hears them read gi^^ a blow or bruise to thy
conscience in thy health, the may find it fit heavy upon thy spirit in the
time (...) sickness; Quaefue^runt juventutis gaudia, trunt serectutis gravimina.
these little sins, probably thou art pleased (...) term them, which now th^^
feel not, may be a tro^ble to thy conscience, a^^ an aching to thy heart
(...) a deathbed; think no (...) little then, whiles you h^^ the sound of this
devo^^ Gentlewomans dolours (...) yous ears, breathing (...) ^ell and
damnation, O hell! ^ell! and all for a little ^eedlesness, or heartles^ess,
sometime in her devo^ion. But I return, when I ^aw her persist in this
soul-^xtremity, uncpable of coun^el or comfort from my di^ections or
resolutions, I asked ^er if she would that I should ^ray for her (hopeing that
God would be entreated to ^ebuke the Tempter, pacify ^er conscience, clear to
her ^nterest in Christ, and fasten those nails of resolution and ^atisfaction
in her heart, which the creature was unable ^o do) but she smiling on me
^eplyed, alas Sir you cunnot ^ray for me, I urged her fur^her; That she would
make ^ryal of it, and that she would join with us in duty, and be careful that
her heart keep time and tune with our prayers; but she would no^ seem to give
any approbation of, or assent to any such motion, thinking it a fruitless
exercise to beg and sue out a pardon for one already condemned, already in hell
as she apprehended she was; hereupon her indulgent and indeared Sisters, whose
rolling bowels opened and yearned toward this languishing Christian, and whose
hearts were ready to fail within them, to see her plunged into such a pit of
perplexities, with the door of despair shut upon her, they earnestly begd of
her, that she would let prayer be made for her, and that she would go along
with us: now after a little pause and demur, she fixed her eyes upon us, and
said, Well, I will see what ye can do, albeit I think you cannot, I know you
cannot pray for me; hereupon we made our humble address to God with Hezekiah,
spread her condition before the Lord, and with Paul doubling and trebling our
petitions that he would have mercy on his handmaid, and know her soul in
adversity; now when we had made a reasonable progress in prayer, it was
observed that her countenance began to change, her heart began to leap for joy,
her sorrow and sighing to fly away, and she to give certain signal Testimonies,
not only of her zeal in prayer, but also of a present income of the Spirit in
answer to prayer, and no sooner was duty finished, but the scene was cha ged,
her confflict with, and her conquest over hell and the Devil accomplished, and
she crying out victoriously and Triumphantly, Now I see that the Devil is a
Liar, and I will never trust him more, he is a Liar, and I Will never give him
hearing more; he persuaded me that my condition was hopeless, and that none
could pray for me, but he has plainly proved himself a Liar, for verily the
Lord has heard prayer for me.

See this! Stand and wonder, that one that was even now upon the very brink of
the bottomless pit, ready to take up quarters in that fiery Region, should be
now mounted up to the Pisga-top of Div^ne contemptation, where she has got a
glimpse of glory where she has seen Heavens gate open, and satisfied her soul
with assurance of her interest there. Behold a clear verification and
performance of such promises as these, isai. 54.8. I hid my face from thee for
a moment, but with everlasting loving kindness will I have mercy on thee. and
Psalm 30.11, 12.

Upon this joyful alteration in her spirit, one by told her for her comfort
that now she had got the victory, I got the victory? no, replied she, Christ
hoth got the victory; Oh Christ thou art victor, Oh Christ thou art conqueror.
See here the humility and self-denial of this sober Christian, while others are
proferring her praise, she reflects it upon God; while others are clapping the
crown upon her head, she plucks it off in have, and sets it on his whose right
it is; she is none of proud Herod's neeces, who attributed that honor to
himself which was Gods prerogative Royal; She was not an Aristotelian, but a
Divine, for whatever the premises were she always made Gods glory the conclusion.
no she was rather one of humble David's daughters, who would have God to wear
the garland because he had won the field, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
to thy name give the praise.

Again after she had laid a while, as if she had been at rest, and as thinking
she had but a short time to stay, she resolved to spend it well, and hereupon,
began to instruct spectators in their duty, and heap up lessons which she would
have bystanders learn when she is dead and gone; O Friends said she, begin
betimes to look after heaven, take it from me, it is a harder matter to get to
heaven then probably any of you thinks of, all the days of your lives is little
enough to be laid out in journeying to this place of happiness. Up then to this
work; why should ought in the world detain you? what is all this world can give
you, but vanity as Solomon censureth it? run through all perticulars under the
sun, extract the quintessence of them all, and the best that can be said of it
is this, its a vanity of vanities? and why will you neglect heaven for vanity?
see here, she that a while ago was not capable of receiving counsel, is now
enabled to give instruction; she that not long since thought her self in hell,
is now suing hard to bring others to heaven. O blessed alteration! even beyond
expectation, and unto admiration, who has made it! O glorious change who has
effected it! doubtless we may say with the Ps^lmist, this is the Lords doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes.

After this sickness increasing, and weakness incroaching still more and more,
one asked her if she were able to lift her hand to her head, she answered, Its
not much material, so long as I can lift up my heart to heaven: Oh Religious
reply, from a devout ^oul; Oh heavenly retort, ^o an earthly proposal; and
^ndeed she had largly learnt ^he Divine art of converting ^ead into gold, I
mean, of ^rawing heavenly inferences from earthly discourses.

Next, one observing as if ^he desired some rest, wished ^er to compose her self
to ^leep; but she answered, is ^his a time to sleep? I have a great deal of
business to do, that little time I have to stay ^ere, and desired to be left
alone (...) little; which when they that attended her, retired a while
according to her order, she was perceived by one that peept through the
Curtains to be praying, and panting after God, like the thirsty Heart after the
water brooks, with hands and heart lift up to heaven, in such a devout and
zealous manner, as if her soul had been just ready to take wing and fly to
rest; this is the business that she was about, this is the work that she had to
do; and whether she was careful to effect it yea or no, judge ye. O all ye old
men, and aged people, you that stand the very next door to death, learn of this
pious president to get the business of your souls effected before your breath
be stopped, and your pilgrimage be concluded: and O all ye young people, up you
and be doing, here is a Lady hard at work, who is as young as your selves, she
dares not take her rest, lest the clock strike, the bell ring; the time
(allotted her, for the work) be expired, before her work be finished; and dare
you say with Solomon's sluggard, yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber; could
ye but persuade your selves as she did, that this is the last day you have to
live, as for ought you know it may be, then you would not easily be persuaded
to procrastinate your repentance till to morrow; if thou could persuade thy
heart that this is the last meal thou shall eat, thou would not surfeit I am
sure, or that this were the last suit of clothes thou shall wear, thou would
not dare to be fantastic, thou would not wast many precious hours, in
propounding such fruitless queries as these, what shall I eat, and what shall I
drink, and wherewithal shall I be clothed? if thou could convince thy heart,
that this may be the last Sermon that ever thou should hear, thou would
hear it better then ever thou heardest any yet; or that this were the last time
you should go to your chamber, so as to come away from thence alive, you would
then say what she has said before you, Is this a time to take rest, I have
much business to do? But to come to my purpose again; another golden sentence
that came from this gracious Christian; is this, when being asked whether her
husband was not a comfort to her spirit, and whether she were not loath to
leave him, My Husband, said she, is the ^reatest and choycest temporal ^omfort
I have in this world, ^ut I can freely part with ^im to have Christ; my
Hus^and, he is nothing to Christ. O now see whether this be not a Saint of the
right ^tamp, whether this be not (...) true Disciple of Christ, when she
forsakes Father and ^riends, Husband, and what not to follow Christ; when ^ll
her aims and ends are swallowed up in desires to be found in Christ?

Another dying speech of this (now living) Saint; was this, when her Husband
out of that abundance of affection that he had for her, asked her if there were
any particular instance wherein he might testify and give a demonstration of
the truth of his love to her or any of her dear relations; do but name it, my
dear said he, and I will infallibly perform it.

She answered, she thought of nothing in this world, she had turned her back
upon it; Here Is a right representative of an heir of Glory, whose thoughts spend
themselves upon the inheritance above; here is a Picture of a person rightly
qualified for communion with God, whose eyes are dazzled with celestia^ sights,
that the gilded gauds of worldly glory seem dark and duskish; whose mind is so
much upon the Apples of an upper Paradise, that the painted Grapes of this
lower Goshen, seem flat and tastless; And now is this mortified Christian,
doubt not got into Heaven, who had got so much of heaven into her while she was
here; now is she at the Wellhead where her soul drinks a full draught of what
she had here but by sips and drops; now is she in possession of what she had
here only in expectation; Oh blessed soul, who would not desire to bear a part
with thee, in the everlasting Haleluja of Jehova! Who would not thirst to be
one of that Quire whereof thou art a Chorister? O sirs, let the Recognition of
our deceased friends, of our Savior, of our house and inheritance which are
above, be like so many Magnets to draw our hearts from things below, till we
can say with this Noble personage, That we have turned our backs upon the
world: And no wonder she should relish the fleshpots of Egypt so little,
while God allured her on with clusters of Grapes sent her from Canaan; no
wonder she should spit out the carnal contentments of this world, which most
men swallow down with much gust and greediness, while God gave her Mannah from
Heaven, bread to eat which the world knew not of; for God was ever and anon
dreining into her heart some drop or other of Heavens delights; so that she
would say sometimes, with a smiling look and cheerful countenance, O that I had
a tongue or breath to declare what comforts I find and feel within me; I see
and feel things that are unutterable, O I am ravished, I am ravished. O the Sea
of delight that this sanctified soul does now swim in, does it not raise your
hearts, sirs does it not almost ravish you, to see your friend thus ravished
thus transported! was ever Paul in a more heavenly rapture! was ever Symeon
more entranced with Divine joy, when he hugd his Savior in his arms! Oh we
may speak it when she is gone, and preach it at her Funeral, that God dealt
familiarly with her.

Now the Devil envying her happiness all this while, yet shaming to show his
black and griezly hue, whiles the lightsome beams of Gods blessed countenance
shone so powerfully upon her gladsome heart, lay like a dog under the Table
snarling and mallicing her fortunate condition, and no sooner he perceived God
to retreat and step aside a little, but he comes from behind the door, and
began to tamper with her, and to tell her That all her peace she pretended to,
was no more then a truce, and her safety no better then a presumptuous
security; whereupon this stately Cedar began to staggar, this accomplished
Christian began to question her title to heaven, and to dispute her evidences:
I am under a cloud, I am not right yet said she; I cannot but doubt yet whether
my salvation be made sure or no, and is not he or she that doubts damned?
Whereupon she propounded this Query to her sister, the virtuous Lady Wivel,
sitting then next her, Whether it was consistant with a Child of God, to doubt
so as she did? whether doubting and believing were consistant? It was answered
her in the affirmative; a man might doubt, and yet be a believer, one that
shall certainly be saved; well said she, you tell me so, but does God tell me
so? show me where the Scripture says it, for the proof of this; one Text was
alleged for all, viz. Luke 22.31. Where Peter sinking into the water, cries
out in fear, save Master or I perish; to whom Christ retorted this check, O
thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt; h^ does not say O thou
infide^ thou unbeleever, thou tha^ have no faith, wherefore did^^ thou doubt,
but O thou (...) little faith, plainly demonstrating, that little faith an^
great doubts are consistant* But to make it more clear, w^ will distinguish,
there is (...) double douting.

1. A doubting that ariset^ ab absentia fidei from the wan^ of it.

2. A deficientia from a defect in it.

The former, that arises from the want of Faith, mus^ needs exclude faith, for
it is absolute infidelity, but faith and infidelity cannot convenire in uno, be
consistent in one and the same Subject, but secondly that doubting that arises
from a defect in, and not from a want of faith, may stand with faith, when it
assents to the promise, yet is accompanied with fears, jealousies, and
suspicions, that either they do not clearly understand the promise, or
presumptuously cofide in the promise, or wrongfully apply the promise; such
doubtings as these which arise not from the nullity, but from the impotency of
faith, not from the Total want of it, but from some particular defect in it,
these are (certainly) consistent, as appears from Mar. 9.24. where the poor man
said, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief, where he professes his faith in
these words, Lord I believe; and yet confesses his unbelief, in these words,
help mine unbelief; here is belief and unbelief; two contrary Inmates in one
house, in one heart; whence observe, that this Christian might be a true
believer, in the midst of her unbelief, and might have the Keel of her
condition steered by faith, though the sail of her profession might be dashed
upon by doubts, and driven back by disputes in her self; and indeed, that faith
for me, which complains most of the want of faith, which can weep with the one
eye, and laugh with the other; Perk.
the sound man feels many grudgings of diseases, whilst a dead man, perceives
nothing that aileth him.

Now having produced some Texts of Scripture, for the better satisfaction and
quiet of her tender conscience, she answered, Well, I dare not question the
Scriptures; I dare not deny what God affirms; yet my doubts are not quite
cured; and hereupon she composed her self to lie quiet a little, not speaking
or minding what was said or done, but laid as if she had been in a deep dispute
about her own condition, as if God and she had been reasoning together, and
expostulating the case between themselves, and driving the controversy to a
conclusion, whereupon after her musing mind had been thus exercised a little,
she looked up and said, may not I hope without presuming? see here the night
almost at an end, the clouds in a manner over and gone, and the sun of hope and
consolation arising the second time upon the Horizon of her heavenly soul; her
faith which had like to have proved (fides in abortu) an abortive faith,
miscarrying in the womb; is now (fides in partu) brought to the birth.

And now this Child of God, drawing near to her Inn, approaching near to the
period of her pilgrimage, ready to bid a friendly farewell to her surviving
spectators and sorrowing Relations, had on the sudden such a flood of comfort,
such an income of Divine joy, such a revelatlon of heaven in her heart, that
roaming toward heaven with a cheerful look, with a soft sweet voice, expressed
her self thus, O joy, joy, joy, diverse times together, as if she should say,
Though I be not yet entered into the joys of Heaven, yet the joys of heaven
(ad modum recipientis) are entered into me; though I am not yet got in at the
door, and set in the chair of State; though I am not yet with Abraham, and
David and Paul, in possession of Heavens Salvation; yet as heaven was opened to
blessed Stephen, which he was shortly to enter, so have I a view of what I
shall after enjoy, so that I can say with Simeon, Now Lord let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Pides in deliquio, fit s^des in t^y umpho.
Now is her doubting turned into beleiving, and her faith improved into
assurance, the result whereof appears in this her tripple Triumph, Joy, Joy,
Joy.

Which is nothing but a sweet sopp, or a cordial draught which God had provided
for his Patient, wherewith to quicken and comfort her against her last
conflict, and as a Viaticum to minister to her wants in this her long journey
which she was just about to take; And now having such provision made her,
having such encouragement to commit her vessel to the mercy of the waters, her
body to the custody of the grave, and her soul to the conduct of Angels, she
raised her self (qua potuit) as Jacob did upon his staff, and breathed forth
these blessed words, a little before she breathed out her last, I thirst for
Christ, I hunger after a Christ, I desire I might be dissolved and be with
Christ. And this she reiterated, and repeated, with such an holy violence,
importunity, and vehemence of spirit, as if she were impatient of delays, and
exceeding sick of love, and not able to contain any longer, till the windows of
her body were opened, and her soul let out, till the gate of heaven were
expanded, and she let in; and now is the door opened, and this choice child of
God admitted in; now are her prayers answered, her desires accomplished, her
attempts effected, and her coronated soul chanting forth Doxologies to God
Almighty, and that in such musical strains, and melodious an Harmony, as makes
all Heaven on a flood of joys.

In a word, Thus much may we say of her, for our Savior has said it to our
hands, Mat. 5. that she is blessed, Blessed be such as hunger and thirst after
Righteousness.

[There's one passage more which I would not omit; when her soul was a dressing
for the brightest immortality, and her body in a manner half dead, through
sense of that abundant peace that possessed her spirit, she burst forth into
that Panegyric of praise, and shut up her life with that Swan-like song of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and
my supplications; because he has inclined his ear unto me; therefore will I
call upon him as long as I live: I confess I was not an ear witness to this
particular dying speech of hers, (for I was then out of the room) but I am
credibly inform^d of the truth of this, by one who I am sure would not lie.]

Thus Christian Reader, let thy heart climb, let thy thoughts aspire after
Christ, till thou can say as David did, (for the waters of Bethlehem) O that
one would give me to drink of the wels of Salvation! till thou can say with
the same Author, I long O Lord for thy Salvation; Psalm. 219.174. till thou
can say with this deceased Sister, I thirst for Christ, I hunger after
Christ, Oh that the time of my departure were near, that I might presently be
with Christ.

These with many more (which I forbear to mention) were the dying speeches, the
spiritual Legacyes which this holy and honorable Personage left to her
surviving acquaintance these were the rays of this sparkling star, the honey
drops of this accomplished Chemist, the fruit that grew on this heavenly Cyon,
which may be sweet to the taste of all that knew her, and precious to the memory
of all that were interested in her; and when she had said these words, she fell
asleep, just as one falls to his rest without any bodily pain or disturbance
discernable; so she expired in peace, and concluded her pious life with
aprecious death, going out like a Torch or Odoriferous Taper, which gives a
light while it lasts, and leaves a sent behind it when its gone. Thus in her
life she was many ways an honor to her Sex, and a Copy for ordinary
Christians to write after, and her death matter of mourning to her Friends and
Family, whose sorrow nevertheless may be abated, and our comfort promoted, by
our well-grounded confidence, that Christ was unto her, both in life and at
death advantage, which we cannot at all dispute or disbelieve, when we consider
what a blessed effect afflictions had upon her; being like a kindly pressure,
which squeized forth the juice of praise, and pressed out the Oil of Patience.
The wicked are like unto a loathsome stinking Puddle, which the more it is
stirred, the worse it smells; for when they are afflicted or affronted, they
express little else but railing, murmuring, and repining, ^^cut aro^^ta odo^^m.
and in their impatiency, foam out their own shame; but as sweet spices issue
out their sweetness most, when burnt or beaten, or as a grain of Mustardseed
savoureth strongest when stamped smallest; so did this child of God, when pained
with a sick body, and indisposed with a sorrowful soul, send for a sweet
smelling savor of rich and manifold graces; her afflictions being Gods
wine press, whereby the more she was pressed, the more did the liquor of grace
distill from her, and the sweeter and more fragrant a savor sent she forth, to
the glorification of God, to the consolation of her self, and I hope to the
edification and reformation of us who were eye and ear-witnssees to this
Christians conscientions comportment both to God and man.

Thus have I for her friends consolation, and for all our imitation, presented
you with a Character of this complete Christian: Briefly delineateing both the
Tenor of her life, and the manner of her death, in which you have Instructions
how to live, and directions how to dye. I Will say no more; The sorrow of her
survivers being such, th t they were ready almost to use that speech, utinam
aut non nasce retur, aut non morertur, would she had never bin born, or never
dyed.
the sorrow of all that knew her, says enough, commends her sufficiently; for
so much had her ingenuous demeanor gained upon all when she lived, that you
might almost as soon have seen a face without eyes, as eyes without tears when
she dyed; so general was this mourning, that it reached evely eye, and peirced
every heart, like the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon;
neither was this grief a sudden short shower, which is quickly over and done,
but a still rain, which (I am confident) will continue dropping, so long as
some continue living; It pittieth me to consider how many of her cordial
acquaintance are at this time in Rachels posture, lamenting the death of their
dear friend, and refusesing to be comforted; How many are in a manner like
David? lying in the dust, crying out in a most melting manner, Would God I had
dyed for thee my friend! would God I had gone a share in thy sufferings, and
born part of thy burden, and ransomed life with thy b^ood! how many are sitting
like Elias under the tree, forlorn and solitary, desireing rather to dye then
live, that (if God see it good) they may speedily go to her, whom they cannot
possibly expect to come to them! And now let our throbbing hearts here stop a
while to ease themselves, while our tears of love are ready to bedew these
lines, and we with Joseph to seek a place to weep in, wailing our loss, since
we cannot word it, and sighing forth our sorrow, when we cannot speak it.

Let us draw the curtain and retire, leaving her soul in the Arms of the
Almighty, and her body at rest in the grave, in hopes of a happy Resurrection.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books fol^owing are Printed for Charles Tyus, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the three Bibles on the middle of
London Bridge.
COmfort and Counsel for dejected Souls, by John Durant Preacher of the Gospel
in Canterbury.

Susurium cum Deo, or Holy self conference of the devout soul on sundry choice
occasions; Together with the souls farewell to Earth, and approaches to Heaven;
by Joseph Hall, late Bishop of Norwich.

The plain man's Pathway to heaven; By Arthur Dent.

Scarbrough Spaw, or a description of the nature and virtues of the Spaw at
Scarbrough i^ Yorkshire; also a treatise of the nature and use o^ water in
general, and the several sorts thereof, as Sea, Rain, Pond, Lake, Spring, and
River water, with their original cause and qualities; where more largly the
controversy among lear^ed writers about the ^riginal of springs is dis^ussed;
to which is added (...) short discourse concer^ing Mineral Waters, ^especially
that of the Spaw, by Robert Witty, Dr. in Physic.

The book of Knowledge, showing the effects of the planets and other
Astronomical constellations, with the strange events that befall Men, Women, and
Children, that are born under them; being newly Printed with very much
Additions; this last Edition being sixteen sheets, and the former Edition but
twelve.

The History of Reynard the Fox, in quarto.

The pleasant History of Dorastus and Fawnia.

Dia a poem, to which is added, Love made lovely, by Will. Shipton.

The Country man's new art of Planting and grafting, in quarto.

Friar Bacon a play, in quarto.

King Leed and his three Daughters, a Play, in quarto.

The History of Friar Rush in quarto.

Sidnies Aurania, in quarto.

These small Sermons in Octavo.

The wise Merchant, or ^he only pearl of price, being a Sermon Preached on
Mat. 13.4, 5, 6. verses, by Mr. Calvert Preacher of Gods word in the City of
York.

Dives and Lazarus, or rather Divelish Dives, by J. R.

The danger of Deferring repentance, by VVil. Fenner.

The book of graces, with sundry prayers for Morning and Evening.

The sinners warning-peece, or heavens Me^senger, by Tho. Robins B. of D.

Man's chief guide t^ Salvation, by Tho. Robins B. of D.


