ELEGIACK VERSES UPON THE DEATH OF Captain THOMAS HARMAN Late Commander of His
Majesty's Frigot, The SAPPHIRE, As they were Presented to His Royal Highness.
AH Mighty Prince! the Fatal News is come!
HARMAN, your brave Commander's in his Tomb!
That Man of War, in Peace at Tangier lies,
Crowned with your Love, stuck full of Victories,
Which your great Favors had begot in him;
Since You were pleased his Actions to Esteem.
Whilst Speckl'd Envy on her Liver feeds:
Fame has took care, to blazon-out his Deeds,
And to Engrave Them in the Book of fate,
(Where his great Name for ever lies in State:)
Which, when by future Ages shall be read,
Will make the Living emulate the Dead.
The Dutchman! and the Boome! those Acts alone
Caused Spain to wonder, and Argier to groan!
The Argereens successfully he fought,
And from the Mouth of Danger Conquests brought.
All full of Wounds, He laid his Trophies down,
Rested his weary Limbs --
Beneath the Shadow of Great Britain's Crown.
Whose Sacred Influence inspired him more,
Than all his Victories had done before.
Thus, in soft Peace he breathed a while, and
As a fierce Tiger leaps upon his Prey,
Even so our Champion, he roused up again,
And through Clouds of Fire cut his way!
His Sword like Lightening did penetrate!
But who is it always can withstand his Fate
It was decreed: And he at last did fall;
Fell as a sturdy Oak by Thunder struck,
Which round about it does endanger All.
So fell his Body, but the gallant Soul,
By Virtue of its Power, did upwards row
Lawson, Minns, Sprag, and many more besi
As soon as They the laboring soul espied,
Let down their Beams, and pointed out t^
To the bright Mansions of Eternal Day.
Ah Royal Sir! we all your Loss deplore;
Our very souls are full of grief all ore.
Oh that we could --
Redeem his Life with tears of Blood!
But it is in vain, our Wishes flag behind,
We are All Earth, and He above All Min^
It is in You, Great Sir, in spite of Fate
To ma^e the Sapphire Sovereign of the St^
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1677.


