AN ELEGY On the DEATH of Sir NATHANAEL HERN, Knight. An Eminent ALDERMAN of the
City of LONDON, who Dyed on Saturday, the 16th of this instant August, 1679.
TRiumph, all you triumph, who never see
Without a triumph, falling Gallantry.
Behold these Corpse and triumph: Let some go,
Through France to Rome, and in their journey show
How we do weep, and what does cause our Woe.
Let them report, how we do here Lament
At their Success, while yet they are innocent.
How Death does list himself, while they stand by,
Veiwing him championing for Popery.
He does their Stabs and Poisons supersede;
They may confine their Daggers, have no need
To sharpen Poisons, to make Patriots bleed:
Their work is taken from their hand, and they
See England falling, whilst themselves may play:
Their Engines are relieved, by him whose Course
Steals on, disdaining Vigilance and Force:
No Guards surprise his Art, no Courts condemn
The Malice that Kills us, and Kills for them.
Since Fraud and Violence betrayed and slew
Godfrey (that word we may now well endow
With Power to speak forth, what is great and true,)
Since he was so devoured, by that fell thirst;
And so devoured, because he met it first.
England, I think, never summoned was to Tears
By an Allarm, that so expressly bears
All Characters of Grief upon its Air;
As this which now breaks in, and strikes our Ear.
My Memory does not rebuke my Tongue,
I think, no other can object, it is wrong.
Oh then! Let none appear in any face,
Which would not well become that solemn Place,
In which that Body lies, which not long since
As urgently did challenge Reverence,
As it now calls for Grief: it loud does call,
It is the Relict of that manly Soul,
Which Worth filled up, and greatn'd, it broke forth
In all his Acts, they Dictates were of Worth:
This did inform his Soul, inform his Place,
And did adjust him to his Sphere; this Grace
Moved in his works, in an Heroic Pace.
Like some good Angel, managing his Feet
To Paths, where Honor his Approach did greet.
He to this Conduct did Obedience pay;
Allways did ask, always did tread this way:
Or rather in this Path his Mansion reared,
And being once planted, allways here appeared.
Did you find him? this way your Eyes you steerd.
Yet Honor he never wooed, but did espouse
Virtue, and Honor waited in itts House.
It saw and praisd him, for he never strayed
From his chaste Vows; this he loved, this him swayed.
Reflect all you, whose Converse made him yours;
(I Will not add Fuel to his Kindreds Grief
May Heaven unto it, lend its sweet Relief)
Collect, pronounce what my Report secures.
I Am sure the Store is great from whence you may
Call Proofs, to attest my Truth, his Gallantry.
You know his Speech which Privacy concealed:
For what was Public, Fame to all revealed.
You saw high Excellence it self display,
Seeing his Mind, in his words open its way,
This decked his Speech with a most constant Ray.
You were led to that Closet, where did stand
The wonderful Effects of Virtues Hand:
You saw, admired what your Eyes did fill,
The noble Products of Celestial skill,
No darkning Tincture, of ought base or ill.
You knew him to condole his Country's woe
In his large Prospect veiwing Blood to flow
Bound for our Coast in a tumultuous Throe.
He greiv'd to see Unfaithfulness in the Arms
Which should defend his Dear Prince from the harms
He did incur, when he for us stem'd storms.
He saw Darts pointed toward his Back, whilst Zeal
For England's good, enjoyed his Face to dwell
There where the Breach, was making on our Weal
He startled at this sight, made Heaven to hear
The sad Resentments, started by his Fear.
You, that do know these things, Proclaim 'em all;
Let London see what fell when he did fall:
Pourtray him to the Age, which wants him still,
And let it see, what will upbraid its Ill.
Sow these Relations, with unwearyed Hands;
Labor to cultivate our Barren Lands.
Reverse this great Mortality of Faith:
Enliven Virtues Ashes with your Breath.
Dear GOD! which do his worth Remand and Crown,
Redeem ours from its dark Oppression;
Tho Sowr'd by Sin, let it retrieve its loss.
Let it heave off its dull inveterate dross.
Let it so sparkle forth, that Papists may
Find their Eyes dazzled, when they aim at Prey.
And may Return to Rome, and there Declare
And Curse, HERN'S Last Breath, which Perfumed our Air.
If we don't thus Improve his Loss, e're long
You Will hear a Shaftsbury, or Player's gone.
All Manhood will renounce our Land, and then,
Owls, Dragons, Satyrs, will make it their Scene:
You do beat off your Guards, your hands disown,
And your selves Prostrate to Destruction.
You Bind your selves, and on the Altar lay
Your Rights, and Importune the Fatal day,
Clearing beforehand him that shall you slay
Who then takes up the Standard which HERN bore,
To face outrageous Vices Swelling Power?
If all that cannot blame HERN'S Life would agree
To follow it, this present Age would see
The Dirt cleared, the next wonder at the stream's Purity:
How great a Beauty will our Land put on,
Would't not forstal the Conflagration?
FINIS.

