AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Resolute ATTEMPT and happy SUCCESS OF A SMALL PART
OF HIS MAJESTY'S FLEET, Under the Conduct of Sir ROBERT HOLMES, Rere-Admiral to
the Red Squadron, Upon the (...) of VLY and SKELLING, On the ninth and tenth of
this instant August, One thousand six hundred and sixty six.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY,
1666.

AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Resolute Attempt and happy Success OF A PART OF HIS
MAJESTY'S FLEET, Under the Conduct of Sir Robert Holmes, upon the Isles of Vly
and Skelling, on the ninth and tenth of August, 1666.
ON the 29. of July, His Majesty's Fleet, under his Highness Prince Rupert, and
his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, weighed anchor from within sight of Zealand.
They steered their course for the Vly, but the winds being contrary, they did
not make the Island till the 7. of August; In which time, several rich ships
happened to get in, which otherwise had fallen into their hands. Being come to an
Anchor, the Generals were informed, that the Islands of Vly and Skelling, were
very ill guarded (notwithstanding there were Store houses, both for the States
and the East India Fleets) and riches to a good value; and what did weigh most,
a considerable number of good Merchant-ships, usually riding there; Upon which,
it was resolved by the Generals, that there should be a speedy attempt made. A
Council of Flag-Officers was called; and it was determined there, that it
should be carried on, in manner following, viz. That three hundred men should
be drawn out of each Squadron, consisting of two parts Land-men, and the third
Seamen; these to be commanded by nine Captains, their Names as follows, Sir
Robert Holmes Rere-Admiral of the Red, to command in chief, Sir Philip Howard,
to command one hundred and twenty Volunteers, Captain John Bellasis, Captain
Hamond, Captain Wiltshire, Captain Haddock, Captain Guy, Captain Silver,
Captain Healing, Captain Butler, Captain John Holmes, each command a Company;
Sir William Jenings was also ordered (that in case they had attacqued both
Islands at one time) he should have commanded one division of the whole. The
ships appointed for this expedition, were as follows, The Advice, Hampshire,
Tiger, Dragon, and Assurance, fourth Rates; the Garland, Pembrook and
Sweep-Stakes, fifth Rates, five Fireships, and seven Ketches; which being in a
readiness on Wednesday the 8th August, about eight in the morning, they
weighed from the rest of the Fleet, and came to an Anchor about a League from
the Buys; where they met the Princes Pleasure-Boat, called the Fanfan, who had
discovered within, a considerable Fleet of ships near the Vly; which proved to
be one hundred and seventy Merchants-ships; the least of which, was not of
less then two hundred Tuns burden, with two Men of War, who had lately
convoyed near one hundred of the aforesaid ships from the Northward, being
homeward bound; some from the Streights, some from Guiny, some from Russia, and
some from the East-Countries; the rest were outward bound ships; all, of both
parts, richly laden. Sir Robert Holmes considering, that if he should proceed,
as his design was, first to attempt the Land, that numerous Fleet might
possibly pour in such numbers of men, as might render the Success hazardous,
Resolved to begin with the Ships; and accordingly having ordered the Advice and
Hampshire to lie without the Buys, he weighed with the rest of his Fleet, and
the wind being contrary, with much ado, he turned into Skelling Road, where
the Tiger came to an Anchor, and immediately Sir Robert went on board the
Fanfan, and put out his Flag; upon which the Officers came aboard him; where it
was ordered, that the Pembrook which drew the least water, with the five
Fireships, should fall in amongst the Enemies Fleet with what speed they could;
Captain Brown with his Fireship laid the biggest Man of War very bravely
aboard, and burned him downright; Another Fire-ship, running up at the same
time, to the other Man of War, he backing his sails, escaped that present
execution of the Fire-ship; but so, as to run himself by it on ground; where he
was presently taken by some of the Long-boates, and fired; The other three
Fireships clapped the three great Merchantmen, which carried Flags in their
Main Tops, and burned them. This put all their Fleet in a great confusion;
which Sir Robert Holmes perceiving, made a sign for all the Officers to come
aboard again, and presently gave order, that Sir William Jenings with all the
Boats that could be spared, should take the advantage, and fall in, and burn
and destroy all they could; But with a strict command, they should not plunder.
The execution was so well followed, each Captain undertaking his Share, some
12. some 15. a piece, that of their whole Fleet there escaped not above 8 or 9
ships; one of which a Guiny Man of 24 Guns and three small Privateers, who
being drawn up into an Narrovv Corner of the Stream, served to protect 4 or 5
Merchant men, that were a head of them, where it was not possible for our
Boats to come at them, though even these fevv were much damaged; This work
took up most part of that day, being the 9th of Aug. so that we had not day
enough, to fall upon the Island of the Vly. Sir Robert Holmes being also
informed by some prisoners, that the place was not so considerable, as it was
represented; and night coming on, and perceiving two of the Frigots, viz. the
Dragon and Garland on ground, It was thought most convenient; for all hands
first to go to work to get them off, which being done, he continued in his
intention of attempting the Vly next morning, as soon as the high water could
permit the motion of his Vessels; But his design was now likewise prevented;
for so great a gust and rain happened that night, that the Arms and Ammunition
in the Boats, Hoyes, and Ketches having received much damage, he thought it
best to weigh, and as the wind stood, to attempt something upon the Island of
Skelling, which the morning proving moderate vveather, he accordingly
prosecuted, landing by the help of his Long boats eleven Companies on shore,
where he discovered only some fevv scattering fellows, but met with little
or no opposition; leaving therefore one Company to secure his Boats, himself,
with ten Companies marched up three miles to the Capital Town, called
Brandares, a very fair Town, or Dorp, of above one thousand houses, where
keeping five Companies upon the skirts of the Town, to prevent any surprise of
the Enemy, he sent the other five to fire and burn the Town. But finding them
somewhat slow to receive that order, and fearing they might be tempted to
forget themselves in the pillage; he himself was forced to set fire to some
houses on the wind-ward, the sooner to perfect the work, and hasten his men
away, which burnt with that violence, that in half an hours time, the most part
of the Town was in a flame. The Town was reported by those that were found in
it, to have been very rich; and so it appeared by some of the Soldiers
pockets, but very few people were to be seen in it, except some old men and
women, which were used with all gentleness and humanity. The remaining Villages
of that Island, which were two or three, had certainly run the same fortune.
But, considering, it was nigh high water, Sir Robert thought it not fit to lose
the opportunity of getting out to Sea; which he thought more considerable, than
to stay 24. hours for the destruction of some few and inconsiderable Villages,
remembering likewise, that the Channels next the Buys, were very narrovv, and
not bold without a franck vvind. By hight of vvwater he got off all his men,
and set sail out of the place retaining still his first intentions of falling
upon the Vly; but as he was going on board, he received Orders from the
Generals, to return to the Fleet with all speed, which he did that evening,
being the 10th. of August; bringing off the marks of a singular conduct, and
most vigorous execution; besides, a considerable booty to the private Soldiers
and Seamen, their States Pleasure-boat of 12 Guns, without any other loss,
then of six men killed, and about as many vvounded.

FINIS.

