AN ELEGY ON Captain William Harman, Late Commander of His Majesty's Ship
Guernsey. Occasioned by a former Copy of Verses on the same Subject.
Has't Thou for this, by thy calm valor, taught
How Young men can fight, and how Old men ought?
Is this the guerdon of the Stout, and Brave?
Are these the Flowers strewn on thy Watery Grave?
Must we confess, to the honor of Argier,
Thou 'wer't Killed in the Streights, but thou were Murdered here?
Dear Sir, could I as well acquainted be
With thy blessed Ghost, as once I was with Thee,
Thou would (what thou did never yet,) complain,
That thou were now by Goose-shot basely slain.
Thou, who so often, when Bullet, Ball, and Fire
Did jointly, to thy ruin, all conspire,
Stood'st on the Billows, as on Native Ground,
Fixed like the Poles, when all the World turned round.
Thy Father's Courage was so tried and known,
'Twas fit to be bequeathed to Thee alone.
Valor in Thee would scarce for Virtue go,
(For Harman's Son must like a Harman do:)
Had not thy Brain commanded still thy Heart,
Improving Nature by well-measur'd Art.
This the brave Sprag foresaw, when Thee he chose
To run the Gauntlet, through 'our then Belgic foes:
When the disabled Cambridge breathless lay;
Though (like a Stag imbauch'd) she stood at Bay,
Till Thou Her, as Aeneas did his Sire,
Brought nobly off, and spitd'st out all their Fire.
At Eighteen to so high a pitch to soar,
Had bin a mir'acle, were not Harman More.
-- But did not I a Poetaster blame?
And am I not my self become the same?
Pardon, dear Friend, if Sorrow make me mad:
Men know not what they say, when they are thoroughly sad.
Take but a parting Tear -- But why on Thee
Are Drops bestowed, when covered with a Sea?
Yet Thou were so beloved, that had the Shore
Received thy Corpse, thou'had'st bin entombed in More.
For though thy Courage did the Stoutest awe,
Thy Gen'erous Mildness equally gave law.
Thy 'obliging temper with it is potent charms
Vi'ed conquests ev'en with Thy victorious arms.
Nor Friend, nor Foe thy 'unbounded power controuls;
Thou 'or'ecom'st Their Forces, and inslav'st Our Souls.
What Valor, Art, and Prudence could command
Was still performed by Thy successful hand:
And when resistless Fate thy Foe appeared,
Though never so pow'erfull, yet she was not feared.
Nay though her Pow'er has placed her among the Gods,
She dar'ed not to attacque Thee, but with Odds.
Methinks I see the Great Leviathan fly
With winged hunger to devour the fry:
Sure of her Prey, she sports upon the Main,
And hugs the thought of what she never shall gain.
A greater Rage the Guernsey does inspire,
She spreads her Sails, and fills them with her Fire:
Only complains One single Ship to meet;
She, and her Captain, used to 'ingage a Fleet.
They stand not long at distance to dispute,
But with warm breath each other's sides falute.
The' insulting Turk with Bulk and Numbers swelled
The English Valor not by Monsters quelled.
The Infidel twice seized the Noble Prey:
Twice from her rave'nous jaws she is snatched away.
English never lose what they 'are resolved to save:
Nor can the Bulky over-pow'er the Brave.
This Harman sees and does; with his bold Hand
Example gives: with his wise Head, Command.
'Midst his own wounds he makes the rest secure:
His Courage keeps them Stout, his Conduct Sure.
And though the Shot thrice pierce his valiant breast,
The Soul, he is losing, he imparts to the rest.
A Soul so active, and diffus'edly great,
'Twould serve, alone, to animate a Fleet;
And 'spight of all Argier, command the Main;
'Twould quickly 'have brought their Cressent to her wane.
Nor will we now thy Death Misfortune call:
He never bravely stands, that fears to fall.
Shall we bewail that man, who 'has lost his blood
In his King's Favor, for his Countrey's Good?
No, it is Our Selves that we commiserate,
Who are deprived by this thy early fate:
Thy early fate, which did designs defeat
As great as could be good, as good as great.
Live then, blessed Friend, thy life's remainder out
In the hearts of all that Loyal are, or Stout.
May our great Charles, revenge thy death, and all
Their Fleet a Victim to 'His just fury fall.
May Harmans daily from the Waves arise
To spread His Conquests through all Seas and Skies:
Till's Flag command, where'ere it does appear:
But may 'He never buy, ev'en Victory, so dear.
Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed in the Year, 1678.


