AN ELEGY On that Worthy and Famous ACTOR, Mr. CHARLES HEART, Who departed this
Life Thursday August the 18th. 1683.
31. Aug. 1683.
CAn HEART be dead, and yet neglected lie,
Like vulgar Trophies of Mortality,
Nor have His Name shrin'd in an Elegy?
Hence Modern Wits, Apollo's Bastard-brood;
If not for Him, mourn your Ingratitude.
You often have Verse on meaner Subjects made;
None should give Presents, and leave Debts unpaid.
Unthankful Tribe! how can ye silent be,
And let His Fame earth with his Corpse, when He
Gave both your Works and You Eternity.
Thus lighted Tapers round their Flames do cast,
And but for Others Good, Themselves they waste.
Pardon, bright Saint, if now my weaker Verse
Appear in sighing o'r Thy Glorious Hearse,
To chide bold Death, and our vast Loss bewail;
Our Loss, which naught on Earth can countervail:
For where is a Name like HEART, that has the Power,
Can force all eyes t'a Tributary Shower?
Whose Sins begot no Libels, whom the Poor
For Benefit, the Rich for Worth adore;
Who lived a Phoenix, who Himself denied,
And to warm Passion a cold Martyr died.
Sure He Is not dead? Such were His looks, when He
Would counterfeit a Death in Tragedy.
But, ah! He Is gone too sure; Cold is His Brow,
And th busy Pulse for ever's idle now;
His Tongue, which late such Melody did arm,
As could to Ecstasy the Hearers charm;
Whose Sweetness ( as we thought) might Fate o'r come,
And make him change his Rigor, now is dumb.
Silent as Sleep He lies, His latest Breath
Life's Ep^logue spoke, and all is still as Death.
Farewell! Thou Darling of Melpomene;
The Best but Imitate, None Equal Thee;
With Thee the Glory of the Stage is fled,
The Hero, Lover, both with HEART lie dead:
Of whom all speak, when of His Parts they tell,
Not as of May, out some great Miracle.
Such Power He had o'r the Spectators gained,
As forced a Real Passion from a Felon'd.
For when they saw AMINTOR bleed, strait all
The House, for every Drop, a Tear let fall;
And when ARBACES wept, by sympathy,
A flowing Tide of Woe gushed from each Eye.
Then, when he would our easy Griefs beguile,
Or CELADON or PEREZ made us smile:
Thus our Affections He or Raised or Laid,
Mirth, Grief and Love by wondrous Art He swayed.
Let no detracting Tongue dare wound His Fame,
Nor the Precise against Actors more exclaim,
HEART has restored their Credit, graced their Name,
His Life the Stage instructed, and now dead,
We Are taught by Him the Worlds gay Stage to tread.
Oh happy me! in such a Time brought forth,
As to behold such Goodness, and such Worth.
All that was Excellent we in Him might see,
Servant to Justice, and strict Honesty:
So Pure each Scene of's Life was, scarce we can
Find Vice enough, to say He was but Man.
His unexampl^d Virtues have no end,
He was a Loyal Subject, Faithful Friend:
Man's Favorite, and th Almighties was He too,
Each hour His Alms and Prayers did Heaven pursue,
Secured of which bright Mansion, hence he flew.
And now, should I aspire each Grace to Praise,
A Work t'astonish Wonder I must raise
But oh, blessed Soul! since great our Loss appears,
Permit me bath Thy Memory in Tears;
For Thy surviving Fame can never die,
Consigned to nothing but Eternity.
While Thy blessed Life and Death to the Best give Laws,
And each this certain Truth from Envy draws,
HEART never made Exit yet without Applause.
Printed by Nath. Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old-Spring, Garden near
Charing Cross, 1682.


