AN ELEGY On that Reverend and Learned Minister of the Gospel, Mr. WILLIAM
JENKINS: Who Finished his Testimony the 19th of January, 1684/5. in the Goal of
NEWGATE, where there are above Fourscore Dissenters still remaining. In a
Dialogue between SENSE and FAITH.
Sense. PRISON! O Dismal thing! What will thou still
Provoke my Sorrow to Employ my Quill
In Mournful Notes! Thou cruel place, forbear
To drein mine Eyes, till there is not left a Tear:
Bampfield and Ralphson's not enough for you
To pack from hence! You must have JENKINS too!

Faith. Come, leave thy Murmurs; his bright Soul has soared
From Two Confinements, to the God h' adored:
He staid but till his Glorious Captain called;
Would have him still in Flesh and Jayl Enthralled?
Weep for thy self, He is to Bliss arrived;
He is not Dead, he is but Re-reviv'd.

Sense. Lament I must, and will; -- when such Dear Saints
Expire in Prisons, I Will fling out Complaints.
In spite of all your Modest words, I Will Roar
As high as where his happy Soul did Soar;
I will Implore a Divine NEMESIS
On such as Shortened that Dear Life of his.

Faith. Weep not, for though he drew his latest Breath
Within those Bars and Bolts, his happy Death
Brings no Dishonor to his pious Name;
It Is as Celebrious as a Smithfield Flame.
Then peevish Sense, be still; let me prevail
That thou no more what Heaven Decreed, Bewail.

Sense. O! that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes
A Well of Tears to weep his Obsequies!
His Dear Remembrance calls for some Arrears,
Which must be paid him in a Flood of Tears.
Where Love is Mutual, and of equal Force,
It Is cutting Grief to feel a quick Divorce.

Faith. Forbear, Mistaken Sense; thy fruitless Cries
Bespeak Impatience; it is but Flesh that Dies.
His Active Spirit is advanced, you know;
He is but gone where thou must quickly go:
Pale Death's the Portal that let us in to Glory,
Our Writ of Ease from all things Transitory.

Sense. Ah! but He Is Gone! -- That Soul-Dividing Word
Begets more Terror then the sharpest Sword!
He Is gone, who almost six and forty years
Preached to poor Sinners both with Sighs and Tears.
No Frowns nor Flatt'ries could with him prevail,
From following his Great Master to a Jayl.

Faith. Cease Exclamations: He his work has done,
With Faith and Patience his blessed Race has run;
Still constant in Adhering to his LORD,
Who now has given him his full Reward:
His Death in Prison does more loudly Preach,
Then when his Voice did the Ears of Thousands Reach.

Sense. If Gasping SION must endure such Rubs,
When Cedars fall, what will become of Shrubs?
Or if successive blows our strength must break,
How shall our Walls be guarded by the Weak?
If men of Prayer must Doubly Silenced be,
SION will lose its best Artillery.

Faith. Can SION fear, or Overthrow or Harm,
When Great Jehovah's strong Outstretched Arm
Becomes its Bulwark? Can we fear a Want
Of Leaders, when God's so by Covenant?
Although our Lord does home some Servants call,
He still supplies us, and is All in All.

Sense. Ah! but how often do our sins provoke
The Lord in Judgment to Repeat his Stroke!
Who can but shake in Storms? Can it be hoped
The Church can stand, when it is thus unprop'd?
Ah! how my troubled Soul's amazed to think
That fainting Sion, will like Peter sink!

Faith. All once must Die; the Prophets have, you see,
No Patent for their Immortality;
When they have done that for which they hither Came,
God can of Stones raise Sons for Abraham:
When Peter sinks, Christ is at hand to heave him,
And by his Promise, he will never leave him.

Sense. Gods hand is heavy, and his Anger's sore;
His Frowns are Deadly, and his Strokes much more:
Such Mortal Visitations have a Voice,
To make Friends Mourn, and Enemies Rejoice.
What Temper's so well set, but will be soon
(As Broken Strings make Music) out of Tune?

Faith. As Tender Parents Exercise the Rod,
Not to Destroy, but to Reform; so God
Is pleased to manage his Rebukes; he has
Full Showers of Love, as well as Drops of Wrath.
Gracious Effects he gives of seeming Crosses,
A Future Purchase by our present Losses.

Sense. Mine Ey's must vent my Grief upon his Hearse;
And weep in Earnest, though I weep in Verse:
When Jonathan was slain, a Royal Eye
In Doleful Accents wept his Elegy:
So must I take like Privilege to Mourn
In Ink, as well as Tears, upon his Urn.

Faith. Dry up thy Tears; for whom thou mourn'st, is Blessed;
He Is Entered into Everlasting Rest.
Joy 'twas to him to do his Master's Will,
Now of his Masters Joy he has his fill.
In Faith and Patience wait; On God attend,
He Will plead thy Cause, and will thy Right defend.

An ACROSTICK.
Well done, Good Servant (now thy God does say)
Into that Joy that never will decay,
Lo thou shall Enter; and abide for Aye!
Love to thy Lord, on Earth was thy Delight;
In Heaven thou ever shall enjoy his Sight;
And now may say, (such Grace to thee is given)
My Cross on Earth, does prove my Crown in Heaven.
It is the Father's Will that now is done!
Enjoyments here below, are quickly gone!
N^ne can from Death's dire stroke Exempted be;
Knowledge nor Grace, could blessed Jenkins free.
In Sion's Peace he placed his chiefest Stay,
Nor could he Live, when he saw that Decay
So near his Heart the Churches Welfare lay.

