MEMENTO MORI

depictions of skeleton, hourglass, and other emblems of Death
AN ELEGY ON That Great Example of Heroic Valor The Right Honorable, Edward
Earl of Sandvvich.
SHall Mercenary Pens Prostitute Verse,
To Guild with Flatteries each Trivial Hearse?
And strive in vain to Imbalme some Silken Sot,
Whose Name deserves, soon as his Corpse to Rot:
Shall useless men, whom Age, or Surfeits Slay,
Or just deserved Diseases sweep away,
Have Gaudy Tombs, and Epitaphs, that rise
In strange Impert'nent Plaudit's to the skies,
And Noble SANDWICH thus submit to Fate
Without a Muse, his FAME to Celebrate;
Condoling in such Passionate Strains, till we
In our own Tears, be drowned as well as HE.
He that in Honors Field, his Countries Cause
Did more, than Fancy can reach when it draws
The Acts of Hero's, and will henceforth shame
The brightest Glories of the Roman Name:
Who stood the Shock of all the Mogan Fleet,
And almost Single durst their numbers meet:
Against whom he long maintained a doubtful fight,
Dispatching Hundreds to Eternal Night;
(Whose base Lives yet no Recompense afford,
Their blood's so thick it Blots a Noble Sword;)
Some Sunk to Rights, not able to abide
The fierce salutes He gave them each Broadside:
Others stood off, their Hulks and Tackle tore,
And Decks o'reflow'd with Brandy and with Gore.
But Fate, that sometimes makes Virtue its slave,
And takes delight for to oppress the Brave,
Seeming at length with the Foe to Conspire,
Spite of Resistance, set his Ship on Fire:
Though he with Noble Resolution chose
Either to bring her Off, or his Life lose:
When thick as Attoms Cannon Bullets flew
And all his men were killed, or else withdrew:
When stoutest rocks, that Tempests did out-brave
Trembled for fear, and duckt under a Wave:
When certain ruin on all sides drew near,
And Death in several Vizards did appear;
The cruel Elements seeming at strife,
Which of them first should rob him of his Life:
Had you but seen how Vnconcern'd he stood,
Flames over's Head, his Feet dabling in Blood;
In what a fearless and composed Estate
He braved the approach of the severest Fate;
And did at last from Death to Death Retire
Courting the Water, to avoid the Fire;
You would confess, such Courage never can be
Enough bewailed in griefs Hydrography.
And would you, Cruel Seas! destroy Him there
Whom rageing Fire, and Cannon-shot did spare?
By this Black deed henceforward you will become
More odious for, than Mare Mortuum.
Kind Dolphines should methinks in Shoals appea^
And on their Backs him above Water bear;
Or some new Island in his Rescue peep,
Rather than he should Perish in the Deep:
Could not the Winds to Countermand his death
with their whole Card of lungs, redeem his breath
No! it is decre'd, his Soul must leave her Clay,
And took at parting a contrary way
In The Flames, Elias-like, that up ascends,
And to it every blessed Center tends:
Whilst Sea-Nimphs never Enamored so before
Dote on the Corpse, and wast it to the Shore:
Knowing it ought, a Nobler Tomb to have,
Than the Imposthum'd Bubble of a VVave.
FINIS.
MEMENTO MORI

depictions of skeleton, hourglass, and other emblems of Death
London, Printed for Philip Brooksby.


