AN ELEGY In Commemoration of the Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM SCROGGS, Late
Lord Chief Justice of His MAJESTY'S Court of KING'S BENCH, who departed this
Life, the 25th of this Instant October. 1683.
29. October. 1663

Thou pleasing Muse, who late did gay appear
Gaudy as Spring, and with thy Songs did cheer
My well pleased thoughts, now like to Sable night
Array thy self, disrobed of all thy light;
With Cyprus bind thy Brows; this mournful Theme
Admits no Day, Grief here is too extreme
To be observed by vulgar prying Eyes,
Who know not in true Grief to Sympathize.
This noble Sorrow is unfeigned. True Love
In Mercinary numbers scorns to move,
But still keeps Harmony with that above.
He Is gone. The Brave amongst the Great lies low;
True Tyrant Death, who will no pity show,
Snatched him from hence: at least his better part
Which shines above, bright as his great desert.
In Heaven he Triumphs, whilst on Earth his Name
Is Breathed aloud by the strong blast of fame;
The Man who truly Loyal durst to be,
When Torrent Faction raged to that degree,
That once again it pushed at Monarchy:
Who Atlas like, did help sustain the weight
Of Leaning Empire, when the wheel of fate
Almost flew from it is Axle, and a fear
Possessed some Men, Heaven did neglect it is care;
Even then his great unbias'd Soul stood firm;
No fear of Danger, nor no threats could charm
His moving Orb e're to run Retrogade,
His Princes Interest, his chief care was made;
He feared no frowns, in vain Temptations were,
Uprightness still did all his Actions square;
In public and in private, Justice shined
In more uprightness never before inshrin'd:
In vain aspersions were, like Crystal He
Cast of the stains of unjust obliquy.
The banded party, which in Treason set,
Was by his Prudence countermin'd; the fret
Of Monarchy, the rude Anarchial rout,
Who sought to bring their black designs about,
Quel'd by that awful power derived from him
Who wears the British Empires Diadem.
In haughty pride they durst no more appear,
But in close Corners, hissing loud, they rear
Their Heads, impolitick, until at last,
That Venom that would fain three Kindgoms blast
Was on the ground in vain at Random cast.
The Laws great Oracle in him is set,
Centered in him both Law and Reason met.
Precedents justly poised had still due place,
And due Proportion ruled in every Case.
Orphans and Widows tears who were oppressed,
Never departed from him unredrest.
The Proud and Rich, who thought 'twas in their Power
The Scales of Justice, with a Golden shower,
To turn with ease, found her poised Balance right,
Not to be altered, nor by Gold or Might.
Retired from business, still his mind was bent
T'improve that Talant his Creator lent,
And make it plain appear, in each degree,
He was the Pattern of Humility.
Then let his Memory for ever live;
Times self to that can never a period give;
The Gowns chief boast to after times he will be,
Ages to come shall read his History;
And strive to Copy his deserved praise,
Thinking him worthy of Immortal Bays,
EPITAPH.
Beneath this Marble, how can it be said
Immortal Scroggs, a Man so just is laid?
It Is but his dust, Reader, suppose no more,
The rest's in Heaven, it is there laid up in store,
Till with loud sounds the Trumpet wakes the dead,
And rising dust is with fresh Beauty clad,
Then shall he live above the Worlds renown,
And wear for ever Virtues shining Crown.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, in the Year, MDCLXXXIII.


