Monsieur St. Ruth's SPEECH TO THE IRISH Army,
On the 11th of July, 1691. Being the Day before the Battle at Aghrim, as it
was found among the Papers of his Secretary, who was killed in the Battle.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers,
I Suppose it is not unknown to you, and to the whole Christian World, what
Glory I have acquired, and how Successful and Fortunate I have been in
suppressing Heresy in France, and propagating the holy Catholic Faith; and
can without Vanity boast my self the happy Instrument of bringing over
Thousands of poor deluded Souls from their Errors, who owe their Salvation to
the pious Care of my thrice Illustrious Master, and my own Industry, assisted
by some Holy Members of our Unspotted Church; while great numbers of those
incorrigible Heretics have perished, both Soul and Body, by their obstinacy.

It was for this reason that the most Puissant King my Master, compassionating
the miseries of this Kingdom, has chosen me before so many worthy Generals to
come hither: not doubting but by my wonted Diligence I should establish the
Church in this Nation on such a Foundation as it should not be in the power of
Hell or Heretics hereafter to disturb it.

And for the bringing about of this Great and Glorious Work, next to the
Assistance of Heaven, the unresistible Puislance of the King my Master, and my
own Conduct, the great dependence of all good Catholics is on your Courage.

I must confess that since my coming among you things have not answered my
Wishes, but they are still in a posture to be retrieved, if you will not betray
your Religion and Country by an unseasonable pusilanimity.

I am assured by my Spies, that the Prince of Orange's Heretical Army are
resolved to give us Battle; and you see them even before you ready to perform
it. It is now therefore, if ever, that you must endeavor to recover your lost
Honor, Privileges, and Forefathers Estates: You are not Mercenary Soldiers,
you do not fight for your Pay, but for your Lives, your Wives, your Children,
your Liberties, your Country, your Estates, and to restore the most Pious of
Kings to his Throne; but above all for the propagation of the Holy Faith, and
the Subversion of Heresy. Stand to it therefore, my Dears, and bear no longer
the Reproaches of the Heretics, who brand you with Cowardice: and you may be
assured, that King James will Love and Reward you, Louis the Great will protect
you, all good Catholics will Applaud you, I my self will Command you, the
Church will Pray for you, your Posterity will Bless you, Saints and Angels will
Caress you, God will make you all Saints, and His Holy Mother will lay you in
Her Bosom.

Printed at Dublin, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1691.


