I Ouercom and Conquer


MEMENTO MORI.

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY, On the Death of Sir William Turner, Knight, AND Alderman of the City
of LONDON, and President of Bridwell and Bethlem Hospitals, WHO Departed this
Life on Thursday, the 9th. of February, about a Eleven of the Clock in the
Forenoon, 1692/3
COme, come, prepare to Weep, our Sorrow's great,
For we have lost our Worthiest Magistrate,
Sir William Turner, Father of our Troy,
The City's Darling and the Orphans Joy.
Oh! who can Name him and forbear to Weep,
Since he, Just Soul, does with his Fathers sleep.
For thee, O LONDON, I am sorry too;
Methinks I hear thee Cry, Ah Joys Adieu,
Adieu! Adieu! Ah Death! what do thou mean,
To take the Pillar on which I did lean?
I once from Ruins lifted up my Head,
But now, Alas! Alas! Great TURNER 's Dead.
So Wise, so Just, and Equal too was He,
He Punished Guilty, and set Guiltless Free;
So Charitable, that though he is Dead,
His Works of Charity Live in his stead.
An Hospital he lately did Erect,
The Hungry Christian to Feed and Protect;
Besides a Chapel, wherein twice a Day
A Minister is ordered to Bray;
Wherein full Forty Poor he does Maintain,
Oh! that our Sighs could him recall again!
So well Beloved was he, that he was sent
Our Grievance to Redress in Parliament,
Where he behaved himself so Just and Wise,
His Death, draws Tears from every Readers Eyes.
He Is Dead alas! who strove with all his might
To restore the Widows and Orphans to their Right.
Weep, weep, therefore, let outward Sorrows show
Your inward Griefs, with Tears your Cheeks bedew,
For him who while he did with us remain,
Wronged not his Conscience for lucre of Gain;
From base Deceit and Guile was always free,
And the great Asserter of the City's Liberty.
But ah, bold Death, spares neither Great nor Small,
All fare alike, the Shrubs and Cedars Tall:
What shall we say, he Mortal was, though Brave,
And as all Mortals, Subject to the Grave.
But why should we thus Grieve? when he, I Am sure,
In Everlasting Mansions is secure;
And with the Blessed does Halelujahs sing,
To our Great Creator and Eternal King.
But since he is dead and gone, we'll let him Rest,
Until the Resurrection of the Just.
EPITAPH.
HERE Lies Interred, under this Stone,
A Worthy Magistrate, well known,
Lord Mayor of LONDON, in Sixty Nine,
And one who led a Life Divine;
Sir William Turner was his Name,
Whom no one Living I hear blame;
A True Son of the English Church,
Whose Name to Harlots smells like Birch;
Whom while he lived on this Stage,
Made Bridewel their chiefest Cage.
Then rest, dear Ashes, in thy Vrn,
Until the Earth Consume and Burn.
London, Printed for George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's-Castle.


