MEMENTO MORI:

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY, On the Death of Algernon Sidney Esquire Who was found Guilty of
HIGH TREASON, AND Beheaded at Tower Hill on Friday the 7th of December, 1683.
7. Dec. 1683
WOnder not (Reader) if you here descry
Satyr usurp the place of Elegy;
No deep fetched sighs, no tears, nor mournful Verse,
Must e're attend an old Rebellious Hearse:
Traitors like stately Tapers set on high,
Blaze for a while, then dwindle, stink, and Dye.
The Apostate Angel since from Heaven he fell,
Smells of the loathsome, sulphurous stench of Hell,
An odious wretched Name is still the fate
Of Rebel man, when e're he proves ungrate.
Ungrateful Sidney! See the ill success
Of Rampant and Triumphant wickedness!
Justly the Ax must cut his thread of Life
Who vainly spent his Threescore Years in strife.
When Traitors pulses beat so wondrous high,
To blood a Vein is the securest way.
An old stanch't Rebel, cursed at his Birth,
A Foe to Heaven, and a Plague to Earth.
Early in Treason he began to excel,
Would in his Cradle scratch, bite, and Rebel.
As strength increased, so Spite and Malice reigned,
And still prevailed over his ill tempered mind.
Fierce was his humor, furious was his Zeal,
A fond admirer of a Commonweal,
This made the Rebel Saint with cursed Sword,
In wrath, pursue the Anointed of the Lord.
His Lawful King in all things he withstood,
Till now n'ere cloyed with fulsom draughts of blood,
Then farewell Sidney! now expect no more
To sport and roll in Royal Purple gore.
All your Rebellious cheats must have an end,
For Heaven its Vicegerent will defend.
The Almighty Thunder justly when he nods.
Shakes the proud Fabric of these Demigods.
Republic Monsters that would Heaven invade,
By's powerful word with Earth are level made.
Gigantic Commonwealth's Men thus are hurled,
From distant Sky's, into the lower World.
Learn then by Sidney's fate, the Factious Crew
Good, Honest, Loyal methods to pursue
Nor seek another Sov'ragn to undo;
If once you're pardoned show your penitence,
No more such base, vile wretches to commence,
But if you are resolved to be perverse
Then gall and Satyr shall be mixed in Verse.
For those who are apt to murmur and Rebel
No Lecture's fit for them but Death, and Hell.
The EPITAPH.
REader, if Whig thou art, thou wilt laugh
At this insipid EPITAPH.
Oh fie! get Onions for thine Eyes,
For here thy Patron Sidney lies.
But where is his wandering Spirit gone,
Since here he suff'red Martyrdom?
To Heaven. Oh! it cannot be,
For Heaven is a Monarchy.
Where then I pray? To Purgatory.
That Is an idle, Romish Story.
Such Saints as he cannot go to Hell?
Where is he gone I prithee tell,
The Learned say to Achitophel.
London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle, 1683.


