The English Seamans Resolution,
OR, The Loyal Subjects Undaunted Valor:
Plainly Demonstrating the Justness of his Cause,
Encouraging his Friends, to Daunt his Foes:
For King and Country, in the Seas he will Perish,
To tame the Rebels, and make England Flourish.
To the Tune of, I prithee Love turn to me. OR, When this Old Cap was New.


I Am an undaunted Seaman,
and for King Charles I will fight
I Will venture my Life and my Fortune
to defend my Countries right:
What Enemies ever oppose us
my Valor with them I will try.
And in the Dukes sight, I Am resoved to fight
with a full resolution to Dye.
My joys lies on the Maine Ocean,
and my Hammock supports my head,
The Bottom shall be my portion
wherein my Grave shall be made:
Before the Butter-Box shall my Brother abuse,
my Crimson Blood it shall fly,
Then tack about Fleet, let Trump and us meet,
for I came to the Seas to Dye.
Now Jocky begins to be civil,
and aloud for a King he does cry:
The Dutch are as false as the Devil,
still working of Tretchery:
With the sound of our Drums, and smoke of our Guns,
we mean for to darken the Sky,
For the Duke and his Fleet, once more will you meet
with a full resolution to Dye.
Slip not your Necks out of your Collars,
but come on with a cheerful heart:
We mean to have some of your Dollars
before that our Fleets do part:
Then drink up your Brandy-wine cheerely,
to Trump and his Company,
For the Duke and his Fleet, once more will you meet
with a full resolution to Dye.


BRave General Monck will defeat you,
and teach you good manners to know,
You know that before he did beat you
and made you to cringe full low:
He Will make you all know to your sorrow,
'twere better Peccavi to cry,
Then for to s^out out, the the other odd bout,
and in the Seas perish and Dye.
Stout Smith that Noble Commander,
of his Valor again you must taste:
He Will show you the English banner
and send you away at a blast,
As Opdam was served before you
when into the Air he did fly:
Then you will repent, that e're you were bent
upon the Main Ocean to Dye.
Brave Holmes and Mimms they have vowed,
for Charles our King they will stand,
The Rebels they shall be subdued
and quelled in the turn of a hand:
For whilst that our Ships can sail Boys,
we scorn a Ships length for to fly:
Pay your money with speed, for that we do need,
or else come to the Seas to Dye,
The Seas were never so graced,
with so many brave Gallants before,
Your Men of War shall be chased
and beaten home to your own door:
We Will block you up in your own Harbors,
and your Cannon Bullets shall fly,
For the Duke and his Fleet, once more will you meet
with a full resolution to Dye.
What must we still wait on your leisure,
or is not your Money yet Coined,
We mean to have some of your treasure
for no Children of us you shall find:
We scorn for to wait on such Puppies,
we have other Fish for to fry:
Then hang up your states, your Masters and mates,
that sent you to Seas for to Dye.
Then leave of your Ieering and Mocking,
and Murmr at home and Repine,
It Is better then for to be Knocking
upon the Salt Ocean Brine:
Then cast up your Caps and be merry,
brave English Boys let them fly,
And pray for King Charles and his Navy
and let the Proud Hollanders Dye.
With Allowance.

Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


