MEMENTO MORI

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
An ELEGY On that Incomparable Example of Hospitality, Charity, and
Generosity, The Thrice-Worthy WILLIAM WHITMORE, Esquire Who departed this Life on
the Fifth of this Instant August, 1678.
GReat WHITMORE! though I never drank thy Wine,
Nor crowded at thy Liberal Board to Dine,
Yet give me leave, with an unbribed Verse,
To pay just Tribute to thy Honored Hearse.
Ungrateful WITS! could you so often steal,
By Mumping Vistts, a Recruiting Meal
At his free Table, and yet when he Dies,
Not Celebrate aloud his Obsequies?
Now I find how our Poets Fancies beat;
They only Write, whilst they know where to Eat.
The Belly helps the Brain: When WHITMORE's gone,
Apollo's Bankrupt; farewell, Helicon.
But I that never yet stooped to a Trencher,
Flattered a Grandee nor pimp'd for a Wencher,
(Those thriving Arts) must, though with weak Essays,
Here sacrifice an Hecatomb of Praise,
To let our dull Degenerous Gentry know
How much they to this Great Example owe.
Whilst others waste Estates in wild Deboch,
And cramp the Mannor-house to a guilt Coach;
Turn out of doors their useless Kitchins, and
Make Servants, Horses-like, at Livery stand;
Though little Miss, it is feared, devours them more
Than Twelve tall Blue-coats did their Syres before.
This Generous Soul those Sneaking Arts disdained,
And Exiled Bounty only with him reigned.
His Noble Hall kept a continual Feast,
And all the Thronging Town became its Guest.
Such vast Provisions in each day were laid,
Pined Cities, whom ambitious Arms invade,
One Meal of his Impregnable had made.
His Charity so Great, the joyful Poor
Were never sent empty from his well-known Door
With Misers Pity, or with Nabals Frown,
Which now, alas! our General Alms are grown.
If any do their Bread on Waters cast,
Repining Judas cries, Why all this wast?
Or makes them choose (with subtle hopes of Gain)
Quick Tiding-streams, may bring it back again.
Our Mountebanks of Zeal cheap Notions nurse,
And love that Piety that saves the Purse.
Good Works they count too Chargeable a Theme;
But He strove with true Goodness to Redeem
Virtue to Action, that Life-feeding Flame
That keeps Religion warm; not swell a Name
Of Faith, A Mountain word, often made of Air,
And those dear Spoils that wont to dress the Fair
And fruitful Charities full Breasts (of old)
Turning her out to tremble in the Cold.
"What can the Poor hope from us, when we be
" Uncharitable even to Charity?
Their Wants proclaim his Loss; and now he is gone,
Let no rude Hand presume his Sacred Stone
For to profane with Cheap Inscription:
For we will shed the Tribute of our Tears
So long, till the relenting Marble wears;
Which shall such order in their Cadence keep,
That they a Native Epitaph shall weep,
Until each Letter spelt distinctly lies
Cut by the mystic Droppings of our Eyes;
Till then, for the Worlds sake, rather than Thine,
Let these few Lines be Sacred to thy Shrine,
As, An EPITAPH.
HEre, Reader, lies a precious Trust
Of Good and Charitable Dust:
A Casket Heavens Choice has been,
To treasure its Dispencer in:
One who its Blessings did convey
With wide-spread Hands a noble way:
Whose Board stood free to Entertain
Guests, though they could not Bid again.
Here, in a word, Entombed does lie
The old English Hospitality,
Now doubly dead, and which we fear
Will scarce again this Age appear;
Unless you, Sirs, thus taught to live,
Him back, in his Example, give.
Mean time let each Mouth he has fed
Join in Applauses of the Dead;
Till like Himself his Fame shall be
Vested with Immortality.
FINIS.
With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L. C. 1678.


