AN ELEGY In Commemoration of the Honorable Lieutenant General TALMASH, Who
Departed this Life at PLYMOVTH on the 12th. of June, 1694. of a Mortal VVound
received in his Thigh, in the Glorious Enterprise in Landing the English Forces
at Camerett-Bay in France, etc.
Licensed, June 15. 1694.

SInce those that should attend this Noble Hearse,
And sigh out Numbers fit for mournful Verse,
Have not resorted to the Muses Spring,
From sad Melpomonie those Wreaths to bring,
Of Cyprus that should Crown in solemn State,
Death's hasty Conquest in untimely Fate;
In humble Strains inspired by Grief I come,
To offer an Oblation at his Tomb,
Whose Loss Commands, our Tears compels our Eyes
To brim themselves with Briny Elegies.
Pardon me then, you of the lofty strain,
That humble I presume, whilst you restain
To pay a Tribute due, and say, that Death
Sowed Seeds of Sorrow when he reap^d this Breath,
From whence a Crop of growing Grief does-rise,
That most to Melancholy add supplies:
When Death his Shafts does level at the Great,
He minds us most of an Immortal state;
And gives large Prospect, that all things below
Are fading, and can no true Joys bestow;
That Honor, Riches, Strength, and Power must have
Declinings, till they drop into a Grave;
Imperial Death's impartial Hand does strike,
The Rich and Poor, and levels all alike.
His Kingdoms in the Dust, his Subjects there,
Know no distinction, but have equal share:
Yet Virtuous Deeds too swift for Death do fly,
They 'scape his shafts, and only cannot die;
They live till Time is lost and is no more,
And then they have Eternity in store.
So Noble Talmash by his Deeds shall live,
Fame brooks no Silence, but due Praise does give;
His Courage England will have ever in Mind,
And France, proud France his Death most dear shall find
Shall rue the day that he his Breath resigned,
His Bounty flowed, and tenderly he eyed
His Soldiers, and their frequent Wants supplied;
And if in any thing, in that took Pride,
When he Battalions, or the Squadrons lead;
Joy brightn'd in each Face, and banished Dread,
None shrunk where e're he did the Legion Head;
His humble Carriage and his Courteous Mien,
Gained him where e're he came, a high Esteem.
Wisdom an Ample Seat in him did find,
To which was an undaunted Valor joined,
Though Modest, and to serious Thoughts inclined,
Refined by Learning, pleasing was his Strain,
By which his Soldiers did Advantage gain;
Rarely the storm of Passion tossed his Mind,
Though for the Camp his Days were most designed.
A Propping-Pillar of the State he stood;
And if he gloried, 'twas in doing Good.
From a long Race of Heroes he descends,
Which to our Nation's safety were true Friends,
And hazarded the utmost in its Cause,
Defending its Religion, and its Laws.
In worst of Times, brave Talmash's Name was Great,
Helped stem the Torrent of an adverse Fate;
In all he Loyalty and Virtue showed,
And paid what Noble Souls to Honor owed.
Fame in an everlasting scrowle has writ
H^s Deathless Deeds, and Heaven has thought fit
They shall be obvious to each curious Eye,
Till Riveted to round Eternity.
The Loss is great, and does Mankind surprise,
But Earth must yield unto the Rival Skies,
Celestial Realms of Light the Blessed above,
Now Triumph to infold him in their Love.
Then though some Tears must fall, lets not complain,
Since by our Loss he reaps so great a Gain.
But let us study to Live well, that we
From Cumbers of this Life by Death set free,
May mount like him, and ever happy be.
THE EPITAPH.
This Marble but contains the Noble Dust
Of Talmash till the Resurrections Morn,
His better part remains among the Just,
Who, Heaven's bright Throne, with dazzling Light adorn,
His Race thus run, the Prize he won at last,
Though we have lost by losing him, yet he,
The Storms and Tempests being over-past,
Has gained safe Harbor in Eternity.
Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1694.


