A Letter sent from M. Chapel out of Ireland, to a friend of his in London.
YOur Letter bearing date the 28 of the last Month, I have received, being
sorry to hear of your discontents in London but I hope God will in his good
time turn all to the best: for those that that truly fear him. Our Rebellion
hear daily increases, so that we cannot travel any way from this City above
a mile or 2 without danger; since S. Samuel Harcourt came over, we in this City
have been much encouraged, his men were landed on Newyears day, and though they
were but one regiment, concisting but of 7 Companies yet they have bred some
terror to our enemies, who before reported that the King would send us no help,
and calls us English Rebels; they began to incamp close about us at Clantaf,
which is but 2 miles hence; but Sr. Charles Coote, the week before Christmas,
with about 1500 horse and foot march toward them, and was with them as soon as
there was any light in the morning, and put them to slight; some he killed some
he caused to be hanged, and 3 or 4 he took prisoners, and after the Town was
pillaged by his Soldiers, he set it a fire with the Corn, which fire was not
out in 3 or 4 days after: it is thought that there were at least 2000 Rebels
in the Town when Sr Charles came to it, he lost not one man at that time that I
can hear of. The last week the Earl of Ormand and Sr Charles marched forth,
both of them about 1 and 2 of the clock in the morning, and when they wear
without the Town, my L. of Ormand with his forces marched toward Finglas, and
Sr. Charles with his marched toward Santrey, in both which Towns the Rebels lay
in garrison, the Towns are both almost one distance fron hence, the farthest of
them is accounted but 2 miles and they are about a middle distant the one from
the other; Sr Charl^^ quickly put his Rebels to flight, who seemed to be
furious at first, and made great shows with their coullers displayed, but durst
not stand to fight; Sr Charles burnt the Town and the next Town to it, and
then marched toward my Lord of Ormand, who was then in fight with the Rebels of
Finglas, and it was reported that he was in danger at that time; the Rebels
seeing another Army coming toward them from the way of Santrey, thought it
had been their own coming to help them, but as soon as they perceived the
contrary they fled; their Coronall (being a man too familliar amongst us)
amongst the rest of his Rebell-rout fled, leaving behind him his hat, scarlet
coat, and blue plush (...) lined with fur, which were (...) but were known to
(...)


