ENGLANDS Sin, and Shame: In a Parallel between the Degenerate Estate of Old
ROME and GREAT BRITAIN. OR, HOR. Lib. 3. Ode 6. Ad Romanos de Moribus sui
saeculi corruptis. Occasionally Paraphrased, and applied for the 30th. of
January 1672. Being the Anniversary of the Murder of that Blessed Martyr King
CHARLES I.
PRepost'rously, thou chargest Crimes,
Vain Britain! on thy Grandsire Times;
Till thou, the ruined Church restore:
It Is Altars, buried in their Dust, rebuild;
Pays't all those Duties it enjoyed before,
And all its Sacred Rites reviv'st again;
For still the more thou unto Heaven do yield,
the higher thou will reign.
Hence springs thy Glory, Hence thy Shame;
And it is neglected Heaven, has thrown on thee
This mass of wretchedness, and misery;
Hence grew thy Jealousies, and Fears,
Unhappy Parents of thy CIVIL WARS!
Where Brother, Brother; Son, did Father wound:
Until thy Wickedness, did know no bound;
But mounted to a Crime
Never known before, by History, nor Time;
And which no Time, nor Age shall know again:
The Lords Anointed by his Subjects slain!
Slain! not by private Rage, or Hate,
But to a public Execution led:
Giving a Face of Justice to his Fate,
As if the Feet were Sovereigns over the Head.
This made thee Slave to Arms, thy self did raise;
Hence sprung Infections to prevent thy days;
This made thy Ships to burn; This makes thy Cities blaze
And mighty Nations far and near,
Who looked on thee, with wonder, and with fear;
Now triumphing on thy distractions gaze.
II.
This Age, thus fertile in all ills,
Had first its general Source
From giving to the Female Sex their wills;
Which is of all flagitious Crimes the Nurse:
For where their feeble Souls an Empire gain;
They Bed, Religion, Stock, and Honor stain:
And forward, like an Innundation go;
Till they whole Rcalms, and Nations overthrow.
How much did Adam's Fall this truth evince?
But, how more wicked is that Sex grown since!
The Virgin yet unripe, that scarcely knows,
To turn her Finger in her Nose:
To learn lascivious measures, does delight,
And studies artful Postures to invite:
E're Nature calls, she acts incestuous sins;
And to her Lust, her shame-fac'd brother wins:
Soon after, crept up to the Marriage bed;
Scarce warm within her Husbands arms,
She Is by desires as bold, as wicked led!
And all her Thoughts imployes, and all her Charms,
Youthful, and strong Adulterers to find;
Such as best please her lustful mind:
Nor cares she they her favors steal;
Nor fears what Sunshine can reveal;
But answers to their beck in open light,
And [O shame!] in her Conscious Husbands sight;
Whether some Factor from the Court do call,
Or else some hot-reyn'd Gaul,
Pay dearly for her Shame and his Delight*
III.
Those Youths, sprung not from such Adulterous brood,
Who died the Holy Land with Pagans blood;
Nor of such spurious strains were those,
Which made the Lillies stoop unto the Rose:
But Spirits of a Warlike Race,
Whose laboring Fathers did Chaste Wives embrace;
And did not teach them Luxury, but how
To wield the Spade, the Mattock, and the Plow:
Who when the Glory of the War was done,
And they with triumphs were returned home,
Strove not to put an idle sternness on:
Forgot the Pride of Feathers they had worn,
And all the Trophies of the War,
And to their labors did return,
Out-watcht the Sun; Out-rose the Morning Star;
And in that friendly time gives rest to all,
If a severer Mother did but call,
Fetched home those Logs which they had cleft by day
For Wars, then taught Men only to obey;
But Ah! How Manners do with Time decay?
Our Fathers, worse than theirs, have brought us forth,
To yield the World an Offspring of less worth.
FINIS.
Horat. Lib. 3. Ode VI. Ad Romanos, de Moribus sui Saeculi corruptis.
DElicta Majorum immeritus lues
Roman: donec templa refeceris
Aedesque labentes deorum, and
Foeda nigro simulacra fumo.
Diis te minorem quod geris, imperas:
Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum.
Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae.
Jam bis Monaeses, and Pacori manus
Non auspicatos contudit impetus
Nostros: and adjecisse praedam
Torquibus exiguis renidet.
Pene occupatam seditionibus
Delevit urbem Dacus and Aethiops:
Hic class formidatus, ille
Missilibus melior sagittis.
Foecuuda culpae sacula, nuptias
Primum inquinavere, and genus and domos.
Hoc font derivata clades
In patriam populumque fluxit.
Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos
Matura virgo, and fingitur artibus
Jam nunc, and incestos amores
De tenero mediatur ungui.
Mox juniores quaerit adulteros
Inter mariti vina: neque eligit
Cui donet impermissa raptim
Gaudia, luminibus remotis;
Sed jussa coram non sine conscio
Surgit marito; seu vocet institor,
Seu navis Hispanae magister
Dedecorum pretiosus emptor.
Non his juventus orta parentibus
In^ecit aequor sanguine Punico;
Pyrrhumque and ingentem cecidit
Antiochum, Annibalemque dirum.
Sed rusticorum mascula militum
Proles Sabellis d^cta ligonibus
Vorsare glebas, and severae
Matris ad arbitrium recisos
Portare fustes; sol ubi montium
Mutaret umbras, and juga demeret
Bobus fatigatis, amicum
T^mpus agens abeunte curru.
Damuosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
FINIS.

