An Exact and True RELATION OF The Landing of Her MAJESTY at Portsmouth, after
many high Tempests, and a long Distress at Sea; and how She was diligently and
magnificently met with in the way by His Highness the Duke of York, the Duke of
Ormond, the Earl of Suffolk, the Earl of Chesterfield, and many other
Personages of Honor: As also, the most pompous and solemn Joys expressed at
Her Landing at Portsmouth, by a great confluence of the Flower of the Nobility
and Gentry of this Nation, in which (on the first Report of Her Arrival) the
City of London sympathized on Thursday May 15. TOGETHER WITH A perfect Account
of Her Happy and most Auspicious MARRIAGE to His most Sacred MAJESTY, on
Wednesday May 21. by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Gilbert Lord Bishop of
London; As also of their Removal from thence to His Majesty's Royal Manor of
Hampton Court, on Thursday May 29. which Day, was the Star-crown'd Birthday of
His MAJESTY.

THE Queens Approach no sooner filled our Ears,
But we were all strait turned Geographers;
We vexed the Maps to give us an Account
Of Scillyes Island, and Saint Michael's Mount;
We every Inch examined, every Joint,
Searching from Dartmouth to Saint Ellen's Point;
And all the Coasts of the Isle of Wight being seen,
We looked for Portsmouth, and there found our QVEEN.
See where She rides, Her Beauties do adorn,
^
The Light, which from then uncontrolled flies,
Dazles the Sun to look upon Her Eyes;
There need no Knots of Ribbons in Her Hair,
The laughing Stars in knots are radiant there.
No sooner shipped for ENGLAND She set sail,
But Neptune sent forth a Tempestuous Gale,
When lo Her Beauties charmed the Winds loud rage,
Calmed the Wild Waves, and did the Sea assuage;
At which loud Triton did his suit prefer
To entertain him for Her Trumpeter,
And many a Meremaid did attend upon Her,
And humbly begged to be Her Mayds of Honor;
The Dolphins near Her shoal'd, and with their Train
Swept the Salt Deep, and cut the Foaming Main;
So great the Tumult, one might well suppose
From Love, not Rage the late great Tempest rose;
The Waves to enjoy Her sight could not forbear
To leap into the Element of Air,
The Air, to bear so fair a Burden, fain
Would change its place and nature with the Main,
Whilst Winds (that struggled who should most have crowned Her.
So sinned by Zeal, that they almost had drowned Her.
Landed at last; Saint Michael's Mount must be
The only place, where happy Destiny
Decreed, that first this Princess should be found
To plant Her foot upon the English Ground;
(...) here of Time some respite being spent
In Gratulation, and in Complement,
To give a short Refreshment, and to ease
Her Body, weary of the churlish Seas,
The Frigots put to Sea, and did convey
This Matchless Princess unto Portsmouth Bay;
Here as along the English Coasts they work,
She was incountred by the Duke of York,
And Chesterfields, and Suffolks Earls, with whom
A gallant Train of Gentlemen did come:
Here the Sea grew more mild, and all the way
Now seemed as gentle, and as smooth as they,
The Winds so friendly, and the Seas so tame,
From the Isle of Wight She unto Portsmouth came;
Now Bonsires warm the Air, Healths drench the Earth,
Portsmouth the Center, and the Stage of Mirth;
Some use their Tongues, and speak their Mirth in Fancies,
Others their Feet, and tread their Joys in Dances;
All things do smile, and do conspire outright
To mingle Royal Greatness with Delight:
The Month is May, and the dressed Spring does stand
In all her Pride to welcome Her to Land;
Here Youth and Love do Pomp and Honor greet,
And Peace and Safety walk in every Street;
And Heaven, the more his Blessings to unfold,
Does hail down Pearls, and rains down riguous Gold.
This was the Place where first His MAJESTY
His Matchless Spouse Queen KATHARINE did see;
For though 'twas Cornwall to the QVEEN did bring
The happy sight of ENGLAND, yet the KING
(But when Her Picture did present the same)
Never saw His QVEEN till She to Portsmouth came.
TO express the State and Glory of this Day,
When eyes did eyes, and souls did souls survey,
When Nobles strove who should exceed each other,
And Pomp, and Joy, to conquer one another,
Would be too large a Subject to engage
The narrow Compass of so short a Page.
From hence these Royal Consorts did transfer
Their Sacred Persons unto Winchester;
Here they are are new united, by a blessed
And solemn Marriage; here the KING possessed
Earth pure as Heaven, and stained with no Alloy,
Braganzaes Glory, and Terrezaes Joy.
From these United Loves, may the Flames rise
Pure, and Unwaving, till they touch the Skies:
May they new Blessings to this Land invite,
And fill the World with their United Light;
May their Loves be a Sacrifice t'attone
Their Peoples Rage, and make their Hearts but one;
May the Church flourish in her Truth and Train,
And be as White as Innocence again;
May those who scorned us in our late Distress,
Now fear, and wonder at our Happiness;
Whiles every Street resounds, and every Green,
GOD Save the KING, GOD long preserve our QUEEN.
London, Printed for C. Wildeberh at the Globe in St. Katharines, and John
Ruddiard at the Unicorn in Cornhill, under the Royal Exchange. 1662.


