AN ELEGY Upon the Death of that Renowned PRINCE RUPERT. Who Departed this Life
on Wednesday, November. 29. 1682.
30. Nov. 1682
AH! Cruel Death, what have thou lately done?
Robbed Us of Him who all Men's Hearts had won;
That Bud of Honor, and Our King's Delight,
Who for God's Cause by Sea and Land did Fight,
To Vind^cate a Prince too much abused,
Exiled from His Due Right, and strangely used
By Rebel-Subjects, but at last was He
Restored again by Heavens Great Deity:
And now He Is safely settled in His Throne,
'Twas Thy Desire He should Enjoy His Own;
Whom Loyal Subjects Honor and Obey,
Thy Soul (Great RVPERT) Posted is away:
I fear thy Counsel may be wanted here,
Who to this Nation was a Loyal Peer,
That Heaven from Foreign parts did hither send
To be Religious, and Great Charles his Friend.
Thy actions for Our King were still untainted,
For things less noble, Rome some Men have Sainted.
But if thy Wisdom here we chance to miss,
This Comforts us, thy Soul Lives now in Bliss;
Triumphant Death, by uncontrolled Arrest,
Did snatch thee hence to make thee ever Blessed.
Then why should we at Deaths surprise repine?
What is our Loss, Advantage is of thine:
At thy blessed Birth kind aspects did appear,
By Kings and Peasants both, beloved here.
But now grim Death has seized thee as a Prey,
Instead of Down, thou now must lie in Clay;
Thou must accept what Mortals all must have,
Thine Honor yet will blossom in the Grave:
When many Years thou have been dead and gone,
The World will say thou were a Princely one,
Scarce Equalized, and out vy'd by none.
What Hero ever yet adventured more.
Than thou, for Charles his right, on Strand Shore?
Or who more freely could have lost his breath
For Englands good, than he whose murmuring breath
Has left his Vitals, while his Soul is fled
To Heaven above, through Earth his fame is spread.
Who now is gone his Carrols for to sing
Before Jehvoah, our Eternal King.
Then since a Flood of tears cannot prevail
Him to Retrieve, whom Death does once assail,
Nor add one Minutes time to his last breath,
That now is Conquered by all-conquering Death,
It Is but in vain to Mourn, a sin to grieve,
None can live longer than God gives him leave;
The old, the young, the strong, the weak must go,
When Death does call to the dark Cell below.
Thrice blessed is he who at the Judgement-day
Possess those Joys that never shall decay.
And since thy loyalty made thee Renowned,
In Heaven I hope thy actions will be Crowned;
Whose active mind, in these our latter days,
Recorded is, and has entailed thy praise:
When thy poor Bones are turned into dust,
How will thou flourish then amongst the Just?
And when thou shall appear at Judgement-bar,
Where Saints and Sinners all adjudged are,
Gods Everlasting Peace remain with thee,
And thus I end my Mournful Elegy.
The Epitaph.
HEre lies a Prince never to be forgot,
Yet could not escape what every Mortal's Lot;
Whose Actions well might Crowned be with Bays,
But Death has put a period to his Days;
And though his Body must return to Dust,
I hope his Soul does dwell amongst the Just.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Rainbow, near St. Andrews Church, in Holbourn,
1682.


