MEMENTO MORI

AN ELEGY On the Right Honorable William Earl of Pembrook Who deceased on the
29th, of August, 1683.
What are the Glories that by Fame acrue
What are the Praises that to Virtues due?
Which Mortals do enjoy, till't pleases Death,
To Damm the Channel, of enlivning Breath.
Just as the winged Attoms fly with light,
So they do fall when that approaches Night.
So when grim Death our Vitals does invade,
We turn to Dust; our former Deeds will fade.
The Censure of the living is but hard,
And Hero' of their due of times debarred
Posterity does seldom rightly Deem,
And Envy always lessens the Esteem,
That we for Generous Spirits ought to have,
When It pleases Fate to lay them in the Grave.
But what do I hear? brave Pembrook's Dead,
And from its Mansion, his great Soul is fled.
Yet 'Spight of Death, his Name shall never Dye*
Whilst others sink his shall surmount the Sky,
Ah! Cruel Death, what made thee thus Surprise
Him who was Loyal, Noble, Just and Wise,
Him who was Valiant, Liberal, and Good,
Whose Bounty did extend to all the stood
In need; and those (...)
He timely Succor (...)
Yet these his Vrtues, Envy sought to Raize.
Stirred up Detraction, to defeat his Praise:
Pernicious Brood that does infect our Soil,
And has engendered homebred Strife, and Toil.
Who are continually with Vipers fed,
To sting the Living, and devour the Dead.
Yet spite of their Attempts, great Pembrook's Name
Shall eternized be, by truer Fame.
Great Souls they all partake of what s Sublime,
And though some Actions tainted be with Slime
Yet this does not retard their course at last,
They stem the Tide, overcome the threatening blast;
Great Pembrook's Course isended, and now he,
A Hero is, to all Eternity.
His Memory will last, for from his Dust;
The Epithet will rise, of Wise and Just.
EPITAPH.
Within this Vrn enclosed lies,
Mortal remains of Just and Wise:
His better part has taken flight,
And Hope abides, where is no more Night,
He who a Tear denies,
H^^^ little pity, h^^^^^d Eyes
LONDON Printed By ^. Mallet. 1683.


