Great BRITAINS Beauty; OR, LONDONS Delight.
Being a POEM, in the Commendation of the Famous Incomparable CITY of LONDON,
and the Royal Exchange, as they now stand Rebuilt, in most Magnificent Splendour
and Beauty, to our Nations Honor, and to the exceeding Joy and Comfort of
King, Kingdom and City.
Written by GEORGE ELIOTT, Gent.
Great Britain smiles, to see Fair London Rise,
With Famous Buildings mounted to the Skies.

GO View Earth's Globe, take Eagles wings and fly,
Search every Kingdom underneath the Sky;
The great Imperial Seats of this vast round,
Whether above or underneath the ground;
Survey each City on Earths mighty Ball,
Her Metropolitans, yea, view them all.
Ascend the Clouds, ride on the wings o'th Wind;
Search every Corner of the World to find
A City standing on the Ground, which can
Compare with Britains Metropolitan.
Europe's amazed, All Christendsme admires as London.
the Whole World does admire,
That LONDON which so late was burnt with Fire,
In so short space, should with such splendour rise,
As all the Cities underneath the Skies
Are quite eclipsed; Their Glory and Renown,
Now London's risen, quite does tumble down.
Go view each Street, and stand amazed to see,
With what fair Fabrics they adorned be;
Each House a Palace, and may entertain
A KING in State, with all his Noble Train.
Her stately Structures causes admiration
To every Empire, Kingdom, I Will, and Nation
Under the Cope of Heaven; Every Land
Rings forth thy praise, and does amazed stand,
To see that LONDON, which so late was hurled
Into a Chaos of the Western World,
Should be Metropolis: Great Britains I Will
Stands on Tiptoes with a pleasant smile,
To see fair London ( Phoenix like) to rise
Out of her Ashes, up into the Skies.
The stateliest Structure, The Royal Exchange.
and the goodliest round
That e're was built, or stood upon the ground,
Within the Bowels of fair London stands;
A Mighty KING did with his Sacred Hands The King laid the first Cornerstone.

Lay the Chief Cornerstone; His Royal Brother
With his Own Hands did also lay another.
French, Spanish, Dutch, the Noble Tuscanite,
The Portugal, the Mighty Muscovite,
The Swede, the Dane, and from all Christendom
Which from beyond Sea to our CITY come,
Stands gazing on it with delighted Eyes,
Says, It Is the stateliest Structure under Skies;
Takes Pen in hand, writes in the Commendation
Of Englands KING, the CITY, and the NATION.
So sweet a Soil, Londons Pleasant Situation.
and pleasant Plot of ground,
In all this Mighty I Will cannot be found,
To build so great a City on; The Nile,
If that it ran through Britains famous I Will,
'Twould not be valued. Such a Stream does run
By Lovely London, Thames a Famous River.
as under the Sun
There Is not the like: For on that River floats,
Upon account, at least Seven Thousand Boats.
Gold, Silver, Pearl, Wine, Oil, and what we lack,
Comes to our CITY swimming on its Back.
But that which makes her Name through Earth to Ring, London the Kings Chamber,
so called by Ontlandish Writers.

She is the Chamber to our Sovereign KING:
The Place in which the Parliament does sir,
For to determine things most requisite;
In it all Causes at the Law are tried,
In it the Nobles of the Land abide. The Terms.

The Worlds Chief Mart, Rich Christendoms Rare Inn,
Which from all Cities does the Garland win:
She now has stood almost Three Thousand Years, London an ancient City.

As by the best Chronologers appears.
But now, Good Reader, I will give account,
To what vast Number all those Souls amount, See Howell in his Description of
London.

That breath therein, Mr. James Howell says,
Thirty years since, in good King Charles his days,
The King commands a Scrutiny to make,
And that the Mayor a strict account should take They took an occasion thereby
to count all under the Mayors Command.

Of all the Catholics: that he might know
How to suppress them, fore they headstrong grow;
And thereupon they took a just account
Of all in general, there did surmount,
Seven hundred Thousand, But what are those,
To that vast Number now she does enclose 700000 under the Mayors Command.

In her wide Womb? For she does comprehend
Full Fifteen hundred Thousand, which do spend
Their days therein. But for her Situation,
Her wholesome Air, her fast and firm foundation, London does contain in her
1500000.

Her Temples, Schools, her Colleges and Halls,
Her Inns of Courts, and her Hospitals,
Her Laws, her Manners, and her Fabrics Fair,
Her Sober Senators, and prudent Mayor:
Her wise Inhabitants, her Grave Divines;
There Is not a City on which Sun now shines;
No not in Europe, one that I can tell,
May with our City stand in parallel.
Nor on Earths Globe, is there a City can
Compare to Britains Metropolitan.
And now, O London, I have let thee see,
There Is not a City can compare to thee
On Earths Circumference: Give God the praise,
And to his Glory ever spend thy days;
Honor thy KING, and humbly him obey, A Caution to the City.

And to the GOD of Heaven ever pray,
That on his Head the Royal Crown may stand,
And the Great Scepter of this Famous Land
May still be swaid by Him that now does Reign,
And by his Seed, till Shilo come again.
Forsake all Sin, and to Gods Glory spend
Thy precious Time; That Heaven may not send
Such Dreadful Judgments, but Thee ever bless
Above all Cities on Earths Universe.
Then let thy Foes say what they will or can,
Thou Wilt be the. Worlds Chief Metropolitan.
With Allowance.

London, Printed for E. Horton, 1671.


