AN ELEGY UPON Edward Fitz-Harris, Executed at Tyburn for High Treason upon
Friday, July 1. 1681.
UNhappy Man! the Nations scorn and hate,
How shall I do thy Death to deplorate?
(...) Tears are due to such a Tragedy,
Who lived unlov'd, must needs unpitied dye;
Upon that Soil where naught but Thorns will grow,
In vain the Heavens their baulmy Dews bestow,
Had thy Crimes been of a less bloody hue,
Humanity would have made something due,
A thing that is soft in all but such as you;
But where the Widows and the Orphans Tears,
Three Kingdoms Misery for many years
Entailed upon them and the Sacred Blood
Of a Great Prince, so merciful and good,
Could no Relentings find, Humanity
It self is forfeit, You deserved to dye:
Such Blood we can compassionate no more
The loss of, than our own diseased Store,
When in the Crisis of a Plurisie
Blood must be spilt, or we our selves must dye;
How many Mischiefs ran in every Vein,
That did that hateful Blood of thine contain:
Whose Circulations still did ebb and flow
With Plots and Stratagems, to overthrow
Thy Country's Peace; whose Pulse did nothing beat
But Plots and Treasons, and whose Native heat
Inflamed by a Popish Devilish Zeal,
Raged with a Calenture as hot as Hell.
Thou that have been the Tennis-Ball of State,
Bandy'd betwixt the Powers and thy Fate,
So for a time suspended, Vengeance now
(Impatient grown) has given the fatal Blow,
That to the cursed Designs thou did intend
Against these Kingdoms puts a final End:
Now it is too late to blind us any more
With feigned Discov'ries, as thou did before;
To flatter Mercy with a Tale, and then
True Papist-like, unsay the same again.
What e're it was, thou ought to let us know
(...) by an Eternal Silence now;
Yet Heaven knows all, and will in time reveal
These Depths of Treachery, which to conceal,
Rome by her Damned Oaths, and Idle Frights,
Obliges her Deluded Proselites.
But stay, Is there no Room for Charity
In such a Case as this? Papists deny
It us, and by uncharitable Votes
Next damn our Souls, when they have cut our throats.
The Laws of our Religion us inclines
TO assume more soft and charitable minds;
And when that Justice once has had its due,
We can both hope their good, and pity too.
Poor Dying Ma^factors; we can pray
For them while there is life; and hope all may
Be well after their Death, especially
Where any Sorrow for their Guilt w'espy;
Where any shows of true Repentance are,
Our Church has charitably taken care
To purge each Souls by Absolution,
Before their Merited Execution:
Our Justice (not invenomed with Spite
Or Malice) grants a charitable-right
To such Offenders, that their Souls may have
A place in Heaven, whose Bodies want a Grave,
Although we make no Traitors Martyrs, we
Allow them Happiness in Charity,
Where they are truly Penitent, Confession
Serves sometimes here to blot out a Transgression,
And to obtain a Pardon, but when here
It is denied, it may be gotten there
Where Pity springs, where boundless Mercies flow,
We wish, and hope it may be his Case now.
London, Printed for Thomas Snowden, An. 1681.


