THE ATHEIST ANSWERED, AND HIS ERROR CONFUTED
By George Elliot, Author of Gods Warning-Piece to London.
Each Spire of Grass, and every silly Fly,
Bias us take heed how we a God deny;
This whole Creation with a sweet conseat,
Proclaim a Being that is Omnipotent.

DEny a God!? blind Athiest cast thine Eye
Up to the Sun, View well the Starry Sky,
Those glittering Orbs, how they in Order stand,
Each in his place, since Heavens mighty hand,
First set them there; See how the watery Cloud
Flies swiftly over thy Head, proclaiming loud,
Its Makers praise: there is not one drop does fall
Till God bids go, and then he numbers all
That comes from thence, yea Heavens Eye does look
On every single Drop: Contrary to the Nature of the Element.
in Gods great Book
It is Recorded: and when they have done,
How swift to other Regions they do run?
For to refresh the dry and parchy Ground,
And thus they fly about this mighty Round,
For not a Minute will they longer stay,
In any place when God bids come away,
What thing can make it self before it be?
That is impossible, it is only he
Who nere beginning had that does and can
(Whose fist does Fathom Heaven with a Span) Mark tris.

Create all things; can that a being give?
Unto it self? or make another Live?
That's void of life it self? O fools and blind!
What frantic Folly does possess your mind?
Wholy besotted? Nothing can make it self.
void of common sense?
To let a Beast have the pre-eminence
Above a Man: by what way does the Light?
Divide it self? how comes the day and Night?
Such order for to keep? the Sun to Rise?
At his appointed time? in one day flies
About this mighty Globe, can any stay,
His fiery Chariot? who dare in his way,
Vouchsafe to stand? with what Majestique Ire?
(This Lamp of Lights, the Element of fire?)
Views all the Heathen World? and on their face
Does set a Brand, and stamps a foul disgrace
On every Athiest, who does God deny;
To let us see how Heaven does defy
That sin Athiesticall. Observe the Snow,
How soft it falls: and how the winds do blow
At Gods command, and when he faith be still
They cease their rage, most humbly to his Will
They do submit: for all things him obey,
He speaks the word, and who dare say him nay?
Can any stop the Tide? how does it keep
Its constant custom when we are asleep?
So does the Sun, Moon, Stars, and every thing
Which from the Bowels of the Earth does Spring,
As Corn and Grass: Observe this and believe.
without our care does grow,
The Heavens over our heads, all things below
Cries our there is a God; this mighty round
On which we live and die, the very Ground
VVhereoe we tread, proclaims a God, yea all
That live and move on this vast massy Ball
With joint consent their Makers praise does sing.
(It is absurd to think that any thing,
Can make it self:) the Lilly and the Rose,
One to the Eye the other to the Nose
Gives sweet content: there is not the smallest Clod
We trample on: but proves there is a God.
What fragrant Flowers does the earth produce?
And all things necessary for our use?
Can it take care for us? or know what need
We have of things? or how can fruit proceed
From out its Bowels without Providence?
That man must needs be void of common Sense,
As stupid as a Stone, to think it can
By its own Power for the use of Man
Produce all things, and wisely to provide
For Man and Beast. And in each order guide
Each Species in its kind: how can a Clod?
(Without the Blessing of Almighty God
Wh is Omnipotent) have any power?
Unto a Spire of Grass, or smallest Flower
To give a being? no that cannot be,
It is impossible, there is none but he,
Who with a word did out of nothing call
This mighty Round, Earths vast and Massy Ball
The goodly Golden Canopy the Skies
With every Fowl that under Heaven flies.
Who in the twinkling of an Eye can turn
Earth into nothing: in a moment burn
The Heavens over our Heads, who with a frown
Can pull the Pillars of Earths Fabric down
Unhinge the Heavens, (and the lowest Hell
Wherein the Devils and the Damned dwell)
In far less space than the twinkling of an Eye Gods infinite Power.

Can make those fierce, unruly Spirits lie
As dead as any Stone. It Is by his Power
And his alone, that every fragrant Flower
Has its peculiar Scent, that bread does give
Such strength to Man, so that he cannot live
Without it long; that Clothes do keep us warm,
Lest that the Cold should do our Bodies harm*
What care can Nature take? can she provide?
For all things living? or how can she Guide
This Great Creation? and in Order keep
All this vast Bulk? and when we be asleep
Does she watch over us? or can she defend
In time of danger? on a sudden send?
A speedy help? that is void of Life and Sense?
It is in vain to expect Providence
From such a one: did she make Earth to hang
'Ith open Air? when all the Angels Sang
Aloud for Joy, and clapped their Heavenly Wings,
To see how God in order placed all things
Wherein they keep: and in that order stand,
E're since that day that Heavens mighty hand
First placed them there: with what equality,
Both Sexes in all things produced be,
Men, Beasts, and Birds, and every kind of thing, This utterly convinces the
Athiest, for by Nature it is impossible.

Which do by Carnal Copulation bring
Their Young ones forth: there is not any lack
Of Male or Female, Nature unto wrrck
Long before this World run. (It is not she,
That can appoint what every thing shall be,
When in the Womb its put) if she were left
To Guide her self, she soon would be bereft
Of all her Children: She Would not long remain,
But to a Chaos quickly turn again.
How many thousands with their Lips confess The practical Atheist.

The being of a God? who neverless
Are perfect Athiests? for they him deny
(As well as those who openly defy
Their Great Creator) for to wish a Curse
Upon our selves, how can the Devil worse
Deprive us of all hopes? for how can we?
At that Great Day expect to Saved be?
Pray to be Damned? and in this time of Grace, That execrable Oath.

Defy Salvation, and in Heavens Face
In Scorn to Spit? is such a horrid Sin,
(Though in this Age too many live therein)
The Devils dare not own: they would be glad
That any gracious prossers might be had
Whereby they might be Saved, though all in vain. Against Blasphemy.

Nor can we Read the Devi's do blaspheme
Gods Holy Name: or any where deny,
Their Great Creator, but does give the Lie
To every Athiest: for they fear and quake
Like Aspen Leaves: with horrid tremblings shake
And do believe a God: when on a Flame,
He sets this World: then his most Holy Name
Will be admired, every Athiest then
Unto his praise will freely say Amen.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by E. (...) for for Thomas (...) Book Seller (...)


