AN ELEGY ON THE TRULY HONORABLE, AND MOST VIRTUOUS, CHARITABLE, and PIOUS
LADY, Countess of Devonshire, Who lately Departed this Life, being a Hundred
and odd Years of Age, whose Corpse now Lies in Deserved State in Holbourn.
ARe all the Poets Dumb? And is there Note
Whose Tears may fill our empty Helicon?
So as to fix a Never-dying Verse
On Pious Devonshires deserving Hearse.
Had She been only that which now adays
Is thought enough for a Great Madams Praise,
Handsome, Brisk, Aerie, Complaisant and Gay,
Less Zealous at a Sermon than a Play;
Been Painted or Perfumed with Ambergreece,
And skilled in naught but Modes and Point-Ve^^,
She would have had the Dablery of the Quill
VVhine, and the Town with vain App^^^^^ fill;
But Her Perfection (like the Suns bright Rays)
Dazells their Sight, and Withers their Sto^^ Bays
Whose Prostituted Pen's for sordid Hire,
Dawb glorious Vice, and from Apollo's Quire
Filch Sacred Raptures, which profanely they
Upon the Shrine of every Wanton Lay.
We scorn to bath her Corpse with a forced Tear,
Nor shall her Train borrow the Blacks they wear.
Their Vulgar Spice and Gums too trivial be,
Ours is a Theme of Truth, not Poetry.
She was a Lady 'bove the Common strain,
In whom all Virtues did United Reign;
By Birth derived from the Noblest Springs,
And Godmother unto the best of Kings.
Her Dawning Beams so glorious did appear,
They Darted Love and Wonder every where;
Yet Her Ripe Years surpassed in inward Grace
The charming Beauties of Her Youthful Face*
Though Streams of Grandeur flowed in her high Blood,
She before Great, preferred the Name of Good.
Knowledge that often Puffs a spungy Crest,
Gave her the Treasure of a lowly Breast.
Wisdom that once abused turns Vanity,
Taught Her a holy Meek Simplicity.
Rubes that Cloth the Brow with Proud disdain,
Her Charity Improved for endless Gain*
How Liberal were Her Alms! which yet she did
In secret, wishing still they might be hid;
And seemed in Publick-view, ashamed more
For to Relieve, than some t'oppress the Poor:
Man's Good, Gods Glory, was her highest pitch,
True Knowledge made her Wise, that Wisdom Rich;
To say sh's now an Angel is scarce more
Praise than she had, for she seemed such before.
Her lie so Straight, it shames the Popish square
Prescribed in Rules of saint Bridget or Clare;
Whilst Pilgrimageing here, she stood possessed
Of Heaven in part, For her Rich furnished Breast
Was a fair Temple, and her heart a shrine,
So Purged, that she appeared All Divine;
Strictly Religious, of firm loyalty,
In discource Pleasant, without vanity;
Kind to her Servants; to Relations Dear,
To nothing but Her Self or sin severe;
To a good old Age she Lived, and every how'r
Into her Lamp fresh Oil of Grace did pour;
At length death Welcome summons having spied,
she Smiled her self into a Corpse, and Died,
The Jewel snatched to Bliss, below is set
In Solemn state the abondon'd Caskinet,
To show how all things Fade, and what small trust
We owe this World, Composed of Fleeting dust,
Where Beauty, Honor, Riches, all we have,
Are Plundered from us by the insatiate Grave.
Ladies! when by her Marble Tomb you pass
Let it is Reflection be your Looking-glass
Where Youth, may learn to Live and Age to Dye,
Your Rule's above, but your Example nigh.
This Heav'n-fled Saint has scor'd both the way,
Heaven sets not Earth such Coppies every day.
Her Vertves be your Guide they lie before ye,
So shall you ad more honor to her story,
And Gain your selves A Crown her Crown more Glory.
FINIS.

