AN ELEGY Upon the much lamented Death of the most Reverend Divine HENRY
WILKINSON, D. D. Late CANNON of CHRIST-CHVRCH in OXFORD; and since Preacher of
the Gospel in London, who dyed the 5th of June, 1675.
Let Us haste to Jordan's banks, from whence not far,
Elijah (mounted in his fiery Carr
Drawn by swift Seraphime) does cut his way
Through Airy Fiery Regions, without stay
At the Olympic houses; till he comes
Unto the Pearly Gates, and A^^re Rooms
Prepared for him by the King of Kings,
Where to the Lamb he Hallelujah sings.
But let us come down again to Jordan's brook,
And while he climbs, on our Elijah look:
And when our sorrows want a briny Tear,
Our Eyes may now take in fresh water there:
Let them upon a Sea of Tears hoyse sail,
And let them leak, and drown too; let a gale
Of Sighs fill our Soul's wings, and make them soar
After this Saint, unto his Heavenly shore.
Methinks I hear the Quire of Angels cry,
Welcome blessed Soul unto our company
Innumerable; Just Spirits, (every one
Made perfect,) cry, Make room for Wilkinson.
Ash, Bridge, Pearce, Caryl, Whitaker, and Strong,
Vines, Venning, Calamy, and Love (among
The Martyrs) Jenaway, congratulate
Their Benjamin, approaching Heaven's gate.
Methinks I see them circling round the Throne,
Spectators, while Jehovah's hand does crown
This Victor with triumphant bays of Glory,
Ensur'd to him on Earth in Scripture-story.
Does not his Treble Soul Heaven's Quire advance,
By adding a new Song, whilst with a glance
He takes a prospect of his acted Scene;
On this World's Theater, his Soul again
Re-acts, and Comments on his ended days,
(To us a Text) and now admires the rays
Of Grace, Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, Power, and Love,
Commenced here, there perfected by Jove.
The time is ended of the dark Eclipse,
Now, now, he clearly sees the Apocalypse,
One minute now, of Knowledge gives him more
In Mysteries, than scores of years before.
But where now am I gone! return my Muse,
Come view his life, his Enochisme peruse.
Has he not for his Lord spent, and been spent?
Come see in every place his Monument.
Oxford! Produce thy high prized Pearls, thy Gold,
(Such as the Indies, Guiny, never told)
Which from Heaven's Factory, our Merchant brought
And found for thee before 'twas by thee sought.
Athens should not have Shipped him from her Port,
Nor the Cathedral from that Royal Fort,
Which he so stoutly Manned, against the attack
Of Romish Monsters while he drove them back.
London! Does not thy Walls yet Echo from
His Trumpet? Has not his Alarm come
Into thy Soul? Does not this Aaron's Bell
Yet ring within thy Ears? Let Spittles Cell
Bear witness of his warning piece; he fired
Upon our Lusts, which guilt and wrath acquired.
Can we forget his winged Soul, that went
After, when his loud cries to Heaven were sent?
As if he longed to know what Heaven decreed,
That he the News might bring to Jacob's Seed.
Cannot the Watch-Towers where the Prophet stood,
Bear witness of that over flowing flood
Of wrath (from the Apocalypse of John
By him foretold) to come on Albion?
How did his working Heart, in every word
Breathe out itself? How did the Spirit's Sword
(Brandished in his skilful hand) help on
Sin, Satan's, Death's last Execution?
He Preached, as if immediately from God
He came; he Prayed as if in's presence stood.
A David's Zeal, a Moses Meekness, Job's
Still Patience, his Lord Christ Royal robes
Of Holiness, did splendidly array
This glorious Saint, sit for his Wedding day;
What shall I say! him shall I dare to call
Henry the First for his Memorial.

