The Extravagant YOUTH.
OR, An Emblem of PRODIGALITY.
Though he was stout, he cannot get out,
in Trouble he will remain
Young Men be wise, your Freedom prize,
bad Company refrain.
To the Tune of, King Iames'sJigg; Or, The Country Farmer.


COme listen a while and I will relate
My sad and most dismal deplorable state,
For now I am in a most woeful case,
My running this wild and extravagent race:
When Silks and Sattins did me adorn,
I said that I was most Nobly Born,
Good Counsel I slighted, and held it in scorn,
But now here behold how I stick in the Horn.
I gave my self over to every Vice,
As Courting, and sporting with Cards and Dice
I thought in my heart it would never be day,
While I was attired in rich array:
With Boon Companions I did Trade,
They counted me a Iocular Blade,
But now all my Glory is clearly decayed,
And into the Horn my self have betrayed.
I once kept my Gelding abroad to Ride,
My Hat and my feather, and Sword by my side,
As long as my Pocket was lined with Gold,
In pleasure I swam, and abroad I roul'd:
But now no longer can I reign,
In sorrowful note I here do complain,
And stick in the Horn where I still must remain,
And cannot get out if i would never so fain.
My Father he went in a Threadbare Coat,
And on his old Angels was wont to dote;
Which he had obtained by Usury,
And now I have spent it as merrily:
I called for Wine like a Hector stout,
My Golden Guinnies did fly about,
I Would Revel and Rant, and i would keep a fine rout,
But now I am in where I cannot get out.
I never would take any thought or care,
I said that I was my old Fathers Heir,
My Festival Fellows was Roisterous Boys,
We lived in delights with a thousand joys:
While we in Splendour did abound,
Methoughts the world went merrily round,
But since friends and fortune together has frownd
I stick in the Horn, where I still may be found.
My Father gave me all his freehold Land,
And then at my Courtesy he would stand,
O then thought I, thy Silver shall not rust,
I Will make it to fly like the Summers Dust:
Then did I keep my Prancing Naggs,
Till I had emptied his Golden Bags,
My Silks flourisht like to a Navy of Flags,
But now they are worn and torn to Rags.
I Mortgaged and sold, and I spent so fast,
The Miser my father was vert at last,
To think that I squandered away such sums,
He scratcht his ears, and he knawed his thumbs,
His whole Estate was quite decayed,
By those vile Projects which I have played,
Thus I have quite ruined the Usurers trade,
And I in the Horn am a sorrowful Blade.
Now here an Example I must remain,
My freedom I never expect again,
Young Gallants be warned, such ruin shun,
Which has both my father and I undone:
All comforts now from us are flown,
My Father in Bedlam makes his moan,
And I in the Counter a Prisoner thrown,
This Horn is a Figure by which it is known.
FINIS.

