MEMENTO MORI

outline of tombstone, which surrounds text, often including depictions of
emblems of Death
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of Mr. WILLIAM LILLY The Astrologer.

OUR Prophet's gone: No longer may our Ears
Be charmed with Music of the harmonious Spheres.
Let Sun and Moon withdraw, leave gloomy Night
To show their Nuncio's Fate, who gave more Light
To the erring World, than all the feeble Rays
Of Sun or Moon; taught us to know those Days
Bright Titan makes; followed the hasty Sun
Through all his Circuits; knew the unconstant Moon,
And more unconstant Ebbings of the Flood,
And what is most uncertain, the factious Brood,
Flowing in civil Broils; by the Heavens could date
The Flux and Reflux of our dubious State.
He saw the Eclipse of Sun, and change of Moon:
He saw, but seeing would not shun his own.
Eclipsed he was, that he might shine more bright,
And only changed to give a fuller Light.
He having viewed the Sky, and glorious Train
Of gilded Stars, scorned longer to remain
In earthly Prisons. Could he a Village love,
Whom the twelve Houses waited for above?
The grateful Stars a heavenly Mansion gave
TO his heavenly Soul, nor could he be a Slave
To mortal Passions, whose immortal Mind,
Whilst here on Earth, was not to Earth confined.
He must be gone: The Stars had so decreed,
As he of them, so they of him had need.
This Message 'twas the blazing Comet brought,
I saw the palefac'd Star, and seeing thought
(For we could guess; but only Lilly know)
It did some glorious Hero's Fall foreshow.
A Hero's fallen, whose death more than a War
Or Fire, deserved a Comet. The obsequious Stars
Could do no less than his sad Fate unfold,
Who had their Risings, and their Settings told.
Some thought a Plague, and some a Famine near,
Some Wars from France, some Fires at home did fear.
Nor did they fear too much, scarce kinder Fate.
But Plague of Plagues befell the unhappy State,
When Lilly died. Now Swords may safely come
From France or Rome, Fanatics plot at home;
Now an unseen and unexpected Hand,
By guidance of ill Stars, may hurt our Land.
Unsafe, because Secure, there is none to show
How England may avert the fatal Blow.
He Is dead, whose Death the weeping Clouds deplore:
I wish we did not ow to him that Shower,
Which long expected was, and might have still
Expected been, had not our Nation's ill
Drawn from the Heavens a Sympathetick Tear.
England has cause a second Drought to fear;
We have no second Lilly, who may die,
And by his Death may make the Heavens cry.
Then let your Annals, Coley, want this day,
Think every Year, Leap-Year, or if it must stay,
Cloth it in Black, let a sad Note stand by,
And stigmatize it to Posterity.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Obadiah Blagrave, at the Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard,
near the little North Door. 1681. July 11


