AN ELEGY Upon the DEATH of TWO Eminent Ministers of the Gospel Mr. PLEDGER and
Mr. WELLS.
Who Both Departed this Life on the Lords Day June the 18th. 1676. The First of
them having Preached Twice, and Administered the Lords Supper the very day of
His Dissolution.
WHAT sudden stroke Commands an Elegy,
When all the Muses Sacred Wells are dry?
Now Tyrant-Sol destroys those Fruits of Earth,
Where to his milder Beams of late gave Birth;
When each Spring fears a Bankrupt to become,
And Murmuring Rivers their own Thirst bemoan;
When Parching Heats have brought that Woe to pass,
I Will make your Earth as Iron, your Heaven as Brass;
Hard as the Adamants Compacted Parts,
Or (what are yet less soft,) our stubborn Hearts;
In such a Drought what Chemist can Extract
That Quintessence of Tears our Griefs Exact,
For such a Loss! Two Good-Men in one day
By Deaths surprising Hand thus snatched away.
Devouring Death! Thy Sithe too sharp is grown;
Such Precious Flowers should not so soon be mown:
Forbear a little longer! Spare, oh spare!
Kill not by Couples! Murder not a Pair!
Why Both? What? Does the All-consuming Tomb
Desire Twins in its Insatiate Womb;
Or would thou make a Miracle Appear
Two Suns Eclipsed in one Hemisphere.
Look up (their Life's above) and see where stands
Their vital Glass, not emptied of its Sands.
But I, in vain Entreat, in vain Accuse,
What Is Heavens Will, it is sinful to refuse;
It Is the just Doom of fallen Humanity,
And not more Natural to be Born then dye;
And now let us Reflect, what can be said
By living Mortals of the Immortal Dead,
May they not smile at the vain Tears we shed?
Sure it is Prepost'rous, we that stay behind
In lingering Expectation of the Wind,
Should Grieve for those are past this Straight before,
And now have safely Reached the blissful Shore,
Thrice Happy Souls! who are to Sail no more.
It is not then on their Behalfs we mourn,
But on our own, That Lamentable storm
Of Sighs and Groans, whilst overflowing Eyes
Dissolve their yielding Balls to Deluges;
And doleful Sobbings with Heartbreaking sound,
Wait their bewailed Bodies to the Ground.
All this does but Express the Love we bear,
And what we ought from their Remove to fear,
For it is a Judgment when the Righteous part,
And Men are stupid, not to lay't to heart.
Ah Pious Souls! which shall we first Admire,
Since Both were equal Lamps of Heavenly Fire,
Burning and Shining Lights, whose Actions wrought
On Hearts, and Jointly with their Doctrines taught;
For well they know Religion did not dwell
In Garbs or Phrases, but in Living well;
Two Painful Laborers, Powerful Preachers both,
Strangers to Covetousness, Pride and Sloth,
No Outside Men, or zealous but in Talk,
But such as in one constant Orb did walk
Of solid Piety, whose Care was shown
For their Flocks good as much as for their own;
And with unwearied Pains like Tapers Bright,
Consumed themselves to Bless others with Light,
Would you see Heathen Chief-Good Christend, and
Ethics serve under Sacred Writs Command;
Their School-points Justly now become our own,
Made Denizens in our Religion
'Twas here, and every Moral Virtue hence
Chose a new Genus, and new Difference,
They found those Humane Lustres had before
But Twinckled in Raw Indigested Oar
Dispersed and Branched in Speculative Veins
Through all the Southern School-mens Sunburned Brains
And therefore Coined them into Practick pence,
Now Current through all Marts of Conscience.
They did design (still their Example Strives)
To Vest these in their Rights unto our Lives;
To Disei pline our Converse, work us That
Which Set faced Monks make but Religious Chat;
Nor know we how their Praises to Divide,
Who both beyond all-Praise, Praiseworthy Died.
To The last in their Dear Masters work Employed.
The Reverend Pledger, Twice that day had Preached
On which his Soul that Longed for Haven Reached.
That Active Soul as Large a one as ere
Submitted to Inform a Body here,
High as the place in Bliss he was to have,
Yet still as Low and Humble as his Grave.
Twice with his Lord that day he had Repast
First Here, But that not Satisfying's Taste
For a Full Meal to Heaven wards did have
And being Spent, (not weary) Sweetly Slept,
In those Almighty Arms, so long had kept
Him Safe, That wondrous Glory to Declare
Wherein he now Enjoys an End^^ss share;
Nor did good Wells less nobly quit the Stage
From the Turmoils of an Ensnaring Age,
For with as much true Zeal and Piety,
He always Lived as other Saints do Dye;
Where, like some Holy Sacrifice, to Expire
A Fever Burns him, but Love Lights the Fire.
Go Happy Pair! May your Immortal State
Invite our Grosser Souls to Imitate.
In The Book of Life your Names Recorded stand
Engraven by your Great Redeemers Hand
Verses are Vain, your Memory's more safe
For Cherubims shall Write your Epitaph,
Which in Mosaic Work with Diamonds Bright
Is Drawn in Heaven, and Read by its own Light.
FINIS
LONDON, Printed for B. H. 1676.


