MEMENTO MORI:

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text,
surmounted by a bishop's miter
AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH of that Worthy PRELATE, The Right Reverend Father in
God, Dr. JOHN LAKE, Late Lord Bishop of Chichester, (One of the Seven Bishops
who were Prisoners in the Tower) who departed this Life on Friday the 30th. of
August 1689.
Peace Mourning Friend! forbear to weep for him
Who is saluted with the Angel's Hymn,
Whom all the Saints Triumphant welcome Home
From's Pilgrim-Voyage on the Briny Foam;
Where like a Ship that is tossed from Wave to Wave
Which ev'ry' moment threaten with a Grave,
Frighted with furious Storms at last h' arrives
At fairer Heavens and Serener Skies,
Through blustering Seas unto that pleasant Shore
He Is safely come, where he shall Weep no more.
The Tears are wiped from his Reverend Face,
Which here he shed in running of his Race,
Which being finished and the Battle done,
He Wears the Crown which by his Faith he Won.
His Conquest now, not Pangs of the New Birth,
The Heavenly Quire does Celebrate with Mirth.
Angels do Shout with Joy, to 's Fathers Home,
Not that a Sinner, but a Saint is come.
And now Heaven Rings with Joy, for the Earth to Mourn,
A Discord it is, not worthy of his Urn:
Whilst they above Rejoice, these Weep below,
Faith and Hope's Conquest it will overthrow;
Whilst they are filled with Joy, these with Complaints,
It Is to deny Communion of the Saints.
Weep for the Sinner, let Floods of Tears be shed
For him, in Trespasses and Sins that is Dead.
Weep for the hardened Wretch, that cannot Relent,
That Lives in Sin, and Dies Impenitent;
Who useless was on Earth, unfit for Heaven,
Of Grace and Goodness that was quite bereav'n.
So, Useless too was that Great Man become,
Condemned to Silence, and to When Prisoner in the Tower.
Martyrdom,
(...)use the World he would learnt to overcome,
(...) that he wanted, but abounded more
(...)s and Grace than all that went before:
(...) ^^eat and Good, Pious and Learned too
(...)rs Will to suffer and to do.
(...) 'twas Heavens Decree, whom Earth Suspended,
(...) Heaven, having the Earth Offended;
(...) Mansion on him to bestow,
(...)lass!) there was no Room below;
(...)ul in his Makers Praise
(...) Earth to a Nobler Sphere to Raise:
(...)termitting, or the Hate
(...) Honor he shall Celebrate,
And to Eternal Ages loudly Sing
Anthems of Praise to Heavens Glorious King:
Whose Holy Temple has an Open Door,
Whose PRIESTS shall never be Suspended more.
But though here is Cause of Joy, yet one thing may
Challenge a Tear from those who come to pay
Honor to the Memory of the Worthy Saint,
Which may their Hearts with Grief, their Mouths fill with Complaint.
When Righteous Men do Perish, the Pious die, Isa 57. 1.

An Indication it is that Evil's nigh.
So Husbandmen do House their Corn before
The falling of the threatening sweeping Shower.
The gathering of the Blacker Clouds do warn
The Ripened Crop to hasten to the Barn.
So God Methuselah the year before
The Flood broke out suffered to Live no more.
So good Josiah, that he might not feel
The heavy Judgments threatening Israel,
That he in them his Portion might not have,
When yet but young, was hurried to the Grave.
So great St. Austin went away to Heaven
Before Hippo was of her Peace bereav'n.
So Valiant Luther, Prince of the Reformation
Died just before Germany's Desolation.
Well may we fear the World will tumble down,
When Righteous Men, its Pillars, fall to the Ground.
And when the Candlestick is taken from us,
The Light goes too; then Lord have Mercy on us.
Such the Deceased was, of whom I Am bold
To say, He was a CANDLESTICK OF GOLD. Zech. 4. 2.

Whose Light like the bright Taper clearly burned;
To Light from Darkness wandering Souls He turned.
The Stubborn Lump to purge from the Old Leaven
He Strived and Prayed, and Praying went to Heaven.
Of Patience, Meekness, Courage an Example gave,
Submitting to God's Will descended to the Grave.
This Light's removed by our Great Masters Will,
And placed above on Zions Glorious Hill;
Where Light, and Love, and Joy do overflow,
A Dark and Gloomy Church hav'ng left below.
This none consider, few do lay to Heart,
Till under Judgments they severely smart.
Which Temper is to be Lamented more
Than all the Instances of Grief before.
London, Printed for Sam. Keble at the Turks Head in Fleetstreet. 1689.


