AN ELEGY ON THE Right Reverend Father in God HUMPHRY, Lord Bishop of London,
Lord Almoner. Who Departed this Life the 7th of October, 1675.
IS Pious Henchman Dead, then LONDON, thou
Did never want more Tears than thou do now;
For if thy Grief could but retrieve him, then
A Sea of Tears should fetch him back again;
Such the old Patriarch's were, with such a hand
They led their Flocks, and ruled the Holy Land;
Such gentle Crosiers weilded they, when first
Their tender Lambs, and Proselites they Nursed;
Guarding the Churches Pale by their strict sway
From sacralegious Thief and Beast of Pray;
Their Fences and Enclosures kept with Toil
Secured their Diocese or Fold from spoil;
Such once were they when in their Graves they slept
And Company with none but Angels kept;
By them he drew a Pious Life, which must
Like theirs, smell sweet, though he be turned to Dust;
He shared with them, besides their ancient Seat,
What Primitive is Apostolic or Great;
Nor was his Life less comely or less clean
In his recess, than in his public scene;
Those gay Adornments which Enriched his Mind
Were not with Robes put off nor yet Confined;
To the Show-Day, and so no Longer last
Than the Solemnity or Pomp was past:
When all dismissed, he laid aside his State,
His trayn of Virtues held their constant weight:
The truly Gallant keep their Court within,
And are Attended by a Trayn unseen;
Their Masks are secret and their Joys unknown,
Their greatest Tryumphs are when all alone;
What the best Prelate should be, was his due,
Their Orders rare, and Orders Glorious too.
No cruel Rancour harbored in his Breast,
Against Men of different Principles possessed,
His Miter was his Shield, and not his Rod,
He loved them all that did but serve his God.
In truth and in sincerity; allthough
He could not every Circumstance allow
As to himself; yet quietly he could
Dispense with small things, so their Lives were good;
Thus like our kind Creator he surveyed
Where we did well, and where from good we Strayed:
But finding Piety, the thing designed,
Forgot our little Faults, and grew kind:
Yet this indulgence neither was not such
But that he still took care of's Mother Church;
To keep up all her Splendour, all her Glory,
And leave her siting them for future story.
He Loved her so, as if sh' had been his Spouse,
And like a Wife he kept her in his House:
That House of large Dimentions, whose old Fame
Lays claim to London as her best Surname;
Mauger all her Honor, heretofore
Could never boast of Temple to Adore
The Almighty in, till Reverend Henchman came
Whose Piety has much enhaunc'd her Fame.
Antiquity nor Custom neither could
Prevail with him to justle out his God:
A Stately Chapel up he quickly
Shall serve him for a Mausolean Tomb:
But why alas do I thus waste my Breath,
He wants no Elegy, nor Epitaph;
But durst commit his Body as it lies,
To Tongues of living Men, not unborn Eyes.
What profits thee a sheet of Lead, what good
If on thy Grave a Marble Quarry stood.
Let those that fear their Rising purchase Vaults,
And send their Statues to excuse their faults,
Whilst thou assured by thy easy Dust
Shall spring at first --
They would not, tho they must --
Nor needs the Grecian boast, whose Pyramid
Above the Sacred Altar reared is;
For tho thy Body fill a narrow Room,
Thou shall not change Deeds with him for his Tomb.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. Coniers. Anno Domini 1675.


