AN ELEGY On the Reverend and Learned Divine, Dr. LAZARUS SEAMAN, Sometime
VICE-CHANCELLOVR of CAMBRIDG, Master of Peter-House, and late Minister of the
Gospel in Alballows-Bread-street.
WHat Seaman dead? and did no Blazing Star,
No Comet beforehand His Death declare?
What, Merlin, not a word of this in thee?
Lilly's but half a Prophet now I see:
For had he known it, he would have quickly said,
This year Presbytery shall lose its head.
But did not Will foretell ther'd be a fall
Of some great Person Ecclesiastical:
Its true he did, and by the event it is plain,
He did no Bishop, but the (...)
Hence let no Foreign State(...) eye
Look on's, 'cause they have War wh^^ we are free:
Let France for Great a Turenne shed to more tear's
Here Is a more doleful Tragedy then theirs
Ours of the two's the greater loss by far,
We Have lost a Prophet, they a Man of War.
And when the stoutest Warriors strength does fall,
Such wrestle with the Almighty, and prevail.
Weep England, weep, say not thy Plagues are staid,
Whilst from the midst of thee the righteous fade.
When Princes call home their Ambassador,
By that they show they do intend a War.
And when Jehovah takes his Lots from hence,
We well may say his wrath does then commence.
Admit (blessed Soul!) my Zeal to drop a verse,
One mournful line upon thy sable Hearse,
Though I profane thy name by using it.
But should we wait to find one out full fit
To praise thee, we might look, and look in vain,
Till the great Day when thou shall rise again.
Unless the Pythagorean fiction's true
We cannot hope to meet with such as you,
The highest pitch which we will dare to aim at,
Shall be but to admire, and imitate.
Could we but see thee fully as thou art,
Could we discern the glorious beams that dart
From Jesus face on thee, those beams of Love
Which from thee back again toward him move*
It Would make us quite forget our troubles here,
For what could hurt us if our hearts were there
Where you are now there is no Division,
No Sects, no Parties, no; you all are one:
One God, one Christ; there is none that say we are
Conformists, Independents, Presbyter:
These words are all unknown, where there is no strife;
There Is no such names writ in the Book of Life.
Either thy Spirit send, great God of Love,
On us below, or take's to thee above:
And seeing we are all coming to thee,
Let Us in the way no longer disagree.
Grant that we all may Holiness and Peace
Promote, and then our diff'rences will cease:
But we in unity shall never live,
Whilst we for Honors, Wealth, and Pleasure strive:
When we see Multitudes crowding about
A spark, we wonder not if they fall out.
All eyes behold one Sun, and yet none wants;
And o^^ God fills with glory all his Saints.
His Epitaph.
Reader, If that thou learned art,
O do not urge me to impart
What it is I cover; for I fear,
Thou Wilt be so eager to lie here,
Should I tell, that thou wilt desire
And wish thy life might straight expire:
Then ask no more, but away go
And send the unlearned, they may know:
I Will tell none else, for here does lie
Entombed, a University.

