MEMENTO MORI

AN ELEGY ON THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, Knight, One of His
MAJESTY'S JUSTICES of the PEACE: Who was found Murtherd on Thursday the 17th of
this Instant October, 1678. in a Ditch on the South Side of Primrose-Hill near
Hampstead.
STRAFFORD crowd up, and brave Montross make room,
Here Is a State-Martyr too, that is lately come,
All goar'd in BLOOD; -- who may most justly crave
To share with you in your immortal Grave.
To you he comes, to you! who best can tell
How many Perils in true Virtue dwell;
Yea, and how dangerous it is in the Gap to stand,
Against Rebellion in your Native Land;
Which now is, or never was, by Rome's cursed Hate,
Destined to Ruin both in Church and State.
If Souls refind, and freed from Humane care,
Could among immortal joys such leisure spare,
As to reflect on all that they did do,
And what they suffered while confined below;
The ill returns which Loyal Godfrey found,
E're his Deserts had thrust him under ground;
Their pity would resent, and sighs attend,
The Funeral of this lamented Friend.
Whom should thou praise, poor blear-eyed Muse? proclaim
Thou would thine own Defects; not sound his Fame:
The worth of whose large Soul can never be
With finite Numbers dressed, much less by thee.
Silence amazed, more meet than Pen, or Eyes,
Will pass Close-Mourner at thy Obsequies.
And yet methinks, by strength of thought, I view
Even still his generous Soul, as first it flew
From its wronged Body, and made blessed Retreat,
And just Appeal, to Gods Tribunal-Seat.
Methinks I see him as at first he stood,
With his pale Body newly streaked with BLOOD;
With gaping Wounds, like Mouths, which called for Woe,
And home Revenge, on those who made them so:
With bruised Neck, and Cheek, with battered Chin;
And Breast as black, as his vile Butchers sin:
But with a Soul more innocent and gay,
Than newborn Lillies in the midst of May.
Ah worthy Knight! If thy high Virtue did
Not all thy thoughts of just Revenge forbid,
What dismal Truths might tell, what Plots might show
To those above, were Hatched by Rome below?
Thou need'st no more but all thy Wounds display
Before those glorious Messengers, and they
With just rewards that bloody Crew might treat,
Who dared to use thee at so harsh a rate.
But thou were always merciful and kind,
Even whilst to humane shape thou wast confined;
And it were cruelty to think thee more
Severe or fierce than thou were known before.
Methinks I hear with an exalted Voice
Thy happy Manes amongst the blessed rejoice,
With Joy like that the cheerful Seaman swells,
When safe on Shore, his dangerous Wrack he tells;
And from the swelling Banks, with aufull scorn,
Beholds those Waves which had his Vessel torn.
So thou, brave Soul! to Heaven did force thy way
Through Men more fur'ous than the raging Sea.
And having gained the Heavenly Port, do now
With safe contempt look down on them below;
Whose rigid usage had so cruel been
To strand the tender Bark thy Soul was in
And still, as if thy Tragedy were grown
Too poor, and mean, to gain from Hell renown;
Do yet like Bloodhounds the warm Quest pursue,
And strive to kill thy Reputation too.
But that is Immortal, -- and shall never want
Remembrance, whilst there is Press or Protestant;
The one to fix it in most lasting Writ,
The other to revere and honor it.
AN EPITAPH.
REader, beneath this weeping Marble lies
The Peoples Love, the Nations Sacrifice:
A modern Martyr, or (to raise thy Dread)
A Justice most unjustly murdered.
Approach his Tomb with Reverence, for he,
Whilst living, was Rome's deadly Enemy.
And whosoever the fatal stab did give,
Went but the nearest way to make him live.
In the Dust his Deeds shall blossom: Time (that brings
A change on other sublunary things)
Will keep these fresh; this Patriots renown
Shall never be strangled by the Triple Crown.
FINIS.
LICENSED, October 29. 1678.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Harris in Sweetings-Rents near the Royal Exchange,
1678.


