AN ELEGY Upon the Truly Worthy, and ever-to-be-remembred Loyal Gentleman,
Captain WILL. BEDLOW, ENGLAD's Deliverer, and the Scourge of ROME: Who Departed
this Life on the 22 of this instant August; to the great Grief of all True
Protestants. With an ACCOUNT of his PIOUS END.
ALas! what sullen Fate has hence conveyed
That Soul once Heaven-Inspir'd, whose Wisdom stayed
The baleful Mischiefs of Blood thirsty Rome,
Baffled the Tyrannies, reversed that Doom
Which over us like a black Tempest spread,
Just ready for to break on Albions head,
And from her Womb ten thousand Murders shed?
Brave BEDLOW, he, who for his Country bold,
Disdained the Traitor's Bribes, and spurned at Gold.
His Soul, more Noble still, was bent on good,
Nor could he see Three Kingdoms set in Blood,
But restless till he from far distance came,
The horrid deeds of darkness to proclaim,
Night-brooded secrets, first contrived in Hell,
By which the Sacrifice of Britain fell,
Renowned GODFREY, whose fresh bleeding Wounds
The loud Alarm to the Nations sounds.
For whilst to stifle Treasons thus they tried,
They lost their Aims, and Blood for vengeance cried
From this low Earth, and reached the lofty Sky,
Where his blessed Soul waved in Eternity;
Then was the far renowned Captain sent,
No doubt by him who rules Omnipotent,
Who soon expelled the gloomy shades wherein
The horrid Crime so late had acted been;
Unmasked the blood-bedabl'd Traitors all,
Whilst some they fled, the rest did justly fall,
Opening wider yet the fatal PLOT,
Which then by thousands was almost forgot.
New Villainies by him were brought to light,
In such dire shapes as might the world afright;
Such as the cruel Seythiens blush to own;
Dire Treason, fit for Scarlet- Rome alone,
And by their Roman dress were only known.
Thus when they saw all the deep Mines they made
As deeply Countermin'd, their Secrets laid
Open to the vulgar eyes, and each start back,
Pale with dread horror at the wondrous tract;
Down to Infernal Regions then they treat,
And would a price with Gold for silence beat;
Set Female-snares our Hero to entrap,
As Sampson once was in a Harlots lap:
But his Heroic Soul disdained a thing
So mean and base; his care was for his KING
And COUNTRIE's safety: for unto the last
He Rome defied, and did her Treasons blast;
Breathed Piety, and did abhor her Crimes,
Repenting him seduced in former times;
Shedding of Tears that e're he did embrace
The Scarlet Strumpet with a Crimson face,
That sacred blood of Saints and Martyrs died,
Which had been shed to satiate her pride;
Discovering till the utmost gasp of breath,
And more had done, had not the Tyrant Death
Snatched hence his Soul, envious we should enjoy
One that would not permit him to destroy
The many hundred thousands, which, had Rome
Prevailed, ere this had in a silent Tomb
Lain slumbring till the final Trumpets call,
A prey for Death, to glut his Jaws withal.
Oh Mourn, Great Britain, since brave BEDLOW'S lost,
And by a raging Feavour hence is tossed
Up to the Confines of Eternal day,
Among the blessed for ever there to stay.
He, at the T^errour of whose Name the Pope
Often trembling stood, amazed, and lost his hope;
Whom all his haughty Agents dreaded more,
Than all besides that trod the British shore.
Ours is the loss; whilst they rejoice, we grieve;
But it is in vain, when sorrow cannot relieve:
Yet let us not despair, but all submit
To what the wise Eternal God thinks fit:
He, though the worthy Hero's in his Grave,
Can raise up more, the self-same way to save;
Or can by other means defend the Throne
Of our just Monarch, Heavens great Viceroy known;
Confound their Hellish Malice as at first,
And raise Discovery from brave BEDLOW'S dust.
The EPITAPH.
REader, behold this worthy Hearse, and Mourn;
It Is his, whose Noble Soul did dangers scorn;
His, who to save his Country braved proud Rome,
And all her threats both present and to come.
Grateful for ever be his Memory;
Whilst ENGLAND's Protestant, he cannot dye:
Though death to Natures debt has now laid claim,
To Everlasting lives his worthy Name.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Langley Curtiss. 1680: 27. Aug.


