AN ELEGY Upon that Renowned Hero and Cavalier, THE Lord CAPEL, Who (for his
Loyalty) was Barbarously Murdered in the Palace-Yard at Westminster, on the
(...) day of (...) 16^
Preserved by a Loyal Person; And never before Printed.

SO have I seen a frolic Bridegroom come,
And guild with smiles the gaudy Wedding-room,
Joy dancing on his Face, whilst in his Eye
The young Bride's Blushes kept true Harmony:
Just with that look the Romans Victors all
In Triumph rid unto the Capital;
But not the Deecij to their Death, their Eyes
Beheld but Fame, Thine blessed Eternity;
Most like the Fire-prooft Martyr, that proclaims
His Conquest crowned in Pyramids of Flames,
In ravishment of Soul; and leaves the Toy
Of Life, not with excess of Pain, but Joy.
I, so brave CAPEL fell; the Scaffold bore
No look of life, but he Dying wore,
Death looked like Death, and all the standers by,
As if that he had come, to see them dye;
Envy her self Great CAPEL's Triumph sung;
Earth groaned his Exit; whilst all Heaven rung
With a loud Plaudit, extasi'd to see
This last Great Act, of his red Tragedy.
Treason combined, called Law established;
Immediate Death by Tyrants menaced,
Could not his Rock-built Constancy abate;
But his Just Soul stood still Resolved like Fate.
And had the Machine of the whole World broke,
The Ruins still had him undaunted took:
To view his Life, would but redrown'd the Eye
Of his and Virtue's Friends; Truth's History
Shall write it to the Age unborn, and they
Peruse it with that Zeal good Vestals pray;
And that sad Page which tells his Death, appears
The Winding Sheet of many Sighs and Tears;
His Life, Why? it is a Theme for Angels meet;
But this I Will say, Of all the Heav'n-bound Fleet,
Of Crimson Martyrs, through the red Sea gone,
Of England's Treason and Rebellion,
Except their matchless Royal Admiral,
CAPEL came richest home in the Ark Loyal;
Where all the Stars shot Volleys, and was given
Eternal Welcome to his Haven, Heaven.
London: Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for W. Davis, 1683.


