AN Express from the African and Indian Scots Company's Fleet, Landed in
New-EDINBURGH IN CALEDONIA.
EDinburgh March 27. On Saturday last, the 25 instant, 1699. here Arrived an
Express to the Court of Directors of the Indian and African Company, from the
Council of their Collony in America, bearing date at New Edinburgh, in
Caledonia, the 28. of December last, which brings the Welcome News of their
being Arrived save at Darien the 2. of November: That the Natives came
immediately on Board of them, with all Imaginable Demonstrations of Joy, at
their Arrival, inviting them a Shore to settle and inhabit amongst them, and
that they should meet with a Kind and Welcome Reception: That on the 3d. they
sounded the Coast and Bay, and on the 4th. brought their Ships within the
Harbor, and begun to Land their Men: That in a very short time, the Chiefs, or
Captains, of the several Tribes, were so very fond of their Treatment, that
they offered not only a Right to what was Uninhabited in their several Bounds,
but also to Resign even their own particular Plantations: And that before the
said Express came away, they had, with all the Solemnity and Ceremony
Requisite, taken Commissions from the said Council, and do actually carry the
Company's Colors in their Canoas, or little Boats: That, that part of Darien
where they are settled, (now called Caledonia) was never before possessed by
any Europian Nation: That the Climate is as Healthy there, as any upon the
Continent of America; And they are so far from meeting with any of those
Contagious Distempers, Epidemick to the English and other American Islands,
that all the Men who were sick upon the Voyage, have, since their Arrival
there, Recovered to perfect Health even beyond Expectation, Excepting a Few who
dyed before Landing, or very soon thereafter; So that the said Express left not
a Sick Man a Shore but Five, who were on a very hopfull way of Recovery: That
the Soil is Extreme Rich and Fertile, and when duly Cultivated, will (no
doubt) produce any thing that is valuable in America: That the Country is
Extremely well watered with excellent Springs, and Rivers of choice Wholesome
Water: That they have a very Commodious and Excellent Harbor, and that as yet
their whole time was bestowed and all hands at Work, in Building of Forts and
Houses.

The Ministers of the several Churches of this City, and Suburbs thereof, did
Yesterday after Sermons, Return Public and Hearty Thanks to Almighty GOD upon
this Occasion.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, 1699.

Exact List of all the Men, Women, and Boys, that dyed o dian and African
Company's Fleet, during their Voyage from SCOTLAND to America; and since their
Landing in Caledonia; Together with a particular account of their Qualities,
The several days of their Death, and the respective Distempers, or Accidents
of which they died.
Nota, By Volunteers, are meant such Young Gentlemen as went in no particular
Station, But only in Hopes of Preferment, as Opportunity should offer.

ALexander Piery, a Planter Fever Daniel Martin, a Sailer Flux Robert
Donaldson, a Planter, Flux ^eorge Menzies, a Planter, Flux ^hn Forrester, a
Planter Flux ^nies Dunnie, planter Flux ^obert Hardy; Volunteer Fever ^^hn
Stewart, Volunteer Fever ^obert Bailie, a Planter Fever ^^hn Smith, Sailer
Fever ^lexander Elder, Sailer Fever ^^romy Spence, Sailer Fever ^ndrew Baird,
Sailer Flux Walter Johnstoun Chirurgeon's Mate Fever ^ohn Duffus, a Sailer
Fever ^homas Dalrymple* Planter Fever ^ames Paterson, Volunteer Flux ^harles
Hamilton, Mid shipman Flux ^acob Yorkland, Volunteer Flux ^ames Davidson,
Planter Flux Henry Charters, Volunteer Flux ^ieutenent John Hay's Wife Flux
^dam Hill, a Planter Flux Walter Eliot, a Mid shipman Fever ^dam Cunningham, a
Mid-shipman Fever ^dam Bennet, a Midshipman Fever ^r. Thomas James, Minister
Fever ^eter Mackintosh, Sailer Fever ^ohn Dainiel, Planter Flux ^avid
Henderson, a Sailer Flux ^ames Graham, Volunteer Flux Wiliam Miller, Volunteer
Fever ^ohn Chiefly, Volunteer Flux ^r. John Malbon Merchant Fever ^lexander
Tailor, Sailer Fever ^obert Gaudie, Planter Flux ^ohn Aird, a Planter Decay
^ieutenent Hugh Hay Fever ^eter Paterson, a Sailer Flux ^^mes Mountgomery Flux
^ohn Luckison, Volunteer Flux ^avid Hay, Volunteer Flux ^homas Fenner, Clerk to
Mr. Paterson Fever Lieutenent James Inglis

After Landing.
Nov: 5 Hugh Barclay, Sailer Fever Henry Grapes, Trumpeter Fever 6 Archibald
Wright, Volunteer Flux James Clark, Volunteer Flux 9 James Weems Volunteer Flux
11 John Fletcher, a Planter Flux 14 Mr. Patersons Wife, Fever 15 Archibald
Mosman Volunteer Flux 16 John Cannie, Sailer, Flux John Sim sailer Flux 20 Mr.
Adam Scot, Minister Flux 22 Roger Munckland, Volunteer Flux Andrew Hamiltoun, a
mid-shipman fever 24 William Baird, sailer flu^ 27 James Young, sailer fevor 29
James Montgomery, a Planter flux John Burtol, a sailer flux December 3 James
Borthwick, a sailer fever 6 David Miller; Planter flux Ensign William
Hallybutton. flux 7 William Ersk in, Planter flux 8 Robert Bishop Chrurgeons
Mate flux Recompense Standburgh, one of the Mates on Board the St Andrew Fever
11 Robert Pendreick William Terner Drowned William Maclellan a Boy Drowned
David White, a Planter fever Willam Barron, a Planter flux Alexander; White a
Planter flux Andrew Brown, a Boy on Board the French Ship Drowned 17 Peter
Teller, a Planter flux 24 Captain Thomas Fullartoun, commander of the Dolphin
after warm walking. Died suddenly 25 This is a True List, compared by Me ROD:
MACKENZIE, Scry. so the said Company.

^O doubt every One will justly Regrate the loss of his own nearest Friend,
but its a great and general Mercy, that of so many as went Crowed in five
ships, upon so long and tedious a Voyage as they had, so (...) ^^e dead,
Especially considering, that on their way, they had the misfortune of taking
in Bad Water, upon (...) inhabited Island, in the beginning of the Rainie
Season, which occasioned general Sickness among them; (...) ^^^m after their
Landing in Caledonia (thanks be to GOD) they Recovered their Health so much
(even (...) Expectation that, when the Express came away, there were but Five
of all our Men who were not at (...) in building of Forts and Houses. And as
even a greater Number of so many as went, might have died (...) time, had they
all remained at Home; so it may be some satisfaction to the nearest friends of
the de^^ (...) that their Names shall stand upon Record, as being amongst the
first Brave Adventurers, that went upon (...) Noble, and most Honorable, and
most Promising Undertaking that Scotland ever took in Hand.

(...) Printed by John Reid 1699.


