THE EXERCISE OF THE FOOT WITH THE EVOLUTIONS, According to the Words of
Command, As they are Explained.

AS ALSO, The Forming of Battalions, With Directions to be observed by all
Colonels, Captains, and other Officers in Their Majesty's Armies.

Likewise, The EXERCISE of the DRAGOONS Both on Horseback and Foot.

With the Rules of WAR in the day of Battle, when Encountering with the Enemy.

Ordered by Sir THOMAS LIVINGSTON, Major General, and Commander in Chief of
Their Majesty's Forces in SCOTLAND.

Recommended to All (Officers as well as Soldiers) in Their MAJESTY'S Armies.

Edinburgh, Prined by John Reid, and sold at his Printing house in Bell's-Wynd.
1693.

READER,
THere is not set down in this Book the Words of Command and no more, as is
done in most of Military Books, Or so obscure, that they are not easily
understood, But in this, after the Word of Command is the Explanation, in
number and Order.

There is also joined the Exercise of Dragoons both on Horse back and Foot, by
Sir Thomas Livingston, Major General, and Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's
Forces in this Kingdom; Who has likewise caused Revise and Correct the faults
past in the Printing of the Book at first, entitled the Exercise of the Foot,
etc. Likewise, Caused Affix to the end of the Book Lieutenant General Mackays
Rules of War for the Infantry, to be Observed when they are to Encounter with
the Enemy in the day of Battle.

Recommended to All, (Officers as well as Soldiers) of Their Majesty's Armies.

And for the easier way to find out the Heads Treated of, The following Index
will direct.

The INDEX Of all the Heads Treated of.
1st, General Observations, 3 page 2d. Orders and words of Command, for the
Exercise of the Musket, etc. 5 page 3d. The Words of Command, with the
Explantion, how a Soldier should Order his Musket, from page (in number) 1. to
2^. 4th. The Exercise of the Granadeer, with the Explanation, beginning when
they are under Arms, viz. The Fire lock shouldered: Beginning at page 25, and
ending at page 40 5th. The Exercise of the Pike, beginning from the Advance:
from page 41. to page 60. 6th. General Words of Command for the Evolutions.
page 60. 7th. Evolution with Musketeers and Pikemen together, in Battalion^
from page 64 to 100 8th. Rules for the Forming of Battalions, Posting of
Officers, Salutes, etc. from page 100 9th. Also Affixt. The Exercise of Dragoon
both on Horseback and Foot. 10th. With, The Rules of War in the day of Battle.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
I.
FIrst, It is to be understood, That the Colonel, during the time of the
Exercise, remains at the Head of the Battalion, The Lieutenant Colonel and the
other Officers, at the first Beat of Drum, Face to the Right about, and at the
second sign by the Beat of Drum, Advance their Arms, and march through the
Battalion, placing themselves in the Rear, in the same order they were before
in the Front; Excepting the Lieutenant Colonel, who places himself in the Rear
of the Captains, where they are to stand till the Exercise be done.

At the same time the Sergeants, who are posted on the Wings, as also the
Drummers of both Wings, are to place themselves behind the Battalion, next, or
in an equal Line with the other Sergeants, and the Drummers that stand in the
Center before the Pikes, are at the same time to place themselves behind the
Major, that they may be always ready when any Sign is to be given, for the
Exercise by Beat of Drum.

II.
When Notice is given by Beat of Drum, after the Exercise is done, the Officers
Advance their Arms again, and march through the Battalion; and Place themselves
in their former Post at the Head of the Battalion. At the same time the
Sergeants of the Wings, as also the Drummers, return to their former Posts.

III.
It must be taken for a General Rule, That nothing be done, nor any motion
made, until the last word of every Command be fully delivered, then all is to
be Performed with a graceful Readiness and Exactness.

Orders, and Words of Command, for the Exercise of the Musket, with the
Explanation, the Musket being Shouldered.
I.
THe Soldier having his Musket Shouldered, must stand with straight Body,
holding up his Head without moving, always looking to the Commanding Officer,
and make no other Motion then what is Commanded him. This is to be observed as a
General Rule in Commands.

II.
The Feet are to be at one step distance, the Heels in a straight Line, the
Toes a little turned outward.

III.
The Musket must lie upon the Left Shoulder, and the Left Hand upon the
Butt-end, the Thumb in the Hollow thereof, pressing the Guard hard against the
Breast, that the Muzzel of the Musket may be mounted; the Lock must be turned
a'little outward, so that the under Part of the Butt-end come straight with
the middle of the Body, that the Musket may more easily be born.

IV.
The Match must be in the Left Hand, the one End betwixt the first and second
Fingers, and the other between the two last, both Ends standing about a Fingers
length out of the back of the hand; the rest of the match hangs down by the
inside of the butt end of the Musket; and because the Match is not to be laid
down in the ordinary Exercise, so it is not to be lighted, without express
Command.

V.
The Musket being shouldred, the Left Elbow must be a little turned upwards
from the Body, but without constraint of the arm, the Right Arm hanging closs
downward along the Body, with the Palm of the hand turned to the Thigh.

Words of Command. 1. Ioyn your Right hand to your Muskets.
Explanation.
YOUR Musket being carried in the forementioned posture, upon the Left
Shoulder, you must turn it inwards with the Left Hand, and at once take hold
with your Right Hand behind the Pan, that the Thumb of your Right Hand come on
the Stock upwards, and both Elbows in an equal Line, the Musket straight, and
the Butt end a little mounted.

Words of Command. 2 Poise your Muskets.
Explanation.
Note, That when the musket is put on, or taken from the shoulder, you must
alwayee look toward the Left Hand, yet without turning the Head
At this Word of Command, with both your Hands with a quick Motion you bring up
the Musket from your Shoulder, and at the same time, without holding it still,
thrust it from you with It is to be observea, that in all Tellings, you never
make the motio, till you come to the last Number, and that the telling the last
Number and the moti be done at one time.
the Right Hand, (in doing which let loose the Left Hand and let it fall down
your side) so that the Lock be turned outward, the Thumb inwards against your
Face, your Feet strait against one another, unconstrained, and standing still.

Words of Command. 3. Ioyn your Left Hand to your Muskets.
Explanation.
Let your Musket sink quickly with your Right Hand, and at the same time
falling back with the Right Foot, take hold of it with the Left Hand almost in
an equal Balance, about two Hands breadth above the the Cock, that the Stock
lie in the full Hand, and the Thumb upwards, and that the Muzzel hang a little
foreward, so low as the Hands and Arms will permit without constraint, holding
both Elbows a little turned outward, the Right Foot a little turned toward
the Right side, the Left Knee a little Bending, the Body strait, you hold the
Musket on the Right Side a little from the Body, that the Body and Face present
it self as much foreward as may be, and ^he Hand remain unconstrained under the
Pan.

Words of Command. 4 Take your Matches.
Explanation.
Take that end of the Match which is held between the two last Fingers of your
Left Hand, with your Thumb under, and your ^wo foremost Fingers above the same,
and ^ell 1, 2, bring it quick out of your Left Hand, hold it a little lower
then the Left Hand, is and about a foot distance from the Pan with the Cole or
end downwards, and keep your Body in the same posture as before.

Words of Command. 5 Blovv your Matches.
Explanation.
In the Blowing of the Match, you must hold your Head still, and bring with
your Right Hand the lighted Match against your Mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow
the Match quick and strong, and bring the same with a motion somewhat quick to
its former place with the Cole as before downwards.

Words of Command. 6. Cock your Matches.
Explanation.
Put your two foremost Fingers a little asunder, bringing the Match above the
Cock, thrust in the same with your Thumb in such a manner that the Cock comes
between your two Fingers, and the Thumb upon it, keep your hand thus till the
following Command.

Words of Command. 7. Try your Matches.
Explanation.
Bring the Cockt Match to the Pan, if it be too low, you must raise it a little
upwards with your undermost Fingers, and if it be too high, you bend it
downwards with your foremost Finger and your thumb, till it comes just in the
middle of your Pan, and being thus well fixed, you must bring it with the Cock
back again, holding it fast till the following Command.

Words of Command. 8. Guard your Pans.
Explanation.
Let loose your hand from the Cockt Match, and cover your Pan with your Two or
three foremost Fingers (if the breadth of the Pan Require it) placing your
Thumb behind the Pan.

Words of Command. 9. Blow your Matches.
Explanation.
As before you move not your head, and bring the Musket with both hands just
before the middle of your Body (at the same time bringing up your Right Foot)
the Cock must come just against the Mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow your Match
hard, and thrusting the Musket suddenly from you, hold it with outstreached
Arms before you, so as the Left Hand comes no higher then your Left Shoulder,
and stand still.

Words of Command. 10. Present.
Explanation.
In presenting the Musket, it must come from the former Posture with the
falling back of the Right Foot (though a little to the Right Side, and not
behind the Left Foot, that the body may the better prese^^ it self forward) and
so brought to yo^ Breast and as soon as it is brought to yo^ Breast; the Pan is
to be opened; The Mus^^ is held with the Right Hand under the Pa^ so that the
Thumb lies in the hollow of Butt; the foremost Finger before the Tric^^ (yet
without touching the Tricker) (...) the Three other Fingers upon the Guard;
Musket in Presenting must not come too (...) on the Breast, but be set firm in
the hollow the Right Shoulder; And must be held strongly, you must keep up your
Body strait, ^^^^^^ly, pressed down a little against the Musket. Elbows as much
as possible in an equal L^^^ with the Butt alittle below the strait Line,
Breast high, the Head strait upwards, the^ Knee a little bent.

Words of Command. 11. Give Fire
Explanation.
As soon as this Command is given, (...) draw the Tricker with the First Fine
which you held before the Tricker, draw the cockt Match quick and strong upon
Pan. If it discharge or not you must ha^^ special care that you draw your
Tricker once.

Words of Command. 12. Recover your Arms.
Explanation.
Bring up your Musket quick again straight before you, together with your right
Foot, and keep the posture; as in Explan: Nine is shown.

Words of Command. 13 Return your Matches.
Explanation.
Take the Match with the right Thumb under, and the two fore fingers above, and
with a turned, or back hand, bring it out of the Cock, to the two last Fingers
from whence it was taken before, tell 1, 2, and join your Right Hand again
under your Pan

Words of Command. 14 Blovv your Pans.
Explanation.
Keep still your head, and bring up the Musket with both hands straight before
your Mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow the Pan strong and quick, bringing the
Musket again with a quick Motion before the Body.

Words of Command. 15 Handle your Primers.
Explanation
Fall back quick with the Right Foot behind the Left, that the Heels, come
straight behind one another, and bring down at the same time with a nimble
Motion your Musket with both hands, holding the muzzel a little lower than was
shown in Explain. 3. Tell 1, 2, upon that take hold of the Primer; the Thumb
upwards upon the cover, tell again 1, 2, and bring it upwards about a hands
breadth from the Pan.

Words of Command. 16 Prime.
Explanation.
Hold your Musket still, turn up your hand with the Primer, and shake out as
much powder upon the Pan as is needful, tell 1, 2, bring it again to its former
place, and remain in that posture till the following word of Command.

Words of Command. 17 Shut your pans.
Explanation.
Open your right hand, let fall the Primer then shut the pan with a full hand,
that your Fingers lie against the undermost part of the Stock, tell slowly 1,
2, bring up the musket with both Hands before your Body, bringing up the Right
Foot again at the same time, in which bringing up, you put your right hand
under the Pan, and with outstretched Arms remain in that Posture, as in
Explanation 9.

Words of Command. 18 Blow your Pans
Explanation.
Hold still your Head, and bring the musket with both Hands straight before
your mouth, tell slowly 1, 2, blow off your loose Corns from the cover of your
pan hard and quick, and thrusting your musket with a quick motion from the
Body, bring it to the former posture again.

Words of Command. 19 Cast about to Charge.
Explanation.
Turn the musket with both Hands, so that the Barrel come outmost, and tell
slowly 1, 2, let go the Right Hand, bring down the musket with the left, step
one Pace forward with the Right Foot, tho not directly before the Left, but
placed a little to the Right side, that the Body present it self the better
forward, take hold of it at the Muzzel with your Right hand, that the bringing
down of the Musket, the putting down of the Right Foot, and the taking hold of
the Muzzel, be done at one time; hold you^ Thumb upwards upon the Stock along
the Rammer, and the Barrel downwards i^ your full Hand, keeping the Body
straight only the Right Knee a little bent, which remains thus bent all the
time you Charge keep the musket straight before your Body with both Hands and
out-streached Arms the muzzel standing straight forwards.

Words of Command. 20 Handle your Chargers
Explanation.
Bring the musket with both hands stra^ to your Body; tell 1, 2; quit your
musket with your Right Hand holding it with your full left hand, about the
middle in balance, with the Muzzel a little forwards and then take hold of one
of your Chargen or Bandeliers, telling again slowly 1, 2, bringing the same
forward a little higher, and about a hands breadth sidewayes off from the
Muzzel, the Thumb upwards upon the cover of the Charger.

Words of Command. 21 Open them with your Teeth
Explanation
Bring the Charger to your Mouth, pulling off the Cap with your Teeth, and the
help of your Thumb; Tell 1, 2, and bring it to its former place, keeping your
Thumb upwards upon the Charger.

Words of Command. 22 Charge with Powder
Explanation
Bring your Charger to the Muzzel, turning it up; pouring the Powder in the
Barrel; Continue in this posture, till the following word of Command.

Words of Command 23 Charge with Bullet
Explanation
Open your Hand, and drop your Charger; take the Bullet out of your mouth with
your Fingers; tell 1, 2, and with your Fingers bring it to the muzzel; Let the
Ball run down; keep your two foremost fingers upon the muzzel, the rest of the
fingers hanging down the Barrel, till the following word of Command be given.

Words of Command 24 VVad from your Hats.
Explanation
Take with your Right hand some of the Wad that sticks between your Hatband and
your Hat, tell slowly 1, 2, and bring the same, as you did the Bullet, to the
muzzel, pressing it in with your Fingers; leave your two Fingers upon the
muzzel, as before, the rest hanging down by the Barrel.

Words of Command. 25. Dravv forth your Rammers.
Explanation.
Take your Rammers with the Fingers of the Right Hand, holding the Thumb
upwards, draw out the same, so far as your Arm can well reach, then take hold
of it again turning the Right Hand, so that the Thumb comes downward to the
upper end of the Stock, or about the uppermost Ring; tell slowly 1, 2, draw it
then wholly out; at this second drawing, hold it between the Thumb and the two
foremost Fingers, the which, with the rest of the Fingers and the whole Arm,
must be stretched out even with the Right Shoulder, that the small end be
toward the Body, and the thick part outward in an even Line.

Words of Command. 26 Hold them up.
Explanation.
Move your middlemost Finger which support the Rammer, and let the thick end
sink down, and hold it so in your hand, with an outstretched Arm, the Thumb
turned upwards in the same height with your Shoulder.

Words of Command. 27 Shorten them against your Breasts.
Explanation.
Set the thick end of the Rammer against the lower part of your Right Breast in
an equal Line with the Musket; tell 1, 2, and slip your Hand down to a Hands
breadth of the end, the Thumb always upwards, and turning she Elbow a little
upwards from the Body.

Words of Command. 28 Put them in the Barrels.
Explanation.
Bring the Rammer upwards before the Muzzel, tell 1, 2, then place it upon the
Wad, thrusting it down so far till your Hand touches the Muzzel; then take it
about the middle, tell 1, 2, thrust down again your Wad, till your Right Hand
comes to the Muzzel; and then take hold of it at the top, tell again 1, 2, and
thrust it fully down to the Charge, holding the Rammer fast with the Fingers
and Thumb.

Words of Command. 29 Ram down your Charge.
Explanation.
You draw up your Rammer as fart as the Arm unforced will permit, tell 1, 2,
ramming down the Charge, with an ordinary force, and then holding still your
Rammer; as before.

Words of Command. 30 withdraw your Rammers.
Explanation.
With a quick motion draw the Rammer with your Right Hand till half of it be
out of the Barrel, then take it with a turned hand the Thumb downward, tell 1,
2, and then draw it wholly out of the Barrel, holding it with the thick end
turned toward the shoulder; keeping the Posture you were told in Explanation.
25.

Words of Command. 31 Hold them up.
Explanation.
Let the small end of your Rammer sink down, and keep your Posture, as in
Explanation 26.

Words of Command 32 Shorten them against your Breasts.
Explanation.
Set the small end of the Rammer against your Breast, as you did before the
thick end as in Explan 27; the Hand not quite follow, but about afoot from the
end of the Rammer.

Words of Command 33 Return your Rammers.
Explanation.
Return the Rammer giving it a gentle turn with the right hand under the barrel
tell 1, 2, put it in the stock, thrusting it in so far as you held it with your
hand, then take hold of it again in the middle, tell 1, 2, thrusting it
downward so far as your hand again, then take hold again at the top, tell
slowly 1, 2, and thrust it now wholly down in these three Motions, take hold
immediately of the muzzel of the musket, the thumb upward, tell 1, 2, and thrust
the musket suddenly from your Body, and keep the same Posture as in Explanation
19.

Words of Command. 34 Ioyn your Right hand to your muskets.
Explanation.
Hold the musket firm, as it was held in the left hand, cast it out of the
right hand, that with a very small motion it comes readily straight up, then
take hold of it with the right hand under the Pan, holding the musket from the
body, the hands as low as the Arms unconstrained will suffer.

Word of Command. 35. poise your Muskets.
Explanation.
Face upon the Left Heel very quick to the Right, and bring at the same time
the Musket with both hands straight before you, at which time you let go your
Left Hand, and push it forwards suddenly with the Right Hand; so that this
thrusting forwards the Musket, and the setting down of the right Foot, is done
at one time, then keep in the Posture directed in Eplanation 2.

Word of Command. 36. Shoulder your Muskets.
Explanation.
Turn your Musket with the Right Hand, thath the Barrel comes outward, and the
Guard inwards against the Left shoulder, take at the same time the Butt end
with the Left hand, laying your Thumb in the hollow of the same; tell slowly 1,
2, and bring it then with both your Hands upon your Left shoulder, not moving
the Head; tell again 1, 2, quit the right hand, and let it fall quickly down
along the Right side, and observe further the Posture, as in Explain. ^. is
shown.

Word of Command. 37. Rest your Muskets.
Explanation.
This is done as in Explan: 1. Tell then 1, 2, and quickly Poise, as in Explan.
2. is shown. Tell again 1, 2, and do as is directed in Number 3. Let loose your
Right Hand from behind the Pan, and with the two or three foremost Fingers,
according to the breadth of the Pan, cover the same, (...) your Thumb bebind
the Pan, and keep the Posture as in Explanation 3. is directed.

Word of Command. 38. Order your Muskets.
Explanation.
Raise your Muskets with both hands strain upwards, without bringing it higher
or lower; tell slowly 1, 2, then let loose the Right hand from the Pan, sinking
the Musket with the left hand, taking at the same moment the Musket with a full
right hand near the muzzel, so that the thumb lies upwards against the Barrel,
and reaches the end of the muzzel. Tell again slowly 1, 2, quit your left hand,
and set down the Buttend of the musket at the outside of your right foot, with
a quickne^ upon the ground, in such a manner that the right foot and musket
come down at one time, the heels in a straight line, the toes turned outward,
letting your Arm hang from the Hand to the Elbow by the side of the Musket, the
left hand in which the match is, ^angs dow^ by the left side, with the Ends
(...) the match outward.

Word of Command. 39. L^y down your muskets.
Explanation.
Lift up your right-foot, turning the musket in ward at the same time, that the
barrel ^^me just to your body, setting at the same ^^me the right foot against
the Flat of the butt-end, then step directly forward a good (...) with the left
foot, lay down the Musket with a stiff body) upon the ground, with ^e Lock
upward; before you tell 1, 2, 3, ^ife your self up again, stepping back with
but left foot, on the heel over the butt-end (...) the inside of the same,
letting both Arms ^ang down by the Body.

Word of Command. 40. Take up your muskets.
Explanation.
Turn your right foot upon the heel again ^ver the butt-end of yowr musket, and
set (...) down behind the same; at the same time ^^rn the right hand with a
small motion to ^^e right side outward, over the right foot, and without
Intermission, step forward with the left foot a large step along the Musket and
at the same time bring the right hand with an out-streached Arm over the musket
strair forward and as much as possible with stiff body, taking hold of it with
the right hand, tell 1, 2, 3, raise up your self and the musket, with the
bringing back of the left foot then take up your right foot again, and (...) at
the inside of the butt, turning at (...) same time the Butt end outward, that
the (...) Musket and the whole body be in the same (...) ture as they were
before the laying down of (...) Musket, and thus standing with your Musket
ordered as in explanation 38 is shown.

The Soldiers must also observe, that in laying do^^ and taking up of the
Musket, not to keep their ha^^ above the Muzzel, but in the laying down of
(...) musket to sink their hands as much as is necess^^^ and at the taking up,
to take hold of it at the (...) place where their band was at their laying it
dow^ then sliding the hand upwards to the muzzel, by so that it be done, with
ease and unfore'd.

Note, Is is further to be observed. That the grounding and taking up their Arm
the Soldiers keep up their heads as much possible: And that all may be done
more (...) actly, at one and the same time, the Souldi^^ that stand next one
another in the Ran^ must look to the right hand Man, yet without turning their
Heads aside and those that follow one another in files, must also observe their
Leaders.

Word of Command. 41. Rest your muskets.
Explanation.
Turn your Thumb inwards, and let your hand sink downwards as far as the arm
without constraint will permit; tell slowly 1, 2, raise it with the Right Hand,
take hold of it at the same time with the Left, just under the Right Hand, tell
1, 2, let go the Right hand and cover the Pan at the same time falling back
with the Right Foot, so that the resting of the musket, and the Falling back of
the Right Foot be done at once hold then the Musket, Body and Feet in the same
posture as in Explan, 37 in presenting of the musket is shown.

Word of Command. 42. Club your Muskets.
Explanation.
Keep your Musket firm ^n your left hand, cast about the same with the Right
Hand, bring up the Right Foot, at the same time that the Butt-end is upwards,
and the muzzel downwards, the Lock outward; at once taking hold of it with the
Right Hand about a foot from the Muzzel, that the Right Thumb come upwards, and
the Left down wards, tell 1, 2. Let loose the left hand, (...) take hold again
at the same time with a (...) left hand, an inch from the Muzzel, (...) it with
outstretched Arms against the (...) Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and bring it upon you
Shoulder, with the Lock upwards, tell 1, 2, quit your Right Hand nimbly, and
(...) hang down by your Side.

Word of Command. 43. Rest your muskets.
Explanation.
Turn the Musket with your Left Hand inwards, and at the same time take hold
(...) the Right above the Left, the Thumb upwards, and the Elbows in a strait
Line, (...) 1, 2, bring the same nimbly with both hand before the Body, tell 1,
2, let loose your Left Hand, sinking the Right Hand (...) Musket a little, and
taking it at the same time with the Left Hand turned, both Thumbs turned
against one another, tell 1, 2, loose your Right Hand, and turning the Musket
bring the Butt-end down, and (...) your Musket with the steping back of the
Right Foot, and observe further the Posture as has been expressed in the
resting of the Musket.

Word of Command. 44 Shoulder your muskets.
Explanation.
Bring up your Musket with the bringing up of the Right Foot to its Poise, with
a stretched out Arm straight before you, and take hold of it under the Pan,
with your Right Hand, so that the poysing of the Musket, and the seeting down
of the Right Foot, be done at the same time.

Take heed to Make Ready at Three Words of Command.
1. Make Ready.
Explanation.
This is to be done, as has been shown before at large in the Exercise of the
Musket, from Explan: 1, to Explan: 8, Inclusive.

Word of Command. 2. Present
Explanation.
This is done as has been shown in Ex: 9, 10.

Word of Command. 3. Give Fire.
Explanation.
This is done as in Explan: 11. after which you go foreward until you are again
Ready Charged, and then Shoulder your Muskets.

Here follows the Exercise of a Granadeer, with the Explanation, beginning when
they are under Arms, viz. the Fire-lock Shouldered.
THE Posture, and what a Granadeer is further to observe in the Exercise of his
Arms, is fully shown in the General Observations, where the Musket is Treated
of.

It is also to be Observed, That when the Granadeers stand in a Body with the
Musketeers, that they then must make the same motions as the musketeers,
because they do not then meddle with their Granades or Bayonets.

Word of Command. Take heed Granadeers, to Exercise your Firelocks.
1. Ioyn your Right hand to your Firelocks.
Explanation.
THis is done the same way as that of the Musket, Explanation. 1.

Word of Command. 2. Poise your Firelocks.
Explanation.
This is done the same way as that of the Musket, Explanation 2.

Words of Command. 3 Ioin your Left Hand to your Firelocks
Explanation.
This is done as that of the Musket, in Explan: 3: except that you are to take
up the Sling and join it with your Left Hand under your Fire-lock, and your
right Thumb upon the Cock, and your forefinger upon the tricker, and the other
Fingers behind, or below the Guard.

Word of Command. 4. Cock your Firelocks
Explanation.
Keep your Thumb upon the Cock, and bring up your Fire-lock with both Hands
straight before you, at the same time bringing up your Right Foot, your Arms
half stretched out, that you may the more easily bend the Cock, tell 1, 2, and
then Cock, thrusting your Fire-lock nimbly from you with both hands, holding
your Thumb upon the Cock, without touching the Tricker with your Fingers, keep
your arms outstretched before your Body.

Word of Command. 5. Present.
Explanation.
In presenting, you take away your thumb from the Cock, and do as is shown in
Exp: 10. except that you are not to open your Pan.

Words of Command. 6, Give Fire.
Explanation.
This done as with the Musket, in Expla. 11

Word of Command. 7. Recover your Arms.
Explanation.
This done as with the Musket in Explan. 12.

Word of Command. 8. Handle your Slings.
Explanation.
Turn with both hands the Fire-lock, that your Lock come outward, holding it
with your Right Hand before your Body, the thumb upwards, draw with your Left
Hand your Sling quickly in an equal line, with your Fire-lock to the left side,
the Thumb upwards, and stand thus till the following word of Command.

Word of Command. 9. Sling your Firelocks.
Explanation.
Bring your Sling with your left hand just above your right Shoulder, and at
the lame time bring your Fire-lock with your Right Hand under your Left Elbow,
bring the sling over your head, draw the sling with your left hand in the
letting loose of the Right, that the Firelock hang upon your right Shoulder,
with the muzzel up, and the Buttend downwards; tell 1, 2, let loose your Left
hand, and let it hang down as the Right Hand.

Word of Command. 10. Handle your Matches.
Explanation.
Bring both hands readily with half outstretched Arms before your body, about
the height of your Shoulder, take it at the same time, with your right hand,
the lowermost end of the match your thumb under, and your two foremost above,
tell 1, 2, and bring it over the back of your hand between your thumb and your
two fore fingers; tell 1, 2, thrust out the Jest hand with the match quickly
forwards, letting at the same time the right hand hang down upon the bag.

Word of Command. 11. Handle your Granades.
Explanation.
Keep your Left Hand in its former posture, face nimbly upon the Left Foot to
the Right, at the same time lifting up the cover of your Granade, pouch with
your Right Hand, take the Granade, tell 1, 2, bring it with an out streatched
Arm, in a straight Line with your Left Hand, your Thumb against the Fuse, and
stand in this posture.

Word of Command. 12. Open your Fuse.
Explanation.
Hold still your Left Hand, and bring the Granade to your mouth with your Right
Hand, tell 1, 2, open the Fuse with your Teeth, tell again 1, 2, and thrust it
nimbly from you to its former place.

Word of Command. 13. Guard the Fuse with your Thumb.
Explanation.
Cover the Fuse with your Thumb, without making any other motion.

Word of Command. 14. Blovv your Matches.
Explanation.
Bring up the Match before your Mouth, tell 1, 2, blow it off hard and quick,
and thrust it at the same time to its former place.

Word of Command. 15. Fire and throvv your Granades
Explanation.
Meet the Granade with your Left Hand, a little downwards toward the Right
Side, as the Arms will best permit, to which Side you turn your Body and Face a
little, fire the Fuse, tell slowly 1, 2, 3, in which telling bring back the
Right Hand a little, with the Granade, throw it with a stiff Arm, stepping
foreward with the Right Foot, in an equal Line with the Left, bringing down the
Left Hand with the Match to the former place, letting the Right Hand hang down
by the Pouch; remain in that posture, and expect the following Command.

Word of Command. 16. Return your Matches.
Explanation.
Bring again both Hands straight before your Body, as in Explan. 10. Take the
Match, put it in its former place, in such a manner as in the Exercise of the
Musket, Explan: 13. tell 1, 2, and let both Arms hang down by your Body.

Word of Command. 17. Handle your Slings.
Explanation.
Take the middle of the Sling with your Right Hand, and with the Left Hand
below, about a Hands breadth from the Fire-lock, lift up the Fire-lock with the
Left Hand, so that the Elbow comes through under the Fire lock, lying upon the
Arm and Shoulder; let go your Left Hand from the Sling, and take hold of your
Fire-lock about a Hands breadth above the Lock; let the Stock come to lie
between the Thumb and the two foremost Fingers, and hold it so with a stretched
Arm so much as the Slings will permit, with the Butt-end before you.

Word of Command. 18. Poise your Firelocks.
Explanation.
Bring the Sling with your Right Hand over your Head, and your Fire-lock with
your Left Hand, and mount it with half stretched Arms, the Barrel turned
forewards, let go your Right Hand from the Sling, turn your Fire-lock with your
Left Hand, that the Lock come outward, and put at the same time your Right
Hand under the Cock, the Thumb upwards, then thrust the Fire-lock quickly from
you, let go your Left Hand; at the same time you must observe that your Right
Hand must be equal with your Shoulder.

Word of Command. 19. Cast about to Charge.
Explanation.
Take the Fire-lock with your Left Hand, about a hands breadth from the Lock,
the Thumb upwards, turn it about that the barrel come outward, and do further
as in the Exercise of the Musket, Explanation 19. was directed.

word of Command. 20. Draw your Bayonets.
Explanation.
Bring your Fire-lock with both your hands to your Body, tell 1, 2, take your
Bayonet with your Right Hand, tell again 1, 2, draw it, and bring it with an
outstretched arm straight before your Body in a right line with your shoulder,
holding the bayonet, and the thumub upwards, and the flate of the blade toward
your body.

Word of command. 21. Screvv your Bayoners in the muzzels.
Explanation.
Put your Bayonets in the barrels, tell^^ 2, turning about the Guard toward
you^ that it mayly fast, and flat, take hold of (...) muzzel of your Fire-lock
with your Rig^^ Hand, the thumb upwards, tell 1, 2, thr^^ing it with both Arms
nimbly from you Body.

Word of command. 22. Rest your Bayonets
Explanation.
Mount your Bayonet with both han^^ turning at the same time, without resti^^
upon the left heel, to the right; As y^^ Face let go your right hand, and
bring^ under the cock, that the barrel be turned ^^ wards your Body, tell 1, 2,
fall back han^^ and foot, and keep the posture shown you in the resting of the
Musket, Explan. 37.

Word of command. 23. Charge your Bayonets breast him
Explanation.
Bring your Bayonet nimbly up with bo^^ hands; and the bringing up of your
righ^^ foot, in which bringing up, you bring you^ right hand under, so that the
Butt rest upon your Fingers, the thumb upwards to the buttend, tell 1, 2, fall
back with your right foot charge your Bayonet breast high, in which charging
the butt end lies in a full right hand and the thumb upon it.

Word of Command. 24 Cast about your Bayonets to the left side
Explanation.
Bring up your Fire-lock straight before you, with the bringing up of your
right foot; letting loose at the same time your right hand from the Butt, and
bring it under the Cock, turn your Fire-lock with both your hands, so that the
Barrel comes outward, tell 1, 2, then proceed further as has been shown in the
casting about the musket, Explan: 19, except that in stepping forward with the
Right foot, you lay your Right Hand upon the guard of your Bayonet, and at once
turn it from you, remaining thus with out stretched Arms till the following
Command.

Word of Command. 25. Recover your Bayonets.
Explanation.
Bring your Bayonet with both hands to your Body, tell 1, 2, draw it out of the
barrel, hold it out with a stretched Arm before your Body, as in Explan: 20 is
shown.

Word of Command. 26. Put up your Bayonets.
Explanation.
Turn your Bayonet with the Point down^ wards on your left side; tell 1, 2, put
it in the seabbard, tell again 1, 2, take hold of you^ Fire lock with your
Right hand by the muzzel, thrusting it readily from you, with ou^^ stretched
Arms.

Word of Command. 27. Half cock your Firelocks.
Explanation
Bring your Firelocks with both hand mounted before your body, as in Explan. ^
the barrel turned toward your body, facin^ to the right upon the left heel,
without intermission; in which turning you let go your right hand, take hold of
the cock with the right thumb, your fingers under against the Guard, as in
Explan. 3: Tell 1, 2, and ha^^ bend your cock, then bring the same hand under
the cock, holding your Fire-lock exactly and readily before you, in such a
posture as often has been shown.

Word of Command. 28. Blovv (...) pans.
Explanation.
Do this as with the Musket, Explan. 14.

Word of Command. 29. Handle your Primers.
Explanation.
This is done as with the Musket; Explan. 15. only the Muzzel is held a little
lower.

Word of Command. 30. Prime.
Explanation.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 16.

Word of Command. 31. Shut your pans.
Explanation.
Let fall your Primer, take hold of the side of the Steel with your thumb
upwards, and your two foremost Fingers under, shut your Pan, tell slowly 1, 2,
and do further is in the Handling of the Musket in Explan. 17. is shown.

Word of Command. 32. Cast about to Charge.
Explanation.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 19.

word of command. 33. Handle your Cartridges.
Explanation.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 20.

Word of Command. 34. O^pen your Cartridges
Explanation.
Bring the Cartridge before your mouth bite off the top, tell 1, 2, and bring
it again to its former place, holding the Cartridge with the Thumb upwards.

Word of command 35. Charge wit ^ your Cartridges.
Explanation.
Bring the Cartridge just before the muzzel turn it up with your hand, put it
in the barrel, holding your two foremost fingers upon the muzzel till the
following word of command.

word of command. 36. Draw forth your Rammers.
This is done as with the musket, Explan. ^^

word of command. 37. Hold them up.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: ^^

word of command. 38. shorten them against your brea^
This is done as with the musket, Expla: ^^.

word of command. 39. Put them in the barrels.
This is done as with the musket, Explan. ^^

word of command. 40. Ram down your charge.
This is done as with the musket, Explan: ^^

word of command. 41. Recover your Rammers.
This is done as with the musket, Expla. 30.

word of command. 42. How them up.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: 31.

word of command. 43 Shorten them against your breasts.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: 32.

word of command. 44. Put them in their places.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: 33.

word of command. 45. Ioyn your right hand to your Fire locks.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: 34.

word of command. 46. poise your Firelocks.
This is done as with the musket, Expla: 35.

word of command. 47. Shoulder your Fire locks.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan: 36.

word of command. 48. Rest your Fire locks.
This is done as with the musket, explanation 1, 2, Tell then 1, 2, and do
further as with the Musket, Explan. 3. only putting your Thumb upon the Cock,
and the Fingers under, against the Guard.

Word of Command. 49. Order your Fire locks.
Explanation.
This done as with the Musket, Explan 3^

word of command. 50. Lay down your Fire locks.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 3^

word of command. 51. Take up your Firelocks
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 4^

word of command. 52. Rest your firelocks.
This is done as with the Musket, Expla^^ 41. But with the difference as here
above (...) Explain. 49.

Word of Command. 53. Club your firelocks.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan. 4^

word of command. 54. Rest your firelocks.
This is done as with the Musket, Explan* 43. yet with the difference aforesaid
in Explan. 48.

word of command. 55. shoulder your firelocks.
This is done as with the musket, Explan. 44, only putting your Right Hand
under the Cock before the bringing up of your Fire-lock.

Take heed to make ready to give Fire at Three Word of Command 56.
1. Make ready
This is done as in the first Three Explanations is largely shown.

Words of Command. 2 Present
This done as in Explan. 4 and 5.

word of command. 3. Give fire.
This done as in Explan. 6 and 7.

Take heed to make ready to Fire and threw your Granades at Three Words of
Command. 57.
1. Make Ready.
This is done as is shown from Explan 8 to 13 inclusive.

word of command. 2. Blow your Matches.
This is done as in Explan. 14.

word of command. 3. Fire and Throvv your Granades.
This is done as in Explan. 15.

Take heed to make ready to use your Bayonets. 58.
Word of Command. 1. Make Ready.
This is done as has been shown before in the Manual, from Explan. 16 to
Explan. 22 inclusive.

Word of Command. 2. Charge your Bayonets Breast high.
This is done as in Explan. 23.

Take heed to make ready your Firelocks again. Word of Command. 59. Make
Ready your fire locks.
This is likewayes done as has at large been shown in the Exercise of the
Granadee^ from Explan. 24 to Explan. 47 inclusive.

The Exercise of the PIKE, beginning from the Advance.
THE Posture of a Pike-man, with his Rik^ Advanced, must be the same with tha^
of a Musketeer with the Musket Shouldered, Viz. That he stand with a straight
Body, hold up his head, look lively, his eyes always upon the Commanding
Officer, make no other motion then what he is Commanded, his Feet must be ^^
little Pace distant from each other, his Heels (...) straight line, his Toes
turned a little ontwards, holding the Butt-end of the Pike in his Right Hand,
stretched down along his Body, the back of his Hand turned outward, but
without constrain^ the Pike must be kept close to his Shoulder, and the out
side of his Thigh, that it may stand straight upward, this must he always
observed with an Advanced Pike.

Pikes take heed to your Exercise.
Word of Command. 1. To the Front, Charge.
Explanation.
THis as all other Chargings of the Pike, and likewayes returning to the former
Posture, must be done at three Motions; As First take hold of the Pike;
Secondly, bring it before your Body; Thirdly, Charge your Pike, as is more
largely to be shown in the following Pages.

First; You take hold of the Pike with your Left hand, just at the Right
Shoulder.

Secondly, You tell 1, 2, and bring the same with both hands and outstretched
arms with a nimble motion, straight before your body, at the same time turning
your Hand, so that the thumb which was under comes uppermost, holding the pike
in a full hand, you must also at the same time turn the Left foot upon your
heel a little inwards, in the bringing forwards of the pike, that the toes come
forwards, and at the same time lifting up the right foot a little, and turning
it to the right side outward, that the heel come in a straight line with the
hollow of the left foot.

Thirdly, Tell 1, 2, and step nimbly with the right foot behind the left, that
the hollow of the right stand in a straight line with the heel of the left
Foot, and pulling at the same time the Pike with both hands backwards, Charging
it at the height of a Man's Breast, and so, that at one time the right foot and
the Pike come down together. You must further observe this following posture,
namely that the right arm stretched out backwards lie just along the pike, the
right hand at the end of the Pick, the pike between the thumb and foremost
fingers of the left hand, and against the body, and in a straight line with the
tight hand; the Left Elbow must be lifted a little from the Body, the head and
Body kept straight, the right Knee stiff and straight, and the left a little
bent forwards, that the pike may no only be kept firm in this posture, but must
lie with a flat spear the aforesaid height of a Man's Breast; which posture must
be observed in all Charges of the pike.

Word of Command. 2. As ye were.
Explanation.
As the pike in the former Commands was Charged at three motions, so must it be
returned to your advance.

As First, Press the right hand strongly down, bring the left hand upwards,
then bring the pike with both hands, and outstretched arms, nimbly before the
Middle of your body, at the same time bringing the right foot forwards, and
placing the Heel in a straight line with the hollow of the Left Foot.

Secondly, You tell 1, 2, bring the Pike with both hands to your Shoulder, at
the same time turning the hand and foot as above is shown, tell 1, 2, let loose
your left hand, and let it hang down by the body, observing further in this
Posture what is directed in Explan: 1.

Word of Command. 3: To the right Charge.
Explanation.
Take hold again of the pike with the left hand by your Shoulder, tell 1, 2,
bring it with outstretched arms just before you, observing the motion both with
hand and foot as in Explan. 1. tell 1, 2, turning nimbly upon the Left foot to
the right, turning at the same time the heel of the right foot the fourth part
of a Circle, and against the hollow of the left, observing that the pike in
your turning may always be kept with outstretched Arms upwards in a straight
line, tell 1, 2, step nimbly back with the right foot, charge your pike; and
further observe to keep this posture, as in Explan. 1.

Word of Command. 4, To the Left as you were.
Explanation.
Raise your pick with a quick motion, at the same time bringing up your right
foot, turn nimbly upon the left foot to the left, bringing the Pike with
outstretched Arms just before the body, tell 1, 2, bring it to your right
Shoulder, observing what is shown in Explan. 2.

Word of Command. 5. To the Left Charge.
Explanation.
Take of the pike with the left hand at your right shoulder, as before, tell 1,
2, bring the same with straight Arms nimbly before the Body, tell 1, 2, turn
nimbly upon the left foot to the left, that the heel of the right foot come to
stand the fourth part of a circle against the left foot, tell 1, 2, charge the
pikes as before, Breast high, and at the same time stepping back with the right
foot, keep the posture shown in the former Chargings.

Word of Command. 6. To the right as you were.
Explanation.
This is done as before, the pike is raised up readily with the bringing up of
the right foot, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the left foot to the right, tell
again 1, 2, bring the pike to the right shoulder, observing what is shown in
Explan. 2.

Word of Command. 7. To the Right about Charge.
Explanation.
Take hold of your pike with your left hand at the right shoulder, as before,
tell 1, 2, bring it then with outstretched arms before the middle of your
body, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly on the left heel to the right about, turning the
right heel an half circle against the hollow of the left foot, tell 1, 2,
Charge breast high, as before, stepping back with the right foot, and observe
further as in Explan: 1.

Word of Command. 8. By the left as ye were
Explanation.
Bring the Pike, as before, straight up, at the same time bring up the Right
Foot, tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to the left about, and bring
the Pike in turning, with straight Arms just before the middle of the Body,
tell 1, 2, and bring it to the Shoulder as before, observing what is shown in
Explan. 2.

Word of Command. 9. To the left about Charge.
Explanation.
Take hold of the PIKE again at the Right Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and bring it
with both hands, and outstretched Arms straight before the middle of your Body,
tell 1, 2, turn nimbly upon the Left Foot to the Left about; tell again 1, 2,
Charge the PIKE Breast high, at the same time bring back the Right Foot, and
keep in the Posture as before was told you.

Word of Command. 10. By the Right as you were.
Explanation
This is done as formerly, namely that you bring the Pike up nimbly before you,
with the bringing up of he Right foot, tell 1, 2, and turn nimbly upon the Left
Foot to the Right about, holding the Pike with outstretched Arms just before
the middle of your Body; tell again 1, 2, and bring the Pike again to your
Shoulder, observing what is said before.

Word of Command. 11. Shoulder your Pikes
Explanation.
Take hold of the PIKE with the Left Hand at the Right Shoulder, tell 1, 2, and
bring it with both hands just before the middle of your Body, tell again 1, 2,
and set your Right foot an ordinary Pace backwards, turning the Left foot upon
the Heel, that both fee^ stand in an equal line, the Toes turned outward; Let
go the Pike with the Right Hand at the same time as you tread back, and turning
the Foot, let the Left hand and the Spear sink down backwards, till the hand
comes just about the middle of the Body; Take hold of the Pike again immediately
with the Right hand about the height of, and against the Shoulder, in such
manner, that the stepping back of the Right Foot, and the taking hold of the
Pike with the Right hand, is done at one time, then hold the Pike thus with
outstretched Arms; the Thumb upwards along the Pike, turned inwards toward the
Body, the Pike sloping in such a manner, that the Butt end of the Pike come
within a Foot of the Ground, tell 1, 2, bring the Pike then upon the Right
shoulder, and at the same time bring up the Right Foot. Observe, that bringing
the Pike upon the Shoulder, the setting down of the right foot and letting
loose of the left hand, be done all at one time; In this posture the heels must
be in a straight line, the toes turned a little outward, the feet an ordinary
pace afunde^ you hold the pike thus upon the shoulde^ with the Right hand, the
thumb turned upwards, and outward from the body, that the Pike may the better
lie upon the shoulder, the spear mounted, and you must take care that you keep
the Butt-en^ but a foot from the Ground, exactly between your two feet,
straight before your Body, letting your left hand hang down by your Body as
before is shown; Hold (...) your Head and Body straight, which po^ture must
always be observed with a Shouldered Pike.

Word of Command. 12. To the Front Charge.
Explanation.
Take the pike with your right hand from your shoulder, turning at the same
time ^^pon the left foot to the Right, placing the left an ordinary step from
the right, the heels in an equal line, the toes turned ou^ words, as before is
directed; In this turning take hold of the pike with the left hand against the
middle of your Body, with ou^ stretched Arms, a straight body, the Pike
sloping, as before, the butt-end a foot from the ground, tell 1, 2, then bring
the pike straight upwards, with both hands before you and in this bringing up
of the Pike, let go your right hand, which is above, and take hold with it at
the butt-end of the Pike, and at the same time being the right foot forwards,
so that the taking hold of the butt, and the setting down of the right foot be
done at one time, tell 1, 2, upon which you step a good pace backwards, with
the right foot, just behind the left, charge the Pike forwards breast high; so
that the charging of the pike, and the putting down of your right foot, be done
at one time; observe the posture shown in Explan. 1

Word of Command. 13. Shoulder as you were.
Explanation.
Raise up the Pike nimbly as in Explan* 2. tell 1, 2. and step back with the
Right Foot, at the same time letting loose your Right hand from the Butt-end,
take hold of it again (in the setting down of your Right Foot,) above the Left
Hand the height of your shoulder, Tell 1, 2, and observe in the shouldering of
the Pike, Explain. 11.

word of command. 14. To the Right Charge.
Explanation.
Raise the Pike with your Right Hand again from your shoulder, take hold of it
with your left hand, stepping back with the Right Foot, hold it sloping with
straight Arms before your Body, as in explan. 11. Tell 1, 2, bring up the Pike
right before you, letting go your Right hand, and take hold of it again at the
Butt-end, placing a^ the same time the Heel of the Right, against the hollow of
the Left Foot, tell 1, 2 and then immediately with the treading back (...) the
Right Foot, Charge as before Brea^ high.

Word of Command 15. To the Left as you were.
Explanation.
Raise the Pike again with the bringing up of your Right Foot, tell 1, 2, let
(...) your Hand from the Butt-end of the Pike The Pike being in the Left Hand,
let the Spear end of the Pike sink backwards, take hold of it with your Right
Hand, about the height of your shoulder, at the same time you remove your Right
Foot, hold the same sloping with ou^ stretched Arms, the Body straight, tell 1,
2, bring the Pike upon the shoulder, with the bringing up (...) the Right Foot,
and observe further the Posture of a shouldered Pike.

Word of Command. 16. To the left Charge
Explanation.
Bring again the Pike sloping before your Body, as often has been said, tell 1,
2, and raise it up straight, tell again 1, 2, and turn to the Left about upon
the Left foot, and place at the same time the Heel of the Right Foot against
the hollow of the left, tell again 1, 2, Charge again Breast high, as before.

Word of Command. 17. To the Right as you were.
Explanation.
Raise up the Pike again with the bringing up of the Right Foot, tell 1, 2, and
turn upon the left Foot to the Right about, tell again 1, 2, and bring the Pike
(with the removing of the Right foot again) sloping before the Body, tell again
1, 2, bring the Pike upon the Shoulder with the bringing up (as said before) of
the Right Foot; Observe further the Posture shown before.

Word of Command. 16. To the Right about charge.
Explanation.
Bring the Pike again sloping before your Body, tell 1, 2, raise the same with
the removing of the Feet nimbly, tell 1, 2, turn upon the Left Foot nimbly to
the Right, holding the Pike strait up with out stretched Arms, at the same time
the heel of the right foot must stand against the hollow of the left, tell
again 1, 2, and charge the pike breast high, as before has been shown.

Word of Command. 19. By the left as you were.
Explanation.
Raise up the pike with the bringing up (...) the right foot, tell 1, 2, turn
upon the Left foot to the left, tell again 1, 2, let go the hand from the
butt-end, and bring it sloping before your body with the removing of the right
foot, and outstretched arms, tell 1, 2, and shoulder, as often as has been
shown.

Word of command. 20. To the Left about Charge.
Explanation.
Bring the pike again sloping before your Body, tell 1, 2, and raise it
straight upward with the bringing up of the right foot, as in Explan, 12. tell
again 1, 2, turn upon the left foot to the left about, tell 1, 2, and nimbly
charge the pike with the stepping back of the right foot breast high.

Word of Command. 21. By the Right as you were.
Explanation.
Raise the pike straight up nimbly tell 1, 2, turn upon the left foot to the
right about, hold the pike with out stretched Arms straight before the body,
tell 1, 2, let go the right hand, and take hold of the pike again with the
setting back of the Right foot so as in Explan, 31; tell 1, 2, lay the pike on
the shoulder, with the bringing up of the right foot; observe further the
posture of a shouldered Pike, as before.

Word of Command. 22. port your pikes.
Explanation.
Bring the pike again before your body, and do as in Explanation 12. is shown,
excepting only, that the spear of the pike do not come so low as to be breast
high, but a little higher upon the port.

Word of Command. 23 To the Front Charge.
Explanation.
Sink the left Elbow with the Pike, so that it be breast high, and remain in
the posture shown in a charged pike.

Word of Command. 24. Traii your Pikes with the Spears behind.
Explanation.
Let go your Right Hand from the Butt-end, and at the same time (holding the
Pike with the left Hand betweeen the foremost Fingers and the Thumb) drop the
Spear upon the Ground, turning at the same time upon the Left Foot to the
Right, that the Heels of both Feet stand in an equal Line, the Toes turned
outward, and the Right Hand hanging down by the side of the Body.

Word of Command. 25. Charge as you were.
Explanation.
Turn upon your Left Foot to the Left that the hollow of the Right Foot come
against the heel of the Left, take hold at the same time of the Butt-end of the
Pike with the Right Hand; Charge your Pike Brea^ high.

Word of Command. 26. push your pikes
Explanation.
The Pike being thus held, you thrust (...) out strongly forward with both
Hands, not stirring the feet, in such manner that the Right Hand come to the
Left Shoulder, o^ as far as the Right Hand can reach, pulling it back again,
and Charging Breast high, as before.

Word of Command. 27. Trail your pikes the Spears before.
Explanation.
Stand still with both feet, take hold of the pike with the left hand forwards
as far as the arm can reach, let go the Right Hand, bring back the pike with
the left, take hold again with the Right as far as the Arm can reach, bring the
pike with the right Hand, take hold of it again with the left as far as it can
reach, bring the same back; And lastly, take hold of it with the Right Hand,
(with the stepping forward of the Right Foot,) about a hands breadth from the
Spear, in such manner, that the thumb and the flar of the spear lie upwards,
hold the pike thus with the Right Hand, at the Right Side, the Elbow turned
outward almost in an equal line with the Body, the Left Hand hanging down by
the side of the Body, the Feet and Heels in an equal line, standing with the
Toes turned outward.

Word of Command. 28. present your Spears.
Explanation.
Take hold of the pike with the Left Hand just above the Right, the Thumb
upwards, let go the Right Hand, take hold of the pike again about a Foot
backwards, layiing the pike with the Right Hand to the side of the Body, and
hold it thus with both hands the Elbows turned outward, the Spear flat, the
left Knee a little bent, one foot behind the other; that the hellow of the
Right come in an equal line with the Heel of the Left Foot.

Word of Command. 29. To the Front Charge,
Explanation.
Stand still with both feet, let go the left hand, bring the pike forwards as
far as the Arm can reach, take hold of it with the Left, let loose the Right,
bring the pike forward with the Left, take the Pike again backward with the
Right Hand, let loose the left, and bring the Pike again with the Right hand
forward, take it once more with the Left, let loose the Right, and take hold of
the Butt-end, and Charge again Breast high, as before is shown.

Note, The thrusting the Pike forward, and the taking hold of it backward, must
be every time done as far as your Arms will permit.

Word of command. 30. Advance your Pikes.
Explanation.
Raise the Pike nimbly straight before you, with the bringing up of the right
foot, tell 1, 2, bring it to the Right shoulder, with the turning and removing
the Feet and Hands, observing further the posture as in Explan. 2d. is shown.

Word of command. 31. Order your Pikes.
Explanation.
Take hold of the Pike at the Shoulder with the Left Hand, bring the same
nimbly with out stretched Arms before your Body, tell 1, 2, let loose the Right
Hand, let the Pike with the left Hand sink down as far as the Arm (unforced)
will suffer, tell 1, 2, bring it to your side by the Right foot, let loose the
Left hand, hanging it down by the Body, in such a manner, that the letting
loose of the Left hand, and the setting down of the Pike, is done at one time,
hold the Pike thus to the Ground by the outside of the Right foot, the Thumb
over against the Right eye, the Arm from the Hand to the Elbow, hanging down by
the Pike, so that the same come to stand up straight, the Feet with the Heels
in a straight line, the Toes turned outward, hold up the head, and the Body
straight, so as in the Posture of the Advanced Pike has often been shown.

Word of Command 32. Lay down your Pikes.
Explanation.
This is done in the same manner as ^ shown in the laying down of the Muske^
Explan. 39. Viz. That you take up your Right Foot, and set the hollow of the
fo^^ against the Butt-end of the Pike; step (...) large step forward with the
left Foot leaning toward it, lay down your Pike with (...) straight a Body as
possible, and remain^^ that posture looking to your right ha^^ Man, but without
turning your head, holding it up as much as possible, tell 1, 2, ^ then raise
your self up with the stepping ba^^ of your Left Foot, turn your Right foot
inward upon your Heel over the Pike, setting it along by the Butt-end, both
your Ar^^ hanging down your Body, and stand with your Body in the same posture
you did before the laying down of the Pike.

Word of Command. 33. Take up your pikes.
Explanation.
This is also done as with the taking up (...) the Musket, Explan. 40. Turn
your right foot outward upon the Heel over the Pike and set the hollow of your
Foot against the But-end of the Pike; At the same time turn your Right Hand
with a small Motion outward to answer the Motion of your Foot, as has been
shown in the taking up the Musket; Step foreward a large step with the left
foot along the pike, and come forward with a stiff Body, as has been said;
take the pike with your right Hand at the same place where you held it at
laying down, tell 1, 2, 3, raise your self up with the Pike, with the stepping
back of the left foot take up your Right foot, and set it inwards by the
Butt-end; observe the Posture as is shown before the laying it down.

Word of Command. 34. Plant your pikes
Explanation.
Take hold of the Pike with the Left hand against the Body, as much downwards
as the Arm unforced will permit; put back the Right Foot a little; Thrust then
the Pike with both Hands fast into the ground; set your Right Foot forwards
again; let both hands hang down by the Body.

Word of Command. 35. Order your pikes.
Explanation.
Take the pike with both hands in the same place where it was let loose; draw
it out of the Earth, with the setting back of the right foot and then in the
bringing up of the right foot, let go the left hand, put the pike down by the
right foot, and further obseru^ the posture as in Explan. 31. is shown.

Word of Command. 36. Advance your pikes.
Explanation.
Bring up the pike with the right hand just before the body as far as the arm
can reach^ take hold of the pike with a full left hand, as much as the arm
unforced will permit, just before the middle of the body, tell 1, 2, bring the
pike with your left hand (letting loo^^ the right) as high as your shoulder;
then take hold of the pike with the right hand at the Butt-end, tell 1, 2,
bring the pike to the right Shoulder, tell again 1, 2, let loose the Le^^ Hand,
which must hang down by the Body a^ often in the advanced pike has been shown.

General Words of Command for the Evolutions.
Word of Command. Take heed to do the Evolutions. 1. Take Heed.
Explanation.
AS soon as this Word of Command i^ given, there must be great silence observed
throughout the whole Battalion, the Soldiers doing no motions either with
their Head, Body, Hands or Feet, but such as shall be ordered, looking
steadfastly to the Commanding Officer, who is to exercise and give the Words of
Command, as was formerly said in the Exercise.

Word of Command. 2. Carry well your Arms.
Explanation.
The Musketeers and Pikemen must carry their Arms as in the exercise has been
shown; namely the Musketeer must carry his musket even upon his shoulder, the
muzzel even and high; the Pikeman holding his pike firm and straight up, as in
the Exercise is shown; the whole Ranks and Files carry their Arms in a straight
Line and high, that when one stands behind or before the File, or at the Wing,
or End of a Rank, the pikes and the Mutketeers show as if there was but one
pike or Musket.

word of command. 3. Dress your Banks and Files.
Explanation.
Those that stand next to one another in the Ranks, look to the Right and to
the Left Hand, and must keep themselves in such ^ posture, that neither Head
not Body is to (...) seen before or after one another, but that the Head,
Shoulder and Heels, be in a straight line; Also those in the Files must alway^
stand with their face against the middle of the Neck of their Leader; Further
it is to be observed at the parade, or when ye wi^^ Exercise, the Ranks must
always be fou^^ ordinar paces asunder, and the Files one ste^^ or the length
of an out streched Arm; (...) the marching up, the Ranks must open (...) the
distance which shall be Commanded^ either a whole step, or a half; Namely thus,
the Right files stands, and those of the Left Hand must stand each from his
Right-Hand-Man an whole Step, or as far as he can teach with an outstretched
Arm^ (or an half pace, which is the half of an ou^ stretched Arm, that is when
the Hand is se^ bent against the Side; which distance is always to be observed
when you Give Fire;) The Files in their Marching off must close so near, that
their Shoulders almost touch, and the Ranks keep to their former distance.

They must begin their March always with the Left Foot, and in their Facings
must always turn upon the Left Foot, except in some Commands in the following
Evolutions.

They must March very softly, and without turning their Heads look toward
their Right and Left Hand, but most to the right that the whole Rank may march
straight, their Hats cockt, the Head upright, and carry well their Arms.

When Arms is mentioned, it signifies both Musketeers and Pikemen; You are not
to charge with the Pikes when the Muskets are presented.

EVOLUTION with MUSKETEERS and PIKEMEN together.
Word of Command. Take heed the whole Battalion to present your Arms. 1.
present your Arms.
Explanation.
THE Musketeers must rest their Muskets, and the Pikemen charge their pikes to
the Front, the Spears in a line breast high; and observe, when they have
brought up their Arms before their Body, to stand in that posture whilst they
slowly tell 1, 2, (and after they have looked upon their Right and Left Hand
Man, and their Leaders, that the Ranks and Files be straight) they rest their
Muskets, and charge their pikes altogether, and stand in that posture as in the
Exercise of the Pike and Musket has been shown.

Word of Command. 2. To the right. To the right. To the right. To the right.
Explanation
In these Four Facings, both Musketeers and Pikemen must raise their Arms up
before their Bodies, at the same time bringing up the Right foot, tell 1, 2,
face four times upon the Left foot to the Right, turning at each time the
fourth part of a Circle, in such a manner, that the Heel of the right foot
comes always to stand in the hollow of the left, and every one to take heed to
observe his right and Left hand Man, and his Leader, that the Ranks and Files
always remain straight, Tell 1, 2, nimbly rest your Musket, and charge your
Pike with the stepping back of the Right Foot, so as before is shown.

word of command. 3. To the Right about
Explanation.
Raise your Arms at the same time, bringing nimbly up the Right Foot, tell 1,
2, Face to the Right about upon the left Foot, holding out your Arms as far as
may be without constraint before the Body, tell 1, 2, Charge, and nimbly rest
your Arms with the stepping back of the Right Foot.

Word of Command. 4. By the left as you were
Explanation.
Raise your Arms at the same time with the bringing nimbly up the right Foot,
tell 1, 2, Face nimbly to the left about upon the left foot, telling again 1,
2, Charge and rest your Arms as before.

Word of Command. 5. To the Left To the Left. To the Left To the Left.
Explanation.
This is done like the facings of the right, only with the difference, that you
turn upon the left foot to the left, every time the fourth part of a Circle.

Word of Command To the left about
Explanation.
This is done as in the facings and Chargings and Restings to the right about,
has been shown, only with this difference, that you face upon the left foot to
the left about.

Word of Command. 7. by the right as you were
Explanation.
This is done as in Explan. 1. is shown, tho with this difference, that you
face upon the left foot to the right about.

word of command. 8. Poise your Muskets and advance your Pikes
Explanation
Raise youa Arms nimbly up with the bringing up of the Right Foot, and stand
thus with outstretched Arms till the following Command, Viz. As the Musket is
in Explan. 44. and the Pike as in Explan. 2.

word of command. 9. Shoulder your Muskets.
Explanation
Bring the Musket upon the Shoulder, and the Pike to the Shoulder, and keep in
this Posture as in the Exercise of the Pike and Musket Explan. 1. is shown.

Word of Command. Ranks take heed to double your Front 10. Ranks to the Right,
double your Front.
Explanation
The Second, Fourth, and sixth Rank stands ready to double the other.

word of command. 11. March
Explanation
The Second Marches, and doubles in the First, and the Fourth in the Third, and
the Sixth in the Fifth rank.

Note, That in this and all other Marchings and Doublings, it is to be
observed, that the whole Rank is to step forward with the Left Foot, Marching
slowly, always looking toward the Right and left Hand, but principally to the
right, that the whole Rank may March equal, carrying their Arms with a straight
Body, holding up their Heads and every one Marching in four Paces to be Right
Hand of their Leader that stood in the Rank before him.

Word of Command. 12. To the left as you were.
Explanation.
Those Ranks which doubled, Face at once upon the Right foot to the Left, and
tread at the same time with the Left foot half a ^^ep backwards; in which
facing they carry their arms up high and straight, that the one do not touch
the other, nor make (...) clattering, and stand thus ready to march.

word of command. 13. March.
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks which ha^ made half a step backwards tread forwards
with the left foot, and march in four paces (...) their former places, the
right foot making the fourth pace, and must be set in his fo^mer place, the
left foot after it; and stan^ thus till the following Command.

word of command. 14. Halt,
Explanation.
As soon as this word of Command is given, the Ranks which marched, face at on^
upon the right foot to the right about, everyone taking heed that he stand
straight (...) rank and File as before.

word of command. 15. Ranks to the Left double your From
Explanation
Those ranks which before Double to the right, stand ready to match, and double
to the left.

Word of Command. 16. March
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks step foreward with the Left Foot, and March in four Paces
in the ranks where they are to double, placing themselves on the left Side of
the Man which stood before them; and observe further as in the former Marches
was shown

word of command. 17. To the Right as you were.
Explanation.
The ranks which Doubled, face at once upon the left Foot to the right, setting
the right Foot half a Pace out back wards, carrying their Arms high and
straight, as before has been shown.

Word of Command. 18. March
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks step half a pace Forwards with the same right Foot,
and March in four Paces to their former places; so that the left Foot makes the
fourth Pace, and stands in the former place, and must remain thus till the
following Command.

Word of Command. 19. Halt
Explanation.
The former Ranks face upon the left foot to the left about, and take heed to
even their Ranks and Files.

Word of Command. Ranks take heed to double your Rear 20. Ranks to the Right
about double your Rear.
Explanation.
The ranks which before stood still, Viz. The first, the Third, and the fifth,
must now March and double, and turn upon the right foot to the right about,
standing thus ready to March.

word of command. 21; March
Explanation
The forementioned ranks step forward with the right foot, and March in four
Paces into the ranks which stood behind them, the left foot makes the fourth or
Last Pace, and comes to stand close to the right foot of the man that stood
behind him, and so to stand till the next word of Command.

word of command. 22. Halt.
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks face on the left foot to the right about, and every
one does straighten himself with his right and left hand Man, carrying the
muzzel of the musket high, the pikes straight, as has been said before.

Word of Command. 23: As you were.
Explanation.
Those Ranks which doubled, stand ready to their former places.

Word of Command. 24. March.
Explanation.
The forementioned Ranks step at once with the Left Foot forward, and march
slowly in four paces to their former Places, and observing also their Marching
and standing, as is shown in Explan 11.

Word of Command. 25 ranks to the Left double your rear.
Explanation.
The aforesaid ranks turn upon the left foot to the left about, and stand so
ready to March.

Word of Command. 26. March.
Explanation.
The fore named ranks step upon the Left foot at once forward, and match in
four paces into the Ranks that stood behind them, in such a manner that their
right foot comes to stand in the fourth pace by the left foot of the man that
stood behind them; and stand thus till the following Command.

word of command. 27. Halt.
Explanation.
This done as in Explan: 22: except that you turn on the right foot to the left
about, straightning your ranks and files, carrying your Arms as before.

word of command. 28. As you were.
Explanation.
The forsaid ranks stand ready to march.

word of command. 29. March.
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks step at once with the left foot forward, and march in
four steps to their former places, observing all what in Explan. 11, has been
said, and the Note thereon.

Rear half Files take heed to double your Front. word of command. 30, Rear half
Files to the right double your Front.
Explanation.
The three last ranks make ready to march and double.

Word of Command. 31. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks step at once forward with the left foot, and march
slowly and exactly, carrying their arms well; The fourth rank marches into the
first, the fifth in the second, the sixth in the third rank, and place
themselves on the right side of the man that stood before them, observing
further as in Explan. 11.

Word of Command. 32. To the Left as ye were.
Explanation.
This is done in the same manner as in Explanation. 12.

Word of Command. 33 march.
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks step at once forward upon the Left foot, and March thus
slowly to their former places, so that the right foot makes the Last or Twelfth
step, and is set before the other.

Word of Command. 34. Halt.
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks face at once upon the right foot to the right about,
observing further what in the former commands has been said.

Word of Command. 35. rear half Files to the left double your Front.
Explanation.
The foresaid Rear half files stand ready to March forwards, and to double.

Word of Command. 36. March.
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks step at once with the Left foot, and march straight and
slowly forward; observe further as in Explan. 31.

Word of Command. 37. To the right as you were.
Do as in Explan. 17.

word of command. 38. March.
Explanation.
The forementioned ranks step at once with the right foot forward, Marching
slowly to their former place, so that the left foot comes in the Last or
Twelfth Pace, and stands forward, observing what has been further said of
straightning their ranks, and files and carrying their Arms well.

word of command. 39. Halt.
The forementioned ranks face at once upon the Left foot to the left about; and
observe further what in the former Commands has been said.

Word of Command. Front half Files take heed to double your rear 40. Front half
Files to the right double your rear.
Explanation.
The Three foremost ranks face upon the right foot to the right about, and
stand thus ready to March, and double.

word of command. 41. March
Explanation
The aforesaid ranks step at once with the right foot forward, and March
slowly, Viz. The third rank in the sixth, the Second in the fifth, and the
first in the fourth, so the left foot makes the last and Twelfth Step, and must
stand by the right foot of the man in his file he is to Double, and so remain,
expecting the next Command.

Word of Command 42. Halt
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks face at once upon the right about, straightning their ranks
and files, as formerly has been said.

Words of Command. 43. Front half Files as you were.
Explanation.
The foresaid Three ranks stand ready to March as they were.

Word of Command. 44. march.
Explanation
The forementioned Three ranks step at once with the Left foot, and March
slowly forward, carrying their Arms high, straightning their ranks, and evening
their files, when they come to their former places.

Word of Command. 45. Front half files to the Left double you rear.
Explanation
The foresaid Three ranks turn upon their left foot to the left about and stand
thus ready to March, and double.

Word of Command. 46. march
Explanation.
The foresaid ranks step again at one time forward with the left foot, and
March slowly into the ranks that stood behind them, in such a manner, that the
right foot is the last and Twelfth Step, and stands next the left foot of the
Man they are to Double, and stand thus till the following Command.

word of command. 47. Halt
Explanation.
The foresaid Three Ranks turn upon the right foot to the left about, and
straighten their ranks and Files.

word of command. 48. Front half files as you were.
Explanation.
The forementioned Three ranks stand again ready to March as they were.

word of command. 49. march
Explanation.
The foresaid three ranks step at once forward with the left foot, and March
slowly to their former places, carrying their Arms well and high, and stand
straight in their ranks and files, as formerly has been said.

Word of Command Files take heed to double. 50. Files to the right double.
Explanation.
The files which are to double, turn at once upon the left foot to the right;
namely, the second, the fourth, the Sixth, and the Eighth, reckoning from the
right Hand, and so through the whole Battalion; but the uneven files must
stand, Viz. The first, the third, the fifth, the seventh, etc. Through the
whole Battalion.

Note, That in this doubling of Files, the Pikes are never mixed amongst the
Musketeers, nor the Musketeers amongst the Pikes, but that every division
Doubles it self apart, and so they must have even files; and in case there be
uneven Files, they are to stand still.

Word of Command. 51. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned files thus faced, ready to March and Double, must at once
step forward with the left foot, and March slowly, every one placing himself
behind his Right hand Man, so that the left foot in the Third and last Pace
comes to stand foremost; with the Heel behind the left Heel of his Right Hand
man he is to double, expecting the next Command.

Word of Command. 52. Halt
Explanation.
The foresaid Marched Files turn at once upon the left foot to the left, and
straighten their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well, as often harh been
said.

Word of Command. 53. To the Left as you were.
Explanation.
The foresaid Files which Doubled, face at once upon the left Foot to the left,
and stand thus ready to March as they were.

Word of Command. 54. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned Files step at once with the left Foot forward, and March in
Three Paces to their former places, and stand in their Ranks and Files as
before.

Word of Command. 55. Files to the left double.
Explanation
The Files which before stood still, must now upon the Right Foot face to the
left, and stand ready to March and double.

word of command. 56. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned Files standing thus Faced, ready to March and double;
namely, the first, the Third, the fifth and the Seventh; etc. step at once with
the Right Foot forwards, and March in Three paces slowly behind the man that
stood on their left Hand, so that the Right Foot in the Third and last pace
stands foremost; with the Heel behind the right heel of the left hand Man he is
to double, expecting the following Command.

Word of command. 57 Halt.
Explanation
The forementioned files face at once upon the right foot to the right,
standing eve^ in their ranks and files, and do as before has been said.

Word of Command. 58. To the Right as you were.
Explanation.
The foresaid files which have doubled, fa^^ again at once upon the right foot
to the right and thus stand ready to march as they we^^

Word of Command. 59 march.
Explanation.
The forenamed files step forward at once with the right foot, and march in
three pace^ to their former places, and straighten their ranks and files as
formerly they stood.

Half Ranks take heed to double your Files.
Word of Command. 60. Half Ranks to the right double your Files.
Explanation.
The half rakns of every division faces upon the left foot to the Right, and so
stand ready to march and double.

Note, That this doubling is either by the half Ranks of every division a part,
or by the half of the Battalion.

Word of Command. 61. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned Files that are Faced to double, step at once with the left
foot forward, and March straight forward to the place where the First Man of
the Right hand stood; where every one to the last Man must turn (observing in
this March, that the left foot must never come at the outside of ^he line of
the Front) and March thus in ^he midst of the Ranks and files wherein they are
to double; so that the Left Foot ^^ust make the last step, as in Explan. 51.

Word of command. 62. Halt.
Explanation.
The foresaid half Ranks Face at once upon the Left Foot to the Left, and
straighten their Ranks and Files.

Word of Command. 63. To the left as you were.
Explanation.
The foresaid Half Ranks face at once upon the left foot to the left, and so
stand ^^ady to March in their former places.

Word of Command. 64. march.
Explanation.
The foresaid Half Ranks step at once forward with their left foot, and March
thus forward till they come to their former places (observing again, that the
Right foot do not come without the straight Line of the front) expecting the
following Command.

Word of command. 65. Halt.
Explanation.
The foresaid half Ranks face all together upon the Right foot to the Right,
straitning their Ranks and files, carrying their Arms well and high.

Word of Command. 66. Half ranks to the Left double your files.
Explanation.
The Half Ranks which stood still before, must March now, facing at once upon
the Right foot to the Left; stand thus ready to March and double.

Word of Command. 67. march
Explanation.
The foresaid Half Ranks begin their March with the Right foot, and March
straight forwards, every one following his leader to the place where the first
left hand Man stood and turned, where every one to the last man must turn, and
march thus forward (observing that the Right foot never comes without the front
Line) into the midst of the Ranks and files in which they are to double; The
Right foot makes the last step, and stands forwards, as in Explan. 56. and thus
stand expecting the next command.

Word of Command. 68. Halt
Explanation.
The foresaid Half Ranks face at once upon the Right foot to the Right,
straightning their Ranks and files carrying their Arms well, straight and high.

Word of Command. 69. To the right as you were.
Explanation.
The foresaid Ranks face at once upon the right foot to the Right, standing
thus ready to march to their former Places.

Word of command. 70. march
The forementioned Half Ranks step forward all together with the Right foot, an
March back to their former places (observing again in their march, that the
left foot does not come without the line of the front) expecting the following
Command.

Word of Command. 71. Halt.
Explanation
The foresaid Ranks face all together upon the left foot to the left,
straightning their Ranks and files, and carrying their Arms straight and high.

Word of Command. Files take heed to Counter march. 72. Files to the right
about Countermarch.
Explanation
The first man of every file must face upon the Right foot to the Right about.

word of command. 73. March
Explanation
The whole Battalion steps at once with the left foot forward, and march every
one slowly to the right Side of the man that stood behind him, till the first
comes to the last, and the last to the first Man's place, (observe further, that
in their march every one turns at the same place to the right about, where the
first man turned; also that they carry their arms well, straight and high;
every one observing their distance in ranks and files, that they disorder not
another) expecting the following Command.

Word of Command. 74 Files to the left about Countermarch.
Explanation.
The first Man of every file must turn upon the left foot to the left about,
and expect the following Command.

word of command. 75. march.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion step at once with the left foot forward, marching slowly
by the left side of the man that stood behind him, till every one has come to
his former place, observing further all what has been shown in Explan. 73.

Word of Command. Ranks take heed to counter march. 76 Ranks to the right about
Countermarch.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion turns at once upon the Right Foot to the Right, and stand
thus ready to counter march.

Word of Command. 77 march
Explanation.
The first Man of every division faces upon the right foot to the right about,
and Marches straight in the middle between the Ranks (all follow one another to
the place where the first Man faced to the right about, and in the same place
do likewayes face, and so march forward till he stands upon the left hand that
stood upon the right, and he that stood upon the left stands upon the right; In
which March care is to be taken, that as soon as the first Man is past, the
last to march in the same line, Marching with his Right Foot where the last man
marched with his Right Foot, marching thus in the straight line of the Front,
and because the Souldie^ come some thing near each other in th^^ March, good
care must be taken to carry their Arms well, that they may not touch or
clatter; And likewise observe the distance of ranks and files as they were
formerly.

Note, This Countermarch may be done by division, or by the whole Battalion.

Word of Command. 78 Halt
Explanation.
The whole Battalion faces at once upon the Right foot to the right,
straightning their Ranks and Files, carrying their Arms well.

Word of Command. 79. Ranks to the Left Counter march.
Explanation
The whole Battalion faces upon the left foot to the Left; and stands thus
ready to Countermarch.

Word of Command 80. march.
Explanation.
The first Man of every Division faces upon the left foot to the left about,
and marches straight in the middle of the two ranks, the which all follow till
they come to their first place; In which March is to be observed, that the
first man, as soon as he is past the last, tread in the same Line with his left
foot where the other did go with his Left foot, and thus to March in the
straight line of the Front; and further to observe in the Countermarch what is
said in Expla. 77.

Word of Command. 81. Halt.
The whole Battalion faces at once upon the left foot to the left, straightning
their Rank and files, carrying their Arms well.

Word of Command. Take heed to close your Files. 82. To the Right and Left
close your Files to the Center.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion faces to the right and left inwards at the Center; namely,
the half raoks on the right face to the left upon the left foot, and the other
half on the left, face on the right foot to the right, that they stand with
their faces and feet toward each other, standing thus expecting the following
Command.

word of command. 83. March
Explanation.
The Right half Ranks step with the left foot, and the left half ranks with the
right foot, at one time forwards, and those that stand in the middle make but
half a Pace, and March thus against one anoterh to the distance of half a Pace,
carrying their Arms well and high, that they do not come to touch, and stand
thus, expecting the next Command.

Word of Command. 84. Halt
Explanation.
The half ranks of the right turn upon the Left foot to the right, and those of
the left hand turn upon the right foot to the left.

Note, When you close your Files to the Right or left, The whole Battalion
must face upon the left foot, and march with the left Foot; and this is to be
observed in their former returning to their Places.

Word of Command Take heed tociost your ranks. 85. Ranks close to the Front.
Explanation
The five last ranks stand ready to March, and close forwards.

word of command. 86. march.
Explanation.
The first rank stands, the five other step at once with the left foot forward,
Marching thus slowly, and Close within a pace of each other.

Word of Command. Take heed to Wheel. 87. To the right Wheel.
Explanation.
The closed ranks and files stand ready to March and Wheel.

Word of Command. 88. march
Explanation.
The Whole Battalion Marches with the Left Foot at once forwards, and march and
Wheel the fourth part of a Circle, viz. the first man of the first rank of the
right hand, ^urns with his body and feet slowly; but so, that the right foot
does not come out of (...) place, he only turning upon the heel, the there of
the same rank also wheel with him and according to proportion, as they are
d^^tant from the right hand man, do man faster or slower, looking carefully to
(...) left hand, without turning the head, th^^ the whole rank may march even;
the (...) rank in their wheeling must keep close the right, and not march so
quick as the there, they having a greater Circumference The other must observe
the same order their march, tho not to close themselver the right as the first
rank does, but to the^^ and to observe their distance well in ranks files,
carrying their Arms well, every one ^^ serving his Leader, and the right and
left M^ Ranks as they are further from the From so in proportion they are to
march faster.

Word of Command. 89. Halt.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion having wheeled the fourth part of a circle stands straigth
ni^^ their Ranks and files, carrying their arms wr^^ and expecting the
following Command.

Word of Command. 90. To the Right Wheel.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion stands again ready to march and Wheel.

word of command. 91. March.
Explanation.
The Battalion steps again at once with the Left foot forward, and Wheels the
fourth part of a Circle, observe further Explan. 88

word of command. 92 Halt.
Explanation.
They stand still here, as was shown in Explan. 89. straighten your ranks and
files, and carry your Arms well and high.

Word of Command. 93. To the right about wheel.
Explanation
They stand again ready to March and Wheel.

Word of Command. 94. March.
Explanation.
As the whole Battalion at twice did wheel at each time the fourth part of a
Circle, so must it now at once wheel half a Circle to the right about; so that
every one comes to stand in his former Place again, oblerving as in Explan, 88.

word of command. 95 Halt.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion being come to their former place, stand, straightning
their rank and files, carrying their Arms well.

Word of Command. 96. To the left, wheel.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion stands ready again to march and Wheel

Word of Command. 97. march.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion Marches at one with the left foot forward, and wheel to
the left the fourth part of a Circle. The first man of the left turns in his
place upon the left foot, as also the first rank Closes to the left, and the
other ranks in their march close to the right, without turning their heads
Observe also what has been saidof distance Ranks and files, and carrying of
Arms.

word of command. 98. Halt
Explanation.
They stand still as before, straightning their Ranks and files, carry their
Arms well, and expect the following Command.

Word of Command. 99. To the left wheel.
Explanation.
They stand again ready to March and wheel.

word of command. 100. March
Explanation.
They wheel the Fourth part of a Circle the left, and observe all in the
abovesaid Wheeling.

word of command. 101. Halt.
Explanation.
They stand thus, expecting the following Command.

word of command. 102. To the left about Wheel.
Explanation.
They stand ready to March and Wheel

Word Command. 103. march
Explanation.
As the Whole Battalion did wheel at vice, each time the Foutth part of a
Circe, so must it now at one time Wheel the ^alf of a Citcle to the Left about,
by which very one comes to his former place. Ob^rve also what has been
formerly said.

word of command. 104. Halt.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion being now come their former places, remain thus straight
(...) their ranks and files, carrying their An^ well and high.

Note, That when you are to wheel with (...) Ranks, the following Rank must not
wheel ti^^ comes to the place where the first rank did Wheel; when you wheel to
the right you must close to (...) right, and look to the Left; And when you
wheel to Left, and look toward the Right.

Word of Command. Files take heed to open your former tance. 105. Files to the
right and Left o^^ wards, to your former distance.
Explanation.
The half ranks of the right Ha^ turn upon the left foot to the right, and
(...) half ranks of the left hand turn upon (...) right foot to the left, and
stand now back back, as in Explant 82: they stood face Face. Above all, care
must be taken to cry their Arms straight and high.

word of command. 106. march.
Explanation.
The half ranks of the right step forward with the left, and the half ranks of
the Left step forward with the right Foot all at once, and March to their
former places, those that stand in the middle make but half a pace

word of command. 107 Halt.
Explanation.
The right half ranks face upon the left foot to the left, and the left half
ranks face upon the right foot to the right, and straitning again their ranks
and files, and carry their arms well, straight and high.

Word of Command. Ranks take heed to open to your former distance. 108. Ranks
as you were.
Explanation.
The five ranks which in Explan. 85, did Close forwards, turn upon the left
foot to the right about, standing thus ready to march as they were, The first
rank of the five which turns, must take special care to carry the Muzzels of
their Arms high, that they may not touch the arms of the first rank that stands
still.

word of command. 109. march.
Explanation.
The forementioned five ranks step at once with the left foot forwards,
marching slowly to their former distance of four paces, observing that the left
foot comes down last, and stands foremost; and expect the following command.

Word of Command. 110. Halt.
Explanation.
The foresaid five ranks face at once upon the left foot to the left about,
straightning their ranks and files as before.

Word of Command. Take heed to lay down your Arms. 111. Rest your muskets.
Explanation.
The Muskets are taken from the shoulder and rested, as is shown in the
Exercise of the Musket in Explanation 37.

Word of Command. 112. Order your Arms.
Explanation.
This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket, Explan. 38. and of the Pike,
Expla. 31.

Word of Command. 113. Lay down your Arms.
Explanation.
This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket, Expl. 39. and that of the Pike
Exp 32. has been said; and it must be observed, that the Musketeers and Pikemen
perform all their Motions at one time.

Word of Command. Take heed to quite your Arms. 114. For Straw.
Explanation.
As soon as this Command is given, the whole Battalion must face upon the left
foot to the right about, and expect the following Command.

word of command. 115. March.
Explanation
The whole Battalion step with the left foot forwards, and march slowly between
the Files of their Arms, and march so far clear from their Arms as the
Commanding Officer pleases to order.

Note, When the Soldiers are Marched beyond their Arms, they do not observe
Ranks and Files; which Marching and Returning may also be done with the Drum,
or with the Shot of a musket, according as the Commanding Officer pleases to
order.

Word of Command. 116. To your Arms.
Explanation
As soon as this Command is given, they all draw their Swords, and run together
(holding their Swords in their right Hand even with their Shoulders, the Points
upwards) to their Arms and stand thus expecting the following Command.

Word of Command. 117. Put up your Svvords.
Explanation.
The whole Battalion turn at once, the Points of their Swords down, looking to
wards the left Hand, and put them in the Scabbards; tell 1, 2, let go the Right
Hand standing thus, both Hands hanging do^^ by the Body, till the following
Command.

Word of Command. 118. Take up your Arms.
Explanation.
This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket, Explan. 40. and of the Pike,
Explan* 33. taking heed that every one observe hi^ leader, and his Right hand
man, that they all rise at once.

Word of Command. 119. Rest your Muskets.
Explanation
This is done as in the Exercise of the Musket, Explan* 41.

word of command. 120. Posse your Musket, and advance your Pikes
Explanation
The Muskets and Pikes are brought up at one time, and held before the Body;
Viz. The Musketeers take their muskets with the Right Hand under their Pans,
and bring up their Muskets before the Body with both Hands, (at the same time
bringing up the Right Foot) in which Bringing up, he lets go the left Hand, and
hold his Musket with an outstretched Arm before the middle of his Body; The
Pikemen do as in Explan. 36. and all stand thus expecting the following Command.

Word of Command. 121. Soulder your Muskets
Explanation.
This is done as in Explan, 9. carrying your Arms well, as often has been said.

RVLSE for the Forming of Battalions, the Posting of Officers, Salutes, etc.
I.
FIrst, the Companies which are to form a Battalion, shall place themselves
according to the date of their commission; Viz. The Colonel, ^^ first Company
on the right Wing; The Second, or Lieutenant Colonels Company, upon the Left
Wing; The Majors o^ Third Company, upon the Right Wing, next the first or
Colonels Company; The eldest Captain, or fourth Company upon the left Wing,
next the Lieutenant Colonels or Second Company. All the other Companies after
that manner must place themselves, till the youngest Company come to stand in
the Center.

II.
When the Companys are marching to the place where the Battalion is to be
formed, the Pikemen must march with their Pike advanced; they must always be
placed on be Left Hand of the Musketeers of their Companys.

III.
When all the Companys are come to the place where they are to form the
Battalion,

Drummer is to stand before the Center of the Battalion, and to be at a ruffle
for warning; and the Musketeers of those Companys which make the right Wing,
shall face to the Right, and the Pikes to the Left, the Musketeers of the Left
shall face to the Left, and the pikes to the Right; upon which all the Drummers
shall beat a Troop, and the Musketeers and Pikemen march through and form the
Battalion.

The Officers also at the same time when the Ruffle is Beat, must stand with
their fa^es toward the Battalion, their Pikes and Partilans in their hands;
and also when the Troop Beats, March and post themselves in their proper Places.

In the same manner is the Battalion to be Reduced again to Companies, only
with this difference, that all those which in the forming Battalion faced to
the Right, must then face to the Left; and those that faced to the Left, must
face to the Right.

Here is also to be observed, that wh^ they March off by Companies, the Company
on the Right Wing shall Marc^ first, Beating a Troop, with their Musket
Clubbed, and their Pikes advanced; And (...) the Company on the left Wing
follows, (...) so one after another, according to Senior (...)

Note, That when they Troop off, the (...) March before the Musketeers.

The P^kes must always be Advanced wh^^ they march before the King.

IV.
The Battalion being formed, as is said be fore, the Colonel places himself in
the Center, before the Pikes and Colors; (...) Lieutenant Colonel behind him;
the (...) of the Captains, as also of the Lieutenant in one line upon the Right
Wing, the oth^^ half upon the left Wing of the Musketeer And the Ensigns before
the Pikes, either (...) the Colors or Half Pikes.

And that the Officers may not alter the places by their continual Moving to
(...) fro, the Captains, as also the Lieutenants sha^^ remain upon that Wing
where their (...) keteers are, and there post themselves (...) cording to their
Commissions; that is, (...) eldest outward, and the youngest toward Center;
so that those that have their (...) keteers upon the Right Wing must rem^^
before them, though there should be found elder upon the Left Wing. But in case
there should be a great many Officers more absent upon the one Wing then the
other, the youngest are always to go over to the other wing to make the number
equal; Though upon Action every one shall remain and be left as near his own
Company as possible may be; Of which all Colonels and Commanding Officers of
Battalions are to take great care, and to see that all be done for the best of
the Service.

The Sergeants are to Rank themseves in Rear of the Battalion, except those
that are Commanded to stand upon the Wings; those Battalions which have but sew
Companies, and by consequence but few Sergeants, must have three upon each
Wing, that is, at the First, the Fourth, and Last Rank; but those Battalions
where there are Sergeants enough, must have one upon the Wing of each Rank, and
this is to be ordered according as there is more or fewer Companies in the
Battalion.

And as to the Drummers, they must be divided into Three parts; The first Third
part shall place themselves upon the Right Wing of the Musketeers, next to the
Corporal, or outmost Granadeer; The second third part upon the Left Wing; And
the other Third part before the pikes, behind the colors, where the Hoboyes
are also to place themselves.

V.
The Battalion being to exercise, no Officer may be absent without leave, but
always stand by the Exercise, with his Arms in his Hand upon the Post which in
the rule of Exercise is assigned him, still expecting such Orders as may be
given him; to exercite the whole Battalion, some part of (...) or a single
Company which they are always to perform with their Arms in their Hands, and
not to quite their Arms

No Officer shall exercise on Horse Back, except the Major, or those that in
his absence do perform Majors duty.

VI.
When the King is to be saluted, so soon as he draws near, all the Drummers are
to Beat a march; and his Majesty being come pear the Regiment, the Musketeers
being Shoulder'^, they shall rest their muskets, and the Pikeman having their
Pikes advanced) shall at the same time Charge their Pikes with the Spears
Breast high, and remain in this posture till his Majesty shall be past the
Regiment; In his Riding by the Officers shall Salute him, he being Three or
four Paces distance from them: And all those that are of one Character, shall
salute all in one form.

Here is to be observed, that in the absence of the Ensign, which otherwise
being present must carry the Colors before his Breast when he is to salute.

He that carrys the Colors being no Ensign, as is commonly done by the Free
Corporal, may march and stand in the Ensigns place, but not salute.

When his Majesty passes the Rear of the Battalion no Officer nor Colors shall
go through the Battalion to the Rear, nor salute any further; but the Soldiers
present their Arms to the Right about, as before has been shown, the Pikes
being charged, and the Muskets rested.

VII.
When a Battalion is to file off and march, the Colonel marches foremost alone,
or he that commands the Battalion, although he were but a Captain, upon which the
half of the Captains in one Rank follow, and then the Musketers; The other half
of the Captains March in the Rear of the last division of Musketeers, and
behind them the Lieutenant Colonel; but the Lieutenant Colonel being absent,,
or in the absence of the Colonel, he leading the Regiment, (...) Captain shall
close in the Rear, to march in the Lieutenant Colonels place; but shall march
in the same Rank with the rest the Captains in the Rear.

No Captain is to march in the Lieutenant Colonels place.

The Lieutenants shall lead the Divisiong of the Musketeers, and the Ensigns
the Divisions of the Pikes, but those Ensigns that carry the Colors, shall
march together before the middle division of the Pikes, and wanting
Lieutenants, some of the Ensignt shall be taken to lead the Divisions of
Musketeers where the Lieutenants are wanting.

The youngest Captain shall always march before the Pikes, having one Ensign
behind him, or more if there be any left when the Divisions are provided.

It must be observed, that they must not March with more Divisions then there
are Officers to lead them; and sometimes finding the Way too Narrow to march
with a strong Front, then they must March with Half Ranks, or less Divisions,
or doubling of files, as may be most convenient.

VIII.
The Drummers shall in their March continue divided in three parts, and a third
part of them by each Division of Musketeers on the Right Ving; and another
Third Part by the second Division of Musketeers on the Left Wing, and the other
Third part by the Pikes. They shall always in their March, one of them Beat in
each Division, but when a Battalion Marches into a Town, or other public
places, they must all of them Bear.

It is to be observed, that they must always march between the Third and
fourth Rank of every Head or Chief division; that is, one Third part by the
First division.

IX.
The Officers in Marching shall carry their Arms downwards, till such time as
they are to salute, and then the Captains and the Ensigns Shoulder them, and
from thence falute; But the Ensigns that carry the Colors, shall in their
march carry them upon their Shoulders, and only take them before their breasts
when they are going to Salute.

The Sergeants and under Officers are not to Salute, but carry their Arms upon
their left Shoulders, the Spears in their Hands downwards, and only in marching
by, take off their hats.

X.
His Majesty shall not be saluted by Guards, or otherwise, out once a day,
except he finding a Regiment or Company Posted, having afterward Commanded to
see it March by; upon which Occasion he must be again saluted.

It is to be noted, That a Battalion being Commanded to march by the King in
Companies, that then all Commanding Officers, the Colone included, must march
at the Head of their Companies.

XI.
The further ceremonies to be performed to his Majesty, as also to all others,
do remain as formerly, the General Officers hereafter named included. The
Lieutenent Generals, or those that are in the same quality or degree, shall for
the future be Saluted by all Officers, the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and the
Colors excepted.

In the Field or Camp shall be given them three Ruffies, also in Garrison by
the Main guard; but all other guards shall beat a march

Before their Door shall be placed a Sergeant and two Sentinals.

The Major General shall be saluted by no Officer, and but two Ruffles given
him either in Camp or Gatrison, and at his Door two Sentinals.

For those Governors that are no Generals, there shall in all places where
they are Governors, be given them one Ruffle.

But for them that have no Commissions as Governors, no Drum shall Beat.

The Main Guato shall Rest their Arms to the Governor, as also every Sentinal,
but if he continue Walking or Standing before the Guard, they may lay down
their Arms.

The Colonels shall have one Sentinel at their Doors, and those of the Garrison
one of their own Regiment. He that commands the Regiment in absence of the
Colonel, shall have that Sentinel at his Door.

The main Guard shall turn out, and stand to their Arms for a Colonel, tho but
once a day; they may return into the Guard, if he continue to stand or walk
near the Guard, but all other Guards shall order their Arms for him, the
Sentinels of their own Regiment shall rest their Arms to him, but those of other
Regiments shall Remain Shouldered.

The Lieutenant Governors and Commanders shall be Treated in their own
Garrisons as Colonels, and the Major Comadants as the Lieutenant Colonels,
except by the absence of the Commander they Command in his Place, and then to
be Treated as before is said of the Commanders.

For the Lieutenant Colonels and Majo^^ the Main Guard is to do nothing but
(...) other Guard turn out and stand over th^^ Arms. The Sentinels of their own
Regiment must rest their Muskets to them, (...) those of other Regiments keep
their M^^kets Shouldered.

For Captains and Subalterns; the Sennels shall keep their Arms Shouldered,
c^^cept it be in Place where they Command and then they are to Rest their Arms,
a^^ the Guards to turn out.

XII
No Cannon shall be fired for any Gener^^ mentioned in the Eleventh Article;
that (...) to say, when they come in, or go out of (...) Garrison.

FINIS.
THE EXERCISE OF DRAGOONS Both on HORSEBACK and FOOT.

ORDERED, By Sir THOMAS LIVINGSTON, Major General, and Commander in Chief, of
Their MAJESTY'S Forces in the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

royal Scottish crown

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, and are to be sold at his Printing House in
Bells-Wynd, 1693.

THE EXERCISE OF DRAGOONS Both on Horseback and FOOT.
A DRAGOON being on Horseback, The first Word of Command shall be, 1. Handle
your Arms.
Explanation.
AT this Word of Command your Butt being in your Bucket, you are to catch hold
of your Fire-lock with your right Hand, so that the back of your hand be
upwards, your Thumb hanging down by the inside of the Stock, an hand breadth
above the keeper, tell 1, 2, pull it from the Bucket, so holding it till the
following Word of Command, in that same posture as when it was in the Bucket.

Word of Command. 2. Advance your Fire Locks.
Explanation.
In that same posture as formerly expressed the Fire-lock is to be brought up
with the Right hand, and at that same time, the Le^^ hand is to be joined to
it: Just above the keeper; The Thumb upwards on the inside of the Stock, tell
1, 2, take away the Right hand, and at the same time turn it with the Left, so
that its muzzle stand straight upward^ It is to be observed, that at the same
time tha^ the muzel stand upwards, the right hand is (...) catch hold of the
small end of the Butt, tell 1, 2, take away the Left hand, bringing th^^ Butt
with the Right hand to the right thigh^^

3 Cast about to the Sword-side.
With your Right hand it is to be brough^^ smartly up, so as a poised
fire-lock, and (...) further as is expressed in the Mannual of th^^ foot, by
Number 8th, excepting the motion^ of Foot and Leg.

4. Draw your Bagonets.
This is to be done as by the Mannual^^ the foot: Number 9.

5 Fix them in the Muzzel of your fire locks.
This done as in the mannual of the foot^ Number 10.

6 Advance your fire locks.
This is done as by the Number 11 in the manual of the foot facing without any
intermission, and in facing you are to take away your right Hand, catching hold
with it the small end of the Butt, holding the Fire-lock as poised, till you
tell 1, 2, then bring it to your right Thigh as formerly.

7. Cast about to the Svvord-side.
This is formerly expressed in the Third word of Command of the Mannual on
Horseback.

8. Oravv forth your Bagonets.
This is done, as in the Manual of the Foot, in Number 14.

9. Put them in their places.
This is done as in the Manual of the Foot, in Number 15.

10 Advance your Fire lock.
This is done as formerly expressed by Number 11, so far as is done on
Horseback.

11. put back your Fire-lock
The But end of the Fire-lock is to lean against your right Thigh, as when
Advanced, and with the help of the Carabin belt, the Fire-lock is to be
balanced, that it continue in its Advanced posture without holding, tell 1, 2,
3, At the first telling the Right Hand is to be taken away from the small end
of the Butt, catching hold of the Stock half a foot above the Keeper, with that
same hand; At the second, the Fire lock is to be brought back with its Butt end
behind the knee; And at the Third, it is altogether to be taken away, so that
the Butt end hang down by the out side of the foot.

12. Loose your Links in order to Dismount
At the performance of this motion, the left hand Man is to be observed, and
all are carefully to observe that so soon as they see the left hand man of the
first Rank begins his motion of stooping, then it is to be studied by Each, who
shall be first down, so as that their stooping with their body, and joining
their right hand to their link be all at one time; and so to remain in that
posture till the left hand man begin to raise his body, which most be as
smattly as when he stooped.

13 Your right foot from the Stirrup.
It is carefully to be observed, that your clearing the right foot of the
stirrup, and joining the right hand to your fire lock be at the same time, so
that the hand catch hold of the fire lock half a foot above the keeper.

14 Dismount.
At the Performance of this motion, The right hand man is to be observed,
carrying your bodies as straight as possible, tell 1, 2, then you are to face on
your Left heel to the right, so that your face be to the Rear.

15. Link your Horses.
At the performance of this Command, it is carefully to be observed, that you
bring your Links from your horse necks with the Left, at the same time you are
to catch hold of your left hand horse, by the head-steel, with the right near
by the ringe, then with your Left hand you are to bring your link to the right,
where you are to link your horses together, and so stand till the following
word of Command.

16. To the right hand about
On the left heel you are to face to the right hand about.

17. Rest your Fire-lock.
At this word of Command, You are to catch hold with your Right Hand the
firelock half a foot above the keeper, and so forward as you will find
expressed in the Advanced Fire-lock, only that the catching hold of the small
end, and the falling back of the Right Foot be observed all at the same time.

18. Vnspring your Fire lock.
With the Right Hand you are to catch hold of your spring, tell 1, 2, press it
with your Thumb, so that it come clear off the Ringe, tell 1, 2, Let your
Carabin belt fall and with your Right Hand catch hold of the small end of the
Butt behind the Lock, keeping the Fire-lock in that same posture a^ Rested.

19. poise your Firelocks.
This motion is to be performed by bringing up your Fire-lock with your Right
Hand, and upbringing of your Right foot straight before your face; so as the
lock, stand outward.

20. Shoulder your Firelocks.
This is to be done as is to be found by the number 36, in the Mannual of the
Foot.

ORDERS and WORDS of COMMAND Teaching the Handling of Firelocks; As also the
Explanation, beginning from a Shouldred Fire-lock.
I.

A Soldier having his firelock Shouldered, must stand straight, holding
always his head upwards, steadfastly observing, and making no other motions
than what shall be Commanded by the Officer Commanding.

II. The Feet an ordinary Pace wide, his Heels in a straight line, his Toos
outward.

III. The Fire lock must be carried on the left Shoulder, holding it with the
Left hand: The Thumb lying above in the hollow part of the Butt, the keeper
closs to the breast, that the Muzzel may the better stand upwards, the Lock
turned a little outward, so that the lower part of the Butt come opposite to
the Buttons of the Coat.

IIII. The Left Elbow must be a little upwards, carried from the body, though
no farther then the Arm will allow, without constraint; and the Right Arm
must hang straight down, so that the Palm of the hand come nearest the Body.

Words of Command with their Explanation. Take Notice to Exercise the Mannual.
1. Ioyn your Right hand to your Fire lock.
A Soldier having his Fire lock shouldered a formerly expressed, must turn it
inward with the left hand, and at the same time, smatch joining the right hand
to it, the Lock outward the Thumb of the right hand come upward on the Stock,
both the Elbows equally high so that the Muzle stand upward.

2. posse your Fire-lock.
At this Command the Fire-lock must be with both the hands smartly poised, and
without any stop, with the right hand vigorously thrust from you, at which
thrusting the left hand must be taken away, and hang straight by the Body, so
that the lock be outward, opposite to the face, the feer straight together
without moving.

Nota, At the Shouldering, the Left Hand Man is always to be observed, and
that without the least moving of the head.

3. Ioin your left hand to your Fire-lock.
The Fire lock must be smartly brought down by the right hand, and catched by
the left hand, (at the same time with the downsetting of the Right foot,) about
two hands breadth above the lock, so that the Stockily in your full hand, your
thumb upwards, your Arms as low as conveniently then can reach, holding both
your Elbows a little outward, but especially your right elbow, the right foot
backward a little to the right side, the left Knee a little bended, the Body
straigth, keeping the fire lock in that posture, a little outward from the
right side, but so as the full Body be as much toward the Front as possible,
your hand without constraint behind the lock.

4: Cock your Fire lock.
The Thumb must be laid on the Cock, and with both the hands, and upbringing of
the right foot with half out stretched Arms, the better, and with more ease,
to cock your fire-lock, it must be brought straight up, tell 1, 2, Cock, thrust
your fire-lock with both your hands smartly from you, and keep your Thumb on
it, without touching the Tricker, with your fingers straight before your body,
with out stretched Arms

5. present
In Presenting of the fire-lock, you are to step back with the right foot, but
so that it come not behind the left, but a little to the right side placed;
that they may the better bring their full body to the front, so taking the
Thumb from the cock, and at the same time of the down setting of your foot, the
butt end of your fire-lock is to be at the hollow of your right shoulder,
holding the butt end so, that the Thumb be in the hollow of the butt, your
foremost finger at the tricker, the 3d: finger closs to the keeper, the body
must be straight, tho a little inclining to the Butt-end, the Elbows as much as
possible in a line with the Butt of the fire lock, the muzzel a little sloping,
the hand straight up, the left knee a little bowed.

6. Give Fire.
As soon as this word of Command is given; you are to draw your Tricker, with
your foremost finger as hard as possible, remaining in that posture till the
following word of Command.

7. Recover your Fire lock.
At this word of Command, the head is not to be moved; but with both the hands
and upbringing of the right foot, the firelock is to be smartly brought up with
outstretched arms, the barrel right before the middle of the face, the left
hand equally high with the left shoulder.

8. Cast about to the svvord side.
The Fire lock is to be turned with both the hands, so that the Barrel turn
outward, and tell longsome 1, 2, take away the right hand; bring the fire lock
with the left low, step with the right foot a step forwards, tho not straigth
before the left, but a little to the right side, that the full Body may so much
the better appear to the Front, and take it by the muzzle with the right hand,
so that the down bringing of the fire-lock, and the down setting of the right
foot, with the catching of the muzzle with the right hand, may be all at the
same time; the thumb must be kept upwards upon the Stock; near the ramrod,
the Barrel downwards, in the full hand, the Body straight, but the right Knee a
little bowed; and continue so bowed till the motions of charging be finished:
It must be kept from the Body, with both the hands alike stretched out, the
muzzle as high as the right shoulder, till the following word of command.

9. Dravv your Bagonet.
The Firelock must be brought close to the body with both the hands, and tell
1, 2, take your bagonet with your right hand again, tell 1, 2, draw it out, and
with a stretched out Arm bring it smartly before your face, your right hand in
an equal line with your right Shoulder, your Thumb upwards on the handle the
blades broadside before your face, the point upwards.

10. Screvv it in the Muzzel of your Fire-lock.
The handle of your Bagonets are to be put in the Muzzel of your Firelocks,
turning them inwards, so as they both fasten, and Blades broadside be upward at
one turn, than with the Right hand the Muzzel is to be catched hold of the
Thumb upwards, tell 1, 2, thrust it from your body smartly, with out stretched
arms, the Muzzel as high as your left Shoulder.

11 Rest your Fire lock.
The Fire-lock with the Bagonet in its Muzzel must be with both hands brought
straight up, and turn without any intermission on the left heel to the right
hand; And in turning you are to take away your right hand, and with it catch
hold under the Cock: Your Thumb on the Cock, so as the barrel be inwards to
your body, drawing your Right hand and Right foot at one time back: Note, that
the right foot be right after the heel of the left, but a little set to the
right side, the left knee bowed a little, both your elbows turned out, though
the right a little more than the left.

12. Present to the Front.
The Fire-lock, the bagonet, with both hands, and upbringing of the right foot
^ust be smartly brought up, and in bringing ^p the right hand, must catch hold
under the Butt; so that the butt stand on the fingers, the Thumb outward on
the butt, tell 1, 2, ^hen with the right foot, step backward, and present your
bagonet to the Front, your left knee bowed.

13. Cast about to the svvord side.
The Fire-lock with both the hands and upbringing of the right foot is to be
smartly brought up, so that in upbringing the right hand is to Catch hold under
the Lock, the barrel being inwards, then with both the hands, the barrel is to
be turned outward: And so forth as is in Number 8.

14. Take your Bagonet from the Muzzel of your Firelocks.
The Fire lock is to be brought closs to the body with both the hands, tell 1,
2, screw your Bagonets out of your Fire locks, and hold it with an
outstreatched arm, straight before your face: as is in Number 9.

15. Put up your Bagonets.
The Bagonet is to be turned with (...) point downwards, pointing toward the
le^^ side, tell 1, 2, put it in its scabbard, tell 1, 2, then catch with the
right hand the fir^^ lock by the Muzzel, then with outstreatch^^ arms, thrust
it smartly from you.

16. Half Cock your Firelocks.
The Fire-lock must be brought up wi^^ both the hands, the barrel inwards,
without any stop, you are to turn upon your (...) foot to the right, in which
turning the right hand is to be taken away, and with the right Thumb catch hold
of the Cock, the finger behind the keeper, tell 1, 2, half Cock you^ Fire-lock,
and bring the right hand behind the Lock, thrusting the Fire-lock smartly from
you, with out streatched Arms.

17. Clean your pan with your Thum^
At the back stepping with the right foot so as its heel come just opposite to
that of the Left, the firelock is to be brought down with both the hands, as
smartly as possible, that the down bringing of the firelock, and down setting
of the right foot be done at once, the fire-lock must be of an just Level, then
with your right Thumb, you are to clean your pan at one motion, your Thumb kept
by the outside of the pan, till the following word of Command.

18 Handle your Primer.
The Primer must be taken with the right hand, the Thumb above its small end
tell 1, 2, then bring it within a handbreadth of the pan smartly, its head
tending something toward the pan, and so wait the following word of Command.

19 Prime.
The firelock must be kept in that same posture as formerly, turning the hand
and the mouth of the Primer downwards, beating it twice against the Pan, as
much time interveening betwix strokes, as 1, 2, can be telled, the third motion
is to return to the place and posture from whence it last came, till the
following word of Command.

20 shut your pa^.
Without any kind of motions you are to open your hand in which the primer is
that the Primer may fall, than you are to catch hold of the Frizel with your
Thumb, above your two first fingers behind, tell 1, 2, shut your pan, and than
catch hold behind the lock with the right band, than tell longsome, 1, 2, with
upbringing of the Right foot, and with both your hands, bring your Fire-lock
smartly up, the Barrel inward, straight before your face, your arms half
outstretched, your elbows equal high.

21. Cast about to Charge.
These, same motions are to be observe as you find set down by the number 8.

22. Handle your Carthrage.
The Fire-lock must be brought close (...) the body with both the hands, tell
1, ^^ quite the fire-lock with the right hand, lea^ing it in the Left in
balance, so that the muzzel be as high as the left shoulder; A^^ with your
right hand you are to handle yo^ Carthrage, tell longsome 1, 2, push it sma^^
out within a little hand breadth of the Mu^^^ of the fire-lock, till the
following wor^^ Command.

23. Open your Carthrage with your Teeth.
The Carthrage must be brought sma^^^ to the mouth where ye must bite from the
^^per end of it as much as will allow the po^^^ till it fall in the barrel: The
thumb imme^atly covering it, and smartly carried to (...) posture from whence
it came.

24. Charge with powder and Ball
The Carthrage must be brought close (...) the barrel, as high as the muzzel,
than (...) end turned down, so that the Powder (...) in, the rest put in with
the two forem^^ fingers, where they are to stay above the muzzel, till the
following word of Command.

25. Dravv your scourer.
The scourer is to be drawn with the fingers of the right hand, keeping the
Thumb upwards, and draw it so far out as the arm will allow, tell 1, 2, Catch
it again turning the right hand, so that the Thumb come downwards above the
stock, just by the abovemost ring, tell longsome, 1, 2, and then draw, so that
in the second draught it be brought out, keeping it straight before your right
shoulder, the small end inward, so that both ends be in an equal line, with a
stretched out Arm.

26. Hold up your scourer.
The fingers are to be let go, so that the butt-end of the scourer turn down;
the thumb stand upward on the courer, holding it straight, the right hand as
high as the shoulder.

27. shorten to an handful against your breast.
It must be set with its butt-end against the right breast, keeping it in an
equal line with the fire-lock, tell 1, 2: bring your hand holding your thumb
upwards, down till within a handful of your Breast, holding your elbow a
little outward from your body.

28 put it in the barrel
The scourer must be brought up to the muzzel, tell 1, 2, then it must be set
down one the Carthrage, thrusting it so fat in the ba^^ as your hand will
allow, and then catch (...) it smartly by the middle, tell 1, 2, th^^ the
Carthrage so far as the hand will all (...) then catch hold of it by the end,
tell 1, 2, bring it as low as it can, holding the sm^^^ end betwixt the Thumb
and fingers, till (...) following word of Command.

29. Ram home your shot.
The Scourer is to be brought so far (...) the arms will allow without
constraint, (...) 1, 2, thrusting home your shot indifference hard, keeping the
small end in your (...) as formerly

30. Withdraw your scourer.
The Scourer is to be thrown out of (...) barrel with the right hand half way,
ca^^^ing the same with the hand so turned, (...) the Thumb come downwards, near
to (...) Muzzel, tell 1, 2, then draw it altogether out of the barrel and keep
it with it (...) end to your shoulder in the same postur^^ was shown by number
26.

31. Hold them up.
The small end is to be let fall, keeping in that same posture as was shown by
Number 27.

32. shorten to your breast.
The small end is to be set to your brea^ ^o as the butt end; as is by number
28. The Fire lock so, as by that same number only, ^he hand must be kept a
handful and an half large from the small end, the better to bring it in its
place.

33. put it in its place.
It is to be brought by turning the hand about the Muzzel, above to the
above-most Ring, tell 1, 2, Than thrust it in to your hand, than take hold of
it by the middle, bring it again low, as the hand will allow; then immediately
catching it by the end: tell 1, 2, than it must be at the 3d: time brought to
its place, where after the usual telling, you are to catch hold by the Muzzel,
holding your Thumb upwards, and tell 1, 2, Thrust your Fire-lock Smartly from
your body, holding that same posture as was shown by Number 10.

34 Ioyn your right hand to your fire lock
The fire-lock is to be kept fast by the left hand, throwing the Muzzel
smartly up, so that the butt end be perpendicular with it, tho with as little
motion as possible, catch it under the Cock with your Right hand, it being free
from your body, your arms as low as can be allowed without constraint.

35. poise your fire-lock.
You are to wheel upon your left heel, and in the wheeling, you are to bring
your fire-lock with both your hands straight before your body, and in
upbringing you are to take away your left hand, and with the Right hand thrust
it smartly out, so that the down-setting of the Right foot, and the thrusting
out (...) the Right hand, be at one time, keeping your self in that same
posture as was shown by Number 2.

36 shoulder your Fire lock.
The fire-lock is to be turned with the right hand, so that the barrel be
turned outward^ the keeper almost near the left shoulder: (...) is to be
observed, that so soon as the first motion of Turning is made, so soon m^^^ the
left hand be at the Butt of the fire-lock with the Thumb in the hollow part of
the Butt, tell 1, 2, Than bring it with both the hands on the left shoulder,
without moving the head, tell 1, 2, take away the Right hand and let it smartly
hang down by the Right side, observing that same posture as w^^ shown by Number
1.

37. Rest your fire-lock.
This is done by number 1: tell 1, 2, bring smartly up from your shoulder, as
by Number 2: Tell 1, 2, and do as by Number ^^ only the Thumb must be on the
cock, the fingers by the keeper.

38. Order your fire lock.
Without bringing your hands higher or lower, you are to bring your fire-lock
right over end; tell 1, 2, free your Right hand from under the Cock, and at the
same time you are to let your left hand sink as low as you can, Catching hold
with your Right, near to the muzzel, your thumb upwards, so as the point of
your Thumb be as high as the upper end of the barrel, tell 1, 2, take away the
left hand; with the Right hand bring your Butt end to the ground, by the
outside of the right foot, the lock outward, smartly, so that the down letting
of the Butt, and the Right foot be at one time, the heels in a line, the toes
outward; Let the arm of that hand hang down by the barrel, the left hand hang
down by the left side, so that the palm hang inward.

39 Ground your Fire lock.
You are to lift your right foot, and at the same time you are to turn your
barrel inwards, so that it come near to the middle of your body, then set your
foot down against the butt-end, step with your foot a large step straight
forwards with a straight body, holding the head upwards, Let the fire lock be
laid on the ground with its lock upwards, tell 1, 2, 3, and rise with the
backstepping of the left foot, then turn your right foot on its heel inwards
over the butt, letting both the arms hing straight down by the bo^^

40 Take up your fire lock
You are to turn your right foot on its h^^^ over the butt, setting its
broadside against the butt-end, at that same time you are to ture the palm of
your right hand out a little (...) the right side over the toe of the right
foo^ then stap with your left foot a large step forwards without intermission,
so that the le^^ foot and right hand come both at once to their places, (the
foot to the ground, the hand (...) the fire-lock) let the right arm he
straight, the body as little bowed as possible, tell 1, 2, 3, then recover your
self with the fire-lo^^ by back falling of the left foot, then lift your right
foot, and set it in its former posture, the barrel turned outward, and placed
also a formerly it was laid down.

A Soldier in laying down and taking (...) a fire lock the better to
facilitate both (...) in down laying he must let his right hand (...) as far as
conveniently it can go down; before he step out with his left foot, and in
uptaking grip it in the same place again, and (...) turning the right foot
inwards again, let the right hand slip along the barrel, so that the Thumb
stand upwards at the muzzle.

Note, In down laying and uptaking of Ar^^ the bead must be kept as high as
possible, and the all may the better be done at one time, each Soldier of the
first rank must look to his Right hand man, the rest to his fyle leader.

41. Rest your fire lock.
The Thumb is to be turned inwards, the right hand is to be let slip so far
down as the Arm will allow without constraint, tell 1, 2, lift the fire-lock
up, the muzzle a little upwards, but so soon as with the right hand you free
the butt end from the ground, at the same time your left hand is to come
along your body as laigh as you can to the right side, where it is to catch
hold by the Stock, the Thumb upwards a hands breadth above the Stock, tell 1,
2, let your Right Hand go, and in back stepping with the right foot, you must
take care that your right hand be behind the lock, your thumb on the Cock, and
the same time keeping your fire-lock, body and feet in that same posture, as
was shown by number 3.

42. Club your firelock.
The fire-lock is to be kept by the left hand, thrust it with your right hand
from you, with the upbringing of your right foot, so that the Butt-end turn
straight up, the lock outward, and at the same time catch hold of it within a
foot of the muzzle, with your Thumb upwards, and that of the left downward,
tell 1, 2, take the left hand away, and take hold with the full left hand
within a^ inch of the muzzle, hold with out stretched Arms a little inclining
to the Left shoulder, tell 1, 2, Lay it on your shoulder (the cock upwards)
tell 1, 2, quite your right Hand smartly, bringing it down by your right side.

43. Rest your firelock.
The fire-lock is with the left hand to be turned a little inwards, catching
hold of it at the same time with the right above the left hand, the thumb
upward, the elbows alike high, tell 1, 2, bring it straight before your face
with both your hands, tell 1, 2, take your left hand away, your Right hand sink
downwards, and at the same time with your left hand turned, so as your Thumb
come downwards, catch hold of the Stock a foot from the lock, smartly turning
it, so as that your right hand come behind the Cock, your Thumb on it, and the
back-steping with your right foot, be all at one time, still observing the same
posture, as before has been showen by a rested fire lock.

44. shoulder your fire-lock.
The Thumb is to be let go from the Cock, and with your full Hand, you are to
catch hold of the Fire-lock, behind the Cock, and with the upbringing of your
Right Foot, the Fire-lock lock is to be brought smartly before your Face, with
your Right Hand, the Arm stretched out, and so forth, as was shown by Number 37.

Take Notice to make ready for firing at three Words of Command. 45.
1. Make Ready.
This is done as by the Mannual, from Number 1. to Number 3. Inclusive.

2. present.
This is done as was shown by the number 4 and 5.

3. Give fire.
This as by number 6. and 7.

Take Notice to make ready your Bagonets at two Words of Command. 46
1. Make Ready.
This is done as will be found from Number 8. to 11. both Inclusive

2. Present to the Front.
This is done, as is set down by number 12. in the Mannual.

Take Notice to Charge your Fire-lock again. 47. Make ready your Fire-lock.
This is done, as is at large expressed from number 13 to 37. both Inclusive.

When they are to March to their Horses, the Words of Command are as follows.
1. Poise your Fire lock.
This is done, as is expressed by the number 1. and 2.

2. Rest your Fire lock.
This to be done, as is expressed by the number 3. in the Mannual of the Foot.

3. Handle your Springs.
Keeping your Fire-lock in that same posture as rested, take away your Right
Hand, and with it catch hold of your Carabine belt by the Spring, tell 1, 2,
bring your hand within a Hands breadeth of the Ringe, in which the Spring goes,
so holding it till the following Word of Command

Note, At the upbringing of your hand, the spring is to be made ready for the
ringe.

4 Spring your fire lock.
At the word of Command the spring is to be put through the ringe, tell 1, 2,
then with your right hand you are to catch hold of the small end of the butt
smartly, so holding it till the following word of Command.

5 put back your fire lock.
This is to be done by stretching out your Butt with your right hand, so that
the Muzzel stand straight up, tell 1, 2, then with your Right hand you are to
Catch hold of the stock, above the left, so that your Thumb stand downward,
tell 1, 2, bring the Butt behind the knee, as low as your Arm will reatch
without constraint, tell 1, 2, quite your firelock, let your hand hang straight
by your body, so that the palm hang inwards.

6 March to your Horses.
This is to be done to the right or left, according as the ground will allow,
faceing always on your left heel, and parting with your left foot, punctually
observing your right hand man, and leader; in marching, care is to be taken
that each man halt at the the head of his Horse.

7. Vnlink your Horses.
At this word of Command, you are to fall to your horses, if you have marched
by the Right you are to face on the right heel to the right, and if by the
left, you are to face to the left, tell 1, 2, then you are to catch hold of
your Links and unlink: Holding your hands at your linking posture, till the
following word of Command.

This is left to the Discretion of the Officer Commanding.
Make Ready your Horse bridles; Your left foot in the Stirrup. Mount your
Horses. 8. Fix your Butts in your Buckets.
At this word of Command, your fire-lock hanging with its Butt end down, by the
o^^ side of the right Leg, you are to Catch hold of it with the Right hand by
the stock, ha^^ a foot above the Keeper, tell 1, 2, bring the Butt end tending
that way as high as the Bucket, tell 1, 2, then thrust the Butt in the Bucket,
keeping your bodies as straight as possible, tell 1, 2, take your right hand
away, bringing it to the right thigh, so that the back of the finger Lean as
high as the haunch.

9. Handle your Sword.
From the former posture of the Right hand you are to tell 1, 2, than you are
to catch hold of the handle of your Sword with your Right hand, so holding it.

Note, Care is to be taken that the Sword be loosed, and ready waiting for the
following word of Command.

10. Draw your Svvords.
At this word of Command, Care is to he taken that the Sword be pulled out at
one pull, so that the point stand straight upward, the Blades broadside
outward, the hand as high as the Gravatt, so holding it till the following
word of Command.

11. Put up your Svvords.
This is done by turning of the point of the Sword over the left Arm, into the
mouth of the seal bard, so that the sword be freely entered; tell 1, 2, Thrust
it in to the bilt at one thrust, so holding it till another Order be given, of
putting up of the sword; tell 1, 2, Let your Right hand go bringing it to the
pomel of your Saddle, waiting the following word of Command.

12. Loose your Butts from your Buckets.
This is to be done, as by the first Word of Command on Horseback, which is,
Handle your Arms.

Then follows, either Advance your Arms, as before has been expressed by the
number 2, by the Mannual on Horse back, or Dismount, as it is formerly
expressed by the number 14 in the foresaid Mannual, as the Officer Commanding
shall think fit.

ORDERS for the COMMANDING OFFICER, of REGIMENTS, TROOPS, or COMPANIES.
EVery Officer is to Answer for the good behavior of the Soldiers in his
Regiment, Troop, or Company.

If any Soldier commits a fault, that any Article of War can reach, the
Officer Commanding the Troop or Company, is not to punish it himself, nor
smooth it over, as many time is done.

Reasons why there are so great Disorders, and so little Discipline amongst the
Regiments.
But he is to Advertise his Colonel, at Commander in Chief of it; If any
Officer be found to neglect this hereafter, he is to be pursued and punished by
a Counsel of Wart, as if he had committed the Crime himself.

Magazins are to be erected, to which Officers must give all the Assistance
they can, and make it as easy to the Commissaries as possible may be; And take
particular care that no Disorders be committed thereabout.

The Regiments being once complete in all their Arms and Mounting; the
Captains must answer to keep it so; Which if neglected, the Major is hereby
Ordered and Empowered to supply the Wants, and stoop it out of the Captains
pay: For which end he is every two Months, to go with the Muster-Master, and
revieu every particular.

If any Soldier goes off the Troops or Companys, that has particularly paid
for his Arms, he is to be repayed again, and the Arms always to remain
nompleat in (...) Troops or Companys.

No Officer or Soldier on a March, is to leave his Regiment, Troop, or
Company, without particular leave upon his highest peril, which should not
without great Reason be granted.

Officers are to take more Notice of Soldiers Qu^^^^^ling, as heretofore they
have done, being the Article (...) War, do reasonably mention the punishment
due to (...).

FINIS.
Rules of War FOR THE INFANTRY, Ordered to be Observed by Their MAJESTY'S
Subjects Encountering with the Enemy upon the Day of BATTLE.

WRITTEN By Lieutenant General MACKAY, And Recommended to All, (as well
Officers as Soldiers,) of the Scots and English Army.

In XXIII. ARTICLES.

Published by his Excellencies Secretary.

Licenced, EDM BOHUN.

EDINBVRGH, Re Printed by John Reid, to be sold at his house in Bells-Wynd.
1693.

MACKAYS RULES To be Observed by the Body of INFANTRY Of Their MAJESTY'S
Subjects Encountering with the Enemy in the day of BATTLE.
In Twenty three ARTICLES.
First.
THE Battalion, ordinarily marching and forming six deep, being come upon the
Field of Battle, shall put three Files of Pikes to cover the Flanks upon each
Wing, and then by the Rear, half Files double their Front to the Left, that the
Corporals may fall to be the Right hand Man of their respective Companies.

II. To the End this motion may be made speedily, without the encroaching upon
the just Intervals which are ordinarily left betwixt the Battalions of the same
Line, the Commanders and Majors shall have a care, when the Army is forming
upon the field of Battle, to make their Men, in marching to their ground, open
their Files to the due distance for doubling their Ranks, (...) out further
motion; whereto they ou^^^ to be often accustomed-in Exercise and oth^^ ways,
that they may be the more capa^^^ to perform it, when there is occasion for^^

III. If the Colonel be present, the Lie^^ tenant Colonel's post is in the Rear
of the Battalion in the center of the Pikes, w^^^ two Ensigns and two
Sergeants; with Orde^ given, in the hearing of all the Regime^^ To Kill without
Mercy, any that sh^^ offer to break their Ranks, by falling (...) from the
Battalion. But if there be no (...) lonel by the Regiment, the Rear is the
(...) of the Eldest Captain, assisted by the for^^^ number of Officers; who,
beside the k^^^ing it up in advancing upon the Enemy, (...) charged with care
to lead it off in the (...) Order they can, in case of a Retreat.

IV. The Officers of the Battalion (...) be posted as near as may be, upon the
(...) of their own Men, supposing them to ha^^ the most influence upon, and
more kn^^ledge of them, than others; so that, in (...) of Disorder, they may
call by name, (...) as they suppose to be the Men of most (...) pour and
Resolution.

V. To avoid confusion and noise, t^^ general motions of a Battalion, in time
Battle, As, Advancing, Halting, and Returning, ought to be intimated by beat of
Drum; and all Officers and Soldiers, upon Exercise and upon Action, ought to
be carefully Advertised to be Silent, Attentive, and Read to Obey, what is
commanded, either by Drum or Verbal Expression.

VI. If the Regiment be complete, every company may make a Plotton, which makes
six Plottons upon each Wing; but if considerably weakened, a Wing may be divided
into four Plottons, which ought to be the least number, to give time to charge
again, and be ready by that time the Fire is round, that the Battalion, if
there be occasion, may entertain a continual Fire.

VII. The Officers commanding Plottons, shall place themselves each in the
center of his Plotton; that when the Battalion advances they may march in a
Rank two Paces before the Front of their Men. But when the signal or Command to
Halt, and make ready, is given, they shall enter the first Rank of the
Plottons; so that the Muzzels of the last rank may be advanced beyond their
Bodies.

VIII. To prevent disorders, its fit the whole Battalion, in advancing toward
the Enemy, halt when some Plottons are ordered to fire, rather than to command
the Plattons out of the Battalion; which is the most usual visible reason of
the Defeat of the Troops; And therefore above all things ought to be avoided
with all possible car^ marching to an Enemy, who understand his Trade, and will
not fail to lay hold on the confusions which those, who come against him, do
offer.

IX. When the Battalion is ordered to Halt, that some Plattons may fire
according as (to the judgment of the Commander) they stand best for Execution;
The first Rank of the Plotton, which are to fire, kneek and the other two
Ranks, which are supposed best (in the disposition made for fighting) to be at
two paces distance, closes as (at the Wood the first Rank kneels without
particular command to them for so doing) to the thrusting of their left feet
amongst those of their Leaders, that the muzzels of the last Rank may be
advanced beyond their Officers, and standing upright shall wait the command for
fireing, the^^ being no necessity for the second Rank stooping, which is an
uneasy posture, and, by the conclusion of some Soldiers judgment, may
endanger the kneeling Rank.

X. As soon as the Plotton shall have fire the second and third Rank opens
withou further command to them for so doing, to their paces distance, that they
might have room to charge their Pikes immediately without expecting order for
it, whether moving to the Enemy, Halting or Retiring, of which particulars a
continual habit must be given to the Soldiers: So that there be no necessity
of a particular word of Command; the first rank kneels, the other two closes
up, levelling well their Pieces, and taking Aim, by bringing up the butt-end of
them nearer their Shoulders than of late times is usual in Exercise, of not
presenting their Pieces though kneeling, and closed up, without a command of
their Officers, no more than of firing, tho already presented, without his
Orders, because that if the battalion be attacqued by horse, and the Commander,
to avoid confusion, chosing rather to keep his fire whole, till they be very
close, and then to fire by Plottons, upon a mint of the enemies squadron, as
break in upon his Battalion think fit to cause it present without design of
firing at that distance, sometimes makes the first rank of the squadron not
only to stoop short, but fall in confusion upon those that follow, but to bring
the Soldiers to a custom of this last particular, they must in Exercise be
often accustomed, and commanded to present and recover again their Arms without
firing, telling them at the same time the reason for i^, particularly at the
same time of Action, and against Horse. The Commander judging it safest to
manage his first fire, least their quick motion might prevent the second.

XI. If the commanding Officer of a plotton, be not altogether persuaded of his
soldiers Patience, and exact Obedience, as to the order of firing to prevent a
confused fire, he shall march softly, according to the motions of the line,
with shouldred Musquers, permitting none to make ready, but such plottons as he
intends immediately shall fire.

XII. When a whole Line of Foot matches in order of Battle to the Enemy, the
Commanders of the respective Battalions shall have a special care to regulate
their pace according to the motions of the Line; it being apparent, that when
both Armies are very near, the Battalion that advances beyond the Front of his
line, will readily be flanked, and by its defeat give the Enemy opportunity to
flank the Battalion to the right and left at the same time they are attacked in
the Front, which may prove a dangerous Consequence, this precaution is
necessary at all times, but most of all in close and covered grounds when the
Troops are hindered (and separated) the sight of each other, in which case they
ought to have some Officer, or good Sergeants, on both the Flanks, to bring the
Commander continual notice of the Motion of the Troops to his right and left,
that he may be found neither too backward, nor too forward, at the approach of
the Enemy.

XIII. All Officers, particulary commanders and Majors, marching in the Line of
Battle to the Enemy, ought to know the order in which the Troops are
Embattelled, at least of their own Brigade, and of that which they were to
sustain, or is appointed to sustain them according as they are Posted in the
first or second line, and know by special remarks to discern their own Troops
from those of the Enemies. To the End that in the confusions, to which those
genetal Actions are subject, that they may not take the one before the other,
which is also most of all to be apprehended and prevented in close and covered
ground where the troops are separated; and it often falls out, that Men are
deceived on this Account.

XIV. In case a Battalion might be ordered, or otherwise obliged to retire
without being put in confusion, or Beat, after warning given not to be
affrighted, and telling them the reason of such a motion, whether to make place
for Troops of the Second Line coming to relieve it; or being disadvantageously
posted, or press with number of Enemies, to post it self behind in better
ground, or that a whole Brigade, or Line, whose motion the Battalion were
obliged to observe, were Retiring, the Commander and Officer commanding
plottons, shall have a care it ^he done in such an order, that the Enemy brake
not in upon them in their Retreat, being always ready at the command, or signal
giv^^ Halt, Face about and fire upon the Enemy; observing, that in this motion
continues in way slowly except the Brigade or Line should happen to halt, only
the plottons which are ordered to fire, shall halt, face about, and having made
their fire, shall gain their Intervals, which they shall have lost in the
Battalions charging their Pieces as they march, and so of the rest of the
Plottons, as the Commanders shall see occasion.

XV. The Colonels, or the Commander of the Regiments Post being the Head of the
Pikes, beside a Captain to assist him, he ought to have two resolute Sergeants,
Men of service, by him to carry his Orders to the right and left, either for
firing such Plottons as he shall judge of best service, according as they stand
to the Enemy, whether advancing or retiring, or any Orders or Advertisements,
which for present service, he might have to impart to his Officers.

XVI. The Front of a Battalion on such occasions, being an ill Post for Men on
horse back, as Majors and Aid-Majors, whose post is the Flanks, to observe how
the Battalion marches, and upon occasion of Disorder or Confusion, to keep up
and rally such as break off, or are sent with the Advertisement of the state of
Affairs, or for new Orders relating thereto, to the Brigadier or next general
Person.

XVII. That such Regiments as are provided of good Bayonets, fixed without the
muzzels of their Pieces, may in aproaching to the due distance of firing, cause
the first rank of the whole Battalion, to fix their Bayonets, and continuing
their march till they be close upon the Enemy, make the first rank kneel with
the points of their Bay^he^ upon the Ground, and the other two Rank closed up,
fire over their heads upon the Enemy, who supposing readily all the fire spe^^
if he happen to stand it, will come up the bolder upon your Battalion, who
receiving him with the first Rank, second with the pu^^ of pike and Bayonet,
will readily break him whether horse or Foot.

XVIII. If by a Resolute Continuan^ and close fire, the Battalion happen to
brea^ the opposite Enemy, the Officers must have a special care their men do
not break af^^ them, but content themselves to make th^^ Granadeers fire
amongst them to augm^^ their Terror and Confusion, that they may receive in
good order, such of the Enemy as shall come up to sustain those which you ought
to have Routed, This Article^ the more carefully to be observed, that in the
advancing of the Line you are subject to be flanked by the Enemies Horse,
posted betwixt the Lines for that purpose.

XIX. The Granadeers shall be well posted into two plottons upon the Right and
(...) Wing without the pikes which cover the Flanks of the Battalion, and two
fire locks of each Compay; a Rank before the pikes, to be employed as the
Colonel, or commanding Officer shall see occasion at the near approach of the
Enemy, Beside which it may be judged useful, that the commanding Officer of
each plotton keep off his best Fire-Men for a second, who shall not fire with
this plotton.

XX. To make these Granadeers upon the Wings, and the Firelocks before the
Pikes be the more effectual against the Enemy. I am of the Opinion (since its
always found, that unexpected Stratagems of Wars do surprise, and contribute
much to the defeat of those that are surprised therewith) that the Plottons of
the Granadeers upon the Wings ought rather to march behind, than to cover the
Flanks till you be close upon the Enemy that he cannot have time to make the
like Disposition against you, which if he did see them so posted at a Distance,
for the same Reason I would have the firelocks rather posted betwixt the first
and second rank of the Pikes, then before the first, till you be very near.

XXI. The Battalions which may happen to be put in disorder by the Enemy, shall
retire to the intervals of the second line: the Officer laboring to keep off
the Enemy, by forming in the Rear some plottons of the resolutest men to fire
upon till relief came up, and then with all possible diligence, see to get
their Ten in order and ready to second their seconds.

XXII. When the Army is embattelled, and the Troops ready to march toward the
Enemy, all Commanders, Majors, and Officers commanding Plottons, ought to
affect a cheerful Countenance, speaking friendly to, and encouraging the
Soldiers in the most touching Expressions, and by the most persuading
Arguments, as Religion, Liberty, and Personal Honor and Safety, humbly
depending upon their good Behavior, the Justice of the Cause, the Obligation
of our Conscience to serve our Master faithfully, the Reputation of our
Country, alleging the good Examples of our Predeceslours, and the like, which
out of the Mouths of Officers, showing good Examples of their own Persons
particularly, it Just to, and Beloved of their Soldiers, will be good effect
to Animate them to the Work.

LASTLY, When all Dispositions are made, and the Army waiting for the signa^ to
move toward the Enemy, both Officers and Soldiers, ought seriously to
recommend (together with their Souls and Bodies) the care and protection of the
cause for which they so freely expose their Lives, to GOD, Who over-ruleth the
Deliberations and Councils, Designs and Enterprises of his Creatures, and of
whose blessing alone the success of all Undertakings does depend, which they
may do in these or the like words.

A PRAYER.
O Almighty KING of Kings, and LORD of Hosts, which by thy Angels thereunto
appointed, do Minister both War and Peace; Thou rulest and command all
things, and sit in the Throne judging right; And therefore we make our
addresses to Thy Divine MAJESTY in this our necessity, that Thou would take
us and our Cause into Thine Own Hand, and judge between us and Our Enemies,
stir up Thy Strength, O LORD, and come and help us, for Thou give not always
the Battle to the Strong, but can save by Many or by Few. O let not our sins
now cry against us for Vengeance, but hear us, Thy poor servants, begging
mercy, and imploring Thy help, and that Thou would be a Defenes for us
against the Enemy. Make it appear, that Thou art our Savior, and Mighty
Deliverer, Through JESUS CHRIST Our LORD. Amen.


