MEMENTO MORI

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY ON THE Death of the most Illustrious LORD, THE EARL of St. ALBANS:
Who Departed this Life the first Day of this Instant January, 1684.
GO stop the swift-wing'd Moments in their flight,
Arrest the Envious Course of Day and Night;
Alas! it will not be, we strive in vain,
Not all our Art can one poor Hour regain:
TIME flies in haste to meet Eternity,
As Rivers to the Bosom of the Sea,
There to be lost; nor can we bribe the stay
Of the least Minute, to prolong the Day,
Which is by Fate ordained to be our last,
Without reverse, when once the Doom is past.
For if there could have been the least Reprieve
To Mortal Breath, thou had been still alive;
St. ALBANS still, had blessed our wondering Eyes,
Who now the Tyrant Death's pale Captive lies.
Let us contemplate thee (brave Soul) and though
We cannot track the way which thou did go
In thy Celestial Journey, and our Heart
Expansion want, to think what now thou art,
How bright and wide thy Glories, yet we may
Remember thee as thou were in thy Clay;
Great without Title, in thy self alone,
A mighty Lord, thou stood'st oblieg'd to none
But Heaven and thy self, for that great worth
Which the propitious Stars that ruled thy Birth
Inspired into thy Noble Soul, and Thou
Not wanting to thy self, did make it grow
To such prodigious height, thou wast become
So truly Glorious, that struck Envy Dumb.
All Differences did in thy praise conspire,
And even thy Foes, if such could be, admire
Thy Noble Life, which like the constant Sun
Did in the same Ecliptic always run
Ever most loyal to the Royal Cause,
Which from the Heaven of Heavens its Tule draws;
Where now thou liv'st, freed from the uncertain sport
Of Time and Fortune, in the Starry Court,
A Glorious Potentate; while we below,
But fashion woes to mittigate our woe.
And now my sorrows follow thee, I tread
The Milky way, and see the Snowy Head
Of Atlas far below, while all the high.
Swollen Buildings seem but Attoms to my eye;
How small seems greatness here? how! not a span
His Empire who commands the Ocean,
Both that which boasts so much its mighty Ore,
And th other which with Pearl has paved its shore.
Nor can it greater seem, when this great All,
For which Men quarrel so, is but a Ball
Cast down into the air, to sport the Star;
And all our general Ruins, mortal wars,
Depopulated States, caused by their sway,
And Man's so reverend wisdom but their play,
By thee St. Albans living, we did learn
The art of life, and by thy light discern
The truth which Men dispute; but by thee Dead
Were taught upon the worlds gay pride to tread,
And that way sooner Master it, than he
To whom both Indies tributary be:
Thus shall we gain by Death, while we Deplore
His Fate, remembering how great and good
St. Abans was, and yet but flesh and blood
As we; how should the brave example move
On kindled Souls, and lift us up above
Low-thoughted Care of dull Mortality,
Since, if as Good, we shall be Great as He.
The EPITAPH.
HAil! Sacred House, in which his Relics Sleep,
Blessed Marble, give me leave to approa^h and Weep:
Unto thy Self, great Spirit, I will R^peat
Thy Own brave STORY: tell thy Self how Great
Thou were in Mind's Empire, and how all
Who Outlive Thee, see but the FUNERAL
Of Glory; and if yet some Virtuous be,
They but the Apparitions are of Thee.
Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without Newgate,
1684.


