AN ELEGY On the much Lamented Sir WILLIAM WALLER, Who Valiantly Hanged Himself
at Rotterdam.
RIse, Grim Alecto, rise ('it is fit to choose
For Hellish matter an Infernal Muse:)
Thou who at Fox Hall did Inspire those Sots,
Tongue, Oats and Kirby to Contrive their Plots;
Who did through wondrous Labarinths of Ill,
Conduct Sir Godfrey safe to Primrose-Hill;
And by Mysterious Ways, and Oaths most quaint,
Of an Old Faggot made us a Young Saint:
Plots thou can make and mar: Thou Stygian Whore
Assist me once! I Will never invoke thee more.
The Hell-born Dame Assents; Her Head she shakes,
Pregnant of Plots, and Pery wick'd with Snakes;
At her Right-Ear an Oats and Bedlow hung,
And at her Lest Prance Everard and Tongue:
Thus Gravely she Recounts what the Cursed Else
Sir Waller Confessed, e're he Hanged himself.
Good Father Ferguson, quoth He, now I
Do mean to make Confession Verily.
When willing Senators wisely were afraid
Of Horrid Scare-crows, they Temselves had made;
When Chapel of St. Stephen, and Place of Peers,
Were overflowed with sudden Floods of Fears:
When Easy Mortals stopped their Ears and Eyes,
With Uncouth Tales, and Incoherent Lies;
When Knaves, and Thieves, and Cheats grew Rich by Plots,
I wisely Worshipped Bedlow and Great Oats;
Because I scarcely then was worth Ten Groats.
These my Right Worthy Patrons with great ease,
Soon made my Worship Justice of the Peace.
Armed with this Power (as if I had a Charter
To Rob and Spoil) I gave no Mortal quarter.
Even Aged Matrons, in my nightly Trade,
I Grop'd; Such might be Priests in Masquerade:
My Skill herein was great; I got the Start
Of Brother Chamberlain in his own Art.
And with my Co-Adjutors at my Tail,
Gill, Merry, Jones, Snow, Chetwyn, Prance, Mansel;
In Obscure Holes, and Lanes I Briskly Blunder'd,
And every Papist, that I found, I Plundr'd:
Even Protestants themselves escaped not my Gynnes;
Though they were Guelphs, their Goods were Gibell^ns.
John Gadbury's Maps and Globes were not Protected;
Such as I liked, were Popishly Affected.
Now see me on a Steed, more big by far,
Then that my Rebel Sire Bestrid in War;
Toward Tuthil-fields the way I do Traverse,
With a Rude Rout of Miscreants at my Arse.
To the Fields we come. Lo, Parson Farringdon,
Like a Brave Knipperdolling, Marches on,
With Hatt Erect on Cane ('it was to seem Taller)
He Cries; In The Name of Gad, a Waller, a Waller.
As, when to warn men to Bear-Garden Plays,
Exalted Pugg from's Rosinant Surveys
Attendant Crowds of Dogs, Thieves, Bums and Boys,
Expressing in his Pleasant Face his Joys:
Like Pugg looked I, when Billing and his Blades
Denuded their Dull, Sullen, Loggerheads,
Throwing their Everlasting Caps to the Sky,
Bawling a Waller with a Full-mouthed Cry.
Environed with my Rogues I bent my Course,
To Lady Dormer's, where without Remorse,
Spoons, Tankards, Pictures, Plates I took away,
(Alas such Popish Trinkets were just Prey!)
And after narrow Search, like cunning Fox,
I seized a Priest, hid in a Pepper-Box;
The Priest to Newgate had his Mittimus,
The Box, being Silver, did belong to Us.
Then in New-Pallace-yard of Westminster,
I most Courageously did make a Fire,
And, True-Dissenter like, in zealous Scorn,
At Noonday did my Saviors Picture Burn:
A worthy Prank of Reformation-work,
That out-does Father Jew, and Brother Turk;
And tells the Christian World I durst Act, what
My Grand sire Pilate would have Blushed at.
With Gun, I and my Knaves to the Savoy came;
Like Skilful Thieves in Pikerings House we Roam;
Closets and Trunks we break; one did unfold
Full Fourscore Pieces of Egyptian Gold:
Good Quids, quoth I; my Brethren, not a word;
All this is Ours; we are People of the Lord:
This Gun, we Bought in the Minories, 'tmust be laid,
And we must find't out in Pikering's Bed.
Then Early in the Morning, let us repair
To tell our Patriots at Westminster:
(Not of the Fourscore Pounds we Stole in Gold)
That Pikering's Gun is Found, and in Safe hold;
This Gun, closed up in Feather-Bed so dark,
That Dextrous Gunner used in James's- Park:
And, if their Honors Vote to have't laid by,
'Twill serve a Surer Marks-man Rumbold.
with one Eye.
My Sancha-Pancha Prance and I, in Lent
A Journey took to Newark upon Trent;
To seize Old Beddingfield, who like a Fop
Forsook's quiet Grave to keep a Ribbon-Shop:
He was grown Young again; say what ye will,
These Cunning Jesuits will be Jesuits still:
The Mayor and We Robbed him of all his Things,
Two Spoons, one Old Plate, Horse, Ribbons, Gloves, Rings.
But why should I my Mighty Deeds declare?
I Will Hang my self now in this wild Despair.
Why do I Live? Brave Anthony is gone,
And Essex with his Razor cries, Ah Hone!
Bold Walcot's Hanged, and close behind his Breech,
Stands Noble Russel making a True Speech:
All-killing Armstrong and Bold Gray are Fled;
Prince Monmouth Sneaks, and dares not show his Head.
All Is Lost; Go Ferguson, get a Rope, go, go;
Here Is a Convenient Beam will serve Us Two:
Then at one Swing himself Sir Waller Hurled,
To's Fellow-Traytors in the other World.
Printed by N. Y. at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden, 1683.


