To the Supreme Authority of the NATION, The PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND. The Humble Petition of Walter Elford of London, MERCHANT,
SHOWS,
THat whereas in the year 1643. the Petitioner residing as a Merchant and
Factor at Smyrna, in good credit and employments; and Sir Sackvile Crow, as
Ambassador at Constantinople, upon false Information of pretended Treason
against the late King, did closely Imprison your Petitioner thirty months, by
which his sufferings were very great (as may appear by the annexed Copy of his
Petition to this Honorable House, and the Report of the Committee for the
Navy) to whom, amongst other things, the same was referred by your Honors,
April 4. Anno 1648. and since by a farther Order of January 27. 1656. it was
also referred by the then, Parliament, unto the several persons therein
nominated (as by a Copy thereof, also here annexed, may appear) But by reason
of the multiplicity of the Parliaments weighty (...) or Turkey Company, and the
said Sir Sackvile Crow, your Petitioner was put off from time to time: Which
Company, and the said Sir Sackvile Crow (as your Petitioner has heard from
themselves) have lately agreed, by presenting the said Sir Sackvile's Lady with
two or three thousand Pounds in money (which in effect was given, even for
betraying and mischieving them more then an hundred and fifty thousand Pounds:)
But your Petitioner could not be permitted to attach the said moneys (though by
him endeavored) toward part of satisfaction of his damages, sustained by the
said Sir Sackvile Crow's malicious dealings with him; By which, and also by
tedious suites, occasioned by his foreign false Imprisonment, your said
Petitioner is almost ruined.

Wherefore, Your said Petitioner does most humbly pray, That your Honors will
be pleased to call to Mr. Garland (one of the Members of this Honorable House)
for the said Report: And that the said Turkey Company may be prohibited the
delivery of those Bonds to Sir Sackvile Crow, which he Sealed to them for the
performance of Articles, and the Security which he gave, not to be discharged,
until he ( who from time to time has not wanted Advocates) shall give
satisfaction to your Petitioner. That your said Petitioner, after so many years
attendance on several Committees, may now at last have Justice on, and
Reparations from, the said Sir Sackvile Crow, as in your Wisedoms shall seem
meet,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. May 25. 1659. Walter Elford.


