AN ELEGY On the Death of that Learned, Pious, and Famous DIVINE, Doctor JOHN
OWEN, Who Dyed the 24th. of August, 1683
22. Sept. 1683.
How came't to pass that none did Silence break,
In all this time, when they would such cause to speak?
Sad Hearts and Eyes could only yet Lament
A Loss so great; Grief would give Words no Vent.
Blame not Unusual Sorrow when there fell
This Reverend Father in our Israel;
Though Verse was silent, there is no doubt but those
Who knew him well, made Elegies in Prose:
And wrote 'em on their Hearts; and we may think,
If writ elsewhere, they used their Tears for Ink.
When such a Pillar of the Church is taken
Away, we have cause to fear the Fabrick's shaken;
And to deplore the Eclipse of such a Light,
Whose Rays Enlivened, Warmed, and Shined so Bright;
And well may apprehend some Ill to come,
When an Ambassador's Commanded Home.
Not that this Venerable Person's Hearse,
Needed (at all) the Ornament of Verse;
But this Resentment's paid, as due by the I aws
Of Gratitude; his Name's above Applause.
H' has raised himself a Monument of his Own,
Which will out-last those of the hardest Stone.
His Fame will Live to lat'st Posterity,
In 's Theo -- Christo -- Pneumatology:
And various Volumes more; where we may find
How in's Great Soul, Rich Gifts and Grace were joined.
His Learned Tongue (which (living) did impart,
Its Message from his Own, to the Hearers Heart;
And taught those Truths whose Worth and Excellence,
Were Felt before, by's own Experience)
Alas, is Silenced now! But 's Pious Pen,
Does and will Preach to Multitudes of Men;
Such Sound and Weighty Doctrines does unfold,
As are by the Scripture-Touchstone proved true Gold.
Which like strong Rocks, Shipwreck the false Opinions
Of Atheists, Papists, Libertines, Socinians.
This Skilful Architect built sure upon
That Chief and Fundamental Cornerstone;
And took great Care the Difference to Descry,
Between true Grace, and mere Morality:
Was none of those that only the Outside Scour,
But to the Form of Piety joined the Power:
Not only Taught, but Trod the Gospel-Path,
And both Defended and Adorned the Faith.
His Zealous Love to God, his Son, and Spirit,
From all true Christian Hearts, Esteem did merit:
For those who join in That, may well Dispense,
In smaller matters with some Difference.
Who can please All? Sure too too few can tell
Where we may find (on Earth) his Parallel:
Who Spoke and Wrote, and Lived and Died so well.
Many a Spiritual Orphan here Remains,
That owe their Birth to his Religious Pains;
And many more that have by him been Fed,
Instructed, Helped, Raised, Cured and Comforted.
Who'd cause to make his Hearse with Tears to swim,
Had not their Loss proved so great Gain to Him;
That long had Traveled in the Narrow Way,
And born the Heat and Burden of the day.
We ought (though to our Loss,) to yield that such
Should go to Rest, who have Born and Done so much:
And may we Learn of Him to Conquer Death,
Who when his Work was finished here beneath,
Lay down in Peace: and as the Sun (they say)
When It sets serene, foretells 'twill shine next day:
So this Great Luminary's Lightsome Even,
Showed with what Splendour he now Shines in Heaven.
HIS EPITAPH.
IN this Place Sleeps an Eminent DIVINE:
ONE who Religion made his Chief Design.
London, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, in
Paternoster Row. 1683.


