AN ELEGY Upon Marsh's one of the two Public Sworn Informers against
Protestant Religious meetings in the City of London, who lately dyed very
miserably in the Prison of the Counter.
Ultor a Tergo Deus.
Go set Scotch Bag-Pipes to the briskest Notes,
But let the Singing men rend all their Throats,
Hang Tyburn round with Blocks, and let Ketch Squeeze
His Eyes to Tears, having thus lost his Fees;
My self (like a young Widow) fain would Cry,
But like her too, I know not how, nor why;
Must get an Onion quickly, or else Woe
Some Irish Poet for Alla-la-loo;
Oh Hone! Oh Hone! tell us what did thou ail
Thus to trappan thy self into a Jail?
Thou had a stout Protection and its said
A lumping Pension for good service paid:
Some Bribes thou got'st, and many a penalty
Was due we trow, and why then would thou dye?
Thy Cloven-footed Masters work's not done,
Thou should have ruined thousands ere thou would gone.
Thou should have made each Nonconformist bow,
And left them all as Poor as thou were now;
Then mounted on State with solemn pride,
Thou might to Hell in gilded Chariot ride:
Been Pluto's Viceroy, and preferred more
Than Judas, or thy Brethren all before.
But now alas! thou scare can get in the end
To be the Groom o'th Close stool Chamber to the Fiend;
But it is in vain thus to Expostulate,
For poor Informers warrant's out of date;
The Man of Gath is fallen that did so stickle,
And swore to confound each Conventicle;
Grim death has by a Seizure snatched him hence,
For to receive his Dear-earn'd Recompense:
Follow the Scent, and from the Stygian Lake,
Fit Junk for such a wretched Subject take;
Black as his Trade let every Line appear,
And each Ear Tingle his sad Fate shall hear,
Not that I am of that Presumptious fry,
whose saucy fingers Pick-lock Destiny,
Who snatch Fates book, and furiously transpose
To Judgments all misfortunes of their Foes;
Virtue may be unhappy, and sometimes
Success here waits upon the worst of crimes,
It is another Day, a clearer Light
Must set all these seeming disorders right;
Yet must we grant that Heaven does now and then
Visibly punish Irreligious Men,
And against none Its Arrows oftener fly
Than these sworn Enemies to Piety,
A Persecuting Spirit never yet
But in a Cloud of shame and sorrow set;
Just God! how equal are thy punishments
Thus blasting base Designs with sad Events;
Though Crafty in self woven Nets is wrapped
And in the Pit he dug for others, trapt;
Hark how the Ravens and the Screech-Owls cries.
With frightful Echoes Chaunt his obsequies.
Whether he is gone now Dead I shall not say
But whilst alive he took the broader way
If Pythagorean Tenets are not flams
He Is grown a Wolf by this, and worries Lambs.
An Epitaph.
Stay Reader! and Piss here, for it is said
Under this Dirt there is an Informer laid,
If Heaven be pleased when Mortals cease from sin
And Hell be pleased when Villains enter in,
If Earth be pleased when it entombs a Knave,
Sure all are pleased, for Marsh's in his Grave.
Printed in the Year 1675,


