An ELEGY On the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury, Who dyed on the
21 st of January 1683*
THe Busy Statesmen who by Toyls unblest
Torment themselves to give their Country Rest*
Those public Great First movers of the State,
Who almost turn the Mighty Wheels of Fate,
Roll the vast Stone like Sysyphus in vain;
Whilst Deaths last Call ends a whole Ages Pain*
The Graves long Rubicon must all pass over,
Whence launching Caesar's can return no more
Farewell, Great Shaftsbury! Times Sithe can stretch
Where Malice, Sword, and Axes never could reach.
Thy Life, great Statesman, stood in Fate so high,
That thou by naught but Heavens own Hand could die.
Yes, Heaven alone compiles thy Funeral-Urn:
Less than the Sun the Phoenix shall not burn.
What did wise Solon, or Lycurgus do?
Lycurgus died, like Thee, an Exile too.
And whilst proud Belgia thy Bones Entombs,
And triumps at the Glory it assumes,
Belgia, who in thy Fate has now done more
Than all her Trumps or Opdams could before.
Belgia has vanquished more in thy one Grave,
Than all the Wounds her Thunder ever gave.
Sleep then thou Activ'st of Mankind. Oh make
Thy last low Bed, and Deaths long Requiem take;
Thou who whilst living kept'st the World awake.
Oh may thy Funeral-Rites walk that large round,
Till to thy Western-shore thy loss resound;
Till Carolina shall in Mourning stand,
With all the Cypress of a VVidow'd Land.
Let Fools and Knaves through their false Optics find
Thy Spots, and be to all thy Brightness blind.
Let Envy all her monstrous Forms suggest,
And lodge the Raven in the Eagles Nest.
Let 'em rail on, and vent their hurtless Gall,
Whilst Shaftsbury's Renown surmounts 'em all.
From his clear Fame the dissolved Clouds shall throw,
And leave the Earthly Vapors all below.
Yes, Mighty Man, lay thy great Relics down,
Thou Idol of the crowd, Dread of the Crown;
Shaftsbury in popular Arts and Hearts so learned
As with his Weight the Scale of Nations turned:
To him the Kingdoms Genius bended low;
The Thrones best Friend, or formidablest Foe.
If the best Gifts which the kind Stars dispense,
The highest Prodigies of Wit and Sense,
For Immortality Foundations lay;
No Greater Soul e're lodged in Walls of Clay.
Swiftly his restless Orb of Fire went round,
And light and warmth we from his Influence found.
His kindest Rays and temperater Heat
The Protestants still-favour'd Climates met:
There his best Aspect smiled; whilst Rome alone
Felt all the Fury of his Torrid Zone.
This was the Cause did such great Foes engage
With such keen Malice, and such Mortal Rage.
For this so high the Roman Vengance boyls
With Fires more hot that their old Smithfield-piles.
But Heavens kind Call has all their Engines crossed,
Heaven that has lodged thee on that safer Coast,
Whence thou look down and see thy Mighty Hunters lost.
EPITAPH.
UNder this Stone does Sleeping lie
All that was Earth of Shaftsbury.
But Funeral-Tears and Weeping Eyes
Infallibillity denies.
Whilst his wished Death's enough to be
The Subject of a Jubilee.
A more sworn Foe to Roman Pride
Not Hannibal himself e're died.
For which his Deathless Fame below,
His Soul above -- His Soul -- Ah, no!
From Heaven's locked out too sure, if they
Who succeed Peter keep the Key.
Doomed to Hells hottest burning Seas,
If the Popes Curse can do the Feat.
If Papel Rage and Roman Spite
For any but themselves Hellfire can light.
An ELEGY On the Death of (the much to be lamented) Anthony K* of Poland*
THe busy Toney who by Toil unblest
Torments himself, to break his Countries Rest;
Who, ceasing to be Engineer of State,
Turned Rogue, yet could not turn the Wheels of Fate:
Like Sysyphus, he rowls his Stone in vain;
Death plucks his Tap, and ends his PLOTS and Pain.
The Graves long Pampus Rebels must pass over;
Thence restless Raskals can return no more.
Wretch of 3 Names farwell! Thy Deaths kind stretch,
Secures Thee from the Sword and Axes reach;
Thy Life, Old Tricker, stood in Fate so high,
That Hang-man's hand was fit to make Thee die;
Yes, Hangman only frames Thy Funeral Urn:
Less man than Hangman Traitors shall not burn.
What did Old Solon and Lycurgus do?
They went to Amsterdam, and died too.
Whilst Belgic Boor Thee and Thy Tap Entombs,
And tryumphs in the Brandy he assumes;
Boor, who (in burying Thee) has done much more,
Than Trump or Opdam, who were dead before;
Boor, with bright Spade, does more in Thy one Grave,
Than in all Graves that his bright Spade ever gave.
Trick on, trick on, thou Will-with'-Wisp! now make
New Broils in Hell, and never Requiem take,
With Plots and Popery keep the Devil awake.
May Thy tormented Ghost walk a large round,
And its deserved Punishment resound,
Till Carolina shall agasted stand,
Mourning Kid-napper, who supplied her Land:
Let partial Whigs, through their false Optics, find
Thy Worth, and ever be, like Thee, half blind.
Let Factious Varlets monstrous forms suggest;
Such Ravens shall never croak in the Eagles Nest:
Rail on, Phanaticks, vent your envious Gall,
Your Toney's Tapping Arts have spoiled ye all;
From Meeting House dissolved Tubs shall throw,
And sneaking Tubster send to the Room below:
Yes, Mouse-trap-man, Thy rotten Loins lay down;
Seducer of the Rabble, scorn of the Crown;
In Treacherous Arts and Trayt'rous Hearts so learned,
His weight all hands of Whimsey-boards still turned:
To him Rebellion's Genius bended low;
The Thrones Friend, when at the Helm, when not, its Foe.
If the worst gifts Malignant Stars dispense,
If mis-applied strength of Wit and Sense,
For lasting Infamy Foundations lay,
No greater Kn^^^ was ever clothed in Clay;
His restless Orb of Shams went swiftly round,
And none but Raskals his kind Influence found:
His gentler Rays, and Life-creating heat,
The Land of Whigs and Betty Morris met:
The unthinking Crowd he courted, and alone
He dreamt to domineer in the British Zone.
But, lost in his own Maze, he does engage,
With eager Malice, and with lasting rage;
His Brain more hot than Copper-kettle boils,
In Shops of Cooks about Py-corner-Piles.
But Hells kind Call has all his Consults crossed;
Hell, that has placed him on a fiery Coast;
Through glass he peeps, and sees his Tricks and Trickers lost.
EPITAPH.
Under this Stone does rotting lie
All the Devil has left of Shaftsbury:
No Funeral Tears, nor weeping Eyes
The melting Sisterhood denies;
Whilst Mine-heer thinks his Death to be
A joyful Brandy-Jubilee.
A firmer Friend to PLOTS and Pride
In Holland heretofore never died;
For which His Odious Name below,
His Soul's above in Heaven. Oh no!
It found no Lodging there, if He
Speak Truth who always kept the Key:
Adjudg'd to sit in the hottest Seat,
The little Guest will do some Feat;
And a fresh Fire in Hell will light,
To entertain the wandering Salamanca-Wight.
LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXXXIII.


