An Elegy Upon the Death of the Most Illustrious Princess HENERETTA. Duchess
of ORLEANCE, Maddam of FRANCE, etc.
OUR day's o'recast Melpomine come on
Assist my Fancy, now I am alone,
Disturbed Spirits come my Soul affright,
Your doleful presence fits my Fancy right,
TO Express this Tragedy then let me choose
The saddest of the Nine to be my Muse,
So shall my Verse with sighs and growns be full,
Fitting the occasion though my Fancy's dull.
I be who the other day rejoiced to hear,
Our Royal Princess came to Dover Peer,
Where Roaring Guns their Martial tune did sound,
Whilst Neptunes subjects danced all a round,
And Barges keeping time (scarce known before
Danced a Curranto with her to the shore.
Where she her welcome by that hollow sound
That chears the English, but the French does stound,
Each Man more breath there from the Air did borrow
TO Express their Joy but soon 'twas turned to sorrow.
Then come sad Muse and briney tears distill
Instead of Hellicon into my Quill,
Our sudden Joy, soon into grief was hurled
Heneretta leaving England, left the World,
Yet never 'twas known before the British Main,
Was the blessed Current to the Eliazin,
Such Happiness she enjoyed in English ground,
As in the Gallick Court could not be found,
She sought but found nothing there worth her stay
She therefore broke her Fast, and fled away
Unto those blessed mansions, where all cares
Are taken away, there is no such thing as tears,
She bears a part with Saints in Heavens blessed Quire
Where we by her example may aspire.
We live to dye strange Paradox yet true
Since we are but strangers we must bid adieu,
Yet Heavens we must complain that you are unkind
Thus to surprise us, and never put's in mind
By Comets, Meteors that do new appear,
But to give warning Princes deaths are near,
Death we have feared you sir, since you began
We think that nothing satisfy you can,
But Princes Corpse, you will brook no common Food,
Since you the sweetness know of Royal Blood,
In Ten Years space from Britains Royal Tree,
Four mighty Arms are broken off by thee.
Heneretta dead this melts us all to tears.
And every one a Niobe appears,
Each Lady drowns with tears her sparkling eyes,
Becoming Martyrs to griefs cruelties.
It Is true, she left us for a better state,
To us unhappy, to her a happy Fate,
Deatl was her Friend, though we of him complain,
That called her from these Earthly cares and pain,
Yet an't we bear it, thus to loose a Friend,
W^ needs must hate what to our Love puts end.
But hark me think I do already hear,
The Heavens themselves with most meliodious cheat
Chant sacred Anthems, hark sweet mellody
Princes souls compose this Harmony,
Whilst Mortals here below do weeping cry
Our Joy is fled unto Eternity.
An Epitaph.
^tay Traveller and thou shall see,
Mortal yet a Diety,
Princes are Gods, his word does cry
Yet tells them they like men must dye,
Beauties Master piece here does lay,
What silks and eloath, nows clad in clay,
The Sun of beauties now is made
Dark, by Deaths interposed shade,
Majesty's here laid in dust,
This tells you Fates decrees are just,
All must obey their just command
Death's Summons no man dare withstand,
Though many from him fain would keep,
Whilst Captives to him truly creep,
Behold a Princess here does lie
Soon snatched from Earths Felicity,
She came to see her Native Land,
Where Pleasures was on every hand,
But such trifles wan't her Aim,
She came, and saw, and overcame,
She saw Earth's joy was vanity,
So took her leave, and went to dye.
R. Philopolymathes

Printed for John Clark at the Harp and Bible in West-smith-field.


