outline of tombstone which surrounds text
AN ELEGY On the Lamented Death of the most Illustrious Princess, ANNE Dutche
of YORK, etc. Who departed this Life (after a long indisposition of ^^dy) upon
Friday the Thirty first of March, 1671.
WHat ailes the Court? what is it It bemoans?
Each angle so abounds with sighs and groans:
Is this a Prologue to some Tragedy?
Or is the Worlds great Dissolution nigh?
Or does one better then the World now dye?
It Is York's great Duchess dies; Death, you are unkind
To crop the Flower, and leave the Weeds behind;
If thou thy sovereign power needs must show,
Go take whole Millions to the shades below
Of Common sort, let such thy power know.
But when to Princes Beds thou do draw near,
To sway thy Seepter in their Royal Sphere,
Thou do proclaim, that earthly Gods must die,
And in the dust with common Mortals lie.
As fatal objects of Mortality.
So falls the Cedar with the tender Grass,
So Heroes over the Stygian Lake do pass,
With the poor Captive that does to it creep;
Princes with Peasants quietly do sleep,
For Death his Court of Equity does keep.
Virtue no more must in this Sex be sought,
Save what in the pattern of the Queen is taught.
For since this Princess bids the world adieu,
Virtue Astrea-like to Heaven flew,
And but one Royal Copy to pursue.
Nor can that Sex longer of Virtues boast,
Theirs are but Pebles to the Gemme they have lost,
And whilst with Foyles theirs but deceive the eye,
Hers Diamond-like through sable curtains pry,
And with new luster now adorn the sky.
She now above Celestial Orbs does shine,
Excelling their luster, should they all combine;
And now in blessed Paradise is set
A Jewel fit for such a Cabinet:
May we by Her example thither get.
Nor need we fear she would visit us again,
If they proud of Her, did Her not detain,
With Halalujah's did Her Breath expire,
And now with Saints she sings in Heavens blessed Quire,
And big with praise, does to that Throne aspire.
Into some doleful Grove let us now retire,
And there our grief-swell'd Lungs in sighs suspire;
Could but our Eyes to Seas converted be,
We Would soon exhale out that humiditie,
And draine them with our tears to siccitie.
That thence-from we may sacred water have
Enough to moisten the too early Grave
Of Her whose death has struck us dead with fears,
For every one a Niobe appears,
Wee're all Heraclitus's by our tears.
Each Lady drowns with tears her sparkling Eyes,
Becoming Martyrs to Griefs cruelties.
Thus all bemoan the loss of her whose State
Is now most happy, why should we blame our fate?
And weep in vain, since it is now too late.
Yet this we know, should Mortals but forbear
To speak her Virtues, and her Worth declare,
The Immortal Angels would her Merits tell,
And let the world know, how she them excel,
But this, alas, the world knows too too well.

