The Experienced Market MAN and WOMAN: OR, Profitable Instructions, TO ALL
Masters and Mistrisses of Families, Servants and others, To know the Goodness
of all sorts of Provisions, and prevent being Cheated and Imposed on, viz,

Butchers Meat, to know whether young or old, fresh killed or stale. To discover
Bull-beef, Ram-mutton, and other Cheats, Bacon, Hams, Brawns, Venison, etc. to
know good from bad.

How to know all sorts of Poulterers ware, as Fowl young or old, fat or lean,
new or stale, with Egg or not, Hairs, Rabits, Leverets, etc.

To know the goodness or badness of all sorts of Fish, fresh and salt; by many
signs and tokens, and to distinguish kinds near a like one from the other,

Directions to prevent being defrauded in buying Butter, Eggs, Cheese, Bread;
English and Outlandish Fruits, and other things that may turn to much Profit
and Advantage.

Edinburgh, Printed and Sold by James Watson, in Craigs Closs, on the North
side of the Cross. 1699.

THE Experienced Market Man, etc.
TO be skilled in buying Flesh, Fowl, Fish, and other Marketings, is not only
creditable and commendable in Masters and Mistresses of Families, Servants and
others, but by well understanding what is good or bad, and to choose
accordingly, much money may be saved which in buying bad penny worths is in a
manner thrown away; wherefore to enable you to avoid being cheated and imposed
on, I have put this small Book into a small price, but great in value; for by
laying out a penny, you may be instructed to save many a Pound.

Butchers meat young or old, new or stale, and many other remarks, and First of
Beef.
AS for the Pieces I leave to every one to choose as they like, or have
occasion; but if it be right Ox-beef, it will have an open, the fat if young,
of an Oily softness, and crumbling between your Thumb and Finger; If old, it
will be rough and spungy, full of skins and strings; If young, the flesh will
be a pleasant Carnation red, the fat whitish; If old, it will be a dark duskey
Color, the fat enclining to yellow.

Cow-Beef, This is known by its closer grain and if young of a cherry color;
the fat white and not so brittle as the former; if old, indent it with your
Finger, and the lean will in a little time rise again and fill the hollowness,
the fat will be tough, and shrivel up between your Finger and Thumb.

Bull-Beef: This looks of a dusky red, in the feeling it is brawny and tough,
not to be pinched or easily broken with your Nails the fat gross and fiberous,
smells strong and ravenish, if you rub it warm between your finger and Thumb.

Newness and Staleness, If new, it will be of a lively color, and feel cool;
if stale duskey, the veins where they appear black, the meat will feel some
what warm and clammy, indented, it will sink down spungy.

Lamb fresh, or stale killed. If a fore-quarter view the Neck vein, if it be of
a bright blew color it is fresh, if of a very dusky inclining to green, it is
stale, and near tainting, not fit to keep, but may indifferently serve for
present spending; if keept cool: As for the hind quarter, put your Finger under
the Kidney, and if it be a pleasant sent it is fresh, if not stale killed; bend
also the Huckle bone, if it be pliable; it is new, if stiff, stale.

Veal. In the shoulder the Vein directs you as in the fore-quarter of Lamb; If
any clammy stabbiness, or spots of green appear, it is growing musty or
tainting: The loyn first taint under the Kidney, the Neck and Beast at the
upper ends first showing a faint yellow, then a dusky green which is the worst
symptom of rainting: The Leg flabby, clammy, or the Veins appearing dusky or
green, I bid you beware of such a purchase:

The flesh of a Bull-calf, is more redder and firm grained than that of a
Cow-calf, the fat more curdling and firmer,

Mutton young or old, fresh or stale, Weather, Ewe or Ram Mutton, Rot, etc:
IF young the flesh will pinch up tender and full again; but if old, it will
remain so, especially in the skinny part. if young the fat will easily part
from the flesh; if old not but with difficulty as being skinny and fiberous.
Ewe-mutton is of a close grain, the fat white and oily, if pinched the flesh of
a lightish red; if Weather, the grain is more open, the fat some what more
firm, the skinny falling sooner when pinched up: If Ram-mutton the flesh will
be a very deep yet dusky red, the Fat spungy, pinched up it soon wrinkles, the
flesh, pressed rises presently, is brawny and tough; the fat rubbed between
your Fingers cast a scent Ravenish.

Pig new or stale. Turn out the leaf of the belly, if the fat be clammy or
inclining to greenish it is stale; if of a bright clean white color new, if
the nose or mouth slaver or be clammy, it is stale, if clean and dry new, if
the hindhochs be stiff it is new, if very limber stale

Pork and Brawn. In Pork the flesh pinching and breaking; the fat soft and
oily, denotes it young, the contrary old; if the Skin hip tender with your
nails, it is young, if hard and ruckling then old, or of a Hog that has not
been gelded till well grown.

If the flesh of a Boar, or Hog, gelded when well grown, the flesh will be
hard, the fat tough, and in scenting have a different smell from other Pork,
rawish and strong, the fat be full of fibers, etc.

To know the legs or hands, whether new or stale, put your finger between the
bone and flesh, and if upon smelling there be any ill scent, it is turning, or
if the skin be clammy, the bending of the joint over limber, the like is to be
feared. If you find many knots like hail shot, in the fat the Pork is measly,
the fore-line, hind-line, etc. may be known the same way.

Brawn young or old, is known by the thinness or thickness of the skin, if
young the fat will be oily and crumble, if old rough and moulder as it were
between your finger and thumb.

To discover defects in dried Hams, or other Bacon.
FOr the first, thrust a sharp pointed Knife under the bone, and if it come out
without much greasing, and presently scented, cast a pleasant Savor, the Ham
is good, if the contrary not; then try the fat on the edges, raise a sliver, if
it be white, firm and well scented, it is good; if yellowish, and of a greasy
softness, it begins to be rusty there, and thus you may try other Bacon.

To recover tainted flesh Venison, etc. Have an Earthen vessel with a cover all
over full of little holes, lay in the flesh with sweet herbs on the top and
bottom, cover all them with a cloth, dig a hole in the ground, and cover the
vessel in it with earth, let it ly twenty four hours, and it will take away the
ill scent, this especially for Venison is very proper, and will recover it when
much tainted, and to know if Venison be tainted, try it under the bones with a
knife, as you do the Hams, for there it first begins to taint.

Poulterers ware, to know whether new or stale, young or old, fat or lean, with
Eggs or not:
A Wild Duck. If a true wild Duck, it has a reddish small Foot? If fat it is
hard and thick on the belly, if lean the contrary, if limber footed new, if dry
footed stale.

A Capon. If young the spurs are short and blunt, his Legs smooth, but see they
be naturally so, and not so ordered by the Poulterers knavery, if this be
suspected, pinch the breast, and if your thumb and fingers goes in easily, it
is young, if not, it is old, if a true Capon, it will have a fat vein on the
side of the breast, and a thick rump and belly, if stale it will have an open
and loose vent, if new a close and hard one.

A Pullet. If a true one her legs and breast are smooth, and in the breast she
pinches very tender, if with Egg the belly will feel soft, but if not more
strait, or if with Egg, the vent will be open, if not hard and close, if new a
hard vent, if stale an open one.

Turkey Cock, or Hen, Turkey Pouts. A Turkey Cock young is known by the
smoothness and blackness of his Legs, and a short spur, If new the Eyes will
appear lively, the Foot limber; if stale the Eyes sunk and the foot dry; The
same observe by the Turkey Hen; but if she be with Egg, she will have a fast
open vent, but if not, her vent will be close and hard, and so for newness and
staleness the Turkey-pout is known as the Cock.

A Cock. If his spurs naturally are short and dubed he is young; if horny and
sharp old, if his ven^ be hard and fast he is new if open and loose stale.

Of a Goose. If the tame Goose has but a few hair and her bill and foot
yellowish she is young; bu^ full of hairs and the bill and foot red denotes he
(...) old: if new she has limber foot, if stale a dry one.

A wild Goose, if red footed and full of hairs she is old, but if white footed
and without hairs young. A braud Goose when pulled if smooth is young but hairy
old; their newness or staleness to be known as the first.

Chickens, Goslings, young Ducklings. If dry pulled they are stiff, if new and
a close vent; if stale limber and their vent greenish, if water pulled rub^
their breasts with the tip of your finger, if new they are rough, but if stale
they are slippery and clammy, so of Goslings, green Geese, young Ducklings, etc.

A Swan. If old full of hairs, if young smooth, if new limber footed, if stale
dry footed.

Pheasant Cock or Hen. The first, if young has dubed spurs, but old small and
sharp: If new a close and firm vent, if stale an open and flaby vent.

The second, if young has smooth Legs, and a curious fine grain of flesh, if
old hairy and rough legged, if with Egg a fast open vent; if not a close vent,
as for new or stale the same with the Cock.

Heath and Pheasant-pouts. Heath-pouts, if new will be stiff and white in the
vent; if fat hard in the vent, if stale dry footed and hard in the vent and
touched hard on the breast will peel, and the same tokens are to know the
Pheasant-pout.

The Bustard, This in all respect is to be noted, and known as the Turkey.

The Partridge, If old their Bills will be white, and Legs of a bluish Color;
if young their Bills black, and Legs yellowish, If new a fast vent, if stale a
green and open one, and if touched will peel. Yet by feeding on green wheat
their crops may be tainted though these marks discover it not, and to know it
smell at the mouth.

Wood Cock and Snip. The Wood-cock, shows its farness by its thickness and
hardness, Youngness by the smoothness of its Legs, staleness by the running of
its Nose, Morishness of its throat and dry footedness.

The Snipe if fat, has a fat vein on the inside under the wing, and handles
thick in the vent: The other marks observe as in the Wood-cock.

Of Doves. Pigeons, Plover, etc. To distinguish these and not be cheated. The
Turtle Dove has a bluish Ring about its neck, and the other part mostly white:

The Stock Dove, is larger then the wood Pigeon.

The Ring Dove, is less then the Stock Dove.

The Dovehouse Pigeon is of a moderate size.

When old they are red Legged, if new and fat they feell full, and fast in the
vent; and are limber footed, but if stale have a flaby vent.

And by this rule you may know the goodness or badness of gray or green Plover,
Thrush, Tielfare, Mavis, Larks, Woodlarks, Black-birds, and all small Birds
whatsoever,

To know the Hare, Laveret, Rabbit, or Coney.
THe Hare. If new and clean killed it will be white and stiff, but stale the
the flesh blackish in many places and limber, if the cleft of her Lip spread
much, and her claws are blunt she is old, but if the contrary she is young.

The Leveret: The Marks to be observed for the staleness and newness is the
same with the Hare: But to know whether it be a true Leveret feel the near
foot, and if there be a small bone or knob it is a true one, but if that is
wanting it is a Hare.

The Rabbit or Coney. If new she will be stiff and the flesh white and dry, but
if stale limber, the flesh bluish and slimmy: If it be a right Coney, it will
have a small gristly knot, on the outside of the forefeet, a little above the
Joint, if old the claws will be long and rough, and long gray hairs stand out
amongst the wool; if fat your Eyes may inform you by looking into her belly, if
diseased the Liver will be waterish or putrified.

Fish new or stale, to distingush the kinds of a likeness, know their goodness,
and of salted and pickled fish. etc.
A Lobster. If this be new, the Tale will flap too when opened like a Spring,
the Fish being boiled: If stale it will be limber. To know if it be full and
not spent, open it on the knuckle or bending the Tail, and if there it fill,
the shell be hard and rise again when dented by your Finger it is full; but if
papy and soft it is spent, and of no value: If you suspect the clause to be
filled with Water, pull out the plugs, and when at any time you buy, trust not
to the weight, but to your further search.

Sturgeon good or bad. If it be bad, having lost its pickle and made up again,
it will crumble and grows rough between your Finger and Thumb, the skin be
rough and flobby; but if good, it will cut like Wax, feel oylly, have some
small blew gristles or sin-news like Veins, streaking here and there; which in
the bad will look dusky, or of a rusty color: If good the skin is tough and
firm, having a fat oily substance under it, not easily parted from the flesh,
which will look white and cast a pleasing scent, the flakes not opening kindly.

Boild Salmon. If good the scales will be of a bright azure color, shining and
many standing up, the Fish of a blushing color, hard or firm, oylly and the
flakes parting kindly. If bad, brittle and rough; if long boiled and standing
without pickle, clammy and of a faint scent.

Prawns and shrimps. If new their Tails bending stiffly inward hard and well
scented if stale the Tails limber, of a faint smell, the Eyes loose and sinking.

Crabs great and small. If new the claws stiff, the Eyes not easily moved, and
of a bright red, where the parts are to be red the scent under the Throat
pleasant, but the contrary of these Signs denotes them to be stale boiled and
naught.

Place and Flounders. If they are not alive and you suspect them stale, it is
known by their limberness, the shirvling of their sins, dullness and sinking of
their Eyes, and a greenness where the guts ly, a clammyness over them if not
just washed; if they are new, they will be stiff, their Eyes look well, and all
the contrary appear.

To know these assunder, the place is spotted with red or orange colored spots
on the Back the Belly of an earthy white, the Flounder is without spots clouded
on the Back, and the Belly of a whitish inclyning azure.

Maids and Thorn-back. If stale their Eyes dull sinking low, their vents flabby
and slimmy, and they limber, their Bellies changing to greenish. These are
supposed to be one and the same Fish, but the Maid growing old, has knobs and
prickles sprouting on her Back; and then is cold a Thorn-back.

Breem, Pike, Carp. Grayhing, Mullet, Terch, Barble, Trout, Whiting, Roach,
Dace, Smelts, Eels, and the like.
TO know these or any the like Fish if stale, look if their Eyes appear dull,
and sinking, their fins cripling up their Bodies, particularly their Tails
limber, and a clammyness about their mouths, their vents flabby and open; they
then are stale, but the contrary marks show them not to have been long dead,
and that however they may spend well enough if not long keept.

Herrings and Macrel. These growing stale loose the redness about the Gills,
and their bright shining color grows limber, their Eyes dull and sinking,
their fins contract and the water succers within their Gills grow blackish or a
dusky red, and of an ill scent; their bellies grow loose and their vent Flaby.

Salt Cod and old Ling. These are good if pinching up the Flakes, they rise
well, and feel oylly; when the bone parts clean from the Flesh and they have a
true color and scent: But if the flesh be rough, crumbling the skin crackling
or shivering: Then they have been ill cured, or met with some mischance, so
that they are good for little and to be rejected.

Other Marketings, as how to choose Butter, Cheese, Bread; English and
outlandish Fruits, and not be cheated.
OF Butter. When you buy Butter, receive not the taste from the Teller, but
with a knife take it your self, for many times there is a good bit placed to
decoy you, when all the rest is bad, perhaps made up of rank salt Butter, by
working of it in water, which takes out the Salt and rank smell but leanness
little or no nourishment in the Butter, so that melted it turns to greasy oil
or wheyish substance.

If you buy salt Butter, and it be in cask, thrust your Knife in the cleft
about the middle of the cask, some hoops being taken off to prevent being
cheated by the tops being packed; and smell presently to it, if it has a strong
smell it is rank and naught.

Of Eggs. If you have not an oppertunity to caudle them hard, then put against
the Sun, if the Whites look of a Muddy or Dusky color; the Yolk, not lying
even in the middle, or broken they once decaying, if not already addled, if you
have none of these Advantages; shake them, and if they squash or swag much,
they are stale and wasted if not addled; though indeed, new Eggs may a little
shake, though little to be heard or felt.

Of Cheese, If the larger sort of Cheese be ruged or rough coated, try it well,
least there be Worms or Weavels in it, or little Mites. If it be over moist and
spungy, it is subject to Mayots, the effects of ill making; if it appear to be
perished, try the extent of it with the Cheese Iron, that you may know what you
buy, and not be imposed on.

Of Bread, If you find little knobs in your Bread, old stale or musty Bread has
been mashed among it: If it taste sweet, it is grown Corn: If gritty, it is
made of smotty washed Corn. And none of these are very nourishing, and
therefore to be eschewed: If Rye be mixed with Wheat, it will be known by the
over moistness and any reasonable Pallat may taste it.

Of Fruits. If pulling the stalks of Pears o^ Apples, they come out without
breaking the Fruit, is rotten at core, how sound soever i^ appear outwardly,
for mustiness small at top and if any, it will there give you the Sent.

Pricked Oranges and Lemons, are known by the Softness and some Spots, also a
fading of the Color, the fullness and emptyness by the Balance of the Hand;
If the Seed in Pomgranets, rather they are wasted: If a Melleon be Hollow, the
top end will be rough, and rived.

FINIS.

