MEMENTO MORI.

outline of tombstone including emblems of Death which surrounds text
AN ELEGY ON THE Death of the Right Noble PRINCE HENRY HOWARD, Duke of NORFOLK,
Who Departed this Life the 13th. day of this Instant January, 1684.
18. Jan. 1684
NORFOLK is Dead like Lightning, which no part
Of The Body touches, but first strikes the Heart!
This Sound is Fatal, for there is not in all
The stock of Sorrow, any Charm can call
Death sooner up; there is Music in the breath
Of Thunder, and a sweetness in the Death:
It brings with it, if we with this compare,
All the loud Noises that torment the Air.
They Cure (Physicians say) the Element,
Sick with dull Vapors, and to Banishment,
Confine Infections: But this Dismal shriek,
Without the least Redress, is uttered like
The last day's Summons, when Earths Glories lie
A scattered heap, and Time it self must Dye.
What now has it to boast of? can we have
A thought less dark then the horror of the Grave?
Now thou do dwell below; as brave a Soul,
As humane sighs and tears did e're condole:
Sprung from those great Progenitors, whose Name
Shines high and glorious in the Book of Fame:
Renowned for Martial Deeds, true English born,
Such as for ever shall our Isle adorn;
Who in their great Example still do live,
And to brave Spirits still Instructions give:
Pointing the way to Honor, by true worth,
Such as themselves did to the world set forth.
Howard! a Name which France has forced to shake,
The very Sound has driven whole Armies back;
But all their Prowess and Heroic Might,
No Death the Universal Monarch, fright;
To Fare their Glorious Heads at length did bow,
And God-like Men like Beasts, in Dust lie low;
Nor was Great Norfolk then his Fathers less,
But all their Virtues did at large express.
Of the first Magnitude a fixed Star,
Never Excentrick in the British Sphere;
But always Loyal to his Prince, he stood
In every Shock of State, and stemmed the Flood
Of Popular Rage, and did himself approve,
To his own Honor, and the Royal Love;
Blessed with great Titles, Wealth, and ample Power,
And by his own great Regarded more.
Valiant and Wise, in Dangers often tossed,
But yet his God-like Courage never lost.
When Fortune frowned, he found himself then most
Resolved, and with collected strength abides
The impetuous rage of Winds and adverse Tides;
Always undaunted, and his Noble Mind,
Not blood est threats could force, nor flatteries blind.
A Hero so complete, not every day
Is formed, but Heaven does once an Age display
Some wondrous work, a while to bless our eyes,
And then destroys, lest we should Idolize.
But yet the Memory thereof remains,
And we are allowed in tears to ease our pains.
Our loss is Universal, all should weep,
A Anniversary our eyes should keep,
To some sad Numbers tuned, some Solemn Verse,
That may his Glories and our Griefs rehearse;
Nor should we cease to grieve and to admire,
Until our wearied Souls, like his Expire.
The EPITAPH.
HEre is true Eloquence,
The Grave alone speaks Sense;
It says that Mortal Joys,
Each blast of Time Destroys,
But he that has Lived Just,
His Glory keeps in Dust.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street, without Newgate,
1684.


