AN ELEGY Upon the Death of my pretty Infant-Cousin, Mris. JANE GABRY, Who
died within the Month, not without some suspicion of being Overlaid by her
Nurses.
SWeet Babe, why did thou leave this world so soon,
Not seen by thy first Parents, Sun, nor Moon?
(...)adst only some short Intervals of light,
(...)o lead thee from one, to another Night;
(...)ill thou should view an everlasting Sun,
Which never knew shade, because it never begun.
Pretty Apostate! why no longer stay?
But newly Christian, and straight fall away?
Pardon, dear Saint, 'twas not for want of Grace;
It Is that transports us to a better place.
Never was Babe baptized with kinder Strife:
^^^gion helps to save the soul, not life:
^ his thread once spun, bears an unerring date,
Plot to be broke, or lengthned, but by Fate.
O Heavens! survive the Font but one poor day?
It Was a short Eve to a long Holy Day.
Was thy too generous heart inspired to die,
To quit thy Sureties from their costly Tie?
Made haste to heaven, new washed from Adams guilt,
For fear that holy water might be spilt.
We shall not load thy Nurses with complaints,
Whose very sin might serve to increase the Saints.
^here may be loss, not guilt, without the Will;
^ometimes the Innocent the Innocent kill.
Nor shall we from thy Inches square thy Bliss,
As Lovers do theirs, by a short-lived kiss.
Plants wither here, set in a barren place;
Heaven is a rich Soil, ripens fruit apace.
A newborn Bud, a tender Blossom here,
Is in a moment ripe and perfect there.
Now thou art full of days: How can there be
Childhood, or Nonage, in Eternity?
Why should we then be Mourners to excess,
As if we grieved at thy stolen Happiness?
Our showrs of tears can only show us kind;
More proper for poor Us, who stay behind
In a bad World, full of perplexing Care;
Whose Charity is colder then its Air.
Rather convert our Sorrows into Joy,
To build new hopes for a more lasting Boy.
The odds will not be great, but three to one; Two Girls dead before.

One Grain will turn the Scale, when three are gone.
And now, sweet Babe, allow my gentle Verse
To drop, not Tears, but Wishes on thy Hearse:
May thy dear Parents and Relations be
As quiet as thy Grave, as blessed as Thee.
LONDON: Printed Anno Domini 1672.


