outline of tombstone which includes emblems of Death and surrounds text
AN ELEGY On the Death of the Right Honorable HENEAGE LORD FINCH, Baron of
Daventry, High Chancellor of England, Earl of Nottingham; And One of the Lords
of the most Honorable Privy Council; Who Departed this Life, December. 18. 1682.
20. Dec. 1682.
GReat FINCH is Dead, Oh! tell it not aloud,
Lest cruel Death insult and grow too proud,
Fraught with so rich a Spoil, whose Worth alone
Was more than Thousand common Victims own,
And by our Loss, alas! too dearly known.
Let Sorrow stalk in silence, and become
The greatness of our Grief by being Dumb:
Let all our Eyes release their flowing springs,
While some sad Bird his Mournful Ditty sings;
Justice her self in sables will appear,
As for a Son, the Darling of her Care;
She Weeps and Mourns, and sighing sorely, stands
Unmoved, dejected, and with folded Hands:
Where shall be found a Man so good, so great,
So Noble, and so every way complete;
When young, untainted with the vice of Youth,
A Soul made up of Innocence and Truth.
Vice he abhorred, but Virtue was his Life,
By which he evermore maintained the strife
With wickedness and sin; nor would submit
To be ungodly to be thought a Wit;
But sollid Wisdom was his only Rule,
(All else is but pretense to guild a Fool)
Sage Care and prudence in his Face were seen,
Sweet, though Majestic, was his port and mien;
His Tongue dropped Manna, sweetly did he speak,
Nor was his Copious Fancy long to seek;
Judgment and Eloquence together join,
And with a perfect Harmony combine,
To make his sense and Language both Divine,
As in some great and Regular Design.
But never must we hope to reach thy praise,
He that dares highest will deserve the Bays.
Nothing thy Merit ever can express,
We hope but pardon, since we do confess
Our Faults, acknowledgement will make them less.
Thou liv'st above the power of Time and Death,
Which though it has deprived thee of thy Breath,
Thy Lasting Name to ages shall endure,
Than Rocks of Adamant more firm and sure;
Thy Universal Goodness shall be told
Throughout the World, thy Glories be enrolled
In the great Book of Fame, where thou shall stand
An Instance high of Virtues large command:
To God thy Duty thou did early pay,
Presenting him the first Fruits of the Day,
And over all thy great Concerns did pray:
The Pillar of the Church as well as State,
Thou bought'st thy Honors at no easy Rate;
But still wast caring for the Nations Peace,
That Arts might grow, and Piety increase,
Thy Countries Glory was thy latest wish.
Most Loyal to thy Pr^nce, whom thou d^dst know
Was placed as Gods Vicegerent here below;
And therefore did oppose all lawless Rage,
That threat'ned so to over flow the Age;
But thou, the Chancellor, with prudent Law
Did keep the Factious Multitude in awe;
Thou every part of Life did act with skill,
And each Relation prudently fulfill:
And when thy Work was finished quite and done,
The all-wise God thought fit to call thee Home.
The Epitaph.
HEre lies the sacred Dust
Of FINCH, as Great as Just;
The Glory of His age,
Who having left the Stage
Of Mortal Life, by Death
Has gained a better Breath.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Rainbow, near St. Andrews-Church, in Holbourn,
1682.


