depiction of SkullAN ELEGY, On the Death of the Reverend, Learned. and Pious
William Bell, D.D. Vicar of S. Sepulchers; who Died July the 19th, 1683.
WHAT Bell is that? I fear it will be Se'd,
England's no Ringing Island, Bell is Dead.
Grave Oxford's Fell, and Lincoln's Mighty T --
Chester, and Brave Ely, and Sarum;
Are somewhat out of Tune (I fear) to see
Bell cast anew, to take his full Degree.
Sorrow each Breast, Silence each Tongue has ceased,
Since the Bell Told, that, Doctor Bell's Deceased.
In Silence Grieve, since Silent now he is,
Who when he Spoke, all Silent would be. It Is
A Tacit mournful Text, the Winding Sheet,
Makes Poets Sigh; Verses give up your Feet,
" Who ever Sob'd in Numbers? Can a Groan
" Be Quaver'd out by soft Division?
If then our Loss be rightly understood,
No News, our Land should Weep into a Flood:
Yet Bords your Aid; for here is a Choice Theme,
Your Wits can never Jump to the Extreme:
But in Defect; no Praise is Excessive,
On Excellencies most Superlative,
Reader, I Pray, let not your Virgin Faith,
Scorn to Submit, to what your Poet Says;
Without Hyperbole; who knew him, Kens
He was a Pattern of all Excellence,
So Excellent, that even to Express,
His Excellencies seems to make them less.
A Mighty Loyalist, and Truths Defendant,
Of Papists and Sectaries, a sweet Opponent:
Panduct of all Knowledge; for no Prelate
More Learned, or more Profound, or any Legate,
Or any Pope, Jesuit, Cardinal:
In Fine, more Learned, more Critical than all.
" Knowledge and Zeal in him so Sweetly-met,
" His Pulpit seemed a Second Oliver.
" Where from his Lips he would deliver Things,
" As though some Seraphims had clasped his Wings.
" His painful Sermons were so neatly dressed,
" As if an Anthem were in Prose expressed.
His Words were Pat and Smooth, and yielding much
Of Nectar and Ambrosia, they were such
As would allure Angels, at any Rate,
To be his Auditors (if possible) Fate,
Made him a Tenant of a longer Date,
Than those ill Husbands (...) so Live, (we see,)
As to neglect to Die, and Die to be.
Unfit to Live again; he Lived to Die,
And Di'd to Live unto Eternity.
Whose Conscience, both to God and Man,
Was equal inoffensive, and the Span
Of whose unspotted Life deserves to Be
Preserved in Mind by his Posterity,
Blessed Soul departed, if to any one
OF the Saints above to Thee I Would Pray alone.
And in my Calendar I Would place thy Fall
And make thy Dying-day Canonical.
" Thy Ghost inspires our Muse, what Spirit Ran
" In Thee before, Lives now in every Man.
Yet can no Muse express how thou art Blessed
With Saints above. Let Angels speak the Rest.
The EPITAPH.
The Vicar of S. Sepulchers Lies
Within this Sepulcher; who Craveth
His Name, the Bells will that declare,
To tell his Worth, who able are,
But He himself? Yet all can tell,
The Doctor lived (and died) so well.
London, Printed by T. Moore, and J. Ashburne, for Joseph Roberts, at the Bible
in Fleet-Lane, 1683.


