AN EGLEY UPON THE Most Execrable MURDER of Mr. CLUN
On^ of the COMEDEANS of the THEATOR ROYAL, Who was Robbed and most inhumanely
Killed on Tuseday-night, being the 2d, of August, 1664. near Tatnam-Court, as
as he was Riding to his Country House at Kentish town.
MOurn Royal Stage, your Poets pous implore,
To cease to write, since Clun can be no more;
Turn all your Sceans to black, and let them be,
The Emblimes of our cares, (...) Tragedy:
Go hide your Tapestry, and Clothes of green,
Act now in black, Clun will no more be seen*
Be (...) nor sighing stand;
For Comic Clun that died by Tragic hand.
Mirth learn to mourn, and banish all our Smiles,
Since Clun has played the last of his Beguiles:
How can my pen bid thy last Rights adue,
When I want words to set thy fames forth true;
It Is beyond Prose, or Art of humane Verse,
Thy taking-Humours to their worth rehearse.
Dye all desire of seeing more the Stage,
Now thou art dead, the Mirror of our Age;
For in thy Action all our joys were seen,
Nor were thou less to either King or Queen.
Thou who by polished words, and Woman's dr^^^
Did Lovers passions to the height expre^^
And made us weep, at seeming sorrow (...)
To hear and see like truth a Fiction (...)
And when we frowned at some pro(...) (...)
Then in a moment changed that (...) (...) Henry 4.

Then (...) and Bessus, (...) (...)
Broke from thy Lips, to make us (...)*
Blind in our haste, The Humorous Lieutenant. More of Venice.
will Bessus run away?
Yet in the mouth of danger get the day;
And thy Lieutenant in his Drink-mad-fight
To gain those Trophies which was but thy right.
O! but Iago, when we think on thee,
Not to applaud thy vice of Flattery;
Yet must that Part never in our thoughts dye,
Since thou did Act, not mean that Subtilty:
Thou all of all, and only Actor he,
That ere trod Stage in English Comedy.
But Hellish Fiends, what Devil reigned in you,
To Rob and Murder him that fed you too?
Could not his Money your cursed spleen abate,
Without he fell, a victive to your hate?
What Execrations shall my pen indite,
Against such Rogues that Eclipsed Clun our Light?
Plagues worse then Egypts be your portion here,
And may you never mount Heavens Hyemspear:
Could I say more, or wish you worse I would,
Therefore i will hold, for fear I wish you good.
But Oh, black death, something I Will say of thee,
(...) thou did act among this treachery:
And thy hand did seal, our poor Clus death,
Who often us pleased with (that you took) his breath:
O thou unkind and mortal foe to man,
Who still art blind, yet checks all thou can.
London, Printed by Edward Crowch dwelling on Snow-hill.


