AN ELEGY On the much Lamented Death of Mr. Samuel Loveday Who Departed this
Life on the 15th of December. 1677. in the 59th Year of his Age.
O Heavy stroke! Oh bitter lamentation!
Scarce will my Tears give way to vent my Passion.
My Tears so overflow, I scarce can guide
My trembling Hand. O stop, you swelling Tide
Of brinish Tears! Alas! my Heart does break*
So strong's my Grief, although my Muse be weak.
Though to the Mournful Muses I make suit
For their assistance, and they all stand mute:
My Grief and Sorrow will my Muse supply,
And teach me to Indite an ELEGY.
My Grief sufficient Matter will infuse
Into my Heart: True Sorrow needs no Muse.
Dear LOVEDAY's Dead, that for this many Years
Has fed the Flock of Christ: Let floods of Tears
Run from the Conduits of your moistened Eyes;
How shall the Flocks be fed when the Shepherd dies?
When Shepherds die, and cruel Wolves remain,
The tender Lambs have reason to complain.
Dear Samuel's gone, he is gone that used to keep,
A faithful Watch, when we could take our sleep.
He Is gone! he is gone! that Sacred Food provided:
Ah! he is gone, by whom the Flock was guided.
How careful was he always to provide
Good Food, and Food convenient beside,
For tender Babes, who in the Faith were young,
Provided Milk, and also for the Strong,
Or Men in Christ, provided stronger Meat;
Also provok^d an Appetite to Eat.
The Ignorant this Holy Man instructed
In paths of Righteousness, and then Conducted
Into the Fold of Christ, where he with care
Did feed them as Christ's Flock, and did not spare,
But spent his strength to find good Pasture out;
Strengthening the Weak, confirming every Doubt.
And that which will perpetuate his Name,
And mount him up upon the Wings of Fame;
And make him like the Stars of Heaven shine;
Yea, make him to the World appear Divine:
And make his ever Honored Name to live,
When Death has not another stroke to give.
Oh! 'twas his pious, rare, and virtuous Life,
The Loss of whom calls for a world of Grief.
Had I but skill to paint his Virtues forth,
Suitable to his Merits, and their worth;
So many were they, and so Excellent,
I should but leave the World a Monument
To be admired, rather than believed:
But ah! he is gone; for which my Soul is grieved.
Grief in my Heart's impressions are so deep,
While Loveday with his Virtues falls asleep,
There Is no Physician in the Earth can Cure;
And scarce obtain I patience to endure.
Were It only I that did this Loss sustain,
The Contemplation of dear Loveday's gain
Would much abate the Grief, that now surprises
My Lovesick Soul: But hence my Grief arises,
His Death's a public Loss, and every Eye
Has cause to drop a Tear, as well as I.
His Life and Doctrine both were excellent,
His Doctrine sound, his Life a President.
Mists that obscured God's Universal Love
He did disperse, and wholly did remove.
And though the Lord has called dear Samu'l hence,
Yet has he left us such an Evidence
Of God's indeared Love to all Mankind,
That we who for a time are left behind,
Have cause to turn our Mourning to a Song,
And bless the Lord that lent us him so long.
And they which never yet beheld his Face,
Have cause to give God thanks that gave him space
To loose those Snarls, and all those Knots untie
That in the Ninth of the Romans seemed to lie.
But ah! He Is gone, that never undertook
To preach from Scripture, God's most sacred Book,
But he so fully opened every part
It seldom mist to satisfy the Heart.
But here my Muse must stop, I must not dwell
Upon his Doctrine, lest my Poem swell
Into so large a Volumn, that my Theme
Will quit her single Sheer, and want a Ream.
Yet one word more to you whom God did lend
So sound a Preacher, and so sweet a Friend;
Lay up his Doctrine by you now in store
For Loveday's gone, will never Teach you more.
And you whose itching Ear and wanton Eyes,
Could relish nothing under Novelties;
Your wandering wanton Eyes now sees the Day
Your loathed Manna's taken quite away.
Ah! that sweet Oracle no more will rouse
Sin-slumbring Souls out of their fleshly Drowse.
Oh! he whose Doctrine dropped like showers of Rain,
Who often strove, yea often strove in vain;
And with endeared Love and Souls-affection
Besought you often to make sure Election:
Who often told you that you must suppress
Your sinful Lusts, your Pride, your vain Excess:
And yet his Doctrine you did not receive,
For which this good Man's Soul did often grieve.
Ah! Death has called him hence, he is fled, he is gone,
You Have now but half your Food to feed upon.
O may that half that is left you yet to use,
Be like the Widows Barrel, and her Cruse!
O may we never see that Cruse drawn dry,
Till God be pleased to send a fresh supply,
And unto some a double Portion give,
In whom our Friend that is Dead again may Live.
But he is not Dead, he is only fallen asleep:
Let Us cease our Mourning, and not always Weep.
If he has changed his Sorrow into Peace,
Why should not we with him from Sorrow cease?
Let Us moderate our weeping for our Friend:
Excessive hope less weeping may offend.
He Is fallen asleep, who waking was so kind
To leave some Soul-refreshing Food behind.
Come, gather up some Fragments that remain,
And freely feed, so will he Live again.
The first choice Dainty that I here present,
Highly conducing to Soul-nourishment,
Is our dear Loveday's choice selected Gift,
His Sermon preached from Matthew twenty fifth,
Upon the foolish Virgins, and the wise;
Its real Worth thou can not over-prize.
All you that this choice Dainty do possess,
Feed of it every Day, or more or less.
And when the sable Curtains of the Night
Are closly drawn, then feed by Candlelight.
And you who for its worth would fain enjoy it,
Let its rich worth invite you all to buy it.
Those Soul-refreshing Cordials likewise
Drawn from the Third of Isaiah's Prophecies,
By him prepared, though not by Humane Art:
O! that they were engraven in each Heart.
His Rules for guiding of the Tongue, endeavor
To keep it as an Antidote for ever:
Which will resist the Poison of the Tongue,
Which is infectious both to Weak and Strong.
That Sermon preached on the Third of Revelation,
Drawn from our blessed Savior's Invitation
To every Soul, to open when he knocks
Their closed Hearts, and to unboult these Locks,
And entertain him as a sacred Guest,
To Sup with them while he provides the Feast.
O that that Sermon might for ever live,
While there is a Soul true Comfort to recieve!
Here stop my lavish Muse, these strains recall,
Attend dear Loveday to his Funeral.
AN EPITAPH.
S Samu'l lies here Entombed in the Dust,
A A Man both Learned, Virtuous, Wise, and Just.
M May Lovday's pious Life our Pattern be
U Until we sleep in Dust as well as he.
E Earth is dissolved by Death, its brittle frame
L Lasts but a while, returns from whence it came.
L Let Death, yea, let the Grave triumph a while,
O Our Lovday shortly will them both beguile.
V Under Death's ashes long he will not remain
D Death-conquering Lovday will arise again;
A And shall come forth like Gold that has been tried
Y In the Refiners Fire, and Purified.
London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1677.


