The French Dancing Master, AND THE ENGLISH SOLDIER: Or, The Difference betwixt
Fidling and Fighting, Displayed in a DIALOGUE betwixt an ENGLISHMAN, and a
FRENCHMAN.
Englishman. MOnsieur, good morn, whither away so fast?
Some great importance sure does cause this haste;
Your running looks do in effect thus say,
Monsieur is gone, 'cause Landlord asks pay.

Frenchman. Begar me no sush man, me scorn de shift,
Me plus Affairs dat me from home de lift.

English man. You scorn to shift, it is true I think you say,
Witness your Shirt not washed this many a day.

Frenchman. Par me foy de Rascal to degrase,
Ne autre man in de varle live in sush case;
Begar though me no speak si bon English,
Me thrush Tord in de belly if de speak dis;
Begar me be de born Gentil-man de France,
Me can learn English a le mode de Dance:
Me play ode leetle Fidle, me can sing,
Par ma foy no Poet Orphus sush Music bring:
Begar you no sush man in all de England have,
For de Fidle, and de Dancing brave.

Englishman. But when you come to meet your Foe in face,
The Fiddler and the Fidle's out of case.

Frenchman. Begar de art Jack-napes to a teetle,
Me be brave Fellow, me can feight a leetle;
Me wear Feader in de Hat, me have Tord by side,
Me be de Gentil-man when me on de Horse ride;
Englishman be a Clown, make Leg like a de Bear,
Franch-man be de Gentil-man, de fidle and de dance rare.

Englishman. It Is true, in dancing you do us excel,
But can you, as the English, fight as well?
When Mars unsheaths his Sword, and Canons roar,
And men lie welt'ring in their purple gore,
When Towns are burnt, and Cities are destroyed,
To what use will your Dancing be employed?

Frenchman. Begar be de creat Fool to speak sush ting,
Brava, brava, de Dance, de Fidele, Sing;
No sush ting in de varle, to peep, to dance,
To be dreass like de Madam, a le mode France.

Englishman. Brave Monsieur! gallant Monsieur! wondrous rare!
Fidling and fooling none with thee compare!

Frenchman. Begar be de Rogue, de Villain, de Carle,
To speak against de Dance, de brave ting in de varle;
Begar me do love it out of all de cry,
Par ma foy de speak against it, tell loud lie:
France-man is de Gentil-man in de high Sphere,
Vat is de Clown vas dis skip de Angletiere?
De French Monsieur skip and leap like de Spright,
De caper, and kick, is not dat a rare Shite?

Englishman. A rare Shite it is indeed, I needs must say,
To see men skip like Puppets in a Play;
To act the Mimick, fidle, prate, and dance,
And cringe like Apes, is a le mode France:
But to be resolute, one to fight with ten,
And beat them, 's proper unto Englishmen.

Frenchman. Begar France-man is couragio, feight like te Tiffell,
De kill, de slay, cut men off de middle;
De brave Monsieurs, de Oliver, de Rowland,
Begar de feight as long as de could stand;
Amadis de Gaul, de Roy Charlemain,
De make blood run down like drops of de rain,
Begar with new fashion so exc'lent! so rare!
No men in de varle wid de French make compare.

Englishman. But Monsieur, have you never heard report
Of Poicters, Crescy, and of Agen-Court?
When France was drowned with streams of French-mens blood,
And English Valor could not be withstood?
Sixth HENRY in Paris Crowned in State,
And France (submissive) did on England wait,
When only TALBOT'S Name did bear such sway,
To make Ten thousand Frenchmen run away?
Is not France, and the Nation still the same,
Whom England did in all Encounters tame?
Have we not Hero's still who are endu'd
With Valor, (Stars of the first Magnitude?)
YORKS Duke, Brave ALBEMARLE, equal to those
Our Ancestors, who Frenchmen did oppose?
With other Worthies of deserved Fame,
Make Frenchmen tremble for to hear their Name.

Frenchman. Begar dis true, de Englishman speaks right,
France leave to Dance, and now de learn to Fight.

Adieu Monsieur.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1666.


