The Earl of Shaftsbury's Loyalty Revived: Or, THE POPISH DAMNABLE PLOT AGAINST
Our Religion and Liberties, lively Delineated in several of its Branches, With
an Account of the Manner of the Execution of WILLIAM Viscount STAFFORD on
Tovver-Hill.




I
depiction of burning of London

II
depiction of murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey

III
depiction of General Days of Humiliation

IV
depiction of execution of perpetrators of Popish Plot

V
depiction of Mr. Dangerfield's attempt on the Earl of Shaftsbury's life

VI
depiction of Mrs. Cellier's attempt on the Earl of Shaftsbury's life

VII
depiction of Papist Plot against the Presbyterians

(...)


IX
depiction of Mrs. Cellier's sitting at the pillory

X
depiction of destruction of treasonable papers

XI
depiction of Pope's reception of English letters

XII
depiction of execution of William Viscount Stafford

The Explanation,
SO exceeding great is the Detestation that Englishmen bear to the unheard of
Tyranny and matchless Superstition of Popery, that they have ever since the
Reformation, but more especially since the Discovery of the late Damnable and
Hellish Popish Plot against their Religion and Liberties, laid hold of all
Opportunities to express their just Abhorrence of it. Among other ways, this of
exposing their Hellish Contrivances by Picture was not thought the most
contemptible.

The PLATE has Twelve DIVISIONS.
I. The First describes the Burning of LONDON, which has been proved
undeniably by Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedloe, and others, to be contrived and carried on
by the Papists. A blessed Religion, that must be introduced by the Ruin of so
many thousand Families! But Devastation alone would not content, without Blood:
For, in the next place,

II. We describe The Manner of their murdering Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, who
took Dr. Oates's Depositions of the Plot; which was no more than every
Gentleman in the Commission of the Peace was bound to do: yet for this
necessary discharge of his Duty, the Conspirators were so enraged, that they
resolved to cut him off; the rather, as may reasonably be supposed, to deter
all other Magistrates from intermedling with any Affairs relating to the Plot.
The Persons actually present at this Murder were, Girald and Kelly, two
Priests; Green, Bury, and Hill, who were since executed for it. The whole
discovered by Mr. Miles Praunce, who was to have acted in it.

III. We come to deseribe The General Days of Humiliation appointed by His
Majesty's Proclamations, on the Thirteenth of November, 1678. and on the
Eleventh of April, 1679. to implore the Mercies of Almighty God, in the
Protection of His Majesty's Sacred Person; and that he would infatuate and
defeat the Counsels of the Papists, our Enemies.

IV. The next thing in order of Time was The Execution of several of the
Plotters, viz. Coleman, Ireland, Grove, Pickering, Whitebread, Harcourt,
Fenwick, Gavan, Turner, and Langhorn, etc.

V. We come now to the Sham-Plots. Their next great Design was to take off one
of our great Bulwarks, viz. the Right Honorable Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury. In
this Fifth Division we give you the manner of Mr. Dangerfield's coming to
attempt him; and,

VI. In the Sixth, The Manner of Mrs. Cellier's (one of the Pope's Amazons)
going to do that Great Work her self, (Mr. Dangerfield having sailed in the
Attempt) and of her turning down Stairs. Although frequently attempted, yet it
has pleased God hitherto (for the good of this Na^^^n by his gracious
Providence to preserve this Honorable Person; and it is the Prayers of all
good Protesta^^^ That he may never fall into the hands of his Popish
Adversaries, whose tender Mercies are Cruelty.

VII. To show the Papists would leave no Stone unt^^^'d to blow off this
Hellish Plot, their next Stratagem was to forge a Plot upon the Presbyterians,
by Name; but in Truth to involve the most zealous and active Protestant
Nobility, Gentry, etc. throughout the Nation: which being fortified with bold
Perjuries, and specious Pretenses, might gain Credit; and thereby they being
destroyed as a Sacrifice to Justice, it might seem probable, That the last
Years Plot was only their malicious Contrivance against the Catholics, who
would then appear the King's best Subjects. The Model of this designed Plot
against the Presbyterians was found by Sir William Waller, in the House of Mrs.
Cellier, hid in a MEAL-TVB, in a Paper Book, tied with Red Ribbons: It
purported to be only Remarks or Chief Heads of Things and Persons to be
charged; as, amongst the rest, there were named, the Lords Hallifax,
Shaftsbury, Radnor, Essex, Wharton, the Duke of Buckingham, and others, to be
of Counsel in this pretended Conspiracy; the Duke of Monmouth General; the Lord
Gray, Lord Gerard, and his Son, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, Lieutenant-Generals
in this Rebellious Army; Sir William Waller, and others, Major-Generals;
Colonel Mansel, Quartermaster-General. By this whole Contrivance it most
evidently appears, that their aim was to ruin all that were true Protestants,
or honest Asserters of the Liberties and Property of the Subject: for indeed
there cannot be assigned above two or three, in all their long forged List,
that can with any Color of Reason, or usual acceptance of the Word, be called
Presbyterians.

VIII. Next we come to describe the manner of Mrs. Celliers sitting in State on
the Pillory, near the Maypole in the Strand, with her famous Wooden Shield, to
defend her from the Fury of the People. She was most justly sentenced to this
ignominious Punishment, for publishing an abominable lying Pamphlet, entitled,
Malice Defeated: A Book stuffed with so many Lies, and notorious Equivocations,
and with so much Malice and Envy to all Protestants in general, that the like
was never publicly sold.

IX. We describe the manner of Assaulting Justice Arnold, by Three notorious
Russians; one of whom, viz. Giles, has been since Tried, and found Guilty, and
accordingly deservedly punished for it.

X. We next describe The manner of their tearing their Treasonable Papers, for
fear of a Discovery.

XI. In the next place, we describe their Holy Fathers receiving comfortable
Letters from England, (with Tears of Joy) of the likely Success of their Plot.

XII. Lastly, We describe The manner of the Execution of William Viscount
Stafford, on Tower hill, who was impeached by the House of Commons in 1678. of
High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King; and was accordingly brought
to Trial before the House of Lords, in Parliament, on Tuesday the last day of
November, and by them found Guilty, and sentenced to Death, on Tuesday
following, viz. the Seventh of December, 1680. and accordingly executed on
Tower hill the (...) of December.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in Ball-Court, near the Black Bull in the
Old Bailey. MDCLXXX.


