THE EARL OF STRAFFORD HIS ELLEGIACK POEM, AS IT Was penned by his own hand a
little before his Death.
STate give me leave, and vex my thoughts no more,
I have too much within me to deplore
My self, and it, who both oppressed do lie
Subjected to a growing Anarchy.
I have plough'd through my soul, and articled
Against my self within me, I have read
All my life over, to find out what sin
Moved Englands, Irelands, and what Scotlands spleen,
And dare convince their blinded rage who can
Find in me errors more then speak me Man.
It Is dangerous to be great, Treason does lie
To be too gracious in a Princes eye:
Use your rage sharpest wit, for all your Art
Though you my head, my King shall have my heart.
Be wise, Vicegerents, whose succeeding fate,
Shall rear you up unto the height of State,
The ladder shakes you climb on, every Round
Is paved with icy fate, smiles on the ground
From whence you rise, and, unadvised, you shall
Find, if not sudden, yet a certain fall.
My sin was too much loyalty, and when
That times to come, as sure there will be Men,
(Although this scanted Age vents none, but those
Who of old Titles and new fashioned clothes
Can boast, whose honest judgments do agree
To love the King and fear his subsidy.)
They, in disdain of their forefathers hate,
Shall speak my virtues, and lament my Fate.
You, you, then (happier Nephews) what I tell
So late, so true, accept as Oracle,
Where ever Justice calls you, for my sake
Be all your Demonstrations fair, nor make
A bad distinction, by mistaken zeal
T'your Prince, 'twixt him, and 'twixt his Commonweal.
Come nearer Death, and let us embrace! but you
That with such care and jealousies pursue
My spited Soul, although my blood's no price
To your wished peace, too weak a Sacrifice
To expiate three Kingdoms; yet from me
Take this my last and perfect'st Legacy
For all the service I have done the State,
My early risings, and my sleeping late,
For all those cares kept sad my charge, my long
Zeal to my Prince, which you miscoster'd wrong,
For all my labors, and in that pursuit
My slaughtered honors, and my life to boot,
Do this, and you shall by my counsel prove
Happy on earth as I in Heaven above
And though (for this shall your most comfort bring)
You loved not me, yet love my Lord your King.
FJNJS.
Printed in the Year, 1641.


