blazon of the Commonwealth
A COMMISSION Improwering the Persons therein named, to hear and determine
several Matters and things concerning the Work of Dreyning the great Level of
the Fenns.
WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for the Dreyning of the
great Level of the Fenns extending it self into the Counties of Northampton,
Norfolk, suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridge, Huntington, and the Isle of Ely, several
Persons therein particularly named, were appointed Commissioners, and thereby
Empowered by view or otherwise, as to them should seem meet, from time to time,
when and as often as any part of the said Level, amounting to the quantity of
30000 Acres or more should be dreyned as aforesaid, to judge the same to be
dreyned, and forthwith to give unto William Earl of Bedford, Edward Russel,
Robert Henley, and Robert Castle, Esqs their Heirs and Assigns, upon such Trust
as is expressed in the said Act, Seisin and Possession of his and their
Proportions of ninety five thousand Acres formerly set forth unto them; And
whereas the said Commissioners have, in pursuance of the said Act, at several
times adjudged the said Level dreined, and delivered Possession and Seisin of
the 95000 Acres accordingly, And whereas, by the said Act, the term of three
years from and after the said Adjudication is limited for the said
Commissioners to give relief in several Cases expressed in the said Act, In which
time it will not be possible, through the multitude of the Petitions that are
daily exhibited to them, to hear and determine the several Cases and Complaints
of Persons who pretend damage by the Adventurers cutting through their Lands,
or to be otherwise relieved within the said Act of Parliament, especially
seeing the said Commissioners sit very seldom, And their meeting usually in
the Middle Temple Hall, which is a great distance from the Level, and thereby
the Petitioners put to great Expense, and travel, in seeking their relief,
Therefore we being willing to provide for the just ease of all persons
concerned herein, and reposing Trust and Confidence in the prudence, honesty,
and discretion of Sir John Hobbart, Sir Ralph Hare, John Gurdon Esquire Samuel
Moody Esquire Tho. Hatcher Esquire James Berry, Esquire Talbot Pepys, Tho. Bendish, Rob.
Brewster, Tho. Ducket, John Cleypool Esquire Rob. Vintner, theelder, Tristram
Diamond Esquire Dr. Richard Stanes, Hen. Ferrour Gent. Mr. Joseph Eversden, Captain
Moses, Mr. Richard Timbs, Dr. Syncots, Mr. Robert Robson, Mr. (...) Barber of
Denver, Mr. (...) Life of Downham, and Mr. Robert Carrier of Peterburgh, Have
Appointed, Constituted and Authorized, and by these Presents do Appoint,
Constitute and Authorize them the said Sir John Hobbart, Sir Ralph Hare, John
Gurdon Esquire Samuel Moody Esquire Tho. Hatcher, James Berry, Esqs Talboth Pepys, Tho.
Bendish, Rob. Brewster, Tho Ducket, John Cleypool Esquire Rob. Vintner, the elder,
Tristram Diamond Esquire Dr. Rich Stanes, Hen. Ferrour Gent. M. Joseph Eversden,
Captain Moses, Mr. Rich. Timbs, Dr. Syncots, Mr. Rob. Robson, Mr. (...) Barber
of Denver, Mr. (...) Life of Downham, and Mr. Robert Carrier, ^r any six or
more of them, to be Commissioners to hear and examine the Petitions,
Complaints, Matters, and Things, for which the Commissioners named in the said
Act can or may by virtue thereof, or any Clause or Article therein, give
relief, not having been before ordered, settled and adjudged by the said
Commissioners named in the said Act, And either to determine, order and adjudge
all such Complaints, Matters, and Things, according to the true intent and
meaning of the said Act, or otherwise to transmit the same or such of them as
they shall think fit, with the state of the Case, to the said Commissioners
named in the said Act, for their Final Determination. And the said
Commissioners, or any six of them, have hereby Power for executing the
Premises to meet at the Bell at Ely upon the 20 day of July next, And are
hereby empowered from time to time to adjourn their meeting to such other time
and place as they shall think fit, and to send for and to examine Witnesses
upon oath, which any six or more of them have Power to administer to any Person
or Persons whatsoever. And such Orders, Directions, and Judgments, as the said
Commissioners, or any 6 of them, shall make, in, and conceruing the Premises,
shall be as effectual to all intents and purposes, as if the Commissioners
named in the said Act, had Ordered, Directed, and Adjudged the same. And all
Persons are required to give obedience thereunto: And all Mayors, Sheriffs, and
other Officers and Ministers, as well Civil as Military, are hereby required to
be aiding and assisting in all and singular the Premises. And this Authority
and Commission shall continue and be in force until the 24. day of June, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God one thousand six hundred fifty four, and
no longer.

Tuesday June 28. 1653.
At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

John Thurloe Secr.


