FORE-WARNED, FORE-ARM'D: OR, A CAVEAT TO BATCHELORS, IN THE CHARACTER OF A BAD
WOMAN
Foemineum servile genus crudele superbum,
Mant. Ecl. 3.
A Bad Woman! Heaven bless us, Sirs! who dare
Approach so near, to write her Character?
Plagues owe their Birth to her envenomed Breath;
To see here is dangerous; to touch her Death.
All Tormets, and all Ills, at first did grow
From her, and thence (as from a Spring) still flow.
He favored her too much, that called her worse
Than all th'Ingredients crammed into a Curse.
The Bane of Mankind, Foe to Innocence,
Firstborn of Hell, and Poisons Quintessence;
Creations Blot, and Natures great'st Disgrace,
The Seven Deadly Sins drawn in One Face.
A Sex for Servitude by Heaven designed,
Yet the most proud and cruel of Humane kind:
Bold, flattering, fond, disdainful, idle, vain,
^ double Tongue, false Heart, and giddy Brain;
^nconstant, gadding, tatling, simple, light,
Composed of Rashness, Self-love, Fraud, and Spite;
Revengeful, sullen, covetous, ambitious,
Always complaining, envious, superstitious;
Faithless, ungrateful, subtle, troublesome;
Contentious with her Neighbors, more at home:
Who always lives in the Intemperate Zone;
For Means and Measure she will be ruled by none;
But chilling Frost, or scorching Dog days proves,
Mortally hates, or else too fondly loves.
The Studies of her Youth are wanton Dances,
^ascivious Songs, Plays, Masquerades, Romances;
^hese antedate her guilty, and begin
^o debauch her long before she is ripe for Sin.
^he never regards the Laws of Right and Just,
^ut tramples all things to promote her Lust.
^he Wickedness her Strength to act denies,
^he by Deceit and Subtilty supplies.
With seeming Modesty she baits her Hooks,
^onsults her Glass to frame enticing Looks,
^^sps, minces, simpers, and instructs her Eyes
that Glances are most charming to surprise:
^er Face (as Tavern-Bush) bedecked with Toys,
^ut easy Youth into her Toil decoys:
Her Curls, like Streamers waving, seem to court
Each spritely Combatant to storm the Fort;
Whilst naked panting Breasts too plainly show
The insatiate Thirst that she endures below.
And though in Single Life she often be naught,
Yet when at length some doting Fop sh' has caught
And into wretched Noose of Wedlock brought,
By Midwife-Rules she boldly goes to Bed,
And on the Novice pawns a Maidenhead:
Who starts next Morn to see her in his Arms;
She Is perfect Hag, when stripped of Arts gay Charms
The painted Roses of her Cheeks are dropped,
Hunch-back's discovered, with Pads underpropt;
He Is forced with strong Perfumes to guard his Nose
From poisonous Whiffs of Breath, Armpits, and T
Ah cursed Love! well art thou feigned Blind.
His mistake's no less fatal in her Mind.
Handsome, she proves a Wench; Deformed, a Witch
If Poor, she makes him Beggar; Slave, if Rich:
Or if sh' affects the Name of Virtuous Woman,
(That Is one who sins but seldom, is not Common)
She then takes Privilege, and thinks she may
Justly rant, domineer, and disobey.
Her Husband soon into Consumption cast:
(For Back and Purse do both together waste)
Whiles to allay, not quench her wanton Fires,
Sometimes she Dildoes, sometime Stalion hires.
Fine Clothes, new Fashions, Gossiping, rich Fare,
And sturdy Gallants, take up all her Care.
Honor she counts an empty term, no tie;
Her Zeal's Pretense; her Study, Vanity;
Her Beauty, Paint; her Wit, Baudery refined;
Her Kisses, Baits; her Love, a Snare designed;
Her Soul (if she have one) so foul and base,
Hell's half ashamed it self t'afford it place.
But hold; enough. Let none be angry here,
And thinks our Pen to sharp a Nib does bear:
All this of a Bad Woman's understood:
But prithee (Reader) show me One that is Good.
FINIS.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by J. van Solingen, and J. Colmar, 1685.


