GOOD TIDINGS TO THE Sick and Lame: OR, The Sick-Man's Library.

Teaching both High and Low, Rich and Poor, next under God, how to prescribe
to, or procure ease for the pained, strength for the weak, health for the Sick,
and cure for Sores.

BEING A true and candid RELATION of the Virtue and uses of four Excellent
Medicines, VIZ.

ARCANVM VEGETABILIVM, PILVLAE VEGETANTES, BALSAMVM VITAE, VNGVENTVM
REFRIGERANS,
Whereunto is added, A few of the many TESTIMONIES and CVRES performed by the
same, their Names, Diseases, and Places of Abode; being sufficient to confirm
the Truth.

Published for the good of all Who labor under PAIN and MISERY.

By RICH. FLETCHER Professors of Chemical Physic in LONDON. By NATH. MERRY
Professors of Chemical Physic in LONDON.
LONDON, Printed for the Authors 1674.

GOOD TIDINGS TO THE Sick and Lame.
COURTEOUS READER,
ARCANVM VEGETABILIVM, Is that Phylosophick, Cordial, Purging Vegetable Spirit,
which has got so great Reputation in LONDON and many other parts of this
Nation, for the Curing and Rooting out of Diseases incident to the Bodies of
Men, Women, and Children, Expelling Noxious Humors, Sweetning the Mass of
Blood, Opening Obstructions, by which it has cured Agues, Fevers, Dropsies,
Scurvies, Worms, Madness, Phrensies, Pains of the Head, Common and Inveterate
Dullness, Sleepiness, Loss of Sense and Motion, Convulsions, Falling Sickness,
Tremblings, and Weakness of the Sinews, Stoppage of the Stomach,
Imposthumations, Ulcers, Pains or Weakness of the Stomach, Spitting of Blood or
Matter, Green Sickness, Stoppage of Women's Terms, Rickets, Gouts, Jaundice. In
short, I have found it to answer the whole end of of Purging and Cordial
Physic; being gentle, safe, and pleasant, yet powerful in operation for the
Rooting out of Diseases and Assisting Nature to withstand the same, by Adding
Strength to Vital, Animal, and Natural Spirits; Resisting Putrefaction,
Expelling Poison, by which it prevents Infectious Diseases, as Measles, Small
Pox, Pestilential Fevers, Plagne, etc.

2 PILVLAE VEGETANTES, This Pill has been largely experienced, and highly
commended by many that have taken it, for the speedy Easing of Pains; as the
Colic, Stone, Gravel in the Reins or Bladder, Gripings of the Guts, Curing of
Fluxes, Easing of the Gout, and other Pains of the Limbs: Also for the speedy
easing of Coughs, Curing Consumptions, Stoppages of the Stomach, Shortness of
Breath, Staying and Preventing Distillations of Rheums, falling from the Head
into the Throat or Windpipe, which causes a Tickling, sometime a Wheesing or
Hooping Cough; commonly called a Distillation upon the Lungs: It is effectual
for allaying or appeasing Violent Fits, whether Madness, Frenzies, Agues or
Fevers, and is a great Provoker of Sweat and Urine.

3 BALSAMVM VITAE, This Balsome cures Green Wounds, Ulcers, Fistula's, Cankers,
King's Evil, Gangrens, to a wonder it dissolves Hard Tumors, Excrescences,
Coagulated or Spongeous Flesh into Matter, and cures the same. It eases old
and cold Pains, Bruises, or Strains: Also ^^seth and strengthens pained,
nummed, lamed, and weak Limbs; and is rare in Cold Gouts.

4 VNGVENTVM REFRIGERANS, This Ointment cures Burns, Scalds, Scabs, Sores,
Tetters, Itch, Ring-worms, Pimples, Pushes, and eases External Pains, and
Asswageth Swellings, Proceeding of Heat, Cures Piles and Hemorrhoids.

This is a short and candid Relation of those four foregoing Medicines of
which Twenty years experience in practice, has afforded me many large Trials
in this City and many other parts of the World, for many have been and daily
are Remarkable Cures performed by the same. And to the end that all others who
have the like occasion may receive the same benefit as to Ease and Cure,
Carefully heed these following Directions, which is plain to every ordinary
capacity; teaching the true use of the same.

DIRECTIONS For the Uses of our Spirit, Pills, Balsome, and Ointment.
FOr Stoppage of the Stomach, Difficulty of Breathing, Inflammations and Ulcers
in the Stomach, Spitting of Blood or Matter, Consumptions, Coughs,
Distillations of Rheums, Weakness of the Stomach or Want of Appetite, Colic
or Stone in the Reins or Bladder, Stoppage of Urine or Ulcers in the Reins or
Bladder, Fluxes of the Belly or Griping of the Guts; take these following
Directions,

Let the Patient first purge with the Spirit, the Dosse being two, three, or
four large Spoonfuls, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient; that
is, for a Child or very Weak Body, two Spoonfuls may be sufficient; but if for
a Stronger Body, three or four Spoonfuls; but for a very Strong Body five or
six Spoonfuls; for there is no danger in taking a large Dosse, it being a
Strengthener as well as a Cleanser; nor in taking too little, if it work not by
Stool; being Cordial as well as Purging. Let the Dosse be taken in the Morning
fasting: Them that are able, may walk abroad and eat their ordinary Diet as
formerly; its operation being safe and easy: The same Night, going to Bed,
take one, two, or three of our Pills, according to the Age and Strength, as
before directed, in the use of our Spirit. Thus continue taking both Spirit and
Pills every other day; always observing to take the Spirit in the Morning, and
the Pills the same Night; and by this means you may expect to find speedy ease,
and the Cure to hasten to a wonder. Probatum est by many.

Now those which are troubled with any of the forenamed Diseases violently,
such may take the Pills for three or four Nights, one after another, after
their Bodies have been purged with the Spirit; and then leave off taking the
Pills for one Night, the next Morning take a large Dosse of the Spirit, and the
same Night begin again to take the Pills, as before; so continue taking the
Pills more or less Nights together, as you see cause: Always observing, That
when you would take the Spirit, the Night before leave off the Pills; for in
what Diseases soever the Pills are proper to, they must be taken at Night;
always observing to take the Spirit in the Morning: and so after little
acquaintance with their operation, you will be able to direct your selves and
others.

For Madness, Inflammations of the Brain, Swimmings in the Head, Frensies and
Pains in the Head,

Purge every other Morning with a large Dosse of our Spirit, and the same Night
take two or three of our Pills, and every Night anoint the Temples and
Forehead with our Ointment.

For Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Tremblings, Palsies, and Weakness of the
Sinews, Let the Sick take a little Dosse of our Spirit every Morning fasting,
and every Night anoint the Nape of the Neck and Joints with our Balsome warm.

For the Seurvy, that Epidemical Disease. In the Cure of this Disease, our
Spirit must be taken in a large Dosse for two or three days, then leave off
taking the Spirit for two days; then take one Dosse of our Pills, the Night
following; the last day of Purging, endeavor to sweat upon them that Night,
and rise not too early the next Morning. When these two intermitting days are
past, take the Spirit as before, and the Pills the following Night, as before.
Also this Method must be observed all along in the Cure, and you may in a short
time find the Subtle Enemy rooted out. Now if there be any breakings out or
pains in the Limbs in this Disease, as often it happens, anoint the parts
grieved or pained with our Balsome warm every Night and Morning.

For the Gout, Take a large Dosse of our Spirit, every other Morning, and the
same Night take two or three of our Pills, and every Night and Morning anoint
the parts pained with our Balsome and Ointment mixed together warmed.

For the Green Sickness, Dropsies and Worms, Take a small Dosse of our Spirit
every Morning fasting.

For Agues, Fevers, Iaundice Black and Yellow, every other Morning take a
large Dosse of our Spirit; the same Night take one or two of our Pills: so
continue as long as you see cause.

For the Rickets in Children, give them every other Morning a large Spoonful of
our Spirit, and every Night anoint their Stomachs and Joints with the Balsome
warm.

For the French Disease Alamode, take our Spirit every other day in a large
Dosse, and the same Night take a large Dose of our Pills, two, three or four,
and sweat upon them. If there be any Swellings, Scabs, breakings out, Ulcers,
or violent pains in the Limbs, anoint the parts with our Balsom every night.

For the Running of the Reins, take our Spirit and Pills, as is besore directed
in the French Pox.

For the Curing of Sores; as Cancers and Cankers, Gangreens and Ulcers,
Fistula's, King's Evil, or any other old Sores: Dress them twice a day with our
Balsom, as you use to do other Wounds or Sores with other Ointments.

If there be any deep Wounds, as in Fistula's, make Roles or Tents with Lint or
Flax, dip them in the Balsom melted, and tent the Wound every Dressing, and,
lay a Plaster upon the Wound of the said Balsom: Dress all such Sores twice a
day: 'twill be convenient, for such Patient, to purge once in three days with a
Dose of our Spirit, and the same night to take a Dose of our Pills, for they do
wonderfully dispose Wounds to healing. In the cure of other Sores, as Wounds,
Stabs, Bruses, apply a Plaster of the same Balsom, and dress them once a day.

In all old or cold Swellings, Strains, Numb, Lame or Weak Limbs, anoint the
apart affected night and morning with our Balsom warm; and every third or
fourth morning take a large Dose of our Spirit.

For Burns, Scalds, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ring-worms, Shingles, Inflammations,
Hot-swellings, Piles or Hemmorrhoid, anoint the parts affected every night and
morning with our Ointment: take a Dose of our Spirit every second or third
morning, and at night take a dose of our Pills.

Lastly, those that are troubled with any other Diseases than those
aforementioned, either Internal or Externial, within the reach of Medicine, of
what nature or kind soever, may safely make use of these our Medicines; for
they have been found so powerful, safe and effectual, in resisting
Putrefaction, easing Pains, strengthening Nature, that being timely taken, many
dangerons Diseases may in a short time be cured by using these Medicines, as
need shall require, the foresaid Directions is sufficient to inform you: And
let me advise all who love their Healths, to take a dose of our Spirti often,
to correct the evil effects the precedent, unseasonable weather, and unsound
Diet; and 1 or 2 of our Pills the same night. These Medicines being-friendly to
Nature, preventing Diseases, rooting out the Scurvie, which secretly lodges in
the mass of Blood, in most seeming healthy Persons, from which Root most other
Diseases arise, being but Branches of the same, stired up by every little
accident Hetrogenious to Nature.

This Medicine being rightly adapted for the destroying of Diseases in Semene,
by altering Ferments, does prevent the Plague, Small Pox, Mezles, and many
Diseases, and is of that renovating property, that it may well be called, as
indeed it is, a rare preserver of health and vigor, consequently prolonger of
life also.

For the confirmation of which, see the History of Life and Death by Francis
Lord Bacon, page 25. who complains of the want of such Medicines in the Vulgar
Art of Physic in his time.

The Art of Physic, says he, which we now have, looks no farther commonly
than the conservation of health and cure of Diseases: As for those things which
tend properly to long life, there is but slight mention, and by the way only;
notwithstanding we will propound those Medicines which are notable in this
kind, I mean, those which are Cordials: For it is consonant to Reason, that
those things which being taken in Cures, do defend and fortify the Heart, or
more truly the Spirit against Poisons and Diseases, being tranferred with
judgment, and choice into Diet, should have a good effect, in sort toward the
prolonging of life: And page 51. We do considenly affirm (neither let any man
reckon us amongst those Heretics, which were called Cathari that often purges
and made even Familier to the body, are more a vailable to long life, than
Exercises and Sweats. Thus far we have digress'd.

For Seamen that go long voyages, these Medicines are of great use and virtue,
and may be a means to save life, when the Doctors Chest may fail; for in
Calenture, Fevers and Fluxes, many Seamen are lost for want of proper
Medicines, powerfully to withstand the same. Now for the Cure of these
Diseases, let the Sick take a large dose of our Spirit, and when the Spirit
has done working, then take two or three of our Pills, and sweat upon them;
and by this Experiment alone, you will find that a Master of a Ship, or any of
his Company, may by these four Medicines perform more noble Cures, though
ignorant in Physic and Chyrurgery, than the knowing Artest with a Chest full
of Gallenical Medicines. And he or she that is furnished with these Medicines,
and uses them according to our directions aforesaid, may cure themselves, with
great ease, safety, secrecy and cheapness, and that there is goodness and
worth in those forenamed Medicines, and that many have been cured by them, who
have been past all probable hope of recovery: In confirmation of which take,
these few of many Testimonies, the whole being too tedious to relate.

TESTIMONIES.
In the twelfth Month 1672, came to my House one M. Broomhale, which a little
before had some of my Spirit, Pills and Balsom, for the use of one Manwaring, a
woman of seventy years of Age, and she had been lame many years, her Legs
ulcerated, swelled, and afflicted with general pains, and shortness of Breath,
insomuch that recovery was not expected; yet for the expense of twenty
shillings was cured, to the wonder of her acquaintance: This is well known to
the great ones of this Nation: This is part of the Relation brought me by her
Friend; she lodged at the time of her curing, at one M. Clarks, Midwife in the
old Ambury at Westminster.

Henry Churcher in Garden-alley in Bishopsgatestreet, troubled with spetting of
Blood and Matter, with an Impostume in his Stomach, cured in a few days with
these Medicines.

Lidia Witcomb of Gloucester, cured of the Worms with two doses of the Spirit.

The Widow Willians in new Kings-street, Wapping, cured of a violent headache
of twelve years, with less than two Boxes of Pills.

Henry Nock, Sadler, in Ashford in Kent, cured of the Stone in a few days.

Anne Marsh, the Wife of John Marsh of Hendun, five Miles from London, after
she had spent many pounds, and finding no ease, began to despair of help; being
troubled with violent Scorbutic Pains, shortness of Breath, want of Appetite,
was in a short time cured with my Spirit and Pills, for less than twenty
shillings charge.

Thomas Bromfield Shoo-maker near the Turn-stile, Holbron, violently afflicted
with the Stone, and stopage of Urine, having not made any water but by drops
for five weeks, and that with great pain: was perfectly cured in six hours with
one dose of Spirit and Pills.

Marget Edmonds in Jerman-street, near James Market, cured of a violent Canker
in her throat, occasioned by the Scurvy.

Mary Diet of Barnaby-street, troubled with violent Fits of the Mother, and
pains of the Spleen, cured for little charge.

A Child of Mat. Broads in Thomas Southwarke, was cured of a bloody Urine in
two days time, to the amazement of its Parents.

A Cornish Navigater given off as past cure, not being able to move hand or
foot, was brought to London, and in a few days was able to come to my Chamber:
He lodged in New-gravel-Lane, Wapping, near Henry Wyards, who was an eye
witness of him, and many others that was wonderfully recovered.

Dorathy, the Wife of John Tupper, Bricklayler, in Eagle-street near
Pickakilly, cured of a violent stoppage in her Stomach, and Headache.

Bernard Ienkes near the Pelican in East-Smithfield, cured of a violent pain in
his Side and Back, shortness of Breath: his Wife of a Cancerous humor in her
Breast.

Sarah Barrow of Dirty walton near Tuexbury, cured of a violent Cancerous
Tumor, which caused the loss of the use of one Arm.

Adam Bennet of Hyneham, twelve Miles from Gloucester, troubled with a tedious
quartin Ague, Consumption, Cough, shortness of Breath; cured with a quarter
glass of our Spirit, and half a Box of Pills.

John Relph, Ship-wright at the Fale on near the Banks-side, Southwark, cured
of a violent Consumptive Cough, after so weak that he could not sit up right in
his Bed, and given over as past help: Also a Child of his cured of a violent
stoppage in his Stomach and Hecktick Fever.

One Every-Tharpe, Water-man on the Bank-side, cured of a tedious quartin Ague,
when near dearhsdoor: the same man some years after cured of a violent pain in
his Side; also others of his Family cured.

One Abbet Fisherman on the same Bank-side, cured of a violent Fever, stopage
of the Stomach, and pains in his Head and Limbs, when past all proble hope of
recovery, with many others of the Neighborhood about Masson stares, and other
parts of the Bank-side, cured to a wonder the names and Diseases, of which are
too tedious to relate.

Mary Carrol, now the Widow Bryon of Chateham in Kent, cured of an old
cancerated Breast so dangerous, that it was feared it must have been cut off, is
now reduced to its perfect shape as formerly, and has remained well this six
years.

Anne Cuny of Poyk, cured of Madness, after she had been many Months in Chains,
and remained well seven years.

A Servant of Thomas Harris, at the two Tobacco Roles in East-smithfield, cured
of Madness in a short time.

Thomas Sadler, a lodger at one Godwrads in Kingsstreet, Giles in the Fields,
cured of Madness in a short time. Another lodger of his cured of violent
Gripings of the Guts, and shortness of Breath. For farther confirmation of
this, inquire of the said Godwards at the Bear Ordinary in Burchin-Lane.

A Sister of Sarah Knights in Cow-lane, cured of a Phrenzie.

Captain Watkins of Mile-end, cured of the Gout in his hands and feet.

The Lady Griffin near Leitchfield, by taking of our Spirit and Pills voided
Sand, Gravel, and small Stones without pain in a great quantity.

John Woolger of Bredhemstone in Sussex, Fisherman, was cured of a Woolf in his
head, by waring a Cap made of our Balsom mixed with Cotton, Wool, and quilted
between to linning Clothes, and by taking inwardly our Spirits and Pills,
notwithstanding his head had been twice opened by advice of Eminent Physicians
and Chyrurgions, by reason of the length and tediousness of his pain, being of
some years continuance, and past all probable hope of recovery, yet well in a
short time, and has remained well this twelve years.

The Wife of Richard Collings of Clare-street, Newmarket, cured of a violent
Scorbutic Leprosy, no part being free from pains and botches.

Willam Jordan at the Maremaid in Carter-lane, cured of a violent Fever,
shortness of Breath, and pains in his Limbs.

Two blind Children cured to admiration, one at Farneham in Surry, the other at
Tamworth in Staffordshire.

Alexander Pope, Water-man of Shad. Thames, cured of a violent quartin Ague and
Dropsy in a weaks time, when he had tried many Physicians of common note.

One Stringer, Journey-man at the Blew-last in Russel Street, cured of violent
pains in his Loins.

The Wife of John Collet of East-smithfield, violently affected with the Sone,
cured.

John Brown, Butcher in Ashsord in Kent, who had a violent hard Tumor on his
Arm-pit, the pain of which caused the loss of the use of his Arm, cured in
thirty days. Another of the like Disease, cured near Dearham in Norfolk.

A Daughter of John Edmonds near Bramsgrove, who was so violenly afflicted with
Convultion Fits, that sometimes she was drawn neck and heels together backward,
and at other times up on a heap side ways, was cured in a short time. Another
of the like Disease, cured in Ambersly in Worstershire.

Thomas Snell of Gloucester, cured of a hard swelling on his face with a quarter
glass of Spirit, and a pot of Ointment.

Cures performed by John Fenny of Wimslow in Chestire with my Spirit and Pills,
one of a violent Canker in her Throat, cured when left off as past cure.

Mary Baly of the same place, cured of extreme Stitches and Vomitings.

Eliner Potter, cured of pains in her head, and spotted, pimpled face.

Another of violent pains in her Jaws and Teeth.

Another of a Quinsie, his tongue so swelled, that his Mouth was not able to
contain it, and was speechless, cured in 24 hours.

Another of the Jaundice, and violent Headache: A Child of his cured of the
Chin Cough.

These Cures, with many more, he gave me an account of at large in his Letter.

A Maid near Coventry, cured of a Gangerine on her face with my Balsom.

A Kinswoman of Robert Rotheram of Bestford near Notingham, had above forty
Stones brought away from her without pain in a little time. Many more might be
added enough to fill a large Volume, for I could instance a cloud of witnesses
more, but let this suffice for brevities sake: I assure thee my aim is the
public good, and that the poor might have cure is my end; If any do misconster
me to their own hurt; I cannot help that, but for my part, I can heartily and
truly say in the presence of him that is the searcher of all hearts, I durst
not have published these things to the world, had I not found that God the
giver of every good and perfect Gift, had blessed the means afforded thereby,
and am fully satisfied, if thou can but make use of it with a thankful heart,
you will find the truth of what I say, for which glory to God only.

Arcanum vigetabilum, that Cordial purging Spirit is 4 s. the Glass, 2 s. the
half Class. Pilulae vegetantes is 4 s. the Box, 2 s. the half Box. Balfauum
Vitae is one 1 s. the Box. Vnguentum Refrigerans is 1 s. the Box.
WHereas this Cordial purging Spirit, Pills, Balsom and Ointment was formerly
sold in some other places in and about London. These are to give notice, that
the said Spirit, Pills, Balsom and Ointment are not to be had or sold in any
other place in London, but at the house of William Rayman, at the upper end of
Bred-street near Cheapside, between the Angel and Bell.

FINIS.

