A Miraculous VICTORY Obtained by the Right Honorable, FERDINANDO Lord FAIRFAX,
against the Army under the Command of the Earl of NEWCASTLE at WAKEFIELD IN
YORKSHIRE: Of the Enemy there was taken prisoners, Genenerall Goring, Sir
Thomas Bland, 2 Colonells, Sergeant Major Car, 13 Captains, 1500 Soldiers, 27
Colors of Foot, 3 Cornets of Horse, 4 Lieutenants, 15 Ensigns, and 1 Cornet,
4 pieces of Ordnance, all their Ammunition, and a great number of Arms, with
the loss of 7 common Soldiers.

Sent in two Letters to the Honorable, W: LENTHALL, Es q Speaker in the House
of COMMONS.

Also a LETTER of great consequence, which was found in General Gorings
chamber, which was sent to him by his Father the Lord Goring.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That public Thanksgiving be
the 28. of this instant May, giveng in all the Churches and Chappells of
London, Westminster, Borough of Southwark, Suburbs and places adjacent for the
great and good success (...) has pleased GOD to give the Forces under the
Command of the Lord Fairfax, at the taking in of Wakefield; And that the
Letters relating that good success, be read in the said Churches and Chapels.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

MAY 29. Printed for Edw. Husbands. 1643.

THE INTRODUCTION.
WHereas it has too often been seen that in a great appearance of outward
means, we are over confident, and in the smallness or diminution of the same,
we are too low and distrustful; so walking by sight, and not by faith, the
divine Goodness and Wisdom, to weane us from this corruption, and to teach us
the contrary Lesson, to walk by faith and not by sight, has often wrought and
given great Victories, b^ little means and unexpected ways.

A notable Pattern and Proof whereof is now seen in the Victory given at
Wakefield, wherein God gave a happy success upon great disadvantage and
inequal by a far lesser number, even less by half, overcoming a greater in a
fortified Town, and the persons taken, far exceeding in number those that (...)
them, and all this not with the loss of ten persons. As this calls for the eye
of Faith, spiritually to discern the great Power and Goodness of God, which
gives the advantage of Victory on the side of the disadvantage in outward
force; so it calls upon us to maintain and continue a course of Faith for the
time to come, and by continually looking up unto God, and dependence on him, to
expect from his Goodness and Bounty the like blessing in other times, of
inequallity and disadvantage. And as this ought to confirm our Expectations for
the future, so both now and hereafter, when Gods strength does so visibly
appear in our weakness, we ought to give the whole Glory and Praise to his
strength, and none to our own weakness.

Thankfulness for blessings past, being an Invitation of blessings to come,
and God not failing to supply that, which he knows will certainly, turn to his
own Glory. Neither ought our Thanksgiving only to bound it self in words, or
in short thoughts and intentions, but it should especially be expressed in a
hearty and real conversion and conformity of soul and life to him, whose will
ought to be the rule of our life, and whose service is the end of our being.

Let it also be further observed, That both this and other Victories have bin
given on that Day, which has been so much opposed by dissolute and Popish
persons, even to a confutatio^ of it by set discourses, and practical
prophanations.

And having given all the Glory to God, it is next just and commendable to take
notice of those whom God has vouchsafed to use in his service, as to encourage
them in Gods work, and that Cause, which God does maintain by his own mighty
and outstretched arm, thus made good in this extraordinary both Deliverance
and Victory.

For my Honorable Friend William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker in the House of
COMMONS.
SIR;
Upon the sixth of this Month I writ to you by a special Messenger, which I
hope is come to your hands; Presently after the dispatch of that Letter, the
news was brought me, that the E: of Newcastle had possessed himself both of
Rotheram and Sheffeild, the Forces in Rotheram held out two days siege and
yielded up the Town upon a Treaty, wherein it was agreed, that the town should
not be plundered, and that all the Gentlemen, Commanders and Soldiers (six
only excepted, that were specially named) leaving their Arms, should have free
liberty to go whither they pleased; But when the Enemy entered, contrary to
their Articles, they have not only plundered the town, but have also made all
the Commanders and Soldiers prisoners, and do endeavor to constrain them to
take up Arms on their party. The Commanders at Sheffeild hearing of the loss
of Rotheram, and seeing some of the enemies Forces advanced in view of the
town, they all presently desserted the place, as not tenible with so few,
against so potent an Army, and fled away with their Arms, some to Chesterfield,
and some to Manchester. The loss of these two places has much elated the
enemy, and cast down the spirits of the people in these parts, who daily see
the enemy increase in power, and to gain ground, and no succors come to them
from any part: The E: of Newcastles Army do now range over all the Southwest
part, of this country, pillaging and cruelly using the well-affected party; and
the last week there is a Garrison of Horse and Foot laid at Knavesborough,
where they begin to fortify the town, and pillage and utterly ruin all the
religious people in those-parts, and round about them. On Friday seven-night
last 3 Troops and some other Forces, of which many were French came from that
Garrison and pillaged Otley, and there barbarously used some honest women of
that town, and in their retreat to Knavesborough upon the open For rest they
took a man and a woman, the man they wounded and beat cruelly, and before his
face ravished the woman. These particulars I repeat, that you may the more
clearly discern the miseries which this country groans under; and here about
Leeds, Bradford, and Hallifax, being a mountainous barren country; the people
now begin to be sensible of want, their last year provisions being spent, and
the enemies Garrisons stopping all provisions both of Corn and Flesh, and other
necessaries that were wont to come from the more fruitful countries to them,
their Trade utterly taken away, their poor grow innumerable, and great scarcity
of means to relieve them. And this Army which now lies amongst them to defend
them from the enemy, cannot defend them from want, which causes much murmr
and lamentation amongst the people. And for ths Army it self, it is so far in
arreare, and no way appearing how they shall either be supplied with money nor
succors, as they grow very mutinous.

Yet upon Saturday last in the night, I caused to be drawn out of the
Carrisons in Leods, Bradford, Hallifax and Howley, some Horse, Foot, and
Dragooners, in all about 1500 men, and sent them against Wakefield, commanded
by my son, and assisted by Major General Gifford, Sir Henry Fowls, and sir
William Fairfax, with diverse other Commanders, they appeared before Wakefield
about four a clock on Sunday in the morning, where they found the enemies (who
had intelligence of their design) ready to receive them; There was in the Town
General Goring, Sergeant Major General Mackworth, the Lord Goring, with many
other principal Commanders and eminent persons, with about 7. Troops of Horse,
and six Regiments, containing 3000 Foot, the Town well Fortified with works,
and four pieces of Ordance; Yet our men both Commanders and common Soldiers
went on with undanted courages, and notwithstitaling the thick vollyes of small
and great shot from the enemies, charged up to their Works, which they entered,
seized upon their Ordnance, and turned them upon themselves, and pursued the
enemy so close; as they beat quite one of the Town the most part of the Horse,
and a great number of the Foot, and made all the rest prisoners, and with them
took four piece of Ordnance, and all the Ammunition then in the Town, and a
great number of Arms, and amongst the prisoners General Goring himself, with
diverse other Commanders, and other common Soldiers, in all about 1500 men, and
27 Colors of Foot, three Cornets of Horse, of which I send a more particular
Life enclosed; The more exact, and particular Relation of this service, as it
is restified to me under the hands of the principal Commanders employed in
that design: I send you enclosed for your better information, and truly for my
part I do rather account it a miracle, than a victory, and the glory and praise
to be ascribed to God that wrought it, in which I hope I derrogate nothing from
the merits of the Commanders and Soldiers, who every man in his place and
duty, showed as much courage and resolution as could be expected from men, When
the Town was thus taken, they found their number and strength too weak to keep
it and their prisoner; so they left the place; and marched away with their
booty. In taking the Town we lost no man of note, and not above seven men in
all, of which one was the Clerk of the store, and an Ensign of the Foot, and
one a Quartermaster of Horse, the rest Common-Souldiers; But many of our Men
were short and wounded. This overthrow has much enraged the enemies, who
threaten a present revenge, and are drawing all their Forces this way to effect
it. I perceive there are Succors sent to Lincolnshire and other adjacent
Countries, which if they were here, might he employed to as much advantage for
the public safety, as in any place. I desire our condition may be seriously
thought on by the house, and the ayds often promised, may presently March away
to us, and that Colonel Cromwell, with his horse and foot may also be ordered
to march to me; that being joined together, I may be able to draw this Army
into the field, and gain fresh quarter for the Soldiers, and furnish our
selves with Powder, Arms, and Ammunition, which is now grown very scarce, and
cannot be supplied, until the passage to Hull be forced open, which now is
possessed by the enemy. If such succors come not timely to us, we cannot long
subsist, but must be forced to accept of dishonorable conditions, which
besides the loss and ruin of this Country, will be a great disadvantage to
the general safety, and withal, some course must be thought on, to furnish
large proportion of money to defray the Soldiers Arrears; which I beseech you
endeavor for them and me, that am

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant Ford. Fairfax.
Leeds, 23 May. 1643. I Send enclosed, a Letter from the Lord Goring, to his
son General Goring, found in his Chamber at Wakefield, which will let the
House see the Enemies great desire to have this Army ruined, that they might
with their whole Force march Southwards.



SAturday night the 20 of May, The Lord General gave order for a party of a
1000 Foot, three Companies of Dragooners, and eight Troops of Horse, to March
from the Garrisons of Leeds, Bradford, Hallifax, and Howley, Sir Thomas Fairfax
commanded in chief; The Foot were commanded by Sergeant Major General Gifford,
and Sir William Fairfax. The Horse were divided into two Bodies, four Troops
Commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax and the other four Troops, by Sir Henry Foulis;
Howley was the Randevouz, where they all met on Saturday last, about twelve a
clock at night; about two next morning, they marched away, and coming to
Stanley, where two of the enemies Troops lay with some Dragooners; that Quarter
was beaten up, and about one and twenty Prisoners taken. About four a clock in
the morning we came before Wakefield, where after some of their Horse were
beaten into the Town, the Foot with unspeakable courage, beat the enemies from
the Hedges, which they had lyned with Mu^kettiers into the Town, and assaulated
it in two places, Wrengate and Norgate; and after an hour and a half fight, we
recovered one of their Pieces, and turned it upon them; and entered the Town at
both places, at one and the same time: When the Baracadoes were opened, Sir
Thomas Fairfax with the Horse, fell into the Town, and cleared the Street where
Colonel Goring was taken, by Lieutenant Alured, Brother to Captain Alured, a
Member of the House; yet in the Market place there stood three Troops of Horse,
and Colonel Lamptons Regiment, to whom Major General Gifford sent a Trumpet
with offer of Quarter, if they would lay down their Arms, they answered, they
scorned the Motion; then he fired a Piece of their own Ordinance upon them, and
the Horse fell in upon them, beat them out of Town, and took all these Officers
expressed in this enclosed List, Twenty seven Colors of Foot, three Coronets of
Horse, and about 1500 Common Soldiers. The enemy had in the Town 3000 Foot,
and seven Troops of Horse, besides Colonel Lamptons Regiment, which came into
the Town, after we had entered the Town: The enemy left behind them four Pieces
of Ordnance, with Ammunition, which we brought away.

Thomas Fairfax. Henry Foulis. John Gifford. William Fairfax. John Holman.
Robert Foulis. Titus Leighton. Francis Talbott.


Prisoners Commanders taken at Wakefield, May 21. 1643.
General Goring, Sir Thomas Bland, Lieutenant Colonel to Sir George
Wentworth, Lievt. Colonel Saint George, Lievt. Colonel Macmoyler, Sergeant
Major Carr; Captains, Carr, Knight, Wildbore, Rueston, Pemberton, Croft,
Ledgard, Lashley, Keayley, Nuttall, Cap. Lieutenant Benson. Sergeant Major
Carnaby, and Captain Carnaby, and Captain Nuttall, left wounded in Wakefield
upon their Engagements to be true prisoners. Lievtenants, Munckton, Thomas,
Wheatley, Kent, Nicholson. Ensigns, Squire, Vavasor, Maskew, Lampton, Ducket,
Stockhald, Baldwinson, Davis, Carr, Gibson, Smathweight, Ballinson, Watson,
Smelt, Hallyburton. Coronet Wivill.

AFter this Letter was concluded our men took Wakefield, of which I send a
particular Relation enclosed, and a Lift of the Prisoners and other Booty
taken; If we had now any force of Horse to join with us, we should in all
probability utterly rout the Enemies in this Country, or shut them up in
holds, which if it do not speedily come, we shall be in danger to perish, if
the Enemy draw his whole Force upon us.

I had forgotten in the Letter to the Speaker to mention the new Commissions
granted by the King, wherein His Majesty, according to the known Laws of the
Land (as all things are said to be done) gives liberty to the parties to whom
the Commissions directed, to Plunder, and take men's Estates, so as they account
for the moitie of the profit to His Majesty; this is confessed by the Captains
now Prisoners here.

From Leeds 23 May 1643. Your Servant Thomas Stockdell.
It is now about three weeks since we had any Letter from you, or any
advertisement from the South.



George
I Saw what you wrote to H. Jermine, and find that the business will be put
on that way; But I am of opinion that Your General will never consent to it,
the latter way of dividing his Force, unless it be in the Country where he
will abide his self, this will be tried to morrow at his return hither, where
the Queen expects him. In the interim, If it were possible to give the Enemy
any such knock, or considerable disturbance, to the Country round about them,
which has not yet felt the misery of their neighbors. I would not doubt but
the Treaty might be resumed again, by which means and by no other, your Army
may be set at Liberty to change your stations, and do something that may be of
consequence indeed. I pray you think seriously hereof, and once in your life
follow the advice of your best friend and dearly loving Father

April 17. 1643. Goreinge.

After I had sealed my Letter I was advised to advertise you. That the Lord
Fairfax never believed you would look into the parts where now you are, but
intended to draw back to the place from whence you came, which made him so
lofty in his Conditions wherefore if you can (as my Authors propose) get
between Bradford and Leeds, you will so annoy, divert, and separate them in all
their disignes, as you may be sure to carry Hellifax and Bradford on this hand,
or Leeds on the other. Take this to heart, and let General King, with my
humble service, know this much, not as new to him and the rest of you, but as
that which all the wisest and most knowing men in the Country advise and hope;
This will so hare them, and satisfy this Country, and will give you such
other advantages, as will render happy and glorious too; whereas on the
contrary, all will fall flat both in power and reputation past expression. And
her Majesty, either unprovided of such a Convoy from thence, as is fit for her
and the Kings present occasions, or else leave this Country naked to the
Tyranny of the merciless Enemy, contrary to contract, and all due Justice.
This is the opinion of others, far better able to advise, then he that so
heartily prays for you, and is

Yours Goreinge.
Cudgel them to a Treaty, and then let us alone with the rest. York April 17.
1643.
FINIS.

