THE SEVERAL STATUTES In force for the observation of LENT: And FISH-dayes, at
all other times Of the YEAR.

With full and ready notes in the margent; Showing the effect in brief.

Published by a well-wisher to peace, for the information of all persons
subject to the violation of the said Laws.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, and are to be sold by him at his house in
Warwick Lane in Warwick-Court. 1661.

Co^^^^s Reader,
HIs Majesty having been ^^^^^^d by his Proclamation lately pu^^^^^ to declare
his Royal pleasure, concer^^^^^^ the observation of Lent and fish (...), at all
other times in the year, the observation of which of late years has not been
practiced, By reason of which, many persons are unacquainted with the Laws in
those cases, the knowledge of which is ^f general concernment unto all. His
Majesty in his said Proclamation, having declared, that offenders in this case
shall be punished according to Law. I have therefore collected together so much
of all the several Statutes, that are in force for the observation of the said
days and time as concerns th^^ ^^^siness: the first ^tatute you have wholly,
the others (...) wholly, but in part, yet the whole as to this (...) further
(...), those that please may read the several (...) at large that are here but
in part; in which th^se things ly intermixed amongst other things. Knowing that
all men have not the Statutes at large, therefore for the information of such
as have them not, I have made this collection, that they may be acquainted with
the Laws in this case, and avoid the penalties therein contained; if any may be
cautionated hereby, so as to prevent their sufferings, I shall be heartily
glad, as having the end answered, for which I have taken upon me to publish the
same.

Yours, W. B.

Anno secundo (...). Eating of f^^sh on certain days, and times (...).
ALbeit the Kings Subj^^^^ now having a more perfect and clear light of the
Gospel, and true Word of God, through the infinite mercy and clemency of
Almighty God, by the hands of the Kings Majesty, and his most noble Father of
famous memory, promulgate, showed, declared, and opened, and thereby
perceiving, that one day, or one meat of it self, is not more holy, more pure,
or more clean than another^ (...) that all days and all meats be of their
nature of one (...) purity, (...) holiness, and that all men should (...) live,
(...) of God, and at all times, and for all meats, give (...) him, of which
meats none can defile Christian men, or ma^e them unclean at any time, to whom
all meats be lawful and pure, so that they be not used in disobedience or vice:
Yet (...) as diverse of the Kings Subjects, turning their knowledge therein^ to
satisfy their sensuality, where they should thereby increase in virtue, have
of late time more than in times past, broken and contemned such abstinence
which has been used in this Realm, upon the Frydayes and Saturdayes, the
Embring days, and other days, commonly called Vigils, and in the come
commonly called Lent, and other accustomed times: the Kings Majesty
considering, that due and godly abstinence is a mean to virtue, and to subdue
men's bodies to their soul and spirit, and considering also that Fishers, and
men using the trade of living by fishing in the Sea, may thereby the rather be
set on work, and that by eating of fish much flesh shall be saved and
increased, and also for diverse other considerations and commodities of this
Realm, does ordain and enact, with the assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assemble^ and by the
authority of the same, that all manner of Statutes, Laws, Constitutions, and
Usages, concerning any manner of fasting or abstinence from any kinds of meats,
heretofore in this Realm made or used, shall from the first day All Laws
concerning fasting repealed.
of May next ensuing, lose their force and strength, and be void and of none
effect.

The penalty for eating of flesh upon any day used commonly as a fish day. St.
5. El. 5.27. El. 11.
And also that no person or persons, of what estate, degree, or condition he or
they be, shall at any time after the said first day of May in the year of our
Lord God, M D xlix. willingly and wittingly eat any manner of flesh, after what
manner of kind or sort it shall be ordered, dressed, or used, upon any Friday
or Saturday, or the Embring days, or in any day in the time commonly called
Lent, nor at any such other day, as is or shall be at any time hereafter
commonly accepted and reputed as a fish day, within this Realm of England,
wherein it has been commonly used for to eat fish and not flesh, upon pain
that every person eating any manner of flesh upon any of the said days or
times prohibited by this Act, to forfeit for the said first offense, ten
shillings of lawful money of England, and also to suffer imprisonment, by the
space of ten days, and during the time of his or her said imprisonment, to
abstain from eating of any manner of flesh.

The penalty for the second offense.
And if any person after he shall be lawfully convict of any offense contrary
to this Act, does eftsoons offend, contrary to this Act, and be thereof
lawfully convict, that then every person so offending the second time, shall
for his second offense forfeit twenty shillings of lawful money of England, and
also suffer imprisonment by the space of twenty days, and during the time of
his or her said imprisonment, to abstain from eating of any manner of flesh,
and so like pain and imprisonment as often as he or she afterward shall offend.

Just. of G. delivery and P. shall determine these offenses.
And furthermore, it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
Justices of Goal delivery, and Justices of peace, in all and singular Counties,
Cities, Towns corporate, and other places within this Realm of England, and
other the Kings Dominions, shall have full power and authority to enquire, hear
and determine all and all manner offenses, that shall be committed or done
contrary to this Act, in like manner and form as they may enquire, hear and
determine any trespass or other offense, against the Kings peace committed or
done, within the limits or place where they then shall be Justices of Goal
delivery or Justices of peace. And the moity of every such forfeiture, shall be
extreated into the Court of the Exchequer, in like manner and form, as fines
for any trespass, or other offense committed against the Kings peace, ought or
should be extreated: and the other moity of the said forfeiture shall be to him
that will sue for the same, by bill, plaint, information, or otherwise, in any
of the Kings Courts of record, in which no essoin, protection, or wager of law
shall be allowed.

To what persons this Statute shall not extend.
Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to
any person or persons that heretofore has, or hereafter shall have obtained
any license of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, nor to any
person being in great age, and in debility and weakness thereby, nor to any
person being sick or notably hurt, without fraud or covin, during the time of
his or her said sickness; nor to any woman being with child, or lying in
childbed, for eating of such one kind of flesh as she shall have great lust
unto, nor to any person being in prison, for any other offense, than for any
offense contrary to this Act, neither to any that is, or hereafter shall be the
Kings Highness Lieutenant, Deputy or Captain of any his Majesty's Army, Hold or
Fortress: but the same themselves may eat flesh, and license and permit their
soldiers to do the same in times prohibited, upon the want and lack of other
kind of victual: neither shall extend to St. Laurence even, St. Marks day, or
any other day or even being abrogate, neither to any Saint Laurence even and
St. Marks day.
such as heretofore have obtained any license, in due form of the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

And further, be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that all Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and their Officers, or the Officers of any of them, shall
have power to enquire of the offenders in the premises, and present the same
to such from time to time, as by virtue of this Act have authority to hear and
determine the same.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that no manner of person or persons, be
impeached, molested or troubled, or Within what time the offender shall be
indicted.
shall incur any pain, penalty, or forfeiture for any offense contrary to the
Act before rehearsed, committed or done, except he or they be accused,
convented, or indicted, of and for the said offense, according to the tenor of
this Statute, within three months next after the committing of the said
offense, 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 3.

Anno quinto and sexto Edwardi sexti. CAP. III. Which shall be Fasting days.
AND it is also enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Which days shall be
commanded and kept fasting days.
every even or day next going before any of the foresaid days of the Feasts of
the Nativity of our Lord, of Easter, of the Ascension of our Lord, Pentecost,
of the Purification, and the Annunciation of the aforesaid blessed Virgin, of
All Saints, and of all the said Feasts of the Apostles, (other than of St. John
the Evangelist, and Philip and Jacob) shall be fasted, and commanded to be
kept, and observed, and that none other even or day shall be commanded to be
fasted.

And it is enacted by the authority abovesaid, that it shall Pun^shment of
o^fendors by the Ecclesiastical Law.
be lawful to all Archbishops, and Bishops in their Diocesses, and to all other
having Ecclesiastical or Spiritual jurisdiction, to enquire of every person
that shall offend in the premises, and to punish every such offender, by the
Censurers of the Church, and to enjoin him, or them such penance, as shall be
to the Spiritual Judge, by his direction thought meet and convenient.

Provided always, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to abrogate or take away, the abstinence Abstinence from flesh in L^nt,
F^ydayes and Saturdayes. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. ^9.
from flesh in Lent, or on Frydayes and Saturdayes, or any other day, which is
already appointed so to be kept, by virtue of an Act, made and provided in the
third year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty that now is,
saving only of those evens or days, whereof the holy day next following is
abrogated by this Statute, any thing abovementioned to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, When the Saturday
shall be fasted in stead of the Sunday.
that when, and so often, as it shall chance any of the said Feasts, (the evens
whereof be by this Statute commanded to be observed, and kept fasting day) to
fall upon the Monday: that then, as it has always been heretofore
accustomably used, so hereafter the Saturday then next going before any such
Feast, or Holy day, and not the Sunday, shall be commanded to be fasted for the
even of any such Feast, or Holy day, any thing in this Statute before mentioned
or declared to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, In what cases
some persons may labor upon the holy day.
that it shall be lawful to every Husbandman, Labourer, Fisherman, and to all
and every other person and persons of what estate, degree, or condition he, or
they be, upon the Holy days aforesaid, in Harvest, or at any other times in
the year, when necessity shall require, to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind
of work, at their free wills and pleasure, any thing in this Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Anno quinto Regin Elizabeth. CAP. V. Constitutions for the maintenance of the
Navy, etc.
BE it further enacted, that from the Feast of Saint Every Wednesday shall be
fish day. Exp. St. 27. El. 11. St. 3. C^r. 4.
Michael the Archangel, in the year of our Lord God M D lxiv. every Wednesday
in every week throughout the whole year, which heretofore has not by the laws
or customs of this Realm been used and observed as a fish day, and which shall
not happen to fall in Christmas week, or Easter week, shall be hereafter
observed and kept as the Saturdayes in every week be or ought to be. And that
no manner of person shall eat any flesh on the same day, otherwise then ought
to be upon the common Saturday.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, for All fish days shall
be observed.
the benefit and commodity of this Realm, to grow as well in maintenance of the
Navy, as in sparing and increase of flesh, victual of this Realm: that from and
after the Feast of Pentecost next coming, it shall not be lawful to any person
or persons within this Realm, to eat any flesh upon any days now usually
observed as fish days, or upon any Wednesday now newly limited to be observed
as fish day, upon pain that every person so offending herein, shall forfeit
three pound for every time he or they shall offend, or else suffer three
months Forfeiture of three pound, or three months close imprisonment, for
eating of flesh upon days prohibited. Alt. 35. El. 7. Forfeiture of the
householder where flesh is eaten. How the forfeiture shall be bestowed. A
proviso for them which have licenses to eat flesh.
close imprisonment without bail or mainprise.

And every person or persons within whose house any such offense shall be done,
and being privy or knowing thereof, and not effectually publishing or
disclosing the same to some public Officer, having authority to punish the
same, for every such offense to forfeit forty shillings. All which forfeitures
for not abstaining from meats, shall be divided into three equal parts: That
is, one part to the use of the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, the
other part to the Informer, the third to the common use of the Parish where the
offense is or shall be committed, and to be levied by the Churchwardens, after
any conviction in that behalf.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that this Act, nor any thing herein
contained, concerning eating of flesh, shall in any wise extend to any person
or persons, that shall hereafter have any special license, upon causes to be
contained in the same license, and to be granted according to the laws of this
Realm in such cases provided.

All and every which said license and licenses, shall be void to all intents,
unless the same contain the conditions hereafter How much every person shall
pay for his license.
mentioned: That is to say, every license made to any person or persons being
of the degree of a Lord of Parliament, or of their wives, shall be upon
condition, that every such person so to be licenced, shall pay to the poor men's
box within the Parish where they shall dwell or remain, in the Feast of the
purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, or within six days after the same
Feast, six and twenty shillings and eight pence, the same to be paid within one
month next after the same Feast, upon pain of forfeiture of every such
license. And every license to any person of the degree of a Knight, or a
Knights wife, shall be upon condition, that every such person so licenced,
shall pay yearly thirteen shillings and four pence, to the use aforesaid and in
form aforementioned. And every license to any person or persons being under
the degrees above said, shall be upon condition, that every such person so
licenced, shall pay yearly six shillings and eight pence to the said use, and
in form aforementioned.

Provided always, that no license shall extend to the eating of any Beef at
any time of the year, nor to the eating of any Veal in any year, from the Feast
of St. Michael the Archangel, unto the first day of May.

Provided also, that all persons which by reason of notorious Licenses in times
of sickness.
sickness, shall be enforced for recovery of health to eat flesh for the time
of their sickness, shall be sufficiently licenced by the Bishop of the Diocese,
or by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the Parish where such person shall be
sick, or of one of the next Parish adjoining, if the said Parson, Vicar, or
Curate of his or their own Parish be wilful, or if there be no Curate within
the same Parish. Which license shall be made in writing signed with the hand of
the Bishop of the Diocese, or of the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and not endure
longer than the time of the sickness. And that if the sickness shall continue
above the space of eight days after such license granted, then the license
shall be registered in the Church book, with the knowledge of one of the
Churchwardens, and the party licenced shall give to the Curate four pence for
the entry thereof, and that license to endure no longer, but only for the time
of his, her, or their sickness.

And if any license by any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, be granted to any person
or persons, other then such as evidently appear to have need thereof, by reason
of their sickness: The licenses granted to any persons before the making of
this act shall extend to the Wednesdayes.
not only every such license shall be void, but also every such Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, shall forfeit for every such license otherwise granted, five marks.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that all licenses heretofore granted to any
subject of this Realm, by any of the late Kings, or by the late Queen Mary, or
by the Queens Majesty now being, or by any Archbishop of this Realm, having
authority so to do, shall be of as good force in Law for the Wednesday now
limited, and other accustomed fish days, as they were before the making of
this Act, for the said other accustomed fish days, so as the parties licenced,
do hereafter observe all such conditions as be limited in this estatute, to
such as shall hereafter obtain any licenses.

And such persons also as heretofore were or ought to be licenced by reason of
age, or other impediment or cause, by Licenses by (...) Law Ecclesiastical.
order of the Ecclesiastical Laws, shall enjoy the same privilege and
accustomed licenses: Any thing in this Act to the contrary hereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

And if any person or persons shall be presented before the said Judges,
Justices, or Officers, within the limits of their authorities, or any
information given to them of any offender of this Act, that then they shall
have full power and authority upon any such presentment or information, to make
process against the offenders of this Act, like as is commonly used upon
indictments of trespass. And if any be presented, and afterward be convicted,
by confession or otherwise, that then every such person shall suffer no less
forfeiture or punishment then herein is before limited: all which forfeitures
to be levied in manner and form following. That is to say, such forfeitures
concerning eating of flesh, as are before limited, to certain uses, to be to
the same uses in that behalf before expressed: and all such forfeitures as
according to the tenor of the Act shall be determinable before the said
Judges, Justices, or other Officers of the Admiralties aforesaid, or before
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, in that behalf, shall be to the use of the
Lord Admiral of England, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, where such Who
shall have the benefit of all (...) forfeitures aforesaid.
offense shall be presented, or whereas the jurisdiction of the cause shall
appertain.

And all such forfeitures, as according to the tenor of this Act shall be
determinable before Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or other head Officers of
Cities or Towns corporate, shall be to the common use of the Corporation of the
said City, or Town corporate, where such offenses shall be presented, or
whereas the jurisdiction of the cause shall appertain.

And all such forfeitures, as according to the tenor of this Act shall be
determinable before the Justices of the Peace, shall be to the use of the
Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors. And if any person shall be convict by
confession, or otherwise upon any information made by any person or persons,
against any offender or offenders of this Act, in any cause (save for the
eating of flesh first before specially limited) that then every such person so
convict upon any information, shall loose such forfeiture as is before limited,
the one half to such as shall make the information, and the other half to those
which upon presentment without special information are before limited to have
the whole forfeiture.

And that for the levying of every forfeiture growing by this estatute, as well
the said Lord Admiral of England, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, their
Lieutenants and Judges, as the said Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
other head Officers within the limits of their Commissions or authorities, have
and shall have full power and authority to make such process, as they shall
think good by their discretions.

Provided always, that none information at the suit of any What Process shall
be awarded against offendor^. Within what time an information shall be made
after the offense committed.
person concerning this Act, shall be of any effect to put any person to answer
or loss of forfeiture, except the said information be commenced within half a
year next after the offense done contrary to this Act, nor that any
information, or presentment for the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or Successors, or
for the Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Mayors, or other Officers
aforesaid, be of any effect, to put any person to any answer or loss of any
forfeiture by virtue of this Act, except the said information or presentment be
within one year next after the offense done and committed contrary to this Act.

Provided and be it likewise enacted, that it shall be lawful What diet each
person must have upon his table on the Wednesday, which shall have license to
eat flesh.
to any person or persons, to have at his or their table, upon every Wednesday,
being ordered by this estatute to be observed as a fish day, one only usual
competent dish of flesh, of one kind and no more, so that he, she, or they
have also served to the same table, and meat at the same meal, three full
competent usual dishes of Seafish, of sundry kinds, eithefresh or salt, and
that without fraud or covin, and so shall also order, that the same fish be
meet and seasonable, and that it shall be eaten or spent in like manner, as
upon Fridayes or Saturdayes in like case are used.

And also such persons as have, or hereafter shall have, upon good and just
consideration, any lawful license to eat flesh upon any fish day (except such
persons, as for sickness shall for the time be licenced by the Bishop of the
Diocese, or by their Curates, or shall be licenced by reason of age, or other
impediment, allowed heretofore by the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm) shall
be bound by force of this Statute, to have for every one dish of flesh served
to be eaten at their table, one usual dish of Seafish fresh or salt, to
belikewise served at the same table, and to be eaten or spent without fraud or
covin, as the like kind is, or shall be usually eaten or spent on Saturdayes.

And that these two Articles and clauses next above, shall be taken and
interpreted from time to time, in the favor of expense of Seafish, and that
the offender or offenders herein, shall be punished in like manner, as is
ordered by this estatute, for punishment of such as shall eat flesh upon
Fridayes, Saturdayes, or other fish-dayes.

And because no manner of person shall mis-judge of the intent of this
estatute, limiting orders to eat fish, and to forbear The intent of this
statute touching eating of fish, and forbearing of flesh.
eating of flesh, but that the same is purposely intended and meant politickly
for the increase of Fishermen and Mariners, and repairing of Port Towns and
Navigation, and not for any superstition to be maintained in the choice of
meats.

Be it enacted, that whosoever shall by preaching, teaching, writing, or open
speech notify, that any eating of fish, Spreaders of false news.
or forbearing of flesh mentioned in this Statute, is of any necessity for the
saving of the soul of man, or that it is the service of God, otherwise then as
other politic Laws are and be, that then such persons shall be punished as
spreaders of fasle news are and ought to be.

This Act to continue and endure to the end of the next Parliament, 3 Caroli
Cap. 4. continued until the end of the first session of the next Parliament.

THE punishment of such persons as are spreaders of false news, by the Sta. 3.
Ed. 1. 33. 2. Rich. 2. 5. 12. Rich. 2. 11. Which is to be kept in prison while
they produce their authors: and if the author be not to be found, then they to
be punished by the advice of the Council.

A Branch of the Statutes of Anno 35. Reginae Elizabethae Cap. 7. Entitled,
Several Statutes made in the reign of King Hen. 8. King Edw. 6. and Queen Eliz.
revived and continued, and certain other Statutes repealed, etc.
IN which Statute among other things, it is provided and enacted, as follows.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, A diminution of
the penalties contained in the statute of 5. El. Cap. 5. for eating of flesh
upon fish days.
that every person eating any flesh upon any fish days contrary to the form of
the said Statute made for the maintenance of the Navy, shall forfeit only
twenty shillings, or else suffer only one months close imprisonment without
bail or mainprise. And every person or persons within whose house any such
offense shall be done, and being privy or knowing thereof, and not effectually
publishing or disclosing the same to some public officer, having authority to
punish the same, for every such offense, to forfeit only thirteen shillings
four pence, any thing in the said Statute contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

A Branch of the Statute of Anno 3. Caroli Cap. 4. Entitled, Diverse Statutes
made perpetual, others continued, and some others repealed, when corn may be
transported, etc.
IN which Statute among other things, it is provided and enacted, as follows.

It seems by this Branch, that Wednesday is not to be observed as a fish day.
And so much of an Act made in the fifth year of the reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act touching certain politic constitutions made for
the maintenance of the Navy, as is not repealed by any later Statute, nor does
concern the eating of flesh or using of fish upon the Wednesday, nor the
transportation of herring or other Seafish, nor freedom of Subsidy, Custom, or
Tonnage for the same, nor transportation of Corn, nor the prohibiting the
bringing into this Realm any Cod or Lings in Barrels or other Caskes, together
with all and every other additions, explanations, and alterations made
thereunto or thereof, or of any part thereof by any Statute or Statutes made
since the making of the said last mentioned Act, and in force the last day of
the Session of Parliament that was in the 21. year of the reign of the late
King James, shall continue in force until the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament.

A Branch of the Statute made Anno decimo septimo Caroli Regis. Entitled, An
Act for the further relief of his Majesty's army and the Northern parts of the
Kingdom.
IN which Statute among other things, it is provided and enacted, as follows.

Provided and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the passing of
this present Act, or of any other Act or Acts, or his Majesty's Royal assent to
them, or any of them in this present Session of Parliament, shall not be any
determination of the said Session, and that all Statutes and Acts of Parliament
which have their continuance, or were by an Act of Parliament made in the third
year of the reign of his Majesty that now is, Entitled, An Act for the
continuance and repeal of diverse Statutes, continued until the end of the
first Session of the next Parliament: shall by virtue of this Act be adjudged
ever since the Session of Parliament in the said third year, to have been of
such force and effect as the same were the last day of that Session, and from
thenceforth, until some other Act of Parliament be made touching the
continuance or discontinuance of the said Statutes and Acts in the said Act of
the third year of his Majesty's reign, continued as aforesaid.

FINIS.

