These several PAPERS Was sent to the PARLIAMENT The twentieth day of the fifth
Month, 1659. Being above seven thousand of the Names of the HANDMAIDS AND
DAUGHTERS OF THE LORD, And such as feels the oppression of Tithes, in the names
of many more of the said HANDMAIDS and DAUGHTERS of the LORD, who witness
against the oppression of Tithes and other things as follows.

LONDON, Printed for Mary Westwood, and are to be sold at the Black-spread
Eagle at the West end of Paul's, 1659.

TO THE READER.
FRIENDS,
IT may seem strange to some that women should appear in so public a manner,
in a matter of so great concernment as this of Tithes, and that we also should
bring in our testimony even as our brethren against that Antichristian law and
oppression of Tithes, by which many of the Servants of the Lord have suffered
in filthy holes and dungeons until death; But let such know, that this is the
work of the Lord at this day, even by weak means to bring to pass his mighty
work in the earth, that all flesh may be silent, and the Lord alone may be
exalted in them who can truly say, Now I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me, and the life that I now live is by the faith of the Son of God, which faith
overcomes the world, through which faith the Saints and faithful of old
subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, claimed the promises; It Is true, we
have need of patience, that after we have done the will of God we may inherit
it, but he that shall come will come and will not tarry; Behold our God is
appearing for us, and they that be in the light may see him, choosing the
foolish things of the World to confound the wise, weak things to confound the
Mighty, vile things, and things that are despised has God chosen, ye and
things which are not, to bring to naught things which are; Surely the Lord is
risen, he is risen indeed and has appeared unto many, he is also ascended and
is taking to himself his great power, he is owning and will own his spouse, his
Church which has long lain desolate and afflicted. But now arise and shine O
daughter of Sion, shake thy self from thy dust, put on thy beautiful garments,
for thy Maker is thy husband, the holy One of Israel, and he will plead thy
cause, and the Mountains of the Lord shall be exalted on the tops of all
Mountains; and as he is risen in us, and become our first fruits unto God, so
is he also risen for us even to cast out all our enemies, to bring down every
high thing within us and without, that exalts its self against him, and he
shall ride on conquering, and to conquer till he has subdued all our enemies,
that God alone may rule and rain, and herein lies our strength, even in the
power of our God, in it we can stand still and behold the Salvation that he
will bring to pass even for us, and here shall we be hid, while all calamities
that shall surely come upon the enemies of the truth be overpast. And while we
rest under the shadow of his wing we are safe, rejoicing in his will, and in
every thing giving thanks, knowing it is his will in Christ Jesus concerning
us; and in this let us testify our Saint-ship to the World; even by our
obedience to his will in all things, by living in his fear and to his praise
all our days; and herein she desires to be found, who is called,

Mary Forster.

To the Parliament of England, who are set in place to do justice, to take off
oppression, and to stop the oppressors.
WE whose hands are hereunder written do testify and declare against the
oppression of Tithes, and against the injustice of them, which has come up
since the days of the Apostles in the Apostasy, and set up by the commands and
laws of men, the author of which was the Pope; and such as were got up since
the days of the Apostles, both out of the power of God and Christ; for the
Priesthood which was made by the Law of God had a command according to the Law
of God to take Tithes, and is disannulled and changed, and God never gave forth
a command, after he disanulled the first, that Tithes should be taken again;
these Tithes have been set up by the Papists since the Apostles, who witnessed
the command of God disanulled, Heb. 7. and all the Scriptures proves Tithes to
the Jews, but not to the Christians, and the law books proves tithes set up by
the Pope (since the days of the Apostles, and not by the Christians in the
Apostles times) and he was the first author of them, and so by a persecuting
usuped authority were they set up since the Apostles, whereby many have been
prisoned till death for not paying of them, and many have had most of their
goods spoiled by Priests and impropriators that have brought up in Sessions and
courts for conscience sake, because they cannot pay Tithes, as knowing the
command of God is disanulled, that gave tithe, and the Law is changed by which
the priesthood was made, and the Priesthood also that took them, and since
that time has the laws of men, and the commands of men been set up, by the
Apostates, Papists, from the Apostles, by their law spoiled men's goods that
cannot observe the Law and command that gives. Tithes, of them that have taken
treble Tithes, and treble; therefore these things are laid before you, that you
may consider by what power you act, whether by the power that set up tithes; if
so, then we can but look for oppression, prisoning till death, persecution,
spoiling of men's goods, haling up and down before Courts, and still an increase
of persecution; But this we say, if you, or whosoever do come into the power of
God, you will say, with us, that this commandment of men set up by them the
Apostates that be in the form of godliness and denis the power that gives
Tithes, it must be disanulled. The false Christians has set up a Law and a
commandment to take Tithes of their own since the true Christians and days of
the Apostles did witness and say the command of God was disanulled that gave
Tithes, so must the commands of men be held up that gives Tithes, and the
commands of God disobeyed which first gave them to the Jews, and the true
Christians witness the end of, and must not the commands of men be disanulled
that takes, Tithes as well as the command of God? Heb. 7. so who be in the
Covenant of God, the Covenant of life witness the end of the command of God to
the Jews that gave Tithes, and so the commands of men must be disanulled that
take tithes, and not to be obeyed by them that live in the Covenant of God? Now
if you act in the same power that has held up tithes since the Apostles days,
which has taken away many of our friends lives, that has been Prisoned till
death, in nasty holes and corners, for bearing their Testimony against that
unjust oppression of tithes, and the unjust power that held them up, and
Priests and impropriators, and the Law and command, and the Author of it not to
be of God nor of Christ, seeing Christ disanul'd the commandment of God that
give tithes, and this command has been set up by the superstitious Papist, who
was the first author of them; Therefore what havoc, what spoiling of Goods,
and peoples estates taken away by the Priests impropriators, worse then ever
the plundering Cavilliers? and what prisoning, what haling into Courts and
Sessions people all about the Nation there is, and chiefly about these Tithes?
and how many of their lives have been a testimony against it, and ended their
lives in nasty holes and dungeons, for their Testimony against Tithes?
therefore for us to be clear of your blood, and not to be guilty of innocent
blood, we lay these things upon you, that if any be prisoned to death, as very
many have been in these Nations, by Priests and impropriators, that we shall be
clear in the fight of God and have forewarned you, and let their blood be upon
you, who are in the place to do Justice, and to take off oppression which you
may do while you have time, if you live in the power of God; and let not the
Nation be ruined, and people prisoned to death, and the blood of the innocent
be drunken, as abundance of it has been within these few years, which lies
upon the heads of some; Therefore keep it clear from off your own heads, we
warn you which to you is the word of the Lord God; there are many in the Prison
at this day in nasty Goals, bearing their testimony for the Lord Jesus Christ
(that disanulled the command that gave Tithes) against the commands of men set
up in opposition to him since the days of the Apostles, who witnesses the
command of God disanulled that gave Tithes.

So here are our hands and Testimony to you now, not that we are weary of
suffering and of Imprisonment, nor cry to you for help, but because the blood
of our brethren has been spilt, and also many thousands have had their goods
spoiled and taken away, and many of them Imprisonned to death, whose blood lies
upon the heads of their persecutors, but it is that you may keep your selves
from blood, and stop the oppressors that causes it, and so keep the Nation
from the plagues and judgments of God, and your selves also, that you be not
rooted out and cast by, by the power of the Lord God, for not doing Justice,
and not relieving the oppressed, as many have been before you, and suffering
his Lamb and babes and servant, their blood to be shed for bearing their
Testemony, and suffering their goods to be spoiled, so as you are in the power
of God, you will throw down the power of the Papists in these Nations, that set
up tithes, and then through that power that throws them down will you come over
the tyranicall oppressing power of the Papist, to live in the power of God,
which the Apostles were in before the Papist came up, and the Laws and
commandment that upholds them.

That all forced maintenance of the Priests be taken away, for while such a
thing is set up, it will spoil many idle men that will not thresh nor plant,
nor dig, nor make Vineyards, and will not Plow nor Sow, that they may Reap,
neither will they preach the Gospel that they may live, and these are never
like to plant Vineyards, but such as are fat and lazy they will run for forced
maintenance to you, and these spoil a Nation, and keeps it from being a free
Nation, and a free Ministry, and keeps the people from being a free people, and
these are the filthy beasts that would have the mouth of the Lord stopped, and
teaches for filthy lucre, and admires men's persons because of advantage.

And such there were in the days of the Apostles before these tithes came up,
by the Law and commandment of men among the Papists, since the command and Law
of God was denied, therefore after you have taken away tithes and forced
maintenance, which is set up, and is not like the Apostles, but like such as
teach for filthy lucre, you enquire what you shall do then, (well) let every
one plant that they may reap, and let every one sow spiritual things that they
may reap carnal, and let them preach the Gospel, that they may live of it, and
that is our hearts desire, and the spoiling of our goods, and our brethren that
has been Prisond to death for not paying tithes, is our Testimony to all the
world, that it is not for covetousnes sake that they suffer, but for
conscience, and for truth and Righteousness, and that shall be answered to the
witness of God in every one of your consciences, yea, and to the witness of God
in all our oppressors, (whether it be Priest or Impropriator, or Lawyer, that
has bought tithes) who for conscience sake we cannot pay them, but say his
Commandment must be disanulled, that gives them tithes, as well as the command
of God which is disanulled by Christ; and this we suffer with our lives and
estates.

We who are of the Seed of the Woman, which bruiseth the Serpents head, to
which the Promise is, Christ Jesus in the Male and in the Female, which is the
Everlasting Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, which took Tithes, nor of the
Tribe of Levi, but of the Tribe of Judah, and who is a Priest for ever, made by
the Oath of God, after the Order of Melchizedech, and remains a Priest
continually; And therefore can we set our hearts and hands against Aarons
Order, which is disannulled, and the Law changed, and do bear our Testimony,
that Christ Jesus the Everlasting Priest is come.

MAargret Fell, senior Margret Eell, junior Bridget Fell Isabel Fell Sarah Fell
Mary Fell Susanna Fell Rachel Fell Mary Askey Ester Be^son Jane Jakes Mabel
Warner Elizabeth Walker Jenet Jeats Agnus Sponder Mary Pepen Elin Towenson Anne
Colinson Anne Bateman Dorothy Maskew Margret Denison Agnus Bank Anne Dogson
Margret Denison Eliz. Kitchen Anne Wilson Elin Newbie Eliz. Newbie Agnus Newbie
Elin Newbie Jane Chester Elin Muckelt Margret Idle Isabel Stephenson Margan
Shepherd Anne Rawes Jane Lancaster Isabil Grave Eliz. Sewart Margret Thomson
Anne Brigs Agnus Thomson Isabel Wilson Margret Clark Jane Halehead Janet
Bateman Dorothy Bateman Mary Bateman Dorothy Bateman Agnus Brown Mabel Wi^son
Isabel Garnet Rebecca Storey Jane Thomson Agnus Wilson Isabel Berk Elizabeth
Newbie Dorothy Ducket Elizabeth Simpson Mabel Moor Eliz. Moor Margret Moor Elin
Rigge Elizabeth Heline Mabel Came Dorothy Lorimer Margret Wharton Isabel Storey
Eliz. Lonsdal Eliz. Rigg Margret Thompson Eling Came Eliz. Rigge Margret
Thompson Eling Came Anne Thompson Agnus Sill Eliz. Hireson Eliz. Maskel Anne
Came Anne Heline Eliz. Wharbrah Dorothy Middleton Eliz. Wison Christobel
Suttoris Agnus Atkinson Eliz. Maning Eliz. Bambrigge Esabel Harling Eliz.
Thompson Margret Moon Isabel Backhouse Margret Smith Mary Wilson Margret Sale
Barbrey Thompson, ^l. Barbry Thompson, yo. Mary Park Jane Johnson Isabel Dogson
Jane Wison Agnus Moor Agnus Hutton Eling Warriner Agnus Howsman Jenet Hind
Mabel Mansergh Dorothy Fowe Eling Howsman Eling Howsman Mabel Thompson Alice
Thompson Isabel Thompson Eliz. Cartmel Bridget Gregge Francis Preston Bridget
Came Sarah Came Margret Store Mary Dodin Elizabel Rigge Eliz. Sadler Eliz.
Sewert Eliz. Backhouse Agnus Wharton Alice Green Isabel Adlington Em. Smith
Margret Smith Agnus Holey Margret Cock Agnus Cock Eliz. Show Eliz. Bateman
Margret Phleming Elin Sands Mary Colinson Anne Vaugh Dorothy Vaugh Jane Dawson
Eliz. Dawson Eliz. Edrington Eliz. Edrington Dorothy Wilkinson Dorothy Storey
Agnus Storey Margret Beck Agnus Whitehead Sarah Benson Mary Benson Dorothy
Benson Margret Benson Eliz. Benson Katherine Benson.
Women, Friends that have given their Testimony against the oppression of
Tithes into the North part of LANCASHIRE.
MArgret Fell Bridget Fell Sarah Fell Alice Corber Mary Corber Susanna Ormandy
Jane Wildman Isabel Wilson Eliz. Asburner Rosemond Benson Margret Clayton Annas
Fell Alice Chambers Eliz. Milner Frances Hale Dorothy Chambers Izabel Yeates
Eliz. Kirkby Jane Kirkby Eliz. Walker Dorothy Hutton Jane Holme Eliz. Park
Alice Fell Frances Sharp Margret Myers Ann Harrison Eliz. Stubbs Ann Dixon Jane
Milner Ann Jackes Eliz. Bows Margret Kirkby Eliz. Kirkby Eliz. Myers Margret
Fell Ann Ocandy Alice Ceuper Barba Ormondy Jenet Fisher Alice Curmen Alice Goad
Izabell Birket Mary Fell Eliz. Saltas Alice Milner Eliz. Milner Margret Cleaton
Margret Lancaster Elizabeth Adison Jane Symetson Ann Rig Margret Rig Annas
Braythwaite Dorothy Braythwaite Margret Braythwait Mary Benson Dorothy Benson
Jane Benson Elizabeth Benson Dorothy Brugthwait Dorothy Saterthwait Dorothy
Braithwait Dorothy Saterthwait Elin Atkinson Elizabeth Wilson Jane Walker Jane
Walker Annas Penington Annas Walker Elizabeth Beck Margret Walker Barbary
Benson Dorothy Braithwait Agnes Rig Ann Ayray Grace Crackenthrop Grace
Whitehead Agnes Whinfield Mary Ayray Jenet Whitehead Elizabeth Whitehead Jenet
Adkinson Margret Bownes Grace Barwick Elizabeth Barwick Ellinor Cloudsdall
Elizabeth Gibson Ann Ayray Kathrine Wilson Frances Lawson Izabell Fallowfield
Frances Sleavenson Marge. Fallowfield Cisely Slevenson Mary Sobinson Frances
Gilson Jane Briham Frances Hebson Mary Holme Jane Winter Margeret Wharton
Elizabeth Holm Jenet Smith Margeret Smith Sarah Smith Izabell Holme Annas Smith
Anas Teusdall Margeret Smith Annas Wilson Mabell Bland Mary Bland Mabell
Robinson Barby Robinson Jenet Denkin Izabell Robinson Elizabeth Hebson
Elizabeth Wilson Elizabeth Morland Margeret Bland Elizabeth Morland Margeret
Bland Elizabeth Bland Elizabeth Robinson Annas Robinson Jane Holme Annas Licock
Jzabell Hoglethrop Annas Holm Elizabeth Coupland Elizabeth VVinter Eliz.
Crackenthrop Elizabeth Bird Margeret Simpson (...) Eliz. Budd Margret Sympson
Francis Sympson Mary Hind Izabel Holm Anne Thompson Margret Weaver Anne Stubbs
Mary Brief Jennet Jenkinson Jane Dickinson Ellin Feeler Dorothy Bains Margret
Shearson Eliz. Walker Anne Holm Anne Waling Ellen Cunning Eliz. Bond Eliz.
Harthwait Eliz. Bains Katherine Land Margret Wilson Jennet Robbinson Jane
Thomson Anne Cornbut Margret Bond Margret Hind Agnus Moor Margret Lucas Anne
Willan Jane Hadan Agnus Wethman Agnus Worsley Ellen Clarkson Margret Turner
Isabel Turner Isabel Kilner Isabel Oulson Margret Haden Jane Huberthorn Eliz.
Robbinson Ellen Wonn Ester Leaper Margret Leaper Ellen Holm Sarah Barkhouse
Mary Beakon Eliz. Thompson Eliz. Thoming Eliz Borough Margret Besbrown Mary
Besbrown Ellin Towming Mary Cocking Jane Corley Math. Croft Eliz. Hardwin Jane
Dorthwait Eliz. Sloth Jane Wilder Agnus Markdal Eliz. Fell Mary Fleming
Margret Robbinson Jane Wilson Dorothy Pearson Eliz. Pearson Isabel Stuckled
Jennet Dickison Alice Barrow Ellin Park Alice Raskel Mary Toweson Agnus Dibson
Kath. Clow Eliz. Dobson Agnus Graton Eliz. Tomson Ellen Thornow Eliz. Thornol
Eliz. Bradshaw Ellen Bark Anne Arnan Emery Johnson Margret Bradshaw Margret
Puling Jane More Anne Park Mary Rood Alice Carter Agnes Thomson Ellin Sander
Emery Carter Alice Archer Margret Carter Agnus Carter Anne Gaunt Margret Sonten
Jane Salthouse Alice Singleton Agnus Bradshaw Ellen Park Agnus Riskel Mary
Thompson Agnus D^bson Margret Dawreg Agnus Malor Eliz. Thompson Ellen Thomer
Eliz. Thorner Eliz. Bradshaw Ellen Park Alice Arman Emery Jackson Margret
Bradshaw Margret Puling Jane Moor Anne Park Mary Rood Alice Carter Anna
Thompson Ellen Sander Emery Cater Margret Thorner Ellen Cater Jennet Carter
Agnus Cater Anne Gaunt Margret Sonton Ellen Butler Jane Salthouse Alice
Singleton Agnus Breadshaw Eliz. Tayliar Ellen Hatton Grace Foister Alice Kay
Alice Smallshaw Cicily Croper Cicily Ascroft Isabel Tayliar Ellen Charles
Dorothy Wilding Eliz. Tarlton Edith. Webster Anne Pike. Margery Swift Kath.
Tatlock Anne Rymmer Dorothy Letherbarrow Alice Aspinwall Ellen White Gennet
Watson Isabel Ambrose Alice Ambrose Isabel Moon Ellin Tomlinson Ellen Brewer
Margret Thompson Eliz. Thompson Mary Thompson Eliz. Butler Ellen Parkenson
Bridget Parkinson Jennet Kirby Marg. Eckles Anne Smith Ellen Tompson J. Ashton
T. Chadock H. Sefton E. Sefton E. Lion R. Wetherby L. Hey R. Hey E. Bispem R.
Letherbarow H. Letherbarow J. Bispham J. Lion R. Lion H. Martland R. Webster A.
Hadock G. Pie J. Underwood J. Dick R Johnson J. Smalshaw W. Longley J. Pie P.
Westhead A. Wetherby P. Leadbeter W. Bower R. Longley T. Fearnes G. Barrow G.
Atherton O. Atherton T. Roose T. Atherton H. Foster J. Martland R. Cubham R.
Hunter Mary Sutton Anne Keniby Ellin Hodgkinson Hannah Keniby Margret Ashton
Mary Johnson Deborah Lion Jane Letherbarow Allis Letherbarow Margret Lion Eliz.
Leadebetter Magret Pie Margret Underwood Jane Johnson Mary Haylewood Mary
Smiken Elizabeth Gilbertson Mary Leadbetter Mary Underwood Mary Lion Anne
Bispom Mary Foster Jane Dicke Jane Fearnes Dorothy Barrow Anne Letherbarow Ann
Atherton Elizabeth Hunter Margeret Atherton Ellin Johnson Edith Hilton Ellin
Smalshaw Margeret Kendall Mary Kendall Mary Tailor Elin Atherton Allis Lion
Sarah Lion R. Watmough J. Kirkes. J. Tarlton W. Bootle H. Haugraice J. Ashton
W. Harison J. Fletcher J. Tarlton B. Boult P. Leithwait W. Hatton G. Hindly W.
Griffith G. Lion R. Litherland Katherin Stockley Margret Kerkes Jane Tarlton
Mary Boult Alice Hatton Jane Young Margret Plumton Alice Meddow Grace Hindly
Margret Brindle Margret Stretch Rebecka Griffith Alice Leithwaith Alice Hide
Izabell Marrow Mary Kenrick Elizabeth Darbishire Elin Hatton Mary Linicar Mary
Knowles Alice Ricroft Elizabeth Ricroft Ann Bootle Ann Lion Elin Wessle Margret
Caldwall Mary Souste Alice Southworth Mary Southworth Margret Hallwood Mary
Millit Mary Millit Katherin Crowd on Susana Croudson Sara Cocker Ann Ashton
Mary Marsh Isabell Earl Elin Earl Alice Lancaster Jane Quitquit Ann Clear
Katherin Holebrook Sarah Holobrook Jane Benniton Mary Cocker Ann Mason Margret
Seddow Mary Seddow Jane Beniton Margret Marsh Ann Barnes Mary Sharrock Margret
Barnes Jane Earl Mary Minchall Elizabeth Minchall Margret Minchall Jane Towers
Katherin Tailor Elin Bownes Ann Holbrook Ann Helwood Susan Parker Margret Earl
Allis Peuheth Allis Hold Jane Wilkinson Elizabeth Fothergil Ann Bowfield Isabel
Handly Elizabeth Bowvel Elizabeth Laidman Elizabeth Creighton Isabel Saffe Ann
Wright Annas Crosdale Isabel Holm Elizabeth Crosdale Jane Pinder Ann Pinder
Babel Gibson Elizabeth Fawcet Jane Walker Margret Pinder Ezab. Fawcet Annas
Thornborough Dorothy Knewstop Annas Thompson Mabel Scafe Eliz. Murthwaite Mary
Cleasby Elizabeth Ayray Jane Bouscald Margeret Lamb Mary Scafe
Northumberland, and other parts, To the Parliament of England, etc.
Jane Watson. Elizabeth Watson. Mary Dawson Elizabeth VVhitfield Jane
VVhitfield Jane Younger Alice Braidwood Barb. Be Jane Davison Elizabeth Shield
Ann Shield Mary Shield Margret Rowell Elizabeth Catsforth Anne Harbottle Mary
Spark Anne Shield Mary Farlam Jane VVilliamston Elizabeth Hutchinson Anne
Dawson Mary VVilliamston Elizabeth Neving Margret Moor Alice Brown Anne Coleson
Anne Featherstone Margret Be Mary Charles Mary Boldock Alice Burre Susan
Whitingstald Dorothy Geurney Frances Field Anne Philip Vrsula Spencer Elizabeth
Helder Sarah Burst Elizabeth Robberts Sarah Burre Susanna Randol Susanna
Pareman Anne Charles Mary Charles Cesle Hanken Elizabeth Cook Ellen Dunn
Elizabeth Wood Mary North Mary Exton Prudence Joyce Anne Starton Mary Thompson
Mary Charles Mary Godfeer Elizabeth Mennord Anne Stapelton Sara Kingsley Mary
Bardwel Anne Finch Grace Chaklee Margret Exton Anne Wennuem Jone Fisher Anne
Goodyear Jane Jeynes Ione Thoms Elizabeth Thoms Elizabeth Walker Isabel Portor
Sara Sismore Alice Underhill Anna Okey Elizabeth Haukins Mary Fisher Meriam Moss
Mary Ward Hester Underhill Jane Pullar Anne Dobbins Susan Hopcot Alice Iefferis
Patience Alcock Comfort Alcock Hannah Ward Barbara Moss Vrsulah Ward Jane Cart
Gayes Band Alice Fox Anne Surman Mary Surman Elizabeth Hopcot Elizabeth White
Margret Cook Maxet Robeson Jone Been Mary Woolman Alice Gregry Mary Maybifield
Alice Meral Marget King Alice Elise Elin Sizmore Rebecca Sizmore Anne Rickels,
youn. Alies King Anne Sanford Hannah Levite Priscilla Trotman Sarah Sturmy
Sarah Hayerd Elizabeth Joins Elizabeth Maies Luce Goldson Mary Whighthead
Elizabeth Enger Susan Clippon Elizabeth Chitcherly Grace Burvey Anne Burvey
Mary Baies Jacobin Baies Anne Folks Alice Offel Elizabeth Burbey Mercy Pedly
Anne Wilmott Ellen Harwood Marget Harwood Anne Barber Elizabeth Brett Alice
Brett Frances Hagger Anne Askby Mary Hagger Dorothy Thorrowgood Ellen Rumbal
Elizabeth Westropp Mary Stompford Mary Asswel Elizabeth Hughes Sara Siser
Blanch Baggley Priscllia Baggley Anne Hagger Grace Withon Blanch Sutton Jone
Wilton Mallun Harvy Jone Preacher Fastie Gibson Annis Dennis Anne Waler Marget
Hank Ellen Ihand Elizabeth Porter Elizabeth Suttin Jone Smith Sarah Pattin
Elizabeth Hagger Grace Hagger Abarry Nodes
CUMBELAND.
ANne Fletcher Jane Gibson Elinor Sargin Elizabeth Sargin Jane Couk Jane Sargin
Anne Pearson Frances Palmer Jane Hall Anne Palmer Elizabeth Fearron Elizabeth
Hall Marget Ashley Anne Dalton Anne Mordin Anne Fearon Jane Huton Dorothy Smith
Mary Smith Anne Benson Anne Spensor Jane Palmer Jane Robbinson Anne Keay Jane
Pearson Elizabeth Pearson Jane Wilson Mary Palmer Isabel Shepherd Marget Curwen
Anne Thumkalt Ellin Read Elizabeth Wilson Ellin Bell Elizabeth Ribton Margret
Threlkelt Joyce Davis Margret Sibsor Mary Bowman Jane Barker Frances Parker
Elizabeth Coultert Jane Dixson Jane Whiteside Bridget Stamper Jane Caipe Agnes
Nickelson Agnes Stricket Jane Seot Jane Relfe Agnes Williamson Margret Atkinson
Mary Fosken Eline^ Grainger Mary Grainger Margret Bewly Jane Wilson Mabel
Fasken Mabel Scot Elizabeth Banks Agnes Ritson Margret Parker Agnes Scot Mabel
Kingston Jane Hodgin Mary Sivitwaire Jane Hasken Jane Hasken Isabell Scot
Katheren Ritson Jane Relfe Elizabeth Banks Isabel Peacock Agnes Fisher Mary
Fisher Mabel Williamson Jane Pearson Jane Ardall Elizabeth Slamper Elin Plasket
Elizabeth Irton Jane Tonter Jane Pingry Jane Scot Mary Scot Katherin Fell
Isabell Boraskil Dorothy Simpson Madglen Boraskill Ann Dine Anne Dodgin Jane
Bushby Margret Aplbey Elizabeth Weston Margret Scot Ann Person Jane Hewetson
Frances Simpson Isabel Buntin Ann Carter Isabel Suel Jenet Watson Isabel Fisher
Jane Fisher Margret Grig Jenet Johnson Susan Sutherswait Jenet Wilson Mary
Faucet Isabel Nelson Margret Fawcet Elin Head Frances Allinson Jenet Allason
Jenet Allason Jenet Allason Elin Liteldale Margret Jackson Agnes Wodell Mary
Dawson Margret Walker Margret Mark Jane Welling Agnes Mark Agnes Mark Margret
Dawson Margret Dawson Agnes Smith Margret Mark Isabel Mark Frances Gaskath
Margret Hodgson Jane Hodgson Isabel Hodgson Mabel Wharton Mary Wharton
Elizabeth Banks Ann Harrison Isabell Toppin Elizabeth Bone Jane Stables Agnes
Patinson Mabel Ridgland Agnes Nickelson Agnes Robinson Mary Robinson Jane
Henderson Margret Pattinson Jenet Blylock Jenet Gibson Jane Tailor Elizabeth
Tailor Katherin Pearson Jenet Godfellow Isabel Godfellow Margret Palmer Agness
Summers Ayhs Summers Elizabeth Summers Modland Dixson Elin Winyeat Margret
Harrison Mary Sharp Mary Wicklife Agness Frear Lucie Bell Elin Simpson Jenet
Peel Elin Pearson Jane Dickinson Ann Richinson Isabel Maison Mary Steel
Iasabel Fearon Margret Willing Agness Lowrance Agness Allason Margret
Williamson Jane Bell Isabel Bell Elizabeth Bell Katherin Bell Elizabeth Sumpton
Jane Pearson Jenet Heston Elizabeth Normand Elizabeth Rodger Jane Bank Ann Bank
Ann Bell Margret Fawcet Ann Fisher Ann Westray Susana Bland Elizab Richardson
Ann Black-ston Elizabeth Gibson Elin Litleton Jane Grave Mary Bowman Jane
Basker Frances Parker Elizab. Conthwait Jenet Wilson Jenet Fearton Jenet
Willson Isabel Robinson Katherin Wilson Elizabeth Rutson Elin Bacon Isabel
Harris Ann Harris Isabel Harris Mary Scraghum Isabell Gill Eliner Sheperd Ann
Hudson Elizabeth Tailor Frances Tarn Elizabeth Dawson Margret Collinson Jane
Readbead Agnes Britch Agnes Holm Margret Sle Isabel Sle Agnes Sle Mary Sle
Margret Todhunter Mabell Peacock Margret Grenhow Frances Grenhow Elizabeth
Bewly Elizabeth Mark Jenet Mark Elizabeth Todhunter Agnes Cook Agnes Sandwick
Margret Bristow Jane Peacock Mary Mark Elizabeth Mark Isabel Mark Mabel Peacock
Agnes Peacock Isabel Peacock Mabel Gardhouse Christian Watson Barbaine Stony
Jenet Nikelson Mary Milburn Elizabeth Heath Elizabeth Stevenson Alice Nickelson
Dorothy Relfe Jane Prestman Agnes Prestman Jane Slaughter Margret Cook Agnes
Greenup Mabel Fisher Elizabeth Patrickson Elizabeth Shippard Mary Patrickson
Margret Fell Grace Stalker Mabel Caipe Dorothy Bewly Judeth Relf Margret Walker
Jane Stamper Jane Barwiss Margret Richardson Isabel Fell Agnes Scot Jenet Caip
Mabel Dixson Jane Prestman Agnes Fell Jenet Caipe Jane Hasken Agnes Hasken
Jenet Scot Jenet Dixson Elizabeth Patrickson Elizabeth Dalkon Jane Head Ann
Maison Jane Head Frances Winder Isabell Head Magret Davis Katherin Tolson Ann
Walker Margret Robinson Elizabeth Tolson Jane Willigin Margret Robinson Ann
Robinson Isabell head Elizabeth Feron Margret Fawcet Margre Sergent Elizabeth
Lancaster Ann Roger Mary Fearon Jenet Walker Jenet Head Elin Head Elin Peile
Ann Head Ann Dixson Katherin Fisher Elizabeth Wilkinson Elin Whodhall Jenet
Dixson Ann Dickinson Ann Dixson Elizabeth Winpeat Ann Jackson Margret Fletcher
Isabel Tiffin Barbary Dawson Jenet Fletcher Alice Jolstock Agnis Bowman Margret
Dickson Eliner Freer Isabel Feron Isabell Rodger Elizabeth Rodger Jane Jackson
Isabel Jackson Elizabeth Harrison Elizabeth Bowman Eliner Dixson Jane Dixson
Margret Robinson Elizabeth Sturdy Elizabeth Hodgson Jane Reed Ann Wilson Agnes
Harberson Jane Ritson Isabel Saul Eliner Mark Magdelen Potter Mary Martin
Margret Martine Dorothy Gibson Jane Hodgson Jane Gouldey Agnes Robinson Agnes
Nickelson Jane Tompson Jane Atkinson Mary Atkinson Agnes Fisher Judeth Fisher
Jenet Geffray Elizabeth Hadgan Jane Fisher Jenet Sherugam Jane Saul Elizabeth
Saul Mary Saul Agnes Saul Jane Hewet Mary M^ssenger Mary Laucack Alice Lhamber
Mary Ritson Agnes Cowen Mary Wait Dorothy Atkinson Elizabeth Wait Jane Atkinson
Jane Spot Mary Atkinson Elizabeth Grave Elin Ritson Jane Osburn Eliza.
Osmotherley Frances Osmotherley Jane Laucock Jane Saul Mabel Saul Jenet Wilson
Elizabeth Willson Dorothy Scragam Mary Whinon Elizabeth Hodgson Elizabeth
Wilson Margret Wilson Mary Wilson Eliz. Baru Mary Keedall Mary Scrugam
Elizabeth Wilson Frances Wilson Mary Wilson Margret Thrikbat Widow Wilson Wid.
Twentyman Margret Wilson Mary Coltart Widow Kickerby Mabel Wilson Agnes Him
Margret Fawcet Mary Fearon Dorothy Cook Ann Beebe Jennet Stubs Mabell Caip
Jennet Facet Dorothy Gill Margret Johnson Ann Wilson Elizabeth Wilson Ellin
Emerson Margret Fearon Jennet Fearon Jennet Salkeld Jennet Robinson Dorothy
Salkelt Dorothy Fisher Katheren Peel Elizabeth Allason Ellen Allason Agnes
Liteldal Iennet Marchel Mary Christian Elizabeth Salkeld Margret Morgan Win.
Mordan Isah. Young-husband Agnes Thompson Agnes Tempel
CHES-SHIRE.
To the Parliament of England, etc. To do righteously, and to stop this
unrighteous Ministry that makes havoc, spoils men's goods, and imprisons them,
and persecutes them till death, for Tithes.
ALL Tithes was since the fall that man was drove from God into the Earth,
false and true, set up by God and man; Tithes in the War to Melchizedeck, the
similitude like the Son of God, to which Abraham paid the Tenths of the spoil;
Tithes in the Law set up by the Command of God, for Levi, for Fatherless, for
Widows, for Strangers, and preserved and kept in a Storehouse, and Christ
being come after the Order of Melchizedeck, he makes an end of all similitudes
and likenesses, he ends the War and makes Peace on earth, and redeems out of
the fall and transgression, and destroys the Devil the cause of War and
strifes, whereby he brings Peace on earth and reconciliation with God, and all
things in Heaven and things in earth, destroying the Devil the author of
transgression, that went out of truth, so leads into the Unity; he it is,
Christ, that ends the Law, and ends the Priesthood which takes away the Tithes,
and the Commandment that gives them, which is according to the Law that holds
them up, and so redeems man out of the Ninths of the earth, who ends the
Priesthood, Law, Commandment and Storehouse, for earthly things, that has the
Tenths, whereby people come to know their Election before the World began, and
this we witness, drove from God, into the earth, up unto God again, redeemed,
out of the earth, up to God again, so we come out of the Ninths and the Tenths
which were offered up to God in the time of the Law, so we come to know before
the earth was, being in Christ by which all things was made, to reign as Kings
upon the earth, and Priests to God; so man drove from God into the earth by
transgression, man brought to God out of the earth by Christ the Emanuel: a
Virgin shall have a Child, his Name shall be called Emanuel, his Interpretation
is known, which is, God with us, who has known the time with God, who ends the
War, and ends the Law and similitudes, and figures, and Priests, and Tithes,
and Commands that gives them, and such as are here in Christ are in the
substance, and cannot hold up Tithes in the War nor Tithes in the Law, nor the
Priest that takes them, nor they that give them, but sees the end of the Law,
and the Commandment by which they are upheld, being in Christ the substance,
and such holds forth a Testimony against the contrary, that is, the Tithes in
the War and in the Law, and such knows the Election before the world began, and
are out of the Ninths as well as the Tenths, and are out of the War, and knows
the Kingdom that stands in Peace, and lives in the Peace, and knows the Peace
on the earth, and good will toward men; So Tithes since the days of the
Apostles in the Apostasy set up by the Pope the Papist, his Law and Command we
utterly abhor, deny and detest against, which is a shame and abominable to be
mentioned among them that are called Christians, and do see that they that give
them, and they that take them are neither agreeable to Law nor Gospel, nor
Melchizedeck, for the Law made provision for Levi and for all Strangers,
Fatherless and Widows, that there need not be a beggar in Israel; and
Melchizedeck took the Tenths of the spoil from Abraham, it is read he once did
so, but you do not read that he took the Tenths of all the spoil of all the
Wars of all Nations from the Soldiers, and the Gospel and they that preached
it, which Christ sent forth in that time, when the Jews Law was standing, and
the Store house, and Tithes, and the Commandment; Christ did not send his
Disciples with a Bagg to the Storehouse, to take Tithes out of the
Storehouse, out of Levies maintenance, and Widows, Strangers and Fatherless,
but sent them without a Bagg, and said, Freely ye have received, freely give;
and enquire who is worthy, and what is set before you, that eat; And these that
Christ sent forth, when they came back, Christ asked them, Wanted ye any thing?
their answer was, they did not; so these planted Vineyards and eat the fruit,
these got a Flock and eat the milk, they lived in the Gospel the power of God
and preached it, and these brought people out of the Ninths, and ended the
Tenths, and ended the Law, and the Commandment, and wrestled with that that
caused the War, so trod out the Corn, threshed in hope, ploughed in hope, sowed
spiritual things, reaped carnal things, and they that were taught in the Word
communicated of those things to him that taught; so the teacher and the taught
was in the Union, and they did not run unto the powers of the earth rawly for
Tenths; Now Tenths are amongst them that are apostatized from the Apostles, and
they have set up laws to give and take Tithes and treble damage for Priests
and Impropriators, and come with Troops of spoilers, with bills and staves, not
like Preachers of the Gospel: but no Storehouse for Widows, for Strangers, for
Fatherless, but all Countries and Cities are full of beggars, and streets and
allies, and Steeple-house-doors, which is enough to make all them sick that
fear the Lord, to see that Christianity should be worse then the Jews Law, and
that they are neither agreeable to Law nor Gospel, nor Tithes in the War; So
all Tithes we bear witness against, Tithes in the Law, Tithes in the War, and
Tithes of Apostasy, who witness our Redemption out of the earth, and Election
before the World began, and so reigns upon it before Tithes of the War, and Law
and Apostasy was, and transgression both, and are redeemed out of it, who are
in Covenant with God, and Peace with him.

And so we say, that all that Petition you for Tithes are Jewishly minded and
Popishly affected, and are not the true Christians nor Christianly minded, and
rather worse then the Jews, for they do not put the Tithes to the same use that
the Jews did; and the Priests are all scandalous Ministers, for they scandal
their Master Christ, and their Lord, whom they pretend to serve in dishonoring
him in seeking to you the Magistrates for their maintenance, as though Christ
did not provide for his, and give them maintenance enough, and those
Magistrates that were Jews, and since the days of the Apostles, the true
Christians, there has been the Popish Magistrates in the beast, false
prophets, Antichristians, Dragons, false churches, days, since the true Church
went into the Wilderness, but she is preparing her self for her Husband, and
coming out in her glory, and the man-child is witnessed, the husband, and the
shout of a King is amongst us, the Lord God Omnipotent, who will throw down all
than is come up since the true Church went into the Wilderness; Therefore we
with our names and hands do bear our Testimony against Tithes, the giver of
them, the setter of them up, and the taker of them, and would that you and all
People should turn to the power of God, in which ye might be in union and take
off these things, which does oppress the Nation, in which power there is no
oppression.

CHES-SHIRE.
ELiz. Yardly Dorothy Yardly Mary Tomasin Jane Tomlisson Mary Pritchard Susanna
Maddocks Kathern Mills Jane Andrews Darcas Sargeant Hannah Sergeant Eliz.
Ducker Juliana Painter Fran. Probbin Margret Parker Eliz. Smith Margret
Baddeley Margret Tomlisson Dorothy Tomlisson Eliz. Baddeley Jane Tomlisson
Fran. Tomlisson Jane Nicholas Fran. Yardly Dorothy Hare Elin Nicson Eliz.
Morris Mary Hare Jane Hare Eliz. Croxton Mary Croxton Mary Loanes Ermine
Pricket Jane Lloyd Margret Lloyd Anne Ledsome Kathern Andrews Eliz. Andrews
Jane Colley Sarah Court Anne Bettily Tomasine Tailor Jane Nicklas Dorothy Llyod
Alice Johnson Fran. Walker Anne Read Mary Gilbert Eliz. Weaver Dorothy Mear
Margret Wooly Mary Tomlisson Anne Johnson Dorothy Naylor Mary Hall Eliz. Lewis
Mary Cawly Margret Rowland Mary Swan Margret Coppock Margret Williams Anne
Janyou Alice Buckly Mary Vandrey Alice Tailor Eliz. Moor Alice Sanders Kathern
Shepherd Elinor Rowlison Sarah Mercer Eliz. Pickring Eliz. Swan Kathern Crosby
Mary Jackson Jane Hucksly Mary Burtonwood Anne Moreton Eliz. Moreton Eliz.
Crosby Hannah Crosby Mary Bradford Elin Crosby Kathern Eaton Elin Williamson
Mary Clare Mary Williams Kathern Anderton Eliza. Wyrral Jane Jackson Eliza.
Anderton Hannah Marbury Mary Anderton Margret Barker Alice Pasley Eliz. Hutton
Jane Dunbabin Elin Anderton Anne Amery Jane Shaw Eliz. Crosby Eliz. Yate
Margret Sanky Margret Cartwright Alice Jones Widow Simcock Margret Garnet
Alice Widdens Widow Parcival Mary Miller Mary Mountford Kathern Hill Priscilla
Hatton Mary Browant Margret Touchet Alice Challiner Eliz. Adlington Mary
Brownant Eliz. Brownant Mary Pickring Elin Preston Anne Sarrat Anne Sharples
Mary Griffeth Ellinor Cotgrean Margret Higenson Priscilla Crabb Eliz. Sarrat
Eliz. Hall Elin Hall Mary Hall Sarah Boulton Margret Royl Elin Boulton C^sly
Cleaton Eliz. Asbrook Margret Milner Eliz. Milner Elin Brown Deborah Bushel
Eliz. Bushel Eliz. Pike Fran. Skeleton Eliz. Widart Jone Edge Eliz. Hattou Eliz.
Hale Alice Hignet Eliz. Sarret Eliz. Bushel Ellinor Barker Ellin Cook Anne
Tomson Anne Millington Mary Bushel Elin Davenport Mary Davenport A^ne Pike
Sarah Brown Eliz. Wood Jone Wood Margret Norman Katherin Hatton Eliz. Moberly
Mary Bradford Eliz. Griffeth Mary Suddern Mary Gerrard Elin Moberly Eliz.
Kilshaw Margret Miller Martha Williamson Elin Hall Elin Baxter Alice Davenport
Eliz. Yayler Eliz. Cowley Alice Pickring Margret Cordal Margret Monk Mary Hill
Sarah Hill Eliz. Stringer Ellinor Hatton Mary Pike Eliz. Friar Mary Warton
Kathern Brierwood Mary Brierwood Mary Key Mary Sanderson Alice Walley Mary
Fisher Mary Sharples Elin Jones Margret Dunbabir Lettice Perrin Margret Wood
Grace Ellet Margery Sharples Eliz. Perrin Eliz. Briggs Susanna Liversticke
Cisly Whitcars Eliz. Beeston Jone Hill Eliz. Husall Anne Dicks Jane More
Dorothy Booth Margret Candwel Eliz. Mear Jone Hampton Eliz. Green Eliz. Hasel
Dorothy Tumkin Cisley Pearson Kathern Madley Margret Hasul Mary Hamsley Margret
Mere Mary Endon Margret Moreton Anne Lounds Anne Wardley Margery Oaks Isabel
Thorncroft Sarah Thorncroft Amy Haywort Mary Smith Lydia Wharmbee Kathern
Walker Margery Lownds Alice Smith Hester Hall Alice Lownds Eliz. Bradbury Eliz.
Hall Mary Leigh Fran. Armit Elin Steward Hester Brumbly Eliz. Stoniard Eliz.
Pass Mary Morris Eliz. Chorley Elin Whitakers Margret Chorley Jane Lownds
Kathern Hitchinson Elin Antrobus Mary Dawson Isabel Plant Anne Leigh Ellin
Dawson Mary Graves Grace Brown Mercy Berrington Anne Baker Margret Picker
Dorothy Deen Dorothy Steel Ellin Picker Mary Strach Mary Bradshaw Eliz.
Bradshaw Sarah Bradshaw Margery Hitchin Jane Miller Anne Wooker Margret Baker
Margret Baker Hannah Baker Eliz. Evans Anne Frinson Dorothy Alexander Eliza.
Battely Amy Buckly Elizabeth Morral Ellin Bertles Ann Becket Ketheren Furnisall
Elizabeth Wood Ellin Hall Margret Barker Katheren Millington Ann Bramal
Elizabeth Bramal Margret Hamson Elizabeth Sudlow Ellin Grange Margret Eaton
Margret Gatlist Ann Sutton Katheren Stockley Mary Green Mary Millington Margret
Midlehurst Ann Berry Kathren Ryther Elizabeth Newby Elnor Forest Ann Loranson
Elizabeth Robinson Margret Bretton Elizabeth Pickring Alice Shak-shaff Ellin
Gloven Margret Barrow Katheren Kerkcum Elizabeth Glover Katheren Foxley Margret
Pickring Margret Pickring Margret Dewsberry Elizabeth Gandy Elliner Barker Jane
Deakin Elizabeth Goulden Margery Eaton Ann Jamney Senior Ellin Shaw Margret
Yarwood Mary Jamney Mary Strettel Alice Burges Elizabeth Burges Mary Smith Ann
Lamb Elizabeth Lamb Elizabeth Felor Mary Janney Martha Janney Margret Burges
Ann Harrison Margery Heath Elizabeth Burges Elizab. Worthington Anna
Worthington Mary Worthington Martha Worthington Frances Worthington Mary
Worthington Sarah Worthington Joan Holm Margret Holm Ellin Holm Ann Holm
Elizabeth Janney Hester Shaw Rebecca Shaw Mary Shaw Ellin Stretch Ann Milner
Mary Milner Mary Pot Joan Armstrong Elizabeth Peirson Mary Pot Sibel Felor
Elizabeth Heeld Ellen Alcock Elizabeth Hobson Margret Pownal Sebel Hough
Margret Heeld Mary Mallory Ann Shield Constant Shield Alice Moss Elizabeth
Ashton Mary Bostock Mary Brock Mary Beely Ann Woyd Alice Millor Sibel Beard Ann
Hall Ann Boar Alice Ridgway Elizabeth Hoyd Margret Harrup Hester Arnefield Ann
Bowler Frances Royle Kathren Sheart Elizabeth Hibert Mary Hibert Jane Burdiken
Elizabeth Sheply Elizabeth Leech Ann Simpson Margret Broadhouse Sibel Sikes Ann
Rowbottom Elizabeth Bowdon Ellin Carrington Mary Warrington Margret Warrington
Mary Hasfort Anne Sibe^t Anne Bower Mary Pownal Kathern Kalshaw Ellin Hide Anne
Oussoncroft Anne Marsland Ellen Hollenshed Eliz. Astel Anne Blemily Jane
Chanler Mary Jamon Anne Brown Margret Ridgway Margret Bealy Ellen Bealy Ellen
Burgess, elder Ellen Burges Margery Burges Kathern Rylance Eliz Falkner Margret
Falkner Ellen Arstenstal Anne Cash Mary Cash Mary Tailor Mary Worthington Eliz.
Kelshal Anne Heeld Dorothy Al^en Margret Coppock Kathern Beck Eliz. Morgan
Margery Owen Vrsula Hitchcock Sarah Owen Martha Owen Rebecca Holm Ellinor
Dewsberry Anne Maddock Deborah Maddock Elinor Underwood Margret Underwood Sarah
Ghorst Dorothy Hand Eliz. Bristoe Sarah Maddock Isabel Lagh Alice Nicholas
Hannah Wa^more Jane Gravener.
YORKSHIRE.
We whose names are here underwritten, being truly sensible of the great
oppression (by reason of Tithes) in this Commonwealth of England, by the cruel
exacting of Priests, Impropriators, Farmers and others, by imprisoning of some
of our Brethren till death, others for years; and by making spoil (and waste)
of others goods, to the utter undoing of them and their Families (as to the
outward) we do here in the presence of the Lord God, and in the sight of men,
bear our Testimony against that oppression, by setting our names to this Paper,
who desire the same may be tendered to the Parliament of England, that that
burden may be removed.

BRidget Clark Grace Backler Margret Blythman Margret Tenant Margret Knowles
Isabel Fish Jennet Carr Anne Wilson Eliz. Horseman Jane Coa^es Ellen Horseman
Isabel Horseman Jennet Calvird Margret Metcalf Cicily Metcalf Eliz. Nicolson
Isabel Lambert Isabel Thompson Eliz. Thompson Margret Metcalf Jane Richinson
Elizabeth Thompson Elizabeth Rowth Jane Metcalf Margret Wethervelt Margret
Robbinson Agnes Clough Jennet Larock Mary Brigg Agnes Brigg Mary Brigg Anne
Watson Mary Clough Isabel Bothamley Anne Wood Isabel Bothamley Mary Smith Anne
Smith Grace Smith Elizabeth Smith Susanna Smith Mary Ambler Elizabeth Husler
Agnes Husler Anne Waide Anne Waide Barbara Clough Eliz. Moor Mary Tailor
Susanna Brookbank Anne Watson Grace Brigg Anne Brigg Ellen Smith Martha Smith
Sarah Smith Eliz Rass^n Katherine Scot Susanna Smith Eliz. Rawson Cicily
Metcalf Mandland Baraclough Luce Smith Susanna Warton Mary Lawson Eliz. Sampson
Priscilla Cant Jane Chaytor Ann moor Mary Jenkinson Anne Jenkinson Mary Hobson
Elizabeth Summerson Anne Faucit Jane Ward Mary Brockblauk Elizabeth Robinson
Mary Brockblauk Alice Peirson Margret Peirson Anne atkinson Jane Porter Mary
Theaker Frances Easterby Sarah marshal Anne Sutton Mary Howson Bridget
Bladworth Jane Knowles Agnes Wildman Jane Redman Agnes Wildman Margret Wildman
Gennet Tennant Elizabeth Clark. Ellen Tennant Rebeccha addison Isabel Bland
Mabel Banks Elizabeth Tennant Dorothy Weight Anne Watkinson Jane atkinson
Katherin Best Mary middleton Eliz. Hogg Jane Hinford Katherin Hakes Susanna
Robbinson Jane Kettelwol Anne Bramley Elizabeth Nelson Margret Occke^nly
Margret Slaughter Mary Taytam Margret Batty Mary Bulcock Agnes Horsman Agnes
Hully Anne Dryber Ellen Lee Mary Whip Elizabeth Crossdale Anne Temple Mary
Smith Elizabeth Tailor Jane Oxard Jane Wilkinson Elizabeth Batter Mary Tudd
Elizabeth Blanchard Anne Dennison Anne Smith Mary Batter Dorothy Todde
Elizabeth Lockwood Anne Coockson Jane Cookeson Mary Walker Senior Mary Walker
junior Katherin Lewis Judeth Lewis Margret Johnson Elizabeth Johnson Sythey
Masterman Mary Masterman Elizabeth Middleton Jane Woodwart Eliz. Johnson Senior
Elizabeth Shepherd Elizabeth Craik Elizabeth Tuler Alice Truman Anne Dennison
Frances Crosby Isabel Wilkinson Anne Wilkinson Jane Ridmond Elizabeth Procter
Anne Proctor Frances Aeston Elizabeth Rowth Margret Mercalf Elizabeth Thompson
Isabel Thompson Anne Thomson Mary Lambert Mary Hartly Jennet Hartly Isabel
Studderd Anne Broun Mary Smith Margret Broun Anne Pollard Ellen Pollard Jennet
Sager Elizabeth Bleakly Mary Wilkinson Jane Cleaton Mary Bradshaw Mary Barcroft
Alice Barcroft Ellen Pollard Agnes minnis Ellen Sager Elizabeth Higgin Mary
mitchel Mary Hargreaves Anne Knowles Susan Heworth Mary Heworth Elizabeth
Heworth Susan Heworth Mary Bertwisle Elizabeth Bertwisle Margret Bertwisle
Katherin Bertwisle Katherin Do Agnes Robbinson Alice Ratcliff Mary Rosthorn
Alice Rosthorn Alice Ashworth Judeth Tailor Mary Frith Hannah Langdal Sarah
Hutton Sarah Jawet Sarah Jawet Sarah Dobson Sarah Howl Mary Hanson Bridget
Green Mary Godely Anne Nubie Anne Wilbie Grace midgley Bridget Green Mary
Pellington Sarah Denham Elizabeth Green Jane Leigh Dorothy Verity Ester Burkby
Alice Crowcher Elizabeth Kitchen Anne Horgreaves Martha Boot Ellen Jowel Anne
Swift Martha Phillip Sarah Bonds Mary Fowler Isabel Booth Mary Fothergil
Elizabeth Sikes Hannah Bartle Grace Marshal Grace Croysdal Ester Pollard Ester
Ramsden Grace Dunster Elizabeth Sikes Susan Thewellis Jone Dyson Mary Whitly
Sarah Lees Jane Fox Elizabeth Ramsden Mary Ramsden Grace Roydes Mary Whitly
Susan Whitly Susan Turner Sarah Turner Anne Wadsworth Mary Wadsworth Easter
Wadsworth Elizabeth Geldart Katherin Horner Iddith Geldard Mary Rider Sarah
Geldart Margret Win Mary Robbinson Susanna Tyreman Isabel Fample Barbarah
Hildreth Mary Dunning Margret Sample Anne mannings Margret Wood Vrsula Rimer
Elizabeth Johnson Margret Parving Katherin Rimer Margret Pate Rosamond Snowdon
Elizabeth Foster Ellen Tyreman Anne Smith Elizabeth Tutin Amey Waid Margery
Whitehead Jane Robbinson Elizabeth Bell Margret Heddon Mary Todd Katherin Rimer
Mary Linsey Ellen Rowland Hellen Johnson Margret Tomlinson Rachel Garbut
Margret Simpson Mary mason Isabel Orton Isabel Ray Susan Wim Margery Braderig
Anne marwood Jane Furbank Jane Holm Isabel Story Elizabeth Tiplady Isabel
Barher Anne Barher Margret Stonds Anne Graystorck Bettrisse Tenting Alice
Nellist Isabel Tompsoe Margret Hodges Margret Stonds Jane Parrit Elizabeth
Spark Margeret Ruddock Margret Pursglove Margery Coultheist Isabel Outhwait
Elizabeth Thorp Elizabeth Larnest Mary Radcliff Effam Word Elizabeth Hodysoe
Margret Hoddysoe Dorothy Hoddysoe Isabel Burdstead Anne White senior Anne White
junior Ester Chapman Anne Cockeril Jane Cockeril Magdalen Slightholm Isabel
Knowles Ellen Smalwood Margery Cockeril Ellen Smalwood Isabel Smalwood Mary
Pearson Anne Pearson Anne Greenbank Ellis Green Elizabeth Heart Jane Bimstil
Ellen Hay Katherin Stockley Jane Rider Susanna Lotherington Jane Faston Jane
Rogers Sarah Jones Alice Pickering Dorothy Smalls Dorothy Heslam Isabel Sulon
Margery Grange Eliz. Pennet. Eliz. Blenkhorn Katherin Clark Dorothy Rooads Aim
Freayre Margret Leming Dorothy Leming Katherin Bowch Eliz. Horsman Jennet measm
Mary Hardcastle Jane Simpson Gennet Graing Mary Grang Mary Bridgwaters Agnes
Atkinson Ester Bridgwaters Ellen Vmpelly Eliz. Grime Isabel Lapington Kathe.
Kirkby Eliz. Stevenson Eliz. Sadman Martha Coward Frances Beswick Ellinor
Cresby Ellinor Hodgson Elizabeth Star Elizabeth magdson Margret Hodgson
Katherin Dickson Alice Hopper Eliz. meggison Katherin Alleson Elizabeth
Thomlinson Ellen Leak Elizabeth Stevenson Frances Write Martha maincleton Anne
Caylew Frances Kyther Isabel Arluck Eliz. Wats Jane Hunter Anne Hunter Isabel
Barker Eliz. Pelch Anne Northen Barbarah Jowsey Margret Chapman Alice Sowly
Anne Fardin Eliz. Jackson Mary mlles Eliz. Smith Dorothy Godd Hellen Barwick
Mary Roundtree Isabel Fardin Elizabeth Jackson Eliz. Baw Isabel Simpson Lucy
Prat Alice Kirton Elizabeth Cherry Agnes Cherry Alice Typlady Eliz. Cherry
Phillice Thompson Dorothy Thompson I^abel Clarkson Agnes Langstaff Katherin
Wilson Elizabeth Langstaff Margret Carter Margret Robbinson Mary Robbinson
Eliz. Raw Elizabeth Robbison Eliz. Spenclay Agnes allenby Eliz. Hawxwel Isabel
Clark Agnes Langsdale Anne Prat Alice Waller Alice Tompson Eliz. Honsdail
Grace Smith Alice maw Anne Parkin Anne Dawson Anne Tailor Susan mainforth
Barbarah Kirk Barbarah Tindal Katherin milner Jane Goodman Isabel applyurd
Clare marston. Hannah Coplaygh Eliz, Goodbarn Isabel Jordan Grace Goobal Eliz.
Powel Margret Loft Eliz. Chambers Eliz. Burland Margret Hopwood Anne Ably Mary
Procter Cicily Knapton Sarah marshal Anne Sutton Mary Sutton Anne Smith Barbara
Siddal Jane Selly Frances Storr Margret Storr Dorothy Storr Mary Nicolson Anne
Nicolson Jane Yeats Elizabeth Whitehead Jone Fearding Francis Thornley Anne
Elisar Mary Whitehead Anne Edames Dorothy Crontser Frances Wright Margret
Hagget Eliz. Turuer Jone Newby Frances Kitching E izabeth Seak Frances
Sanderson Eliz. Beck Bridget Emerson Alice Cass Margret Blashel Rebecca
Sudaiber Jezabel Huntlay Rachel Garbur Margret milner Margret Teuslay Jane
Barker Anne Burn Jennet Lilforth Mary Tuinam Susanna Plumner Mary Barber Jane
Elliker Mary Parkinson Mary Smith Eliz. Tomlinson Mary Tom^inson Anne Parkinson
Eliz. Brown Mary Tomlinson Margret Morehouse Isabel Parkinson Isabel Carr
Bennet Hill Isabel Young Anne Young Anne Squire Mary Rawson Eliz. Weinman Ferah
Weinman Eliz. Somerstals Mandlin Frankland Mary Somerstals Mary Rowly Jane
Riply Anne Ibbitson Mary Ibbitson Eliz. Ibbitson Anne Dickinson Eliz. Dickinson
Eliz. Watson Margret Scot. Susanna Hill Mary Tenant Alice Smith Isabel Grain
Anne Fletcheard Martha Branne Margret Dickinson Anna E^e^ton Isabel Dickinson
Isabel Watlingson Mary Bollard Eliz. Dickinson Agnes morhoas Margret Hill Alice
Smith Anne moor Jennet Chambers Isabel Chapman Margret moor Ellin moor Margret
Flankland Anne Atkinson Eliz, mason Agnes Kidar Mary Baython Eliz. Wilson
Ellinor Watson Eliz. Watkinson Ellinor Watson Mary Robbinson Ellen Townson
Eliz. Lucas Margret Wildman Jane Dickinson Jane Totum Martha Blahey Eliz.
Priestly Mary Downing Alice Shoane Alice Jesoppe Eliz. Couldwel Mary Dickinson
Grace mareden Alice Oxley Jane Swift Eliz. Waterhouse Eliz. Creswicke Margret
Dickinson Judeth Rothwel Katherine Brookbank Sarah Woodhouse Grace moakeson
Anne Charlesworth Mary Catlein Anne Jessop Dorothy Hicke Dionice Couldwel Anne
Dison Eliz. Crowder Eliz. Burgess Frances Hinchcliffe Mary morton Martha Priest
Martha Couldwel Grace Hurst Margret Mourton Eliz. Trout Eliz. Wordsworth Anne
Wilcock Mary Colson Mary Cotsworth Mary Todde Margret Leaper Isabel Jarret
Ellen Jarret Alice Beeswick Mary Story Thomason Leaper Jane Clough Mary Fowle^
Clare Harlas Jane Pearson Jane Chat Alice Hairst Mary Pilkington Alice
mainprice Anne Stringer Anne Hodson Dorothy Gibson Frances Hutch Eliz. Gilburn
Katherine Langdak Barbarah Aoklam Betteris Stabler Rebecca Drape Eliz. menson
Dirothy Robson Grace Barwick Jane Drape Jane milner Eliz. Botterrel Christian
Darfield Betteris Harrison Jane Ask Mary Burn Christian Dickinson Mary Todde
Eliz. Farthing Margret mankman Eliz. Hodgson Isabel Jailer Jane Waln Mary
Clifford Margret Smith Martha Coats Eliz. Blakey Grace Jackson Katherine Brown
Anne Kettlesing Grace Swave Grace Pawson Helene Pape Anne Bond Alice Alston
Alice Dilworth Ellen Gardner Dorothy Hodgkinson Agnes Crossdale Mary Crossdale
Jane Waln Susanna Chambers Isabel Knowles Eliz. Bond Alice Hairst Margery
Hairst Ellen Walbank Jennet Clough Agnes Rudd Mary Rudd Bridget Driver Eliz.
Waddington Jone Borough Ellen Cutler Isabel Baily Isabel Waln Jane Killam
Margret Killam Anne Willeston Anne Nicolson Jone Kil^am Anne Hickson Sarah
Nicolson Eliz Harrison Rebecca Hamond Sarah Denham Eliz. Fletcher Alice
Richardson Anne Smith Eliz. Bains Anne Peck Anne Camsal Anne Lambart Mary
Vicars Alice Brown Jone Lambart Rebecca Spavan Mary Carrington Martha Lambart
Trothy Young Mary Worsely Mary Rowbothom Eliz Holms Mary Aldam Jennet Bunting
Mary Parkin Bridget Bladworth Dorothy Williams Clarah Burton Eliz. Allisson
Jane Spencer Anne Allisson Alice Crabtree Anne Scirlew Anne Cock Sarah
Mapplebeck Mary Howson Jane Beamont Mary Lavarack Mary Law Eliz. Iclese
Magdalen Dawny Susanna Dawny Mary Clarkson Katherine Clarkson Susanna Arnold
Eliz. Parker Eliz. Clark Katherine Knots Anne Boulton Mary Cook Rebecca Cook
Katherine Cook Jane Burnly
DURHAM.
We whose names are underwritten, seeing the unjustness and oppression of
Tithes, do in the fear of the Lord bear witness, and give Testimony against
them; And those that Receives, and by great and cruel Oppression requires the
Payment of them by a Compulsatory Law, or condemns the refusers to Prison for
not doing it, And if the Lord suffer such a thing to be still by the
hard-hearted Tax-masters, we are by him made willing to give up our Bodies and
Estates, for keeping our Consciences clear, rather then yield to the oppression
and unreasonableness of some men who makes shipwreck of good Conscience, so
they may have their wills of the other; And to this is our hands put.

MArgret Rayn Eliz. Lee Anne Bainbridge Isabel saire Elenor Eyon Kathern Shaw
Mary Richinson Isabel Rain Katherine Rain Isabel Appelby Mary Hutton Isabel
Hutton Elenor Allenson Mary Chapman Elenor Pinckney Anne Tippling Elenor Rain
Mary Morlay Jane Walker Barbary Eyon Jane Bowran Elizabeth Robinson Elizabeth
Allinson Dorothy Heslupp Alice Robison Margret Bowran Jane Wrightson Frances
Walker Mary Appelby Jane Barret Mary Appelby Anne Wrightson Gennet Bowran Mary
Walker Alice Selby Anne Tallier Susan Tall^er Mary Hunter Anne Wilkinson Eliz.
Row Eliz. Wilkinson Mary makepeace Frances Vicars Jane Whantley Anne Whatfield
Jane Snowboll Mary Wilkinson Mary Laborn Anne Richardson Eliz. Whitefield Mary
Hopper Jane Barret Margret Hopper Eliz. mare Thomleson Hunter Eliz. mallom Anne
Sompson Jane Hopper Canstance Boggan Eliz. Jackson Jane Trotter Alice Ireland
Eliz. Hopper Anne Emberson Eliz. Emberson Jane Emberson Margret Emberson Mary
Robinson Isabel Henderson Anne Henderson Margret Ramshaw Margret Bradley
Margret Ramshaw Eliz. Lidle Mary Stevenson Is bell Thomson Phillis Liddle
Elliner Wardel Jone Sanders Sarah Horeson Mary Chipses Isabel Ruston Jane Hall
Mary Heighington Frances Hornplay Eliz. Hoper Anne Hall Anne Hodshon Allsee
Adamson Anne Guard Suesance Harswhitel Gillence Woodmass Mary Richardson
Katharine Smith Mildred Spalk Anne Harswhitel Anne Readhead Margret Shaw Ezibel
Heighly Margret Walker Ezibel Walker Alice Clark Eliz. Clark Jane Richardson
Isabel Beaton Anne Robinson Margret Robinson Mildrel Foster Frances Fall Anne
Patisson Barbery Burdon Ellen Rutless Eliz. Readhead Isabel Appelby Alice
Appelby Anne Richardson Anne Spark Isabel Newby Eliz. Brian Anne Over Mary
worly Kathern Smith Mildrel Spark Anne Haswell Anne Readhead Margret Shaw
Isabel Highly Margret Walker Isabel Walker Alice Clark Eliz. Brian Jane
Richardson Isabel Reighton Anne Robinson Margret Lobinson Mildrel Foster
Frances Hall Anne Pattiun Barbery Burdon Ellin Rutlas Eliz. Readhead Alice
Appelby Anne Richardson Anne Spark Isabel Newby Eliz. Brian Grace Pearson Anne
Richmond Margret Richmond Ellenor Tompson Anne Bainbridge Barbary Emmerson Jane
Nicolson Jane Gatley Sarah Welberry Margret Robinson Katherine Wrightson Johan
Hodgshon Katherine Dodsworth Bridget English Constance Loyse^art Anne Robinson
Jane Robinson Anne Draper Frances Avery Jane Daveson Anne Robinson Anne
Langstass Ellinor Emerson Eliz. Richmont Anne Hodgson.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
These are the names of the Women, who are witnesses against the oppression of
Tithes, taken at Northampton.

MAry Gains Eliz. Wills Katherine Ladd Phi. Haddon Frances Varney Mary Green
Sarah Todd Anne Hewlit Anne Cook Alice Irons Jane Hunt Rebecca Peak Elish. Hunt
Eliz. Hunt Anne Richardson Eliz. Averick Mary Hagge Mary Green Anne Patteson
Katherine Gats Abigal Lauruck Anne Vincet Anne Stanley Ellinor Steunson Mary
Nottingham Susanna Nottingham Hannah Nottingham Judeth Nottingham Eliz. Pours
Anne Coks Alice Juies Dorkas Robinson Hannah Freeman Mary Page, younger Alice
Harris Sibbil Gibs Amey Robinson Eliz. Roel Sarah Palmer Eliz. Pug Eliz.
Ellington Eliz. Ellington Anne Ellington Rebecca mekernes Anne Whitlick Mary
Belly Hannah Day Mary Day Eliz. Day Eliz. Garret Alice Whitelock Alice Belly
Sarah Bernes Margret Wills Eliz. Belly Elen Polings Anne Brooks Anne Warren Anne
Wallis Mary Young Eliz. mekernes Mary Kenwrden Hester Wadsworth Eliz. Powel
Eliz. mekernes Helen Garret Eliz. Norcot Eliz. Abbot Mary Warren Alice Woolston
Alice underwood Mary Warren Alice Preston Dorothy Ward Mary Britten Anne Key
Anne Innfield Mary Steepens Eling Goedhe Margret Beeb Eliz. Bull Jone Goby Anne
Roberts Anne Ear Anne Nickols Joice molton Anne Preston Eliz. Binion Eliz.
Wells E^iz. Weight Mary Warren Eliz. Knighton Anne Ibs Eme Durnil Anne
Mekernes Anne Pell Deborah Roberts Anne Corby Mary Tarry Frances Houghton
Bridget Pell Jone Wadsworth
These are the names of Friends in Welingburough and thereabouts.

County of NOTTINGHAM.
The names of Women Friends, who bears Testimony against the oppression of
Tithes.

ANne Tomlinson Mary Garret Mary Sharp Eliz. Frith Eliz. Wood Ellin Cook Anne
ashwel Susanna Touny Anne Pattinson Since Green Alice Clife Eliz. Wood Mary
Sharp Mary Flintham Mary Buller Kathern Shareman Anne Green Eliz. Spur Anne
anderson Mary Barton Anne Dawson Vrsula Green Anne Hazard Anne Shaw Mary Vicars
Margret Shackerdal Eliz. Elsam Bridget Hamman Jone Bacon Eliz. Barton Alice
Vfton Eliz. Kitching Judeth Garland Anne Bark Isabel Cooper Eliz. Hatfield
Eliz. Meares Lydia Bark Susanna Hubbard Mary Snoden Mary Clay Anne Poison Eliz.
Copla Frances Cooper Eliz. Cooper Jone Hyfield Mary Alcock Mary Holmes Ruth
Cook Anne alcock Hannah Glassop Sarah Slater Eliz. G^assop Patience Wilkinson
Anne Need Emes Buroughs Mary Hand Jone Burton Dorothy Wyld Mary Wightman
Rachel Slack Jone Martine Hannah Lister Ellin Cooper Mary Cooper Mary
Leadbeater Eliz. Cockram Mary Cockram Anne Fricknal Susanna Reynold Eliz. Clay
Margret Whitworth Mary Clay Anne Langford Sarah Clay Sarah Brandrith Eliz.
Brandrith Mary Blackeborn Eliz. Brandrith Mary Fields Martha Grace Anne
Brandrith Alice Woodhead Anne Crofts Jane Anclife Anne Crofts Elizabeth Rogers
Anne Noden
LINCOLNSHIRE.
We whose names are subscribed, do hereby declare that we are very sensible
Tithes are a great oppression set up in the time of Popery; and we desire the
removal of them.

ANne Leverton A. Frotheringham Eliz. mason Eliz. Woolsey Susanna Holland Jane
Preston Eliz. Brinckle Mary Greswel Mary Pheasant Martha Wright Anne Recket
Anne Northern Sense Northern Sarah Moss Eliz. Harrison Vrsula Hooton Vrsula
Buroughs Eliz. Northern Mary Garland Anne Pheasant Eliz. Rogers Anne Freestone
Prudens Fisher Sarah Thompson Jane Wilkinson Mary Hudson Jane Lightfoot Ellen
Brumby Anne Gaunt Anne Pheasant Mary Northern Eliz. Williamson Eliz. Jackson
Ellen Gaunt Anne Sharp Ruth Panel Eliz. Harpham Eliz. Fletcher Martha Teff.
Eliz. Jarnil Jane Harrison Anne Hird Eliz. Smith Anne Winch Eliz. Smith, junior
Mary Smith Susanna Cussons Mary maple Mary Cussons Ellen Smith Katharine
makaril Anne Thornton Didolis Carry Mary Oliver Anne Beck Alice Sharp Anne
Foster Ester Heart Mary Foster Anne Cook Eliz. Barnard Anne Spain Katherine
Pickaver Hannah Seaton Mary Packins Ellen Foster Anne Hobson Dorcas mell
Dorothy Foster Eliz. Gathorn Dorothy Pickaver Thomasin Norton Eliz. Hobson Anne
Haldenby Susanna Parrot Mary Scot Grace Scot Anne Garton Alice Beck Margret
marston Eliz marshal Eliz. Lee Mary Berrier Anne milner Cassandra Chapman Ellin
Gilliot Frances Hobson Rachel Beck Mary Chandler Anne Sherman Eliz. Robinson
Eliz. Waterfool Eliz. Higham Margret Darlinton Mary Turner Alice Tate Mary
Trevis Susanna Yorksey Isabel Drury Anna Brown Sarah Otter Eliz. Clark Mary
White Bridget White Mary Rosse Alice Winsor Ellenor Gibson Mary Parker Kath.
Pid Anne Pid Eliz. Bainton Eliz, Pid Mary Crosby Eliz. Gaskin Anna Whiteworth
Susan Smith Anne Parker Eliz West Anne Bagaley Mary Trueblood Eliz. Parker Anne
Crosby Susanna Billidge Eliz. Hutchinson Jane Sanders Anne Berrier Mary
Thistleton Margret Dounham Hollen marshall Mary Chanler Jone Westwood Anne
Shoreman Grace Robinson Anne Stoker Bridget Turington Sarah Classon Sarah Kirk
Elizabeth Waterfal Anne Waterfal Elizabeth Haigham Ellen Wilson Margret Smith
Mary Wilson Frances Seagrave Rebecka Thornton Mary Sowter Dorothy Rawbuck Eliz.
Kirk Elizabeth Davie Anne manby Anne Havey Jane Phillips Elizabeth mathews Anne
morris Anne makepeace Eliz. Boot Katheren Swayer Susanna Whitman Margaret
Ashley Anne Thornton Jane Hempsted Anne Hempsted Mary Hempsted Dorothy
Armstrong Elizabeth Wilkinson Sarah Fotherby Katheren makaril Alice Streaton
Anne Stelworth Mary Blackney Mary Lumkin Anne Bellamy Anne Rose Anne Haris
Rebecka Day Mary Gibson Anne Fisher Anne Johnson Eliz Wray Anne Thomlinson
ESSEX, NORFOLK, SUFFOLK, CAMBRIDG, and HUNTINGTON.
To the Parliament of England, etc.
Now friends, you being first chosen by the Nation as a Parliament for to do
the Nation the right, and to take off the Nations oppressions; are not you to
search out the oppression? and are not people to lay their oppressions before
you, without petitioning you to do them justice? and is not petitioning often
for exalting such that will not do justice without flattering petitions, and
then have but thanks, and seldom the thing done? and has not flattering
petitions and addresses exalted such as God has overthrown, that has not done
justice, nor will not do justice to the just, when oppressions and grievances
have been laid before them? the cry has been, It has not been a petition, it
has not been an address, because it has not been in the Worlds method and
form; therefore the oppressed shall not have justice done to them, which ought
according to justice and equity, when the thing is made known unto you in the
simplicity and innocence, without flattering petitions and addresses, you ought
to do them justice, (for that end are you of the Nation chosen) if the
grievance to you be made known, else the grievance will lie upon you; if you do
approve your power and not abuse it, you will remove the grievances off you and
the Nation, which if you do not, God will overturn you by it; and if you will
set up a ministry, and own a ministry, let them be such as will keep the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the second Priesthood, without charge; for here are
our Names who are the witnesses of Christ Jesus, that he has disannulled the
Commandment that gave Tithes, and has ended the Priesthood that took them, and
we are witnesses for Christ Jesus against this Popish Antichristian Ministry
that takes them, who are of the Popes tribe, got up since the Apostles, with
their law and commands for Tithes (out of the power of God) which must be ended
and disanulled by the power of God, which are not of the tribe of Aaron, nor of
the tribe of Christ, for neither Christ nor the Apostles after they had
disanulled the commandment of God, never set up a command in the World after
that was disanulled, for to give the tenths to a minister; for the first
command was only to the Jews that gave Tithes, which Christ the everlasting
Priest denied, whom we confess ended, in whom ye live, who is our life; and
this is our Testimony given in to you, our faith stands in that power that
brings down the mountains, and exalts the valleys, and lays them down
with the valleys which are grown to be mountains; and thus does God overturn by
his power and arm all transgressors.

REbecca Havens Mary Tili Joan Johnson Mary Catchpool Mary Clark Mary R^lph
Judith Tomblin Dorothy Crisp Anna Cook Elizabeth Crisp Anne Humphery Alice
Parnel Elizabeth Garlen Mary Turner Hannah Ham Mary Love Mary Lucas Rebecca
Lucas Elizabeth Lucas Lydia Chitrum Lydia Read Mary Williams elder Mary
Williams Mary Gibson Sarah Lonskin Mary Cook Elizabeth Rolph Sarah Banning
Elizabeth Godwood Sarah Reynolds Susan Swan Mary Reeve Elizabeth Overel Hester
Potter Margret Bray Elizabeth Sanders Elizabeth Selly Susan Belsher Katheren
Lamb Margret Gray Sarah Osburn Sarah Luke Mary Middleton Johannah Lamb
Elizabeth Rice Abigael Ludkin Elizabeth Gibson Ellen Midleton Mary Hadly Mary
Llyod Mary Ansel Elizabeth Langly Anne Wethered Mary Steddal Margret Ball Sarah
Chandler elder Sarah Chandler Elizabeth Green Alice condol Susan Crumplin Grace
Reynolds Alice Gorlyn Susan Cockeril Emlin Wire Mary Bliant Mary Petfeild Anne
Taylcot Mary Danks Mary Grant Sarah Grant Anne Langly Jone Desborrow Anne
Stamage Mary Renolds Mary Renolds Susan Pateradg Sarah Hatcher Anne Keys
Hester Haward Hester Haward Eliz. Till Jane Banks Margret Banks Ellen Palmer
Mary Wandewel Grace marson Rebecca Hodson Margret Christmas Mary Dagnet Anne
Cookwith Bridget Ball Anne Clark Anne Clark Sarah Clark Mary Stampford Mary
Stampford Mary Boocher Eliz. Westrop Eliz. mascal Christian Burch Martha Went
Eliz. Gilman Tomasin Warner Eliz. Hospit Grace Dersly Judith Shortland Mary
Allen Mary Cream Frances Cakebread Elizabeth Simmons Margret Lenlce Mary Rolph
Dennis miller Ellin Hoy Jone Barker Jane Cakebroad Susan Spark Margret Web
Cordala Symonds Margret Ludgater Martha Bawrel Martha Harp Anne Green Tasse
Hulback Mary michel Susan Halls Eliz. Tober Sarah Burch Vnes Lynly Joan Symonds
Sarah White Susan Vpsheard Faith Walker Margret Randen Eliz. Howlet Jane
Pledger Eliz. Freeborn Anne Alword Mary Ward Eliz Fuller Ellen Nicklas Martha
Pettet Martha Baker Frances Symonds Eliz. Wenfel Elizabeth Harrington Judeth
Bretton Mary Harrington Elizabeth Harrington Katherine Harrington Dorothy
Gallifants Sarah Scot Anne Coote Anne Abrams Eliz. Sparrow Judeth Treson Grace
Morly Eliz. Reynolds Anne Green Eliz. Heningham Martha Green Hannah Isack Grace
Christmas Eliz. Hannick Rebecca Savel Anne Sach Susan Jarvis Eliz. Abrams Alice
Collison Martha Sowel Martha Beadle Jane Pryar Kathern Isack Anne Morly Eliz.
Morly Joan Barns Eliz. Isack Alice Norden Sarah Norden Margret Coppin Dorothy
Martin Mary Hinningham Dorothy King Jane Walker Margret Cant Eliz. Jayd Margret
Bassom Tomasin Bassom Eliz. Bassom Eliz. Carter Ruth French Margret Brag Eliz.
King Frances moles Mary maning Katherin Stow Margret Hat Anne Web Angellica
Nicholson Mary Nicholas Joan Amy Alice Bowls Mary Carter Mary Emery Grace
Hammant Matthew Hudson Rose Bridge Rose French Mary Ganner Rose Mole Eliz.
Knight Mary Hauchin Mary Bust Mary Colman Eliz. Gunner Rachel Wade Eliz.
Phillip Martha Ellis elder Martha Ellis Eliz. Peter Eliz. Kye Grace Fluck Grace
Coote Anne Reynolds Joan Jarvice Margret Clark Mary Crow Eliz. Body Anne Bridge
Eliz. Bridge Mary Bridge Judeth Smith Margret Bridge Anne Hales Mary Innevere Mary
Shepy Jane Fann Ellen Eve Jane Eve Elizabeth Perry Margret Perry Eliz. Elton
Frances Piggot Mary Eve Anne Eve Frances Piggot Ellen Morral Anne Haddock Mary
Jother Ellen Gunn Sarah Gunn Ellen Philbrown Mary Coote Mary Amie Priscilla
Churchman Grace Day Susan Adam Margret Zuson Elizabeth Cole Sarah Ambros
Margret Lanworth Jane Cakebread Mary Allen Margret Allen Mercy Baker Mary Smith
Sarah Ambros Phillip Eve Sarah Overal Eliz. Guion Eliz Thirgood Judeth Guyon
Mary Harvy Mary Filbrick Elizabeth Guyon Ann Wright Priscilla Ame Eliz. Sutton.
Mary Guyon Jane Potter Dorothy Jepps Elizabeth Eynon Anne Haywood Susan
Chitcock Margret Huntsman Sarah Drake Barbara Coster Sarah Guyon Anne Cage Mary
Norton Ellen Ambros Anne Adams Margret Hayard Mary Cockerton Mary Barker Martha
Tillingham Eliz. Matthew Hannah Hallibread Anne Norton Anne Blanchfeild Susan
Dynes Martha Danbe Mary Ludgater Margret Gray Susan Cooper Eliz. Ludgater Mary
Bowman Martha Smith Martha Pease Susan Sparrow Eliz. Sparrow Mary Winterflood
Hannah Saunders Hannah Saunders Sarah Cadney Eliz. Aylet Mary Bourn Judith
Quilter Mary Bradey Hannah Lake Margret Child Susan Chapman Anne Islands Jane
Bigny Hannah Ostler Eliz. Jolly Alice King Eliz. Larrance Rachel mayes Mary
Lawrance Sarah Lawrance Anne Philbeck Mary Lines Katheren Gardner Margret Ebbs
Prudence Tuely Mary Gilman Mary Bennet Anne Whitlock Anne Read Margret Allen
Mary Hubbert Sarah Formon Alice Die Margret Took Mary Jary Dinah Adams Mary
Woodward Alice Cock Eliz. Gould Eliz. Barton Ishel Barnard Eliz. Kemp Alice
Bradshaw Kathern Bull (...) Pice Mary Priest Eliz. Waller Eliz. Priest Eliz.
Burton Eliz. Carter Mary Malton Agnus Haselwood Mary Whitworth Katheren Fenn
Martha Maulton Eliz. Good Eliz. Hubbeard Mary Rolph Mary Weeks Anne Bregster
Dorothy Ward Frances Clements Elizabeth Paterson Amy Pardin Eliza. Smith Eliz.
King Mary Durrant Ann Bacon Anne Tackster Eliz. Ransum Eliz Huggen Eliz. Miller
Anne King Eliz. Brown Susan Brown Frances Chamberlain Anne Horn Anne Swan
Katheren Scarling Eliz Cock Susan Smith Jone Bullin Susan Gill Martha Breese
Bridget Barret Martha Barret Amy Bonnard Eliz. Allen Anne Allen Faith Wolf Mary
Cousen Mary moulton Eliz. Gibson Margret Spooner Martha Smith Martha Allen
Elizabeth Brody Eliz. Roper Alice Leada Christian Brody Jane Pollard Jone
Jeffery Sarah Lawrance Jone Salman Martha Hawkins Anne Hawkins Jane Hollie Mary
Rettall Ellen Nonne Anne French Hannah Ward Eliz. Hunt Ann Walton Anne Potter
Joan Hawes Frances Posford Johannah Codlin Sarah Hawes Katheren Tailor Susan
Allen Susan Lamb Christian Pettet Mary Jennex Rachel Sadler Susan Roberson
Katheren Ransom Ellen Spark Mary Peaches Frances Goodwin Frances Bond Ann
Gayford Margret Stebbing Rose Parker Grace Adams Martha Heath Martha Gorbul
Alice Colvil Eliz. Bantock Johanna Ridlesdale Eliz. Kettel Anne Brag Margret
Prick Grace Farden Eliz. Shipman Anne Crosbee Anne Cable Alice White Fran. Hill
Mary Boorn Priscilla David Margret Goddard Mary Barnes Mary Coote Hester Wood
Christian Pettet Sarah Stedman Susan Kerrington Katheren Baker Martha Dikes
Mary King Mary Peche Sarah Norton Mary Scot Eliz. Stafford Susan Driver Alice
morphew Susan Go^dsmith Anne Weeks Faith Gorbul Anne Trundle Eliz. Bautock
Sarah Kettel elder Eliz. Dixon Hannah Wait Susan Clark Abigael Smy Anne Bacon
Eliz. Crosbee Eliz Baily Alice Talwin Grace Bourrowgh Anne Wateridg Alice Wily
Anne Prentice Barbara Gardner Jane Nutial Mary Yardly. Margret Middledich Mary
Burlingham Susan Kerrington Sarah Godwood Anne Jay Anne Root Eliz. Pinson
Dorothy King Bridget Driver Eliz. Driver Dinah Friar Jean Heard Anne Warn Eliz.
Turner Mary Turner Christian Bundish Margret Bines Sarah Kettal Anne Ferriar
Margery Bullock Grace Farden Hester Farthing Mary Phright Eliz Dunmore Alice
Simon Grace Borough Anne Bourrough Thamar Alderidg Susan Wyly Mary Turpen Mary
Bridges Susan Cook Anne Ezbel Mary midledick Katherine Sadler Eliz. Edwards
Johanna Cook Eliz. Prick Anne Froward Sarah Friar Susan Pallen Rose Gates Anne
Gough Susan Rolph Frances Gardner Ruth Gorbul Alice Pears Mary Gorbul Frances
Smith Sarah Hawes Anne Page Tomasin Bennington Katherine Lame Margret Shenman
Eliz. Akis Margret Candler Anne Dux Katherine Sawer Margret Tovel Sarah Cross
Sarah man Mary Virtue Eliz. Hayle Kinborrow Libbies Anne Tattle Eliz. Churchman
Eliz. Ross Cisly Leech Frances Ribbons Mary Tailor Eliz. Skinner Jone Britewel
Abigal Camplin Margret Cole Margret Posford Eliz. Akers
ESSEX.
Kathern Willis Katharine Seywell Martha Crossier Mary Bernerd Rebecca Sparling
Mary marriage Sarah Sparkling Sarah Bott Sarah Bott Sarah Belsham Anne Barker
Martha Portway Mary Choppin Anne Pasival Susanna Cut Dary Bowtel Eliz. Foster
Rebecca Davy Frances Quilter Mary Fordham Mary Foster Eliz. Crow Jane Petchey
Rebecca Davy Jone Skillingham Eliz. Crow Mary Smith Mary Crosner Ellinor Bugby
Hannah Scooling Mary Bailey Mary Evah Mary Byat Sarah Palmer Alice Levite Alice
Levite Margret Bret Mary Special Rebecca Emsden Eliz. Batt Amy Special Mary
Lark Hannah Choppin Priscilla Jarvis Anne Tyler Dianah Noake; Katharine Jarvis
Anne Child Hannah Lark
CAMBRIG-SHIRE and ISLE of ELY.
Widow matthews Widow Prior Widow Cole Widow Norris Widow Presson Widow Ashton
Widow Purkinson Widow Snesby Widow Royston Widow Pool Widow Steevens Widow
morlin Widow Beeton Widow Cock Widow Canham Widow Bonner Widow Lightfoot Widow
Sowrsby Widow Sparrow Widow Hattley Anne Crabb Anne Hawks Grace Folbig Eliz.
Asplan Rebecca Berry Eliz Nunn Eliz. Kater Mary Place Anne Love Margret Hurt.
Martha Dorman Margret Pain Sarah Drury Anne Crabb Susan Wilkinson Eliz. Easy
Martha Johnson Bridget Peachey Margret Vpin Eliz. Ewers Eliz Thorrowgood Emm
Rose Anne Watts Bridget Blow Anne Beech Eliz. Blinks Anne Forster, sen. Anne
Forster, jun. Mary Salmon, sen. Mary Salmon, jun. Susan Feast Hannah mynit
Margret Vipence Sarah Portis Margret Right Mary Vipence Eliz. mace Eliz. mills
Mary Grown Alice Winfield Hannah mynit Alice Jeffe
Parts of Huntington
Judith Kidson Alice Ellington Jone Aubery Anne Ellington Eliz. Ellington Eliz.
Goules Sarah Goules Rose Goodcheap Jone Hills Mary Jellings Mary Nixon Ellen
Ingram Jane Burgis Hester Ingram Mary Ingram Eliz. Parnel Eliz. Patison Eliz.
Coxon Anne Wright Eliz. Nursed Anne Wooter Alice Austler Mary Parnel Anne
^ngram Phebe Nicholson Judah Thompson Frances D^ury Thomison Bitterny Anne
Sammon Luce Field Anne Been Judah Letchworth Mary Love Deborah Godfrey Mary
Woods Margret Sulman Mary Godfrey Mary Royce Jone Yeats Anne Harbor Anne
Roberts Anne Morlin Eliz. Peace Thommison Blackley Eliz. Phiphers Grace Cole
Anne Cole Eliz. Berry Anne Norris Eliz. Norris Mary Norris Jane Jobson Mary
Bates Alice Ashon Jane Wright Anne Seagar Mary Marshal Martha Pryor Susan Tynge
Jane Smith, elder Jane Smith, young. Anne Ratford Eliz. Pepper Marget Morlin
Emm Morlin Amy Wingfield Anne Frizby Clemment Whisson Marget Presson Edith
Parkinson Bridget Hilton Ellenor Allen
BERK-SHIRE, HAMP-SHIRE, and WILT-SHIRE.
To the Parliament of England, etc. For them to do Justice, and to take off the
unjust oppression of Tithes that was never commanded of God.
THE Priests that sues our Friends up in Courts for Tithes, said, They could
not pay the Protector his Tenths, who took the Tenths of the Tenths, except
they had their Tenths, and that was their excuse; and therefore they sued us in
the Protectors name, and have prisoned our Brethren to death, and drove away
almost all their goods they had. The Pope took the Tenths of the Tenths the
King took the Tenths of the Tenths, the Protector took the Tenths of the
Tenths, which have been overthrown before you, which has taken the Tenths of
the Tenths from the Priests, which wrestled it out of the Popes hands, which
the Priests does no work for us of whom they take the Tenths, and keep us in
the Ninths; and so they cannot say we are covetous, that do not pay them Tithes
that do no work for us, and we never set them at work, nor hires them; Now if
you take the Tenths of the Tenths, do ye walk out of the steps of the Pope,
King or Protector in that? And therefore we say, all those things must be
broken down by the power of the Lord, which will overturn Pope and his Tenths
of Tenths, and overthrow his Ministers, and the takers of them before you: Come
into a Reformed Church, as it was amongst the Apostles, ye must deny the
commands of men that gave Tithes, before you come to the Church in God the
pillar and ground of truth, that disannuls the Commands of God that gives
Tithes: And Christ did provide another maintenance for his Ministers and
Disciples then Tithes, and did not send them to the Storehouse for to take the
Tenths, though the Jews Law was standing, and the Priests that took Tenths
before Christ was offered up, and while that Law was standing, Priests was
standing, and his maintenance the Tenths, and when that Law was changed, the
Priesthood was changed, and the commandment disannulled that gave Tenths, and
they that came into that that ended the Law, and changed the Priesthood, and
disannulled the commandment, came into Christ the everlasting Priesthood and
Covenant, of which we are into the Election before the World began, and here
underwritten are our names that do testify against the oppression of Tithes,
and they that have set them up, and held them up since the days of the
Apostles, and that Law and Church; for the true Church suffered in the
Primitive times by that Priesthood that took Tithes for bearing their Testimony
against the Priesthood that took Tithes, that the commandment was disannulled,
and that Law was changed by which it was made, and the Priesthood was changed
also, and so he was to cease, so that Priesthood was of no force, nor Law that
was made, nor commandment that gave them Tithes; And so by that Priesthood that
had the form of godliness and not the power, by such the true Church and the
Apostles suffered, as we now, by a false Antichristian Priesthood, and a false
Law, and a Commandment set up by the false Antichristian apostatized
Christians, since the days of the Apostles, since the true Church fled into
the Wilderness, has the false Church upon the Beast set them up, by whom the
blood of the Martyrs, Prophets and Saints have been drunk, and the witnesses
slain; but the true Church is coming out of the Wilderness again, and the Beast
and the false prophet cast alive into the lake of fire, and the Judgment of the
great Whore is come, the false church; The Lamb, the Saints shall have the
victory, the Lamb, the Bride is known again, preparing for her husbands coming
out of the Wilderness, and the daughters of Abraham are meeting of her, who
gives in their Testimony against this oppressive Church, Ministry and
maintenance, and their Testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ to reign, and that
the everlasting Gospel is to be preached again to all Kindreds, Nations,
Tongues and People, and Tithes shall be taken away and denied by them who are
come into the power of God; the Gospel is the power of God which ends men's
commandments that gives Tithes, as well as the Commandment of God; Tithes were
thrown down by the power of God witnessed by the Apostles, though once a
Command of God, and since their days set up by the commands of men, and must
be thrown down again by the power of God which never changes, and the
Christians suffered by the Jewish Priesthood that took Tithes in the days of
the Apostles; so the Jews inward suffered by the Jews outward since the days
of the Apostles, in the primitive times has the true Christians suffered by
the false Christians, for not paying them tithes, who have set up tithes not by
the Command of God, neither is the Priesthood made by the Law of God that takes
Tithes, for that Priesthood which took Tithes was made by the Law, and they
were not called Ministers of the Gospel, but was made by him who ended the Law,
and the Priesthood by which the Law made, and disannulled the Command that gave
them, and this the Apostle witnessed the Ministers of the Gospel, and there was
never no Priesthood that took Tithes who was made by the Law of God, but what
was in the time of the Law, in the time of the War, which Law Christ ends, and
takes away the occasion of the War; this Priesthood which takes Tithes now,
made by Colleges of men, they are neither made by the Law nor Ministers of the
Gospel, but by the inventions of men; So we in the power of the Lord God deny
them.

ANne Curtis Isabel Goddard Anne Hat Eliz. Wright Anne Sharp Jone Dee Anne
Creed Hannah Miles Sarah Lambull Mary Smith Anne Harrison Jone Wilsbee Ellin
Burly Mary Erberry Mary Emerton Mary Fellows Alice Anger Alice East Anne
Weedon Tomsen Chapman Eliz. Bird J^n^ Hussy A^^^ ^urnel H^nna^ W^bb Marge^y
R^^hardson E^iz. ^^^^bridge Margret Whithart Mary matthews Mary Curtis Margret
mapelton Rachel Coap Amee Bail Mary Stanclife Frances Kent Hannah Richbill
Margret Richbill Eliz. mideltun Hannah Emertun Castle Bishop Anne Bartholm
Briget Smith Anne Ball Anne Wigg Martha Hat Anne South Mary Dean Grace marlow
Mary Ren Sarah Binfield Grace Wix Marth. Nobes Eliz. Dany Anne True Mary Wyron
Jane Cooper Margret Redford Eliz. Rason Mary Scotton Frances N^sh Ellin Cook
Alice Hoompheryes Eliz. Aldridge Frances Barret Vrsula Keand Eliz. Webb Mary
Philpot Jane Philpot Jone moth Alice Boarnes Mary Rickman Jone Allud Susanna
Philpot Eliz. Allud Mary Allud Jone Hancocke Eliz. Forde Mary Rummey Anne
Hodson Eliz. Joyce Anne Rawlens Grace Beacham Dowance Goodall Jone Sawyer Jone
Rummey Mary Smith Eliz. Steel Alice Pocock Anne Slade Dorothy Marks Anne Spicer
Mattha Weston Dorothy Austel Mary Cracy Ellinor Hathens Hannah Goddard Anne
Good Anne Dod Jone Reat Lucy Cheaker Katherine Sadler Sarah Alfield Eliz.
Normanton Eliz. Rance Eliz. Gibbs Jone Avenel Sarah Osgood Margret Hill Judah
Capon Anne Champe Vrsula Clarke Ruth S^ane Mary Oats Mary Ozgood Dorothy
Blackberry Susanna Hill Elizabeth Ogborne Emm Rance Margaret Rotten Jone Rotten
Sarah Harrisson Mary Benham Judah Hayes Anne Holloway Katherine Styles
Elizabeth Morrell Sarah Austell Margery Rich Elizabeth Hobbs Anne Hind Anne
Sheerewood Anne Wise Jane Kible Sarah Rusell Elizabeth Jarvis Anne Lundon
Ellinor Hide Mary Slade Margaret Fulbrook Anne Wix Bridget Carve Jane Duckeat
Agnes Slade Elizabeth Keat Elizabeth Smith Elizabeth Belinger Jane Stevens Anne
Malam Mary Malam Ruth Hill Anne Hill Sarah Malam Ellinor Higes Mary Tockar Mary
Slade Mary Tocker Ellinor Tocker Margaret Befen Jane Cock Elizabeth Befen
Elizabeth Coeborne Amy Samson Florence Westel Jone Mivol Margery Ellet
Elizabeth Lamb Anne Hall Elizabeth Pearson Anne Keep Anne Bailey Jone Smart
Anne Fowler Hellena Menchen Emm Far Christian Waterhouse Elizabeth Orchard
J^anna Waldren Vrsula Hobes Amee Sampson Jone Hedges Mary Gill Jone Stilwell
Katherine Valler Elizabeth Valler Mary Mills Katherine Jess^p Jane Hunt Tomisin
Streeter Anne Hunt Elizabeth Blackm^n Anne Worlidge Frances Worlidge Mary
Worlidge, sen. Mary Worlidge, jun. Jane Streeter Margaret Booker Elizabeth
Hewet Eliz. Streeter, jun. Sarah Biddle Jone Biddle Jone Hockley Alice Turner
Jone Tribe Jone Neath Katherine Neave Sarah Kempe Jone Wake Charity Nightingale
Joane Marshall Mary Bailey Mary Tukes Mary Burges Anne Dawes Anne Aslett Frances
Smith Eliz. Simons Anne March Jone Slye Elizabeth Gates Jone Gates Elizabeth
Read Anne Bullock Jone Carrell Anne Bazell Jone Wake Jone Beacham Sarah
Murford Parnell Cropp Elizabeth Earl Elizabeth Carter Grace Senex Anne
Rainsted Susanna Curtis Anne P^tter Eliz. Streeter Mary Tongs Barbary Willis
Anne Davis Tomisin Blinston Jone Buckett Jone Buckland Ellinor Hawkins Margery
Barger Eliz. Carter, sen. Eliz. Carter, jun. Honor Antram Mary Bodicott
Magdalen Clearke Mary Mathewes Frances Chaplin Elizabeth Penny Edith Tyzard
Vrsula Tugwell Mary Cannons Elizabeth Cole Vrsula Hersent Ellinor Embree
Susanna Hersent Deborah Dornford Sarah Hersent Susanna Kiblewait Hester Burges
Mary Hickman Jone Whithead Jone Manners Rebecka Manners Dorothy Rutter, jur.
Rebecka Ennus Avis Ford Eliz. Chapman Dorothy Rutter, sen. Mary Lun Eliz. Stent
Johanna Austin Rebecka Reeves Sa^ah Jenings Mary Marsters Alice Monday Eliz.
Green Avis Cheek Anne Whithorne Eliz. Lun Lettis Loes Jone Booker Jone Buckin
Eliz. Jenkins^n Mary Walter Anne Reeves Eliz. Penford Barbery Mooren Margery
Barf^^t Eliz. Sewett Mary White Anne Weston Jone Smart Anne Cleverly Mary
Knight, sen. Mary Knight, jun. Anne Flood Anne Coomes Katherine Haines Anne R^w
Lettis Paice Jone Wigg Anne Wigg Anne Wigg Ma^y Pace Jone Terry Jone Appleton
Ruth Hayman Jone Weight Marg. Stockwell Katherine Tees Fran. Bidlecom Priscila
Mosely Winifred Newman Grace Newman Jane Bishop Rebecka H^arn Elizabeth Day
Alice Denman J^ne Barnes Jane Newman Anne White Anne Read Elizabeth Stocks
Alice Dyer, sen. Margaret Neat Jane Humphry Mary Biller Margaret West Mary
Lovegrove Dorothy Bath Jane Gouldney Jone Hulbert Sarah Bailey Jone Ha^coord
Anne Hibberd Mary Duke Susanna Godby Margaret Star Hester Bay^y Ma^gery
Langfier Anne Jones Alice Dyer, junior Marje^y Wastfield Margaret Hacman Jane
Self Jone Stevens Mary Stevens Elizabeth Phelpes Sarah Paradise Meliar Stevens
Anne Am^r, senior Amy Amor Mary Whitbread Alice Bartlet Jane Whittacre Margery
Cool Marg. Edwards Mary Brice Anne Mereweather Kath. Mereweather Katherine
Luffe Sarah Luffe Jane Huddin Anne Line Ma^y Chivers Ellinor Moxham Jone Moxham
Jone Gain Susan Shell Elizabeth Barloe Elizabeth Andros Ma^y Line Frances
Beacher Ellinor Noyes Jone Hudden Susan Shell Margaret Fishlake Mary Bartlet
Mary Leonard Sarah North Anne Tucker Mary Cool Margery Cool Margery Shell
Millicent Shell Susan Shell, senior Mary Wythers Susan Wythers Avice Andros
Mary Davye Alice Player Anne Merimouth Cicily Tailor Elizabeth Briant Anne
Tibbols Judith Jones Christian Tyler Ellinor Stevens Margery Estmeade Deborah
James Elizabeth Tyler Melior Rily Elizabeth Wastfield Margery Cawley Jane Call
Susan Call Susanna James Jone Hale Frances Smith Margery Noyes Jone Baker
Susan Cloud Magaret Deck Anne James Elizabeth Bolten Martha Leader Mary Gale
Jone Keepin^ Ellinor Bence Susanna Mercer Anne Bence Jane Jennings Elizabeth
Henley Anne Read Elizabeth Read Elizabeth Ethridge Mary Hobbs Mary Hinton Mary
Read Anne Read Mary Bencister Mary Milledge Mary Manners Mary Crockers Anne
Harris Elizabeth Hobbs Deborah Daniell Hester Matravers Margaret Hand Jane
Potter Jone Potter Anne Hand Sarah Moody Mary Husday Mary Matravers Elizabeth
Matravers Dorcas Lord Ellinor Woodam Eliz. Wallis, junior Sarah Hathway
Elizabeth Bridgman Elizabeth Wallis Susanna Paradise Anne Bristow Elizabeth
Brown Hester Brown Jeannes Dowse Mary Andros Jane Andros Elizabeth Bond Vrsula
Allins Jane Beal, senior Anne Matravers Abigal Matravers Mary Matravers Jone
Bushel Hester Hand Bridget Reeve Elizabeth Stanmore Sarah Stanmore Abigal
Stanmore Sarah Clement Jane Bollin Susanna Bollin Mary Paradise Christian Aust
Alice Phelpes Anne Phelpes Elizabeth Phelpes Ma^y Edwards Jone Foord Elizabeth
Husdy Margaret Barret Elizabeth Allins Mary Allins Jane Beale Sarah Beale Sarah
Edwards Jone Woodman Martha Edwards Elizabeth Holbrook Jone Mereweather Jone
Frand Katherine Ludwell Elizabeth Boddy Susannah Blanford Anne Blanford
Katherine Blanford Hellen Beathop Alice Blanford Marg. Mereweather Jane Benham
Sarah Ingram Dorothy Davis Bridget Fidshall Bridget Bailey Anne Hope Jane May
Jone Hollaway Anne Jacklyne Jone Jacklyne Elizabeth Gouldny Margaret Vyner Anne
Swanberry Mary Bredmer Jane Air Elizabeth Pinchen Sarah Symson Elizabeth
Flower Grace Flower Edith Doddim^eade Annabel Butler Sarah Turner Jane Gibbes
Mary Gibbes Susanna Butler Elizabeth Davis Jane Rickets Jone White Jane Pinchin
Margaret Green Anne Green Elizabeth Wyar Susanna Flower Jone White; junior
Jone Symson Sibella Gibbons Elizabeth West Jane Gibbons Elizabeth Flower Jane
Flower Ellinor Flower Elizabeth Salway Margery Dobby Elizabeth Wyar, jun.
Sibbella Gibbons, jun. Jone Foot Cicella Little Jane Pearce Rebecka Little
Sibilla Foot Jone Foot, junior Jane West Agnes Castle Jane Foot Mary Stone Mary
Foord Jone Kelson Mary Newman Elizabeth Batten Anne Batten Edith Awdry Sarah
Batten Millicent Castlyn Sarah Parsens Mary White Jone Hatchet Elizabeth Bull
Silvester Cave Rebecca Phelpes Margaret Press Margaret Weeks Joanes Wythers
Perrin Self Anne Walton Margaret Rason Anne Butler Frances Greenhill Jane
Whatley Kinbury Air Jone Tucker Susan Hall Ma^y Adlam Jane Hallis Jone Adlam
Mary Adlam Margaret Gawen Elizabeth Swetland Marg. Gawen, junior Mary Bailey
Ellinor Widows Margery Willis Jane Wilton Rebecca Bailey Elizabeth Webb Vrsula
Webb Bridget Webb Alice Webb Anne Webb Jane Webb Cicilla Harris Katherine
Trewman Mary Higgins Margaret Barnard Jane Ryly Alice Smith Jane Richman Sarah
Barnes Lucy Sheppard Eliz. Barnes Elizabeth Hood Jone Angel Sarah Gale Margery
Trewman Margaret Hawkins Sarah Gingell Mary Burch Ma y Baker Eliz. Barret Mary
Fry Ellinor Langley Susanna Ady Frances Ferris Mary Ferris Sarah Swane Margaret
Gale Mary Box Mary Gale Mary Bishop Anne Tyler Grace Tyler Grace Saltar Susanna
Ferris Genavera Summers Elizabeth Laufier Jone Roggers Margaret Scot Anna
Rogers Anna Whood Elizabeth Rogers Mary Amor Mary Smith Jane Few Cicilla
Seeven^ Jone Shelly Margery Shelly Martha Smith Jane Mythers Grace Francis
Susanna Harrison Onner Higgins Elizabeth Eyres Catherine Tyler Mary Woodward
Anne Long Mary Parradice Dorothy Rawlings Alice Rawlings Mary Nicholls Anne
Guy Mary Line Mary Hollis Mary Bradman Margaret Summers Jone Sloper Mary Swayne
Susannah Dyer Margery Webb Jane Pearce Jone Webb Anne Mundy Jane B^azer Bridget
Hitchcock Lucy Laurence Hannah Williams Abigal Smi^h Ma^y Laurence Margaret
Greenaway Martha Laurence Margery Clark Anne Kingsman Sarah Crabb Mary Bunn
Alice Kinsman Anne Kinsman Jone Hancock Mary Sterry Martha Scealy Elizabeth
Mundy Mary Hathaway Jane Barret Lucy Lamb Jone Sealey Jane Smith Mary Hadnam
Rebeccah Lamb Anne Mabbet Faith Box Mary Box Eliz. Smith Kearsey Sparrow
Ruth Kington Mary D^eke Katherine Hathway Alice Pallet Mary Gale Sarah Player
Abigall Barrett Jone Smart Mary Huchins Grace Huckins Hester Brown Joice
Jaques Elizabeth Holbrow Jone Packer Katherine Atkins Mary Winckworth Anne
Atkins Jone Huckins Deborah Hort Elizabeth Pounter Jone Hort Mary Punter Mary
Edwards Grace Hort Mary Power Mary Shingells Prudence Punter Jone Beak
Margaret Sparrow Margery Miles Sarah Bond Jane Whiteing Anne Sergean^ Deborah
Steeven Sarah Stammon Margaret Wimblet Margaret Gardner J5ne Warman Rose Warman
Jone Hicks Dorothy Burg Dorothy Woulton Eliz. Sanders Jone Wimblet Mary Morse
Jone Morse, jun. Mary Morse Alice Woodward Anne Oately Anne Waulton Alice
Gutterige Jone Bath Jone Morse, wid. Anne Sanders
SUMMERSET-SHIRE
We whose Names are here underwritten, being by the Light of Christ entered
into the New Covenant, and seeing the Unjustnesse of Tithes do witness, and
testify against them, and the great Oppression by them; having hereunto
subscribed our Names.

ELizabeth Addams Margaret Ley Jone R^dgers Mary Lang Hanna Guire Anne Coburne
Jane Smith Ellinor Dean Anne King Frances Leveret Alice Chessicke Jone Day Mary
Coggen Agnes Bennet Bazell Wilmunton Mary Wornell Anne Thecher Elizabeth Hodges
Sarah King Mary Wilmunton Frances Bishop Jone Wilmington Mary Starr Hester
George Sarah Goodson Jone Loscome Rachell Phillips Hanna Savage Christian
Waterman Mary Hurford Sarah Marten Alice Bear Jone Browning Margaret Browning
Mary Browning Dorothy Clace Jone Hopkins Elizabeth Munden Mary Hide Mary Hide,
junior Dorothy Brook Anne Swetman Dorothy Parsons Tomisin Parsons Jone Heart
Jone Thecher Elizabeth Sampson Hester Long Elizabeth Mores Jone Allen Ellinor
Pranket Avis Stage Alice Quantick Elizabeth Humphry Anne Pittard Rose Pittard
Christian Lace Maudlen Heart Bridget Bishop Philip Pittard Dorothy Fevor Mary
Addams Dorothy Bicknell Frances Addams Frances Lockier Mary Winsor Jone Winsor
Winifred Winsor Susan Warfield Susan Budd Elizabeth Heart Jone Hutchens Jane
Hutchens Margaret Willet Margaret Jacob Alice Turner Vrsula Kelloway Elizabeth
Thecher Jone Heart Anne Heart Jone Olice Elizabeth Swetman Julian Coggen Mary
Wilmington Alice Wilmington Sarah Starr Grace Beaton Dorothy Chivers Grace
Pidle Anne Swetman, jun. Frances Estmont Edeth Corpe Jone Bull Frances Andrews
Susan Leveret Thomaze Bennet Anne Beaton Margaret Down Mary Creese Mary Long
E^^m Roman Mary T^^acher Mary Stev^ns Elizabeth Oldaies Lucie Travers Ma^y
Langdon, jun. Debora Higdon Sarah Janes Sarah Batt Edith Batt Agnis Tylor Anna
Tylor Mary Tylor Anne Gundry Elizabeth Wa^s Jone Wats Hanna Porch Mary Gundry
Margaret Gundry Lydia Gundry Agness Hillier Agness Barrat Jone Pitman Elizabeth
Masters Mary Lyd^ Jone Bacon Elizabeth Mallet Agnis Jones Agnis D^y Mary
Walliss Jone Lotsham Anne Nicholas Mary Tailor Julian Shephard Elizabeth
Shephard Jone Metford Jone Mabson Abigal Martyn Joyce Mabson Precilla Gapper
Margaret Pille Mary Moore Dorothy Moore Mary Piper Judeth Wottis Ma^y Lambert
Anne Board Mary Board Hanna Board Alice Oram Jone Pavior Mary Pinkerd Jone Cook
Ma^y Cook Alice Cook Anne Sampson Ellinor Pomury Anne Huchens Edeth Huchens
Agath Huchens Martha Gibbs Jone Cole Ellinor Gane Amee Sage Agnis Sage
Elizabeth Day Elizabeth Wickham Bridget Nash Mary Samborne Anne Melles Sara
Green Jone Allen Ales Gane Wa borogh Short Garteret Gane Christian Frances
Jone Frances Charity Hill Elizabeth Veal Anne Hill Anne Chilton Susanna Clement
Margaret Boulter Sarah Boulter Anne Minchen Anne Jones Jone Maws^ll Susannah
Goslet Susannah Poope Elizabeth Poope Alice Hiscox Anne Nash Abigall Nash Jane
Pinker Judeth Daniell Jone Daniell Jone Pearce Sarah Pearce Anne Gottell
Susannah Pearce Jone Small Margery Radford Ellinor Dogget Elizabeth Sturedge
Mary Cannons Mary Lusbury Jone Douting Sarah Lediat Elinor Biggs Susannah Jones
Susannah Landsdon Jone Doggett Alice Skidm^re Anne Collins Sarah Sargant
Rebecca Scrine Jane Morle Elizabeth Stockman Mary Emsbury Sarah Morley Jane
Murford Elizabeth Evins Hanna Collins Alice Collins Mary Down Sarah Reed Anne
Candell Elizabeth Browning Joice Cowling Rebecca Cowling Precilla Rowlings
Precilla Allin Alice Bennat Martha Warden Eliz. Daniell Anne Brock Mary Hasell
Eliz. Ba^son Elizabeth Price Frances Batson Mary Jones Ruth Brock Margaret
Baugh Eliz. Milkens Mabell Wastfild Mary Hicks Anne Giller^ Jane Bail Abigal
Selwood Susanna Ba^nes Ellinor Daniell Rachell Jobbins Alice Withey Kather.
Withey Anne Lock, sen. Elizabeth Lock Anne Lock, jun Anne Lambert Anne Jews
Mary Mapson Elice Hall Mary Bryan Vstul Plumly Anne Fear Hannah Blemnan
Gartery Clothier Anne Preston Sibbil Stroad Mary White Rebeckah Gibbs Jone B
yan Esbell Stroad Dorothy Scot Dorothy Waters Mary Weeb Anne Rucke Mary Cosens
Eliz. Davis Mary Horwood Luce Rock Eliz. Wethyman Eliz. Stacy Alice Vinson
Eliz. Tucker Anne Marshall Anne Wilmote Eliz. Atkins Mary Pitts Anne Giles Mary
Giles Grace Giles Jone Giles Jone Salsbury Jone Stent Elizabeth Key
OXFORD.
We whose Names are underwritten, do here set our Hands against the Injustice
of Tithes, and long Oppression of them, which has been upheld contrary to
Christ Jesus, the everlasting High Priest, who is after the Order of
Melchizedeck, and not after the Order of Aaron, etc.

JAne Bettris Anne Tailor Eliz. White Eliz. Constable Eliz. Francklin Anna
Squier Ellen Seal Jone Hayward Anne Lankett Ann Lanket, jun Hester Mansill
Elinor King Hanna Pickering Mary Lo Elizabeth Lo Anne B^xe Martha Patrick
Anne Williard Mary Williard Eliz. Daken Anna Bettris Jone Lankett Rebecca
Lanket Mary Harris Ellen Huggins Jone Attley Anne Ryland Kath. Wheeler Alice
Stephens Susan Tailor Eliz. Digby Mary Busby Anne Carter Anne Stoe Joyce Bucher
Eliz. Watson Mary Busby, jun Eliz. Bulle Mary Hedges Margery Hedges Eliz.
Coutes Anne Marchell Jsabel Stapell Anne Cunington Eilz. Bager Eliz. Buttler
Eliz. Cruch Mary Harden Kath. Hichman Vrsula Hall Dyna Leaver Jone Prier
Bridget Coals Kath. Tarrent Jone Small Anne Cater Christian Martin Jone Gilpin
Hester Good Margaret Westly Jane Wittney Hester Good Allice Read Margaret
Hichman Emm Emett Frances Lavell Elizabeth Beast Mary Francklin Elizabeth Shadd
Alice West Elizabeth Larner Anne Brinckfeild Elizabeth Cole Katherine Strenth
Elizabeth Baker Margaret Baliss Dorothy Bennet Margaret Castle Anne Harris
Liddia Bayliss Frances Quatterman Jone Shepherd Josion Shepherd Eliz.
Sesheons Ann Sessions Elizabeth Hawkins Eddy Cripes Jone Seacole Anne Adams
Hester Harris Anne Nutt Maude Writon Grace Busby Elizabeth Watts Anne Barnes
Lettice Wrighton Jsbell Nicholls Anne Trepass Ellinor Elsritt D^ans Min Susanna
Bruise Bridgett Merry Elizabeth Cheires Anne Vpstone Ellinor Flecher Mary
Barrett Mary Flecher Ellen Flecher Mary Haughten Anne Haughten Alice Horn
Alice Coulling
BUCKINGHAM.
A remnant of the Lords handmaids in Buckingham-shire: Truly we cannot, whose
hearts are upright to the Lord, but join our testimony with our Brethren,
against the unjust Oppression of Tithes; and have with one consent our Hands
set, in the Power of God, to stand in the time of Trial, witnesses for the Lord
against the same.

ANne Sherwood Mary Britnall Martha Brown Constance Dearson Hester Nicholas
Alice King Jane Saverson Margaret Knight Susan Fa timore Ma^y Chalman Eliz.
Goodman Elizabeth Glidwell Alice Hall Mary King Eliz. Balding Susan Cleark Mary
Busby Eliz. Thornton Eliz. Cuningham Sarah Ansell Alice Milling Mary Groom
Elizabeth Glidwell Susan Mouse Mary Steel Jane Mark Martha Mably Anne
Buttifant Ma^y Breirly Anne Hunt Christian Bedford Margaret Marshall Susan
Hollis Hannah Glidwell Jone Vaugh Dorothy Robinson Anne Hicks Elizabeth Vessey
Martha Ansley Jane Woolrich Jane Dyons Elizabeth Tailor Anne Arnot Elinor
Dearson Elizabeth King Mary Glidwell Mary Kaindkin Katherine Steevens Rebecca
Deverick Anne King Dorothy King Hester Burridge Elizabeth Starling Mary White
Elizabeth Swelson Alice Hutton Rebecca Courston Constance Dearson Mary Arnot
Ruth Pingham Elizabeth Medien Mary Burkett Anne Parfert Jane Randel Mary
Reading Gulielmamaria Springet Martha Giger Mary Pennington Priscilla Hathorn
Anne Sweame Jane Pensen Anne Hersent Frances Mead Martha Spot Jone Dant Anne
Gibbions Elizabeth Cragg Mary Burket Rebecca Spott Anne Higgens Sarah Body
Ebizabeth Aldrige Mary Aldrige Martha Spot Ann Alding Dorothy Morete Elizabeth
Peck Sary Russel Mary Garret Sarah Russel Bridget Kibble Dorothy Moorer Judith
Alderidge Elizabeth B^tton Martha Bluck Katherine Saxton Faith Jusley Mary
Swayn Margaret Hathorn Jane Pussy Ruth Harwood Ellen Came Anne Cork Emery
Streeman Alice Cla ke Ellin Clark Jemine Brickwel Mary Rowell Susan Wheeler
Hary Batas Jsable Field Elizabeth Alford Katherine Kingham Sarah Fripe Mary
Winck^lls Johanna Cock Johanna Redman Anne Morley Annas Elliat Elizabeth
Sanders Elizabeth Rumsey Anne Air Jone Poufly Hannah Gay Sarah Shrimpton
Frances Rame Elizabeth Spyar Jane Turner Elizabeth Judensden Anne Steevens Anne
Spyer Martha Johens Sarah Fenner Jone Borrowes Phillichriste N^y Dorothy Lucas
Judith Goodwin Elizabeth Symcock Elizabeth Hampshire Mary Goodwin Mary Goodwin
Eliz. Littleboy Eliz. Stryar Eliz. Stryar Anne Hampshire Eliz. Shempton Eliz.
Shempton Mary Knight Eliz. Shrimpton Alice Turner Alice B^lshker Anne Cooper
J^ne Rosse Anne Bennet Ruth Airs Sarah Smyth Susan Gallant Jone Jorden Anne
Dorell Dorothy Rosse Winifret Cled^n Sarah Lamborn Dorothy Douden Mary Weaver
Katherine White Mary Besson Sarah Cosford Judith Belson Mary Hutchins^n Alice
Sliven Anne Baker Mary Crancknel Hannah Skidmore Susan Child Elinor Noy Mary
Goodwin Anne Sherwood Anne Harvy Eliz. Kellow Eliz. Austin Margaret Sterton
Susan Smith Jone Page Jone Underwood Mary Cooper Jone Cook Sarah Sutton Anne
Sutton Alice Brinckler Jane Cook Margaret Cook Susan Kendall Elizabeth Border
Mary Burdes Alice Wheeler Jone Larrith Eliz. Glidewell Susan Newman Eliz. Black
Margery Biggs Jane Brown Sarah Lamborn Martha Deacon Hester Weedon Judith
Johnson Ellinor Hawks Eliz. Davies Sarah Mortiner Jane Jones Mary Dean Eliz.
Kingham Anne S^ar Amey Streattin Katherine Venner Sarah Batt Elizabeth Grace
Susan Tombs Joyce Prentice Mary Pearce Mary Lucas Mary Lucas Alice Greeing
Susan Bedal Sarah Mortimur Alice Axtel Rachel Puatt Jone Davison Mary Hoar Jone
Ward Ellinor Dearbuck Eliz. Lockfeild Susan Todd Eliz. Pewtruce Sarah Brown
Martha Cruch Anne Trayer Martha Treacher Jone Abey Elizabeth Science Margaret
Aldy Eliz. Winter Susan Witney Mary Witney Hannah Halsy Susan Dover Jayce
Gardener Anne Winch Elizabeth Gray Eliz. Hickman Sarah Foar Deborah Wilkins
Mary Brewer Jane Craften Mary Baker Elizabeth Parret Mary Parret Mary Prat Anne
Nash Susan Child Mary Nickson Eliz. Hooper Hannah Norwood Margaret Pews y
Sarah Gardner Sarah Tench Martha Winter Sarah Bailey Alice young Ellinor
Pleasants Sarah Harden Anne Honer Anne Tranmore Anne Ashburn Sarah Nash Susanna
Emerton Widow Salter Hannah Hastings Constance Winge Mary Dingly Hannah Alcocke
Ma^y Steward Mary Wagstaffe Michell Blabe Anne Weston Anne Hill Mary Hill Jone
Good Mary Smith Anne Smith Mary Lampery Hannah Thorpe Mary Ladbrooke Mary
Vivers Margaret Parker Anne Mercer Anne Baylis J^yce A^is Anne Kendall Mary
Wright Anne Green Sarah Butcher Anne Cole Eliz. Kecke Hannah Wing Eliz. M^rley
Mary West Eliz. Alc^cke Eliz. Smith Eliz. Hawkins Ellinor Shelswell Em Tailor
Katherine Tailor Frances Toard Martha Bloxham Sarah Huck^ Eliz. Green Mary
Masson Deborah Green Jone Ward, Widow Mary Haynes Vrsula Ward Sarah Bloxham
Sarah Jakeman Philip Lord Ksander Hawten Sarah Hiron Vrsula Gunn Anne Pargeter
Anne Gunn Mary Tomson Eliz. Ball Penellope Tustian Eliz. Fardon Eliz. Knoles
Anne Penn Elizabeth Penn Mary Howkings Margery Hawtin Anne Hawtin Elenor Alcock
Jone Hiron Eliz. Bradley Al^ce Mathias Eliz. Robbins Dorothy Claredge Christian
Tims Sarah Tims Anne Tims Eliz. Tims Isabel Camden Eliz. poynter Mary Gilks
widow Alice Huckel Anne Eales Mary Lovedreme Anne persons Eliz. Bennet Ithamer
Tailor Eliz. Ason Luce Peek Luce Hall Mary batman Eliz. plumer Eliz. Hudson
Anne Ionson Dorcas White Mary Berry Alice Tailor widow Eliz. Belcher Anne
Hastings wid. Susannah Woodfeild Eliz. Butcher Philip Sandige Sarah Tomkins
Susannah East Mary Knight Hannah Strength Eliz. Hickman Eliz. buckingham Anne
Tustian Sarah Brown Sarah Williams Anne Draper Avis Fifeild Mary Coats Hannah
Edwards Eliz. Grant Bathiah Hazelwood Jane bachelor Mary mansel Martha Goodbee
Sarah Shepard Jone mansell Grace Claredge Mary Borton Eliz. mason jun. Jone
Haselwood Alice Fletcher Eliz. mason sen. Anne Stanton Jane Claredge Alice
Hitchman Susanah Rush Anne Doyly Jane Gilkeson Margret parker Anne Mercer Anne
Coleing Eliz. Gullipher Eliz. Good Anne Smith jun. Eliz. Shelswell Mary Crasse
Sarah Wailes Susannah Wats
WARWICKSHIRE
Anne Tims Mary Times Alice Emes Mary Times Eliz. Gibbins Jone Parker Hannah
Rose Rebeckah Rose Hannah Whitehead Dorothy Brary Margery wilcocks Yeedah Ropin
Yeedah Simson Eliz. Young Mary Whittring Mary Southum Isabel Edes Margret
Tustien Margret Rose Jane Smalewood Jone Smalwood Jane Eedes wid. Dorothy
Corbit Mary Corbit Bridget Wyat Mary Wyat Alce Borough Eliz. Knib Susannah
Knib Mary Nichols Frances Jarvisse wid. Jone Abrey Anne Tenent Dorothy Fapsen
Dorothy Williams Sarah Archer Anne Ward Elner wrench Anne Banner Anne Sabel
Mary Veares Katherin Clarke wid, Anna Mardock Eliz. Astbury Eliz. Estwick sen.
Eliz. Estwick jun. Prudence Gamball Sarah Streeter Jone berry Eliz. Hanx Ell^n
Sanders Alice Nubard Milbrow Davis Sarah Rogers Eliz. Clive Mary written Mary
Hands Mary Lord Mary Reading Anne Reading Mary meedes Mary Headen Patience
Hankock Anne Moore Elizabeth Ears Mary Burton Anne Hands Margery Beesly Alice
Knibb Percy Veares Prudence Thomas Anne Duttridge Mary Beesly Eliz. Whitehouse
Sarah Whitehouse Sarah Hibel Jane Carter Mary Murthal Alice Hadaway Mary
Reading Eliz. Hall Mary Stover Mary Harris Margaret Swinsen Ann Walker
Temperence Meek Ellen Jackson Sarah swinson Margret Bickly Margery Bickly
Phillip barefoot Mary meek Eliz. Read Hannah Read Eliz. Hea^y Frances Bridges
Ann Kiff Pearcere bearfoot Mary Ludford Hannah Barfoot Jone VVeate Ellen Jaxon
the elder Mary Allen you. Jone Gest Margret Swensen the younger Sarah Harris
Mary Baylies Dorothy Burton Sarah Renolds Eliz. Edwards Eliz. heath Mary heath
Olive Badg^ey Anne Baker Eliz. Hale Sarah Farmer Anne Maxf^eld Eliz. Aldrig
Alice Hall Grace Hall Alice Wriit Mary Pease Mary Croxel Mary Sanders Mary
Burton Sarah Standly Jone Burton Jane Byech Han^ Hopkines Mary Food Mary Nims
Anne Phillips Elizabeth Batchilor Sarah Park Mary Carter Susan Smart Mary
Wear Alice Toucy Elizabeth Gibbon Anna Hollister Kathrine Phillips Mary
Chambers Jone Weal Jone Hol^ister Jane Web Magdalen Bradford Sarah Swead Anne
King Elizabe^h Wilkison Anne Long Mary Willis Elinor Lewis Joyce Airs
Elizabeth Abbat Jone Howell Martha Swade Anne Joanes Jone Hosier Ellinor Allen
Anne Sne^gr^ve Anne Davis Mary Hampton Alis Loyd Elizabeth Loyd Anne Warren the
eld. Anne Davis the eld. Sarah Smyton Anne Purdy Jone Day Margret Reves Joyce
Reves Margret Walker Mary Stemason Hannah Neves An^e Soul Margret Bickhead
Alice Nurdan Mary Hilly Sarah Smith Mary Leath Eliz. Gibbons the el. Anne Long
the elder Elizabeth Brown Margret Tailor Margret Wilkee Francis Holdstone
Elizabeth maynard Sarah Wilkison Susana Freeman Jone Northal Jone Seager Anne
Cooper Mary Fry Mary Cole Philice Cole Jone Coal Margret Crome Jone Hilsly
Sarah Coal Anne ames Mary Burgis Eliz. more the eld. Anne Chaffie Jane Batho
Mary Belch er Elizabeth Eagles Mary Burleigh Rebeckah Howel K^tehrine Hughes
Katherine Hammond Rebeckah Watkins Margret Thomas yo. Elizabeth Williams Mary
Goldney Anne Jordan Jone Hilley Anne Burden Mary Cook Deborah Dyer Garterit
Poil Anne Brinkworth Rachel Jarret Margery Cook Bridget Templeman Elizabeth
Parmiter Judeth byfeild Mary byfeild the eld. Mary byfeild the yo. Briget
Horseman Anne Gannocliff Mary Leveret Dorcas ball Elizabeth Seward Margret
Prince Mary Croker Martha Croker Sarah Croker Margret Pi^kin Mary Prince the
eld. Mary North Margret Arnold Mary Evans Elizabeth VVoory Katherine Smith
Christian Jayne Jone Potterfeild Sarah bennet Joyce Warren Elizabeth Ford
Elizabeth milner Sarah bourne Francis price Jone Dapwel Catherine Clarke Ruth
Davis Sarah Davis Jone Farm^r Alice Hignil Margret Lovel Martha Jenkins Margret
Turner Ellinor Sorrow Jane Bricksworth Eliz. Merrick Judith Batten Rachel
Mogridge Alice Hall Margery Wall Sarah mynor Eliz. Harris Judith Comely Anne
Jellet Mary Roberts Eliz. Dowell Anne Daniel Margret Thomas eld. Mary Ford wid.
Jennet Williams Mary Lovel Eliz. Hubbert Martha Choik Anne Speed Margret
Yeamons Eliz. Oliver Bridget Hollister Eliz. Pyott Deborah Pyat Anne Day Mary
Wastfeild Katherine millerd Mary blagdon Eliz. Yeamans Mary Linday Mary
Huntington Mary N^ake Lydia Toney Martha mason Barbara Blagdon Elinor Jones
Jane Weal Margret Tailor Sarah Price Margret Price Katherine Oatley Hester
Francklin Jone Dowle Jane Farmer Alice Moore Sarah Peake Sarah Prince Jane Lord
Bethsua Speed Jane Borough Dorothy Hulet Sarah Grave Sarah Granger Alice
Philips Sarah Champnies Alex. Parkins Grace Priver Margery Claxan Anne Mayes
Hannah Parker Mary Didicot Judith Weeks Judith Rac Alce Slauter Mary marks
Sarah Allies Eliz. Faint Margret Griffin Mary Stanford Margret Gallay Eliz.
Gottey Eliz. Balromb Hannah Loxtone Mary Copeman Eliz. Driver Blanch Phillips
Margaret Hall Frances Handiman Margret Nuton Margret Farnal Eliz Child Eliz.
Morgan Anne Long eld. Elizabeth Park Briget Winfeild Eliz. Cannings Sarah
Staturne Anne Warran Britewood Jeffryes Margery warren Jane Warren Jane mabb
Eliz. Sanders Anne Ling Katherine Davis Anne Redwood Jone Tippet Eliz. Martyn
Jone Dixon Eliz. Neale Sarah Baugh Mary Sanders Jone Shepman Mary Wathen Mary
Bird Margret Phelps I^ith bows Mary Haggat Eliz. Dolphin eld. Grace Bullock
Mary perry Anne bateman Anne Wathen Eliz. Morris Deborah Styles Anne Ford
Margret Hunt Sarah White Anne Hall Alice Droyton Anne If Eliz. Bowen yo. Eliz.
Hunt Eliz. Gibbins yo.
GLOUCESTER -- SHIRE.
To the Parliament of England, etc.
To do equity, to take off this unequal maintenance of the Teachers, which do
take of people whom they do no work for, who swallows down the needy for a
thing of naught; and the Judges of their Courts have been like ravening Wolves,
prisoning such unequally on the Priests behalf, whom they do no work for, and
will not give them maintenance; Therefore if you equally do weigh and consider
things to bring the Nation into peace, it must be in equity, for if you do but
consider these Priests which are the bringers of the Nations into troubles,
setting them one against another (which was not the way of the Ministers of
Christ, whose) throats are as open Sepulchers, who drinks up iniquity, and who
swollowes down all; (mark) the fatherless part, the widows part, and the
strangers part, and so are worse then the Jews.

HOw do you who are the heads of the Nation expect we should pay your taxes,
when you suffer the Priests to take away our goods, that do no work for us,
and they come and claim through a pretense Tithe from you, of us for their
preaching, that to us does not preach, and will not suffer us to try their
doctrine, but we must receive all whether bad or good; and if we do question
it, six months in the house of correction, or five pounds fine: And if the
Priest come and pretend 15 l. Tithes they will take a hundred pounds; You grant
them fifteen pound of us whom they do not work for, and they will take a
hundred pounds, and drive away our horses and oxen, and plough geer, and take
ten times as much as the value, as they have done, which is upon record,
whether this be the way to ruin a Nation, or to preserve it, judge in your
selves, and how in this case we are like to pay taxes; this is not the way to
bring the creation into liberty, which would be at liberty, but to keep it in
bondage, and it is an unrighteous thing to force people to maintain a Minister
that they know in their consciences they are contrary to God; and then again it
i^ an unrighteous thing that they should not have their liberty to question and
try their doctrine without imprisonment, and friends, yet this unrighteous
Ministry shall have their liberty, and be collerated by the power of the Nation
to spoil the goods, to summon to Courts, to prison to death, to take treble and
treble more then themselves demand, and to drive away the goods, Catel^ and
Oxen of them they work not for; judge in your selves concerning these things,
here are our names against i^^

Perses Warner Anne Prigg Susanna Friar Rebecca Cook Edeth Scarlet Cicilly
Turner Hester Doding Mary Cox Alice Barkely Sarah Howel Sarah Bampton Florence
Long Mary mills Anne mills Sarah Venn Jane Hathway Eliz. Pouting Susana
Champneis Briget Ames. Anne Silcocke Katherine Dorney Susan Venn Hester Ashford
Hannah Dorney Eliz. Long Mary Jeffery Hester Geffery E iz. mousell Edith
Bingham Eliz. Dando Mary jefferies Abigal Boushall Anne m^lledge Mary
Stinchcome Meriam Wear Mary monday Sarah Power Clara Robbins Hester Boy Jane
Collings M ry Howborow Jane Clarke Mary Howborow jun. Eliz. Parsons Margret
Hollester Mary Tovey Anne Champneis Agnes Field Bridget Tailor Lydia Roberts
Lucy Wait Susan andrews Eliz Tailor Mary Walker Edith D ^ndo Elia. Pick Eliz.
Noote Jane Lippiatt Agnes Edmonds Silvester Baker Jane Whiting Briget Thurston
Sarah Champneis Mary Walker Sarah Budding Alice ^ Hollester Ellioner Holder
Jane Sturges Alice Small Eliz. Smith Mary Smith Margret Pullen Alice baker Jane
Champneis Jane White Jane Parker E^iz. Smith Alice wilson Mary Wilson Mary
Summers Ellioner Thruston Alice Haynes Eliz Haucock Eliz. Edwards Eliz. march
Eliz. Field Anne Stone^ Jane Smith Jane Smith Katherine Smith Mary Hall Mary
Hall Eliz. Budden Rachel Trueman Anne James Anne Joanes Frances Cole Eliz.
Atwood Edith Tipper Rebecca Scuse Mary marshal Katherine Graves Elioner weston
Margery Stambag Anne Warner Anne Williams Anne Thornedel Frances Br^deford
Christian Kite Venice Russel Hannah Evans Anne Norris Hester Walker Katherine
Eastburg Jane Pirrine Eliz. Green Sarah Russel Mary Durey Alice Butcher Anne
Keite Sarah Bramsgrove Mary m^sely Elioner Walker Jane Fowler Jane Wiggen Jane
Harwood Christian Reite Anne Pettifer Mary Pettifer Jane Pettifer Sarah
Pettifer Sarah meaks Vrsula Vpton Diana meaks Sarah Woolley Eliz. Tomlinson
Bridget Ball Mary Woolley Susannah Roach Rachel Cabbel Hester Alesop Alice
Sifford Martha Hathway Sarah Long Margret Cabbel Anne Symons Anne Jeffery
Martha Jeffery Sarah Abbot Sarah Summers Edith mills Eliz White Marg. Graves
Jane Beese Anne Cox Sarah Hollester Anne Hill Anne Deeks Hester Davis Anne
Dick^on E iz. Wickham Mary merrick Eliz. Cox Mary Tiler Ruth Ogborn Lidda
Thurston Mary Davis Anne Atwood Alice Sellman Maudline Jackson Jone Swine
Susanna Deverel Sarah Curtis Sarah Meal Priscilla prigg Rebecca Wodham Mary
Flower Anne Wickham Elioner Wodham Mary Britain Eliz. Wodham Mary Bullock Eliz
mowsel Mary Edwards Mary Clement Mary Smith Eliz. Smith Anne Bampton Widow Cad
Jone Freeman Mary Surman Joice Surman Margery Surman Anne Surman Jone Surman
Sarah Surman Mary Beale Alice Beale Mary Jones Jone Wall Jone Simmens Abigal
Silly Margret Smith Felice Carter Ruth Currier Anne Rykets Margret Duke Alice
merrel Eliz. Hapward Margret Griving Margret Heaps Anne Heaps Anne Rickets
Eliz. Joys Jane Irey Mary Webb Comfort michal Ellinor Hatcher Anne Holland
Anne Winyeat Anne Wasfield Eliz. Orkey Eliz. Smith Eliz Ready Anne White Mary
Long Jone moor Anne Edmonds Margret Lambert.
LONDON and SOUTHWARK.
To the Parliament of England, etc.
TO you which should do Justice, we who are of the female kind, whose names are
underwritten, do bear our Testimony against Priests and Tithes, who have
spoiled our Friends goods, and prisoned many of them to death, and has many of
them in prison, because they cannot put into their mouths that does no work for
us and them, which is an unreasonable thing, and they that be so much crying up
Tithes for maintenance for their Ministry, are such as are covetous and great
men, whose fruits declares which is manifest that they have not so much love to
their Ministers as to maintain them themselves, but would have others to
maintain them with Tithes, them that own not their Ministry, and is not of
their Church, and this is their end, we see their crying up their Ministry is
not to maintain them themselves, but that others should maintain them for them,
whom they do no work for, and this is their covetous end; so this is to save
themselves, and not so much that they care for their Ministry, if they did,
they would maintain them themselves, and would not seek to others to maintain
them.

1. Let no man be prisoned for observing the Order of the Church of God and
Doctrine of the Apostles, that is, if any thing be revealed to him that sits
by, the other is to hold his peace, that all may learn and be comforted, least
you be the men that quench the Spirit, and limits the holy One, and dispiseth
prophecies, comforting and edification.

2. Let none be prisoned for not paying Clerks wages, for saying Amen, turning
the hourglass, and such like services.

3. Let none have their goods spoiled or be imprisoned, because they would not
come to the old Mass-house, which is called the Steeple-house; for we are
prisoned and fined for not going to the Steeple-house, and we are prisoned and
fined for going to the Steeple-house, and asking the Priest a Question, and yet
our goods are strained and spoiled, and we are prisoned because we cannot mend
the Steeple-house, and yet will not suffer us to come there; and in some places
will hardly let us stay from it without fines, and we are prisoned and our
goods strained for not giving the Priests Tithes, who will not answer us a
Question, and they hale us out if we come but into the Steeple-house; and there
never was in the world such an untoward and unreasonable generation,
Edification, Comforting, Learning and Prophesying is destroyed in your Church,
1 Cor. 14.13.

4. Let none have their goods taken away for not paying for the Priests bread
and wine, their Communion, those they do not eat withal nor has not for these
many years, yet the Churchwardens, so called, strains the goods of our
Friends, to make them pay for their bread and wine, and Communion which they
eat and drink.

5. Let the Creation have its liberty; how do you who are the Heads of the
Nation expect that we should pay taxes when that the Priests takes our Friends
goods, and plunders them whom he does no work for? and some of our friends who
have been for the Parliament ever since the beginning of the late Wars, have
suffered more by these plundering Priests, then by the plundering Caveliers,
and you have sadned the hearts of them that are your Friends, by setting up
Tithes, and tollerating of them, then all that have gone before you, who have
pretended to take them away.

MAry Elsen Mary Foster Anne Sampson Anne Robbinson Amey Matthews Mary Lonejoy,
sen. Mary Lonejoy, jun. Margret Hutle Alice Richinson Dorothy Tailor Mary
Bassenden Mary Johnson Frances Transom Eliz. Hutle Mary Wilkinson Grace Parley
Anne Ostinge Agnes Pool Agatha Netherwood Martha Watson Vrsula Garret Mary
Westwood Ruth Brown Eliz. Peacocke Anne Jempel Margret mekins Frances Standis
Priscilla Eccleston Authry Carpenter Sarah Yeats Sarah Sager Anne mericke Alice
Stodart Sarah Blackborrow Barbarah Jarman Jone Crane Vrsula Ford Anne Cart Anne
Cart Margery Clipsham Susanna Lysoe Ruth Brown, jun. Mary Goodman Sarah G^les
Sarah Knowles Eliz. Perkinson Magdalen Person Eliz. Harris Katharine Askew
Sarah Ataway Jane Long Isabel Emms Ester Baldwin Mary Hall Anne Vose Mary Fox
Mary Basely Eliz. Fordham Rebecca Ward Anne Gilman Sarah Ward Margret Holms
Eliz. Lock Jone Hill Mary Sanders Anne Brampton Margret Jeanaws Margret Page
Eliz. Hautilane, sen. Eliz. Hautilane, jun. Cibel Carter Liddia Oades Jane More
Eliz. Drew Sarah Knowles Sarah Pool Mary Harris Margret Sharle Rachel Giles
Hannah Thorndal Mary Vouse Mary Shoutwell Alice Thompson Margret Orinel Anne
Lee Eliz Pool Mary Corford Anne Austin Margery H^pe Mary mackeral Sarah Coppock
Rebecca Pool Dorothy Billing Frances Hudson Eliz. Worlidge, sen. Eliz.
Worlidge, jun. Eliz. Tibbots Anne Hemes Eliz. Palmer Anne Alice Ellinor Chicket
Eliz. Whilwright Jane Laurance Eliz. Matthew Jona Clapton Margret Stevens Grace
Roberts Eliz. Robison Beatrix Oziar Alice Evance Margret Freebody Mary Smith
Martha Wooden Rose Hamm Ellinor Roman Jane Whitleg Anne Hawood Annis Gaunt Anne
Holland Aquila Gifford Ellen Barnet Anne Goodaker Katherine Charles Susanna
Laurance Margret Bickney Ely Hutchins Liddia Farmer Mary Jenkes Fran^es Bourn
Mary Lourance Ma^gret Kirton Dorothy Bergot Ester Ma^son Ma^gret Syrah Mary
Neave Margaret Drinckell. Ruth Powel Clare Smith Sarah Bates Anne Thomson Sarah
Martin Susanna Bond Anne Wallis Margret Stamper Rebecca Trevise Eliz. Stoddart
Jane Nicolson Mary Vaughan Constance Cushman Alice Stoddart Jane Raynor Ester
Shearwood Katharine Bently Bridget West Frances Loda Eliz. Emmut Mary Ellet
Katharine Prestho Anne Applin Anne Coniers Eliz. Proody Eliz. Farewell Jane
Terkeridge Eliz. Rogers Mary Powel Mary Pierce Eliz. Dallon Vrsula Walkin Anne
Langston Jone Parre Jane Parre Susanna Young Thomason matthew Jane Hall Luce
Wilkinson Eliz Shaw Mary Deveruck Martha Pickot Eliz Whiteman Jane Botterfield
Mary Cox J^deth Fordham Mary Loyd Frances Facley Margret Facley Eliz. Pane
Margret Welsby Prudence pink Judeth mullen Elinor Brook Eliz. Brist^w Sarah
Wetherly M^rgret Hall Jane Hunter Anne moor Eliz. Wilki^son Alice Lake Jane
Dadford Isabel mattain Philip Wescote Eliz. Smith Jane Nicolson Magdalen
peirson Annis Gregory Eliz. Ratclief Eliz. Sawon Julian Barret Anne Stanford
Rebecca painter Eliz. Oliver Rachel Green Eliz. Baily Abigal Darceg Rachel
Alford Mary Draper Anne Cully Susan Jefferies Mary Pie Jone Mickel Christian
Jones Eliz. Heart Margret Cumens Eliz. Vpcut Margret Bateman Susannah Bateman
Susannah mansel Grace Randolph Sarah Noras Alice Whitpain Eliz. Cox Margret
Woodward Phillipy Croutch Mary Wo^dward Eliz. Woodward Ma^tha Woodwa^d Grace
Reeve Anne Gardner Anne Heart Sarah Plumley Eliz. munden Eliz. Hall Anne ^ngram
Eliz. Burg Anne Gardner Ma^y Fowler Anne Boucher Jane Pattison Anne F^agdon
Margret Shargen Dorothy Champion Mary Holcraft Anne Winch Mary Goodal Ester
Swift Rebecca Haywood Sarah Hinson Anne Swift Eliz. Fallow Jane Scot Isabel
Dickinson Anne Bibby Mary Hackleton Beatrix Berthes Ellen Padley Grace Michel
Eliz Green Eliz. Webster Frances Hull Sarah Weight Sarah Bird Katherin West
Jone Bery Anne Tyler Lucretia Speed Judeth Davis Anne Hudson Mary Booth
Katherine Catin Mary Beet Rose Hull Eliz. Nicols Susannah Keet Nevel Simmons
Sarah Allen Frances Pointer Amy Ketten Eliz. Morsel Susan Kilby Margret Davis
Tacy Davis Susannah Harris Bridget Fraily Katherine Maderkel Margret Rogdon
Jone Stark Alice Lawson Frances meek Deborah Flavel Mary Strut Eliz. Newman
Eliz. Sweet Jone Wingreen Dorothy Cooper Anne Richardson Margret Bradish
Barbarah Pick Rachel Philpot Martha Houghton Eliz. Tailor Frances North Alice
Clark Alice Boolman Mary Gray Mary Hinkins Barbarah Handy Jone Raurha Jone Coll
Lydia Newman Eliz. Slater Anne Smith Jone Mabson Margret Brook Deborah Coachman
Anne Waker Barbarah Adle Joanna Lovelesse Wilnint Benson Anne Grassingham Eliz.
Davis Ame^ Stanton Mary Oker An. James Margret Poulson Katherine Foukes Anne
Grascock Margaret Kirton Anne Air Eliz. Terrel Eliz. Smither Alice Pickering
Ellen Edmonds Elizabeth Good Ellinor Belton Mary Bagnald Isabel Selbe Lydia
Saunders Susanna Goodal Eliz. Thorrowgood Katherine marman Jane Lockley Mary
marden Anne Write Mary Tailor Eliz. Sansom Susanna Fry Sarah Alexander Isabel
Lounes Katherine Price Elizabeth Hall Sarah Pickering Mary Laiton Alice Davis
Dorothy Stacy Katherine Duplier Isabel Bartlet Mary Kirkman Grace Hall Rachel
Steward Mercy Wally Jone Noble Ellen Colly Eliz. Dorwood Jone Lewis Ellen Jones
Ellen Tailor Eliz. Bouner Eliz. Hurlstone Margret Westcot Anne Sodley Anne Cox
Re^ecca Every Mary Carter Sarah millman Alice Harne Eliz ^ilner Mary Year
Katherine Fisher Jone Cook Anne Clifford Abigaill warn Faith Warden Mary Lee
Thomason Dicker Dorothy white Katherine Blann Kath. Atkins Susan Adkins Alice
Nicolas Ellinor Bellamy Eliz. Broughton Anne Coapeland Isabel wats Anne Heart
Anne Gardner Ellen Burgess Margery Parker Dorothy Door Ellen Bigrave Margery
Allen Ann Lam Eliz. Stone Susannah Cock Katherine Hutchinson Margret wintrey
Phillip Friend Bridget Brand Crysabel Triming Jane Bellamy Mary Hall Margret
Davis Katherine marcroft Mary Burrage Sarah Nut Mary Holford Grace Hudson Eliz.
Keeine Doras Erbery Mary priest Olive Chair Eliz Parker Christian Bryan
Frances Haukins Loveday Killow Judith Linsoe Duglas Temple Anne Winchester
Katherine Winchester Mary White Mary Boucher Mary mease Idith Beomon Maudlin
Carter Joane Shink field Rebecca mullens Katherine Baranton Mary Phillips Alice
Foun Jone Bigs Agnes Dolman Chischan Saunders Mary Saunders Sarah Low Mary
Saunders Anne Knolman Priscilla stoite Mary Lenthal Mary Doves Anne Astin
Bridget hawine Margret Peterson Jone Goffe Sarah Hutchens Sarah Smethet Susanna
Wright Eliz. Lane Eliz. Boylo^ Martha Perkins Hannah Corlimore Ruth Sevel Mary
Smart Dorothy Brend Sarah stent Eliz. Craft Lewis Saul Anne Lowbridge Susanna
Robson Eliz. mitton Eliz. pottery Mary Cook Alice parsons Sarah Parsons Hannah
parsons Anne Lucy Mary Heckers Jane Cook Susanna Clemments Sarah watson Eliz.
Cowes Charity Robbinson Anne Jeuner Jone Trevant Alice Tuckinson Eliz. Damson
Rachel Seany Abigal Craft Rebecca Newham Anne Durly Mary Ruberbon Liddia Jesset
Ellen Brown Mary Chaplin Sarah mane Marg. Kitcher Anne Samson Grace Tanner
Eliz. Grove Katherine Cashby Margret Beans Sarah Hall Christian Carrier Anne
Yarrington Eliz. Basel Eliz. Cole Mary Border Mary Heirs Sarah Carter Barbarah
partridge Rebec. Everet Barba. marshal Eliz. Bedwal Bridget Sly Eliz. Baker
Sarah Powel Mary Baptester Eliz. Bird Mary Fuller Dorothy Annis Ester Gale
Susanna Gammon Judeth Everton Eliz. james Alice Watton Sarah mi^et Anne
peterson Rose Gobsel Jone Boyce Jone Woles Margret Nargrave Mary Downs Jane
Busy Margret Webb Dorothy price Eliz. Williams Sarah Mayham Christian Webb
Agnes Cock Eliz: Roberts Eliz. pate Susanna Child Eliz. Conway Anne Bennit
Eliz. marle Ester Edwards Mary Russel Katherine Russel Frances Broakbanck Eliz.
Dix Eliz. Lambel Eliz. Newman Eliz. Russel Eliz. Baker Jane Wamesly Jane
Watters Mary Roulfe Mary Yease Mary Stanton Magda^ene Fuller Tabitha Dwan
Margret Watling Margret Warden Jane Cock Isabel Parlour Deborah medo Hannah
Downs Hannah Chrisle Ellen Hartly Martha Simonds Mary Datteon Eliz. Frelman
Sarah Brariar Eliz. Darby. Eliz. Croude Liddia Edper Eliz. Oliver Margret Allen
Frances Seal Aven Dance Jane Holden Margret Butler Mary Patty Mary Gallog
Sarah Swen Glare Goldesmith Mary Joanes Ellinor Ebells Mary Carver Alice
Harrison Jone Bennet Alice Heart Margret Green Venus Cabet Jone Green Rebecca
Glangre Anne Rollnes Eliz. Young Anne mouses Eliz. Bacon Mary Webb Mary Foster
Judeth Smith Eliz. Leanerd Ellen Web Jone Holland Sarah Prash Sarah Collia Mary
Tie Anne Wardal Margret Collins Mary Jalls Eliz. Stickland Jane Fauks Eliz.
perkins Eliz. martel Susanna Perkins Mary Foukes Sarah Gyles Hannah Wise Eliz.
Watson Alice Thoston Anne Hoope Eliz. Larwood Eliz. Luar Eliz. Pukes Susanna
morris Abigal Pittin Jone Carter Mary Copper Mary Foster Sarah Bristow Eliz.
Jalafe Katherine Germyn Margret Fouler Mary Bedford Susanna Parkes Ellen
Bartles Eliz. Catter Jone Lofmore Bennet Nokes Vrsula Harwood Mary bradshaw
Mary Pettifer Ruth Field Mary Darnel Mary Horn Elizabeth Brown Mary Brown
Lucretia Crispe Alice Stamp Jone Harwood Eliz. stevens Dorothy Kent Mary
Roberts Jane Bullock Mary Boreman Deborah Favel Sarah Luke Arebella VVison
Abigal Goden Anne bidel Matthew bidel Eli. Buck Anne allen Margret uster Mary
Crakford Eliz. mills Anne Johnson Sarah Godfry Eliz. Root Lones Powel Judith
patching Tabytha Harris Martha Vincent Sarah Harloc Dorothy Tompson Mar^ret
Greenway
To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
We would have you to read these things, and do justly as it speaks.
LEt the Impropriators who bought or rents their Tithes of the Colleges, turn
them up to the Colleges again; or unto whomsoever they bought them of, and
demand their money again; and let the Colleges be taken away that makes
Ministers, and do not let them stand up in the Lords place, nor you neither;
for God is able to make and send forth Ministers into his own vineyard; and do
not take the authority from Christ, unto whom all power in heaven and earth is
given; and cannon he make Ministers without Scholars or Colleges? And does
not John a Minister, say, as many as receive him, to them he gives power; And
so whom he sends forth are content with his wages; receive freely, give freely,
and that is set before them, that they must eat; they must not go trouble
Magistrates, the powers of the earth, which Christ bids go into all nations to
preach the power of God, which is the Gospel; but Ministers of men, not by the
will of God, whom men sends forth, that makes not vineyards, that plowes not,
nor threshes not, such as they seek to men for Tenths, and keeps people in the
ninths, that has set up tenths by a Law, that sends laborers into the World,
such as are made by natural tongues, which be natural men; And those are them
that have persecuted us for maintenance, and hales us up to their Courts for
their Tenths; which has made the Gospel burdensome, and have been the
stirrers up of Magistrates, who gives them the tenths for persecuting of such
whom the Lord sends into his vineyard, and these have made the tumults in the
Nations amongst people, about outward things, which is their maintenance, not
for preaching the Gospel, but about outward things; do ye think people do not
see these things?

And you may sell all the Gleab-lands, and Abbey Lands, and Monasteries, and
Nunneries, and Kings Rents, and his houses, and the bells to pay the
Impropriators, who have bought the Tithes of Kings, let their rents and parks
be sold to pay them again, and let the Earth be restored again to its place,
and they that have bought them of Colleges, let the Gleab lands be sold to pay
them, and so let the Earth be redeemed.

DOrothy Gotherson Judith King Emery Beenne Jone Nichles Gillian Grimes Eliz.
Dofes Rebecca Piece Jone Clowes Jone Heart Emlem Turnbridge Eliz. Lucks Mary
Greenland Eliz. Prichares Eliz. Hoper Rebecca Elkinton Jone Gilman Jane Clemans
Mary Standen Mary Rinnington Alice Birckham Anne Spice Mary Hoult Mary bartlet
Mary methus Anne Hoult Eliz. Hills Mary Chambers Jane Gore Eliz. Kite Margret
Grinstead Martha Deplock Win Reeve Eliz. Everndeme Eliz. Housegoe jun. Eliz.
Housegoe Mary Turner Frances martar Jone Heart Lidia mormere Mary Cumber Eliz.
Philpot Abieazer Boykin Jane Hopper Matthew Helly Jone mowlen Anne Thrum Anne
Picker Mary Gomber Alice Noakes Mary Noakes Mary forman Eliz. Denn Mary Hills
Anne Howard Eliz. more Alice Spurgen Eliz. Richeson Mary Blake Eliz. Dingle
Avery Kingsfoot Susan Cook Anne Gower Mary Joans P. Harris Ellinor Bredgate
Eliz. Fox. Thomazin Hogben Eliz. Toos Alice Goodwin Mary Howson E^iz. Cock
Eliz. Pollard Susan Wats Mary Goldherts Alice More Mary Gener Anne Foul Mary
Catchfo^d Martha Bishop Rebecca parthon Mary Foul Margret Couchman Jane
Elmenston Susan Wills Anne Dorly Eliz. Foul Elinor Olid Mary Campine Alice
Newman Sarah Rite Martha Standly Martha Copper Kath. Darley Eliz. Couchman sen.
Eliz. Couchman jun. Mary James Margret Holland Eliz. Highway Eliz. Rolan Eliz.
becraft Mary Correr Judith Dirrum Jone Stamer Mary Day Susan Brooks Anne
Godfrey Ellen Fowler Eliz. Coee Anne Barker Mary Roe Eliz. Stroud Thamar pike
Eliz. Barwell Ruth King Mary King Alice Clapson Cameler pieces Isabel Iferd Jone
Humfrey Dennis Brand Eliz. Reeves Katherine Edwards Alice Waltham Anne Farmer
Anne Newman Mary Bly Mary W^ndbanck Judeth Warren Eliz Crow Rebecca Burch
Susanna hackna Grace Roberts Mary Apthorp Matthew French Jane Astwood Anne Tilly
Eliz. Burt Katherine Gallwith Anne Scot Jane Collisor Cisil Gilbart Hannah
Allen Vrsula Bond Em. Hamman Tomazin West Beatrice Dawson Mary Sanders Jane
Albright Eliz. Albright Sarah Coleman Eliz. White Eliz. Smith Anne Smith Mary
Lawrance Frances Ireland Eliz. Coleman Mary Shemeld Sarah Baker Annis Ketle
Hannah Wilson Eliz. Ketle Alice Lycot Jane Tailor Mary Wilson Eliz. Chester
Rebecca Elingham Sarah Tailor Milbrew Smith Eliz. Rolan Eliz. Highway Margret
Holland Eliz. Becraft Mary Coxer Judith Dyrum Jone Stamer Mary Day Susan Brook
Anne Godfrey Anne Tailor Eliz. Tailor Mary Chandler Katherine miller Clear
Smith Susannah West Frances Reeve Sarah Gray Anne Osburn Susanna Arnot Anne
Burgis Anne Heath Alice Walker Anne Scot Isabell Allen Margret Hamersly Margret
Brixton Eliz. Green Ellen Johnson Anne Fisher Ellin Joanes Jane Sligh Ellin
mason Margret Hall Anne Titterton Anne Johnson Anne Hall Dorothy Alcock
Susannah Tailor Margret Eurenal Jane Lownes Anne machin Sarah Clowes Anne
Feirnbough Hester Dale Hester Brinly Martha Sleigh Sarah Sleigh Eliz. Stonier
Eliz. Ford Margret Woolrich Jane Allen Sarah Rowley Anne Rowley Rachel Rode
Mary Woolrich Sicily Jordan Sarah Jordan Jone Jordan Eliz Breeland Margret Babb
Eliz. Gent Jone Brandly Alice Dale Margret Clowes Jane Waywood Judith Cowley
To the Parliament of England who ought to free the Nation from oppression and
oppressors.
FRiends, a Compelling Worshipper has a Compelling Ministry; a compelling
worship and a compelling maintenance; so this is the false Churches way, got up
since the days of the Apostles, which is not by the constraining of Love; so
we with our hands and names, lives and estates go against it, now in the day in
which the Lamb and the Bride his Wife is coming out of the Wilderness.

ELiz. Alye Eliz Smith Given Owen Sarah Dren Mary Hacket, young. Eliz.
Careless Mary Amphlet Katherine Pooly Isab. Amphlet Mary Amplet, young. Susan
pierson, young. Lydia Clark Margery Walker Frances Ball Isab. Walker Anne
Skiller Edbrough Bearcraft Margret Stevens Alice Dane Mary Hacket Elner price
Jone price A^erlin Letsom ^ne Walker Katherine Jones Joyce Jones Anne Griffin
Alice parker Sarah Floyd Margret Knight Eliz. Fido Elner Frankomb Frances
Walton Mary Townsend Eliz. Dane Vrsula Hill Mary Hill Eliz Hanns Jone Chandler
Mary partridge Susannah Cole Bettredge Roberts Elner Brace Mary Bell Sarah
Reynolds Anne Holiack Anne Asson Jane Newey Anne Newey Isabel Newey Mary Huniat
Eliz. Baylis Hannah Cha^dler Eliz. Booker Mary Tilsly Anne Ardin Jane Heekes
Anne Hodges Margret Lacy Mary Croly Jane Carter Anne Bagley Mary Caddick
Margret Geffres Mary Bilingham Eliz. Crumpe Alice Lacy Margret Roberts Hester
Allen Allnor Smart Mary meek Eliz Kinward Sarah Bryenton Margery Higgens
Susannah Dukes Anne Abere Katherine Goseline Eliz. Reed Eliz. phillips Jane
Abra Jone Neckols Susanna Jones Sibel Savage Susanna pierson Eliz. Wright Anne
Skiller, young. Dorothy mar^in Joice Darling Jone Stollerd Eliz. Rawson Margery
Cullath Mary Bradly Sarah Butter Eliz. parish Margret Harves Mary Hay Mary
Hoday Mary Hunt Dorothy Hunt Frances Palmer Sarah Carwright Susannah Guen
Bridget Smith Sarah Glifear Margery Cotton Mary Harris Eliz. Lea Mary Woodward
Susanna White Deborah King Anne meadwell Joyce Evens Eliz. pitway Deborah Blick
Anne Harris Alice Welsh Jone Woodward Alice Davis Eliz. Hardman Rebecca Welsh
Sarah Freasam Eliz. Shartharle Marg. Robins Hannah Ball Mary Woorly Fra. Pitway
Margret Taudy Martha Woorly Sarah Walker Barbarah Walker Eliz. Tombos Hannah
Radge Jane Walker Eliz. Allifear Mary Hardman Mary Godfree Kath. Allinton Mary
Turner Jone Rudge Mary Langston Sarah Walker, youn. Kath. Knight Mary Beard
Jone Hulland Eliz. Walker Kath Hay Mary Izard Eliz. Haines Jane Taudy Anne
Welsh Rebecca Bennit Alice Be^nit Sarah Bennit Anne Brauthy Eliz. Cemmens Mary
Dolbins Hannah Williams Sarah Kators Alice jarkith Anne Tailor Anne Fowler
Isabel plasterer Mary Roberts Sarah Box Eliz. Baines Cicilla pitway Isabel Dove
Eliz. Emes Jane Keatler Mary Treadwel Eliz. Walker Frances Smith Kath.
Cartwright Anne Yeeds Anne Godfree Elizabeth Harton Anne Rock Anne Cartwright
Frances Guese Anne Whittle Eliz. Bennit Mary Ballard Isabel Banner Mary Banner
Anne Sheakle Eliz. shekle Mary Sheakle Eliz. Kinril Jane Harris Alice Riland
Mary Riland Anne Baylis Eliz. Clark Mary Pregin Alice Booker Jane Booker Mary
Dudsil Mary Hichins Mary Cleavens Joyce Washborn Eliz. Wheeler Kath Smith Kath
Smith Mary Judge Priscilla Salsbery Alice Turner Jane Goastly Elinor Hay Alice
Harris Mary Walker Alice Woodward Elizabeth Ems Elizabeth Andrews Sarah Phelps
Mary Smith Grace Peakock Mary Doom Mary Brooks Mary Bag Mary Box Eliz. Wheeler
Jane Goastly Alice Abery Mary Edwards Jane Strain Mary Strain Mary Kirman Mary
Trudy Christian Boom Alice maundor Kath. Given Jone Given Jone Walker Sarah
maunder Eliz. Give Elizabeth Willis Eliz. Tailor Marian mushin Mary Hind Jone
Fox Sarah Richarson Homer Richarson Rebecca Richarson Ester Harris Mary Pare
Anne Tomkins Anne Cook Alice Given Anne Wilkinson Jone Cross Mary Bomdbery
Susan Simmonds Susan Brinckly Mary Carnake Sarah Bortwight Mary Blemint
Part of WALES and HEREFORD-Shire.
To the PARLIAMENT of England, etc.
FRIENDS,
YOU have thrown your selves away out of the affections of the sober people in
setting up Tithes, notwithstanding the many Petitions and addresses unto you
against them up and down the Nation from the sober people therein, and the well
wishes of the choicest of the Nation toward you; Now the contrary part in
whose hands you fall, and to whom you join and yield to, will not stand you in
stead in the time of your Trial; and how should they but fear you, and stand in
question of you that have not taken off the Tithes, the oppression? and by
which the cause not taken away the Priests and the Parishes be on heaps, and
persecuting their hearers, and oppressing of them with treble and treble
damage; and therefore the sober people of the Nation would have had you to have
taken away Tithes that caused the difference in the Nation, and to bring peace
in the Nation, which if you do not, the Lord by his power will remove you as
unfit for his use, and break you to pieces, if that you do not dwell in his
power that does break to pieces; and fear the Lord God and dwell in it, the
power of God, and his wisdom, that thereby you may know the supreme power over
all the world, and transgressors in it, in that line. You have hindered your
selves from the love of the sober people of the Nation, and if you do not take
off oppression, how should the Lord stand by you, or the people of the Lord
either.

Therefore consider these things, and the Lord give you understanding, for all
eyes are upon you, good and bad, and wait to look what fruits you bring forth.
Therefore it is the Word of the Lord to you, join to no wicked thing set up by
the Papists, to no accursed thing, to no abominable thing, for if you do, the
Lord will throw you out and overturn you; Therefore join to that which is
good, if you do intend to have his blessing.

If you querie how you should do with Impropriators; Sell all the Gleab Lands,
and the Bells, except one in a Town, or two in a city, to give notice of fire,
and all the late Kings Parks and his Rents, that had Tenths, and sold the
Tithes, to make up these, to give to e Impropriators that have bought Tithes,
and the Abbeys and the onasteries, which much of the Tithes were given to, if
you do intend to satisfy the Nation, and deny your selves of his Parks, houses
and Rents; So let them be sold, and the Colleges sold, and all the Tithes that
belong to them thrown down, and then if you will have Schools to teach boys
Natural Languages and several Tongues to make Merchants of them, let every one
that sends his Son pay him his wages; and if any neighbors be moved to help
them, let them ^elp them, that none be compelled by a Law to maintain another
Ministry, but what is done, let it be in love; So let Christ send forth his
Ministers and Laborers into his Vineyard, and so cumber not our selves about
the Ministry of the Gospel and its maintenance, and let no man be persecuted
about Worship, Church, Ministry, Priests maintenance; but if any man has
received freely, let him give freely, so let the Nation be brought to a free
Nation, and the people to a free people; for we declare with our hands, and
with our lives and estates against the Ministry that takes Tithes, and the
setters of them, and the first Author of them up, and the Law that upholds
them, which have been set up since the days of the Apostles; but keep the
peace, and give them what you will give of your own Freely, and do not compel
people to maintain a Minister which they know to be false, and to be in error,
and a Persecuto^ and a Minister of unrighteousness. Trust not in the arm of
flesh, for the arm of the Lord which is the power, is able to overturn all, and
which will wither all flesh, and the reasonings of flesh, and all who trust in
any carnal thing, or strength, or weapons, but only the power of the Lord God,
his strength and hopes will fail him, and the power of the Lord God will go
over him, which has no end; Therefore trust in the power of the Lord God,
which comprehends the whole world which has no end.

ELiz. Jenkins, sen. Eliz Jenkins, jun. Ruth Evans Rose Tailor Alice Price Mary
Phillip Katherine Morgan Gwenllian Jenkins Rebec. Price Mary Price Eliz. Morris
Barbary Hoskins Eliz. morgan Vrsula Williams Anne Rice Cicil Hanbury, sen. Jane
Thomas Margret Hanbury Cicil Hanbury Anne Edward Anne Eliis Margret Thomas Jane
Dawson Blanch Lewis Ellin^r Barber Dasy Rosser Jennet David Kath. Genowe Anne
morgan Jane Curtis Lucy Hix Jone Edy Eliz. Holms Isabel Hopkin Eliz. Hix Anne
Hubbert Anne Thayer Kath. Cox Hannah Cox Alice Grindal Jane Cox Mary merrick
Sarah Hughes Jone Hibbs Kath. Foord Mary Hughes Mary Bowen Ellen John Jone John
Eliz. Thomas Margret Williams Eliz. Harry Kath. Thomas Jone Hopkin Mary
Prichard Mary Collenbeach Kath. David Jone Thomas Malte Williams Jennet John
Eliz. David Gwellen Williams Anne Hamon Eliz. Hamon Margret Hopkin Ruth
Granford Jane Daniel Kath. morgan Hannah Riderth Margret Wybern Eliz. morgan
Jone Jones Margret Baret Mary Barrow Alice S^lman Mary Williams Eliz Griffeth
Mary Protherough Eliz. Therburn Sarah Bateman Jennet Jones Rebecca Howel Jone
Spark Eliz. Relly Jane Watkin Eliz. Thomas Anna Freeman, wid. Mary Jones Mary
Roberts Mary Powel, wid. Eliz. Reed, wid. Hannah Grimer Margret matthews Jone
mars, Ellinor William Mary Preece Mary Sarch Mary Grimer Mary Rogers Kath.
William Mary Robert Anne Roberts Mary William Sibel Thomas Eliz. Thomas Eliz.
Lewis Mary Evan Anne Beevan Mary Beevan Vrsula Hodg Eliz. Richards, wid.
Margret Gibbon Eliz. Gibbon Eliz. David Mary Ingram Mary England Mary morre
Anne Evan Welthian Thomas Eliz. Vaughan Jone Gawler Mary Jenkin Mary Robert
David Jones Mary Plant Mary Pain Margret Pa^ Eliz. Cowles Eliz. Cater Margery
Ingram Eliz. Cater, jun. Hannah Ashmead Eliz. mind Mary Pain Alice Fareal Mary
Freeman Mary Grime Eliz. Grime Margret Alcop Eliz. Ekelee Jone Jones Eliz.
Barber Eliz. prichard Katherine prichard Mary Carners France: Gawler Ellinor
Hodges Joyce Beaven Mary Rosse Elenor Beavan Frances Young Eliz Ekley Joyce
Bibb Eliz. Gwillams ^sabel Caldwal Margery Powle Bridget Davies Mary Hoult Anne
Powel ^rances Jones ^linor Gwyn ^ucia Powel ^nne Powel ^nne Baker ^lice
Williams ^ledgde^liz. Smith ^ladis David ^anglust Thomas ^aud John ^liz. Thomas
^nis Vaughard ^ane Hanard ^van John ^liz. Thomas Mary Lawrence Mary Watkin Jane
Holdinge Mary Williams Joyce Steven Sarah Philips Winiffred Williams Owen Price
Jane Edwards Margret Vmphery Dorothy Lewis Dorothy mores Elinor Price Katherine
parkers Katherine Guyn Jane Jones Katherine Prees Margret Jones Katherine
Edward Elinor Lloyd Margret Lewis Margret Ewards Katherine Jones Margret James
Maud Thomas Given Powel Markred Iohnes Jonet Oliver Katherine morise Eliz.
morise Mary Danis Anne Hughs Jane Cledon Margret Price Margret watson Anne
Watson Anne Bage Margret Cleaton Anne Cleaton Anne Jones Jone Perkes Mary moor
Katherine Oliver Margret Oliver Katherine Price Mary Houd Jane Oliver Jone
David Eliz. David Mary moore Bridget Watson Jone Rees Elinor Jones Sarah Thomas
Elinor David Jone Mills Anne Meridith Jane Moris Anne Griffith Gwen morgan Gwen
Evans Margret moris Margret Rees Katherine Powel Anne David Margret Crowder
Jane Crowder Anne Owens Katherine Meredith Elinor Meredith Jone Jones
To the Parliament of England, etc.
YOu who are the Parliament of this Nation, you should have thrown down tithes,
which is the cause of so great troubles in the nation at Courts, Assizes and
^ssions; and many families in the Nations their goods spoiled, and their
estates ruined, ^any prisoned to death by Priests and Impropriators, which
abundance of the so^r people of the Nation has petitioned you, and sent to you
by addresses, to have ^em taken away; which your voting them, up have voted
your selves out of the sober ^oples affection of the Nation, among the bruits;
and such as be brutish will not and by them in the day of your trial.

2. If you querie, how shall the Impropriators be satisfied, who bought the
tithes (...) the King, have you not his parks and his rents? have you not his
houses to sell and ^ke up their money and give them again? or will you sit down
in his houses and take (...) possession? has not God thrown out such before
you? will you be like them that ^s and takes possession? will ye stain your
selves? have you not houses of your own sit in? this is a warning to you least
you dishonor your selves and your names.

3. You should have sold all the Gleab-lands, and sold all the Bells, saving
one ^ly in a Town, and Colleges and their Lands, and given them to all the
poor of ^e Nation; that there need not have been this lamentable cry for bread
and clothes ^ong the poor in the Nation; and have paid the Impropriators with
the overplus.

4. All that would have a Minister, let them maintain him.

5. All that would have meeting houses, let them maintain them; and all that
^uld have Clerks to turn the hour glass, and say amen, and hang the
pulpit^ath, let them maintain them, and not suffer others to be cast into
prison because ^y would not maintain such, and hold up such, and maintain such
things for others (...) have not the use of them.

6. And all such as have bread and wine for their communion, not let
others(...) be forced to pay for it, that eats nor drinks not with them,
neither has any communion with them, not suffer them to be compelled to pay
for it, which neither ea^ nor drinks, for that is a beggarly communion; but
they that will have a communion let them pay for it.

7. Let none be fined and imprisoned for not doffing their hats, and let none
b^ persecuted for saying thee, and thou, thee to a particular, and you to many,
a^ give over setting up of images, in your steeple houses, and daubing them
over wi^ gold, as at Tantlins steeple-house in London; let the money that you
bestow(...) such vain things be given to buy the poor clothes and bread, and
that wholesome p^ces may be provided for them, as Nurseries, that none may be
starved or perish(...) hunger.

8. Let no one be fined or imprisoned, or compelled, or forced to go to the
steep^ houses, and that no one should be whipped for vagabonds or rogues which
speak t^ word of the Lord, as they have been, which are worth 40. or 60 pounds
by the year and that none should strike or fight, or that none be banished
about Religion(...) worship, seeing Christ said love your enemies, and the
Apostles said, we wrestle(...) with flesh and blood; and how have you obeyed
Christ and fulfilled his will, when there has been so much whipping and
bloodshed, and wrestling with flesh and bloo^ by Church and ministry for
maintenance in this Nation; let none go under the name of a Minister of Christ
that will have any persecuted for speaking to him, or pe^secute any because
they will not give him maintenance, imprisoneth, or hales befo^ magistrates and
Courts, let not these go under the name, of threshers, or plowers(...) hope,
such as serves not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; let all suc^
as these which are called ministers, be looked upon as popish, and not
according to the Apostles, that for Tithes, Easter reckonings, Gleab-lands,
mortuaries, ten groats a grav^ 20 or 20 shilling for a sermon over the dead;
Church women for money, sprinkle infan^ for money, and are made ministers of
men, and by men, just like the Heathen as the^ make their Powoughs, which
priests are not made by the Law, these that profess themselves to be ministers
of the Gospel are not made by the will of God nor by the revel^on of Jesus
Christ, for revelation they deny, and so are made manifest to be the false
Church and not the true Church, which Christ is the head of, in whom he is in
the mid^ prophet and King, who does reveal himself to his Church and people,
to all the^ which Christ and God has not sent into the vineyard, but which are
made by t^ will of men, and are sent but from men, these have been traitors to
Christ's doctri^ and to Christ their King, who says love your enemies, but
these persecute their c^ friends, which are friends to their souls, for their
maintenance, and so are out of(...) Apostles doctrine, which says, wrestle not
with flesh and blood, which never prison any for their benefits, nor haled
before Magistrates, as this popish tribe has d^ since the days of the
Apostles; so the Lord give you and all people an unde^stand^ to consider of
these things, and what has been lost since the days of the Apostl^ and what
now has been come in again.

RAchel Hatcher Eliz. Jackson Alice Life. Mary Life Katherine Plat Anne Hatcher
Amie Titchbourn Anne Donefeild Sarah Growner Anne Bonick Jane Gray Anne Fielder
Else Lewen Ma^y Burket Ma^gret millit Ruth white Eliz. Hubbard Bridget Pitts
Ellin Birkhead Anne Garrat Jone Horly Anne horly Mary Becket Sarah Lather Anne
Edlin Grace Eldin Vrsly Abrock Jane Amey Rose Biddel Eliz. Amey Sarah Everard
Jone Clear Sibel Lisnee Margret morris Eliz. Cowles Anne Slado Eliz. Andras
Jane Ruming Rachel Carter Dorothy Hollis Catron Person Jane Rance Eliz.
Smalepeece Jane Siggings Jone Horsley Mary Simons Anne Goage Mary manhood
Dorothy Rusel Frances Ribman Frances Chandler Mary Cook Eliz. Penfoold Sarah
marner Mary west Sarah Hayle Eliz Blacksun Anne Barnard Jane marnar Mary Barber
Mary brian ^den murnar Eliz. Brocket Mary Sleet Mary Slees Sarah ^rocket Mary
Parkar Mary F^mmand ^dith Shaw ^nne Voytch Margery Colstock ^nne Batter ^gnes
Soale Mary Jounner Mary Flete Sarah Houlden Anne Odden Margret Petter Eliz.
Shaw Jone Eakman Anne Tompson Susan Knowles Anne Femand Anne Killingbanck
Margret Knowles Anne Smight Anne Choose Mary Sayers Eliz. Willpersors Jane
Clear Frances matthew Jone mills Margret Crattenden Eliz Crattenden Eliz. Else
Mary Dobson Anne Dobson Eliz. Brickstocke Grace Reding Judith buckman Mary
Allder Margret Wilkinson Margery Wilkinson Ellen Willey Katherine Bowen Jane
Kemsull Mary markwick Susan copper Eliz. Adams Anne Heuryote Jone Stowan Anne
Dapson Mary Danes Sarah Weler Eliz. Burnden Elenar Danes Mary copper Eliz.
Ashfoold Eliz. Ludford Mary Houlden Eliz. Killingbanck Mary Grover Mary Bynnes
Anne Steeve Ellinor Tugwel Martha Wilbersofe Anne Linvell Jone Luggins Eliz.
Michael Dorothy Pearce Alice Banckes Mary French Mary Haines Mary addams Susana
Beard Eliz. Cottingham Margret Smith Eliz. wilbore Dinnis Hyland Jone Tappen
Anne Baylie Jone Wenham Eliz. Gallaway Eliz. Hilton Susan Hilton Eliz. Gould
Grace Percey Anne Frank Mary Akehurst Anne Beard Sarah Cottingham Mary
Cottingham Sarah Beard Jane Roots Eliz. Averidge Kath. Boyse Mary Hollman Anne
Lee Mary Well Susan May Jone Wheeler Kath. Hoy Lucretia Hakins Eliz. Pashing
Eliz. Walker Anne Lee Anne Lockfold Jone Clarke Mary Loyas Margret Palmer Jone
Patching Eliz. Woods Jone Hampshire Martha Silling Dorothy Woodger Jane Dawson
Mary Hoggesflesh Rebecca Patching Sarah Deane Susan Dean Mary Wheatly Jone
Hoggsflesh Anne Dawson Anne Jesay Mary Killingberk Lidia Brommell Margret
Capenter Mary Hollman Eliz. Scalle Katherine Seaman Eliz. Chelsam Bridget
Seaman Rose Peeter Frances Boughton Susan Burtenshaw Jone Peeter Jone Heethe
Mary Boorn Mary Swan Wid. Anne Boy Sarah Wanham Margret Wounch Jone Pilfold
Eliz. Higscome Susan Slening Sarah Batchellor Jane Yates Mary woollard Mary
Comber Jone Ch^^smore J^^^ Wheeler Mary Langhurst Eliz. Blace Eliz. Bachelor
Anne Bachelor Sarah Seman Susan watford Dorothy Stedman Katherine Patten Jone
Clarke Jone Stockbale Alice poterten Jone Stone Eliz. Kneling Jone Haman Ione
Woodward Eliz. Lee Anne mildred Jude King Eliz. Frotsone Ione Pitson Mary
Braborn
DORCET-SHIRE.
1. FRIENDS, It is manifest that those called Priests and Teachers of the
World, are them that serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and the
Priests and Teachers of the World seeks ours and not us, it is now made
manifest.

2. The Priests and Ministers of the World, are such as loves enemies, and
persecutes their friends.

3. And they are not such as wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with flesh
and blood; nor such as wrestle with the powers of darkness, and brings the
Creatures in the Liberty of the Sons of God.

And the Priests cry to You the Magistrates for Tithes, the Popes Alms, and
this they lie begging with their Petitions, and lie ready at your doors; and we
would have you to maintain these begging Priests some other way then by the
Popes Alms, and not suffer them to go plundring up and down the Country; and
this is our desire.

Now whether the people of God has not suffered more in your days concerning
Worship, Church, Priests and Maintenance, Clerks and Tithes, and in Courts, and
spoiling their goods, and death, and imprisoned, and whipping (for speaking the
truth) as Rogues and Vagabonds, those that be worth three or fourscore pounds a
year, and in the Counties where they dwell; and some for not doffing their hats,
and for speaking the word thou to one, and you to many (singular and plural)
then the Puritans did in the Bishops time?

And are not you worse then the Ecclesiastical Courts, who held up ^^eir
Tithes, Priests, Steeple Houses, Clerks, Vicars, Curates, their maintenance by
a Law? but you have none, and yet profess Liberty Conscience.

And Friends, (...) long as any of you have any Interest in Tithe, o^ any thing
else which does oppress the Nation and the people, it mu^ be a greater power
then self that must bring you to deny yo^ selves, and to work the Nations
Redemption, and to bring it into Liberty, from under that which does oppress
it; and so let that man


