THE Form of the Proceeding TO THE FUNERAL Of Her Late Majesty QUEEN MARY II.
Of Blessed Memory, From the Royal Palace of Whitehall to the Collegiate Church
at Westminster; the 5th Day of this Instant March, 1694/5. To begin at twelve
a Clock.
(To be punctually Observed by all Persons therein Concerned.)

March 2. 1694/5
I do appoint Edward Jones to Print this Account of the Proceeding.

NORFOLK, and MARSHALL.

KNight Marshal's Men, to clear the way. To meet in the Inner Court at
Whitehall, where the Statue is.
Knight Marshal's Deputy. Servants to the Officers of Arms. Three hundred poor
Women, four and four.
2 Trumpets. The Banner of Union born by a Knight, Sir Philip Meadows. Grooms
and Pages of the Chamber. Officers of the Stable. Housekeepers. Officers of
the Robes, and Wardrobe. Gentlemen of the Chapel and Vestry in Copes, and the
Children of the Chapel singing all the way. 2 Trumpets. Officers of the
Jewel-house. Officers and Comptroller of the Works. Sewers of the Chamber.
Gentlemen-Ushers, Quarter-Waiters 2 Trumpets. To meet in ^he King's
Privy-Lodgings, and Rooms adjoining where they are to be put in order by the
Officers of Arms.
Chaplains to the King and Queen. Aldermen of London. Surveyor-General of the
Works, Sir Christopher Wren, Knight. 2 Trumpets. Twelve Gentlemen of the
Privy-Chamber to the King and Queen, Eight whereof carry the Canopy; of which
Number are to be Three of the Queen's Gentlemen-Ushers of the Privy-Chamber Who
are to attend with the Canopy at the West Door of the Abbey, to receive and
carry it over the Queen's Body when taken out of the Chariot. Carvers to the
Queen. Cup-bearers to the Queen. Sewers. to the Queen. 2 Trumpets. An Officer
of Arms. The Queen's Secretary and Treasurer. Knight-Harbinger, and Master of
the Jewel-house. Lord Mayor of London. 3 Trumpets. Two Officers of Arms. The
House of Commons. To meet in the great Banqueting Room.
Sergeant at Arms: Speaker of the House of Commons: To meet in the
Council Chamger and the Privy-Gallery and Fane Room.
Four Officers of Arms. The House of Peers. Sergeant at Arms, and Usher of the
Black Rod. Speaker of the House of Peers. Note, That at the Proceeding before
the Body, the youngest of each Degree go foremost.
An Officer of Arms. The Banner of Chester, The Banner of Wales, The Banner of
Cornwall, Born by LORDS. An Officer of Arms.
The Banner of Ireland, by the Earl of Montrath. The Banner of Scotland, by the
Earl of Selkirk.

Two Officers of Arms.
The Banner of France, and England quarterly, The Great Banner, The Banner of
England.

Born by EARLS. The Queen's Master of the Horse, Lord Viscount Villers, Who
after leaving the Horse at the Door of the Church, is to go to his place among
the Peers.
leading the Mourning Horse; and two Equerries (with their Caps) attending. The
Helmet and Crest, born by an Officer of Arms. The Target, born by an Officer of
Arms. The Sword, born by an Officer of Arms. The Coat of Arms, born by Norroy,
King of Arms. The Queen's Lord Chamberlain, Lord Marquis of Winchester. The
Church of Westminster, at the entrance into the Abbey, are to fall into the
Proceeding here. Clarenceux, King of Arms, (between two Gentlemen Ushers)
carrying the Scepters, Orb, and Crown, on a Cushion; except at such time as the
Body is in the Chariot: And then Clarenceux, with the two Gentlemen Ushers, go
before the Queen's Lord Chamberlain.
Six Bannerolls, born by Sir T. Parkyns. Sir W. Roberts Sir W. Russell. Sir D.
Hampson Sir W. Colepeper Sir W. Villers.

Three Peers, Assistants to the Corpse, or Supporters of the Pall.

The Body, in an open Chariot, drawn by eight Horses, a Man to lead each Horse;
and the Sceptres, Orb and Crown upon a Purple Velvet Cushion. Two of the
Queen's Bedchamber Women, one siting at the Head, and the other at the Feet, to
take care of the Body.

Three Peers, Assistants to the Corpse, or Supporters of the Pall.

Six Bannerolls, born by Sir F. Head. Sir E. Ward. Sir Ste. Lennard. Sir W.
Recesby. Sir Cl. Fisher. Sir J. Cope. The 12 Baronets and Knights to meet in
the Presence next the, Guard Room.




Gentleman Usher, Garter King of Arms, Gentleman Usher, At the Abbey door The
two Gentlemen Ushers are to take Care the two Ladies be helped out of the
Chariot, and led to their places among the Bedchamber Women.
Earl of Pembroke, Lord Privy Seal. The Chief Mourner,Duchess of Sommerset,
supported by two Noblemen. Her Train born by two Duchess, Duke of Leeds, Lord
President of His Majesty's Council. Duchess of St. Albans, Duchess of
Southampton.

Assisted by the Queen's Vice-Chamberlain, Mr. Sayres.



Eighteen Assistants to the Chief Mourner, etc. To meet in the Privy-Lodgings
on the Queen's Side.


The Duchess of Devonshire. Countess of Bridgwater, Countess Dowager of
Winchelsea, Countess Dowager of Thannet, Countess of Sandwich. Countess Dowager
of Radnor, Countess of Monmouth, Lady Howard of Effingham, Baroness Weston
Countess of Arran,
The Duchess of Leeds. Countess of Oxford, Countess Dowager of Northampton,
Countess of Carnarvan, Countess of Sunderland, Countess of Macclesfield,,
Countess of Dorchester, Lady Eliz. Cromwell Baroness Cromwell Lady Rockingham.


Two Gentlemen-Ushers. Six Ladies of the Bedchamber. Six Maids of Honor. Six
Bedchamber Women: The Band of Pensioners. Yeomen of the Guard.
When the Body is placed in the Mausoleum the Chief Mourner is to be seated in
an Armed Chair at the Head of the Body.

The Supporters to the Train on two Stools with low backs, a little behind her.

The Ladies of the Bed Chamber within the Mausoleum, three on each side of the
Body.

The Assistants to sit within the first Rail without the Mausoleum

The Queen's Lord-Chamberlain to have a black Velvet Stool to sit near the Foot
of the Mausoleum.

To meet in the Guard-Room.
The Band of Pensioners are to go in Order single on each side the outward
Rail; and then two and two into the South Isle leading to Henry the Seventh's
Chapel, and stand there on each side, and when the following Proceeding goes to
the Interment, then the Pensioners are to follow to the Chapel Door, but no
further.

The Yeomen of the Guard are to stay on each side the Organ Quire, from the
Quire Door up to the Rail.

Proceedings to the Interrment after the Sermon.
The Queen's State.

Note, All Persons that shall have Tickets for Places within the Collegiate
Church at Westminster from the Duke of Norfolk, are to take Notice, that no
Person can be set in after Twelve a Clock but those who go in the Proceeding.
The Queen's Master of the Horse.



The Queen's Lord Chamberlain

The Church of Westminster, and both Choirs.

The 3 Supporters of the Pall.

The Body

The 3 Supporters of the Pall.

Supporter to the Chief Mourner.

The Chief Mourner.

Supporter to the Chief Mourner.

Supporter to the Train.



Supporter to the Train.



Vice Chamberlain Ladies Assistants. Ladies of the Bedchamber. Maids of
Honor. Bedchamber Women. Gentlemen Pensioners to the Chapel Door. Some Yeomen
of the Guard to keep the Door.


In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones, 169^. EDINBURGH, Reprinted by the Heirs
and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most excellent Majesty, 1695.


