A Short Testimony concerning CATHERINE ALLARDES, Late Wife to JOHN FVLLERTOVNE
of KINNEBAR: Who departed this Life, the last day of the last Month called
February; Anno. 1670.

Psalm 37. verse, 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end
of that man is peace.

Psalm 116. v. 15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of the
Saints.

Rev. 14. v. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth,
yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them.

Printed Anno. 1671.

A short testimony concerning Katherine Allardes, late wife to John Fulertoune
of Kinneber, who departed this life, the last day of the last Month called
February, 1670.
SHE was a woman of extraordinary patience, and meeknes, and of few words that
having been near 23. years married with her, I cannot say, that ever I saw her
angry, though she could and did correct her children, and keept them in as
much awe as most, and did reprove undutiful servants or others very plainly
and downright: and yet without hasty rash words, for never in her life can any
say that they have known her to take the name of God in vain, or let fall from
her any of the (so recokened) petty oaths; she hade always water in
readiness to cast upon the breaking forth of any appearance of fire in any
person. After our Marriage, once or twice I came upon her in the fields, when
her eyes were streaming forth tears at prayer, and I being earnest to know
what weighted her spirit, if it was dissatisfaction of her marriage, after much
pressing, she at length told me it was not any thing of that, but she was
grieved (for that she often testified against) that I should comply so much
with the profane drunken neighbors, and others that frequented my house, and
if I continued that way of entertaining them, the Lord would depart from our
family, which words; though I made little answer unto them, then they were
as bread cast upon the waters. She was also very extraordinary diligent in her
calling and employment, as is well known to all about her, and had the care and
accounts of all my corns and rents, and when I was often dissatisfied that she
her self did spin, and handle yarne so much, she would answer, she had not
peace in her mind to be unimployed in some honest necessary work, and would
tell me, if the Lord permit the enemies of the truth to take our estate from
us, or banish us therefrom, for conscience sake, I can, said she, through the
Lords assistance, mantain thee and my children in a comfortable way; And she
often said, I am wholly out of covetousness, anxiety, or fear of want, knowing
that I have a good and loving Provisor who never failed me. I often would speak
of our many children, and what I should do with them; her ordinary answer was,
if they fear the Lord they have enough, and we have enough of the things of
this life to leave amongst them: if they fear not the Lord, there is too much
to give them, I am willing they suffer for their folly. Some years ago my
estate being very much run under debts, so that in the reckoning of all it was
ruined, and all our relations gave us advice to sell it, and save something of
the price; and these who were filled with malice and the spirit of persecution
against us, (because we denied their way to be of God, and would not longer eat
of their polluted Sacrifices, being about 13. years ago) they triumphed and
insulted over our hard condition; when they heard of my creditors beginning
their work against me and our estate, their words were, we see God bringing him
down, and going to spew him out of the land, for it was reckoned I was going to
Ireland, (as I did conclude to do) which words wounded me as arrows, not for my
estate I can say, but because they who are now brought down, would get such
advantage against the precious truth, because of which I being much brocken in
my spirit, for many weeks I was not wholly satisfied that she was not as much
touched: She told me, she was little moved with that aparent change at all.
After some days the Lord in condescendence to my weakness, was pleased to show
me in a very plain, clear vision, that my estate and house near feign should be
recovered, which I not believing, within twenty four hours thereafter, he
dowbled the vision again; and show me the way how it should come to pass
(which is not fit here to mention, lest swine should tear and mock) the which I
did then tell her, she told me, she was always confident the Lord would do
that for us, or else that which was as good. And after some years when a change
began to appear on our outward condition, and that it was told, that some
witless idle talking people said, we had gotten money sent us from another
place, she would answer that it is little matter what they say, for they know
not him who is Lord of all, who has seen it meet to bless now when men has
cursed, (But Balaam cannot curse Israel,) but we never received money from
others, except such as were due to us, for fair barganing, etc. Nor never could
we, said she, so long as we had of our own to furnish us food and raiment, or
could help our selves by labor, and much have we given, but never yet received
on any such account, knowing it is better to give then to receive. She loved
such of the Presbyterians as was of a sober, serious, conversation: and for
their zeal for curbing of wickedness among the people, and there making some
difference betwixt the Precious and the Vile; but she had a great contrariety
to their spirit of persecution, and concluded if ever they got the flesh they
so much lust after, viz. power; it would be for a further stroke, and bitter
cup, except the Lord redeemed them from that spirit of rigidity, bitterness,
and persecution of tender consciences. She loved that little more moderation
which appears in Episcopals, but hated the loose ungodly lives of most of them,
and believed the Lord would in his due time meet with them because of their
conniving at, or not curbing this flood of iniquity broke forth in the Nation
under that government.

She was one who was more then ordinary acquanted with, and had the secrets of
the Lord revealed to her, which I can truly witness, though its like I shall be
but little believed by the benighted world. I might name more nor now I shall,
but a little touch I have freedom to give, When about 11. years since, he,
called Mr. Thomas Cowper Minister at Montrose, had excommunicatted me after the
space of some months; one morning on the first day of the week, (called the
Sabbath) she and I approaching to wash our hands, she said, the Lord has let
me see that Thomas Cowper is laid by useless, and is to preach no more. Which
was to me something strange, to hear her so positive as was not her ordinary,
I said, it is very much if it be so sudden: she said, it is to be even so. And
that day in the evening, there came one and told that Thomas Cowper going in to
the Kirk to preach, was at the Kirk door struck with a distemper, and was
carried back to his house, out of which he never came again with life, though
he lived long after: And I may say, the man went about that work with great
reluctancie and unwillingness against the light, not being so wholly given up
as many of them now are, to hardness of heart, spite and enmity. For one day
he and I walking in my garden, he said, I know its Reformation ye would be at,
will ye stay among us to help us forward therewith: I answered, there was no
stay in Babylon that was become the hold of every foul spirit, he said, is
there none else there in that ye call Babylon; I answered, its like there is,
but they should not stay there, nor was it to be expected that that few were
able to carry on a Reformation, while among them, then he besought that either
I or my wife would give him warrant to seek a delay of that sentance, seeing he
had sought it so often, and now they distrusted him; she and I denied to give
him warrant to seek one hour, and then he cried out (with tears falling from
his eyes) alace for evermore, that ye will not grant me that request. And so
the next day, did cast me out, who was not in their Church. And some years
after, being about seven years since, this present Preacher at Montrose having
excommunicate my wife, the which after seven days was told her, she said, it
was strange the man would show so much malice and ignorance to curse her, that
for any thing she knew, he never saw, and was sure he never spoke with her, nor
knew never her principles nor practices, except it were what he had gathered
from lying slanders, but said she if we follow that that is good what can harm
us; and it is our place to watch that we may be keept holy and harm less in our
Generation, not having an evil eye against that Generation who must be doing
their work in this Age, as in former Ages against the Saints.

I may also mention that about 5. or 6. years since, two of my Salmond-Fishers
agreed to bring in to me lymestone, for so much the Boat full; (I then having
building in hand, the lyme-stone about two or three mile off along the
Seashore,) and one evening after their passing out of the water, there arose a
mighty tempest of a North Wind, that they could get no shore, but gave up
themselves for death, their oars being mostly washen from them, and their saill
beat down: The next day they told me that two of my men were lost, which
weighted me very sore, and the rather because one of them was a
Fellow-sufferer with me for conscience sake, and the other was an
extraordinary vicious person. While I was in this grief for them, my wife
having been sick of a long time, and I sitting by her, the third day after
their way-going, she told me the two men were safe and alive, and that the
wicked person whom she named, was preserved for the sake of the other, and not
only so, but the friend of truth was set safe on the rock, and the other was
drowned in the water, but was drawn out again and saved by the friend, which
was truly so; for their came word some days after, that after the middle of
the night the boat came in among the mighty waves of broken water at Fife-ness,
and one swell carried the boat upon the top of an high rock, where she set her
bottom, being fallen out, the friend looked and found the boat fast, and stopped
upon the rock and stood, the other began also to come out, and the waves
plucked him over the rock, the friend looked for him (being Moonlight) and
seeing him not, only saw a bonnet floating on the water, and having a tree in
his hand, he reached the tree to the bonnet on the water, the other under the
water striving with death, gat hold of the staff and held fast as any do in
such condition, the friend not knowing what it was, drew and he came up; and
was saved to the admiration of many in that countery to this day, how they were
saved: and he called Lord of Kin-kell Hamiltoune furnished them with money;
after a day or two sent them home. The profane person after that he began to
abstain from some of his wicked ways, and be more serious, so that his
relations caused draw blood of him, as a madman, all which I concerned not my
self into, knowing that his physic behoved to come from another, and after
some time, I found it expedient to advise him to begin to walk in the good old
way, the light, in which he would find rest for his soul, and as therein he was
found faithful, he would come to know refreshment from the presence of the
Lord: Which he listened to, and grew more and more clear in his judgment, and
since has born a measure of testimony for the truth both in words and
conversation.

Other things I might mention which is not fit here, that my dear Wife had
revealed to her of the Lord. But now I shall touch of her carriage before her
departur hence! About eight months since, she told me, it was showen her that
she was married to another, she having gotten a new Name and a white-stone, and
all clade in white linen, the which, when told me was a wound to my heart; for
I concluded, she was to be taken from me, and joined more near to the Lamb, yet
I often cried to the Lord (that if it was his will) that bitter cup might
depart from me, not knowing, but that he might be entreated to spare her a
little then she began to grow sickly and six or seven weeks ago her sickness
increased much, that was known she was in a dropsy; about twenty days since
she was brought to bed of a child, (pretty easily considering her condtition)
then I began to have some hopes, the Lord had granted my supplication; About a
week after her delivery she began to be worse in her body, and about six or
seven days before her removal, one day sobbing very sore, she told me, that
the enemy of her soul was assaulting her very strongly to doubt of Gods love
to her, and telling her, that she had been too much in the encumbrances of the
world and that she had been too little devouted for Heaven, and that she was
not yet washen clean in the Blood of the Lamb; but that there stuck some of the
earth to her, by her too much looking at me and her children. And she desired
me to cry to the Lord for her, that the Son of righteousness would expel that
cloud, and beat back the enemy. And after some words I had to her, I found that
rock, that always in the wilderness follows and gives my thristy Soul drink,
then assisting me to pray before her bed, after which, she said, she had met
with refreshment; about evening I enquired if the enemy continued yet his
assaults, she said nay, the battle was ended, and she had the peace and love of
GOD running down on her Soul as a mighty river: And after that, daily comforted
and strengthened me, exhorting me not to mourn for her, and when I would be
sitting by her at sometimes, when some few of us used to meet together in the
Family, she would warn me not to neglect the occasion of waiting on the Lord;
and of meeting together and edifying one another. And said she, thou have more
reason then thousands to be zealous for the Lord, seeing he has done for thee
beyond what he has done for thousands, not can thou say that ever he failed
thee in the time of thy need, and he will not faill to be a help to thee and
thy children in my room. The time of her sickness was really a constant praying
time unto her, and exhorting to the fear of God; she said to her sister, I can
say, since ever I knew the truth I never wittingly disobeyed the LORD. Two
days before she departed, she said to me, some had been the day letting fall,
that our friends did not pray in the Name of Jesus, which she could not receive
nor own, and enquired me if I knew any such, I told her, I knew none such, nor
would I own such, for the Scripture bids ask in the Name of Jesus, as John
has it chap. 14.13. and chap. 16.24. And there was no acceptance but in the
Name of Jesus. The night she departed, being the last of the twelfth Month, I
desired her that after her speech failled (while life continued) she would let
it appear, her mind was fixed on the Lord by lifting up her hands, which she
did almost constantly, for about two hours till her breath failled, during
which time, her Sister speaking to me, said, what comfort would she now take of
all the Kingdoms of the world if offered her; she answered again (so as with
some difficulty it was heard by my laying my ear to her mouth,) the Lords
precious truth is the sweetest thing that ever she knew, and a while after she
said, blessed be the day that ever I knew it, repeating twice over. Then I said
to her sister, I believe clouds are far from her now, she answered, away with
clouds, clouds are far from me. Thereafter we could discern her lips moving, to
take up this words often uttered, LORD JESUS. After speech failled, she beckned
to each child at home to come to her and having lift up her eyes and hands
Heaven-wards, she laid them on their heads and blessed them. Then I rising to
stand a little in the floor, in a little space she missing me, looked after me,
and said, Dear, and hastily I drawing to her, breath was coming off, and she
moved no more. Which was about the 12. hour at night, of the last day of the
Month called February, 1670. and about the 40. year of her Age.

The next day there came one that she dearly loved, that came several times to
her in her sickness, viz. Arthur Straton of Kirkside his Wife; who was desirous
to see her and lay her hand on her, the which when she had, she said her face
appeared to her as the face of an Angel: that she never saw any thing whiter,
and had a red on her cheeks, as it seemed at a distance, and others testify
her beauty was wonderful to be seen on a dead body.

She was generally beloved of high and low in this part of the Nation, which
more appeared in her sickness by so many coming and sending to see how she
was, even some who had never seen her face, and by the general sound of the
multitude at the grave side, who sounded, such another woman they never knew,
and such a Lady was there never before in Kinnaber, nor likely would never be
again, for none upon earth can say they knew a spot in her conversation.

This I write not for exalting the creature, and drawing honor thereunto, but
that the Lord may have the glory of his work wrought in her, for to him is only
due all glory, honor, and praise, let all who have the breath of the Heavenly
life, exalt the Lord, and abase self making it of no reputation, even so Lord,
let this be thy work on me, and thine own work shall praise thee.

JOHN FULLERTOUN,
Kinnebar the 9. of the first Month, called March. 1671.

