THE FOURTH HUMBLE ADDRESS OF Several Societies of Baptized Believers (commonly
called Anabaptists) in the County of Lincoln; Humbly presented to Charles the
II. King of Great Britain, etc.
Containing Their faithful REPRESENTATION, sober VINDICATION, true THANKFULNESS,
Peaceable and constant RESOLUTION, and Humble PETITION, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
WE are not ignorant of the great and scandalous Reproaches, which as well by
our Neighbors, as by Public Intelligence, has of late been thrown upon us,
in common with all that are denominated Anabaptists in this Nation, as if we
were accessory to some Tragical undertaking, against your Majesty's Person and
Government, which wicked and indeed altogether Unchristian-like Practices, we
have in diverse Petitional Remonstrances, declared our utter disaffection to,
and detestation of.

And moreover, these rumoured Rebellions have not only been laid upon us in a
way of Scandal and Reproach, but we are also exposed upon this account, to many
other Indignities, Losses, and Inconveniences, by Imprisonments, and other
like Grievances, as if we had indeed been criminal, in those so much by us
despised Projects.

The consideration of which Grievances, May it please your Majesty, together
with the Remembrance of your Worthy Princely Promises, and Clemency to us
vouchsafed in times past, in order to our Ease and Protection from those
Oppressions, and very grievous Impositions, by some of your Majesty's Deputies,
exercised upon us (which we desire to mention here with such a grateful mind,
due and humble thankfulness, as becomes peaceable and faithful Subjects, in
that behalf) as also the clear evidence of our own Consciences in point of
Innocence, as to the evils premised, had indeed created in us, your poor
suffering Subjects, fresh resolutions humbly to have Remonstrated our
Sufferings to your Majesty, as also to persist in our wonted Importunities and
Supplications, for the accomplishment of what your Royal Self was pleased
Verbally to Indulge unto us, when by your Clemency we were admitted into your
Royal Presence; yet so, May it please your Majesty, as that we therein always
desired to have our eyes toward Him, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings;
and truly this our humble purpose was got to that maturity, as had not our
Remonstrance it self been surprised by a Party of Horse, and our selves at the
same time Imprisoned, it might have been presented to your Princely hands some
Months ago.

But even while we have since been waiting for an opportunity to clear our
Innocence to your Majesty and the whole Nation, we have met with your Majesty's
Declaration of the 26th. of December 1662. the through perusal and consideration
whereof, has in a measure turned our mournful Remonstrance, as it were into an
Hymn of Praises to the Most High, who (we hope) has put it so seasonably into
your Princely heart, to renew all those your Royal Engagements, and Promises,
which since it has pleased God to bring so perfectly to your Majesty's
Remembrance, we hope it may be an encouragement ministering comfort to all
patient Sufferers, and of concernment to those, who have in this respect, been
too incredulous touching your Majesty, which peradventure has proceeded from
their not weighing public affairs, otherwise than they appeared immediately to
correspond with their particular ease and quiet.

But now, may it please your Majesty, we hope that both our selves and others
will be abundantly satisfied, that there was a Principle of Truth in your Royal
heart, antecedent to those worthy Engagements, the convincing appearance
whereof, will yet more lively appear, when they shall branch forth themselves
in such an Act, as your Majesty has so solemnly promised to promote, to the
great content of all men certainly, save such as have not learned to do to
others as they would in the same case be done unto.

Under your Majesty's favor, we are humbly bold to say thus much of your
excellent Declaration, That therein is so much said, and that with so much
Equity, Indifferency, Reason and Clemency, as that we verily think, no good
Subject, can tell how with modesty to desire more.

Whereupon we do even heartily pray unto the Father of Peace, That he would
vouchsafe to continue your Majesty in those so acceptable Purposes and
Resolutions, to the advancing His own glory and the prosperity of your Majesty,
and all your peaceable and good Subjects, and to the removal and total
extinguishing all those remains of distrust, which the late strange, and indeed
harsh Scene of affairs has contracted in the minds of many good People in
these Nations; insomuch, that their eyes were more beyond the Seas, than in
their own native Country, for a place whereon to rest the soles of their feet.

Finally, May it please your Majesty, we have only these things to testify
and request in all humility before your Majesty (viz.) That as we have formerly
declared our Resolution (in the strength of God) to live peaceably, and either
in a passive or active sort, obediently under your Government; so upon the
occasion of the late Reproaches cast upon us, we do hereby once more sincerely
declare the same Resolution to remain in us.

And as touching matters of Religion, we judge what we have therein received,
to be as precious as ever, and so as much resolved to continue the same
(through Christ strengthening us, as ever) which we humbly hope your Majesty
will not deem as an act of disloyalty; and we are the rather induced to believe
this, from your Majesty's own construction of our Third Petition, where your
words are thus recorded (viz.) That you were satisfied your Lincolnshire
Petitioners were a peaceable People, and good Subjects; which term, good
Subjects, (we conceive) could not have respect to our relinquishing our
Religion (the Heads whereof were long before presented to your Princely hands)
for your Majesty knew right well, that at that very time we were in your
Majesty's common Goal of Lincoln, for that we could not conform to the Church
of England as now established.

Wherefore in all humble Submission, we do earnestly beseech your Majesty, that
it may please you to hasten the Deliverance of your innocent suffering
Subjects; who (though Innocent) are yet Imprisoned in your Majesty's common
Goal at Lincoln, as well as in several other Places of your Dominions: As also
that the intolerable Burdens that lies upon us by the Proceedings of the
Commissary Courts, may be removed, which truly are such, as if your Majesty do
not remedy, will in a very short time bring us, our poor Wives and innocent
Children to utter Ruin; for we are already by means thereof brought in great
straits. Our Neighbors and near Relations are afraid of us, and dare not deal
with us, for fear of their Excommunications. But that we be not further
tedious, we do in all Humillity present these our sad Sufferings, Resolutions
and Supplications to your Princely Consideration, humbly beseeching your
Majesty, to grant your poor innocent suffering Subjects the Fruition of your
Princely Favors.

From the Castle of Lincoln, January, 17th. 1662/3. And your poor Subjects as
in Duty they are bound, shall ever pray, etc. Tho. Grantham, Daniel Cheesman,
John Thorpe, Rich. Drewry, Rich. Crawford, John Kelsay, John Lupton, Val.
James, Will. Burton, John Watts, Will. Lilly, Tho. Muxworth.
In behalf of all concerned in this Petition.


THis PETITION was delivered into His MAJESTY'S own Hand, the second day of
this instant February; His Princely Answer was, That there should be a speedy
and effectual Course taken for the Releasement of Them in Lincolnshire, and the
rest throughout the Nation.


