FORM and OVERTURE, FOR AN Additional ACT, anent Registrating Summonds, and
Instruments of Interruption,
FORASMUCH, as by the 19 Act of the last Session of this Current Parliament,
all Summonds and Instruments of Interruption of Prescription, then Raised and
Taken, were Ordained to be Recorded in a particular Register, to be appointed
for that effect, and that within a Year after the date of the said Act, which
was the ninth of October 1696. His Majesty with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Does hereby Declare, That the said Years Space should
not Run against Minors.

Arguments why Minors ought to have been Exceped in the said Act, the 9 of
October 1696, And therefore that the same ought now to be Rectified.
By the Act 81. Par. 6. JAM: 6. Minores are excepted that the three years
within which Spulies should be pursued, should not run against them.

By the Act 9. Par. 2. Ses. 1. CHA: 2. Anent the Prescriptions of five Years,
Ten Years, and Twenty Years Respective, in the Cases of Arriestments, House
Maills, Bargains, Holograph Writes, Minors are Excepted, That none of these
Prescriptions should Run against them.

By the Act 10. of the said Parliament 2d. Session 1: K: Charles 2d, anent the
Seven Years, within which Citations used by way of Interruption, should bs
Renewed, Minors are Excepted.

Beside several Acts of Parliament more, as to the time appointed for pursueing
Summonds of Error. Actions of Removing, and the time for Redeeming Apprysings,
etc. In all of which Minors are excepted.

Item, Our Lawyers by their Writings testify, That by Our Law Prescription
should not Run against Minors. VIZ.

Chraigie, In his Repertorium Verbo Prescription.

Locharts Index of the Acts of Parliament, Verbo Prescription.

Stair, His Institutes, Tittle Prescription, page 347: N: 18.

Item, The Decision of the Lords, the 5 of July 1666, (...) against Wodsetters,
anent the 13 years, within which by the Act of Parliament 1617, Prescriptions
then already Run, might be interrupted, Found, That the said 13 Years did not
Run against Minors, Albeit no mention was made of them in the Act of Parliament.

In Respect whereof, And for preventing the Expensive Debate, that Minors may
have in pleading. Why the Years time mentioned in the said Act of Parliament,
for Recording Summonds of Interruption, should not militate against them; It
ought to be Rectified, by declairing Minors not liable to the said Year: Or
otherwise, allowing Minors yet a competent time for bringing in their Documents
to be Reeorded; In regaird of the Security, they might have thought themselves
in by the Grounds in Law aforesaid: And specially that the said particular
Office, to which by the Act of Parliament, Application should be made for
getting their Documents recorded, was not established till near five Months
after the date of the Act, whereby the Leidges were deprived of so much of the
time allowed to them by Law; And therefore highly reasonable that an Additional
time, at least should be granted for inbringing their Writes to be Recorded.


