A full and true Relation of the whole Transactions of the Company of Vintners,
the Farmers, and Coadventurers, as to the Farms of 40 s. per Tun, and Wine
Licenses, and the Medium.
ON the sixth of November, 1637, at a general meeting of all Retailers of Wines
in London, Westminster, and the Confines thereof at Vintners Hall, the
generality made choice of Alderman Abel, then Master of their Company, Edward
Kynaston, Ralph More Wardens, Rowland Wilson, Thomas Hutchinson, William Bowyer
Esqui^es, Robert Shaw, and Joseph Graves, George Hulbert, Michael Gardener,
Thomas Langton, and John Wilcoxe, or any three or more of them, (whereof the
Master and the chief Warden to to be one) to deal for the generality touching
an advancement of price upon retail of Wines suppressing the Coopers, a general
pardon, and diverse other benefits to be granted by his Majesty to the retailing
Vintners: But the Committee was not to conclude any thing therein without the
consent of the generality of Retailers, as by the Order made that day at
Vintners Hall may appear.

The Committee proceeded therein accordingly by and with the advice, consent,
and direction of the generality from time to time, as appears by their own
Orders at Vintners Hall, which are here faithfully set down, as they were truly
transcribed, and compared with their Book of Orders there.

The Orders are in these words,

^se were the ^sistants be^s the gene^y.
22 Die November. 1637. Master Abel Alderman, Master: Master Kinaston, Master
More, Master Courtman, Wardens, Master Bowyer, Master Davis, Master Robert
Shaw, Master Wild, Master Bonomy, Master King, Master Darling, Master
Leechland, Master Hamond, Master Griffith, Master Hulbert, master Field, master
Gardener.

^neral ^rt.
At this Court all the vintners and others Retailers of wine in London,
Westminster, and the parts thereunto adjoining were warned to meet together at
the Vintners Hall in London, the greater number whereof there appeared, and
upon report made to them by the Committees formerly chosen by them, what was
demanded for his Majesty. It was assented unto by the generality, that the
Committees might yield to pay forty shillings upon a tun, provided that they
might be assured to have from his Majesty the immunities and benefits proposed,
the which their assents was showed and expressed by holding up of their hands,
and they to report their proceedings to the Court from time to time.

The immunities and benefits were then put into writing by the Clarke of
Vintners Hall, and were comprehended in eleven heads or Articles, and
entitled: The humble desires of the Retaylers of Wines and were Presented
together with a petition to his Majesty a true Copy of both which here
follows.

The Petition of the retailing Vintners of London, and their Propositions and
Demands contrived and made amongst themselves at their Hall, in November 1637.
Whereby it may appear who projected the penny a Quart on Wines.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of your Majejesties Loyal Subjects, the Vintners and
Retailers of Wines, Freemen of the City of London.
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas the Company of Vintners of London, has anciently in times past,
been a flourishing Company, and has had and enjoyed sundry ancient Privileges
and Immunities, whereby the Freemen of that Company have in the exercise of
their Calling, become men of eminent place and authority in this your City of
London.

May it please your most excellent Majesty to be informed, that of late times,
the Wine Coopers have so invaded the privileges, and intruded into the Trade
and Profession of the Vintners, as that the said ancient Company is much
decayed thereby and impoverished, and like further to decline, unless by your
Princely Clemency the same be restored and upheld. And therefore your humble
Petitioners, prostrating themselves at the feet of your sacred Majesty, do most
humbly pray your Majesty will be graciously pleased to restore them to their
ancient freedom in the use of their profession. And withal (for the better
enabling them to do your Majesty service, and go on cheerfully in their
Callings) and to grant unto them such further additions of your Princely
Favors and Immunities, as are contained and expressed in the Schedule annexed,
and to pardon all their Delinquencies and transgressions past.

And in an humble and thankful acknowledgment of your Majesty's so ample and
royal favors extended to them, your humble Suppliants will with a free and
unanimous consent pay to your Majesty's use^, and your royal Successors the sum
of 2 l. for every Tun of Wine, which they shall hereafter retail or vend within
this your Kingdom, and as in duty bound will ever pray.

The humble desires of the Retailors of Wines.
THat all Merchants and others Importers of Wines into the Ports of London, may
be enjoined to sell their Wines to none but Retailors of Wines, being Vinters,
to the end your Majesty may have 2 l. on the Tun, upon all the Wines that shall
be imported, whereby the Merchants and others may not undersel the Vintners,
and deprive your Majesty of the said 2 l. on the Tun aforesaid, and the said
Vintners be hindered both in their whole Sale and Retail. 2 That no Retailors of
Wines, and other Buyers of Wines, within any place or places of this Realm, be
permitted to buy any Wines at any Port or places within this Realm, unless the
said Retailors or Buyers, do pay the aforesaid 2 l. on the Tun to his Majesty,
otherwise it will come to pass that all Retailors and other Buyers of Wines
will furnish themselves, to save the 2 l. a Tun, and neglect the free Vintners
of London. 3 That all Coopers and others may be restrained from intruding into
the Vintners Trade, buying or selling Wines either in gross or by retail for
time to come. 4 That all free Vintners may dress and sell Victuals, Beer,
Sugar and Tobacco in their Houses in London, or elsewhere as anciently they have
done heretofore, they buying their Tobacco of any licensed to sell it. 5 That
there may be a repayment by way of defalcation of the 6000 li. which the
Vintners paid into your Majesty's receipt of the Exchequer, for a great part
whereof they pay Interest at this day. 6 That the granting of Licenses to
retayle Wines within London and three miles compass, may be hereafter and
hence forth restrained, and none to be hereafter granted, And also that the
free Vintners may have power according to their ancient Charter to draw wines
freely in the four principal Roads, and all Cities and Port Towns within this
Realm. 7. That his Majesty will be graciously pleased to grant to all free
Vintners and retaylors of Wines his his most gracious, general, and free
pardon for all delinquencies and transgressions whatsoever by them committed in
the exercise of their Trade, either by whole sale or retail to this day, And
also a confirmation of their ancient Charter with liberty to adventure for Wine
of all sorts, with such additions as it shall please your Majesty to confer
on them, and to be annexed to their Charter. 8 That all Retailors of Wines
within London and three miles thereof, may be reduced to be Freemen of the
Company of Vintners, for the better government of their trade in general. 9
That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to grant to the said free
Vintners license to sell at 1 d. a quart, over and above the prices yearly set
by the Lords of the Council; whereby they may be enabled to pay to your Majesty
2 l. upon the Tun. 10 That high Country Wines in regard of their extraordinary
prices and small Cask, may be sold at 1 d. a quart, above the rate allowed for
ordinary French Wines. 11 That if his Majesty hereafter shall be graciously
pleased to let to farm the said 2 l. per Tun; Then that the Company of Vintners
may be admitted to farm the same before any other.
Whereby, and by the said Order of the 22 of November, it appears that the
demand of liberty to raise 1 d. 2 d. a quart, and the offer 40 s. a tun,
proceeded originally from the generality of the Vintners, and as it was their
voluntary offer and project, so every Article of their desires is for the
benefit of each drawing Vintner, the Clark of the Company put the said Articles
into writing in the Common Hall, as the several drawing Vintners directed and
dictated to him.

The next meeting at Vintners Hall was on the 27 of November, 1637. The Order
thus.

These the Assistants this day.
27 Die November. 1637, Reg. Car. 13. William Abel Alderman Master, Master More,
Master Courtman, Wardens, Master Wilson, Master Bowyer, Master Shaw, Master
Bludworth, Master Bonamy, Master King, Master Robert Lee, Master Griffith,
Master Hulbert, Master Baily, Master Gardener.

At this Court upon relation made by our Master of the passage of the business
referred to him and other Committees, touching the payment of 40 s. on a tun to
his Majesty for Wines retailed, and upon reading of the Petition prepared to
be delivered to his Majesty with the several reasons thereto annexed. It is
ordered that the master together with the former Committees appointed by the
court shall proceed in that business as they shall from time to time find
expedient, acquainting this court with their proceedings.

By these orders it is manifest, that this project was the work of the
general company of drawing vintners, for they chose the Committee, they take
account of the Committee, and they order and direct the Committee to proceed,
acquainting them with their proceedings. In all which Alderman Abel was but one
of the Committee chosen and employed by his Company for their public service;
and neither he nor any particular man, but the drawing vintners had, or could
have any private interest or end. For Alderman Abel had given over his trade
long before.

The next Order was the seventh of February, in these words, viz.

Septimo die Februarii, 1637, Reg. Car. 13.

These were Assistants besides the ge^rality.
Master Abel Alderman Master, Master Kinaston, Master More, master Courtman,
Wardens, Master Wilson, Master Hutchinson, master Bowyer, Master Davies, Master
Robert Shaw, Master Bludworth, master Bonamy, Master King, Master Darling,
master Conradus, Master Griffith, Master Hulbert, Master Field, Master Ashwell,
master Gardener.

A general Court.
This day all the Retailors of Wines inhabitants within the City of London, and
adjacent places being warned to appear at this Court, the greater number of
them appeared: To whom the Master related what had been further propounded in
that business now in agitation with his Majesty, and amongst other things,
that his Majesty was pleased to accept of forty shillings a tun for wines
retailed, and likewise for the farm thereof thirty thousand pound a year, but
his majesty would not contract with the whole generality, but with some
particular men of ability, to whom his majesty may resort for the performance
of that which shall be contracted for, and thereupon the said master propounded
to the generality.

First, whether they did hold and confirm their former resolution to pay forty
shillings a tun for all Wines to be retailed, and

Secondly, whether they would accept of the Farm thereof at thirty thousand
pounds a year: To both which Propositions with an unanimous consent, they
agreed and declared their consents, by holding up their hands.

And likewise it was also considered for furtherance of the proceeding in the
said business, that ten persons should be named, who should contract with his
majesty, in such manner as learned Council should advise, and for that purpose
the generality did nominate William Abel Alderman, Rowland Wilson, Thomas
Hutchinson, William Bowyer, Esquires, Robert Shaw, Edward Kynaston, Ralph More;
Jacob Bonamy, George Hulbert Esquire, and Michael Gardener Citizens, and
vintners of London; with this, that if any of the said ten should refuse to
take upon him to be one of the said Contractors, that then another should be
chosen in his steed, and those ten to contract with his Majesty, and to stand
engaged for payment of the ^arm rent at the times, and in the manner to be
agreed upon, and it was thought necessary and agreed, that the said ten should
take unto them so many as should make up thirty, who should under write, and
bring in every man a thousand pound, for so much thereof, as should be thought
expedient from time to time to disburse, and that every of them should ratably
according to their sums disbursed receive profit, if the business proved
profitable, and likewise to bear their proportionable shares of charges and
loss, if the business shall not happen to produce profit, but loss.

By this order it is to be observed, first, that as this project had his birth
at Vintners Hall, being there contrived by the generality of drawing Vintners,
so it was still prosecuted by the generality, for the greatest number of them
appeared at this Court.

Secondly, That the generality confirmed it with an unanimous consent, not one
contradicting it.

Thirdly, That for furtherance of the business the generality nominated
Alderman Abel then Master, and nine more Vintners, who should contract with his
Majesty on the Companies behalf, because his Majesty would not contract with
the generality.

Which shows with what cheerfulness and earnest desire they prosecuted the
effecting of the project; and this convinces those that pretend that the
Vintners were persuaded, or threatened by Alderman Abel, the Alderman did not,
nor needed to persuade them, for they nominated and engaged him. And had not
this and nine other Orders of their Hall clearly manifested with what earnest
desires, and unanimous assents they contrived and prosecuted it, they would
have out-faced all truth. But against their own orders what can be replied.

And none do testify any words of persuasion or threats, but those that are
parties and delinquents in the highest degree.

1 Parties to the original contriving the Project. 2 Parties to the Indenture
of creation of the project, and 3 Parties that took benefit by the project, so
they all speak in excuse of themselves.
At another general Court, 21 Martii, 1637. and a Court of Assistance held 29
of March, 1638, they all ratified and confirmed their assents formerly given to
the said project, not any one gainsaying it.

On the nineteenth of May, 1638, they appointed who should seal the
quadupartite Indenture (which is the Deed of Creation of the Project) the Order
is in these words.

(...) were the ^ants ^t that (...)
19 May 1638. Reg. Car. 14. William Abel Alderman, Master, master Kynaston
Warden, master Wilson, Master Robert Shaw, master Bludworth, master Bonamy,
master Darling, master Leechland, master Conradus, master Griffith, master
Hulbert, master Ashwell, master Gardener.

At this Court the names of such as are appointed to seal to the Indenture,
between his majesty, the French and Spanish merchants, and the Corporation of
the Vintners were here appointed and declared, viz.

William Abel Alderman. Edward Kinaston. Ralph More. Robert Shaw. Jacob Bonamy.
Ralph King. George Gopsel. Henry Barns. Cordwell Hamond. George Shaw. George
Hulbert. Anthony Baily. John Birch. Francis Ashwell. Michael Gardener. Matthew
Forster. John Gregory. William Hancock. William Kimpster. Thomas Simcots.
Thomas Dudley. George Stanley. John Wilcox. Mark Hillesley. William Bellamy.
Ralph Hutchinson. Joseph Rogers.
All these (except the Alderman then master, are drawing vintners, whereby it
appears by whom, and for whose ends this project was set on foot, and
prosecuted.

25 May 1638. The several persons here undernamed, brought and paid at vintners
Hall the several sums here under mentioned, as Farmers and Adventurers of
Sharers, and the persons and sums hereunder set down, are entered in the Hall
Book, excepting two or three of them, who afterward brought in their said sums
of a 100 li. a piece to master Travers the Under-treasurer, to the said
Farmers, and their names and sums are entered in his Book.

li. William Abel Alder. 100 Ralph King. 100 Thomas Dudley. 100 George Stanley.
100 Mark Hillesley. 100 Thomas Simcots. 100 William Conradus. 100 William
Leechland. 100 Cap. Matthew Forster. 100 John Gregory. 100 George Hulbert. 100
Jacob Bonamy. 100 Thomas Darling. 100 Joseph Rogers. 100 William Dickens. 100
Cordwell Hamond. 100 Edward Darling. 100 George Griffith. 100 Thomas Wilcoxe.
100 Robert Lee. 100 Ralph More. 100 Edward Kinaston. 100 Rowland Wilson. 100
Michael Gardener. 100 Ralf Hutchinson. 100 Andrew Courtman 100 Matthew Terry.
100 Robert Shaw. 100 Richard Davis. 100 Francis Ashwell. 100 Henry Crone. 100
Cap. Henry Sanders Thomas Gough. 100 Christ. Metcalf Cap. Langham. 100 Henry
Lee. 100 William Bowyer 100 Roger Kilvert. 100

Note the said sunmes were not brought or paid to Alderman Abel, but at
Uintners Hall, whereby it still shows this to be the work of the Company.

After all this, at two several assemblies of the Company in their Hall it was
ordered, that the seal of the Compnny should be put to the said Indenture of
creation of the project.

The Orders follow in these words.

These the ^sistants this day.
16 Junii 1638. William Abel, Alderman Master, Master Kinaston, Master More,
Master Courtman, Wardens, Master Wilson, Master Bowyer, Master Davis, Master
Shaw, Master Heart, Master Bludworth, Master Clegate Master Darling, Master
Hamond, Master Conradus, Master Griffith, Master Baily, Master Ashwell, Master
Gardener.

Whereas for the settling of the Farm of forty shillings to be paid to his
majesty upon every tun of wine to be imported, and sold in this Kingdom, there
are Indentures quadrupartite to be passed between the Kings most excellent
majesty on the first part; the Corporation of Vintners on the second, the
Company of French merchants on the third, and the Spanish merchants on the
fourth part, which are to be sealed on the companies behalf, with the common
seal of this company, which is to be performed at the Kings Aturnies chamber.
It is ordered that the common seal shall be taken forth and delivered to our
master, and he to cause the same to be put to the said Indentures, and to
return the same seal to be safely kept in the treasury.

Secundo die August. 1638. Reg. Car. 14.

These were the Assistants present besides the generality.
Master John Heart Master, Master Griffith, Master Alexander Child, Wardens,
Master Alderman Abel, Master Wilson, Master Davis, Master Robert Shaw, master
Kinaston, Master Bludworth, Master Bonomy, Master King, Master Darling, Master
Leechland, Master Robert Lee, master Courtman, Master Conradus, master George
Shaw, master Gardener, M. Hulbert, master Birch, Master Foster.

^neral ^rt.
The generality here assembled gave consent that master Alderman Abel should
have the Companies common Seal delivered unto him, and that he should therewith
seal the Companies part of the quadrupartite Indenture made with his majesty
and others, and when that is done to return the same to be safely kept in the
Treasury, together with the Companies part of the said Indenture. And
accordingly the Seal was sent by master Heart, then master of the Company, to
Alderman Abels house, by the hands of their Beadle; and master Griffith, one of
the Contractors then Warden of the Company carried it to master Atturnies, and
sealed the Indenture with it, the Alderman being then out of town.

What can be more plain, then that this was the work of the whole Company.

The Companies part of the Indenture must be kept with their common Seal in
their Treasury, for so was it appointed by this last Order of the General Court.

The Project was contrived by the generality at a general Court, as by the
Order of the 22 of November. It was confirmed by the generality with unanimous
consent, not one contradicting it at a general Court 7 Feb. 1637. and then the
generality nominated and appointed ten of their Company to contract with his
majesty on behalf of the whole Company.

And their common Seal was ordered to be put to the Indenture of creation of
the project at a general court, when Alderman Abel was not Master. And besides
out of Town.

So all the material and principal passages of the creation of this Project
were acted in their Hall at general Courts, and by the generality.

And it cannot be denied, but that a greater number of drawing Uintners
appeared at those general Courts, then has been known at any Court of former
times.

And as it appears by the Orders of those general Courts, that Alderman Abel
was engaged in the business by the generality (as he was master of their
Company) so it appears also by the same Orders, that neither he, nor any others
were single actors of any thing in the creation or contrivement of the Project,
but that it was the very Project of the generality of Retailing vintners, for
the profit of themselves only

The 20th Novemb^
For upon reading the Petition of James Mason and Robert Quarterman and others,
preferred against Alderman Abel and the rest of the Farmers, upon the 20th day
of November at their Hall. The then Master and Wardens of the Company of the
vintners, with the rest of the Court of Assistance, made a Declaration, and
entered it in their Hall Book, wherein are contained these very words.

And master Alderman Abel and diverse other the Contractors never sith-hence
dealt in gross, nor benefited themselves by the advance upon the retail of
Wines: so as he has in all this been but a person even entreated into the
business for the Company, and no whit for himself, nor has otherwise, or in
other manner, or for other cause acted any thing at all in or concerning this
business.

For the Medium.
It was first occasioned by the drawing Vintners, for in the first Article o^
their project, they demanded that all Merchants, may be enjoined to sell their
wines to none but the retayling Vintners.

The Merchants opposed it, and showed that in case they should be tied up from
selling their wines to any but vintners, it would be their undoing, and the
overthrow of their trades, unless the Vintners would oblige themselves to take
off their wines at the prizes ^et by the Lords, for otherwise the Vintners
would beat down the Merchants prices, and leave their wines on their hands.

Whereupon after several debates, touching that particular between the
Merchants and Uintners, it was at a general Court held at Uintners Hall the
21, of March, 1637. agreed and consented to by the generality of Retailers:
That they would yearly take from the Merchants at the set prices, such a
quantity of wine as was by them yearly imported according to a Medium, to be
taken of their last seven years importation.

And at another general Court, the 29 off the same March, they again
consented to take off the Merchants wines, as by the order following appears.

29 Martii 1638.

These we^ Assistants ^sides the ^rality.
William Abel Alderman, Master, master Kinaston, master More, master Courtman,
Wardens, master Wilson, master Hutchinson, master Bowyer, master Davies, master
Robert Shaw, master Bludworth, Master King, Master Clegate, master Darling,
Master Hamond, Master Conradus, master Griffith, Master George Shaw, master
Hulbert, Master Field, Master Baily, Master Ashwell.

A genera^ Court.
This day upon a general summons of all retailers of wines given by the
Officers of the Hall for their apperance here, a very ample number of them
came, to whom the Master again declared what had passed betwixt himself and
some other committees of this Company, and the Medium of wines by them required
to be taken off, and the Master again propounded to the said retailers whether
they were willing for accommodation of those English Merchants to take their
wines being good and merchantable, as in former times, in such a moderate way
as is lately propounded, and hereafter to be agreed upon, not exceeding the
Medium; No wars, act of State, contagion, great sickness, or mortality
hindering the vent of Wines. To which they declared and signified their
consents, as also that the farm of 40 shillings a Tun, shall be accepted at the
rent of 30000 li. per annum, and the granting of Licenses for Taverns at 7000
li. per annum.

And the next Court day being the 19 of May 1638. the Company appointed a
certain number of retailing Vintners to seal the quadrupartite indenture on
behalf of the whole company which, indenture was several times openly read
and ratified in their Hall at general meetings, and in that Indenture the
vintners covenant expressly to take off from the Merchants 4000 tun Spanish,
and 5000 tun French wines; (being the Medium agreed on by the merchants and
vintners) and in consideration thereof the merchants covenanted and obliged
themselves to sell to no coopers, nor country vintners.

Thus was the Medium begot by the London vintners and for their benefit, who by
this means monopolized the retailing of wines both in city and country, and
were the sole Authors of the Medium; and afterward to make sure work, they got
an order from the Council Board that those merchants that should break their
contract by selling wines to coopers or country vintners should not have their
wines taken off.

The vintners having thus tied up the merchants from selling to any but them,
would not take off their wines, as by contract they were bound, but furnished
themselves from Strangers, and left those native merchants wines on their hands
to their great loss and almost undoing.

Thereupon, those merchants were driven to petition the Lords of the council,
and to set forth the unfaithful and fraudulent dealing of the vintners, and
upon several hearings of what could be said on both sides, their Lordships
ordered the vintners to take off from those merchants who had been so much
wronged a small quantity, far short of that which the vintners by their own
contract were bound to take, and were wines which a select committee of
vintners ( Michael Gardener being one) had chosen and marked out for good and
merchantable wines.

True it is, in regard of the great quantity of wines imported that year, the
vintners might have bought those wines somewhat cheaper, but they retailed them
all at the highest prices, and lost not, but gained by them, and in case any
one piece of those wines failed on their hands, it was through the Uintners
own wilfulness, in that they would not husband them, rack them from their
lees, and take them from the Merchants in due time as by their contract they
were bound and ought to have done.

In the great and numerous company of Vintners, there are about 40. whereof
some would not pay the Merchant for their Medium wines, others would not pay
the 40. shillings a tun to the King, and some of the refusers to pay for
their Medium wines were upon complaint of the Merchants, owners of those wines
committed to the Fleet by the Lords; and others that would not pay the 40.
shillings a tun, after long forbearance, were sued.

These forty being indebted to his Majesty in great sums for the forty
shillings a tun, petitioned the Honorable House of Commons against Alderman
Abel, Ralph More, George Grifsith, Rowland Wilson, and the rest of the Farmers,
and by their Petition they set forth, that they were compelled to take medium
Wines to their loss, and enforced to pay fotry s. upon a tun all Wines, both
which are untrue, for they had voluntarily obliged themselves by their said
contract to perform both, upon more then valuable considerations as is before
declared, and upon those and the like false pretense, that they opposed the
project, they would exempt themselves from making restitution to the
Commonwealth of the great sums which they have gained by the project.

To these its answered, that they amongst the rest were present at the
contriving of, and gave their consents to the project at vintners Hall, and
again, though they refused to pay the 40 s. per Tun to his Majesty yet they
have the conscience to take the 1 d. and 2 d. a quart, and enjoyed all other
benefits and advantages by the project, and yet more, some of them had the
faces to take the 3 d. a quart, which was half a Tun above the set prices on
Malligoes and Sheries, as was proved before the Committees of Parliament.

Thus you may see how these men had the consciences to take on all wines 4 l.
on some 8 l. on others 12 l. a tun above the set prices (although in the set
prices there is included a competent gain to them) and to exact all other the
advantages by the contract, but they will not pay the King 40. shillings a
tun, nor take off the Merchants wines as other vintners did, and as they by
their contract were bound to do.

These will enjoy all profits, but will endure no loss.

Are not these men more inexcusable to blame, then the rest of the vintners,
that taking the 1 penny and 2 pence a quart paid the 40 shillings to the King,
and performed their contract with the merchants. For the end of these men's
complaint in Parliament, was to free themselves from payment of the 40
shillings a Tun to the King, on those Wines for which they had taken from the
Subject 4 l. 8 l. and 12 l. a Tun, above the set prices.

But the truth is, that the Vintners, having received a double benefit by this
their Project, to wit, pardon for their fore-past delinquencies, and increase
of price on all their Wines, would have escaped the justice of the high Court
of Parliament, and have prevented both punishment and restitution by casting
their Project from off themselves and others, and by conceasing and denying
their most unconscionable benefit, but their own Orders which they so long
denied, and would still deny, have been several times proved at the several
Committees, and out of those their own Orders (against which no modest man
would con^end.) They have upon ten several hearings before the said Committees
been four times voted by the Committees to be the Contrivers of the Project and
Delinquents.

For the Licenses.
The 22 day of November. 1637 A general Court.
At a general Court, viz. on the foresaid 22 day of November 1637, when the
several immunities and benefits comprehended in eleven heads or Articles were
put in writing at Vintners hall by their Clark, one of the said Articles (
viz.) the 6th, was, that the granting of Wine Licenses in and about London be
restrained, and that the free Vintners may draw Wines in the four principal
Roads, and in all Cities and Market Towns. But the said Licenses being before
that granted by the late King Charles, to the Lord Goring, and he in actual
possession thereof.

The 7th. of Februar. 1637. A general Court.
The said generality as in the aforesaid Order of the 29th. of March 1638. did
consent and agree, That the granting of Licenses should be farmed at 7000 l.
per annum, and whereas by the aforesaid Order of the seventh of February 1637,
the generality nominated ten Contractors to contract with his Majesty for the
duty of 40 s. per tun, at 30000 l. per annum, who should take to them so many
as should make up thirty, who should go 1000 li. a man Adventure at this
general Court ( viz.) on the said 29th. of March 1638. The 29th. of March,
1638. A general Court.
They order, that the said Contractors shall take to them so many as should
under-write 1000 l. a man, as shall make up with the said Contractors 37
shares, and accordingly the said Contractors did take to them so many as did
make up their shares, who did under-write their names at Vintners Hall, to go a
1000 l. adventure in the said farms, and brought into stock a 100 l. a man,
which was paid into the hands of master Traveis Under-treasurer to the Farmers.

Thus the retailing vintners assumes the whole benefit of all the
aforementioned benefits and immunities to themselves, excepting the farming of
the 40 s. per tun, and Wine Licenses, which by the preceding Orders, most
plainly appears. They turned over to the said Contractors and Coadventurers,
who accordingly did contract with the said late King Charles, and the said Lord
Goring for the said farms, and did rent to themselves an house for a meeting
place, and did take to themselves a Treasurer an Assistant and Under-treasurer,
Clarks and Accountants, and Waiters, and several other Officers, and did allot
and pay to them by their Under-treasurer their several yearly stipends, and did
sit and make Orders which were first drawn up by Master Griffith, one of the
said Farmers, and afterward engrosse in a fair Book by Master Winton their
Clark, and did receive the benefit and profits arising by the said Farms, which
said Contractors and Coadventurers did take to them several Sub-adventurers.
The names of all which are hereunto annexed with their particular adventures in
the said Farms, as they are set down under the hand of Master George Griffith,
one of the said Farmers and Assistant to the Treasurer, which said Contractors,
Coadventurers, and Subadventurers did agree amongst themselves, about November
a thousand six hundred thirty nine, to purchase of the said Lord Goring, his
whole interest in the said Wine Licenses, and that each of them should have and
bear his share of loss or gain in the said purchase, according to his said
Adventure. And what moneys soever should be taken up at Interest, or brought in
by any upon that occasion should be born and paid by the said Contractors,
Co-adventurers and Sub-adventurers, according to their several adventures, as
will appear by several Orders of the Farmers, and a note of Subscription hereto
annexed under thirty of their hands. Which said sum of 18000 li. was paid to
the said Lord Goring in manner following, That is to say, 9000 li. thereof out
of the joint stock of the said Contractors, Co-adventurers and Sub-adventurers,
and 9000 li. more by the order and desire, and upon the undertaking of the
whole number, by moneys taken up at Interest by William Abell and Robert Shaw,
together with two or three others, and upon payment of the said 18000 li. to
the said Lord Goring, the said Lord Goring did assign his said interest to the
said William Abell and Robert Shaw, and 10 others in trust for the rest, etc.

Who by virtue of the said Assignement, did receive the profi^s thereof, until
Francis Dickens their Clerk under pretense of a former Deed to his father
William Dickens in the year 1643 went to Oxford, and carried all the Books of
Accounts a way with him.

Whereupon the then Committee for the public revenue, sequestered the Agencie
of the said Wine Licenses with the profits thereof, and put in Agents of their
own nomination.

And the said Contractors, etc. refusing to pay their just shares, and the said
Agents (since the said sequestration) receiving the Rents and profits arising
by the said Licenses.

The said William Abel and Robert Shaw after many tedious and vexatious Suits,
and after several times petitioning and appearing before the said Committee for
the revenue for release of the said Sequestration, and all without the least
redress.

The said William Abel and Robert Shaw have lately presented their humble
Petition to the Honorable Committee of Parliament for Prisons and Prisoners
against the said Contractors, etc. and others in that Petition named, which
Petition their Honors have bin pleased to recommend by their Letter to the
honorable Committee of Judges sitting at Salters Hall, and thereupon the said
Abel and Shaw have applied themselves by their Petition for relief to their
Honors, both which Petitions are here annexed, together with a Petition lately
presented to the Parliament by some of the said Contractors, etc. under the
names of the Master and Wardens, and Company of vintners of the City of London,
in which Petition they acknowledge the payment of the said 18000 l. for the said
purchase of the wine Licenses, which they say in their Petition, they were
forced to take up at interest, and for a great part thereof some of their
members have been imprisoned these 9 years past, there are like without redress
in the premises still to continue to their utter ruin; which said petition
upon the Parliament, referring the examination of the Agency for Wine Licenses
to the Committee for inspection into treasuries by their Order of the first of
August 1653, The said Master and Wardens, etc. Contractors and Co-adventurers
together have several times appeared before the said Committee, and now lately
( viz) on Tuesday the sixth of December 1653, with Council owning the contents
of their Petition and craving releife thereupon, as will appear by two several
Orders of the said Committee, hereto annexed.

In which petition they acknowledge the Purchase, the consideration of the
Purchase ( viz) 18000 l. The taking up of the moneys at interest, and the
imprisonment of their members for the same and that even to their utter ruin
and there never being any other member either of the Company of vintners (as of
the Company) or of the contractors Co-adventurers and Subadventurers (as of
them likewise) that is or ever was in prison for any of the said 18000 l. other
then the said Master Abel and Master Shaw and one master Moore lately
imprisoned also for the said moneys.

The said Abel and Shaw do humbly conceive, that upon comparing the Companies
said Petition presented to the Committee for inspection, etc. and the said
Committees two Orders, together with three several Orders of the Farmers here
following, and their note likewise of subscription under their hands, hereto
annexed. That these men will most justly be liable to pay the debts, either as
the Company, or as Contractors, etc.

The Vintners Petition, the Committees Orders, and the Orders of the Farmers
here follows.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Petition of the Master, Wardens, and Company of Vintners of the
City of London.
Showing,
THat the granting of Wine Licenses in England and Wales, were excepted out of
the Statutes against Monopolies, in the 21th year of the late King James.

That the late King Charles. the 20th. day of December, in the seventh year of
hise Rign, by his Indenture under the Great Seal of England, did constitute
George Lord Goring, and others in trust for him Agent or Agents for the Wine
Licenses in England, Wales, and Berwick, Devon and Cornwall, and Exeter
excepted for 21 years, from the 20th. of December 1630.

That in the year 1638, the said late King, for valuable consideration granted
to Sir Sackvile Crow Baronet 1600 li, per annum, to be issuing out of the Rents
and sums of money to grow payable to him his heirs and successors, for or in
respect of granting Licenses for selling of Wines, amounting then unto 2166 l.
13 s. 4 d. per annum; out of which 1600 l. per annum, your Petitioners
purchased 400 l. per annum, which cost them 2400 l. and then there remained to
the Crown no more then 566 l. 13 s. 4 d. per annum.

That your Petitioners being beforehand advised by learned Council of the
legality of the said Lord Gorings and his Trustees interest did in the year
1639 by special command of the late King Charles, in consideration of 18000 l.
paid to the Lord Goring, and of the said 2166 l. 13 s. 4 d. reserved to the
Crown purchase the said Agency from him and his said Trustees.

That one William Dickens some times Servant to the Lord Goring, did manage
the said Agency for the Lord Goring, and aftewards for your Petitioners and the
said Copartners (so long as he lived) and after him Franciss Dickens, Gent, his
son did the like for your Petitioner, and respectively Accounted before
Auditor Spackman in their Names and to their uses.

That your Petitioner enjoyed the said Agency, and four hundred Pounds per
annum until they were interupted by Francis Dickens under pretense of a
fraudelent Deed who went to Oxford in the year 1643: By reason whereof the then
Committee of the Public revenues sequestered the said agency, and all rents and
Profits, etc and put in other Agents of their own nomination, who keep their
Office in Fleet street, and have enjoyed the profits thereof ever since. And
under pretense of Francis Dickins Delinquency. Your Petitiones have ever since
been kept out of the said Agency. Notwithstanding they have used all the means
they could to be restored thereunto.

That when the present Agents entered upon the said Agency, there was due to
your Petitioners for Arrears and Fines 14000 l. or thereabouts, and in annual
Rents for Licenses about 3000 l. per annum, besides the profit and benefit of
making and renewing of Licenses. And all arrears and profits, except 566 l. 13
s. 4 d. per annum due to the late King, all which was of right to have come
into your Petitioners hands, they having really disbursed for the same 20400 l.
which your Petitioners were forced to take up at interest. And for a great part
thereof, some of their members have been imprisoned these nine years past, and
there are like without redress in the premises, still to continue to their
utter ruin.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray your Honors will be pleased to
commiserate their distressed estate, and speedily to take strict examination
how, and in what manner the present Agents have demeaned and do demean
themselves in the said Agency, and when, and to whom, and how much money they
have answered to the Commonwealth, and in what condition the Agency now
stands, whereby your Petitioners doubt not but the Interest of the
Commonwealth will be much advanced, and your Petitioners also receive some
competent satisfaction for the great sums of money so as before by them
disbursed; The rather for that, besides the sums before mentioned, They have
lent to the use of the Commonwealth at least 12000 l. for which they pay
Interest to this day:

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. George Griffith, Master. Henry
Croone Edw. Fauconer Richard Maijor
Wardens Joseph Rogers. Thomas Benson.


At the Committee of Parliament for Inspecting the Treasuries, and regulating
Officers and Salleries.
Nove. 2^ Dickins (...) his Sist^
WHereas, upon reading of the Petition of William Dickins, Anne, Elizabeth,
Tomazin, and Mary, his sisters, being the younger Children of Mr. William
Dickins, their late Father deceased, wherein they allege that the said William
Dickins having an Interest in the profits of a Patent made from the late King
unto the Lord Goring and others for compounding for, and granting Licenses to
sell wine by retail throughout England and Wales ( Devon and Cornwall excepted)
did by his last Will, whereby he made Francis his Son, his Excecutor, bequeath
unto the Petitioners several sums of money, amounting in all to three
thousand nine hundred pounds to be raised out of the yearly Revenue of the said
Patent, out of which the Petitioners assert, they have not yet received any
thing toward their said portions for that the profits of the said office were
in May, one thousand six hundred forty four, sequestered for the Delinquency of
Francis Dickins, Executor of the said William, though he was only Interessed
in the said Revenue, as an Executor and Testementary Trustee, for which Causes
they prayed satisfaction of their Portions out of the arrears of the said
profits of the said Patent. This Committee upon the whole matter, finding
themselves incapable to determine any thing; as to the relief of the
Petitioners, until the present Commissioners and Agents for Wine Licenses, and
also the Master and Company of Vintners London, who claim several Interests in
and to the office of Agency and granting of Wine Licenses be heard, do
therefore Order that the present Commissioners and Agents for Wine Licenses, as
also the Master and Warden of the Company of Vintners; and likewise Master
Cozens, late Clerk to the Committee for the Revenue, together with the
Petitioners, do attend this Committee in the Inner Court of Wards, on Tuesday,
the twenty ninth day of this instant November, by two of the clock in the
afternoon, to offer and manifest what they can unto this Commit, relating to
each man's respective Interests, and thereupon this Committee will declare their
(...) make such Order the^ein as shall be (...)

At the Committee of Parliament for Inspecting the Treasuries, and regulating
Officers and Salaries.
December. ^ Dickins Vintne^ ^don.
WHereas upon reading of the Petition of William Dickens, Anne, Elizabeth,
Thomazin, and Mary Dickens, his sisters. It was ordered the two and twentieth
day of November last, that the matter of the said Petition should be taken into
consideration the twenty ninth day of the same month, and that the Master and
Company of Vintners London, who make claim to the same thing, as the
Petitioners do together with the present Commissioners and Agents for Wine
Licenses should then attend this Committee, to say what they could in reference
to their Interest: And accordingly the said parties then appearing, but not
being fully prepared to make out their several Interests. Thereupon, by
consent of all parties the Cause was put over to be heard this present day, and
now the parties appearing, and the Petition of the said Dickins being again
read, wherein the Petitioners prayed relief and satisfaction of the sum of
3500 li. in Legacies given to them by the Will of Mr. William Dickins their
late Father deceased, and appointed to be paid out of the profits and arrears
incurred upon the Patent for granting of Wine Licenses granted by the late King
to the Lord Goring, the said William Dickins and others: and in lieu of a great
sum paid and engaged for the Lord Goring, he the said William Dickins was to
have one thousand eight hundred thirry three pounds ^ix shillings eight pence
per annum out of the profits of the said Farm in case it should yield so much
above the Kings Rent, of which Will Francis Dickens eldest son of the said
William being Executour, he the said Francis though but a Trustee for the
Petitioners, in reference to so much of the benefit of the said patent, as
amounted to satisfy the said legacies, yet was the said patent and the profits
thereof sequestered by the Commissioners for compounding at Haberdashers Hall
for the Delinquency of the said Francis, insomuch that the Petitioners have
been kept from their legacies, upon which their subsistence depends as in their
portion is alleged upon consideration whereof and heareing of the Master and
Company of Vintners London, who also claim an interest in the profits of the
said patent for Wine Licenses by grant from the Lord Goring and others, wherein
the said William Dickens joined, for which the said Master and Company of
Vintners paid eighteen thousand pounds in money, and 1800 pounds per annum,
during the time that they held the same: and so they affirm that the arrears of
Rent and Fines, are of right belonging to them while the term of years in the
said patent remained, which determined in the year one thou- six hundred fifty
one, this Committee upon the whole matter are of opinion that the several
intrests of the persons aforesaid are not comprised within their power to
determine, and do order that Master Mayer be desired (as one of the Committee
for Compounding at Haberdashers Hall) to report to the Parliament with what
convenient speed he can the true state of the cause relating to the interest
of the petitioners, as it stands cleared before the said Commissioners.

18o Junii, 1639.

Present, Mr. Alderman Abel Mr. Kinaston Mr. Robert Shawe Mr. Darling Mr.
Wilcockes Capt. Forster Mr. Rowland Wilson Mr. Griffith. Mr. Leechland Mr.
Courtman Mr. Simcockes Mr. William Dickins.


Moved, that those that shall be bound for the 7000 l. per annum for the
Licenses for retailing of Wines to the Lord Goring be nominated. Master Wilson
and others moved, That Mr. Treasurer and the Deputy should treat with the Lord
Goring about the buying in of 3000 l per annum, due to him for thirteen years
out of the said Licenses, and if they could prevail to have it at five and an
half years purchase, or under, then that the Adventurers in the 30000 l. Farm
should buy it in, and then whom were bound should run the less danger, and
however those bound should be saved harmless by Covenant from the other
Adventurers pro Rato to their particular Adventures.

21th. of June, 1639.

Present, Alderman Abel Mr. Darling Mr. Courtman Mr. Dickins Mr. Conradus Mr.
Dudley Mr. Griffith Mr. Davis Mr. Bonnamy Mr. Robert Lee Mr. Hilsely Mr. Cox.


The last Court read and confirmed, and Mr. Treasurer and Deputy now moved to
have a further consent to treat with the Lord Goring, and that they hoped to
prevail to obtain his 3000 l. per annum at six years purchase, which comes to
18000 l. out of which to abate 1768 l. which is found to be received less then
7000 l. the last year, which the Adventurers are to make good, so that there is
really to be disbursed only 16232 l. which is to the adventurers under five
and an half years purchase, and to obtain his Lordships security to pay the
3000 l. per annum during the whole time, if it should happen that the Licenses
should be resumed by his Majesty, or by any act of Parliament, or act of State,
which, if could be obtained, the Committee present consented unto, and wished
the bargain perfected; and those that happen for it any way to be engaged, the
total adventurers to save them harmless; and it was consented unto, that if
the Lord Goring desired the 400 l. per annum, which the adventurers bought
formerly of Sir Drue Deane's Executors for 2400 l. he should have it, deducting
the said 2400 l. out of the 18000 l. for the six years purchase, as aforesaid.

The third of November 1640, present, Master Alderman Abel, Master Leechland,
Master Hammond, Maptain Foster, Master Griffith, Master Courtman, Master Bowyer.


At this Court it was ordered, that master Alderman, master Leechland, master
Edward Darling, and master Griffith should confer with the Lord Goring, to
cause master Dickens to seal the Deed for the Licenses, with expedition, that
it be no further delayed, which being effected, that it be made over for the
security of master Alderman and others that are engaged at interest, and master
Alderman, and such others so entrusted to re-assigne the same, when they shall
be freed of such their engagements.

BY which foresaid Petition and orders, and the note of subsciiption here
following, nothing more plain, Then that the Wine Licenses were by the said
Contractors, etc. ordered to be purchased, and moneys likewise to be taken up
for the said purchase, and the parties that shall become engaged for the said
purchase to be re-imburst: But that the said Abell and Shaw were and are the
parties so engaged, and that by their last mentioned Order of the third of
November 1640, the Deed of the Wine Licedses be assigned over to them, for or
toward satisfaction of the said moneys or debts, so by them entered into,
which they never did, nor ever after (the said Order making) went about to
perform, but that the said parties Abell and Shaw are the very parties
imprisoned for the said debts, there being never any other imprisoned for the
same, except lately the aforesaid Moore.

But it does further appear by the said Petition, and Orders, that the said
Contractors, etc. under the names of the Master and Wardens, etc. instead of
giving the least satisfaction to the said Abell and Shaw, they (by their said
Petition, and the said Orders) set forth their claim and Title in and to the
said Wine Licenses, and endeavor to get them and the profits thereof to
themselves and their own uses, leaving the said Abel and Shaw like most
unconscionable men (as in their Petition) to continue in prison without
redress.

The two petitions of the said Abel and Shaw, together with the note of
Subscription, under the hands of the said Copartners, and the names of all the
Contractors, etc. as they are set down under the hand of Master George Griffith
now Master of the Company, and one of the said Contractors, here (follows.)
One of which petitions is directed to the Honorable Committee of Parliament
for prisons and prisoners, and recommended by their Letter to the Honorable
Committee of Judges sitting at Salters Hall. The other to the said Judges
themselves, and both for relief against the said Copartners.

TO THE HONORABLE the Committee of PARLIAMENT FOR Prisons and Prisoners.
The humble Petition of William Abel, and Robert Shawe, now Prisoners in the
Upper Bench.
Shows,
THat the granting of Wine Licenses in England and Wales were excepted out of
the Statutes of Monopolies, in the 21 year of the late King James.

That the late King Charles the 20th day of December, in the seventh year of
his Reign, by Indenture under the great Seal of England, did constitute George
Lord Goring, and others in trust for him Agent or Agents for the Wine Licenses
in England, Wales and Barwick, Devon, Cornwall, and Exeter excepted, for 21
years, from the 20th. of December 1630.

That in the year 1638, the said late King for valuable considerations, granted
to Sir Sackvil Crow Baronet 1600 li per annum, to be issuing out of the Rents,
and Sums of money payable to the late King his Heirs, and Successors, for or in
re^pect of granting Licenses for selling of Wines amounting ^hen unto 2166 li.
13 shil. 4. d. per annum. So as there remained ^o the Crown only 566 li. 13
shil. 4. d. per annum, out of which ^600 li. per annum, your Petitioner William
Abel with three others purchased 400 li. per annum, which cost 2400 li.

That also certain Copartners, being beforehand advised ^y learned Counsel of
the legality of the said Lord Gorings and ^is Trustees Interest, diverse of them
to the number of thirty, ^d authorize and give order under their hands to your
Petitio^ers and others to buy the said Interest, and did likewise under ^eir
hands engage to save your Petitioners and the rest harm^ss for what moneys they
should take up at interest toward- ^e said purchase (as by a Copy of the said
Subscription hereto ^nnexed will appear.)

That in pursuance of the said Copartners order, your Peti^oners and others did
in the year 1639, for and in considera^on of 18000 li. paid to the said Lord
Goring, and of the said 2166 li. 13 shil. 4. d. reserved to the Crown, purchase
the said Lord Gorings Interest and Agency from him and his said Trustees.

That the said Lord Goring did enter into a Statute of 24000 ^i. to your
Petitioners, and ten others of the Copartners nomi^ated by the rest, and did
likewise himself, and one Philip War^ick his trustee Covenant to and with your
Petitioners, and ^he said ten others likewise nominated by the rest, that they
should peaceably and quietly enjoy the said Agencie from themselves or from any
other person or persons claiming in, from, by or under them, or either of them,
etc.

That one William Dickins, sometimes servant to the Lord Goring, did manage the
said Agencie for the Lord Goring, and afterward for the said Copartners so
long as he lived. And after him Francis Dickins Gentleman his son, did the like
for the said Copartners, and respectively accounted before Auditour Spachman in
their names, and to their uses.

That the said Copartners enjoyed the said Agency, and 400 li. per annum, until
they were interrupted by Francis Dickins, under pretense of a former Deed from
the said Lord Goring to the said William Dickins. Which Francis went to Oxford
in the year 1643. By reason whereof the then Committee of the public Revenue
sequestered the said Agency, and all rents and profits, etc. and put in other
Agents of their own nomination, who keep their Office in Fleetstreet, and have
enjoyed the profits thereof ever since. And under pretense o^ Francis Dickins's
Delinquency.

And your Petitioners thereupon have several times petitioned and appeared
before that Honorable Committee for a release of the said Sequestration, but
could never obtein a fina^ hearing thereupon.

That when the present Agents entered upon the said Agency* there was due to the
said Copartners for Arreares and Fines 14000 li. or thereabouts, and in annual
Rents for Licenses about 3000 li. per annum, besides the profits and benefit of
making and renewing Licenses, and all Arreares and Profits, except 566 li 13
shil. 4 d. per annum, due to the late King, all which was of right to have come
to the hands of the said Copartners, they having really disbursed for the same,
by the hands of your Petitioners 20400 li. a very great part whereof was taken
up at interest (as by a particular of the bonds hereto annexed will appear) by
your Petitioners, and some others, by the order and appointment of the said
Copartners (as aforesaid.) And your Petitioners have a long time undergone the
hard bonds, great charge and disgrace of imprisonment for the same, and are
still like to continue there (without redress) to their utter ruin.

Now for as much as your Petitioners have had many tedious and vexatious suits,
yet undetermined, with the said Copartners and others involved in this
business, whereby vast sums have been fruitlesly expended in suits at law and
equity, and your Petitioners estates wasted, and they become altogether unable
to support such exorbitant charges, with so many and so powerful adversaries.

Your Petitioners therefore (for their more speedy relief herein) humbly pray
that your Honors will be pleased to commiserate their distressed estate, and
to call before your Honors the said Copartners, the said now present Agents,
the said Lord Goring and his Trustees, and the said Francis Dickins, and to
command to be brought before all Deeds, Writings, Books of Account, and to
examine all such parties and witnesses upon oath, as may tend to the setting
forth of right and truth, and the discovery of deceit and fraud, and to restore
to each party according to justice and equity.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
This presents witnesses, That we the Adventurers in the Farms of 40 shil. per
Tonne and Wine-Licenses, do give order unto the Worshipful William Abell
Alderman of the City of London, Richard Kilvert Esquire, Master Robert Shawe,
Master Edward Darlinge, Master Ralph Moore, and Master George Griffith, to make
an absolute end with the Right Honorable George Lord Goring, concerning his
three thousand pounds per annum out of the Wine-Licenses, and what they
conclude we will allow, and for what moneys shall be taken up at Interest by
any toward payment of that business, we will save them harmless for our
proportions adventured. In witness whereof we have hereunto put our hands the
15th. November, 1639.

Edward Kynastone Richard Kilvert Matthew Forster Jacob Bonamye Robert Lee
Andrew Courtman Fran. Ashwell John Gregory Thomas Symcottes John Wilcocks
Thomas Darlinge Thomas Goughe Ralph Hutchinson William Abell Rowland Wilson
William Conradus Henry Sanders Ralph King Henry Croone George Stanley Chr.
Metcalfe Edward Terry Joseph Rogers William Kempster William Dickins William
Jhanns Thomas Dudley Cornelius Cook Mark Hildesley Thomas Cox.


Will. Abell Bound to George Gaell Gent. in a Bond of 1200 li. to pay 676, the
Bond is dated the 27 of May 1640 payable the 27 of November following. 676
Will. Abell Rob. Shaw E. Darling
Bound to Edmond Hamond in a Bond of 1500 li. to pay 1037 li. 10 sh. the Bond
is dated the 18 of November 1639, due the 20 of May 1640. 1037-10 Will. Abel E.
Darling W. Dickins
Bound to Sir Jarvis Elwes in a Bond of 800 li. to pay 520, the Bond is dated
the 16 of May 1639 payable the 18 of November following. 520 Will. Abell W.
Leechland Rob. Shaw Ral. Moore.
Bound to Peter Bulteel Merchant in a Bond of 1000 li. to pay 624, the Bond is
dated the 16 of June 1640, payable the 24 of December following. 624 Will.
Abell W. Leechland Rob. Shawe Ral. Moore
Bound to Richard Woodward Esquire. in a Bond of 1000 li. to pay 622 li. 10 sh. The
Bond is dated the 15 of June 1640, payable the 17 of December following. 622-10
Will. Abell W. Leechland Rob. Shaw Ral. Moor
Bound to Dame Anne Moulson in a Bond of 2200 li. to pay 1556 li. 5 sh. The
Bond is dated the 15 of June 1640, payable the 17 of December following. 1556-5
William Abell is damnified by the Co-partnership over and above these Bonds,
Robert Shaw is damnified by the Co-partnership, over and obove these Bonds,
Ralph Moore obscures himself, so as he cannot be taken by Arrest. Edward
Darlingr, William Leechland, and William Dickins, are all three deceased, and
plead no Assettes, yet were all three supposed to have left great estates
behind them.

A Particular of the Names of the Coadventurers, with their particular
Adventures, as they are set down under the hand of Mr. Geor. Griffith one of
the Farmers or Cortractors, and now Master of the Company of Vintners.
Alderman Abel 1000 li. Mr. Davis. 1000 Mr. Darling. 1000 Mr. Leechland. 1000
Mr. Ralph Moore. 1000 Mr. Griffith. 1000 Mr. Courtman 1000 Captain Forster.
1000 Mr. Hamond. 1000 Mr. Rowland Wilson. 1000 Mr. Bowyer 500 Mr. T Hutchinson.
500 mr. Rich Kilvert. 1000 mr. Robert Shaw. 1000 mr. Matthew Terry 250 mr.
Edward Terry 250 mr. Ed. Kinaston 500 mr. Kimpster. 500 mr. Bonamy. 500 1000
mr. Hancock, 500 mr. King. 500 mr. Conradus. 500 mr. Ashwel 1000 mr. Hillesley.
750 2000 mr. Tho. Cox 500 mr. Corn. Cook 250 mr. He. Lee Vi. 250 mr. R. Meers
250 mr. Gregory, 1000 mr. Simcots. 1000 mr. Dudley. 0500 mr. Wilcoxe. 1000 mr.
R. Hutchinson, 1000 mr. Rogers. 0500 mr. Crone. 0500 mr. Robert Lee 0500 Capt.
Sanders. 0500 mr. Meacalf, 0500 mr. Gough. 0500 Ca Geor Langham. 1000 mr.
Dickens. 1000 mr. G. Stanley 500 1000 mr Ihanns 500 mr. Roger Kilvert 1000 mr.
Thomas Darling 0500 mr H. Lee merchant 1000 mr. Hulbert. 1000


