The Fathers good Counsel to his Lascivious Son.
OR A Caveat against Wenching
The Proverb old does tell us all you know,
As crows the old Cock so the young does crow,
The Father does chastize the Son for sin,
And quite forgets what vice himself lived in.
The Son reflects, pray Sir leave off the Game,
And I Will endeavor for to do the same;
The Old Man hearing this with shame amends:
The Young one does so too, and both are friends.
Tune of, The delights of the bottle.


Father. COme Son, you are young, yet I often have been told
That in wenching and drinking you are desperate bold
In running these courses you Ruin will find,
And troubles create in your old Father's mind:
Give over betimes then before it is too late,
And I Will strive for to get you a handsome young Mate.

Son. What Music is this which from you I do hear?
It tickles my fancy, and pleases my ear;
Your good admonition I willingly take,
But first set me see you those follies forsake:
For it is known at this day you have a wife and a miss,
The one is your drudge, and the other you kiss.

Father. But sireah, how dare you speak thus to my face?
Your sides I will b^ng if you do me disgrace,
Suppose what you say does appear to be true;
Yet sure I should not be told on it by you:
Give over betimes then before it is too late
And I Will strive for to get thee a handsome young mate.

Son. You know I am young, and perhaps may be wild,
Which makes it well known that I am your own child
You every day to the Tavern do go,
And at night come home drunk with a Neighbor, or so,
And it is known at this day you have a wife and a miss,
The one is your drudge, and the other you kiss.

Father. Good Wine is most proper for us that are old,
It inlivens and comforts our bloods that are cold,
And to keep a young Miss I account it no harm,
For a young handsome bedfellow keeps a man warm:
But youngman be wise before it is too late,
And I Will strive f^r to get you a handsome young mate

Son. You say you drink Wine 'cause blood is grown cold,
And I Will drink, that by drinking I never may be old,
For he that with Bacchus does daily engage
Shall ever be young, and never suffer old age:
But it is known at this day you have a wife and a miss,
My Mother's your drudge, and the Harlot you kiss.

Father. You saucy young Rascal, my neighbors can tell
That of all other women your mother lives well;
My care and industry ever was such,
To give her sufficient, and never to grudge;
But youngman be you wise before it is too late,
And I Will strive for to get you a handsome young mate.

Son. By your favor, good Father, it is very well known
That 'twill never out of the flesh when it is bred in the bone,
Therefore I advise you your labor to save,
For without your good help many Misses I have:
But it is known at this day you have a wife and a miss,
My mother's your drudge, and the Harlot you kiss.

Father. Oh impudent villain! what, do thou confess
That thou do keep Harlots? and wilt do no less;
Come hither my youngster, for thee I will geld,
Lest my name by thy Bastards be hereafter upheld;
Yet if you will be wise now before it is too late,
I Will strive for to get thee a handsome young mate.

Son. I have told you, kind Sir, I have Mates three or four,
And if I do want, can have more the next hour,
But if yours don't please you, I Will get you another,
That I Will warrant you far shall out-frolick the other:
For it is known at this day you have a wife and a miss,
My mother's your drudge, and the Harlot you kiss.

Father. But Son, you mistake me when I speak of a mate,
I mean a good wife with a handsome estate,
Leave off those women, and I Will do the same,
For I find they will ruin Purse, Person, and Fame;
And if now you will grow wise before it is too late,
I Will strive for to get you an honest young mate.

Son. These words may prevail, if your deeds be the same,
But first let me see you forsake the old game;
Turn off your young wench and to my Mother be kind
And in your own steps I will walk, you shall find:
For now at this day you have a wife and a miss,
My mother's your drudge, and the Harlot you kiss.

Father. Well Son, a lewd woman's a desperate thing,
And a Whore to your person much danger will bring;
Though it does not become me to tell what I Have done,
Yet I now will reform and advise you my Son:
Now prithee grow wiser before it is too late,
And I Will strive for to get thee a handsome young mate


