FAITHFUL JEMMY, And Constant SVSAN, Living near Reddriff.
When Iemmy he was bound to Sea,
Susan she did complain,
Said he, my Dear, be of good cheer,
while I return again.
To the Tune of, State and Ambition.


JEMMY and SUSAN both loving and Loyal,
and in their Embraces their joys did abound,
Fortune divided them, this was a trial,
sweet Susan with sorrow encompassed round:
Now he was forced to leave his sweet Susan,
and also commanded to hoist up their Sail,
This was a grief to them both in conclusion,
ah! how she in sorrow then did bewail.
Thus his sweet Susan alas! she lamented,
she blaming the fate and her fortune unkind,
Jemmy beholding his heart then relented,
he said my dear Creature, thou surely shall find:
Though for a time we must now be divided,
my heart I will lodge and lay up in thy breast,
If by the powers above we are guided,
when I return my dear love shall be blessed.
I do desire to have Life no longer,
then I do intend to prove true to my Dear,
Though for a time we are parted asunder,
yet I will be faithful, love be of good cheer:
Never was creature more fair and compleater,
then my loving Susan, the joy of my mind,
Graced with Beauty in every feature,
I Will be unchangable, Love thou shall find.
Oh that my sighs and my tears were prevailing,
my dear to enjoy thee, and all would be well;
But in thy absence all blessings are failing,
sweet Jemmy it is thee that my grief can expel:
Love do not leave me, sweet Jemmy reprieve me,
now from those sad fighing, and sorrow and grief,
Thou have my heart, dear Jemmy believe me,
then take some pity and yield me relief.
My dearest Jemmy, the Seas they have danger,
when in raging Tempests the Billows do roar,
I to those sorrows my Love am a stranger,
and when thou art gone I shall never see thee more:
I have five hundred pounds to my portion,
in Silver and Gold, love all shall be thine;
Why should thou hazard thy Life on the Ocean,
and leave me in sorrow here to repine?
Cease my sweet Susan, for I am engaged,
with Noble Commanders to Sail on the Main,
Love, let thy sorrows and tears be assuaged,
dear be but contented and do not complain.
Let not my absence my jewel so grieve thee,
the pride of my Heart and joy of my mind,
Take here my Ring as a pledge I will leave thee,
and I will be faithful, love thou shall find.
Then from her fair Eyes the tears they did trickle,
like streams that flowed down from the fountain of love,
Faithful and Loyal, and scorns to be fickle,
her heart it was fixed and could not remove;
Susan in sorrow almost brokenhearted,
the wind it did serve with a most pleasant gale,
Then these two Lovers, alas! they were parted,
for the goodly Ship was now under Sail:
Now he is gone, may the Heavens protect him,
from all the proud Waves of the Tempestuous Main,
Keep him from danger, and always direct him,
and send him in safety to England again:
Here to complete our joys with a blessing,
in a true Lovers knot which can never be untied;
All that is mine, he shall then be possessing,
and never depart till Death us divide.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street.


