VERSES set Forth by HENRY FAULCONER BELL-MAN And Presented to His Worthy
Masters in the Ward of FARRINGTON WITHIN
WHEN Sun from Sky is fled, and don't appear,
And Midnight-Silence does possess each Ear;
When it does freeze and snow, and cold Winds blow,
My Service in the dark I to you show.
Walking my Rounds, and Ringing of my Bell,
To see your Houses are in Safety well:
I go through Storms of Hail, and Frost, and Rain,
And still your Humble Servant will remain.
For Michaelmass-Day.
MASTERS, you know, this is not the first time,
That I have unto you expressed my Rhyme;
Good Morrow, Sirs; you see I do not fail:
Upon this day St. Michael did prevail
Over the Devil, only with this Speech,
The Lord rebuke thee, Satan; I beseech,
It is to teach us, that whilst here we live,
Bad Language to our Foes we should not give.
For the Evening.
SLEEP of the Blessed makes Kings, and Kings of Men,
Whom Cares still fly, and Rest embraces them,
Of Mischiefs, the sole solace, and best Friend
To give them due repose, and Comfort lend.
Who putting on the shape of Death, do give,
Only by that, all Creatures means to live.
Sleep, Thou have but two Sisters; and they are,
Death and Oblivion, both which shorten care.
MAsters, your Bell-man humble Thanks Presents
Unto you all, for your Benevolence,
Of late received by him, from your free hand;
The Lord reward you, who has all Command
With the best Blessings, in this Vale of strife,
Crown you hereafter with eternal life:
And so till after Candlemass I Will Ring my Bell,
In hopes that these rude Lines will please you well.
ARISE from Sin, Awake from Sleep,
The Earth does mourn, the Heavens weep;
The Winds and Seas distempered have bin,
And all is by Reason of Man's Sin:
Wherefore Arise, lay Sleep aside,
And call on God to be your Guide;
From raging Sword, and Arrows flight,
And from the Terrors of the Night;
From Fire's flame, from sin and sorrow,
God bless you all, and so Good Morrow.
For Christmass-day.
TRUE Son of God, Elder then Time, that have
Thy Birth but now, yet from Beginning wast
Author of Light, and Light before all other;
O thou that wast the Parent of thy Mother:
Whose Word was made Flesh, and constrained to dwell
In the straight Prison of a Virgins Cell:
All this the King of Glory did, and more,
To make us Kings, that were but Slaves before.
For the Morning.
ASsist me, Muses all, that I may praise
The glorious Morning, and her glittering Rays,
Thorough all the spacious Earth, for to thy grace
The Morning-Sun steals Kisses from thy Face.
All sleepy Mankind to their Sports thou 'wakest,
And sleepy Slumbers from their Eyelids take,
Thy Beauty to behold, or hear thy Voice,
Serpents and Men, Beasts, Birds, and all rejoice.
On DEATH.
DEATH is but one short Sleep, and Life's no more,
But one short Watch, an Houres-time before.
Let us endeavor, whilst to us there is light,
And see our Journey be not left till Night;
That when the Moment comes, which others dread,
We may with Courage climb our dying bed;
And so from thence to the Skies we may ascend,
To meet our Savior CHRIST at this Worlds END.

