Joyful News to the Nation:
OR, The Crowning of King Charles the II. on the 23. of April being on St.
Georges day, of his going from the Tower of London to White Hall, on monday,
being the 22. day, with his passing by Water from White Hall to
Westminster Hall, and from thence to the Abbey, where he was Crowned; From
thence quite back again with his Noble train, with the rare fireworks upon
London Thames,

To the Tune of Packintons pound.


OF all the rich pleasures that ever was seen,
The like unto this I think never has been;
All people are glad and rejoice in our Nation,
To think they should live for to see ye Crownation:
Let Us give God the praise,
To see the brave days,
And let us repent us of our evil ways,
And then God will bless us in every relation,
And happy will be this our Kings Coronation.
On April being the twenty two day,
The King from the Tower did then take his way,
And as for his pleasure he marched along,
Thousands of people did after him throng,
His Majesty then
With his Noble men,
The people still cried out, and never would len,
With God bless your Majesty in all relation,
And send you long Reign, and a happy Crownation.
The glass on the windows they then did take down
And they on their Chambers made many a pound
For the sight of the Gentlemen yt there did stand
They had what they pleas^d on them to demand,
And all this was why
The Kings coming by:
They on the tops of the houses did lie,
The like near was heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
Four Pageans prepared for the King to pas in,
Like Castles and towers, the like was not seen,
The one imitating Pleasure and Peace
The which from our borders should never decrease
About it a Vine
Showing Plenty of time,
The conduits did run down with brave claret wine
The like never heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
The Second part
to the same Tune.
THe twenty third being on St. Georges day,
The King then by water did then take his way
Where he did go unto Westminster Hall,
There the Nobility, Gentry and all
Did meet and did stand
With caps in their hand:
Ready to be at our good Kings command,
The like nere was heard of not in ^^y Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
From thence to the Ab^ he went with his train,
Where the two Bishops did him entert^^n
And under his feet there was cloths on the ground
For to walk on as he went to be Crowned:
The people did fill
Their voices most shrill,
Cried, God bless your Majesty ever more still:
The like near was heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation
The King then was crowned and went quite back again,
To Westminster-hal with his br^ve noble train
With Kni^hts and with Lords, and Barons and Earls
And all for to beautify Noble King Charles.
To see people throng
As they pass^d along.
It would be to tedious to put in my song.
The like never heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
The Knights and the Nobles were brave in attire
Which made the beholders much to admire,
The Duke went before him, and the way led,
The King followed after with the Crown on his head:
The people ^id shout,
That was roun^ about,
Only the Phanaticks that stood very mute:
It grieved them to see such a turn in the Nation
And troubled their conscience to see the Crownation.
Then strait came a Champion unto the hal-dore
And out came two Earls, and did put him before
The King called him to him and drank in a Cup,
And bad yt the Champion should then put it up;
The Cup it was Gold
Most rare to behold!
My self I did see it, no by others was told,
The like never heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
The guns in the ships, and the Canons on shore
The bells and the trumpets most loudly did rore
The bonefires did burn in every street,
And al people made up their joy most complete,
They feared no dismay,
But thus they did say,
Happy are we for the Crownation day,
The like never heard of not in any Nation,
As there was prepared for our Kings Coronation
A Castle or tower that seemed very good,
Made by an Artist, which on a barge stood,
It stood on the river of Thames there all night,
With fireworks about it most full of delight,
Those fireworks there,
Which I do declare
Was to the beholders most wondrous rare,
The like never heard of not in any nation
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
And by it a bowling green there did stand,
As seemed as handsome as any on land
It Was framed by one man, who thought it no charges
A most rare green, and it stood on two barges
His Majesty then
With his Noble men,
Might when he pleased to go to that green,
The like never heard of not in any Nation
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
Let al men on earth now but think on this thing
To see how our God have preserved our King,
And let all rejoice, and not any be sorry,
And ^ive God the praise, where belongs all the glory
And honor your King
In every thing
For he unto us glad tidings did bring,
The like never heard of not in any Nation
As there was prepared for our Kings Crownation.
Now God bless the King, and send him a long reign
That truth and peace may with us still remain;
Let all hearts join one in love and unity,
And let us pray all for the King Progeny
With Lords and with Earls
That loves King Charles
He is worth more to us then thousands of Pearls,
And let any one pray in any Relation
And then God will send us plenty in our Nation.
Peter Fancy.

FINIS.
London, Printed for Richard Burton at the Horse-shoe in Smithfield.


