The Female Highway Hector:
OR, An Account of a Woman, who was lately arraigned for robbing on the
highway in man's apparel: Containing, A Relation of several noted Exploits
which she performed in that bold Undertaking.
To an excellent new Tune called The Rant.


YOu Gallants of every Station,
give ear to a Frollicksome Song;
The like was never seen in the Nation,
'twas done by a Female so young.
She bought her a Mare and a Bridle,
a Saddle, and Pistols also,
She resolved she would not be idle,
^or upon the Pad she did go.
She Clothed her self in great Splendour,
for Breeches and Sword she had on,
Her Body appeared very slender;
she showed like a pretty Young Man.
And then like a Padder so witty,
she mounted with speed on her Mare;
She left all her Friends in the City,
and steered her Course toward Ware.
The first that she met was a Grocer
was walking with Cane in his Hand,
She soon to the Spark came up closer,
and boldly she bid him to stand.
She took from him but a Guinea,
and then met a Tailor with Shears,
And because the poor Rogue had no Money,
she genteely clipped of his Ears.
The next that she met was a Tanner.
for loss of his money he cried,
And because he bauld in this manner,
she handsomely tanned his Hide.
She rode about seven-miles farther,
and then a Stage-Coach she did Rob;
The Passengers all cried out Murder:
but this was a Fifty-pound Iobb.
And then she robbed a Welsh Miller,
she faced him and gave him the Word:
Hur splutter'd, and swore hur would kill hur,
if that hur had got but hur Sword.
And then she came up with a Quaker,
she told him, she must have his Coin:
Quoth he, Thou silly Wise-acre
thou shall have no Money of mine.
She showed him a Pistol to prove him;
he told her by Yea and by Nay,
That since the good Spirit did move him,
she might take his Money away.
An Excise-man, she then next accoasted
and bid him Deliver with speed;
He often of Valor had boasted,
but he was a Coward indeed.
She Rifled him then of his Money;
oh! this was a very rich Prize,
She took from him Four-score Guineys,
which he had received for Excise.
The next that she met wsa a Padder,
well mounted upon a bay a Nag;
Oh! this made her so much the gladder,
she told him she wanted a bag.
He thought she would certainly fight him,
prepared himself out of hand:
And she was resolved to fright him,
she damned him, and bid him to stand.
He presently drew out his Rapier
and bid her to stand on her guard;
But quickly away she did Caper.
the High-way-man, followed her hard.
He followed and soon overtook her,
and searched her Breeches with speed;
And as he did well overlook her,
he found her a Woman indeed!
The High-way-man stood all amazed;
but she had no cause to complain.
Though with her he did what he pleased,
he gave her the Money again.
Printed for C. Bates at the White Heart in West-smithfield.


