THE PHANATICK ANATOMIZED.
A True Phanatick to Anatomize,
Requires the Head and Brains of one more wise
Then I; Yet since that I am set upon it,
I Will go through-stitch with it what e're comes on it.
His Extract's Ancient, having for its rise,
Our Grand Forefathers first in Paradise;
Adam and Eve were Nonconformists, They
The strict command of God did disobey,
He is so Fruitful, and loves Propagation,
That Is Tribe (like hated Jews) fills every Nation.
To see him in his Clothes you might well swear,
That he some Clothier, or Weaver were:
They are not black, but of a Medly hue,
Not much unlike to Russet, or Coventrey-blue.
About Eight years he has been dumb, but now
By the Benign Aspect of Princely brow,
His Speech's restored again, I wish that He,
For such a Miracle may thankful be.
His Hair is short, and stands almost upright,
As if but newly rescued from a fright:
But some of them are White, and Gray again,
Not caused by age, but violent heat of brain;
Which being restless, drives them forth to action,
Which ends most commonly in dangerous Faction.
His Head and Crown is round, and balld behind,
And to Vertigoes very much inclined;
His forehead high, and hard beyond all Story:
His Chin is an extended Promontory.
His Eyes are small, yet one bigger then the other,
The great one views himself, the less his Brother.
His Nose is sharp, and very quick of scent,
To smell out Belly-chear in starving Lent.
His Ears are long, one always hanging down,
To listen after News that stirs in Town:
The other tending upward 'bove his Chin,
For Mah'mets Pidgeon to whisper in.
His Beard in length is almost half a Span,
And it is that which most denominates him Man.
^^bition, Pride, (like Rivers to the Main,)
(...)Dissemboge themselves into his Veins.
^^s Countenance is supercilious,
(...) if God made Him only, and not Us.
^s low of Stature, Nature did decree,
That of a thing not good, the less should be.
He Is very aged, yet has strong conceits,
He shall live many years, and act strange feats;
But I Am persuaded with a strong presumption,
He Will shortly die of Megrim, or Consumption.
As for his Speech, seeing he has been dumb,
I know not what 'twill be, but must say Mum.
His Chops are lean through envy, and his Face,
Is the seat of Impudence, and not of Grace.
His Mouth, and Gullet's large, whereby he is able,
For to impov'rish a well fraught table.
His Palate is precise, for in no wise
Will down with him Plum-pottage or Mince Pies.
His Arms and Hands are long, but strong withal,
And gripeth hard who under them does fall.
His breath is tainted both with Rage and Spite,
His Neck is stiff, and cannot turn to the right.
His Breast (having no Window to it) I spare
To look into, because I cannot, nor dare;
Some think his Heart is hollow, but it is fit
To leave that unto God, who searches it.
His Back, and Sholders broad, yet cannot bear,
A heavy Burden, such as Common Prayer.
His Belly's Tympanous, and full of pain,
Caused (some think) by emptiness of brain.
His unbeseeming parts I shall pass by,
Judging they hold with the rest just Simmetry.
His Knees are stiff, whereby he hardly can
Bow them in suit, either to God or Man.
His Thighs and Legs are weak, and cannot bear;
I wish he would once learn to forbear
By undervaluing words our Hierarchy,
To render odious to every eye.
Best Christian's He that others censures least,
And most himself Reforms, and never rests,
Until (with fervent tears) he does bemoan
His Brothers slips, together with his own.
His Feet are lame, whereby he often erres,
And cannot go straight because he interferes.
His Soul I will not meddle with at all,
But leave it to the Master of us all,
Whom I shall always pray with fervent cry,
To unite us in the bands of Charity.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini: 1672.


