FAMILY EXERCISE, OR, The service of God in FAMILIES.

1. TIM. 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.

PSALM. 101.2. I will walk within mine house with a perfect heart.

For EDINBURGH, and printed there by Robert Bryson and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of JONAH. 1641.

The necessity of Family Exercise.
IT is not only required that every one in the house be diligently employed in
some honest and profitable business, according to their calling, In the sweat
of thy face thou shall eat bread, till thou return unto the ground, Genesis 3.19.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called, 1. Cor. 7.20.
There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day, Luke 16.19. And that all resort to the public
worship of God in the Congregation, Wisdom cries at the gates, at the entry
of the city, at the coming in at the doors, Unto you, O men, I call, and my
voice is to the sons of men, Blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors, Prove. 8.3, 4, 34. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his temple, Psalm. 27.4. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor
a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord, And they shall wander
from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and
fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it, Amos 8.11, 12. How
then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? Romans 10.14. And he gave some Apostles and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the saints,
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11.12. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be
a kind of first fruits of his creatures. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let
every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. Wherefore lay apart
all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness
the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls, Jam. 1.18.19.21. As
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby,
1. Pet. 2.2. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip, Heb-2.1. But one
thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good part, which shall not be
taken away from her, Luke 10.42. And which is yet more, That every one pray,
meditate, and worship God apart; and severally by themselves in secret. But
thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly, Matthew. 6.6. Now when Daniel knew that the
writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his
chamber, toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did afore-time, Dan. 6.10. For
every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened, Matthew. 7.8. And Isaac went out to meditate in the
field at the eventide: and he lift up his eyes, and saw, and behold, the camels
were coming, Genesis 24.63. Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Watch ye
therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man, Luke
21.36. Ye lust; and have not: Ye kill; and desire to have, and cannot obtain:
ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not, Jam. 4.2. But it is
necessary also that the worship of God be set up and exercised in every Family.

I. Because this is warranted by the word of God, and by the examples of the
godly, And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there
that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? let him go and return
to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicat it. Deuteronomy.
20.5. A psalm and song at the dedication of the house of David, Psalm. 30.
Title. For I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment: that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him, Genesis 18.19. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom you will serve, whether the gods which your fathers served, that
were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land
ye dwell: But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. A
devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms
to the people, and prayed to God always, Acts 10.2. And ye fathers, provoke not
your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the
city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us, whose heart the Lord opened,
that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And when she was
baptized and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be
faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there. And she constrained
us, Acts 16.14.15.

II. This not only serves for the honor of God, and procures comfort to the
conscience. and reverence and obedience to the commandments of the
householders, but also makes the family to be a Bethell, or the House of God,
and brings upon it blessings of all sorts, and safety, For bodily exercise
profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4, 8. Except the
Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep
the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. It is in vain for you to rise up
early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows. For so he gives his
beloved sleep. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: And the fruit of the
womb is his reward, Psalm. 127.1, 2, 3. Blessed is every one that fears the
Lord, that walks in his ways: For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands:
Happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as a
fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants,
round about thy table, Psalm. 128.1, 2, 3. And the ark of the Lord continued in
the house of Obed-edom the Gittite, three month: and the Lord blessed
Obed-edom and all his household, 2. Sam. 6.11. And thou shall know that thy
tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou shall visit thy habitation, and shall
not sin, Job 5.24. Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house,
and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land, Job 1.10. Even as the
neglect thereof makes families to be companies of Atheists, and dens of
thieves, and brings down upon them the curse of God, The fool has said in
his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt: they have done abominable works;
there is none that does good. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge?
who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.1,
4. Power out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not; and upon the
families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured
him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate, Jer. 10.25. The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the habitation
of the just, Pro. 3.33. The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the
tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, Prove. 14.11.

III. This is a great help to the Kirk and Commonwealth, whereof Families are
the seminary. Without it, neither good Laws in the City, nor the word of God
in the Kirk are duly regarded. And God looked upon the earth, and behold it
was corrupt: for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, Genesis 6.12. Now
the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord. And he said unto
them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings, by all this
people. Nay, my sons: for it is no good report that I hear; ye make the Lords
people to transgress. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge
him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the
Lord would slay them, 1. Sam. 2.12.23.24, 25. So Joab arose and went to Geshur,
and brought Absalom to Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 14.23. 2. Sam. 15. 1. King. 1. Upon
these and the like reasons, it were good that all householders should say with
Joshua, I and my Family will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. I and my maids will
do the like, Esther. 4.16.

The parts of Family Exercise.
I. THe parts of Family Exercise are 1. reading of Scriptures in a constant
course, that all in the Family may profit in godliness, and may make the
better use of the public ministry. And that from a child thou have known
the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3.15. Neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my
necessary food, Job. 23.12.

II. It is not enough that the members of the Family come to the Kirk to be
catechized, but they must in a plain and easy manner be instructed at home
in the grounds of Christian Religion, and that doctrine which is according to
godliness. Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honor
thy father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise) That it
may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth. And ye fathers,
provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. And these words which I command
thee this day shall be in thine heart. And thou shall teach them diligently
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes: and thou shall write them upon the posts of thine
house and on thy gates. And when thy son asks thee in time to come, saying,
What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments which the Lord
our God has commanded you? Then thou shall say unto thy son, We were Pharaohs
bond men in Egypt, and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand,
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 20, 21. For I know him, that he will command his children,
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him, Genesis 18.19.

III. Prayer and thanksgiving morning and evening, before and after meals with
singing of psalms, when and where it may be had, The one lamb thou shall offer
in the morning, and the other lamb thou shall offer at even, Exodus 29.39. And
it was so when the days of their feasting was gone about, that Job sent and
sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings
according to the number of them all: For Job said, it may be that my sons have
sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually, Job. 1.5.
Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice, Psalm. 55.17. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. For it is sanctified by the
word of God and prayer, 1. Tim. 4.4, 5. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess: but be filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in psalms and
hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the
Lord: Giving thanks always, for all things unto God and the Father, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.18.19.20.

IV. That godliness may be practiced, there must be exercise of discipline in
wisdom and patience, by admonition, reproof, and correction for such faults
as are proper to be censured in the Family: and if servants vvil not amend, by
remooving them: And for this end, diligent observing and watching over their
vvayes is necessary. And it was so when the days of their feasting was gone
about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings, according to the number of them all: for Job said,
It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did
Job continually, Job 1.5. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which
will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that
when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them, Deuteronomy. 21.18. He that
works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101.7. And the servant abides not in the house
for ever: but the son abides ever, John 8.35. If I did despise the cause of my
manservant, or of my maid servant, when they contended with me, Job 31.23. And
the ass said unto Balaam^ Am not I thine ass, upon which thou have ridden
ever since I was thine, unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And
he said, Nay, Number. 22.30. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child but
the rod of correction shall drive it far from him, Prove. 22.15. He that spares
his rod, hates his son: but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes, Prove.
13.24.

V. To observe the providence of God, and to make use of the works of his
justice and mercy, both past and present, that he may be known to be the
Lord, For I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him, Genesis 18.19. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold. Every
man may see it, man may behold it afar off. Behold God is great, and we know
him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out, Job 36.24, 25, 26.

VI. Private Fasting and Humiliation, when by public calamities, or the
private distress of the Family, God calls unto it, And it came to pass
when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain
days, and fasted, and prayed before the GOD of Heaven, Neh. 1.4. Go, gather
together all the Jews that are present in Shuschan, and fast ye for me, and
neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will
fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to
the law, and if I perish, I perish, Esther 4.16. And the land shall mourn,
every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives
apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart, Zech.
12, 12. And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this honre,
and at the ninth hour I prayed in mine house, and behold, a man stood before
me in bright clothing. Acts 10.30. And for afflicting our souls, and
strangthening our faith, the Scriptures to be read, and the prayers to be
powered forth, must be pertinent for the time.

The duty of the Master of the Family.
TO the Master of the house belongs not only the ordering and ruling of the
house in wisdom, the providing of things needful with diligence, and the
giving of good example in all godliness and gravitie: but also the performance
of all the parts of Family Exercise, as to read, to catechize, to pray with,
and for the Family, to exercise discipline, to show and set forth the works of
God, and to direct and order the times and manner of Humiliation, And thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. And when thy son asks thee in time to come
saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
the Lord our God has commanded you? Deuteronomy. 6, 7, 20. For I know him, that he
will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he has spoken of him, Genesis 18.19. Hear ye children the
instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding, Pro. 4.1. And they
said unto him, Where will thou that we prepare? And he said unto them, Behold,
when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a
pitcher of water, follow him into the house where he enters in, Luke 22.9.10.
And upon just and necessary causes disabling the Master of the Family, or
drawing him away, they ought to be performed by some other member of the
Family Who then is a wise and faithful servant, whom his lord has made him
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? Mat. 24, 45, And
Abraham said, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? and the
steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus, Genesis 15.2. And it came to
pass from the time that he had made him over seer in his house, and over all
that he had, that the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake: and
the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the
field, Gen, 39, 5. And in all these Family Exercises, and whole government of
the house, the Mistress of the Family has a special hand, I will therefore
that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none
occasion to the adversary to speak reprochfully, 1. Ti. 5.14. Prove. 31. from
verse. 10. to the end. The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as
becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of
good things: Thal they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their
husbands, to love their children: To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home,
good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed,
Tit. 2.3, 4, 5. And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila
and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the
way of God more perfectly, Acts 18.26.

The times of Family Exercise.
THe fittest times for Family Exercise, must be chosen by the wisdom and
discretion of the governors of the Family, as the morning before they put
their hands to work, and the evening when the days work is ended, and the
time of rest draws on, and such other hours as may be best spared from the
duties of their particular vocation. Upon the Lords day the Family is to be
brought to the Kirk: they are to behave themselves quietly and religiously as
in the presence of God, and when the public worship is ended, the family is to
be conveened, and the Master of the Family beginning and ending with prayer, is
to take account of what they have heard, with instruction, admonition, and
exhortation, that they may profit in the knowledge and obedience of the will of
God. But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall
not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy
maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, Exodus
20.10. And the morrow after they entered into Cesarea: and Cornelius waited for
them, and he called together his Kinsmen and near friends, Acts 10.24.

The manner and matter of prayers in the Family.
THe prayers of the holy men of God in Scripture, are framed according to their
own estate, and the estate of the Kirk for the time, and conform to that
perfect prayer of our Lord, Matthew. 6. Luke 11.

So many as can conceive a Prayer, ought to make use of the gift of God. Others
who are rude and weaker, may begin with a set form of prayer, but so as they
be not sluggish in stirring up in themselves according to their daily
necessities, the spirit of prayer, which is given to all the children of God in
some measure, And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications: and they shall
look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his first born, Zecha. 12.10. And for this end, they may
begin with these following particulars, and other the like.

I. Let them confess to God how unworthie they are to come in his presence,
and how unfit to worship God, and especially to pray, and therefore earnestly
ask of God, the spirit of prayer.

II. They are to confess their sins, and all the sins of the family;
accusing, judging and condemning themselves for them, till they bring their
souls to some measure of true humiliation.

III. They are to give thanks to God for his many mercies to his people, and to
themselves, and especially for his love in Christ, and for the light of the
Gospel.

IV. They are to power out their souls to GOD in the name of Christ by the
spirit for forgiveness of sin, for grace to repent, to believe, and to live
soberlie, righteously, and godly, and that they may serve God with joy and
delight walking before him.

V. They are to pray for such particular benefits, spiritual and temporal,
as they stand in need of for the time, whether it be morning or evening,
health or sickness, prosperity or adversity.

VI. They ought to pray for the Kirk of Christ in general, for all the
Reformed Kirks, and for this Kirk in particular, and for all that suffer for
the Name of Christ, for all our Superiors, the Kings Majesty, the Queen and
their Children; for the Magistrates, Ministers, and whole body of the City;
asvvell for our neighbors absent in their lavvful affairs, as for those that
are at home.

VII. The prayer may be closed with an earnest desire, that God may be
glorified in the coming of the Kingdom of his Son, and in the doing of his
vvil, and with assurance that themselves are accepted, and what they have
asked according to his will shall be done,

Prayer and thankesgiving before and after meat.
PRayer and thankesgiving are to be joined with our ordinary meals before and
after, not by a child or a servant (except for themselves when they take meat
apart) but by the Master of the family, all lifting up their hearts to God from
a deep feeling of their own indigence, from an carnest desire of the blessing
of God upon themselves and their refreshment, and from the lively sense of the
fatherly care and good providence of God tovvard them: B see ching the Lord,
that their eating and drinking, and whatsoever they do, may be to his glory,
and for enabling them to the duties of their callings, and that he would
increase grace in their hearts, make them content with their condition of
life, and make them meet for the Kingdom of heaven, and so forth, as Christian
prudence shall direct.

This Family Exercise to be begun without delay.
THe great mercies of God to this land, the late renewing of our Covenant
with God, and the many svveet fruits which shall be reaped by this
religious exercise, do call upon us for a present doing without delay,
against all excuses, whether of old age and former negligence, or of vvorldly
business and hindrances, or of the mockings of Atheists and profane men. And
therefore all Families must be instantly ordered, Discipline exercised against
swearers, cursers, liars, drunkards, profane or negligent observers of the
Sabbath, idle bellies, and such others: and till the Catechism appointed by
the General Assembly come to our hands, the short Catechism which has been
in use, may be still used, and all made to understand the Ten Commandments,
the Belief, Lords Prayer, and doctrine of the Sacraments; and all other parts
of family exercise above expressed, are to begin so soon as may be; In
confidence that the holy Spirit, which our Heavenly Father will give to them
that ask him, shall help our infirmities. If ye then, being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly father
give the holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which can not
be uttered. And he that searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of
God, Romans 8.26, 27. And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplications: and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as
one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his firstborn Zech. 12.10.

Blessed and preserved shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed and
preserved shall thou be when thou go out, from this time forth, and even for
evermore, Deuteronomy. 28.6. Psalm. 121.8.

FINIS.

