FOUR TRACTS.

I. A Short Discourse about Divorce and its Causes, Fornication and Adultery.
II. A Charge to Judges, Juries, and Witnesses concerning Oaths. III. About
Infant Baptism. IV. A Letter to a Lady, who has forsaken ^he Protestant
Religion for the Romish.
By J. Gailhard, Gent.

Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any People,

Prove. 14.34. Let none of you imagine evil in your Hearts against his
Neighbor, and love no false Oath; for all these are things that I hate, says
the Lord,

Zechar. 8.17. Wherever I am, and whatsoever I do, it seems to me as if I heard
the voice of the Archangel, saying, rise ye dead and come to Judgment.

Bernard. Inest sua gratia parvis. LONDON, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black
Swan and Bible, without Temple Bar, and R. Smith at the Angel and Bible, near
the May Pole in the Strand. 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE following Discourses having amidst my most serious Thoughts, been Penned
at several times, and upon different occasions, and in this present
Conjuncture, being like to be useful; as it is every one's duty in his Station,
to lend a helping hand to pull down that Babel of erroneous Doctrines and of
sinful Practices, which the Author of Confusion is Building very fast; I think
it not amiss now to Publish them. The First and Second contain Matters of Fact,
the Third of Faith, and the Fourth both of Faith and Fact: and as the things
therein spoken against, do arise out of an evil Principle, so they tend to a
bad end, therefore the more to he minded and opposed.

As Gods Word speaks of Doctrines, so it does of Works of Devils, and the all
of them be bad enough, and to be avoided, yet therein are diverse kinds and
degrees of evil, for though every sin be offensive to God, yet it is not equally
destructive of Human Society: Any one, who in a sober Sense will mind it, not
simply as a Christian, but also as a Man, not only according to the Dictates of
a good Conscience, but also in Conformity to Reason, Human Wisdom and Interest,
shall find the two former things I write against, to have been and still to be,
as fatal and pernicious to Mankind, as any other Transgression whatsoever of
Divine and Human Laws, nor ever have they been more Epidemical in the Nation
than now they are. Therefore never a greater need than now, to punish and
suppress them; or else, if not timely prevented, we daily more and more shall
feel the mischievous inconveniences and dangerous Consequences thereof.

No true Servant of God, but in seeing and hearing, will vex his Soul from day
to day, with the unlawful deeds of Men; of some for committing Sins, of others
for refusing to restrain and punish them, they not only will do no good, but
also hinder others from it, because they think it will reach them, and their
own corrupt inclinations hate to be crossed and curbed: Some who might do
better in their Station, instead of promoting Piety, Virtue, and Honor, as
it is their duty, do with all their craft and strength oppose it, and thereby
proclaim themselves to the World to be vicious and thorough-pac'd Debauchees,
would ridicule all Sobriety and Temperance, and contrary even to worldly
Wisdom, which says, Si non cast tamen caute, do not so much as care to avoid
the appearances, or save their credit in the World, but glory in their own
shame. In my opinion it is a stupendous hardness in their vicious courses, for
though sin would leave them, yet they are unwilling to part with it; the older
they grow the worse they are, their Natural strength fails them, yet their Lust
is not mortified, and upon all occasions are Enemies to Virtue, and by their
Discourses and Example, influence the younger sort, in an Age that can produce
but few Joseph's, if any at all: The generality of Youth giddily and headlong
running into sin and destruction of several kinds, who are glad of any
pretenses to justify their Practices, by and from those that have more age and
experience, though not more Grace than themselves: But of two sorts of Sinners,
young and old, I take the last to be the worse of the two: It Is no more strange
than true, that they are worse than the Prodigal Son, who upon consideration,
at last and before it was too late, came to himself, for all the while before,
he had been out of his Wits, as is every Sinner that continues in his evil way:
Nay they are worse than Creatures void of Reason, then some Fowls of the Air,
Jer. 8.7.
for the Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the time of
their coming, but this People knows not the Judgment of the Lord. They are a
shame to the Nation, a Scandal to our Holy Religion, and through their
unchristian actings and vicious courses; cause Gods Enemies to Blaspheme:
Because they hate to be Reformed themselves, they do what they can to hinder
others from being Reformed, which makes me afraid we are here ripe for
Judgment; we had a War with a Witness, yet after it are as bad as before; and
now, though Provisions be not scarce, yet we are in a kind of Dearth, for they
are unreasonably dear, may God be pleased to keep it from ending into a Famine,
which frequent unseasonable Weather gives us just cause to fear; or, for the
same cause from being turned into a Plague, which God in his just Judgment, may
send upon us, because thorough Repentance, suppression of Vice and Immorality,
we will not return to him, though he has called us to it, for when a Land can
bear no longer the wickedness of her Inhabitants, the Lord thorough War, Plague
and Famine, as thorough so many sluices, does ease it of that burden, and
thereby hurries out of this World, Man, Woman and Child. None so desperately
wicked, but with Balaam would dye well, yet there is but one way to it, that is,
to live well, do good within his Sphere, to punish and restrain Evil, and not
countenance and support it, as too many, directly or indirectly do, but what
will be the end of this? certainly such a bitter Root can produce no other than
bitter Fruits? but whilst those Men of the World will not obey God's
Preceptive, those who fear him must submit to his Providential Will.

As at this time the Nation labors under the Guilt of Adultery and Perjury, so
it does too much under that of Idolatry and Blasphemy. Our Church, together
with all other Protestant ones, has sufficiently made good the charge of
Idolatry upon the Romish, which we find a sad and frequent Experience of, in
those Members of hers we have here among us; as for Blasphemy, it walks
barefaced, and has two sorts of Followers, one of abominable Monsters, lately
broke loose against the Son of God, whom they, after the wicked in the 50th
Psalm, are not content to think, but do say, he is altogether such a one as
themselves, and most impiously would make the Holy One to have given Example
for their execrable wickedness, and, O wonder! such Wretches meet with favor
and support. The other kind of Blasphemers are those which like the Soldiers,
who, to make our Lord a Mock-King, platted a Crown of Thorns and put it upon
his Head, and put on him a Purple Robe, and in derision said, hail King of the
Jews: so these with giving him the name of God but a secondary, dependent and
created one (if without Blasphemy I may so say) make of him a Mock-God: the
Soldiers after his death, took his Garments from him, but now, after his
Ascension and sitting at his Fathers Right Hand, these would strip him of his
Divinity, and of that Infinite Majesty of his own, which he is clothed with;
and if one soberly tells them of this unwarrantable and sacrilegious Attempt of
theirs, he, for his pains, is called Furious, Mad, Frentick, etc. against which
rash Censure, and unchristian Judgment, our Savior bath pronounced a Sentence,
Whosoever shall say to his Brother Raca shall be in danger of the Council, but
whosoever shall say thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire: but all such
Men we leave to the great Judge, who one day will call them to an Account for
these, not merely Idle, but Evil words, at that day when the Cause shall not be
between Man and Man, but between God and Man for all they have said and done.

A SHORT DISCOURSE ABOUT DIVORCE.
SINCE the time of the Reformation, and, may be before, the Sin of Uncleanness
was never so bold and presumptuous in this Kingdom, as after the Restoration:
Before, there was something of Modesty, in some of those who Committed it:
Shame, which from the time of our first Parents Trangression, became a constant
Attender on Sin, was not yet altogether parted from it; many ^ike Gene 3.10.
Adam, who hid himself after it, did seek dark Corners to satisfy their Lust,
which is a Work of Darkness, by St. Paul expressed under the name of Romans
13.12, 13.
Chambering and Wantonness, to be cast off: But after that King was come back,
this Sin appeared with a bare Face, did Ride on Triumphantly, for Rewards were
bestowed upon those who had committed it, Encouragement given to do it, and to
be Accessory in helping others therewith to Defile themselves; the Example of
Great Men Encouraged it, so that it became Epidemical, was by both Sexes
contracted into an Habit, and accounted a modish piece of Galantry, People
Ephesians. 4.19.
being past feeling, began to Philip. 3.19.
glory in their Shame, and were thought to be Commendable for the Practice of
it: Thus was the Generality of the Nation over-flown with this mighty Stream,
and, as it were, in a way to outface God, to tread Virtue and Chastity under
Feet, and renew the Times of 2 Samuel 12.12.
laying with other men's Wives in the face of the Sun.

And since the Time we named, that filthy Sin is so far Spread, and has taken
so deep Roots, that as the Prophet says, Jer. 5.8
Every one is neighing after his Neighbor's Wife, and London is become such as
Jerusalem and Samaria are Described by the Prophet, Eze. 16. the whole chapt.
and the Whoredoms of some Women, no less conspicuous then those of chap. 23.
Aholah and Aholibah, which the same Prophet speaks of more at large: And tho
the number of such be much multiplied, yet some make themselves more Notorious
than others, and they are grown the bolder, because no Effectual Course is
taken to Curb them, a Toleration and Indulgence having made them more
Brazen-faced, Impunity being an Encouragement to commit Crimes, which those who
are in Authority, whose Duty, and in whose Power it is to Restrain it, become
Accessory to, and Guilty of, and are to Answer to God, as they should to men,
for the ill Effects and Consequences arising therefrom.

Magistrates cannot pretend Ignorance of this, either as to matter of Right, or
of Fact: As Englishmen they must take notice of the Laws, and cause them to be
put in Execution; but as Christians, they know, or ought to know, how often,
and in what Style, the Word of God, both in the Old and New Testaments, speaks
of it; which they are concerned to mind, and not to wink at: and 'twill not be
amiss for me, here in part, to mention it; Ex. 20.14.
Thou shall not commit Adultery, is as express a Commandment as any in the
Word, and one of the Ten, whereof the breakers do incur the Curse of the Law.
Two Things we ought to take Notice of; First, That when the Law of God forbids
a Sin, all of the same kind are also forbidden, as in this, not only Adultery,
but also Fornication, Incest, etc. Secondly, The Negative or Forbidding
Precepts, are of a larger Extent than the Positive; these bind semper, non ad
semper, but the Negative oblige always, and at all times. As for Instance, I am
Commanded to Love my Neighbor, and to Gal. 6.10.
do him Good, that is, as far as I am Able, and when there is Occasion and
Opportunity; for I may happen to have no Means to Relieve a man in Want, at
another time he shall want no Relief, but at no time, and upon no Occasion
whatsoever, I am bound to do him no Wrong nor Injury; So upon no time nor
occasion whatsoever, I must not allow my self in Thoughts, Words, or Deeds,
(for the Law requires an Inward, as well as Outward Obedience) to Defile my
self, or attempt upon the Honor and Chastity of my Neighbor. And God, the
more to make us mindful to avoid the foul Sin of Adultery, is not Satisfied to
Forbid it in the Seventh Commandment, but does repeat it in the Tenth, Thou
shall not Covet thy Neighbor's Wife: The Seventh Precept was full Enough, but
in the Tenth over and above, God expressly Forbids the inward Desire, Lust
and Concupiscence, and every inward motion in the Soul contrary to Chastity.
Thus God, who is a pure, and a holy God, has Commanded us, in all manner of
Conversation, to 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
be Holy, as He is Holy.

Now, that Whoredom and Adultery must needs be Abominable Sins, it appears,
because God compares Idolatry to it, and Idolatry is to us, represented under
the Names of Whoredom and Adultery: Scripture does Thunder terrible Curses
against this Sin, they who are guilty of it, are excluded from Heaven, and from
entering in through the Gates into new Jerusalem, Rev. 22.14, 15.
for without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, etc. who are threatened
of a Judgment which imports Condemnation, Heb. 13.4.
but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge; and because often men are apt
to Flatter themselves with Hopes of avoiding that Judgment, the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, etc. shall enter into the Kingdom of God. In another place, he is
as Positive as can be upon it, and no doubt to be made of it. Ephesians. 5.5.
For this you know, that no Whore-monger, nor Unclean Person, etc. has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. It Is as certain as it is,
that the Spirit of God, who says it by the Apostle, is the God of Truth, this
is the unavoidable Doom of all that are such, except they be 1 Cor. 6.11. v.
15, 16, 18, 19, 20.
Washed, Sanctified, and Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. With how much Abhorrency this Holy Man speaks of that filthy
Sin, in the same place, we read v 15, Know ye not that your Bodies are the
Members of Christ? Shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the
members of an Harlot? God forbid. And to show how great a Concernment this
matter is of, he again comes upon it, v 18. Flee Fornication, every sin that a
man does is without the body; but he that commits Fornication sins
against his own body. And to press it the more, in the next Verse he says, in
a Chiding and Wondering way, What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own.
Therefore you may not dispose of your Body, but ye are to glorify God in your
body. Here is not one word without a great Emphasis: That Sin must be an
Infections Disease, and a great Plague, seeing we thereupon are forbidden to
have any Society with the nearest Friends and Relations, for in the foregoing
Chapter he says, 1 Cor. 5.11.
But now I have written unto you, not to keep Company, if any man that is
called a Brother, be a Fornicator, etc. with such an one, no, not to eat. That
holy Apostle is so set against that filthy Sin, that he fotbids any thing that
is an Inticement to, or a Fruit of it, and would have us to be Chaste in Lives
and Tongue; Ephesians, 4.29. and cha. 5.3, 4.
Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your mouth; and in the next Chapt.
he explaineth his meaning, but Fornication, and all Uncleanness, or
Covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints, neither
Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient, but
rather giving of Thanks. He will not suffer any thing that is, or may happen to
be Accessory unto that filthy Sin; and in another place, among other things
which he advises to, this is one, Coloss 3.3, (...)
To put off filthy Communication out of your mouth. The Reason he gives
elsewhere, These. 4.3, 4, 5.
For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain
from Fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel
in Sanctification and Honor.

Hitherto I have spoken of Fornication and Adulte^^ together, but as this last
carries with it great Aggravations, and is more Heinous than the other, I must
speak of it by it self, for so does Scripture in several places, and indeed
Adultery does imply Fornication, which is a lower Degree than the other: God
having done speaking with his Saints, turns to the Wicked, and One of the
Articles of the Charge is this, Psalm. 50.16, 18.
Thou have been partaker with Adulterers: Thy Portion was with them, and tho
this deserved Punishment, because I presently Executed it not upon thee, Thou
^houghtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, but ^hou shall come to
Judgment, For I will reprove thee, and set these things in Order before thine
Eyes. Adulterers shall not escape Punishment. Adultery is such a Sin, as makes
God's true Servants, such as Jeremiah, wish; Jer. 9.2.
Oh that I had in the Wilderness a Lodging place, that I might leave my People!
Why so? c. 23.10.14.
For they be all Adulterers. And in another place, he complains, that the Land
is full of Adulterers. He is not the only Prophet that said so, another speaks
to the same purpose, Hos. 7.4.
They are all Adulterers: Hence it appears, how God takes a special Notice of
that as an abominable Sin.

Hitherto we heard of none but Adulterers, tho under that Name both Sexes be
understood, but the Apostle Names Men and Women, Jam. 4.
Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, and calls them Enemies to God, because
Friends to the World; Know ye not that the Friendship of the World, is Enmity
with God? But what will become of God's Enemies? Matt. 8.12.
They shall be bound Hand and Foot, and cast into outer Darkness: There shall
be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

Out of all this it clearly appears, How Eternal Death and Damnation are
prepared for Fornicators and Adulterers, except God be pleased to give them
true Repentance: But because this Sin, especially Adultery, does Highly Disturb
humane Society, and brings Confusion into Families, therefore God in his Word
has appointed Temporal and Bodily Punishments for those that are Guilty of it,
and that is no less than Death; Lev. 20.10.
The Adulterer and Adulteress shall surely be put to Death. Which is confirmed
in Deuter. 22.22.
another place. The Scribes and Pharisees said to Our Savior, how John 8.3, 5.
by the Law of Moses, the Woman taken in Adultery, that was brought to him,
should be Stoned. This is a Precedent for all well-governed States, to have
Penal Laws to punish Offenders in this kind; and to this very Day, in
Conformity to those Laws of the Jews, in many places they are put to Death,
which they well Deserve. Adultery imports a great Aggravation above
Fornication, for there is Perjury, in as much, as in the Presence of God, and
of Men, a solemn Promise is made of being True and Faithful one to another.

And although in the sight of God, the Guilt, whether of Man or Woman, be the
same, and that even Death was equally Inflicted upon both: Yet in some Cases,
Moses had a greater regard for the Husband than for the Wife, as in the matter
of Jealousy, no Remedy afforded for the Wife, but there was an indulgent and
miraculous way for the Man to satisfy himself when he wanted Proofs, and this
was the Water of Trial and of Jealousy, as we have it at large in the Book of
chapt. 5. from 12. to 31.
Numbers; and if she were Guilty, in an extraordinary way she was punished with
Rotteness, but if she were Innocent, yet nothing was done against the Husband:
This Disparity appears also in another Case, about the Bill of Divorce, which
upon slight Grounds, Deuter. 24.1.
The man might give the wife, and send her out of his House. But the Woman was
not allowed to do so with her Husband: Therefore, as I already said, tho in the
Husband and Wife, in the sight of God, whose Law makes no Distinction of Sexes,
the Sin be equally Damnable, yet, as to Penalties, Laws are made to put a
Difference; a greater Curb ought to lie upon the Woman as the weakest Vessel,
and so sometimes more apt to miscarry in Matrimonial Duties; but chiefly
because that greater Inconveniences are brought into Families, thorough Woman's
Failing in this then of Man's: As to Men there is a great Difference, and this
Sin is attended with more dangerous Consequences on the Wife's, than on the
Husband's side; if a man gets a Child by an Harlot, that Child shall not
succeed in the Estate, but if the Wife has a Child by a stranger, then strange
Blood is brought into the Family, to Defraud and Rob the true Heirs of their
Right. This Corruption of Blood appears too much in some great Families, when
the Pure Blood is stained with Base and Vile: Hence it may be that we see many
who go for Sons of Great and Wise Men, who want common Sense and Reason, either
out of some Natural Cause, or of some Particular Judgment of God, to Punish the
Unfaithfulness of some Wives, or Neglect, and want of Care in Husbands, to
prevent their Wives miscarriages in that kind.

We see our Laws have, in the Case of Life and Death, made a Difference in the
Punishment to be inflicted: If the Husband kills his Wife, he is to be Hanged,
when if the Wife kills her Husband, she is to be Burned; the Husband is the
Head, and the Offense against the Head is more severely to be Punished; and as
it is so in matter of Life, so it ought to be in point of Honor: And the
common, Opinion, and Experience of the World, teaches, how let the Husband be
as Naught, Debauched and Profligate as can be, if the Wife be but Honest and
Virtuous, her Husband's miscarriage, will not Reflect upon her; but the
miscarriages of the Wife are imputed to the Husband, because it is his Duty and
Interest, and has Right, by all Lawful and Reasonable Courses, to hinder it.

Now, what this Lawful Course is, here I say it: After a Husband has given his
Wife gentle and repeated Warnings, to mind her of her Duty, as to avoid the
Company of such Persons as he has cause to suspect, and which he does not
like, and the Wife does not mend, but goes on in her way, and (contrary to that
which every honest woman will do) she holds Corespondence with such as her
Husband dislikes, she having so far forgotten her Honor and Duty, he ought to
mind his, and Remedies to reclaim her proving useless, he may Sue for a
Divorce, which was the Ancient way, yet not upon so slight Grounds as practiced
of Old, but upon such as God's Word allows of, namely the the case of Adultery.
Julius Caesar, upon putting away his Wife, would say, Caesar's House must be
free from Suspicion as from Guilt: So a man ought to provide for both his
Capacities, the one according to the Rank and Station he is in, which he is to
keep up, and not to neglect, else he will make himself Contemptible, and lay
Stains upon his Family; the other is, as a Christian he ought to purge his
House of Wickedness: to remove Evil out of it; the Head of a Family, is in
Honor and Conscience Bound to restrain in it all Evil Courses, whether of
Servants, Children, or Wife, or else he Sins in suffering that Evil, which
he can, and it is his Duty to prevent; and will pass for a Man void of all sense
of Honor, and who cares not a Straw for his Reputation. Such a Man ought to be
ashamed to live; tho I am not for making good Solomon's Saying, Prove. 6.34.
Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, in the day of Vengeance he will not spare. Yet
I would have him to avoid the other Extreme, Insensibleness, when he is so
nearly concerned; and this agrees with what says the Wise Man, chap. 5.15,
16, 17, 18.
Drink Waters out of thine own Cistern, and running Waters out of thine own
Well, etc. Let them be only thine own, and not the Stranger's with thee. And
that this is spoken of Husband and Wife, who, without Roving abroad, ought to
be only one for another; In the next Verse he adds, Let thy Fountain be
Blessed; and Rejoice with the Wife of thy Youth.

This matter is so Copious, and out of Scripture and Reason so much can be said
of it, that it is almost unexhaustible, therefore, I intend, as much as I am
able, to restrain it within Bounds; and in Order thereunto I say, after a
Husband has tried all Fair Means to no Purpose, and he sees the Disease is
beyond Remedy, and finds how nothing can Prevail, then they, who will not do
Just Things out of Love to Virtue, must feel Punishment inflicted upon them, a
Divorce Sued for and obtained. Some Divines assign several just Causes, as they
think, to break a Marriage, and others do Differ from them about it; but only
Two I will bring, which generally are agreed upon. The First, When Matrimony is
Unlawfully Contracted; that is, within Degrees forbidden by the Law of God, as
may be between Brother and Sister, or the like, then indeed such a Marriage is
ipso facto, void and null: But here I intend not to speak of such a kind of
Marriage, concerning which, the Church of Rome, has often, and does commit
gross and intolerable Abuses, in a Dispensing way with that which God has
Forbidden; but my Design is to speak of a Marriage Lawfully Contracted, whether
there be any just Grounds out of God's Word, to break it off? For Marriage has
a Relation to it, and to the Good of Conscience, in as much as it is a Divine
Institution from the Beginning of the World: Also, it has a Prospect toward
the Laws of the Land wherein the Parties do live as Members of the Politic
Body; and the warrant from the Word, is what I intend chiefly, if not only to
insist upon; for all Municipal Laws are good, only as they agree with, and are
not contrary to that Infallible Rule of Justice and Equity, which, when they
Deviate from, are not to be Valued.

There is indeed upon some Accounts, a great Difference, as St. Paul expresses
1 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9.
it, between the Man and the Woman, whereof the Excellency is on Man's side,
however that Prerogative of the Husband over the Wife has sometimes been
abused, as by the Jews, so by other Nations, who would not suffer their Wives
to recede, specially in public, from that Obedience they owed the Husband, for
fear the Husband's Prerogative should thereby be Wounded; upon this Ground
Queen Vashti, Esther 1.
for refusing to come to King Ahasuerus, when Commanded, by reason of the ill
Example given thereby to the Ladies of Persia and Media, by the Counsel of
Memucan, was Divorced; but this was done by a Reason of State, and not
according to any Divine Rule. Now I must come close to the Point.

Wherefore I State the Question thus: There is a lawful and only cause of
Divorce, namely the Case of Adultery; what God says about this in the Old
Testament, we already Examined; let us now hear what is his Pleasure under the
Gospel. Our Savior Matthew. 5.32. and chapt, 19. from 3 to 10.
in two places of St. Matthew, decides the matter; the first is in his Sermon
upon the Mount, where he Condemns the common Practice of the Jews, who upon any
trivial Account used to turn away their Wives, as when they did not please
them, and the like: But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife,
saving for the Cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery: The other
Text is in the same Gospel, where our Savior Argues the Case against the
Pharisees, who had put the Question to him; Whether it is Lawful for a Man to
put away his Wife, for every Cause. In this place, he more at large speaks to
the Point, but to the same purpose; he makes a Distinction between the Law of
God, which was from the beginning, and the Toleration of Moses, only for the
Hardness of their Hearts, to avoid greater Inconveniences, as Abusing and
Killing, when they were weary of them: Moses did after the manner of Egyptians,
only to prevent a greater Harm, give the People leave to put away their Wives
out of a Politic Reason, but our Lord sends them to the first Institution, for
therein he Vindicates the Law from the Abuses crept in through ill Custom and
Tradition. Moses Tolerated, not because it was not sin, but only to avoid a
greater sin, as might be, thorough the Perverseness of their Heart, making them
away, as I said already; and our Savior declares why those Divorces were Sins,
(except in the Case of Adultery) because this made them commit Adultery, for
God's Law said, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

This I lay for a Foundation, that Humane Laws, when contrary to God's, cannot
make this Void: And tho among Human Laws, several Causes of Lawful Divorce be
assigned, yet, as said before, Divines and Civilians are agreed, that Adultery
is a just Cause of it. Our Savior decides it in an Emphatical way, But I say
unto you,] as if he had said, Tho others assign other Causes, yet I own but
One, the Case of Fornication, and the Reason is, Because '^^s directly opposed
to the Essence and Nature of Marriage; whereby, according to God's Order,
Husband and Wife are made One Flesh, which Union is broken thorough Adultery;
for One cannot be One Flesh with Two or more, she who is joined to an
Adulterer, is One Body with him, as he who is joined to an Harlot, is One Body
with her; for, 1 Cor. 6.16.
Two shall be One Flesh: However, for the Woman's Credit, the Bill was given,
as also to Secure her in the World; for she was to be cleared from Guilt, or
else to be put to Death, according to the Law. Divorce upon such Grounds was
contrary to the first Institution of Matrimony; for tho it be a Voluntary Act,
yet after it once is Contracted, they may not thorough Fancy and Lust, break
the Bond of it; for what God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Only
Adultery does it. Moses complied with that Humor of theirs; and that
Indulgence of his, was not of a Moral Concernment, only for a time; Human Laws
do condescend to the Abilities of Men, according to what they can do, but God's
Law has no such Regard, it shows what they ought to do.

To come closer to the Point: I say, Our blessed Savior could not have spoken
more clearly than he does, that as no Man may put away his Wife, except in the
case of Adultery, so in that case she might be put away with a good Conscience;
and this is the true Sense of the Words by the Rule of Contraries: For Christ
says, That whosoever puts away his Wife, except for Fornication, and shall
marry another, commits Adultery; therefore he that puts her away for
Fornication, and marries another, does not commit Adultery: Although it may
not be Dissolved at the Pleasure of men; for it is not only of a Natural and
Civil, but also of a Divine Right, being, as already observed, a Divine
Institution; yet it is not so Indissoluble, but it may be Dissolved for a Cause,
which God approves to be just for it is Dissolution, and that is Adultery; for
that Indissolubility is not Absolute, but only in some Respects, and was not
intended for a Punishment, but for a Comfort to the Innocent: Therefore
Adultery, and such Impurities, are a lawful Cause of a Divorce; and the Woman
who has Perfidiously broken the Conjugal Faith and Contract of Marriage, is
justly put away and Divorced, and the Husband does very well to prosecute her
in Law for that End: And let the Success be what it will, Christ absolves the
Husband, whose wife is Convicted of Adultery, from the Bond of Marriage.

It is also to be observed, how in that of chapt. 5.27, 28.32.
Matthew, our Savior has a regard to, and explains the Seventh Commandment,
wherein is Forbidden, not only an Outward, but also an Inward Adultery; for the
Law requires Obedience in Thoughts and Heart, as well as in the Outward Act of
the Body; so that Lust is in God's Sight, Fornication and Adultery, and in the
Law, Adultery, both in Desire and Fact, is Forbidden; For whosoever looks on
a Woman to Lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
Heart. And herein our Savior opposes his True Interpretation of the Law, to
the False one of the Scribes and Pharisees; and his Judgment he declares to be
Antithesis or Opposition of an Exception forbidding Divorce upon Trivial
Accounts, but allowing it for a just Cause, namely if the Wife has committed
Adultery: We also must take notice, how in that Exception made by our Savior,
[saving for the Cause of Fornication] He says not (...) Adultery, but (...)
Fornication, whereby every unlawful Communication is signified, so that the
Word Fornication being more General, and of a larger Extent than that of
Adultery, in as much as every Adultery comprehends Fornication, tho Fornication
may be without Adultery, which is between married Persons, and is either
Simple, when only one of the two is married, or Double, when both are; I say,
hereby we are taught how great a Restraint Christ puts upon Wives, and how
Close he would have them keep to Matrimonial Faith and Duty.

Out of what has been said, I hope it is plain and clear, That a man may
justly, and according to the Law of God, put away his Wife in the Case of
Adultery. As to the Question, Whether the Husband's Fornication, as well as the
Wife's does break the Bond of Matrimony; and whether, in that Case, a Wife may
put away her Husband Guilty of Fornication? I Answer, That tho the Husband's
Fornication be a Breach of the Faith, promised and given his Wife, yet God does
not Allow the man's, but only the woman's Adultery, to be the lawful Cause of a
Divorce: This was the Practice under the Law, the Husband gave the Wife the
Bill of Divorce, but the Wife never to the Husband. And herein our Savior
makes no Alteration, tho he had a fair Occasion to have spoken of it, and to
the Purpose, in case it had been his pleasure and mind to have admitted it, but
nothing is said in the way of Precept, Approbation, or Toleration, in relation
to it; the Reason of this Disparity on Man's behalf is showed by St. Paul, 1
Cor. 11.7, 8, 9.
Man is the Image and Glory of God, but the Woman is the Glory of the Man; for
the Man is not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man; neither was the man
created for the woman, but the woman for the man. Now the Laws call it
Adultery, in as much as the Husband thereby Defiles his own Bed, but not that
of another: But a Wife committing Adultery, makes the Adulterer to defile
another's Bed, and bring in a spurious Seed into another man's Family;
therefore God's Law Levitic. 20.10.
condemned both Adulterer and Adulteress to Death, and so should the Laws of
every Country.

That which made it a Capital Case, Exodus 22.16, 17. and Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29.
was the Woman's being Married; it was Death for any married or unmarried man,
to lay with a married Woman, but 'twas not so with the man; for if a man, tho
married, had enticed a Maid not betrothed, lain with her, he was to Marry her,
or give her Dowry, in case the Father utterly refused to give her: A Reason
that may be assigned is this; That a man was allowed to have many Wives, but no
Woman was allowed to have more than One Husband, which gave men a great
preference above Women, and shows how the Woman's Bond was within a narrower
Compass and shorter than the Husband's; which comes up to what we say, how tho
the Wives Fornication broke the Bond of Marriage, yet the Husband's did not. It
must be observed how strict the Law was against Women, in this kind of Sin,
that if a Virgin was only Betrothed, and not actually Married, yet if she had
suffered her self to be either Seduced, or unvoluntarily Abused, if she had not
cried for help in the City where she might have had it, she was to be Stoned to
Death, as appears in the same Chapter. It Is observable, Deuter. 22, 24.
that the Law, which appointed Sacrifices to make Atonement for many, and
several sorts of Sins, yet none therein was appointed for Expiation of Murder
and Adultery, nothing but Death could do it.

God's Law does Forbid Adultery as well as Murder and Theft, so that Adultery
is as much the Breach of the Law, as are to Kill and to Steal, and the Breakers
in any Branch deserve Punishment; but if there be any difference, the Severity
was greater against Adultery than against Theft, the Adulteress was
unpardonably Punished with Death, but according to their Civil Laws, the Thief
was not punished with Death, but Condemned only to make a Restitution,
sometimes Two for One, sometimes Four, and at other times Five for One, Exodus
22. So that though, in Relation to God, both these were a Breach of the Law of
an Infinite Majesty; and so for both the Law required that Satisfaction, which
no Finite Creature is able to give to an Infinite Creator; yet in relation to
the Party wronged, the Penalty made a great Difference in the Punishment, the
one being Capital, the other not. About this, here the Laws of the Land have
made a great alteration; for Theft, when it reaches to a very small Sum, which
may be called as little as Nothing, is punished with Death, when Adultery is
not; which is quite the contrary of what among the Jews was practiced. I know
that the Ceremonial Law being Abolished, does not at all Oblige us, but the
Moral we are as much Bound to as they were; as to their Judicial Laws, those
which related to the Ceremonial indeed do not Tie us in the least, but those
which related to the Moral, and are part and Explanation thereof, do.

Now, one would think, it had been better in this kind of Laws, to have
followed the Pattern of those which God gave his People by the ministry of
Moses, but our Lawgivers thought fit to do otherwise, and we may suppose they
had some Reasons for it, if there be any in and for such things; for indeed
sometimes such Circumstances happen, as do much Aggravate the Nature of Crimes,
as when they grow Epidemical, too Common, and too Frequent, too Bold and
Presumptuous, then to prevent the Spreading, and other dangerous Consequences
thereof, the Legislative Power does well and wisely, and God's Laws allow them
so to do, to put stronger Curbs, and lay greater Penalties upon Offenders; the
Civil Power is allowed to Enforce the Observation of God's Laws, but has no
Dispensing Power to Relax therefrom: Wherefore, if once the Legislative Power
thought fit, upon occasion, to lay more Severe Penalties upon the Breach of One
of God's Commandments, than there was among the Jews, much more may the same
Power revive those Penalties, which once were inflicted by God's Law, and make
Adultery a Capital Crime, as it was among the Children of Israel: Certainly
nothing can be said, tho never so much, for changing the Penalty for Theft, but
there is more for renewing the Punishment, which by God's special Precept was
laid upon Adultery; for now that filthy Sin is as Common, Frequent, and
Brazen-faced, and Odious, as ever it was, or at this time Theft can be,
wherefore the Penalty for Adultery should now be Death, as it was in the
beginning: There is no Justice, Equity, nor Sound Reason, to punish with Death,
one who Steals Half a Crown from me, and let another, who with bringing in
Strange Blood into my Family, Robs it of Thousands and Thousands, to go
Unpunished. This, with humble Submission I may say it, were too much for men
with their Tradition, to make God's Commands of None Effect.

Another Truth I must make out, which is this: After a Divorce is made upon the
account of Adultery, then the man is Free, and at Liberty to marry another, so
that Uncleanness does Entitle not only to a Separation a mensa and thoro, as by
a new Unscriptural Name they call it, of Board and Bed, but also it breaks off
the Bond of Matrimony; and this Last is a necessary Consequence of the Former;
tho there are some men in the World, who allow a Divorce, but deny the Liberty
to Marry another, misgrounding their Opinion upon what is said, Matthew. 5.32.
Whosoever shall marry her that is Divorced, commits Adultery. But any
heedful man, to know the meaning of this latter part of the Verse, will read
the whole; Whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the cause of
Fornication, ca^seth her to commit Adultery. Then follows, and Whosoever
shall marry her that is Divorced, Saving for the cause of Fornication, for this
is Necessarily to be understood, commits Adultery. Good, if she be put away
upon a Trivial account, and not for the Cause of Adultery; and in that case
it is not to commit Adultery, or else our Savior had Contradicted Himself. It
were most Unjust to make the Innocent to suffer the Penalty due to the Guilty,
which will be, if either he be forced to keep the Adulteress, or to run the
Danger of committing Fornication: And as once a Woman is found Guilty, so let
her Suffer, Divorce be granted, and that which necessarily follows, leave be
given the Husband to marry another, that being the Remedy provided against
Incontinency, for as long as the Disease reigns, the Remedy ought not to be
taken away: Thorough Adultery is broken not only the Use, but also the
Essential part of the Contract, and the Tie of it. The Innocent must not
suffer, for it is not he, but the Guilty that breaks the Bond of Marriage; so
that it is clear the Tie is broken, because the Fundamental part of that
Contract is, thus it cease; then our Savior's words admit of no Distinction,
Restriction, or Limitation, they absolutely approve of Divorce in case of
Adultery, and not only in part from Board and Bed, as said before: And every
where in Scripture, the Word Divorce, implies not only a Separation between
Husband and Wife, but also a Liberty to marry another.

This Point is so generally allowed by Protestants, that it is become a
Controversy between the Protestant Churches and the Romish, for the Council of
Trent, Sess. 14. Can. 7. and Bellarmin de Matrim. l. 1. c. 16. say, That by
Adultery Marriage is not wholly dissolved, but the contrary we proved; and Pual
1 Cor. 7.27, 28.
says, Art thou loosed from a Wife? if thou marry thou have not sinned.
Marriage is a Remedy against Incontinency, for says the Apostle, To avoid
Fornication, let every man have his own wife, (v. 2.) and every woman her own
husband. And when there happens either a Voluntary Parting, or a Legal Divorce,
a Brother or a Sister are free. Certainly, when the Bond of Marriage is loosed,
as it is by Adultery, it is no sin to marry, as the Apostle said but just now; he
who marries another, as long as the Bond remains undissolved, commits Adultery,
but if it be dissolved, it is no Adultery. The Argument is this: If for Whoredom
the Man may put away his Wife, then the Bond is dissolved, but for Whoredom, as
our Savior says, the Man may put away his Wife, therefore for Whoredom the
Bond is dissolved, and so he may marry another; except for Fornication, that
is, without the Cause of Fornication, is an Exception, which happening to be
the Case, he is allowed to put her away. Now Christ's Exception, except it be
for Fornication, is jointly to be extended to both points of putting away, and
marrying another; so, if he may put away, he may afterward marry another.

In all places of the Old Testament, where the Question is about Divorce, it
appears to be the Will of God, that upon some certain Grounds, it should be
lawful for Persons lawfully Married, to make such a Divorce as the Parties
might marry others, and the Jews never knew of any other kind of Divorce but
that, and this we have Instances of here among us: In the New Testament, our
Lord and Savior, and his Apostles, never gave other Definition of a True
Divorce than this; when it is lawfully made, it is lawful for the Innocent to
marry again; in Matthew. 19. he speaks but of Two kinds of Divorce, one Unlawful,
contrary to the first Institution of Matrimony, when upon any unjust Ground a
Man divorceth his Wife; the other Lawful, which is upon a lawful Cause, namely
Adultery; he declares against the first, and concludes for the last, whereby
the Marriage is so dissolved; that it is lawful to marry another Wife: And if,
as it ought to be, by the Laws of Men, as it is by God's, the Adulteress was put
to Death, there would be no ground left for the Question, Whether the Man may
marry another Wife? And I think it a sufficient mitigation of God's Law here,
to spare her Life, when in many other Countries the Adulteress is justly put to
Death.

Now the Two matters of Right are proved. 1st. In Case of Adultery, one may
Lawfully put away his Wife. 2ly. Having Lawfully put her away, he may marry
another. To this agree our famous Protestant Divines, and Casuists, as Calvin,
Beza, Martyr, Bucer, Piscator, Perkins, Paraeus, Rive^us, Busanus, Polanus,
Amesius: So does also the Civil Law: but Dr. John Reynolds has upon the matter
written an Excellent Treatise, which was Printed in 1609. called, A Defense of
the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, etc. Wherein he proves the Lawfulness of
a Marriage upon a Lawful Divorce. What the Romish Church says and does to the
contrary, is to satify her Covetousness, and get Money for granting Dispenses.
Thus the Court of Heaven and of Conscience having declared, it concerns the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts to follow: When I speak of the Ecclesiastical
Court, I do not intend to make it a different one from that of Conscience, for
of all sorts of men, Divines and Clergymen are tied to the Rules of God's Word,
and in a special manner bound to promote his holy Will therein contained, when
occasion is offered: They ought to have a watchful Eye over their respective
Flocks; when they hear of, or observe any Scandalous Practice in this kind,
it is their Duty first to Admonish, and if this cannot prevail, to Prosecute as
far as their Station will allow: If they were pleased to take notice of, and
endeavor to reform the Abuses that lead into this filthy Sin, which now we
Write against, they, with God's Blessing, might sometimes happen to prevent
abundance of Evil committed in this Kind, with representing how married women
ought to avoid not only the Act of Adultery, but all Inticements to, and
Occasions of Uncleanness; as are Evil Companies, unlawful Sports; Dangerous
Recreations, too Gaudy Clothes, for their Apparel ought to be Modest; so to
avoid Lascivious Gestures, and Obscenous Words: for as in the 7th Precept
Chastity is commanded, so whatsoever is contrary to it, is therein Forbidden; as
Lust in the Heart, the Eyes, or any part of the Body; Filthiness in Discourse,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, or any thing else apt to inflame Lust. And as Matrimony
is of a mixed, that is Divine and Human Right, so the Clergymen, especially
the Heads, ought in this matter to act in both Capacities, to Censure, Reform,
Punish, and appear to be Enemies to Abuses and Abusers in this kind. But it is a
very sad case to hear any of that Character, in a solemn Assembly, impiously to
say, how some Expressions in Scripture, relating to the Point in hand, were
Additions posterior to the Original, without naming any Author for it.

An Adulteress does quite destroy the End of Marriage; for God said, Genesis 2.18.
It is not Good for Man to be alone, I will make him a Help-meet for him. Thus
a Wife is given a Man to be a Help unto him, but an Adulteress is a Scourge,
and not a Help. Adam said, in the Spirit of God, This is bone of my bones, and
flesh of my flesh: The Husband cannot say of an Adulteress, she is Bone of my
Bones, but she is Bone of another man's Bones, and Flesh of other man's Flesh.
And what shall we say to what is contained in the latter end of the following
Verse? They shall be One Flesh, seeing she makes her self One Flesh with
another or others than her Husband, whereby we plainly see the Ends of the
Institution of Matrimony are wholly destroyed: And as Man is to leave Father
and Mother, so near Natural Relations, and cleave unto his Wife, and they Two
to be One Flesh, so is the Wife to leave Father and Mother, and every other
Relation whatsoever, and cleave unto her Husband, that she may become One Flesh
with him, as he with her; otherwise the End of the Matrimonial Bond is not
Answered, but made Void.

In Scripture Four Things are required, as necessary in Marriage, of those who
are under the Bond of it. First, That Husband and Wife should Love One another
to the height of Dearness, which is represented by the Love Ephesians. 5.22.23,
23.25,
between Christ and his Church. Secondly, They ought to Live together, unless
the Calling of God requires otherwise for a time. Now, a Wife that runs
after other Flesh, 1 Cor. 7, 5.
may not be said to Live with her Husband, but rather to depart from him, in
which Case she is not Divorced, but goes away her self; and in some Cases
happens sometime a Circumstance material to the Point of Divorce; namely,
when the Unbelieving Wife does depart from the Believing Husband, and breaks
thus the Matrimonial Bond; in such cases, says St. Paul, v. 15.
A Brother or Sister is not under bondage. Thirdly, They ought not to Defraud
one another of Conjugal Benevolence; for neither Husband or Wife have Power of
their own Body, but mutually each of other's, as v. 3, 4, 5.
expressed in the same Chapter; therefore they may not Dispose of their Body
upon others. Fourthly, That the Husband does behave him self as the Head and
Preserver of the Body, and the Wife must submit, and be subject unto her own
Husband, as her Head, as the Church is subject unto Christ, as in the
fore-quoted Ephesians. 15.
place. These Duties married people must observe, as being the revealed Will of
God, and when they are Broken, the Conjugal Bond is thereby much shaken, but
wholly Dissolved only in the case of Adultery, and the offended Party has
cause, if he pleases, to Sue for a Divorce, which may not justly be denied, at
least a suitable Punishment, which though the Party desired not, yet I think
the Laws should Condemn the Offender to.

Indeed, it is the Duty of the Supreme Power, and Magistrates under them, to
consider of how great Consequence this matter is for a well-regulated
Government, as it is certainly the Ground of all Government: For what is a
Kingdom but a Collection of several Shires, or Provinces? and these Shires of
Cities and Towns? and these Towns consist of Houses, inhabited by Families; and
these Families composed of Husbands and Wives, of Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants; whereof Husband and Wife are the Spring and Foundation: So that
whosoever will have a well-regulated Nation, he must begin with Families,
whereof Husbands and Wives are the Heads, which is to Build upon a sure and
good Foundation, or else it is in vain to look for pure Streams when the Spring
is corrupt. Adulterers and Adulteresses will Propagate a Spurious Brood,
stained with Vices derived from the corrupt Blood of their Parents; for too
often, on the Bad Side, the Proverb proves true, Like Father, like Son; Like
Mother, like Daughter: in some Families we see such Stains, as the Ill Names,
and Bad Courses of Parents, do hinder and ruin the Fortune of Children. It Is
then palpable how Superior Powers are concerned to make good Laws and Rules,
and to see they are Observed, whereby the Disorders which happen in Families,
to the Prejudice of Conjugal Duties, be Restrained and Punished. Such good
Orders will bring out, at least in some good measure, Men and Women good in
every Relation, better Parents, better Children, better Husbands, better Wives,
better Masters, better Servants, better Princes, and better Subjects. The
Importance of this Truth has been so well known by Popes, that where Popery is
Predominant, they have Engrossed unto themselves, almost the whole Power
relating to Matrimony, with their Dispensing with Forbidden Degrees of
Consanguinity and Affinity, and with starting new ones of their own Invention,
still reserving for themselves a Dispensing Power for Money; wherein Princes of
their Persuasion, suffered themselves to be Fooled by them, having first, by
Fraudulent Suggestions, gotten the Imperial Power into their own Hands, and
afterward, by Force, drawn to themselves the whole Authority of Judging and
Determining in Matrimonial Causes, as in most other matters.

Somewhat before we said, how the Civil Law is for us, now we must briefly show
it. Some of the first Christian Emperors, (as well as some Heathen before) to
Justinian, and after, being sensible of the Necessity of Preventing Abuses in
this matter, by the Advice of able and wise Judges, made Laws to grant Divorces
for certain Causes: Such, among others, Cod. Theod. Tom. 1. ^it. 16. De repudi.
fol. 310.
were Theodosius and Valentinian. Only Three Causes are given, for which a Wife
may Sue for a Divorce, and are therein named; If her Husband be a Murderer, a
Poisoner or a Destroyer of Sepulchers; but she might not Sue, tho he were a
Drunkard, a Gamester or Adulterer: but the Husband might, if she were an
Adulteress, a Poysoner, or a Baud; Si maecham, vel medicamentariam, vel
Conciliatricem, Fol. 313.
are the words: Further, Sane si Divor^ium prior maritus, etc. If the Husband
first has desired a Divorce, and Accused the Wife of a great Crime, as
Adultery, let him Prosecute her according to Law, and obtain Vengeance, that
is, Divorce, and enjoy the Portion and Downy; for so I take it to be the
meaning of suam recipiat largitionem, and prese^ntly must be free to marry
another: He upon that account, not only may Sue for a Divorce, which ought to
be Granted, but also to retain the Portion and Dowry, and so leave her to the
wide World without Maintenance, and also marry another: Nay, if 'twas only
upon the Account of Ill Nature and Manners, and not for Crimes, Two Years after
he may marry another; Si vero morum est Culpa non Criminum, etc. etiam post
biennium ducturus Vxorem: Which seems hard. Let it be taken notice of how
Adultery is a just Cause of Divorce in the Wife, but not in the Husband.

In the same Code, it is said, Quamvis Adulterij crimen inter publica referatur
quorum delatio in communi omnibus sine aliqua Legis interpretatione conceditur,
Tom. 3. Lib. 9. Tit 7. ad leg. Juliam de Adulteris ad Evagrium fol. 57.
etc. This Crime of Adultery was so Odious, that any one might be an Accuser,
but much more is the Husband concerned, for in the said Law it is added,
Imprimis maritum genialis thori vindicem esse oportet, cui quidem ex suspicione
ream Conjugem facere, nec intra certa tempora Inscriptionis vinculi contineri
veteres retro Principes annuerunt. Here by this Law, a Husband must first
Vindicate and Avenge the Honor of his Bed: And former Princes allowed him to
accuse his Wife upon Suspicion, without Prescription of Time; and tho she
proved Innocent, there was nothing of Punishment inflicted upon the Husband:
it is wished, here was in Case of Adultery, no prescription of Time, as there
is, for can any rational man say, That a Woman upon Oath of two or three
Evidences, Convicted of Adultery, to be less, or no Adulteress, because she is
proved so a Year or two beyond the time of Prescription? Is not a Murderer, a
Murderer, indeed, and as such to be Punished, because he is Tried and
Convicted 10, or 20 Years after the Murder was Committed? It Is not a longer or
a shorter time that can make that not to be a Crime, which is a Crime indeed.
In my poor Judgment, I must say, any Human Law which presumes to Dispense with
God's, is very Unreasonable; God has said, Thou shall not commit Adultery,
absolutely, without any Restriction, so that to commit it, is with every Person
at all times, and in all places without Distinction, a Breach of the Law, and a
Sin, and every Sin deserves Punishment.

Again, the Romans were so strict and severe, or rather just, that if a Woman
had had her Servants Company, she was put to Death, and he Burned, as ^t
appears by the Law; Tit. 9.
Si qua cum servo rem hahere detegitur, capitali sententia subjugatur, tradendo
ig^ibus verberone. With them, amongst several other Causes of Divorce, were the
following; If the Husband can prove his Wife to be desirous of Feasting with
Strangers, he not knowing, or not willing; if The lays out one Night against
his will, or without just cause, and if she does frequent Plays, or public
Shows, the Husband forbidding it, also for Adultery, which none that has any
regard to God's Law, can deny to be a just Cause of Divorce; in which case,
Christian Emperors favored much the Husband; For if a man had wrongfully
Divorced his Wife, they said no other Punishment upon him, than that he should
give back her Portion, or that called Donatio propter Nuptias, or Dowry; or if
there were none of these, the Fourth part of his Goods. Thus the Emperor, M.
Aurelius, answered those who advised him to put away his Wife Faustina, a very
Debauched woman, If I put her away, then I must give back her Portion, that is
the Empire: So he kept one for the sake of the other. He, tho otherwise a Wise
man, had not the Spirit of Julius Caesar, who, as I said before, gave no other
Reason for Divorcing his Wife, than this; My House must be as free from
Suspicion as from Guilt. Indeed, the Honor and Prosperity of Families, does
sometimes so much depend upon the Good Behavior, or Miscarriage of a Wife,
that no Husband may be Blamed for looking narrowly into it; and upon this
Consideration, Ancient Laws allowed Husband's such a Latitude in those matters,
tho some were apt enough to abuse it; wherefore Christian Laws have fixed
narrower Bounds, The Cause of Adultery.

Justinian in his Lib. V. and in Authent. 22. ad con: 117. and Cod Lib. 5. tit.
17. leg. consensu. fol. 162.
Code, from the beginning of his Fifth Book, thorough Twenty-four Titles, and
in his Authentic, 22. and some others, in Constit. but especially God. It Is
thus. Sicut enim sine justa causa dissolvi Matrimonium justo limite prohibemus;
ita adversa necessi^^te pressum vel pressam quamvis infausto attamen necessario
auxilio, cupimus liberari. For as we forbid to Dissolve Matrimony otherwise
than upon just Causes, so upon urging Necessity, we desire to afford the
wronged Party a necessary, though unhappy, Help and Relief; and one of the
Causes for the Man is always Adultery; Authent. ut lic. Mat. and aviae causas.
Col. 8. Tit. ult.
nec ullo modo expellant nisi Adulteram. Let him not turn her away, except in
the case of Adultery, universally owned to be a Just Cause. Elsewhere many
other things to this purpose are to be seen: All this we quote, not that these
Authorities be Laws for us, but only to show the Sense which former Ages had of
these matters. But though we have our Municipal Laws, Statutes, and Acts of
Parliament, yet the Authority of the Civil Law is not to be despised, for it
contains much of Reason, Justice and Equity, and was compiled upon mature
Deliberation; and, as I said before, by the advice and help of wise and knowing
men; and here we are so far sensible of it, as therein to yield much to our
Civilians, and Drs. Commons is a place well known for such matters.

Now to enforce this the more; as we already observed, by God's Law Adulterers
and Adulteresses were put to Death, whereby the Bond of Marriage was quite
Dissolved; and so at this time it should be here as in other places, then there
would be no occasion to Sue for a Divorce, nor for leave to marry another. Now,
an Adulteress ought, at least morally to be Dead, being covered with Extreme
Infamy, which is directly opposed to the Covenant of Marriage, which is Heb.
13.4
Honorable in All, and the Bed Undefiled. Surely God would not have any one to
live in Wedlock with those whom he would not have to live at all, And indeed
it is neither just, fit, nor expedient, that an honest man should be coupled
with an infamous woman. The wise Roman Emperors had so great a Regard to the
equal Honor of both married Farties, that they looked upon those Marriages to
be of no force that were contracted between one of a good Name, and another of
Bad Reputation.

I shall not say how an Incurable Impotency of Body, Madness, and Leprosy, are
accounted just Causes of Divorce, much more Adultery is so, under both Old and
and New Testaments; and Christian Princes ought now to be as Careful as ever
others were, to preserve Honesty in Families, which are to give a Seed unto the
Church, to the Glory of God; hinder their being Tainted with Ignominy, and
restrain Wickedness and Infamy. No Wise and Good Man will deny it to be the
Duty, as it ought to be the necessary Care of Magistrates, first with Severity
to Punish Whoredom and Adultery, as well as Theft and Robbery; for to Rob me of
my Honor, and of my Wife, is to Rob me of my own Goods. Next they are to see
that Marriages be Lawfully contracted, then that they be faithfully kept. And
lastly, That upon Just Cause they be Lawfully Dissolved, and leave granted
again to Marry, at least to the Injured Party: For God never intended in
Marriage, to give a man a perpetual Torment instead of a Meet Help; neither
does God approve that to the Breach and Violation of this Holy Contract, which
happens when Love cease, Murder should be added, which is when Hatred does
succeed Love; for, 1 John 3.15.
Whosoever Hates his Brother, is a murderer,

I think it unnecessary for me to bring any more Evidences upon this matter out
of the Civil Law, ^or out of the Writings of our Protestant Divines. They that
have a mind to be more at large Informed concerning the Point of Divorce, let
them pe^use what that Famous Divine Bucer has Written, ^n his Second Book of
the Kingdom of Christ, Dedi^ated to Edward the 6th, and therein they may find
Cause of Satisfaction, as ground of Information: Good Counsel he gave that
Young Prince so Zeal^us for the Glory of God, that well he might have ^een
compared to good King Josiah, if God had ^een pleased to continue him a longer
Life. And ^ere again I must say, that which cannot too often ^e Inculcated, how
certainly it is every Prince's Duty ^ithin all his Dominions, to Discourage,
Discountetenance, Restrain, and Punish all Vices, especially the Sins of
Uncleanness in general, and of Adultery in particular, to prevent the sad
Effects thereof, which so much Dishonor God, and cause Disorders and
Confusions in Families: On the contrary, nothing makes us so like unto God, as
Holiness, wherein chiefly his Image in us does consist, which that filthy Sin
is so contrary to. Holiness (says David, (becomes thine House, Psalm. 93.5.
O Lord, for ever.

To come nearer our Constitutions, I shall add, out of the Book of the
Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, first began by Order of Henry 8th, and
continued under Edward 6th. In the Chapter of Adultery and Divorce, we find
these Words in the Original: Turpitudo tam horribilis adulteriorum est, u^
aperte decalogi praecepto confossa sit, etc. Whereof the Sense in English is
thus: Cap. 1 fol. 47.
The filthiness of Adultery is so horrible as to be plainly condemned in one
of the ten Commandments, and according the Old Mosaical Laws^ the Guilty was
Punished with being publicly Stoned (...) Death by the People, and also
according to the Civil Law was put to death: Wherefore our Ecclesiastical
Judge^ ought most grievously and severely to Punish a thing s^ odious unto God,
and on which our holy Ancestors inflicted special Pains and Punishments. Hence
it is plain how according unto the Laws of God, given by the Ministry of
Moses, by the Practice of our form good and just Kings, even before the time
of Reformation, and since the Beginning of it, in the day of Henry 8th, and
Edward 6th, according to our Ecclesiastical Laws, the abominable Sin of
Adultery may not be spared, which would prove an Encouragement to commit it,
but ought smartly, and without mercy, here among us to be Punished.

Now, to go on, we come to matters of Fact, a^ of Right, before the Civil
Power: When Magstrates know the Transgression of Divine and Huma^ Laws, in
relation to Adultery, they are Bound (...) take notice of, and use a course to
prevent, sto^^ and punish it: Death was, and still in some place is inflicted
on the Adulteress; but it is a great mi^igation to reduce it only to a Divorce.
By (...) general Consent of all Nations, which by the Law (...) Nature might
know how Sacred a thing Marria^^ is, not to be broken upon every slight Ground;
however in some certain Cases, of which Adultery ever was one, they all allowed
of it^ Romulus made a Law, that it should never be Lawful for a Wife to leave
her Husband, but to him permitted to leave his Wife in some cases, as of
Adultery, Witchcraft, etc. So that our Christian Magistrates, if they will not
make themselves worse than Heathens, when a Husband is a Sufferer by the
Injustice done him by his Wife, and becomes a Plaintiff, there ought to be a
readiness in those concerned to hear his Cause, to examine the Grounds, and at
last to do him Justice: And this regards not only that sort of Magistrates,
that are entrusted only with the Executive part, to see it done, but also those
in whom resides the Legislative Power, to see that Laws be executed; and also,
if Occasion, and the Necessity of the Case requires it, to make new ones. Would
to God, Magistrates would take such effectual Care to Punish the Guilty in this
kind, according to Divine and Human Laws, that no place might be left for
Disputes and Questions: The Adulteress is not worthy of Compassion, only of
Torments and Pains, chiefly when she has made unto her self, an habit of that
Sin, and no man may have the Charity for the Guilty, as to wish her not to be
Accused, for Adultery is a public Crime, which for it self, and Terror to
others, ought publicly to be Punished, and Discountenanced: And herein, after
private Admonitions proved useless, to Dissemble is not praise worthy, as some
do fancy, for this Vice introduces Disorders into Families, Scandals into the
Church, and Confusions into the State. It Is easy out of Ancient and Modern
History, to Evidence how Fornication and Adultery have been the cause of the
Overthrow of great Empires, of Calamities to Potent Nations, of the Ruin of
great Persons, and of very considerable Families. Abimelech, King of Gerar, a
Philistine, who having nothing to do with the Covenant, wanted the true fear of
God, yet how do^^ he reprove Isaac, as if in this kind he had laid a Snare
against him and his People, for saying his Wife was his Sister: Genesis 26, 9, 10,
11.
What is this thou have done unto us? One of the People might lightly have lien
with thy Wife, and thou should have brought Guiltiness upon us. And
Abimelech charged all his People, saying, he that touches this Man, or his
Wife, shall surely be put to Death. This was to secure both Isaac's Life, and
Rebeckah's Honor, which last they would hardly have attempted upon, but after
the destruction of the first: In Egypt, Pharoah's words Genesis 12.
to Abram, were to the same purpose upon the like Occasion: So sensible they
were, how they ought not to meddle with another man's Wife, as long as her
Husband is alive; and this was the Ground of Israel's fear for his Life, tho
thereby his Wife's Honor was the more exposed, for she being looked upon as
unmarried, people had been more free, and would have thought it had been more
lawful for them to have attempted upon her Chastity. But not to insist upon
this, out of so many Instances I could produce to demonstrate the great
mischiefs caused by Uncleanness, let these Three serve for all; that Sin Ruined
the Trojan Empire, brought the Danes into England, and the Moors into Spain.

If Christian Magistrates would but strictly Execute that which Divine, and
some Human Laws, have prescribed, that Wickedness could be restrained, and the
World not so much troubled and stained with it; but they indulge and wink
either for Money, Favor, or out of Corrupt Inclination: They ought narrowly to
look into, and Examine the Grounds, whether true or false. And as the Innocent
is not to suffer, so the Guilty must not go Unpunished, thereby to be hardened
in their Evil ways, and become Precedents for others to do the like. This
concerns great Persons more than Inferiors, for as they stand upon the point
of Honor more than ordinary people, and to keep Infamy out of their doors,
left it comes in, and stains their Blood to Posterity, so they ought to help to
drive it out of their Neighbors, and Peers Mouses, and to keep it farther off
from theirs; for that which to day is the case of one, may the next be that of
another; and they who do not mind it, may be said in a high degree to have
forfeited a true Sense of Honor, and to deserve that Fire should come into
their Bed, which they would not help to Quench in their Neighbors. It Is too
true, how Prostitute Women generally find more Favor than the Virtuous, a
strong demonstration of the Corruption of the Times, and of the Depravation of
the Nature of some, more than of others; and as Corruption optimi est pessima,
so where the greater the Honor ought to be, the more conspicuous is the Infamy
when men fall under it, Great Men may not be ignorant how their Inferiors fix
their Eyes upon them, and they must have a care not to give just Grounds of Ill
Opinion of their Behavior, for else, instead of the Honor and Respect, which
otherwise they might expect, they shall become Despicable and full of Contempt.
In this World every one ought to answer his Character, and behave him self as
becomes his Quality and Station. The great sign of a Man of Honor is for him
to do nothing but what is Honorable, and according to the strictest Rules of
Virtue; and keep Dishonor out of his or her Family, for I speak to both Sexes,
for want of which care, men often bring upon themselves a whole load of Infamy,
and like a Carrion, tho alive, yet, above Ground, do Stink in the Nostrils of
others.

Those who in this case of Fornication and Adultery, are called to Judge
between Party and Party, ought, as Scripture says, to be men of Truth, Exodus
18.21.
fearing God, and hating Covetousness. Not prepossessed with Prejudice,
Partiality, or Passion, ever remembering they Judge not for themselves, but for
God, who is present in every thing they do, and the Sovereign Judge; and if I
may so say, he comes in as a party for the Breach of his Laws. Wherefore it is
their Duty and Concern, to Enquire into, and Examine things, not to deny
Justice, but to render it, and punish the Guilty; and Examples must be made to
strike as Terror into vicious Persons, to Curb them from doing, out of fear of
Punishment, that which they will not do for love to Virtue.

Some will say, If Divorces be granted, then presently all will be full of
them, and the best way to prevent, is not to grant it.

This is a general Objection drawn out of Bellarmin, against Divorces. Then,
say they, a Gap will be opened for infinite ones; if the Innocent may marry, so
may the Guilty, and many would be glad of Occasions to put away their Wives to
marry others; we know how sometimes things are apt to be abused, but of
necessary things, the Use must not be taken away for the Abuse sake; a Wronged
Plaintiff must be Relieved, if there be Justice upon Earth; Divorcement of an
Adulteress is a Punishment for her Sin, now it is but Justice to Punish the
Guilty: But to say, that a Marriage with another, after a lawful Divorce, is
unlawful, and that a Divorce in the Case of Adultery, ought not to be granted,
is as if one would conclude, that Judges must not punish Rogues, and
Murderers, because so doing, would open a way to many Hangings; fiat Justitia,
says one, ne pereat mundus; Justice saves the World from Ruin. And tho there
be those, who to get an Occasion for Divorce, would pick unjust Quarrels with
their Wives, it does not follow but that these who have a just Cause for it,
should be allowed it; Because Thousands of Innocent Persons have wrongfully
been put to Death, must not the Guilty as Traitors, Blasphemers, Murderers,
and Idolaters, be put to Death? Certainly, the matter is impartially to be
enquired into, and as the Innocent is to be cleared, so the Guilty ought to be
Punished. Besides, tho Divorces upon lawful Grounds were granted, that they
should thereupon spread so far as they pretend, that is not very likely, seeing
among Jews, Greeks and Romans, where Divorces were allowed, they were not, as
far as we read, very common neither, except they will say, we have among us
many worse men, than ever they had: I will grant we may happen to have as bad
as ever they had, yet, to avoid one Inconveniency, we must not run into a
greater one: The ready way to prevent both, is Impartially to do Justice; for
Prove. 17.15.
he that Justifies the Wicked, as well as he that Condemns the Just, they
both are Abomination to the Lord. This I must say, how indeed it is very hard
and unjust, for want of doing Justice in time, thereby to prevent
Inconveniences, to make any one run the Hazard of having another man's Child
imposed upon him, because he is within the four Seas, and to Succeed in his
Estate and Title.

In matter of Treason, one Overt Act proves the Designing and Compassing of the
King's Death, and bare Words, without any actual Attempt, are accounted an
Overt Act, and Treason does reach not only to the King's Person, but also that
of the Queen, and of the Heir-apparent to the Crown; nay, a design of Falling
upon the King's Guards is made Treason: all this very well for the Security of
those lives, which the safety of the Kingdom does sometimes depend upon. So,
certainly a great Regard must be had to preserve Right and Property, and to
prevent Intrusions, Disorders, and Confusions in Families, which Evil is the
more dangerous, because it spreads the further, and becomes the more
Epidemical, and may soon reach the very Vitals of the whole Government, and the
Throne it self; and thus a whole Nation from Head to Foot, become Sons and
Daughters of Whoredom and Adultery: Therefore all imaginable Care must be had
to put a Restraint upon such Evil Courses as lead into such Dangers. Now, as to
Adultery, if, as we ought, we have a regard to the Law of God, the same
Severity should be used to punish it, as Treason and Murder; for God, who
says, Thou shall not Kill, has also said, Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Hence it is, as I said before, that by God's Law the Adulterer and Adulteress
were put to death, as well as the Murderer. A Thief for stealing from me the
Value of Eighteen-pence, shall be Hanged, and he or she that Robs me of my
Reputation, and my own Blood of my Estate and Succession, shall go free and be
unpunished: This indeed is very strange and un-equal.

As to the Laws of men, I shall allow a Disproportion, how with some, Treason
is a greater Crime than Adultery, (though with others both are Capital) so let
the Punishment be less, not to reach to Life for Adultery, as for Treason,
Murder and Theft: However, when we come to prove matter of Fact, there is in
some Cases for Adultery to fill up the Disproportion: Shall not actual Attempts
be Equivalent to prove a Fact, as well as bare Words? If Treasonable Words be
proved against one, he is thereby Convict of Treason; and if a man be found
alone in a suspected place with another man's Wife, locked up in a Room, and
upon Oath in such a dishonest and unbecoming Posture, with such other
Circumstances, not fit here to be named, which though they prove not rem in re,
yet are not only strong Presumptions, but also clear Evidences of a Design, and
actual Attempt to commit Adultery; much more when Fruits of such Meetings
appear, it may reasonably be concluded, specially after a public Noise in the
World of such Intreagues, that this is not the first meeting they had upon such
an account. When once Affections are Debauched, and both Parties willing to
meet, they shall not want Occasion, at one time or other, though never so
strictly observed, to indulge their Lust; much more, if both Parties be free
from any Watch set upon them: After such Evidences, does not this cerrainly and
justly deserve the Penalty of the Law, namely, a Divorce? It Is a sad and
shameful thing, that among such Christians as make a Profession of owning the
Word or God's Laws, (especially those that are of a mixed Nature, and regard in
part Religion, and in part Order and Preservation of Society) should not, as
much as may be according to the Pattern of God's Law, the Rule of all Equity:
but the Accident must be minded more than the Substance, and the Shadow be
preferred before the Body, for want of one Circumstance: And because such a
Crime was committed within a Year or two before such a Time, that is, before
the Offender was Prosecuted for it, though proved Guilty, yet must escape. Is
not an Adultery committed Seven Years ago, an Adultery as well as that
committed within these Four or Five? Can that Circumstance alter the Nature of
the Thing, and make that not to be Adultery, which is so indeed? Shall we find
Justice no where, on the Right, or Left Hand, Above, nor Below? After this, one
may say, it is not to be found among us, which way soever we turn ourselves to
have it: Then we must look up to God, who in his due time, will for certain
render it, and may be with a Witness against the Guilty, and all that are
Accessory to it, as are of all the Evil committed since, those that spared and
justified the Wicked.

The Law has so well provided in Cases of another kind: If a man has spoken
Threatening Words, he is Bound to his Good Behavior. An Attempt of Rape, though
not Executed, deserves Death, though this may be as Unvoluntary as Adultery is
Voluntary. That party which gives and exposes that which is not her own,
ought to be Punished as well as he who takes that which is not his own: Now,
we know, that 1 Cor. 7.4.
The Wife has not Power of her own Body, but the Husband. Must the Husband be
Betrayed, and know that to be given to others, which is his own, and take great
Care and Pains to get and preserve an Estate for a Stranger's Blood, and have
his Bed daily Defiled without Help and Remedy, it is very sad indeed, chiefly in
a well governed State. Jerem. 2.24.
A wild Ass used to the Wilderness, that Snuffeth up the Wind at her Pleasure,
in her Occasion who can turn her away? All they that seek her, will not weary
themselves, in her Month they shall find her. No wonder, because she is Wild,
if during Rutting time and Madness, none will take pains in vain to reclaim
her, yet there is a time when she comes to her self, in her Month, and shall
there be no Time, nor Way to Tame an Adulteress? Must she run as far, and as
long as she pleases without Restraint in her Wickedness? And must she be
Indulged and Encouraged in her evil Courses? Few such Examples can soon Infect
a whole Country, for Evil Ones are followed rather than Good. If we have good
Laws, why are they not put in Execution? If in this kind we want them, or they
be defective, why should we not have them? Gal. 3^ 19.
The Law must be added because of Transgressions. When Transgressors are
increased, if Laws in being are not sufficient to Restrain them, they must be
Multiplied, if Old Ones be Dormant, let them be Revived and put in Execution.
This does depend upon the Prudence of Lawgivers, who from time to time, as
they see Cause for, do Enact New ones; yet this may be said, none can be made
more Necessary for the Glory of God, and the Good of Civil Society, than to
prevent and punish Adulteries, whereby Order, Interest, and Peace of Families
are over turned: Base and corrupt Blood being mixed with Noble, it peopleth the
Country with a Spurious Brood, and makes the Nation to Degenerate from Virtue
to Vice; If this Evil arises out of Remissness in the Executive part, there it
ought to be Remedied, and Punishment inflicted as well as upon Adulterers and
Adulteresses, who thorough Perjury and Breach of the Matrimonial Bond, and by
such abominable ways, do what they can to Confound and Ruin Families, which
should deserve no less than Death, so that Divorce is a great Mercy, and
thorough this gentle Punishment, they have time allowed, if God be pleased to
give them Grace to Repent of their Lewdness: But to some may be applied what
God says, Jerem. 3.3.
Thou have a Whores Forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed.

Here I suppose a Case: A Husband upon Information given him, and out of his
own Observation, finds he has Cause to Question his Wife's Honesty, and that
she is Unfaithful to him, he knows the Person, and is acquainted with several
Circumstances of time and place, and after a further Inquiry into the matter,
he is persuaded his Wife has abused him, her own Behavior does daily more and
more confirm him in his Opinion; she keeps Company with such as he dislikes,
and has given her Warning not to do it, yet she is so Fond of that Society,
that if she cannot publicly see the party, she will do it in private, and
venture rather parting with her Husband, than to be deprived of the Company of
her Gallant, who long before has sufficiently Ruined Here Is, and Husband's
Reputation: The Husband takes no public Notice of it, as long as he can endure
it, and until it becomes spread abroad as much as any thing of that Nature can
be: This Woman at last being passed Shame, keeping no longer any Measures, and
being broken so loose, that every one that has a mind may take Notice of her
Miscarriages, having forfeited Honor, and void of Thankfulness for a Husband
that has given her a high Rank, continues running on in her former Courses.
The Husband can no longer forbear Complaining in Public, and according to Law;
the Woman, instead of withdrawing somewhat out of the Crowd of the World,
which every Person of Virtue and Innocence, under such Circumstances, would do,
appears abroad as often, and with as much Pomp and Vanity as ever, finds such
Friends as most Women of ill Character have, by their means, under the Notion
of want of some Formalities and Customs, the Prosecution is first Weakened,
then Stopped, after which, we Ride Triumphing up and down the Streets.

It is known how our Laws make it extraordinary difficult to Prove things of
that nature; it is a Work of Darkness, and so hard to be brought to Light, and
when it is committed, the Guilty avoid the Light, do not seek for, nor admit of
Witnesses: Though Proofs by some, thought to be Competent, be brought in, which
to give to the least that can be, may, in the Judgment of many, be called
strong Presumptions, yet they go further when compared with the whole Carriage
of a Woman of an Ill Reputation, who cares not to take any pains to remove the
evil Opinion which people have of her; a Behavior very different from that
which Persons of that Sex, and of Honor, hold to redeem their Reputation, when
it falls into Jeopardy and under Censure. Once 'twas here the Case of a
Nobleman upon the account of Adultery, to Sue for a Divorce, which was
obtained, and he Married again, which may be a Precedent to other Cases of the
like Nature. It ought to be the Hearty Wish of every True Englishman, to have
Justice equally distributed, for one as for the other, and of every true
Protestant, without doing any Wrong, to see Dignities and Fortunes, to continue
in Protestant Lines and Families,

When Reasons of Piety, Virtue, Honor, and Duty cannot prevail, then Fear and
Punishment ought to be made use of: If Lewd Women would but hear what says a
Wise King, who at his own Costs, had gotten a great Experience in these
matters, they might from him Learn Useful and Profitable Things, against their
Course of Life: But, alas! they care not for Solomon's Books, or any other part
of Scripture, for their Lust is their God, and to Satisfy it, their Aim,
However, let us hear what a Character he gives of an Adulteress, and see how
fitly it is appliable to some in our times. Prove. 7.11, 12.
She is loud and stubborn, her Feet abide not in her House. Now is she without,
now in the Streets, and lies in wait at every Corner. Stubborn to every good
Counsel; at Home she cannot stay, it is not a fit place to entertain Lovers
under the Husband's Eye; some may happen to watch over her Actions, there all
necessary Freedom upon such Occasions, may not be had: She is to be seen up and
down the Streets, sometimes the fair Coach stops in a Corner, waiting for an
Answer to some Errand which a trusty Servant is gone upon; and in the Coach, v.
10.
She is with the Attire of an Harlot; that is, with Patches, Painting,
uncovered Breasts, an Eye sparkling a Fire of Lutt, and one Gesture or other
that betrays her inward Corruption.

However, she is to be found at Home, when the v. 19.20.
Good Man is not at Home, when he is gone a long (or a short) Journey: Has
taken a Bag of Money with him, and will come home at the Day appointed. Till
then, the Gallant is free to come, and is invited to do it; how well does this
fit our times? Then, says she, chapter 9.17.
Stolen Waters are Sweet, and Bread eaten in Secret, is Pleasant. Afterward,
Chapter 3^.20.
She Eats, and wipeth her Mouth, and says, I have done no Wickedness. Such
is the way of an Adulterous Woman. Therefore, no wonder if these things make a
Man uneasy, when he has found them out; chapter 12.4.
for, as A Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, so, she that makes
Ashamed, is as Rottenness in his Bones. Very painful and troublesome: But there
is a Danger greater than all this: What Is that? Life is in Danger: chapter 6.26.
For the Adulteress will Hunt for the Precious Life. When a Husband is too
clear-sighted, he becomes troublesome, and lays in the way, then he must be
Removed; Would to God, of this we had not so many Instances, as there are in
the World! When a Woman loves another better than her Husband, then the
Husband's Life is not safe, wherefore it is no wonder if those that are
concerned, do look to it, it were in them a prodigy of Stupidity if they did
not; he cannot be sure of his Life that sleeps with a Snake in his Bosom,
there being so many ways to send one packing out of this World: When once the
Devil has prevailed upon a Woman in a settled way to be False to her Husband,
he may on the Adulterer's behalf, happen to lead her further, and form a
Combination between them, after they have taken away his Honor, to deprive him
of his Life, for the Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, and that
Adultery can be followed by, and end in a Murder, for commonly Sins go by
Couples; we have a sad Instance in David's case, a man, otherwise much better
than most Adulterers. Sometimes the Adulteress is not satisfied to bring the
Adulterer to a Piece of Bread, but also she will bring Her Husband to his
Grave: Therefore, in that same Chapter, God, by Solomon's Pen, goes about to
Terrify men from the Sin of Adultery, by reason of the Danger, for he compares
it to Fire and to hot Coals: v. 27, 28.29, 32.
Can a man take Fire in his Bosom, and his Clothes not be Burnt? Can one go
upon hot Coals, and his Feet not be Burnt? So he that goes in to his
Neighbor's Wife. Whosoever touches her, shall not be Innocent. And Three
Verses lower; Whosoever commits Adultery with a Woman, lacks Understanding, he
that does it, destroys his own Soul. But if this Consideration cannot work
upon the Minds of the Adulterer and Adulteress, as it does not without a
special Mercy of God, yet as the Crime is common to both, so also a common
Danger hangs over their Heads; for tho they seem not to care for God's
Judgments, and thorough one way or other they escape Human Justice, I mean of
those men in whose Power it lays, and whose Duty it is to punish them, yet they
are not out of danger on the side of the wronged Husband; for v. 34.35.
Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
Vengeance. Which he may happen to take some occasion to execute. Jealousy,
says he elsewhere, Songs 8.6.
is cruel as the Grave, the Walls thereof are Coals of Fire, which has a most
vehement Flame. In desperate Cases, sometimes desperate Remedies are made use
of; and tho I would by no means approve of such Courses yet the thing might be
attended with such Circumstances, as in some measure might extenuate and excuse
the Fact, in the sight of men. God complains Isa. 59.4.
that None calls for Justice; but if it be called for, give God no cause to
complain that there is none to render and execute it: Indeed the Magistrate is
bound to afford the Plaintiff Husband Relief, when he has just cause to sue
for it, and not be Partial out of By-ends, and corrupt Principles.

And, if I may be so bold, I will add, their Care ought to be extended, not
only against Adultery in some special Cases, but also against Fornication, and
all Uncleanness, according to Law, not only punishing Persons, but suppressing
Places that are Harbors, and Seminaries of Debauchery in that kind, which
draws every other after it. The Toleration of such things is fit for Rome, that
spiritual Sodom, where a Trade is carried on, and a carnal Gain made by such
things; which, Acts 17.30.
In times of Ignorance God winked at, but now Commands all men, every where
to Repent. But suppose we should want Grace as a Motive to Suppress
Fornication, with all Circumstances and Dependencies, and out of a Principle of
Conscience, yet if we will but follow the Dictates of Reason, we shall find a
Necessity to do it for the public Good, to preserve Order in the Kingdom, and
to prevent Confusion with abundance of Mischiefs, as Quarrels, Thefts,
Robberies to supply Lusts, Treasons, Murders, and all kind of Villainies, and
in few words, the Ruin of Soul, Body, and Fortune arising therefrom. That sort
of Women, I should say Vermin, are very dangerous to Seduce Young and Old, but
Young Men especially, that are unacquainted with their Tricks, whereof Flattery
is the most enticing and pernicious. A proper Character which Solomon gives of
a Whore, by him called the Strange Woman, is in Three places expressed thus:
Prove. 2.16. and 7.5. and 5.3, 4, 5.
She flattereth with her Words, and he enlarges thereupon; For the Lips of a
Strange Woman drop as an Honeycomb, and her Mouth is smoother than Oil. But
see the End of it. Her End is Bitter as Wormwood, Sharp as a Two edged Sword,
her Feet go down to Death, her Steps take hold on Hell. Again, chapter 7.27.
Her House is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. And
elsewhere, chapter 9.18.
The Dead are there, and her Guests are in the Depths of Hell. Thus that Wise
Man by his own Experience, sets her out to the Life, and Draws her in her own
Colors. Would to God, Men would once but seriously Consider, how the Lord is
present every where, and nothing is, or can be hidden from his Sight, for he
has an All seeing Eye: chapter 5.21.
For the ways of man are before the Eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings. And, chapter 15.3
The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the Evil and the Good.
Then, may be, they would avoid doing that in his Sight, which they would be
ashamed to commit before the meanest man in the World. Jerem. 16, 17,
Mine Eyes, says God, are upon all their their ways, they are not hid from my
Face, neither is their Iniquity hid from mine Eyes. And at last to be called to
Judgment for all, because God is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with
Approbation, and without Punishment.

Before I make an end, I must not omit to lay before those whose Duty it is to
stop. this Mischief, and do not, some things out of the Word of God, which here
they ought to make their Rule, and which hereafter shall be their Judge. That
Righteous Man Job shows an Abborrency of Adultery, even without coming to the
very Act, in these following Words: Job 31.9 10, 11, 12.
If mine Heart have been deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid wait at my
Neighbor's Door. As if he had said, If there has been in me so much as a
Thought, a Desire, a Design, And what if so? Then let my Wife Grind under
another, and let another bow down upon her. That is, if I have done it, I
deserve to be served so; for often God does inflict a Punishment of the same
Nature as the Sin is that procured it: Sinners are Punished in the same kind as
they Transgressed, but why so, Job? He answers; For it is an heinous Crime,
yea, it is an Iniquity to be Punished by the Judges. For it is a Fire that
consumes to Destruction, and would root out all mine Increase. By reason of
the Curse of God entailed upon it: But let it be taken notice of, that as God
will visit for it, so it is an Iniquity to be Punished by the Judges, it is the
Duty of Judges to Punish it: And lest Judges would excuse themselves, saying,
we want Proofs, God offers himself to be a Witness, and a swift one too,
Malachy, 3.5.
I will be a swift Witness against the Adulterers. Often Witnesses, as long as
they can, decline to give in their Evidence, but God does not so, ye shall not
want Ground of Conviction says the Lord, rather than you should, I will be a
Witness my self, and bring to light those hidden works of Darkness. O ye
Judges, I will take Notice how you behave yourselves, for in the same Verse God
says, I will come near to you to Judgment, to observe whether you do Justice
in such Cases, and to Judge you if you do not.

God takes Notice of this Sin, suffers it to go on, to give Judges and
Magistrates time to Punish it, Ezekiel 22.9
In the midst of thee they commit Lewdness: This is not all, it goes on, One
has committed Abomination (observe the Word) with his Neighbor's Wife. I will
surely Visit for these Things, says the Lord, if unrighteous Judges will not
Judge them. Then chap. 23, 45, 46, 47, 48.
The righteous men, they shall Judge them after the manner of Adulteresses: How
so? I will bring up a Company upon them, and will give them to be Removed and
Spoiled; and the Company shall Stone them with Stones, and dispatch them with
Swords, they shall slay their Sons and their Daughters, and burn up their
Houses with Fire. When that Sin is not Punished with private Judgment, at last
God does it with public: The Concealers, the Denyers of Justice, become
Accessory, and this brings public Judgments upon Cities and whole Kingdoms:
And Thus, says God, will I cause Lewdness to cease out of the Land, that all
Women may be taught not to do after your Lewdness. The Lord not only makes
Adulteresses Examples of his Judgments, but also makes them Examples to others
as a Buoy to take Warning by: When God has been, as it seemed only looking
upon for a while, then he sits upon the Judgment Seat and judges, chapter 16.38.
I will judge thee as Women that break Wedlock. As indeed Punishment is tied to
the Tail of Sin, when un-repented, Rev. 2, 20, 21, 22.
I gave her, Jezabel, space to repent of her Fornication, and she repented not;
behold I will cast her into a Bed, and them that commit Adultery with her into
great Tribulation.

But to return close to our Point, and which is our main Design, to ground it
upon the Truth of God's Word, which we lay our chief stress upon: Before I
conclude, I desire the Reader to remember what our blessed Savior, the great
and supreme Judge, said upon the matter, and to make him take the more notice
of it, in few words, I shall make a kind of Recapitulation of the Substance of
it; out of which it does clearly appear, that in this point of Divorce, Two
things occur to be Discussed, which our blessed Lord does by his Authority
decide, in the two places of Matthew's Gospel, already Quoted; in the first
Occasionally, when he purges of, and refutes several false Glosses, which the
Scribes and Pharisees had put upon the Law: but in the last, he speaks to it, as
being the matter in hand, and directly to answer the Question put to him,
Whether for every Cause a Man might lawfully Divorce his Wife? Which he denied,
and gave reason for it out of Genesis 1, 27. and 2.24. But because, as the
Evangelist Observes, they came unto him, Tempting him, and this design was, if
possible, to make him Contradict Moses, John ^.
as at another time they would have done, in the Case of the Woman taken in
Adultery, that they might have something wherewith to Accuse him; here to
Entangle him, they brought in Moses's Authority, who had commanded to give a
Writing of Divorcement, but of it he gave a Reason, namely their Hardness of
Heart, whereat they could not be pleased: And in the following Verse, he
Magisterially and by his Legislative Authority thus Decided it: But I say, etc.
These Words to be compared with those of Chap, 5. which are Parallel, and about
the same Subject, as quoted before, and both do plainly affirm the self same
thing, which has two parts, the first about Divorce, the Second about Marrying
again after it.

As to the First there are Two Things, one Expressed, the other Employed, and
this last as well as the first coutained in the Text: Our Savior affirm that
no man may Divorce his Wife, for every Cause, vain and trivial, as the Jews
used to do, but at the same time he declares there is one Cause, and only that,
which he names Fornication, for which a Man may lawfully put away his Wife: For
when he denies that any man may Divorce his Wife, except for the Cause of
Fornication, at the same time he implies that Fornication is a lawful Cause to
put her away, and every Divorce Grounded upon that Cause, and none else, Is
Lawful; or else, why should he make that Exception? If his Intention had been
to Teach that there is no just cause in the World for a Husband to Divorce his
Wife, he would absolutely have spoken it thus, for no Cause whatsoever, and not
have assigned one with an Exception, Saving for the Cause of Fornication; he
must be Blind who cannot, or Obstinate that will not see this Truth out of both
these places.

But they both do also afford another Truth, as a just and right Consequence of
the former; if the Divorce be unlawful, then a second Marriage, is unlawful,
which by the Rules of Contraries implies, that if the Divorce be Lawful, then a
Second Marriage is also lawful, so any man who has put away his Wife for the
cause of Fornication, may marry another, for there is no middle, either make
the Divorce Unlawful, and the second Marriage Unlawful, or the Divorce Lawful,
and a second Marriage so. These two things are so depending one upon another,
and so much the Consequence one of another, that we see our Savior does enjoin
them together, that having spoken of the Divorce, he presently and immediately
mentions a Marriage of both Parties, in the 5th chapt. of the Woman, and in the
19th of both Man and Woman. It Is said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife,
saving for the Cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery: How does
he cause her to commit Adultery? Because she Marries another; if she would
continue Single, there would be no Adultery committed, but she marrying another
Husband, and the Marriage with the first holding still, and not being
dissolved, because Fornication which is the true Cause of Divorce, did not
intervene, then such Marriages are mere Adulteries: So then, the Husband who
has unlawfully Divorced his Wife, if he marries another commits Adultery,
and the Wife that is thus unlawfully Divorced, if she marries another Husband,
does also commit Adultery; but neither Husband nor Wife, if lawfully Divorced,
though he marries another Wife, and she another Husband, do commit Adultery. as
observed before by the Rule of Contraries: A second Marriage is an Effect of a
Divorce, so if the Cause be Good and Lawful, or Unjust and Unlawful, the Effect
must be such.

It is well known how by the Jewish Law and Custom, a Woman Divorced might and
did marry another, and our Savior finds no Fault with this, nor with marrying
again, but with their Divorce without just Ground and Cause; for if they were
lawfully Divorced, they might Marry again: For, as observed before, Marriage is
the Remedy which God has appointed against Incontinency, so that those who are
lawfully Divorced, if they have not the Gift of Chastity, as the Apostle says,
to avoid Fornication, must Marry, 1 Cor. 7. What must a Man do after he has
put away his Wife, and she, after she has been put away, and they cannot
Contain, must he turn an Whore-monger, and she an Harlot? How can this be
justified after a lawful Divorce? With Paul, I may say, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is Honorable with all, but Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will
Judge. Heb. 13.4. In his due time, tho often, Prove, 8.11.
Because Sentence against an Evil Work, is not executed speedily, therefore the
Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. But let such unto
themselves apply what the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2.3.
Their Judgment Lingereth not, and their Damnation Slumbereth not.

Thus we proved the Point with clear Evidence out of Scripture, Human Laws, and
strength of Reason, which might be more Enlarged upon, if Occasion required it.
This I must add, That it is a sad Case, a loud and crying Sin, that must need
reach up to Heaven, when Justice cannot be obtained against neither Adulteress
nor Adulterer, as if there was a Combination against it, to provoke God and Men
to the utmost, till God's time be come to render it, who being most just, never
fails to do it when he thinks fit; but sometimes when he does, men take no
notice of it, tho I think it to be one of the chief Causes of the heaviest and
most frequent Judgments inflicted upon the Nation; for as it is one of, if not
the most common National Sin, and none in Scripture more often, nor more
strictly Forbidden, as, most of any, contrary to God's holy and pure Nature; So
those who commit, and continue in it, must look for the most dreadful and
terrible Judgments, which God's Justice, Anger, and Vengeance, for the Contempt
of his Authority, and Breach of his Laws, can, in this World, and in that which
is to come, pour upon wretched. and presumptuous Sinners. Besides, I would have
all Offenders in this kind to know, That there is not in the World a Meaner
Wretch than the Lewd and Vicious Man, who does the Devil's Drudgery, and being
a mere Slave to his Passion, is thereby put upon the most Indecent, Basest,
Vilest, Shameful, and most Dangerous Shifts that can be; is ever Restless,
being continually Spurred on by his Lust, which first in this World will Hos.
4.11
Take away his Heart, for Whoredom and Wine do so; and except God shows Mercy,
for want of that Purity which in Relation to Women, the Apostle so 1 Timothy 5 ^.
carefully Commends to his young Disciple, shall in the next hurry and deliver
him into everlasting Burnings: For the Truth and justice of God require that
the Fire of Lust wherein they Burned here, should hereafter be punished with
Eternal Flames: For, says the Apostle, Them that walk after the Flesh, 2 Pet.
2.9.10.
in the Lust of Uncleanness, God reserveth unto the Day of judgment to be
Punished, with a Pain Adequate to their Sin.

FINIS.
A CHARGE TO Judges, Juries and Witnesses, CONCERNING OATHS.
HAVING of late been Summoned to give in upon Oath, my Evidence in a weighty
Business, I was at first Amazed and at a stand, then moved with just
Indignation to hear several Men, with a Brazen-face, to Swear for Truth that
which in my Conscience I knew certainly to be False; (for I speak only of those
Things and Circumstances, which come within the Sphere of my certain Knowledge)
and, upon serious Thoughts, such prostitute Wretches, tho they speak but to one
part of a Cause, yet they give Men reasonable Grounds of entertaining an Ill
Opinion of the whole: For, no good Cause may be supported by evil and unlawful
Means, which at last will Discredit, Blast, and Ruin it. In the mean while such
Practices of Swearing falsely, do bring Dishonor upon God, Scandal upon our
holy Religion, and are a Shame to a Nation; and if not, as much as it is
possible, Suppressed and Prevented, God, the Judge of the whole Earth, will, in
his due time, require it at the Hands of those in whose Power it lies, and
whose Duty it is to do it.

Wherefore, upon so just and necessary an Account I look upon my self as Bound
to give in my Evidence, and I Wish Judges, Jurymen, and specially Witnesses,
may so take notice of, and mind what I shall say, as every one to do their Duty
in their respective Stations; for herein I shall bear Witness for God as for
men. And my great Motive why I now commit to Paper these few Lines, and Serious
Thoughts of mine, it is only to bear Record unto the Truth! For, 2 Cor. 13.8.
I can do nothing against, but for the Truth; which I think I am called to,
thorough the Occasion which is the Ground of all this. Which to Prosecute, I
shall make use of both Law and Gospel.

I Thank God, when I appeared in this Business, I never but once before had
been Summoned to bear Witness upon Oath, for I own it, I fear an Oath, the
fewer the better, and the least Account one is to give God about these matters;
for therein Men, tho unwillingly and Ignorantly, yet thorough want of Memory,
or some Mistakes, are in danger of Failing: Wherefore I shall ever avoid, as
much as I may, being brought under an Oath, without a just and necessary Cause;
rashly and hastily to venture upon it, is usually attended with bitter Effects,
and is the cause of much Evil of Sin as of Punishment from both God and men. He
that easily and hastily does Swear, will as easily and hastily Forswear; for
when he makes no Conscience to take an Oath, he will make none to break it.
Neither would I multiply Oaths, for many Oaths many Snares.

To go upon sure Grounds and Explain the matter, we must first see upon what
Occasion an Oath is taken, and what it is; because too often, thorough the
Unrighteousness, Malice, and Craftiness of False and Self-ended Men, Truth is
driven into Corners, which yet God in his due time, and sometimes in an
Extraordinary manner, will bring to light, to the Confusion of the Wicked that
would have suppressed it. Therefore, because one man will not Trust another,
and that men do suspect the Sincerity, and are in the Dark about the Thoughts
one of another, upon such an account, God, who alone knows, and is the Searcher
of the Heart, Heb. 4.13.
For all things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to
do. is called upon to be a Witness of the Truth of that which is in Question
and Sworn; for, chap. 6.16.
An Oath for Confirmation to men, is (says the Apostle) an end of all Strife.
Not to sow, foment, and promote it, and shelter Villainies under God's most holy
and sacred Name; for this overthrows the good Ends for which an Oath was
intended, and perverts Justice and Equity, over-turns the whole World, and
tends to Disorder, Confusion, and Ruin; all Effects of Perjury.

Now, an Oath is a calling of God to Witness for the Confirmation of what we
Say, or Promise: It Is a Religious and Necessary Confirmation of Things doubtful
by calling on God to be a Witness of Truth, and a Revenger of Falsehood, which
last part is much to be taken notice of, though many who Swear, mind it not;
and there is a great Reason, why God should avenge the Abuse of his Name, for
if often the meanest men cannot endure to be named as witnesses unto a Lie, how
much more will the most Infinite, Glorious, True, and Holy God, suffer his
Sacred Name to be so Abused, as to Shelter and Countenance a Lie?

An Oath was ever looked upon as a Thing so Sacred, that in all important
matters, men could find nothing Surer or Stronger, to Tie one another to the
Truth of what they said or promised, then to put them to their Oath. Thus
Abimelech, to make sure of Isaac, said to him, Genesis 26.28.
Let there be now an Oath betwixt us, etc. that thou will not hurt us. For when
Men or Women do take an Oath, they thereby Numb. 30.10.
Bind their Soul by a Bond with an Oath. And we read how before that time,
Abimelech had made Abraham to Swear, Genesis 21.23.
Now, therefore Swear thou unto me here, by God, that thou will not deal
falsely with me, nor with my Son, nor with my Son's Son. Thus also Abraham made
his Eldest Servant Genesis 24.2.
to Swear, about the Charge he gave him concerning a Wife for Isaac: And we are
to Observe the Servant's Conscientious Care and Tenderness about the Oath, v.
5. and Abraham's explaining how far he Thought to Bind him by his Oath, v. 8.
which Oath the Servant remembers, v. 37. So Jonathan, after he, to assure David
of his sincere Love, had Sworn and said to him, The Lord do so and much more to
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.13.17.
He caused David to swear. This is the last and surest way to engage men to be
True, as to make God concerned in their Dealings of one with another; for, it is
supposed that though they care not for men, yet they will have a regard unto
God, who will not fail soon or late, to avenge his own Honor, if wronged.

Wherefore, because we must Swear by a Greater, Heb. 6.16.
For Men verily Swear by the Greater, than themselves, and that is by God, or in
his Name, for Three Reasons, First, God has expressly Commanded it, Deuter
6.13. Isa. 45.23. Heb. 6.13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name.
And when God Swears, he Swears by himself, ( l) I have sworn by my self.
The 2d Reason, because an Oath is a Religious Invocation which is due to God
alone. Thirdly, Because God alone knows the Heart, and he is able to judge of
the Truth, or Falsehood of our Thoughts. So then, when we call God to Witness,
we render that high and special Worship that is due only to him, for thereby we
bear Witness that God is present every where, sees and avenges all Falsehood
and Unrighteousnesses of men, which things are proper to God alone: So then, to
Swear in God's Name, is a part of his Worship, wherefore not only as we said
before, God Commanded to Swear by his Name, but has also Forbidden to Swear by
False gods, and Creatures, not so much as Exodus 23.13. Joshua 23.7.
To make mention of their Names, or to let them he heard out of their mouths,
which Joshua interprets by causing to Swear.

The Lawfulness of Oaths, by what we Observed but a little before, does appear
out of God's Precept, and Example: Whereupon we are to take Notice how God
Swears by several of his Attributes, which he does to condescend unto man's
weakness and unbelief, for we are apt enough to mistrust his Word, and
therefore to give us gracious and infallible Security of his Promises, and
Threatenings too, he confirms them by an Oath: Thus he Swears sometimes by his
Life Numb. 14.21.28 Isa. 49.18.
As I live says the Lord, in several places of Scripture, for he is the Living
God, a Characteristical Note of the True God. At other times, he Swears Psalm.
89.35.
by his Holiness, which is his Nature. Again, he Swears Isa. 62.8.
By his Right hand, and by the Arm of his Strength. That is, by his Power, that
he being Almighty, is able to do what he Promises or Threatens: And also he
Swears by and in his Truth, as to Psalm. 132 11.
David; and whenever he Swears, he does it by his Truth, Tit. 1.2.
For he cannot Lie: So he does by Jerem. 44.26.
his great Name, and that which comprehends all, Isa. 45.23.
He Swears by himself, that is, by his Nature and Attributes.

Because Oaths are sometimes necessary, God has given Rules and Directions
about them; we have them thus; Jerem. 4.2.
And thou shall swear the Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness. This is plain enough, so that men may not pretend Ignorance: we
must Swear the Lord lives, that is, by the Life of the Lord, of the living
God, which was the ordinary Form of Oaths used not only in those times, or
before by the People of God, as we read of, 1 Samuel 14, 39.45. and chap. 19, 6.
but also long before among the Heathens, to Swear by the Life of their Kings,
which Joseph learned in Pharaoh's House, to Swear Genesis 42.15. 16
by the life of Pharaoh. Also in our Savior's time one was to speak the Truth
by the Life of God; thus the High Priest said to Christ, Matthew. 26.63.
I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ
the son of God? This was their way whenever any one was to Swear. This
speaking the Truth in God's Name, is in Scripture called to give him the Glory;
thus Joshua exhorts Achan, Josh. 7.19.
My Son, give, I pray thee, Glory to the Lord God of Israel, make Confession
unto him, and tell me now what thou have done? Hide it not from me. After this
manner the Pharisees dealt with the Man whom the Lord Jesus had restored unto
his Sight, John 9.24.
Give God the Praise. Thus, when any one was to Swear, there was a Compellation
in God's Name for such a one to speak the Truth, whereby, when it came out,
Glory was given unto God; so every one that Swears, must do it Psalm. 63.11.
Isai. 65.16
by the Lord, and he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the God of
truth. Not by Baal, or any Idol whatsoever, as forbidden in several places of
Holy Scripture.

To this manner of Oath and Phrase, the Lord Lives, answers, 1 Samuel 25.22.
Romans 1.9. 2 Cor. 1.23.
so also and more do God unto me, and, God is my Witness, and, I call God for a
Record upon my soul. All which import, that as we call upon God to be a Witness
to the Truth of what we say, so it implies an Imprecation that he would take
Vengeance of us, if we Swear falsely in his Name, which ought not to be made
use of but upon Account o^ Necessity, that is, of Religion, Charity and
Justice. He then who Swears must do it in God's Name and that, 1st In Truth.
2ly, In Judgment. 3ly, In Righteousness. To these Three Conditions, are
opposed, False, Rash, and unjust Oaths.

It is a Duty incumbent upon every one that takes an Oath, to Swear in Truth,
that is truly, and nothing but what is according to Truth, not abusing God^^
Name to attest an Untruth; the words of our Oaths if minded, are full and
comprehensive to swear the Truth, nothing but the Truth, and the whole Truth
that is to the best of my Remembrance. Now, Truth is a Divine Thing, which is
asserted by Oath when in the Dark. There is a Truth of the thing spoken of,
when we speak according as the thing is indeed or as near as possibly it can
be; and herein sometimes by reason of human weakness, the whole Truth does not
come out, for we do not always know things a^ they are. But there is also the
Truth of the Mind that is, one Swears as in his Mind and Conscience^ he is
persuaded of the thing, this must always Necessarily be in the Oath, or else
there is Perjury in the Case.

Now Truth relates either to Divine things or to Human: To the former, when we
entertain and have right Notions and Thoughts, due and reverend Expressions of
things immediately belonging to God, as his Nature, Attributes, Works and Word.
The Truth required in regard to Human Things, is either in common Society, and
Dealings between Man and Man; or else in public Judgments, in Courts of
Judicature, which concerns the Judges upon the Bench, fairly to Sum up
Evidences, and impartially to direct the Jury. 2ly, This Concerns the Jurymen,
not to receive any Prejudices or suffer themselves to be Biased or Bribed, nor
to stand too much upon this, that any of them will agree with the rest, rather
then to be Pinched, or Suffer in being locked up very long, when in their
Conscience they are Convinced that most of the rest are in the Wrong; an Honest
Man will say, I have rather to be Starved (though there be hardly once in Seven
Years any such Dilemma) than to go against my own judgment and Conscience,
which when thus wounded, will at one time or other rise and fly in their Faces.
3ly, This regard's the Plaintiff, who is to promote his just Cause by Fair and
Lawful Ways, without False Accusations, Subornation, or such unwarrantable
Practices. 4thly, The Defendant, who in his own Defense must forbear using any
malicious and unjust Means, and make use of none but such as are according to
Truth, Law and Reason. 5ly, The Evidences are concerned, whose Duty it is with
bearing true Witness, to help and relieve their Neighbor in his just Cause,
when it is in danger of being Oppressed. And here I would have all Parties, from
the Judges to the Witnesses, to mind that there is a great Day of Judgment a
coming, when all indifferently shall stand at the Bar to give God an Account of
every Idle Word, much more of every False and Unjust Judgment, Evidence, or
other Sinful Dealing, when the Secrets of all Men shall be made manifest, and
Men's own Consciences shall be Witnesses against themselves, their own Judges
and Tormentors, and let them know, how God ever is among them, though in an
invisible way, and sees, hears, and sets down upon Record their false and
unjust Dealings; for Prove. 15:3.
the Eyes of the Lord, for whom they judge and bear Witness, are in every
place, beholding the Evil and the Good; and Zechar. 4.10.
these Eyes of the Lord do run to and fro through the whole Earth. So that he
leaves not himself without Witness. And the Qualification of those who are to
judge the People, whether under the Name of Judge or Jury, are plainly set down
in God's Word, they must be Exodus 18.21.
Able Men, such as fear God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness.

But we must return to Truth, and somewhat longer insist upon it, the
Importance thereof is made out First, By the many positive and reiterated
Commands of God for us to Practice it in every thing we say or do. Secondly,
Because God does so often, and so expressly Forbid us the Practice of the Vice
contrary unto that heavenly Virtue, namely to Lie; for as Truth is the Daughter
of God, so a Lie is the Child of the Devil; and often God in one and the same
place, does Command one, and Forbid the other. God's great Commandment is, that
we should speak the Truth, Love, Follow, and 2 John 4. 3 John 3. 1 John. 2.21.
Walk in the Truth. God is the God of Truth, nay, Truth it self, and no Lie is
of the Truth; John 1.17.
Truth came by Jesus Christ, and he himself chapter 14.6.
is the Truth; and, chapter 18.37.
For this cause he came into the World, that he should bear witness unto the
Truth. The necessary Qualification for one to ^e admitted, and abide in his
Tabernacle, is, Psalm. 15.2, 3.
To speak the Truth in his Heart, not to back-bite with his Tongue, nor to take
up a Reproach against his Neighbor. See how Heart and Tongue are concerned in
matter of Truth: to the same purpose, the Psalmist says, 24.3, 4. Who shall
stand in the Lord's holy place, he that has not Sworn Deceitfully, etc. So
that by the Rule of Contraries, he that speaks not the Truth in his Heart,
shall not abide in his Tabernacle, nor he that has Sworn deceitfully in his
holy place. This is the Mark by David given of an upright Man, but the
Character of the Wicked is that he speaks Lies; For the Wicked are Estranged
from the Womb, they go astray as soon as they be Born, speaking Lies, Psalm
58.3. but, Psalm. 96.13.
God shall Judge the World with Righteousness, and the People with his Truth.
Here is the Pattern for men to Judge by, as God does with Righteousness and
with Truth. It Is said of the Messiah, the Lord Jesus, Isa. 42.3
He shall bring forth Judgment unto Truth: Here is a Precedent for you, O ye
Judges of the Earth. Judges, Jurymen, and Witnesses, lay hand upon your
Conscience, and see whether there be not a just Cause to renew the Prophet's
Complaint; Jerem. 9.5.
They will deceive every one his Neighbor, and will not speak the Truth, they
have taught their Tongue to speak Lies, and they delight in Lies, Psalm. 62.4.
Another Prophet says, Isa. 59.15.4.
Truth fails; and, have we not a most just cause to complain of it? and None
calls for Justice: yea, some call for it, but cannot obtain it: Nor any
pleads for Truth; and though they do, it is to little or no purpose; for they
Trust in Vanity and speak Lies; at least they Believe it. I am much afraid that
2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
God has sent a strong Delusion that men should Believe a Lie, and many too:
Hear of a glorious Promise, Zacha. 8.3.
Jerusalem shall be called a City of Truth. Would to God we could say so of
London! But with Grief and Sorrow, I am afraid it is not so, it is true but of
very few,

To Lie, is to tell for True that which one knows to be False, or to affirm
that to be False, which he knows to be True. Though a man may ignorantly tell a
Lie, yet not Lie, for to Lie implies a design for to Deceive or to Hurt,
whereupon the difference is to be observed between telling a Lie, and Lying or
making a Lie; for an honest and conscionable man may happen ignorantly and
imprudently to tell a Lie upon a False Report, as of such a man reported to be
Dead, when it is not true; but to Forge a Lie, is with an evil Design, and to
Deceive: the Intention and Contrivance is that which makes it Abominable; and,
if it be so, as it is in ordinary Discourse and Conversation, how much more upon
the occasion of Oaths, when God's most holy Name is made use of, not in
Private, but in Public, and in Judgment, whereby Truth, which is part of
Justice is perverted, and Lie, part of Injustice is set up.

There are Three sorts of Lies: The Officious, to do a Man some Service, as to
Lie to Save his Life, Liberty, etc. The Merry or Pleasant, to tell a Lie with
an intent to Divert a Company: And the Pernicious to Hurt one. As to the Two
First kinds, I say, that though Casuists differ about the Question whether or
not they may be used? which in my Opinion I think unlawful, and look upon as
Snares, by degrees thorough Custom to be drawn from one kind to another, yet
all own the last called Pernicious, to be most Wicked, and by no means to be
allowed, Psalm. 5.6
Thou shall destroy, says David, them that Speak Leasing, or Lies; Prove. 12.19.
the Lip of Truth shall be established for ever, but a Lyng tongue is but for a
moment. To Lie, is to abuse God's Gifts, who has given us a Tongue truly to
express our Mind, and not to Deceive, or otherwise Hurt our Neighbor: It Is for
a good, not for a Bad Use, and we must not abuse the Gifts of God, such are the
Organs of Speech; this also overthrows Human Society, and breeds Jealousies,
Animosities, and Causes Disorder and Confusion. Certainly this kind of Lie is
worst of all against God thorough the abuse of his Gift, when others, no
greater Sinners, are Dumb, and God has given thee the free Use of thy Tongue,
and also it is against man, with procuring his Harm. The other Two sorts, tho
Evil, yet in a less Degree then this; and if according to the true Rule, a Man,
though to save his own or Neighbor's Life, ought not to tell a Lie, much less
to ruin his good Name, Fortune, or his Life.

God in his gracious Promise of the Restoration of Jerusalem after the Seventy
Years Captivity, gives them this Charge, Zach. 8.16.
These are the things that ye shall do, Speak every man the truth to his
Neighbor, execute the judgment of truth. Which Precept the Apostle enlarges
upon thus; Ephesians 4.25.
Wherefore putting away Lying, Speak every Man the truth with his Neighbor.
God having by Paul given a Character of the most wicked and worst of Men,
concludes it with this most abominable Brand, Romans 1.25, 26.
they changed the truth of God into a Lie. And see the judgment immediately at
the tall of the sin, the greatest on this side Hell that God inflicteth upon
men; For this cause God gave them up unto vile Affections, and other terrible
judgments, expressed in that remaining part of the Chapter, but God will in his
just Judgment, follow them further in the World to come; for they who make
Lies, shall not only be excluded Rev. 21:27.8.
From entering into New Jerusalem, but also lodged among every other wicked
Man, as Unbelievers, Abominable, and Murderers, Wheremongers, Sorcerers, and
Idolaters; also, Liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with
Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death. The Devil is by our blessed
Savior Branded with Two Things, for being a Murderer and a Liar; he does but
name the first Crime, but the last he does exaggerate and insist upon, as if it
was the Greatest of the Two: He contents himself with saying, John 8.44.
the Devil was a Murderer from the beginning. Of the other he says, He abode
not in the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he Speaks a Lie, he
Speaks it of his own, for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. And therefore the
Everlasting Fire is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and for his Children
too, who with him are Jude 6.
Reserved in, or to Everlasting Chains under Darkness. Those Liars are those
wandering Stars, to whom, if not pardoned, is reserved the blackness of Darkness
for ever. If such terrible judgments and pains be reserved for the common
Liars, that are the Devil's Children, how much greater Degrees of Pains shall
be inflicted upon those who were not content to Lie in their ordinary
Discourse, but who have highly aggravated it with their Perjuries, and bringing
in the Name of God to Countenance their pernicious Lies, who not only have 2 Timothy 3.8.
Resisted the truth, as St. Paul speaks, but are gone further, and to speak in
another Apostle's Words, James 3.14.
have Lied against the truth.

Now to the Second Qualification, as he that Swears must do it in Truth, so he
ought to Swear in Judgment, or Considerately, and with Discretion; for Psalm.
11^.5.
A Good Man will Guide his Affairs with Discretion, making Conscience of all
his ways, especially of an Oath, well weighing and advisedly considering what
it is that he is to Swear, and who it is by whom he Swears, so as neither to
profane his Name, or make it common with using it upon unnecessary and light
occasions, as expressed, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. Nor make use of it Jam. 5.12.
unadvisedly, but Religiously and Reverently, and only in matters of weighty
Concernment, and not as Mat. 14.7.
Herod, who Promised with an Oath to give Herodias's Daughter, whatsoever she
would ask: As Rash a thing as Man can hear of; for she might have asked any
thing else as well as John Baptist's Head: And if this Condition is to be
Observed in any thing, certainly it must be in matters of Judicature, which are
so public, and the Consequences so great: hereby Man is required to Swear in
knowledge and wisdom, therefore Children, Fools, Madmen, Atheists, notoriously
Impious, and People Drunken, when in the Fit, must not be admitted to take an
Oath; for he who Swears, must beforehand be well Instructed in the Thing in
Question, that requires his Oath, for he is called thereby to confirm it, and
then he must well understand the binding Nature of an Oath, and the
Consequences thereof; for he which makes no Conscience of an Oath, is not to
take it, he ought to know how far he is Bound thereby: Whereof we have a
commendable Example in the Spies by Joshua sent over Jordan; how Cautious to
make Plain what Jos^^a 2
Rahab made them Swear to; as also was Abraham's Servant, as already Quoted;
and this Oath of the Spies, at the taking of Jericho, Joshua remembered to have
it kept. Then the Mind and true Meaning of the Swearer is to be considered,
what he aims at, when he does Swear. So is the true and proper Signification
of the Words made use of in the Oath, the meaning of those who require,
administer, and take the Oath, must be very plain.

Now, as not only Evil it self, but also occasions of Evil, ought to be
avoided, it were fit and convenient for Magistrates when they tender an Oath,
to proceed warily therein, and with great Caution, for fear of becoming
Instruments of Damnation to those who forswear themselves; wherefore it would
be very Necessary not Indifferently to offer an Oath, but first to have some
thing said whereby men might well understand what they are about, how Holy and
Sacred it is, and how great the Danger to Swear to a Lie; or else for want of
giving such a warning, they may become accessory to the Sin of him who
forsweareth himself for want of a due and timely Warning, without which the Law
or Custom are Defective; for none does For-swear but he who Swears, and both
Judges and Jurymen ought to be very Cautious how they believe one, who without
Consideration, runs him self under an Oath, or who in his Deposition, does
Stagger, Waver, or Contradict himself; such should be Discouraged, and the
Testimonies of Witnesses ought indeed more to be Weighed than Numbered. I deny
not but that in necessary Occasions, when a Man offers himself to Swear, he
may, and ought to be admitted to take his Oath, or else this would put a stop
to the Course of Justice; but I mean, that when one's grossly ignorant, or
suspected of being inclined to Perjury, something should be Enacted to prevent
it, and the Court be more Cautious how such a one is admitted to Swear. So,
hereupon those who make use of them, ought in Conscience be Wary how they bring
them in, for fear of being partakers to other men's Sins.

The Third thing for him that takes an Oath, is, To Swear in Righteousness, or
Righteously. That is, that the Matter by Oath to be Confirmed, be just, and
lawful; for one must not Bind himself to any thing by Oath, but what is such;
for an Oath ought not to be made a Bond of Iniquity, as was done by those
wicked Fellows, that Acts 23.14.
Had bound themselves under a great Curse, that they would eat nothing until
they had Killed Paul. If a Promisory Oath, then it must be with a full purpose
to Perform what one does thereby Oblige himself to, and accordingly to be
Careful to make it Good; and if the Oath be Testificatory, to bear Witness to
the Truth of a thing, it must be done out of certain Knowledge of the matter:
So must the occasions of taking the Oath be just, and the end good, as to
promote the Glory of God, and the Good of our Neighbor, Levit. 19 15, 35.
In Righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor, and ye shall do no
Unrighteousness in Judgment. So in Righteousness, Witnesses must S^ear, and not
to pervert Judgment and Equity.

It Is also to be observed, how when we are Sworn' it must be before those that
have Right and Authority to Exact and Administer an Oath, one is not to Swear
in a public and solemn way, without a Call from those who may lawfully Summon
us to it. We must also take notice how by Oaths we Bind ourselves unto God as
unto men, which no Human Power can Release and Dispense us from; Wherefore it is
said, Matthew. 5.33.
Thou shall not forswear thy Self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.
But we must now begin to draw near the main Point, namely Perjury, this must
take up our Serious Thoughts concerning several Things relating thereunto, from
the Greatness, and Righteousness of the great God, from the Nature and
Consequences of the thing, and of several other necessary Circumstances, duly
to be Weighed and Considered.

The Ark was called the Ark of the Testimony; First, because the Exodus 25 16.
Tables of the Law, whereby was Testified God's Covenant with his People, were
laid up there, then because from above the Mercy Seat, which was above upon the
Ark, God did meet with Moses, to v. 22.
commune with him of all things which he gave him in Commandment unto the
Children of Israel, and because the Ark was within the Tabernacle, so the
Tabernacle is called the chap. 26.33. Numb. 17.7, 8. and 18.2.
Tabernacle of Witness. As upon that Signal and Special Occasion where the
Glory of the Lord appeared, and God himself was both Witness and Judge to
decide of the Dispute about the High Priesthood, immediately after the
Rebellion of chapter 17.8.
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and their Punishment, and the Plague which followed
upon the People for their Murmuring at it, I say, God there appeared in the
Miracle of Aaron's Rod, which was Budded, bloomed Blossoms, and yielded
Almonds. So, in doubtful and disputable Cases. But God is, and will be both
Witness and Judge, men call upon him to be a Witness to the Truth of what is in
his Name Affirmed and Transacted, but will certainly be the Judge, whether or
not men call upon him for it. Though there be now no Ark, yet Heaven is his
Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, Genesis 31.50.
No Man is with us, says Laban to Jacob, See God is Witness betwixt me and
thee. God being present every where, is Witness to every thing, and sees every
thing to reward it, but specially when he is called upon to be a Witness and a
Judge between man and man.

In that Excellent Prayer of Solomon upon the Dedication of the Temple, he
makes a special mention of Oaths, 1 Kings, 8.31, 32.
If any man Trespass against his Neighbor, and an Oath be laid upon him to
Swear, and the Oath come before thine Altar in this House, Then hear thou in
Heaven, and do and judge thy Servants, condemning the Wicked, to bring his way
upon his head, and justifying the Righteous to give him according to his
Righteousness. A Man has Wronged his Neighbor, but he denies it upon the
Accusation, an Oath is laid upon him to clear the matter, the Oath to be taken
in the Temple before the Altar; hitherto men have acted their parts, but can go
no further, wherefore God's turn comes to act, though his Altar and the Temple
be upon Earth, yet God hears in Heaven, which is the great judgment Seat, the
true Seat of Justice and Equity; and what is done after hearing, he judges
between the Parties: And how? First, Condemns the Wicked, that is, him who
Profaned his Temple, and his Altar, by a false Oath; then Execution follows
the Sentence, for he brings his Way upon his Head: And also he justifies the
Righteous, and gives him according to his Righteousness. Let all men that are
brought to their Oath, take a special notice of this, that God is both Witness
and Avenger; wherefore there must be an awful Reverence of God's most Holy and
Sacred Name, which is made use of upon Occasion, not upon Common and Trivial,
but only necessary, just, and weighty Accounts. Wherefore the Nature and Use of
an Oath, are to be known before one Swears. First, the Nature, by considering
three things, the Person to be Sworn by, that is, GOD; the Parts of the Oath,
or the several Actions included and implied in it, which are Four; 1st, An
Assertion by way of Affirming or Denying, either barely, or with Obligation to,
or from something: The 2d, An Acknowledgment of God's Omniscience, Almightiness
Justice and other like Attributes. The 3d, An Invocation of him to bear Witness
to the Truth of what we say. The 4th an Imprecation against our selves, if we
do speak Falsely; that is, a referring over, and offering ourselves into his
Hands to be Punished by his power and justice.

Then the Purpose or Use, to which these Actions are to be applied, are to be
Considered; that is, the ending of a Controversy, which otherwise cannot be
conveniently ended. So that an Oath is a Religious Service of God, whereby we
refer ourselves unto him as a competent and fit Witness and Judge of the Truth
and Falsehood of our Speeches, about a Controverted matter, for the ending
thereof. Now the Use of an Oath must be known in Two Things; 1st, Of just
Occasions of using it; as when the matter is of moment, either in it self, or
in the Consequents and Effects of it, as for the Satisfying of another that
requires and will accept of it; or binding of one's self either to another, as
Genesis 47, 31.
Jacob caused Joseph to Swear, or to himself, 1 Kings 2.23.
as Solomon Swear that Adonijah should Dye. 2ly, We must know the just manner
of an Oath, in regard of using it upon such an occasion, and that in the Three
ways I mentioned before, which men cannot be too much put in mind of, namely,
in Judgment, that is, in a serious Consideration of the Cause of our Swearing,
and Greatness of the Name of God, by which we Swear in Truth, that is, a
perfect Agreement betwixt the meaning of the words of him that Swears, and
betwixt both these, and the things themselves, of which the Speech is, and that
also according to the Intention of him that tendereth the Oath, so far as he
shall manifest his Intentions to him that Swears. Also, in Righteousness,
that is, in Reverence to God, Care of doing Good not Hurt unto our Neighbors,
by Swearing, and Aiming at the right end, which is quietly determining of a
Doubt by interposing God's Name, to show our high Opinion of him; for thus God
and Man have their due, and that is Righteousness in every act, that every one
whom it concerns, may have that which is due to him therein.

It must be observed how in matter of Oaths, there are an Affirmative and a
Negative part, that is, Things Commanded, and Things Forbidden; for every one
of the Ten Commandments, when it commands a Virtue, does at the same time
forbid the Vices contrary to it, and when a Vice is forbidden, the Virtues
contrary are commanded, though Commanding is expressed in Affirmative Terms,
as, Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it Holy; The Forbidding is declared in
Negative Terms, Thou shall not, wherein is contained every other Precept of the
First and Second Tables of the Law of God: Now men ought to take Notice how
Negative Precepts are of a larger extent, and more binding than Affirmative;
for these bind only Semper, non ad Semper, at Certain Times, not at all Times;
but the Negative do bind Always, and at all times; as, I am bound to Help and
Assist, and be Charitable to my Neighbor, but that is only when he wants my
help, and as far as I am able, which I am not always, neither does he always
stand in need of being helped; but the Negative Precept goes further, for I
stand bound never to hurt him, to do him Wrong and Injury at no time
whatsoever. This I now take notice of in relation to the Third Commandment, not
to take the Name of the Lord in vain, which I shall have occasion to speak of,
as being the Ground which in this matter I am to go upon, for therein the
Abuses of an Oath are forbidden, and it is Abused in Two ways: 1st, In the
Taking, 2ly, In the Keeping thereof. In relation to the First, as to the
matter, for it is Object or Subject, for the Object, the Thing or Person Sworn
by; for the Subject, whether Affirmative or Promissive: As to the First, the
Thing must be True, and the Oath Necessary, not Trivial, which deserves not an
Oath. As to the Second, the thing Promised ought not to be either Impossible,
or Unlawful: As to the manner of using the Oath, it must not be taken 1st,
Ignorantly. 2ly, Without Cause, or just Inducement thereto. 3ly, Irreverently.
4ly, Ragingly, or in the bitterness of Passion. 5ly, Maliciously, with a Design
of Hurting any Man. 6ly, Nor Falsely.

Have a great Care of Negative Oaths, wherein lays a great danger of
Forswearing, therefore not to be tendered nor taken, for they can be no Proofs,
only sometimes strong Presumptions: Indeed, one may well say, I never heard
such a man say so, or, I never saw him do so, but no man may say, He never said
or did so; he might say and do so, though you never heard or saw him speak or
do it. A Negative Assertion may by a good Consequence be drawn from a Positive
thus, Such a man, at such a time, to my certain Knowledge, was in the City,
therefore at the same time he was not in the Country, for at once he could not
be in both places; but I may not Swear, such a one, at such a time, was not in
the City, because I did not see him, for he might be there and you not see him,
only in this Case, if the place be within such a narrow compass, that he cannot
be in it when you are there but you must see him; as for Instance: At such a
Day, and such an Hour, we were Twelve at Table in such a place, he was none of
the Twelve, therefore he was not there, though one may say, he was not at
Table, yet he may not say he was not in the Room, for he might be hidden in
some secret part thereof. All this I say, to show how Cautious men ought to be
in point of Oaths; but I see this matter is so Copious, as I find it draws me
very far, wherefore I must restrain it only to my present Purpose, namely.
Perjury.

Perjury is, when God, is called upon for a Witness to an Untruth, which the
Prophet speaks of, Isai. 48.1.
Hear ye this, O House of Jacob, which Swear by the Name of the Lord, and make
mention of the God of Israel, but not in Truth, nor in Righteousness. And it is
Perjury either when one Swears that to be true, which he thinks, or knows to
be False, or that to be False, which he thinks or knows to be True; or else
when he Swears to do that which he does not intend to perform; or afterward,
upon Second Thoughts, and for some Wordly Considerations, tho he at first
intended, yet breaks his Oath and Promise; this is expressly Forbidden; Lev.
19.12.
Ye shall not Swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou Profane the Name of
thy God. A Crime so odious unto him, as the contrary Virtue is so acceptable,
that for the sake of those that are endued therewith, God forbears inflicting
his Punishments upon Cities and Nations, these ^stand in the Breach when God is
ready to break in, we have his Word for it, Jer. 5.1.
Run ye to and fro thorough the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know,
and seek in the broad Places thereof, if ye can find a Man, ^f there be any
that executes Judgment, thak seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it. Judges
are Sworn to judge according to Law, and to do Justice, and Witnesses to Swear
the Truth, yet says God there, verse 2.
Though they say the Lord lives, surely they Swear falsely. Would to God that
was not so True as it is here! But now there is as much Cause as ever, for God
to Expostulate among other things, chap. 7.9.
Will ye Swear Falsely?

So then, Perjury is a False Swearing, or a known or imagined Untruth,
Confirmed by Oath with De^eit, which was either Purposed and Intended before
the Oath was made, or Resolved on afterward, which ^oth contain Two Things.:
First, the Matter, which ^s an Untruth; and the Manner, that gives Being ^o't,
a false Oath with a Design and against Knowledge. Now, there is a Logical
Untruth, when we ^o not speak as the Thing is, or when our Speech ^oth not
agree with the Truth of the thing: There ^s a Moral Untruth, when our Speech
agrees not ^ith our Mind; that is, when we Speak not as we Think or Know, and
this last chiefly makes the wilful and malicious Perjury; for one being imposed
upon, ^r-mistaken, may happen to Swear an Untruth, which ^e believes to be a
Truth, and so it may be called a ^ash and Profane Oath, yet not strict
Perjury, because the Speech agrees with the Mind, though not ^ith the Truth of
the thing: And thus, though a ^an Swears that which is False, yet may not
strictly ^e said to Swear Falsely, because without a Design ^o Deceive.
However, though herein the Sin be the ^ast, yet still a Sin it is, that from
men deserves Pu^ishment, by reason of the Evil Consequences; for ^ometimes a
Man's Life and Fortune may happen ^hereby to lay at Stake; besides, that this
is the way, namely, fear of Punishment, to make men more Cautious how, and what
they Swear, it is the ready and proper way, to speak in David's words, Psalm.
63.11.
to have The Mouth of them that speak Lies to be stopped. And this is the more
to be minded, that in such Cases the Cause is not only between Man and Man,
between the Subject and the King, whose Office is to punish the Guilty, but
chiefly between God and Men, whose Holy Name is thereby abused; for the end of
Perjury, whether Assertory or Promissory, is Falsehood and Deceit. If Vain
Swearing be a Sin, much more False Swearing.

Several Questions are put about matters of Oaths which here I shall not meddle
with, because not t^ my purpose, as whether unlawful or unpossible Oath are
Binding, which I conclude for the Negative, and whether violent and extorted,
which I declare for the Affirmative, if only they import a Wordly Cause and no
detriment to God's Glory, for which Psalm. 15.4.
David is my Security, nor to other man's Rights.

Of all Sins, Perjury is one of the most grievous and abominable, and he that
commits it, is not Satisfied to make himself a Liar, but also must proclaim
himself to be such with a Witness: To ca^ the God of Truth to be a Witness to a
Lie, which no Man of Honor could endure of himself, is to ca^^ and in as much
as in one lies, to make God a Lya^ like himself, which is the highest degree of
Blasphem^ for Tit. 1.2.
God cannot Lie, this is to Rob him of h^ Truth, one of his most Essential
Attributes, which he is so tender of, and to deprive him of his Nature, for
take away Truth from God, and he cease^^ to be God, for his true Character, and
Mark (...) Distinction from all, is to be the True GOD. And if God himself
Exodus 19.26. Heb. 12.18.
upon the Mount, amidst Lightning, Thunder, Fire, a Cloud, Blackness, Darkness
and Tempest, with the Voice of a Trumpet, exceeding loud, declared he will not
hold him Guiltle^ that takes his Name in Vain, that is, he will no^ leave them
Unpunished, what will he not do to him who, in the highest degree, does
thorough Perjury Profane it, seeing he Thunders such a Threatening against the
least degree thereof? And it is observable that the Word in the Original, [ in
Vain,] which in the Chaldaick, Syriack, and Arabic, is rendered, Falsely, with
a Lie, Precipitently, or Rashly, signifies the Breach of that Commandment in
the least Degree: But we are to take a special Notice of the dreadful Penalty
contained in the reason annexed to the Commandment, that God will not leave
this Sin unpunished, that he will not justify, cleanse, and expiate, according
to the Expressions of the other Languages we named but just now. And this is
the only Precept whereunto such a Threatening is annexed, to show how detestable
that Sin is in the sight of God; this is 1 Kings 2.9.
David's Expression, when he gave Solomon charge about Shimei, hold him not
Guiltless, that is Punish him: So as to Perjury, though men neglect to Punish
it yet as to the Sinner he shall not escape his just and fearful Judgment, for
as the Sin is Grievous, so God will Grievously punish it: And if taking his
Name in Vain, by abusing it in every Trifle, is to meet with so severe a
Judgment, as we said before, so I say again, what will it be, and how heavy,
when that Holy Name is by some men Impiously made use of to Confirm their Lies.

In that Third Commandment, by the Name of God, are understood his Nature,
Attributes, Works, Word, and all Divine Perfections, whereby God has made
himself known unto us: As we are Forbidden to Abuse, so are we Commanded to
make a Right Use thereof, which consists in the inward Frame, and Religious
Disposition of our Souls, in the Reverence we express in our Words, and
Discourses about it, and in the Study we make, how to Promote it in our Lives
and Conversations; that is, both Inwardly and Outwardly, in the Antecedent,
Concomitant, and Consequent Circumstances thereof.

By the word to take, is meaned to speak, use or mention it: Men are known by
their Names, so by God's Name, God himself is to be understood; and to give Men
a warning I cannot too often mention, how herein God naming the smaller fault
in taking his Name in vain, declared the hainousness of the greater, for if
taking only his Name in vain be a Sin, how abominable is it, when it is
Blasphemed or used to confirm a lie: Not only the mentioning God's Name where
it should not be used, that is, when there is no just cause for it, is
forbidden, but also chiefly the abusing or using it amiss, when we should do it
with fear and holiness, Psalm. 99.3.
for his Name is great and terrible, and Deuteronomy. 28.58.
it is a glorious and a fearful Name, yea Psalm. 72.19.
a glorious name to be blessed for ever: Psa. 111.9.
Holy and reverend is his Name. That holy Name, Psalm. 113.2, 3.
The Lords name is to be praised from the rising of the Sun unto the going down
of the same, and blessed from this time forth and for evermore; But false
Swearers, instead of blessing they curse it, and if some, only for taking God's
holy Name in vain, be called his Enemies, for says David, Psalm. 139.20.
Thine Enemies take thy name in vain, much more they who curse it.

By reason of the importance of this matter I shall now by the Grace of God in
few words declare the meaning of that third precept whereof the end is, that
God will have the Majesty of his Name to be most Sacred unto us, and so must
not be despised or unreverently profaned: Hence follows our duty, to use it
with a Religious veneration: So that we must think or speak nothing of God's
Nature, Attributes, Works, Word and Ordinances, but with an awful Reverence,
much less make use of it for self ends or worldly Interest; but with a true
sense and tenderness of heart; never mention any thing relating to God, but
therein admire and adore his Wisdom, justice, Goodness and power; and when
others are wanting therein, we may charitably warn them of their duty, which if
slighted, the occasions of coming into such Companys must be avoided, not to be
hearers and Witnesses of the dishonor put upon God, and disparagement to our
holy Religion the true Christian Reformed Protestant: for such Men when once
God has left them to themselves, they harden themselves, turn the acts of Sin
into an habit, then the custom of sinning takes away the feeling of Sin, from
one sin they fall into another, they daily 2 Timothy 3.13.
Wax worse and worse, so except God gives them Repentance they cannot Chap.
2.26.
recover themselves out of the snare of the devil who are taken captive by him
at his will, and they cannot 2 Pet. 2.14.
cease from sin. This I insist upon to show the necessity of avoiding evil
companys which corrupt good manners and are snares to draw Men into
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Impiety, Swearing, Cursing, Forswearing, Blasphemy, etc.

Now if there be so much evil when Men do rashly and unreverently take God's
holy Name into their lips, how much more then when it is made use of for wicked
ends? And if God in this Precept does exclude, as he does, from pardon those
who take his Name in vain, how much more those who slight, despise and profane
it to serve their own turns, and as we hinted before, an Oath is a calling upon
God to be a Wittness of the truth of what we say, or of the sincerity of our
intention in what we promise. So Men ought to be very cautious of affirming
nothing but what they know to be true, and have a great regard to the nature
and greatness of an Oath wherein God is taken to Wittness against the Soul of
the Swearer if he deceives. And as a false Oath ought to be avoided, so a due
consideration ought to be had in taking of a lawful one, and this should be in
a legal way, I mean when lawfully called and upon a necessary Account; which,
as I said before, is part of God's Worship as expressed in the Prophecy about
the call and confederacy of the Isa. 19.18.
Assyrians and Egyptians with Israel, They shall swear to the Lord of hosts,
that is, serve and worship him, for, in that day shall five Citys in the land
of Egypt, speak the language of Canaan, and Chap. 65.16.
he that Swears in the Earth shall swear by the God of truth, again, Jer.
12:16.
And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people
to swear by my Name, the Lord lives as they taught my people to swear by Baal,
then shall they be built in the midst of my people.

When human Testimonies are failing, our refuge is in going to God and calling
him to Wittness, for he is the Eternal and unchangeable Truth, not only the
right and proper Wittness, of the Truth, but as the only assertor thereof, who
alone can bring to light the hidden things of darkness; for Psalm. 139.2.
he knows our thoughts afar off, and is the only searcher of the heart,
wherefore that makes him so jealous and angry when that which belongs only to
him is transfered to the Creature or to Idols, that makes him so heavily
complain and threaten, Jer. 5.7.
how shall I pardon thee for this, thy Children have forsaken me and sworn by
them that are no Gods? That is, worshipped them, which I will not pardon, and
the reason why he will not pardon is set down lower, They have belyed the Lord,
v. 12.
called him to be Witness to their lies, sworn falsely in his Name. O the sad
condition of perjured men, they think all is well with them, but God has found
them out and points at them, Isa. 28.15.
because ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we
at agreement, when its overflowing scourge shall pass thorough, it shall not
come unto us, and the ground of all this confidence or carnal security is this,
for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves.
But men must have a great care not to turn into Injury and contempt of God that
which is intended for his honor and service, for Oaths were instituted as for
peace among men, so for the honor and glory of God, wherefore it is one of the
Ten Commandments, and one of the first table as immediately relating to God;
and as Princes and Magistrates are keepers of both Tables of the Law, so they
and those under them, as it is their duty, ought to have a care, that that which
is intended for his glory be not turned to his dishonor, as it is a most wicked
impiety when Men swear falsely by God's Name, so it is a sinful compliance and
unpardonable neglect for those whose duty it is to punish such crimes, not to do
it, for God is deprived of his Nature and of his Truth when he is made or
suffered to be made an Wittnes to and approver of a lie, whereby his glorious
Name is most abominably profaned.

Perjury and False Swearing which as it was the occasion, so it is the chief
subject of the present discourse, is of so high a concernment, that of the Ten
Commandments it takes up no less then two, for as in the Third we are
forbidden to take the Name of God in vain, so in the Ninth we are prohibited to
bear False Wittness against our Neighbor: See how both these, God's Honor and
our Neighbor's Safety are twisted together, for as thereby such men sin
against God, so they extremely wrong their Neighbor, which is contrary to that
rule of Justice contained in our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, all Mat. 7.12.
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. Now certainly no Man would have another
to Swear him falsely out of his good Name, Liberty, Fortune and Life, therefore
they should not do so to others: But this People care neither for the Law nor
the Prophets, nor for Jesus Christ or God himself, if False Swearing against
and wronging our Neighbor in private be forbidden, much more in public in a
Solemn way, under notion of Justice and in Courts of Judicature, whereby every
thing a Man has is laid at Stake. Poor 1 Kings 21.10, 13.
Naboth, by two False Witnesses, who are well and properly called Sons of
Belial, was Sworn not only out of his Vineyard, but also out of his Life: for
indeed one who is a False Wittness to Swear another out of his Estate, will
make no difficulty to Swear him out of his Life. If there had been no False
Wittness, the High Priest, Scribes and Pharisees had wanted a pretense to
accuse our Blessed Savior which to compass Mat. 26.59.
they sought for false Witnesses, and therein found an occasion to put him to
death, according to the Prophecy long before, Psalm. 35.11.
False Witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not,
as David had also said before, Psalm. 27.12.
False witnesses are risen up against me. This generation of Men were of all
Ages, as old as the Devil their Father who from the beginning was a Liar, and
is the Job 1.6, 7. Rev. 12.10.
slanderer and false accuser of God's People, as we see it in the case of Job.
Certainly God will avenge himself and Men for that wherein they are so
abominably wronged in every thing belonging to them, even in the Mind and
Judgment of some who thorough false swearing are imposed upon, for the perjured
Man does cheat and deceive, seduce and impose upon Reason it self, both to the
Ruin of private men, and overthrowing of whole Nations, for not only some
privave men, but also the public does suffer: Some Jews do write how when upon
Mount Sinai the Tables were given, as soon as the Law against Perjury was
pronounced the whole World was shaken, as if this had been the most important
of all.

If Men would but read and consult Scriptures thereby to be guided and make
God's Word their rule, there would not be so much cause in the World to
complain as there is, about this matter: They might read how positive, how
clear and how full it is thereupon: They might find therein grounds enough to
be dissuaded from it, the hainousness of the Sin that ends in blasphemy, its
Character of those who commit it namely God's Enemies, Psalm. 139.20.
Thine Enemies take thy Name in vain, the Curse they undergo, the punishment
they must expect, and so many more such Circumstances which attend that sin:
How many in the World that make no Conscience at all to swallow down an Oath,
who know not, mind not and care not for the bitter Consequences thereof, a
hundred to one are such, for there are more wicked then good and honest Men,
and this thing, our Juries should seriously consider of, and weigh more then
number Evidences.

Though there be some in the World who, like the unrighteous Judge, fear
neither God nor Man, or if they do, rather Man then God; yet these few things I
shall lay before those who happen to read these lines and may be concerned in
what I say: we have to do with a just and true God, who sees, hears and
remembereth all, and will call us all to an account for what we think, speak
and do, for after Death follows Judgment; we all must certainly die, the time
when, we know not, for we have no certain lease of our lives, all our days are
in God's hand. So a Forsworn Man may happen to go out of this World with a
False Oath in his mouth, and thus appear before God to receive his private
Judgment, and then O fool though thorough Perjury thou should gain the whole
World what profit is it for thee if it be with the loss of thy Soul? Deuteronomy.
5.24. Chap. 9.3. Heb. 12.24.
For the Lord our God is a consuming fire, and a jealous God, of his Name, of
his Honor, and of his Truth, naked such as it is, without painting or
disguising, how beautiful is it in it self unstained, it is an Attribute so
Essential and so acceptable to God as belongs to the Nature and to the Three
Persons, the God of Truth, Christ the Truth, the Spirit of Truth, and that
excellent Truth so much commended by St, John in his 2d. and 3d. Epistles.

The Law, Tim. 1.9, 10.
says Scripture, is made for liars for perjured persons, and the worst sort of
Men; so according to this Law they shall be judged, in the mean time God in his
word does not simply forbid the crimes of Lying and perjury, but thunders
Threatenings against those who commit them, it is said, Mat. 5.33. Exodus 20.7.
Levit. 19.12. Deuteronomy. 15.21.
Thou shall not forswear thy self, and ye shall not swear by my Name falsely,
and among other grievous things for which God calls people in question this is
one, Jer. 7.9.
Will ye swear falsely, and if to convince those that are such, you want
Evidences, I will help you to some without exception, for Mal. 3.5.
I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift Wittness against
false Swearers, and he will himself Judge not only false Witnesses but also
corrupt Judges and Juries. Take notice of a Temporal judgment upon this
account, Zech. 5.3, 4.
I will bring forth says the Lord of hosts a Curse into the house of him that
swears falsely by my Name and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
shall consume it with the Timber thereof and the Stones thereof. This is
Lightning, Thunderbolt and fire from Heaven, and I doubt we have here too much
cause with the Prophet to say, because of Swearing, Cursing and Forswearing,
Jer. 23.10.
the land mourns: This is one of our Loud and Epidemical Sins, which has
^rought upon us the many Judgments we labor under.

As God has said he will be a Wittness against False Swearers, so he has
declared he will be Judge too. Psalm. 9.8.
God shall Judge the World in Righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the
People in uprightness. It Is as if he had said, I will be a just Judge: And thus
with Abraham we may say, Genesis 18.21.
Shall not the judge of all the Earth do Right. Now if God judge^ in Justice
without Mercy, who can stand in Judgment? Romans 2.2.
We are sure, says the Apostle, that the judgment of God is according to truth
against the^ which commit such things, as are named in the latter end of the
foregoing Chapter amongst whom are Covenant breakers, that is, perjured
persons, and such others as make no Conscience of their ways, and changed the
truth of God into a lie. Isai. 1.23.24.
Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah, I
will ease my self of mine Adversaries and avenge me of mine Enemies. But who
are those Adversaries, who are those Enemies? in the foregoing verse they are
thus described, Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they Judge
not the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow come unto them. These
are their Sins, these Things they Commit and Omit, therefore upon them will I
visit their Injustices, whether they be Witnesses in Swearing Falsely, or
Judges in perverting Judgment.

The Great Day of the General Assizes of the World is coming on, when we all,
Judges, Juries, Witnesses, Plaintiffs and Defendants, must stand at the Bar,
and then God shall want no Witnesses, but the Guilty Men's Consciences, which
now are Asleep, and Seared with a hot Iron, will Awake, be Quickened, and fly
into their Faces, and be as a Thousand Witnesses to Convict, as many Judges to
Condemn, and as a Thousand Executioners to Torment them; the Devil himself, who
is here a Seducer, will then be an Informer, and Accuser: Now we are assured,
that Acts 17.31.
God has appointed a Day, in the which he will Judge the World in
Righteousness, by the Man whom he has Ordained: Such a Man as is God also,
that knows all things, and needs not that any one should t^ll him what is in
Man, for he searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, and this God-Man, Judge
of the World, is named elsewhere; 2 Cor. 5.10. and Romans 14.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done; whether it
be Good or Evil; called Jude 6,
the Judgment of the great Day, though many wish there was no Judgment Day, yet
it is such a Truth as they may not deny, and the Thoughts thereof should make
all wicked Men to Tremble, if they be not worse and more hardened than Acts 24
25.
Felix, an Heathen was, who Trembled when Paul reasoned of Judgment to come.

And now let first the Judges hear their Charge, what is their Duty here, and
what shall be Required of them hereafter; I mean not only the Judges upon the
Bench, but also the Juries, whose Verdict is the Sentence, and only in point of
Law are guided by the Judges: The Thing ought to answer the Name, it is called
Verdict, quasi Verum Dictum, therefore let it not be Falsum Dictum, a False and
Unjust Sentence, thorough Seduction of the Judgment, or Bribery; for Judges,
such as indeed they are, ought not to be influenced by any corrupt Practices,
whether Judges upon the Bench, or Jurymen in the Court; Psalm. 2.10.
Therefore be Instructed Ye Judges of the Earth, which is a Charge by David's
Pen, given by the Judge of all the Earth. And hear what says upon the matter,
the great Lawgiver under God, I mean Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
And I charged your Judges at that time saying, Hear the Causes between your
Brethren, and Judge righteously between every Man, and his Brother, and the
Stranger that is with him. Ye shall not Respect Persons in Judgment, but ye
shall Hear the Small as the Great. You shall not be afraid of the Face of Man,
for the Judgment is God's. Herein they were told of the Duty of their Office,
first to hear, which must neither de denied nor delayed, and according to what
they hear, they are bound to judge justly, whether between Jew and Jew, or
between Jew and a Stranger, for Justice ought equally and impartially to be
rendered unto all, without any Bias, or Regard of Persons in Judgment, whether
Friends or Enemies, Relations or Strangers, Great or Small, Poor or Rich; and
because some men are often apt to be dazzled and influenced by the greatness and
wordly Advantage of others, either out of Interest, Love, or Fear; here Judge^
are charged not to mind any such thing, nor to suffer themselves to be wrought
upon by any such outward Advantages and wordly Considerations, and the Reason
is given in the Text, For the Judgment is God's, and not Man's. The Heathens in
their Hieroglyphics, represented Justice, one of the Four Moral Cardinal or
chief Virtues, by the Figure of a Woman Blindfolded, and holding Scales in her
Hand, the first to signify, she ought not to look upon, or see any thing in the
Parties to Bias her Judgment, the second that the justice of the Cause,
without any regard to the Person, must decide the Dispute, and both to require
an Impariality in the Judge, always looking on God as present with them: Psalm.
82, 1,
For God Judges among the gods.

In Jetro's Prudent Advice to Moses, about Judges, he mentions Four
Qualifications, required in all that are in such a station, Exodus 18.21.
Able Men, such as fear God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness. First, Men
endued with Knowledge, and Understanding, which are natural Parts, necessary
for those that are in such places; for else, how can they that want judgment in
themselves, be competent Judges over others? The Understanding is the Light of
the Soul, whereby it must be guided, and which without it lies in Darkness,
wherefore it concerns those that appoint Judges to make choice of such as God
has fitted for the place, and given them Endowments proper for it: But this is
not enough, all Natural Gifts are defective without Grace, therefore the Heart
of Judges should be Sanctified with the Fear of God: This ought to direct their
Knowledge, and here must be the Ground of all their Judgments. And as the
Understanding ought to be Sound, and the Heart Upright, so must the Conscience
to love, search, find out, and judge according to Truth, be very wary and
cautious to do nothing against it, rather detest, abhor, and punish all Lies,
Falsehood, and any thing conttary to it. Besides these, they must not want Moral
Virtue, but avoid things contrary thereunto. Now Justice is one of the Four
Moral Virtues, and as nothing is so apt to pervert it, as Covetousness, for it
makes men seek after Bribes, and both Blinds the Eyes, and Corrupts the
Heart, so they that are appointed to do Justice, ought not only to be free
from, but also to 1 Coloss. 3.5.
Hate Covetousness, which by the Apostle is well called Idolatry, because
Riches is the god of, adored and served by the Covetous Man; in few words, the
same Apostle calls the Love of Money, which is Covetousness, the Root of all
Evil. This is the most pernicious Rock of all which Judges can run upon: This
very same Sin, though they had every other Quality for the Place, does
Unqualify them for it, and highly declares them Incapable of: Except they hate
Covetousness, all other good Qualities are Insignificant; and it is Pity, a
great Shame, and Scandal to any Court of Judicature, that any one, who ever was
Branded with, and Convicted of Bribery, should be suffered to sit upon the
Bench, and have Daily Occasion to satisfy his Covetousness, and Pervert Justice
and Judgment; of such speaks David, when Psalm 26.10.
he says, Their Right Hand is full of Bribes, but Fire shall Consume the
Tabernacles of bribery, Job. 15.34.

We have in Scripture another most considerable Charge, though to the same
Purpose as Moses's, in King Jehoshaphat's Instructions to his Judges, thus; 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7.
And he said to the Judges, take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for men, but
for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment: Wherefore let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no Iniquity with the Lord
our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. This is very full and
comprehensive, first to show how Cautious Judges and Juries must be of what
they do, not to be Rash, or Hasty, or Corrupt in their Judgments; and though
they be appointed by men as Princes, etc. as those Princes and Kings themselves
are appointed by God, so Justice is Originally in and derived from God, for
that saying of Divine Wisdom of the Son of God, is most true; Prove. 8.15, 16.
By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth, by me Kings
reign, and decree Justice. Not only from, but by me, in my Name and Authority:
Wherefore Jehoshaphats Reason is very true; First, Negatively, [Ye judge not
for men,] Then Positively, [but for God] with this weighty Consideration, that
God is with them in the judgment. If Judges should judge for Men, that is, for
those who appointed them for that Office, then they would judge for the Absent,
for Princes who gave them their Places are not present at their judgments, and
therefore if they have a mind to know what passes in such Courts, they stand in
need of being informed by others, for they cannot know it by themselves, but
when they judge for God, it is for him who being every where, is always with
them, hears, sees, and observes all their Proceedings, and knows all by
himself, and therefore needs not being informed by men of what passes there;
Heb. 4, 13.
for, There is not any Creature, or thing, that is not manifest in his sight,
but all things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to
do. Therefore Judges in the Discharge of the Duty of their places, ought to
look upon, and eye God, and not men, or at least God chiefly and primarily:
Wherefore this good King Jehoshaphat, would have not the fear of himself be
upon his Judges, as if he would turn them out of their places, or undergo his
Displeasure, if they did not Right, but he would work upon them out of a more
noble and higher Motive, not out of a Principle of Interest, but of Conscience,
and that makes him point at the very Spring of all Justice, Equity, Rewards and
Pains, when he says, let the Fear of God be upon you; and they ought to have a
great care, and it ought to be their whole and constant Study to do it, by a
Reason drawn from the Purity of the Nature and Actings of God, for there is no
Iniquity with the Lord our God, as the Spring is, so the Streams derived from
it, ought to be: God's Representatives upon Earth, in administering of Justice,
ought to imitate him, and not suffer Justice, which is pure in it is Source, to
be corrupt and defiled by themselves, as the Pipes thorough which it is
conveyed; for as it is Written, Be ye Holy as I am Holy, so they are Commanded,
Be ye Just, for I am Just, or else, thorough his just Judgment, they may happen
to be Infatuated and deprived of their Understanding, a heavy Punishment, for
Job. 12.17.
God makes the Judges Fools.

Now, as to Witnesses, besides what I have already said upon the matter, the
Charge is, Exodus 23.1.
Put not thine Hand with the Wicked, to be an unrighteous Witness. Which
argues, how sometimes there is amongst the Wicked a Combination to be false
Witnesses, to pervert Right and Justice: Prove, 24.28.
Be not a Witness against thy Neighbor without Cause, and Deceive not with thy
Lips, Without a just Cause, and a lawful Call, men ought not to intrude to be
Witnesses against any one; no Enmity, Envy, or Jealousy should prompt us to it,
but when we are Summoned, then have a care not to tell Lies, but to speak the
Truth from the Heart. The ^inth Precept is very Positive and Universal, renewed
and confirmed in several other places, Exodus 20.16. Deuter. 5.20. Matthew. 19.18.
Luke 18.20. Romans 13.9.
Not to bear false Witness. The Character which Solomon gives of a False
Witness is this; Prove. 2^ 18.
A Man that bears false Witness against his Neighbor, is a Maul, and a
^word, and a sharp ^rrow. A Dart, a ^^ammer, and not barely an Arrow, but a
Sharp one, ail these Offensive Arms, whereof some break things in pieces,
others divide, and this to show the Mortality of the Wound, made by such False
Tongues. Now, such Villainies as these are the more Abominable, because there is
nothing to be pleaded for, to excuse it, it is no Mischance, no Ignorance, no
Mistake, nor Infirmity, but it proceeds out of a rotten Principle, out of a
corrupt Spring from the Heart, wherein it is designedly, deliberately, and
maliciously Contrived and Hatched: For, says the Lord Jesus, out of the Heart
proceed, among other horrid Sins, Matthew. 15.19.
False Witness and Blasphemies.

The wise King makes a comparison and shows the difference between the true and
the false Witness, sometimes with joining them together in the same verse, as
thus, Prove. 12.17.
He that speaks truth shows righteousness: but a false wittness deceit. One
is a just man the other a deceiver. Again, Chap. 14.5.
A faithful wittness will not lie, hut a false wittness will utter lies: At
other times he speaks of them disjointly and separatly, that we may the better
know whom to trust and value, and whom not, out of that contrariety, opposition
and antipathy which is between them, v. 25.
thus, A true wittness delivers souls from Trouble, Vexation and Oppression,
which the false one does promote and encourage, for the deceitful speaks
lies, Chap. 19.28.
an ungodly wittness scorneth judgment, both Justice and Punishment, but a
godly wittness makes Conscience of an Oath, and of all his ways, and says with
David, Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Because
Men are apt enough to follow evil Examples, and to do as they see others do, to
swim, as we use to say, with the stream as if for company sake to do as many
others, could justify, at least excuse our faults: God to prevent such an
unsound notion, and hinder that pernicious practice, has declared his mind
thus, Exodus 23.2.
Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment,
this in the beginning of the same verse he forbids, and calls it, to follow
a multitude to do evil: But to make an end of this part of my Discourse, I can
show home the foulness and detestableness of this Sin, no better then with
adding what Solomon says, Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19.
Among the six things which the Lord does hate, and the Seven that are an
Abomination unto him, they are almost if not all reduced to this wicked Sin,
for a lying Tongue is one of them, a false witness that speaks Lies, is
another, and I think that under them are also to be found hands that shed
Innocent blood, which a lying Tongue also does, an heart that devises wicked
Imaginations; feet that be swift in running to mischief, and him that sows
discord among brethren; Which all do arise out of the same Spring.

We have spoken of the Distemper, now we must come to the Remedy: As the
corruption of human Nature is such that most Men will not out of a Principle of
Love do Good, nor forbear doing Evil, therefore what Love cannot do, Fear must,
Oderunt peccare boni Virtutis amore, oderunt peccare mali formidine paenae:
Good men hate Sin because they love Virtue, but bad men avoid it for fear of
being punished, wherefore a Law is necessary as a Curb, for as the Sanctions
thereof do promise Rewards to those that keep it, so they threaten with
Punishment ^he breakers thereof, and this is the way to restrain and keep them
in aw; Law and Sin are relatives, ^or if there was no Law, there would be no
Sin, ^or 1 John 3.4.
Sin is the Transgression of the Law, and Romans 3.20.
By ^^e Law is the knowledge of Sin, and Chap. 4.15.
Where no ^aw is there is no Transgression, on the other side, (...) there was
no Sin, there would be no need of Law, Gal. 3.19.
for The Law was added because of Transgressions, ^or, says the Apostle. 1 Timothy 1.9.
The Law is not made for (...) Righteous man, but for the Lawless and
disobedient. Wherefore God to restrain this most wicked Sin of Perjury has
made Laws and appointed against it Temporal and Bodily as well as Spiritual and
Eternal Punishments, or else as Impunity is an encouragement ^o commit Crimes,
without these Temporal Punishments there would be no living in the world, for
the Wicked do little mind Eternal Pains, it is Fear of the Present, that works
upon them if any thing can; for this reason there are in the Word of God, heavy
^udgments threatened against the Wicked in this kind, ^ot only in the Third
Commandment, as we already observed, but in other places too; Prove, 19 5.
A False Witness shall not be Unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not
escape. To tell Lies is very bad, but to tell ^t in God's Name, is worst of all.

For thus; -- A Nomine Domini incipit omne Malum.

God threatened it with Sword and Famine, and in his due time brought it to
pass: Jerem. 5 12.
They have belyed the Lord, says the Prophet, and said, it is not he, neither
shall Evil come upon us, neither shall we see Sword nor Famine. Thus flattering
themselves in their vain and carnal Security; but hear what is added, v. 15.16,
17,
Lo, I will bring a Nation upon you from far, O House of Israel, says the
Lord, it is a mighty Nation, it is an ancient Nation, whose Language thou
know not, etc. they shall eat up thine Harvest, and thy Bread, which thy
Sons and thy Daughters should eat, etc. These were the Chaldeans, who in time
did the Work, when they Besieged, Took, and Destroyed Jerusalem. To this same
Purpose, but more generally speaks another Prophet, and this judgment to be by
Fire, Zech. 5.4.
that shall consume Timber and Stones, as it had befalle^ the City which was
Burnt, and one of the Reasons o^ this judgments was, as there expressed, for
Swearing falsely by his name. Upon the same Ground, the Prophet quoted just
before, 2 Chronicles. 36.13.
threatens the Ruin of Jerusalem, which happened in Zedekiah's days, who had
forsworn himself, for it is observed that when Ezekiel. 17 13.
Nebuchadanezar did set him upon the Throne, he made hi^ Swear by God, which
Oath he broke, and Perjured himself; which Perjury, how odiously taken by God,
we may see it in the Prophet speaking of the K of Babylon has made a Covenant
with him, v. 15, 16.
and has taken an Oath of him, but he despised the Oath, and brake the
Covenant. But, says God, Shall he escape that does such things? or, Shall he
break the Covenant and be delivered? No, says the Lord, seeing he despised the
Oath by breaking the Covenant, when he had given his hand, and has done all
these things, he shall not escape. v. 18.
As it was justly Avenged on him. And this very Oath Sworn to an Infidel,
because in God's Name, God calls it his Oath and with a strong Asseveration
threatens a Punishment for it. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, as I Live,
surely mine (...) that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken,
v. 18.
even it will I recompense upon his own Head. All was executed, and he heavily
Punished for it. God, to avenge the profaning of his Holy Name, does punish
not only private Persons and Families, but also Kings and Kingdoms; wherefore
all are concerned in the Punishment thereof, and if men neglect to do it, God
himself will set his Hand to it, and do the Work: If the Distemper be but
Personal, the Punishment of that Person will satisfy God; but if it be
Epidemical, then the Vengeance shall be General; nay, sometimes the Innocent of
that Crime are involved with the Guilty, as in the Case of the Gibeonites,
though they had deceived Joshua, with their Lies, yet notwithstanding the
People had a general Order to destroy all those Nations, it is said, Josh. 9.15,
16, 18, 19.20.
They Smote them not, because the Princes of the Congregation had Sworn unto
them by the Lord; for they said, We have Sworn unto them by the Lord God of
Israel, now therefore we may not touch them, lest Wrath be upon us, because of
the Oath which we have Sworn unto them. They understood what an Oath is, and
how dangerous to break it, and how long after was the Breach of it by Saul,
avenged? wherefore God sent a Famine for Three Years, and being inquired by
David, declared, it is for Saul and his bloody House, because he Slew the
Gibeonites. So for this same Sin, the Breach of Oath, the whole Land suffered,
and Seven of Readiness Sons lost their Lives to expiate for it. Among the several
Instances we have in Scripture of God's signal judgments, for breach of Oaths,
this is a considerable one. God's Anger was moved with a witness, and would not
be appeased till after the Gibeonites had Hanged before the Lord, those Sons of
Saul 2 Samuel 21.14.
which by David's Command, had been delivered up to them, for then, and not
before, the Lord was entreated for the Land; for thereupon the Famine ceased.
Thus we see that where the Magistrates suffer Faults, especially Perjuries to
go unpunished, there God's judgments lay upon the Land, for all that might be
pretended to excuse it, as here, for the Gibeonites had with a Notorious Lie,
cheated and imposed upon Joshua and the People, v. ^.
Saul had done it in his Zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah, and so long
after the Oath had been Sworn. All this is, I hope, Sufficient to show how God
in his Law, not only Threatens, but also actually Punishes the Abuse of his
holy Name thorough Perjury, in such a public and solemn a Manner, as whole
Kingdoms and Nations are therein concerned. I pray to God that for that very
Sin which is so common in the Nation, and no due care taken to prevent and
Punish it; that Threatening of God by the Prophet Jeremiah already Quoted, does
not reach us to bring a Nation upon us, not from far, but from near, I mean
that to whom belongs the Character of a bitter and hasty Nation, by the Prophet
Habek. 1.6.
given the Chaldeans, for our Neighbors in their Nature are Hasty, and in
their Successes Bitter and Insolent. Once God (...) us with the Spaniards,
blessed be God that he repented him, and cast the Rod into the Fire; but now he
has gotten another nearer our backs. Let us remember that Swearing Falsely is a
Nation destroying Sin, which God punishes either mediately by Men, or
immediately by some Extraordinary judgment.

These public judgments are upon extraordinary Cases, when Kingdoms have
contracted this Sin, and no due care is taken to stop and punish it, the want
of punishing it in private Persons, ends at last in the Ruin of whole Nations,
which I pray God may in due time seriously be considered: but because the
occasion of my Discourse is about things not altogether so universal, as
chiefly relating to the Courts of Judicature, and not to the Politic part of
the Government, I shall conclude this Head with what God ordered in his Law to
be done in the Case of False Witnesses; because one man might out of Enmity or
desire of Revenge, Swear against another, God declared one Evidence not to be
sufficient, but provided there should be Two or Three, as being supposed that
Number would not so easily design a Man's Ruin, as one single Man. Well, God's
Rule which is certainly the wisest and the best, that any Man or Nation can
follow, about False Witnesses, is this: (...). 19 15, 16, 17 18, etc.
If a False Witness rise up against any man, to Testify against him that which
is Wrong, then both the Men beeween whom the Controversy is, shall stand before
the Lord, before the Priests, and the Judges which shall be in those Days, and
the Judges shall make diligent Inquisition, and behold, if the Witness be a
False Witness, and has Testified falsely against his Brother, then shall ye do
unto him as he thought to have done unto his Brother: So shall thou put the
evil away from among you. And those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such Evil among you. And thine Eye shall not
pity, but Life shall go for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand,
Foot for Foot.

This contains several very important Things. First, That sometimes, and too
often, some men do rise to Wrong their Neighbors, which when it happens, as no
man may be a judge in his own Cause, so the Plaintiff, to be Righted, must take
lawful Courses, and prosecute his Adversary before Legal and Competent Judges,
those who at that very time are in Office and Authority. Here, besides the
Civil Judges, the Priests are named, for though the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions be of a different nature, and not to be Confounded, yet matter of
Oaths and Swearing being a part of God's Worship they to whom the Care of
things relating to Religion is committed, God would have them not excluded, but
to be present, to mind that which concerned his Service, the more because at
that time the Government of the Jews was Theocratical, or Divine, God so
eminently and visibly directing and ruling over them; and therefore it is said,
both the men in Controversy shall stand not only before the Judges, but before
the Lord, the true Competent Judge; for upon all such occasions, the great
Judge is ever present to observe how the Judges behave themselves, who here are
commanded to make diligent Inquisition, not perfunctoriously and lightly, but
to mind and make it their Business: for, to speak in Solomon's words, Prove.
25.2.
as It Is the Glory of God to conceal a thing, so the Honor of Kings, and of
Judges and Juries too, is to Search out the matter, till the Truth be found
out, which being Effected, judgment and punishment are to follow thereupon, and
the Mischief the Guilty maliciously intended against his Brother, is justly to
be retorted upon him. Thus this abominable Crime of Perjury is a great Evil to
be put away from among a People, for fear a whole Nation do suffer for the
Wickedness of one, or some few particular men. and thus Justice being executed
upon the Guilty, they shall be made Examples unto others, who Hearing shall
Fear, and out of a Terror of the Punishment, shall henceforth commit no more
any such Evil. This will prevent it is spreading further, and in the inflicting
of this due Punishment, God's Command to the Judges is this, Thine Eye shall
not Pity, no mercy for such wicked and miserable Wretches, who are the Plague
of Church and State, therefore both Church and State must set helping hand to
root it out, and put it away, Life shall go for Life, etc. Here is a Divine
Rule for all Judges and Juries, against Perjured Persons, who are the worst
kind of wicked men, as are 1 Timothy 1 9, 10.
Ungodly, unholy, Profane, Murderers of Fathers, Murderers of Mothers,
Men-slayers, Whoremongers, Sodomites, and Liars, in the highest Degree, among
which, all they are Reckoned. Thus much as to the Punishment of this detestable
Sin, according to Divine Laws.

As to human Laws, it appears how all Nations knew by the Light of Nature how
much Perjury was abominable in the sight of God, and unto men execrable;
therefore they enacted Laws severely and strictly to punish it, as we may read
in several profane Authors: This I say, because I know how Men who so far
corrupted themselves, do not much think on or mind God's Wrath, but are in fear
only of Men, for their Body, but not at all for their Soul: He who once has
forsworn himself, Vbi Semel, etc. Cicero pro Rabirio.
says one, must never afterward be believed though he would swear by many
Gods. The Civil and Canon Laws are larg^ and clear upon this.

Infamy is the first pain inflicted upon Perjured Men. Cod. lib. 2. Tit. 4. de
Transactionibus l. 41. S^ quis major. This Infamy and pain of Perjury is so
heavy, so foul and filthy, that though God if he pleases, may thorough
Repentance forgive it as every other Sin; yet before Men either in Civil or
Ecclesiastical Courts, it sticks so fast that it can never b^ washed off, nor
are they ever, when convicted, admitted to bear Witness in any Court of
Judicature and in the decret. c. 6. q. 1. can. 17. infames. Perjure^ Men are
declared to be Infamous, So it is c. 3. ^. 5. Can. 9. constituimus; and farther
decret. c. 6. q. (...) Can. 18. quicumque, we read of him that has bee^ noted
of Infamy that his Evidence is never to be received, and de Testibus et
attestationibus, cap. 54. Test^ monium, it is ordered that a Man branded with
Infamy is never any more to be believed either in h^ own cause or in any other
Man's, for Perjured Person are always to be rejected: and in the same Qui semel
periuratus fuerit nec Testis sit post hac sed nec ad sacramentum accedat.
decret. (...) 22. q. 5. Can. 14. parvuli. He that once has For sworn himself
afterward must be no Witness nor admitted to take an Oath or to swear in his
own cause or any Man's else: Now so great a crime as Perjury, deserves according
to the Law of Retaliation, the grievous though just, penalty of Infamy, for the
Perjured Man as much as in him lays, would make God Infamous, seeing he brings
him as Witness to confirm his lie, wherefore it is very just to make him
Infamous indeed, for that Man ought no more to be believed who was not ashamed
to call upon God, who is Truth it self, to bear Witness unto his Lie: and it is
to be observed how thorough Perjury Men not only do highly provoke God, but
thorough a just Judgment, do also thereby forfeit their Credit with Men, who
will not believe them, no not when they speak the Truth, which always becomes
suspected out of the Mouth of a Liar: Hence it is that our most blessed Savior
often rebuked evil Spirits and would not suffer them to confess who he was, the
Son of the Living God, for fear that great and important Truth should by his
Enemies be suspected for a Lie, because coming out of the Devils mouth, who is
the father of Lies; and we know how wickedly the Jews were inclined to take
advantage against him when they said, Mat. 12.24.
He did cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils.

Besides Infamy there are other Penalties, as to be deprived of Ecclesiastical
Goods and Dignities if the Perjured Persons be possessed of any: De rescriptis
cap. 2. So may not have any Office in the Church as unworthy of having any hand
in the Government thereof, which Decree is de jure-jurando cap. 10. querelam,
also cap. 12. cum quidam, and they are to be deprived not only of all Office
and Benefice in the Church, but also of every Dignity and place in the Civil,
so as never any more to be admitted to the same or any other, wherefore if
Doctors, Magistrates, Judges, Jurymen, and Witnesses be convicted of Perjury,
they may and ought to be removed out of their Places and Employments, so they
should for matters of Bribery chiefly in Courts of Judicature, for I am fully
persuaded that he who takes a Bribe to sell or pervert Justice, will not
scruple to Swear a false Oath to receive Money and satisfy his Covetousness.
Withal I add, that the false Witness may be Indicted and sued for damages by
him whom he wronged by his false Evidence. Panormit. in cap. 1. de crimine
falsi.

Forsworn Men are also by several Human Laws adjudicated and condemned to
Corporal Punishments, as to Banishment, Whipping, the Pilory, the Galleys,
Imprisonment, branding in the Forehead, boaring thorough in the Tongue, and
with Death in Capital Cases, in conformity to God's Law by Moses as already
mentioned: So then such abominable Vermin were by the several Laws of
different Nations, stained in their Names and Honors, punished in Goods and
Fortunes, whether Secular or Ecclesiastical, in their Persons, Liberties and
Lives: So they were also liable to Church Censures, as Excommunication, Fasting
with Bread and Water only, upon certain days, and sometimes for seven years
together, to make public Penances, and such things as we read of in the
Decretales: Hence it most clearly appears how justly by the Divine, Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, Perjured Men are judged worthy of all sorts of Pains.

This I shall add, how to avoid the evil, the occasion also that leads to it,
is to be avoided, wherefore I think that every doubtful case is not always to
be decided by an Oath, but by the truth of things when it is found out, though
it had been betrayed by the Perjured Person, therefore such forsworn people may
be indicted for Perjury, and if convicted, the wrong they had done the party
cease, and the sufferer enters upon that Right and Possession which he
thereby unjustly had been deprived of: It were also very just that any, and all
that abet, entice, countenance and directly or indirectly promote and encourage
Men to forswear themselves, or already forsworn, as they have an hand in the
Crime, so should also be made sensible of and have a share in the punishment,
for the Tempter does cause the Temptation which is the snare to and mother of
Sin. It is a thing worthy of David to say (as of every honest and true
Christian to imitate) Psalm. 101.
He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house, be that tells shall
not tarry in my sight. If every master of Family would observe this rule, a
great deal of mischief and the ruin of Souls might thorough God's blessing be
prevented: keep Children and Servants from telling Lies, and they will not
suffer themselves to be brought to swear Lies: By these means may be prevented
from coming upon us, the sad times complained of by the Prophet, Isa. 59.14.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: for Truth is
fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter. But woe be to the Nation which is
in such a case, for thus the door lays open for Judgment; and it is well worth
our serious inquiry, whether a due care has been taken by those who are
concerned, to prevent and punish this and other Epidemical Sins? which wholly
to Enumerate, would prove a great work. I see too much cause to conclude for
the Negative, and by what we feel, we must Judge of what we must fear: we have
warning pieces enough, so the Murdering ones cannot be far behind, rather near
at hand. We had a War with a witness, we are in a kind of Dearth, for though
Provisions be not scarce, yet are unreasonably dear; may God keep it from
ending in a Famine, or being turned into a Plague, which the Lord in his just
Judgment, when he pleases, can send upon us; for when the Earth cannot bear the
wickedness of her Inhabitants, God thorough War, Plague and Famine, as thorough
so many sluices, does ease it of that burden, and thereby hurries Man, Woman
and Child out of this World.

But let us come nearer home, for it is neither just nor fit we should entertain
and cherish here that which abroad we declaim so much against, with
detestation. I for my part am afraid and was ever since I attained to some
years of ripe knowledge and discretion, that Perjury and breach of solemn Oaths
and Promises to God, is one of the great National Sins, for the Punishment
whereof God who sometimes uses to punish one Sin with another, has permitted
it to spread so much and become so Epidemical among us, and I further look upon
it as one of the causes, of the Troubles and uneasy burdens which the Land
labors and groans under; and how many more may happen to be brought upon us,
God alone knows, I am sure if we may by the prospect of present things judge of
those that are to come, we have much more reason to fear then to hope, except
thorough a speedy repentance we do prevent farther judgments for we must
believe what the God of Truth has declared that he will not hold him or them
guiltless that do take his Name in vain; for this Sin, with Profaneness,
Uncleanness, Atheism, Impiety, Idolatry, Blasphemy, and so many more which like
a dangerous Plague and deadly Gangrene daily gain upon us, except they be
stopped thorough the diligent care and good example of the Government,
Magistracy and Ministry, for with the Law I must mix the Gospel, will
certainly bring Ruin and Destruction upon the Nation. God has already smitten
us in several ways, which any one not willingly blind may see and perceive, and
his hand is stretched out still against us, except thorough a speedy and sincere
Reformation, without which all our Fasting and Praying will be insignificant,
we prevail with him to cast the Rod into the fire.

That is in relation to God before whom we ought to Humble our selves and
Repent: As to Men, Justice must be executed upon Offenders, or else the evil
shall not be removed nor the accursed thing put away, whereby Men become
accursed. We read how careful God was before the taking of Jericho to forewarn
his People not to have any thing to do with the accursed thing; Josh. 6.18.
And you, in any wise keep your selves from the accursed thing, lest ye make
your selves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing and make the Camp of
Israel a Curse and a Trouble; for this brings Trouble upon any Nation in the
World, as it did upon Israel, who Could not stand before their Enemies but
turned their backs because they were accursed: Chap. 7.12, 13.
Neither, said God, will I be with you any more except ye destroy the accursed
from amongst you: and thou can not stand before thine Enemies until ye take
away the accursed things from among you. I know how every Sin is a Cursed
thing, but some are more then others, and this in a special manner; for, Deuteronomy.
27.19.
Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the Stranger, Fatherless and
Widow. Only these kinds are set down against the perverting of all manner of
Judgment, several of the species being put for the whole genus according to the
way of God's Law, wherein under one kind of Sin, all of the same Nature are
forbidden, now the readiest way to pervert Judgment is by false swearing either
in Judges and Juries who are sworn to Judge in Justice and Conscience according
to Law, or in Witnesses who by their Oath are bound to Swear the Truth, so that
an Oath which is appointed for a remedy, becomes poison.

There are First an Inconsiderate false Swearing when thorough weakness a Man
is enticed and drawn into it. Secondly, An Ignorant Perjury, when a Man being
mistaken swears a thing to be true because he thinks it to be so, though it be
false, And Thirdly, A Wilful Perjury, when a Man Swears falsely either out
of Malice against one, or out of Covetousness or some such self end; which all
are bad, but certainly this last is worst of all and unworthy of Mercy, which
argues the corruptness of the Principle and demonstrateth the Heart whence it
springs to be poisoned; and toward preventing, punishing, and suppressing them
that are infected therewith, they that are concerned and whose Office it is,
ought to bend their entire strength, make it their whole study, and apply all
their Wit, Authority and Resolution. O that the Vermin of Knights of the Post
was wholly rooted out, and the Nation purged of it, at least never to appear at
the springs of Justice and before the Courts of Judicature, there to introduce
Oppression and Confusion; nor be suffered in any honest Company, for they are
the plague of human Society, and ought to be looked upon as Spies who seek to
find occasions and forge causes of doing mischief: these are the firebrands of
a Country to bring all therein into disorder and Ruin. Perjury must be left for
those who pretend there is a power on Earth, that may dispense from Oaths, and
pardon the breach of them, as it is in the Kingdom of the Romish Antichrist, so
must in the taking of them, be all manner of Equivocations and mental
Reservations for those Locusts that are broke loose out of the Bottomless Pit,
I mean the Jesuits. But for true Christian Protestants who make a Profession of
the pure and true Doctrine of the Gospel, they ought in their Practice, as in
their Principles, wholly to detest and abhor it.

Every honest Man ought to fear an Oath and not be forward, rather avoid being
brought to it, except upon a Good and Lawful account, and beforehand consider
the binding Nature and Consequences thereof, and when upon the Stage, to
remember he must Swear the Truth and nothing but the Truth, therefore to be the
more Cautious of what he says, for though one may happen to impose upon Men,
yet he never can upon God who hears and sees all windings and turnings of the
heart: this rule holds for Young as well as for Old Men, for young die as well
as old, though one would think according to the course of Nature they have a
longer race to run, yet Experience teaches it to be a mistake, for more die
under Thirty years then above: however soon or late all must die, Death is
certain but the time uncertain, and truly though some Perjured Young Men should
live the longer, yet this Sin would make their life but uncomfortable; for
being Enemies to God they cannot be at peace with their Consciences and
themselves, nor with others, for there is a Curse tied to the back of Perjury,
which, except they be wholly hardened, and that on this side Hell is the
greatest of all Judgments, hunts them perpetually and makes them miserable; for
Isa. 57.20, 21.
The Wicked are like the Troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast
up mire and dirt. There is no peace says my God to the Wicked, nor shall be.

As for Witnesses that are come to Age, they ought to be the more weary of what
they say, because having already one Foot in the Grave, they cannot tell how
soon the whole Body shall be tumbled into it: Wherefore they ought to consider
every Day, and every Moment, as being possible for it to be the last of their
Life; and when they give in their Evidence, as if they were upon their
Deathbed, and come to their last Gasp, and as if they were taking the
Sacrament upon it. Surely in that Condition, besides the immediate Presence of
God, no man, that has any sense of Religion, would take the Holy Ordinance of
the most Sacred Blood and Flesh of Our most blessed Savior, to be a Witness to
a Lie, and go out of this World with a False Oath in his Mouth, to appear in
the Presence of the All-seeing and All-knowing God of Truth, to give an Account
of himself! I am Charitably loath to believe any one is so desperately Wicked,
as considering all these Circumstances, would Swear Falsely: If so, when any is
upon such an Account, brought to his Oath, let him look upon himself as at that
very time lying under all such Circumstances, for he can be sure of nothing to
the contrary, it being not impossible for him to Dye at that time of a Sudden
Death, which has been and is still the case of many. Now, I say, these
Thoughts may work upon, and Influence one on such an Occasion, to say the
Truth, and not to suffer himself by any means to be Biased in what he is upon,
nor to have any Regard to those he does speak for, or against, from the King
that Sits upon the Throne, to the Beggar that lies on the Dunghill; he must
be Partial only for the Truth, and withal Consider, that he Witnesses not for
men only, but also for God, who is Concerned, called to be a Witness, and whose
Cause Truth is.

Every one that is Witness for another, has his own Witness for himself, and
must with Joh say, Job. 16.19.
Behold, my Witness is in Heaven: this God owns, and I Wish that every one when
he gives his Evidence, would represent God speaking to him thus; Jerem. 29 23.
Even I know, and I am a Witness, says the Lord. It should make one Tremble to
speak a Lie in the Presence of the God of Truth; as no man when he does an evil
thing desires to have any one present, and witness to what he does, for as Evil
is a work of Darkness, so he that commits it in any kind, does seek dark
places, and avoids the Light, which would reprove him for his Work; now, if one
when he does a bad thing is so unwilling, and afraid to be seen by any man, for
Shame, from the Time of our First Parents, is an Attendant of Sin, how much
more ought one to be ashamed, and afraid to do Evil, and speak Lies in God's
Name, in God's own Presence, and under his Eye, which none can avoid? This
Presence and Testimony of God, is the only way to clear and secure all things,
at least for time to come. Thus Samuel, upon his going out of this World, takes
great care to make all things even between himself and the People; 1 Samuel 12,
3, 4, 5.
how He had not Defrauded nor Oppressed them, neither taken any Bribe to blind
his Eyes. The Truth whereof he calls God to Witness, to whom, after his Death,
he was to give an Account of. The People gave in their Witness, that he had
spoken the Truth; but besides, he had that of his own Conscience, but that of
God was the greatest of all, for therein lies the Comfort and Assurance of a
Good Soul; for, 1 John 5.9.
If we receive the Witness of men, the Witness of God is greater. And this I
Wish every man that is brought upon his Oath would Consider well.

Upon this Point, one thing more, I would Commend to the serious Consideration
of Judges and Juries, namely, the Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequents of
Perjury, among other things, the Malicious Designs and Contrivances, thorough
the Suggestions of the Devil, and Corruption of Man's Heart, whereby the Guilty
do inure themselves to, and harden in Evil things, thereby fitting and
disposing themselves, thorough ill Habit and Custom, to commit any Villainies in
the World, according to their own Counsels, by which at last they fall from
worse things to worst of all. Some of the Concomitants are Falsehood,
Hypocrisy, Deceit, Impiety, etc. all Punishable by the Laws of God and men. As
to the Consequents they are Dreadful, Pernicious, and Destructive; for thereby
a Dishonor is put upon God, and Occasion offered his Enemies to Blaspheme, a
Scandal upon Religion follows, with a Stain upon a Nation; this also will
Ruin Persons Families, and overthrow whole Kingdoms. After this, no man's Good
Name, Honor, Estate, Liberty, or Life can be safe and secure. So after this
rate, no man may call his own, any thing he has, thus farewell Property and
Right: And what to Day is one man's case, may to morrow be any one's else, so
Division, Distraction, and Destruction are at hand, as Effects of Oppression,
for thereby man's right and just Cause are oppressed, and we know what the wise
King says in the Case; Eccles. 7.7.
Surely Oppression makes a Wise Man Mad. He that loses his own, loses his
Wits, with a surely, therefore will he endeavor to see himself Righted; and if
Lawful ways, because they be Corrupted and Abused, do fail, then God knows what
the next Step will be: Right oppressed, is sometimes turned into Fury, and this
is the ready way to set Men together by the Ears, and to make them to Cut one
another's Throats, the Mine and Thine is the ground of Discord in the World,
and therefore it is but just that every one should enjoy his own; whereupon God,
the Sovereign Judge, says, Ezekiel 21.27.
I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until he come
whose Right it is, and I will give it him. Though Men will not, I will.

Therefore when Perjury is found to be in a Cause which appears by
Contradictory Depositions, for it is not possible for a Thing to be, and not to
be, a man cannot at the same time be in Two several Places, so in the same
Circumstance of a Matter, one to Swear for, the other against, is a palpable
Contradiction, for two contrary Oaths about the same thing, cannot be True, but
if one be, the other necessarily must be False; as if one Swears, that such a
man, at such a time, was in the Country, and I Swear, that same Person, at
that same time, was in the City, because for several Days together, I met with,
Saw, Discoursed, had Meetings, Walked, Managed Businesses with, and visited him
in his own House, and I cannot believe that a Spirit had assumed that Man's
Body to act all that part with me, nor that I saw a Vision, or was in a Dream
all that while.

Hence it clearly appears, that there is a Perjury in the Case, for as some
have Sworn the Truth, so others have that which is False: Wherefore the matter
is very well worth strictly and narrowly Inquiring into, to find out the Truth,
and see at whose Door the Perjury lies, there to Punish it, that hereafter Men
be not exposed to the Mercy of such Wretches and Villains. And what I say, is
for one side, as well as for the other, for I am Partial for neither, only for
the Truth, the justice of the Cause is what I stand for, and am no ways Biased
by the Merits of Persons. Upon such Accounts Men ought to Swear for no other
End than to bear Record unto the Truth, which I pray God to Discover, as he is
the most True and Faithful Witness, and as he is the Great and Supreme Judge,
to cause an Exemplary Punishment to be made of this loud and crying Wickedness,
as they that are concerned to do it, shall answer to God at the last Day; for
Judges, Juries, Witnesses, Parties, and every Man, shall some time, before the
Judge of the whole Earth, stand to be Tried and Judged, when there shall be no
Dissembling nor Concealing of the Truth, but all things shall then be manifest,
and be seen, even just as they are.

In the mean time, what Laws are in being against the Crime, ought exactly to
be put in Execution, and wherein they are Defective and Wanting, it may easily
be Supplied by the Legislative Power, when those in whose Hands is the
Executive part, who have so many Occasions to observe where it is Wanting, and
where not, do according to their Duty represent it to them. Thus all will
unanimously concur to set up the Glory of God, the Good and Welfare of the
Nation, and to the Immortal Praise of all those that will be Instrumental
therein, or to their Eternal Confusion if they neglect it. Psalm 94.2. Psalm
63.11.
Then lift up thy self, thou Judge of the Earth, and the Mouth of them that
speak Lies shall be stopped.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE ABOUT INFANT BAPTISM.
THE Doctrine of the Sacraments is of so high a Concernment in the great
Mystery of our Salvation, that the Enemy thereof Satan, has raised many of his
strongest Batteries against it: They are the Seals of God's Pardon, which he
does what he can to Tear, or at least to Deface, thereby to Deprive us of the
Assurance of God's Love in Christ. As to the First, which is Baptism, how many
Disputes and Questions has he started against it? With Papists we have no less
than Seven about it, whereof the Two First, relate also to the Lord's Supper;
As first to the number, There are but Two Sacraments, and they would have
Seven. 2ly, The Virtue of the Sacrament does not depend upon the Intention of
him who administers it. 3ly. It is not lawful for Laymen or Women to Baptize.
4ly, The Baptism of John had the same Virtue, and was as Effectual as that
afterward Administered by the Apostles. 5ly, Baptism ought to be administered
according to Christ's Institution, without any Addition, Diminution, or
Alteration whatsoever. 6ly, Every Child Baptized, is not thereby Regenerated,
and every one that has the Sign, has not the Thing Signified. 7ly, Baptism is
not absolutely necessary to Salvation, for some are Saved without it, but it
ought not to be neglected or delayed.

See how sometimes God suffers men from one Error to fall into another: and
to maintain one they multiply others: Thus Anabaptists, to Assert that Infants
ought not to be Baptized, hold the Quintessence of the Damnable Pelagian
Heresy; 1st, That they have no Sin. 2ly, That there is no Original Sin at all.
3ly, That no Sin comes by Nature, but is Learned only by Example and Imitation
of others. 4ly, That all that dye in Infancy shall certainly go to Heaven, for
none is Damned but for Actual Sins: Against what Scripture says; First, All
Infants are Sinners, Psalm. 51.5.
Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. It Is
the case not only of David, but of every one else; Isai. 48.8.
For, we are called Transgressors from the Womb; and, Ephess. 2 3.
by Nature we are children of Wrath, even as others. Then Secondly, Many
Infants have been made Vessels of Wrath, and the Effects of God's Wrath for
Sin, are fallen upon them, as in the Flood, in the Destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah; God's Order to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.3.
was to Destroy utterly the Infants and Sucklings of the Amalekites. And the
Psalmist Psalm 147.9.
declares him Happy, that dasheth the little ones of the Babylonians against
the Stones. But, Thirdly, All Sin is not Learned by Example, as we see in the
Case Cain, who had no Example of any Murder Committed before him. Their Fourth
Assertion is Rash, and without Ground in Scripture. But now to the Point.

The Word Baptism in Scripture has several Significations. It is first taken
for the whole Holy Sacrament, instituted by our Lord; sometimes for the Sign
Matthew. 3.11.
Water, and other times for the Thing Signified, as the Holy Ghost, washing
with the Blood of Christ. Secondly, It Is taken for Doctrine, Mark 11 30.
The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven, or from Men? And it is called, Acts
13.24.
The Baptism, or Doctrine of Repentance. Thirdly, It is taken for Death,
whereof it is a Figure. Matthew. 20.22, 23
Are ye able, says our Savior (...) the Sons of Zebedee, to drink of the Cup
that I shall drink, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with?

Here I intend not to engage in any Dispute against all that are in an Error
concerning Baptism, my Design being upon some occasion given me, only to
Vindicate the Doctrine of Infant Baptism against Anabaptists. And to state well
the Question, we say, and own, how men newly Converted, that are come to Years
of Discretion, ought to give an account of their Faith before Baptism be
administered to them. We also own, Children of Jews, Mahometans, and other
Infidels, must not be Baptized, except Godfathers, or the like, promise before
God, and in presence of the Church, they will cake Care to see them Bred, and
Instructed in the Knowledge and Fear of God: But to deny Baptism to Infants
born of Christian Parents, it is to deprive them of their Right, to Despise the
Ordinance of God, to take away the Mark whereby they are distinguished from
Children of Unbelievers, to Cheat them of Christ's Livery, and the Badge of
Christian Profession, it is, with Pelagius, to deny them Naturally to be
Sinners, and not to need being Washed: And it is also to deprive Parents of the
Comfort to see how God takes care to bring their Children within the Pales of
his Church.

Before we proceed further into this matter, to make it the Clearer, it is
necessary, to go back, and say something in general. In order thereunto, God
has not only made us Promises in his Word, but to help our Weakness, and
strengthen our Faith, has also appointed Sacraments to Signify, Seal, and
exhibit Things Promised, for Sacraments do Seal that which the Word Promises:
Thus God works upon two of our Senses, first upon the Ear, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God. And upon our Eye,
with the sight of those visible Signs, representing invisible Graces: Hence
Augustine calls a Sacrament, The Visible Word. Thus God did with his Church
under the Old Testament, and thus he does under the New, and man must not
pretend to be wiser than God, and to alter the Rules he has given.

And as the Church of Christ is formed by degrees, and that daily some were and
are added to it, so there are Two Sacraments instituted, one of Initiation,
whereby we are introduced and admitted into it, such was Circumcision under the
Old, and such is Baptism under the New Testament, another to Feed, Strengthen,
and Confirm, such was the Passover of Old, and now the Lord's Supper, which
Sacraments of the Old and New Testaments, though they differ in some
Circumstances, yet agree in the Substance; both these of the New Testament,
John 19.34.
Water and Blood, came out of our Savior's Side.

God is the Author of every Sacrament, none but God, who can give the Grace
signified, has right to Institute a Sacrament, wherefore God instituted those
under the Old Testament, and our Lord, who is the same, those under the New. To
every Sacrament belongs a Precept and a Promise; the Precept of Baptism is,
Matthew. 28.19.
Baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; the Promise is, Mark 16 16. Luke 22.19.
He who believes and is baptized, shall be saved. The Precept of the
Lord's Supper is, first to those who administer it, [this do] that is, take the
Bread, bless, brake, and distribute it, so pour the Wine into the Cup, and give
it. 2ly, To those who receive it, it is Commanded, Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28
to take, eat, and drink, the Promise is, this is my Body, this is my Blood,
which is shed for many, for the Remission of sins. Now in every Sacrament, the
words of the Precept ought punctually and exactly to be observed, without
Addition, Diminution, or Alteration.

There are Four sorts of those whom Sacraments are administered unto, for some
have the Sign without the Thing Signified, others have the Thing Signified
without the Sign; some others have both Sign and Thing Signified; lastly, some
have neither Sign nor Thing Signified,

A Sacrament is an Ordinance of God, wherein God under visible signs, does
represent some invisible grace, in and thorough the Mediator, therefore in the
Sacrament are the visible and earthly part, and the invisible and spiritual,
which some call the outward and inward parts of the Sacrament. Then the Third
thing is the Analogy and Relation between the Sign and Thing signified, and the
Acts outward and inward; and except one does understand this, he can never have
a right Notion of the Nature of a Sacrament. To demonstrate it, I shall insist
only upon the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, which is the only Point I handle in
this Discourse.

Water is the Visible Sign in Baptism, and the Blood of Christ is the Invisible
Thing thereby Signified, the Analogy and Conformity is this; as poured or
sprinkled Water washes the Filth and Uncleanness of the Body, so the Sprinkling
of the Blood of Christ upon our Souls, does Purify them; for, 1 John 1.7.
the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. Both these are mentioned
elsewhere, Heb. 10.22.
Having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and the body washed with
pure water. By this last, the Apostle alludeth to the several washings under
the Law, as to the use of Water in Baptism. Now, the Minister does administer
the outward Sign and can do no more, but the Holy Ghost gives the Thing
signified, and with applying it, does purify and sanctify us: to this purpose
says John Baptist, Matthew. 3.11.
I baptize you with Water, but he that comes after me, will baptize you with
the Holy Ghost.

Though this Water be a common Element, yet being bestowed upon so holy an Use,
as well as Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, it is thereby sanctified; what
I say, is not to attribute so much to it, as if the use of the Sign could
infallibly confer the Grace thereby signified, but it is to show how
Anababaptists are in the wrong to undervalue Sacraments in general, and this of
Baptism in particular, as 2 Kings, 5.10, 11
Naaman the Syrian did the Water of Jordan. They are not bare Signs, but 1st,
Signifying Signs, for by those visible Signs are represented things not seen,
which we do believe. 2ly, They Seal not only the Analogy between the Signs and
the Things Signified, but also the Virtue and Efficacy of the Union of Sign and
Thing Signified, being duly and lawfully used, is thereby Sealed. 3ly, As that
Heavenly Treasure offered us in the Word, is really and spiritually tendered
and represented by those Signs, so thorough the hidden Power of the Holy Ghost,
Faith, whereby we are united to Christ, intervening, his Benefits and the Holy
Ghost are thereby exhibited to, and der^^ed upon us.

From this Sacramental Union of Sign and Thing Signified, arises the
Sacramental Phrase or manner of speaking used in Scripture, whereby the Thing
Signified is spoken of the Sign, and the Sign of the Thing Signified; thus Genesis
17.10, 11.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, which verse 11, is called the Sign of the
Covenant, that is the Sign and the Seal of it; the Bread is the Body of Christ,
Mat. 26.26, 27, 28,
This Cup is my blood, which is shed for many for the Remission of sins. That
is, the Bread is the Sign and Seal of my Body, the Wine is the Sign and Seal of
my Blood: Baptism is the Tit, 3.5.
Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. That is, the Sign and
the Seal of Regeneration, or of the Blood of Christ, which cleanses all our
sins; Many more such Expressions we find in Scripture.

Furthermore, by Baptism we are incorporated into Christ, made Members of his
Body; 1 Cor. 12 13.
for, We are all baptized in one Spirit, to be one body, Jew or Greek, bond or
free. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
The Church is Sanctified by the washing of Water, and John. 3.5.
Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. I know the visible sign of Water is not meant there, it is the
thing signified, it is Regeneration, the working of the Holy Ghost, it is a
spiritual Water, John 4.14.
A Well of Water, springing into Eternal Life: John 7.35.
Rivers of living Water, Isai. 58.1
All that are Thirsty, are invited to come to the Waters: which are promised to
be poured upon, Ezekiel. 36.25.
even clean Waters. This is that Love of God, said to be Romans 5.5,
shed abroad in our hearts. Those Gifts of the Spirit, promised Joel 2.28. and
Fulfilled upon the Apostles, Acts 2. It Is that Baptism of the Spirit, which our
Savior Acts 1.5.
commanded them to wait for; though I say the Water in Baptism be not meaned
here, yet the Thing Signified is; therefore it shows the Excellency of that
Sacrament, wherefore it must not be Despised, or Neglected.

I say further, Gal. 3.27
All who are baptized have put on Christ, at least outwardly; and Rom 6.3.4
As many of us, says S. Paul, as were baptized in Christ, were baptized into
his Death, thorough baptism, and raised again to walk in Newness of Life. These
are the Three Parts of our Regeneration: First The Death of Sin, which clearly
appeared in Christ's Death; and because the Old Man does not presently dye in
us, then comes the Second Part, It Is Burial, whereby, and by Degrees, it Wastes
away. After which, is the Third Part, We begin to raise in Newness of Life.
This I shall no longer insist upon, having, as I think, said enough to show how
great a Reverence we ought to have for, and what a high Account we must make of
that Holy Sacrament, for the Divine Ordinance and Glorious Attributes given it
in Scripture: This being thus Premised, I proceed, and fall to the Point.

I Argue thus: First, Under the Old Testament, Infants were Circumcised,
therefore under the New they ought to be Baptized; for there is the same Reason
for Baptism under the Gospel, as was under the Law for Circumcision, which by
St. Paul is called Romans 4.11.
the Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith, which is a proper Denomination for
Baptism; by Circumcision, the Jews, the Seed of Abraham, were distinguished
from others, who had no share in the Promises, and by Baptism we are received
in the Church, and made visible Members of the Body of Christ. Now,
Circumcision and Baptism, in Christ we have, Colos. 2.11, 12.
and find them both joined together, and as Circumcision is brought to the time
of Christ, so, in some sense, Baptism was very long before the Birth of our
Lord, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.
I would not ye should be ignorant, says St. Paul, how that all our Fathers
were under the Cloud, and passed thorough the Sea, and were all baptized unto
Moses. I know they will say, there is a double Circumcision, so there is a
double Baptism, (if I may call it so) when we distinguish the Sign from the
Thing signified; one Circumcision, is made with Hands, Coloss. 2.11.
the other without, that of the Romans 2.29.
Heart, so there is an Outward and Inward Baptism, one of Water, the other of
Mat. 3.11.
the Spirit, and of Fire; yet this does not hinder, but that the Circumcision
with Hands was the Sign of that made without Hands, as the Baptism of Water is
the Sign and Seal of that of the Spirit. We conclude therefore, that all their
Infants were Circumcised, and all, as well as the Parents, were Baptized in the
Cloud and Sea, for all passed thorough, so all Infants of Christians ought to
be Baptized.

May be they will make the following Exception, which is not to the purpose,
that according to this, only Males and not Females are to be Baptized, because
only the Males were Circumcised, but as to this, the reason is different, for
Females as well as Males are capable of Baptism which was not of Circumcision;
Men must not dispute with nor be wiser then God, who instituted Circumcision at
first, and now Baptism at last, having then appointed that feal, he commanded
it to be applied to the part that was capable of it, and the fittest for his
end, which was to show the corruption of Man's Nature, and the casting of that
superfluity was the seal of his Promise to sanctify Abraham's Seed, and we may
say this seal was in some manner communicated to the Females: Now I think it is
clear enough how under every Testament there has been a Sacrament appointed by
God to introduce those whom it is administered to, into the Church;
Circumcision, was it in the time of the Jewish Church, as Baptism is in the
time of the Christian, this is the Key that opens it for us, whosoever does
not go in at this door which is the Ordinance of God, when he may, John 10.1.
He is a Thief that would break into the Sheepfold.

My Second Argument is from Christ's command to the Apostles, Mat. 28.19.
To Baptize all Nations, under which, Men, Women and Children must be
comprehended, and he who says all excludes nothing: When St. Paul says Romans
5.12.
By one Man Sin came into the World and by Sin death, so death passed upon all
Men, none may deny but that Children as well as Men are comprehended under the
Name all Men, for Children die as well as Men: Other places I could bring to
the same effect, but this is clear and to the purpose, to show how out of this
generality Children may not be excluded, for they as well as Men are
comprehended under the words all Nations; and as Christ receives into his
Church some out of every Nation, of every quality and Sex, so out of all Ages,
Young and Old. We read of several whole Families that were Baptized as that
Acts 16.15, 33.
of Lydia, and of the Jayler, as of Acts 18.8.
Crispus and several more of the Corinthians, as of 1 Cor. 1.16.
Stephanas and of others, it is very probable that amongst so many Families were
Children also Baptized. The Jayler and all his, meaning Children and Servants,
were Baptized.

It is certainly a very cruel and uncharitable thing for a sort of Men to shut
upon Children the Church door of Baptism, to keep them out when God will have
them to come in: Upon great and weighty occasions, as of Fasting and Prayers of
which in Scripture we have a very considerable instance, a great Army of 2 Chronicles. 20.13.
Moabites and Ammonites being come against Jehoshaphat, King and People being
much afraid, they all addressed themselves to God not only Men and their
Wives, but also their Children: And the Prophet Joel proclaiming a Solemn Fast
for the Kingdom of Judah, Joel 2.16.
will have them to bring into the Congregation their Children and those that
suck the breasts, the Prophet thought that their cries might move God to pity
and to pardon.

The Third Argument is very weighty, and it is thus, the Seals of the Covenant
are to be Administered to those whom the Promises thereof belong unto, but the
Promises of the Covenant belong to the Children of those whom the Covenant is
made with, therefore they must receive the Seals thereof, this is God's
Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17.17.
I will be thy God and of thy seed after thee, and what follows? This is my
Covenant, verse 10. which verse 11. is called, the Sign of my Covenant betwixt
me and you, every Man-child shall be Circumcised the Eight day, that is, shall
receive the Seal and Sacrament: St. Peter makes the application of this for
those under the Gospel, Acts 2.38, 39.
Repent, says he, and be Baptized every one of you i^ the Name of Jesus
Christ, etc. for the Promise is un^^ you and to your Children. I ask to what
purpose would the Apostle make mention of their Children if they had not been
concerned as in the Promise Remission of Sins, so in the Seal of the Promise,
namely, Baptism? If it had been said only for the Fathers that were concerned,
with their Repentance and being Baptized there had been an end, but seeing this
Remission of Sins, which is the Promise, is made to Children as to Parents and
that the way to obtain it, is to be Baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, i^
follows that their Children must also be Baptized in the Name of Christ to
obtain Remission of Sins.

Farthermore our Savior calls little Children to himself, forbids Men to
hinder them from coming to him, and gives the Reason, Mat. 19.13, 14. and Chap.
18.2, 3.
For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and thereupon laid his hands on and
Blessed them, if then the Kingdom of Heaven which is the Promise and the thing
procured by the thing signified in the Sacrament, belong to little Children,
why should they be deprived of the sig^ and Sacrament of it, which God has
appointed?

Some other Reasons I would bring in, but in my Answer to their Objections I
shall have occasion to make use of them: Another sort of Argument I will here
bring, not to lay any great stress upon it, for they will not receive it: It Is
the Testimony of three or four Ancient Doctors, in Triph.
Justinus Martyr who lived about 164 years after Christ, says, none is
admitted to the Lords Supper who does not profess our Doctrine, and who has
not been washed with the washing of Regereration; in another place he says,
Infants are Baptized in the Faith of their Parents. Origenes who lived about
250 years after Christ, upon the 6th. Chapter to the Romans, says, The Church
received from the Apostles the custom of Baptising Infants. Basilius who lived
about 381 says, in S. Bap.
Let not Baptism be delayed, how can one say I am of God, if he has not his
mark to show. And Austin who lived about 421, ad Dardanum cap. 12, 13.
We say the Holy Ghost is in Infants Baptized though they know it not; and in
his Sermon upon the words of the Lord, No body doubts but that Infants must be
Baptized in the Name of Christ. And against Pelagius he proves Original Sin by
the constant Custom, of the Church to Baptize Infants, that Heretic and
Sectators never gainsaid it, which he would have done, if it had not been so.
But this I bring only to show how Baptising of Children does not come to us
from Papists, as Anabaptists would have it, but was practiced long before the
Corruption of that Church, since 'twas by Christ instituted after his
Resurrection.

Now I come to Answer their Objections, the First is, no Infants were Baptized
in the time of the Apostles, and there is no command for it. To the First part
I answer, that though there be no example expressly set down, it does not follow
there was none, so we have no positive example that Women received the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper nor express command for them to receive it, yet
we all admit them to receive it: To retort the argument upon them we say, there
is no precept nor example why they should not be Baptized.

As to the Second part about the Precept, I say that tho we have it not in the
very words and expressly, yet it is implicitly, and by very good consequences, we
deduce it from several Texts, as I already have instanced in some; now it is a
Rule in Divinity that the perfection of Scripture does not consist only in
those things which expressly and in the very words are therein contained, but
also in those which by good and lawful consequence may be deduced out of those
that are positive, which we look upon as Divine and oblidging our Faith; such
are Acts 2.25, 26, 27, etc. Romans 4.5. and Chap. 10.5, 6, 7. and others which it
were too long to insist upon: I only shall speak to that of Mat. 22.31, 32.
St. Matthew where our Savior with drawing consequences proves the Immortality
of the Soul and the Resurrection of the Body against the Saducees; Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob were long before dead and buried, that is, their Bodies, but
God being the God, not of the dead, but of the Living, it follows they were
alive, which could not be said of the Body but only of the Soul; this as to the
Immortality of the Soul, but the Soul is not the whole Man but only a part, now
God is the God of the whole Man not only of a part, so being the God of
Abraham, he is God of his Body and of his Soul: but when our Savior spoke, the
Bodies of the Patriarcks were dead and cannot be living but by a Resurrection.
Thus in the same Chapter verses 42, 43.44, 45. the same way of arguing is used:
In all this, the analogy of the Word is to be observed, for it does not
contradict it self, this is a necessary Rule for every one that will well
understand Scriptures, there is no positive command to Preach to or Baptize
English, Scotch, French, Dutch, etc. but we draw the consequence from this,
Teach and Baptize all Nations, which is as express a Precept as any can be.

Another thing I add for answer, we ought to observe the difference of Times;
the Apostles at Jerusalem did write to the Brethren of the Gentiles in Acts
15.23, 29.
Antioch, Syria and Cilicia to abstain from Blood and Strangled things, which
no doubt Christian Liberty allowed them to Eat, but they were willing to avoid
giving Offense to the Jews, for fear that should obstruct their Conversion, for
upon a sudden they would not make a general alteration, only by degrees, thus
Acts 16.3.
St. Paul Circumcised Timothy by reason of the Jews, but he did not Circumcise
Titus, Gal. 2.3.
the reason was different, the Light of the Gospel was clearer and clearer, and
he positively tells the Chap. 5.2.
Galatians, I Paul say unto you, that if you be Circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing: Now I come to the point and say, the difference of times is
to be observed; when our Savior sent the Apostles to Baptize there were no
Children of Christians, at least to speak of, for the whole World consisted of
Jews and Gentiles to be converted, but now thanks be to God, there are many
Children of Christians, and this may be a reason why Infants are not mentioned;
neither in the command to Baptize all Nations, are Men or Women named, no more
then Children, yet we all must agree they are meant and understood, for we have
a Rule that generals do include and contain particulars as I could instance in
every one of the Ten Commandments and other parts of Scriptures.

Secondly they Object, God commands those to be taught who are to be Baptized,
but Children cannot be taught therefore must not be Baptized: The word to Teach
in the Original signifies to make Disciples, but that Command belongs only
to those that were of Age to be converted to the Christian Religion, as being
till then out of the Covenant of God, but the Reason for Children of Christians
who are born of Believers, and are within the Covenant, it is different,
wherefore the Precept to Teach, is for those that are capable to be taught, all
are to be taught though not at the same time, those who are capable before
Baptism, must be taught, those who are not must be taught after, as we see the
Jews Children were not taught the Law before they were Circumcised, because not
capable of it, tho there was a positive command for Parents to Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Teach it their Children, but afterward they were instructed when come to Age,
and we see in the command to Mat. 28.19, 20.
Teach and Baptize, there is Teaching before and after, for our Savior having
commanded to Teach and Baptize all Nations, he adds in the last verse, Teaching
them to observe all things I have commanded you, therefore in Baptism, Parents
with Godfathers and Godmothers oblidge themselves and promise in the presence
of God and before the Church, to take care those Infants shall be instructed
when they come to Age.

And to show how this Precept of Teaching is only for those who are capable of
it, Mark 16.15.
St. Mark implies it, for there our Saviors words are thus, Go ye into all the
World and preach the Gospel to every Creature, certainly it is not meant to
preach it to Stones, Beasts, Birds and to unreasonable Creatures, tho they be
Creatures, as did the Popish Extravagant Francis, but to those Creatures that
are capable of being Taught, this is all that may reasonably be drawn from the
word Teaching, but to conclude, that because Children cannot be Taught,
therefore must not be Baptized, is just as if, out of St. Paul's words, that, 2
These. 3.10.
If any would not work neither should he eat, one would say, Children, Old and
Sick People, must not Eat, because they do not Work, it is meant of those that
are able to Work.

Thirdly they say, as long as Infants are such, they cannot be Regenerate
because they cannot receive the Word which is the converting Ordinance,
therefore Baptism which is the washing of Regeneration must not be Administered
unto them: I answer, Children are baptized because charitably they are looked
upon as believers and belonging to the Covenant, and it is a very presumptuous
thing to say they are not capable of Regeneration, we know the word to be the
usual Means and Ordinary Instrument of Conversion, but we must not tie God
thereunto, when he pleases he can work without: Tho Children be not
Regenerated in the same way and by the same means as are Men come to years, yet
their Regeneration is possible to the Holy Ghost, though we cannot think upon
the manner of it; many a Regenerate Man come to years of Discretion, cannot
tell how nor when his Regeneration began, or the time when he was Converted,
several were so before they could perceive it. Wonderful is the working of the
Spirit in us, which is by our Savior compared to the Wind, John 3.8.
which Blows where it lists; thou hear the sound thereof, but can not
tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one that is born of the
Spirit. This we must not rashly judge of, lest with the Children of Israel, we
be said Psalm. 78.41.
To limitate the Holy One of Israel. Genesis 18.14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Mat. 19.26.
With God all things are possible. If we take upon us to decide who are not
capable of Regeneration, we will be like the Sons of Zebedee in another Case,
their Mother having asked of our Savior on their behalf, Mat. 20.21, 23.
that in his Kingdom one might sit on his Right Hand, the other on his Left.
The Answer was, It shall be given only to those for whom it is prepared by the
Father. So of Regeneration, it is only for those who are thereunto appointed by
the Father, to stop our Mouth, and to curb our Curiosity from diving too far
into the Secret Things of God. Luke 23, 40, etc.
The repenting Thief was not Converted by the Preaching of the Word, he heard
no Sermon when upon the Cross; neither was St. Paul Converted by the Hearing of
the Word, except it was by that which came Acts 9.3 4,
to him immediately from Heaven.

But to return to Children: 1 Cor. 7.14.
Those of believers are holy: Nay, some are so from the very Womb, such was
Jer. 1.5.
Jeremiah. Luke 1.15.
John Baptist was full of the holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb. St. Paul,
though a great Persecutor, yet He was Separated from his Gal 1.15
mother's Womb, as he says himself, Romans 9.13.
God loved Jacob before he was born. Shall after this, a sort of Men declare
Infants not capable of being Regenerated? Surely God has taken some care for
their Salvation, especially since they make a considerable part of the World,
Matt. 14.21. and 15.38.
we find them in the Assemblies of the Church, and if not able, led and carried
after him, partakers as of his Doctrine, so of the Fruits of his Miracles; we
hear them crying, Mat. 21 15, 16.
Hosanna, to the Son of David; and our Savior approving it against the
Pharisees, when he says to them out of Psalm 8.2. Have ye never read, Out of
the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou have perfected Praise? Wherefore, Acts
10.15.
what God has sanctified, let no man call unclean, in this, as well as in
another sense.

I Answer further, suppose Infants were not capable of Regeneration it self,
which is the thing signified in Baptism, yet they cannot be denied to be
capable to receive the sign of it, which can be done without any outward or
inward act, only Passively; and this Ceremony is not performed without the
Word, there is the word of the Precept, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. It Is the Word that makes the Element
or Water to be a Sacrament, wherefore seeing Infants are capable of receiving
the outward sign of the Sacrament, as also the thing signified, the washing of
sins with the Acts 2.38.
Blood of Christ, by the Holy Ghost, and the Forgiveness of Sins, which we are
Baptized for; therefore that Holy Sacrament ought to be administered to them,
lest they, who refuse it, Acts 5.39.
be found even to sight against God. If they be but Children of those that make
Profession of the Faith, let no men take upon themselves to pry into those
things that are above them, as is the Mystery of the Sacrament, which God has
reserved to himself, only let them obey, about the Ordinance, we believe some
are Regenerated, by means of the Sacrament and some are not. Our Adversaries
themselves must confess, that after all their Teaching before hand, some of
those who amongst them are Baptized, be Hypocrites, though they make Confession
of their Faith: Acts 8.13.
Simon the Sorcerer believed and was baptized. Romans 9.6, 8.
All that are of Israel, are not Israel. Those only are the Sons of God who are
the Children of the Promise.

Fourthly, They Object thus, Children do not Believe, because they want the use
of Reason, therefore ought not to be Baptized. I Answer, To say Children do not
believe, is not true; though they believe not in that degree which men of Riper
Years do, yet they believe in Inclination, the Holy Ghost preparing their Minds
and Will, which can be done without the use of Reason, in a manner
incomprehensible, to them and to us? for in Conversion and beginning of
Regeneration, we are all merely Passive: tho they be not capable of Reason or
of Faith by the Word, which is the ordinary means to produce it, yet, as I said
before, God has other ways to work it in them, as he pleases: and men must
not be so Presumptuous as to stint God therein.

I know, Knowledge, Assent, and Confidence in, or Relying upon God, to be the
Three Parts of true saving Faith, that is begotten in us by the usual way of
the Holy Word; that Infants have these in the perfection of men of Riper Years,
I do not Dispute, but let those who altogether deny Faith in Infants, take
notice of the Difficulties and Inconveniences they run into. For if Children
have no Faith, either none are saved, or if some be, then there are two
different ways of Salvation, one for Men come to Years, the other for Infants,
which does not agree with Scripture: and according to that Opinion one must
conclude Faith does belong only to men of Riper Years, and not to Children: If
so, what can be said to these general Texts of Scripture, Heb. 11 6.
Without Faith it is impossible to please God: He Mark 16 16. and John 3.18.
who ^elieveth not shall be Damned. Heb. 12 14.
Without Holiness ^o man shall see the Lord. Johu 3.5.
Except a Man be Born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Hence one must conclude, Children cannot please God, shall be
Damned, shall not see God, shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, when our
Savior tells us, Mat. 19.14. and 18, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Of such is the Kingdom of God; and, Unless we become as little Children, we
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Out of all this we may well
conclude Children to have Faith.

But it is very difficult to say what manner of Faith, or to what degree,
however we may say it is an Habitual Faith, a Seed and a Root, which though at
present does not show it is acts, yet at last it will, like Seed under Ground,
Fire under Ashes, a Tree which will bear Fruit in it is due season. Children
have a Tongue and Legs, but it requires time before they can speak and walk,
though they have not the use of Reason, yet one must own them to be Rational
Creatures, because they have a Rational Soul: And this I say, in Answer to what
is Objected, that they have no Faith because they want Reason. With St. John,
Faith I call a Seed; he says 1 John 3.9.
the Seed of God is in him that is born of God. In Isa. 59.5.
Cockatrice's Eggs, Spiders, Serpents, Toads, though never so young, there is a
Venom: In Lions, Bears, Wolves, though never so young, there is a principle of
Ravenousness and Cruelty. In the Wicked is a Seed and Spawn of all Evil, even
in their Infancy; for David says, Psalm. 58.3.
They go astray from the very Womb; but as to the Elect and the Righteous,
Psalm. 71.5, 6, 17.
God is their Hope and their Trust, from their very Youth. Where the Prophet
speaks of himself. And in the next Verse he says, by thee have I been holden
up from the Womb, thou art he that took me out of my Mother's bowels. And he
adds, v. 17. O God, thou have taught me from my Youth. The Difference is,
that these Evils come by Nature, and the Good is effected thorough Grace.

Yet suppose Children had neither Faith nor Repentance, it does not follow they
must be deprived of Baptism, for all this might be said of Circumcision, and
yet God commanded Children to be Circumcised, and to oppose this as contrary to
reason, is to Dispute against God, who would have Circumcision a Sacrament of
Regeneration, (for as I observed before, it is called Circumcision of the Heart,
and without Hands) to be administered to Children, whereby we are taught it is
not always necessary the Truth signified in a Sacrament, should go before the
Sign, sometimes it is enough it should follow, at least in part; so that except
one would make (which were a kind of Blasphemy) the Mercy of God less toward
us and our Children, than toward the Jews and their Seed, we must not deprive
them of Baptism, the Seal of that Covenant, no more than they were not deprived
of Circumcision, for by these Two Sacraments, God did and does separate some
from others, to offer them his Salvation. They who have no right to the
Promises, must join themselves to Christ's Flock, before they receive his Mark:
Thus God instructed Abraham in the Doctrine of Faith, and in his Covenant
before he gave him Circumcision, but once having admitted him into the Church,
he ordered his Seed to be made partakers of the same benefit.

Out of what has been said, one would hope every Rational Man would be
satisfied, how Infants ought to be Baptized, and the Sign not to be denied
those who may have the Thing signified. But because I know Matthew. 13.11.
It Is not given to all, to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but
only to those whom God is pleased to reveal it to, for it is not any man's Parts
or Learning that can do it, 1 Cor. 3.6.
Paul may Plant, Apollos may Water, but God alone can give the Increase. To him
must be left the Success of things, all I now can do, is to beseech the Lord to
open Luke 24.45.
the Understanding of those who are concerned, As he did that of his Apostles,
that they might Understand the Scriptures; and open their Heart as that of Acts
16.14.
Lidia, to attend unto the Things spoken.

Some other things there are relating to this matter, wherein Anabaptists
differ from us, which we must not omit. The First is about the outward Act used
in Baptism: They would have it done with Dipping, whence they have gotten the
Name of Dippers, and it is the signification of the Greek Word, whence comes the
word Baptism. And though as much as we can, we must close with the Ceremony of
the Institution, yet that outward Rite is not of the Essence of the Sacrament,
and that which is used has the same Effect and Signification: It does not
appear any where, that they that were Baptized were dipped under Water, for
they had been in some Danger of being Drowned, but that they went into the
River, or other Water, and he who Baptized, as John Baptist, or other, poured
it upon their Head, whereupon they were accounted to have been under Water, as
in some kind they had been; but those who at that time were Baptized, were
persons come to Years, and consequently more able to resist the Coldness of the
Water in cold Weather, in case any Quantity had been poured upon them, which
yet was but little. But leaving aside the Difference of Climates, Hot or Cold,
of Constitutions Weak and Strong, of Age Childhood and Manhood, or
Inconveniency that might arise therefrom. I say, in the Church Sprinkling has
succeeded Dipping, and not without Ground in Scripture, for the word Sprinkling
is used for the Thing signified, and of this we have Two Witnesses, St. Paul is
the first, Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith, having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure
Water. There are Sprinkling and Washing; And chap. 12.24. it is spoken of the
blood of Sprinkling. The other is St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2.
Thorough Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus Christ. If the Thing signified be represented with Sprinkling so
may the Sign be administered with Sprinkling, and the Child lying upon it is back
in man's Arms, may be said to be under the Water sprinkled upon it is Face. We
also find in Scripture, that the Administration of that Sacrament, is both as
to the Sign and Thing signified, called Washing, so that there is no certain
and constant Obligation to the strictness of the Greek word, and to the outward
Rite of Dipping, and Sprinkling Answers the end of the Sacrament, and the
Analogy between the visible, and the invisible parts of it, as well as Dipping;
and we see in the Lord's Supper, there is no Obligation to any certain Posture,
so that [provided there be no Superstition nor Idolatry] it may well be
received Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing.

Another thing we differ in is, about Rebaptisation: Hence they are called
Anabaptists, from baptising again those that were baptized before. The Church
of Rome does not rebaptise those who from us turn to them, nor we those who
from them come to us, but Anabaptists do all that come to them out of other
Persuasions; and though the Lord's Supper be administered many times, yet
Baptism is not, or ought not to be but once, because Baptism is the Sacrament
of Initiation, and the Lord's Supper of Nutrition and Increase, Baptism is a
Regenerating, and the Lord's Supper a Confirming and Strengthening Ordinance.
Now, as there is but one beginning of spiritual Life, thorough Regeneration,
and there is but one Introduction and admission into the Covenant, so the
Sacrament of these things ought only once to be administered, but as during our
whole Life we need spiritual Nourishment, so the Sacrament of it ought often to
be reiterated, as in our natural Life we are born but once, but we must Eat
often to preserve our Life.

I must resolve a Difficulty, and then I have done. It Is said in one place,
Ephesians. 4.5.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. And in another it is spoken of the Doctrines
Heb. 6.2.
of Baptisms, as of many. There is certainly but one Sacrament of Baptism,
instituted by our Lord Jesus. In that first place the Apostle exhorts the
Ephesians to Unity, for this reason, that our whole Salvation is grounded upon
it, in it is Principle, Progress, and End, One God, One Lord, One Faith, One
Baptism, one Hope, one Body, and one Spirit, whereby all these are united: In
consequence of this, we find Acts 4.32.
the multitude of those that believed were of One Heart, and of One Soul,
Philip. 1.27.
and ought to stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind. So that this admits of
no difficulty. But in the other place the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews to tend
to a perfection, and make a further progress in the knowledge and way to
Salvation, the Principles thereof having been laid before, whereof he names
some, as Repentance, Faith toward God the explication of what is signified in
baptism, called the Doctrine of Baptisms, of laying on of Hands, of
Resurrection, and of Eternal Judgment. And such Articles as are taught in
Catechisms. The Apostle does not Institute many baptisms, for there is but One,
that of John Baptist, and of Christ being the same, but the Doctrines of
Baptism are several, as of Repentance, Mark. 1 4.
of the Remission of sins, of Regeneration, etc. Now though there be but one
Sacrament of baptism, there are two parts of it, the Earthly, or the sign, and
the Heavenly, or thing signified, which both are called baptism, and in this
place St. Paul meaning both, calls them baptisms.

In the Primive Church several good Rites were observed by those who being of
competent Age, were to be baptized, as the giving in of their Name amongst
those who professed themselves Christians, the Examination they submitted to,
and gave an account of the Progress they had made in the Christian Doctrine,
then the Confession of Faith, and the Apostle's Creed amongst the rest was a
renunciation to the Devil and to his Works, all which may well be continued in
relation to those new Converts, who are come to Years of Discretion, before
they be baptized: And herein we shall not disagree with Anabaptists, or others,
but as to Questions put to a Child newly born, when he is baptized, about that
Renunciation, Whether he will forsake the World, etc. and the Answer of the
Godfather and God-mother in his Name, is Ridiculous, and, as it were a jest,
not to say worse, in so holy and Serious a business; to ask questions of a
Child, who can neither Hear, Understand, nor Speak, and take the Answer of a
stander-by, who cannot well answer for himself, without a special Proviso, as,
if God thorough Free Grace will be pleased to enable him, and though one could
answer for himself, it does not follow he may answer for others. All that
Fathers, Godfathers, and the like can do upon such an occasion, is to Promise,
when the Child is come to an Age capable of being taught, they will take care
to see he be Instructed in the Knowledge and Fear of God, according to the
Rules of Christian Religion.

FINIS.
A LETTER to a LADY who has forsaken the Protestant Religion, for the Romish.
MADAM,
SOME few opportunities which, though in a kind of a broken manner, I had to
discourse with you about Religion, afforded me matter of sad, yet charitable
thoughts, for your Spiritual condition: It Is usual, and not without some
grounds, to say there is in us a prejudice of Education, which sometimes
hinders from harkening to things but reasonable enough in themselves; But it
seems that has had no influence upon your Ladyship, in the change you made of
a Religion wherein you were born and bred; you over-looked all considerations
of that nature, and I am afraid, upon no serious thoughts or solid grounds:
What Worldly prospect you might at that time happen to have, and in that
conjuncture, God knows, and I leave it to your own examination; but sure I am,
there could be none to balance the value of a Soul, which thereby you ventured
the loss of, to all Eternity: All the Temptation of the World, and frailty of
Human Nature, which is the best, and most that may be said on your behalf, can
never excuse you in the sight of God, nor hardly in that of Men, who have seen
no just or reasonable cause for it.

But, Madam, what is past and done, cannot be helped; yet out of a real desire
for your good, and to look to that which is to come, this I may boldly say, you
can never answer it to God or men, if hereafter you be not acted by an earnest
care and diligence, to settle your greatest concern in the World, the Salvation
or utter ruin of your Soul; be very serious about it, and avoid not coming to a
discussion of the matter, as some in your state are apt to do. The Devil is the
Prince of Darkness, and he hates the light, because his works are evil; your
Priests, who under the notion of a Confession, and by means of an Absolution,
do Blasphemously pretend to forgive your Sins. and a power to open for, or to
shut upon you the Door of Heaven, do thereby Tyrannise over your Conscience,
and will dissuade you from coming to any Dispute, because, if the Word of God
be the Rule, their cause cannot abide it. But as now, they have you in their
Snares, so for their own ends, they will omit nothing to keep you therein; the
Light of the Gospel might discover their Cheats and Tricks upon the Souls of
Men, and so make you to give them the slip, they will endeavor to keep you to
this juggling of theirs, namely, the blind Obedience, and to Believe what the
Church believes, though you cannot tell what that is, to do what she Commands,
and trouble your self no farther. But, Madam, such Advisers, and Ghostly
Fathers, or Spiritual Guides, as you call them, should by you be brought upon
the Stage, and put to this Trial: Come, I will hear what you can say for the
Religion that I now profess, and against that which I left, a friendly and
peaceable Conference I desire about these things, between you and some
Ministers of the Church of England, or other Protestant ones. This, Madam, is
the ready way not to be imposed upon, and you, nor no body else, ought ever to
refuse being farther or better Instructed and Informed; and it is high time for
you to begin in earnest to go about it, for indeed I may say, you have been
lulled asleep, though you wanted no warning from above.

And because for the good of your Soul, I wish I might be instrumental in so
Christian a Work, I shall here upon this Paper set down some few thoughts of
mine, as are Conducing toward so great a Work. And because the Romanists find
themselves not very able, out of Scripture, the only competent Judge in these
things, to defend their Errors in Doctrine, they for themselves have made what
they call their Strong Hold, under the Name of the Church: For as Anciently the
prevaricating Jews cried out the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, so
Roman Catholics thunder out the Church, the Church, in hopes to shelter
themselves under so specious a Name: But Madam, pray be not mistaken, that
glorious Name out of some peoples mouth is but a Scarecrow, and misapplied.

That which at this time, I intend by the Grace of God to offer to your serious
consideration, is chiefly this, against the Primacy and Infallibility of the
Romish Church, which indeed are the two Pillars it stands upon; for if you
question any thing, then to stop your Mouth, she says of her self she is
Infallible, and to get your Obedience, she will say she is Head Mother and
Catholic Church, but then you must take their bare Word for it, if we may
easily believe any thing, which we must not, when our Eternal welfare lies at
Stake. Before I have done, I hope, by the Grace of God, to prove this, First,
That the Romish Church has no Supremacy over other Churches, and that her
Bishop is no Universal Bishop, nor Primate of the Christian Church. Secondly, I
shall beat down the ground they go upon, namely, that Peter was the Prince of
the Apostles, from whom they pretend their Supremacy to be derived, Thirdly, I
intend to show how Popes are no Successors of Peter, neither 1. of his
Doctrine; nor 2. of his Seat, or else he had been a Non-Resident Bishop, for he
never was at Rome, at least any long time; and this being done, I shall speak
against the pertended Infallibility of that Church and of her Bishops, having
before Premised some things against Peter's Infalliblity.

I must not engage in the Common place about the Church, which is of a large
extent, yet I ought to take notice how the Word is sometimes improperly taken
for the Temple or Meeting place, and properly for the Assembly or Congregation
of those who make part of the Body of the Universal Church, which being
dispersed all the World over, and consisting of all serts of Men and Women, of
every People, Quality, Age or Sex, for which cause it is denominated Catholic
the true Members whereof are for certain visible only to Gods Eye, this
Universal Church does Subsist in the National ones, and these in the particular
Churches: The Word Church is from a Greek Word derived from another, which
signifies to call from one place to another; here we must observe the
unreasonableness of the Romish Society, which would be called the Church,
exclusively to all that are not within her Pale, when there has always been
the Greek, Ethiopian, and other Churches, standing by themselves, so now we
have the Protestant and Reformed Churches from the Errors of the Romish, which
consist of several National ones; and though in some of the forenamed National
Churches there be Corruptions, yet in none greater than in that of Rome, which
all Protestant ones do charge with Idolatry: Besides that Church commits a
great absurdity with calling her self Catholic, when at the most she is but a
part of it, for it is a contradiction to be Universal particular, as the Roman
Catholic Church does import, neither does the name Roman make it to be that
Church which was in Rome when St. Paul did write his Epistle, no more than the
Jewish Church is now what it once was.

Here, if I would enlarge, I might divide my Discourse into three Branches;
First, What the Church is. Secondly, What are the Marks whereby to know her.
And, Thirdly, What is her Authority. And therein according to the Etymology of
the Greek word for Church, show there are two sorts or calling, one outward
only, the other inward and joined to the outward; but properly speaking, the
name Church comprehends the Assembly only of Gods Elect; for in the Church are
two different kinds of Men, some are Members of Christ and the true Church,
which are the House it self; others are indeed in the House of God, but are
none of it, like the Straw among the Wheat, till they go out and are separated;
of this sort are all Christians, National, Visible, Particular Churches,
wherein are the pure Preaching of the Word, and the right Administration of the
Sacraments, according to the Institution, which are the proper marks of
Christ's Church, but in that of Rome they are very much corrupt; these I say,
and several other things to the purpose, I might insist upon, but for brevities
sake I shall forbear, to come to what I chiefly proposed to speak of.

And that is, First, The Church of Rome, which is but a Particular one, has no
right of Superiority, or Supremacy, over any other Particular Churches, she
has no Patent for it; what Power she has in that kind, was gotten by Craft
and Usurpation, and was since maintained by force and violence. Jesus Christ is
the Head, King, and Master of his Church, and they cannot out of his Word, or
Apostolical Practice, show that ever he gave the Romish Church any such
Privilege or Prerogative, as I hope to shew't somewhat lower, it is but a Human
Invention. Ecclesiastical Histories assure us, that Patriarchs or Bishops of
Antioch, Alexandria, etc. were Independent from Rome, nay, some of them sharply
censured the Bishop of Rome: Indeed in the 4th Century some Jarrings began,
between him of Rome and that of Constantinople, which being then the Seat of
the Empire, was become the new Rome: But all was much, according to the Temper
of the Bishops then in being; and for a proof that no such Prerogative belonged
to Rome, in the 6th. Century we read how Gregory the great, Bishop of the
Place, declared, that whosoever called himself Universal Bishop, or Bishop of
Bishops, was the forerunner of Antichrist. Though not long after his Death, that
Mystery of Iniquity began to be set up, by a common Agreement, between Phocas,
who having made away his Master the Emperor Mauricius, during a violent Fit he
had of the Gout, promised Boniface then Pope of Rome, that if he would procure
him to be owned for Emperor, he would own him for Universal Bishop; this is the
true ground of that Usurpation, and not any falsely supposed Gift of
Constantine the Great, much less of Christ: It Is observable how about the same
time, that Mahomet began his Imposture, the forenamed Bishop of Rome, by
Virtue of a Grant from Phocas, took upon him the proud Title of Universal
Bishop, for the Grant was made in 606, which was the very year that Mahomet
retired to his Cave to forge his Impostures, which in 608 he began to propagate
at Mecca, and the Successors of both, endeavored by the same Methods, that is,
Craftiness, Lying, Fire, and Sword, to Propagate it, and these are now the two
great Impostures in the World, one in the East, the other in the West. And we
know it to be the endeavors of all Usurpers, to maintain themselves as much,
and as long as they can in their Usurpations, so that Boniface's Successors
being acted by the same Spirit of Ambition as he had been, and having met with
favorable conjunctures to settle and fix in that Usurpation, they enlarged it
as much as they could.

And because, to engage the Consciences of men, they would pretend to a Divine
Right for this encroachment; we must in the next place, blow up and overthrow
that imaginary Ground of theirs, which they fancy and would persuade People to
have been derived to them from St. Peter, but we say, nemo dat quod non habet,
No man can give what he has not. Peter never had any Primacy or Superiority
over the other Apostles, and herein we go upon sure grounds, for all along we
have Scripture for it. Neither before our Blessed Saviors Death, nor after his
Resurrection was any such Title as Prince of the Apostles, or the like,
bestowed upon him, nor any Power in the least given him over them. In the
School of Christ we hear Lessons of Humility, against Pride and Ambition, and
himself he gives for a Pattern, when he says, Mat. 11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and in that great Act of
Humility, when he washed his Disciples Feet he said, I have given you an
Example, for if I who am your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, Joh. 13.14.
and thereby condescended to so mean a thing, much more ought ye not to
domineer over, but to serve one another. Hence it is, that upon all occasions,
he strictly forbids all that tends to affect any Superiority among themselves,
even in relation to the World to come, wherefore he sharply reproves the Sons
of Zebedee, for their aspiring to sit one on his right Hand, the other on the
left in his Kingdom, which argued a desire of Superiority over their Fellow
Disciples, whereupon they were moved with indignation against the two Brethren;
and not long before his death, about the Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27, 28.
strife which was among them which should be accounted the greatest? if there
had been any such thing intended for Peter, this had been a fair Opportunity
for Christ to have declared it, and said, Peter shall be the greatest, he shall
be your Prince; but he otherwise decided it, with showing the opposition
between the worldly Kingdoms and his (which is not of this World, as to Pilate
he declared it, but Spiritual) thus, Luke 22.24. etc. and Mark 10.43.
The Kings and Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, but it
shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great let him be your
Minister, or Servant.

If after our Savior's Ascension, any Title of Superiority, as visible Head of
the Church, Christ's Vicegerent, Primate of the Apostles, or the like, had
belonged to Peter, he certainly would have made use of it in his Epistles, but
in the first we read only this, Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and this in
the second, Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, which is no
more than Paul and other Apostles called themselves by; these, and no worldly
ones, are the glorious Titles made use of by those Holy Men, and if over and
above there had been any other belonging to Peter, he would, as his due, have
received it from them, or at least, himself would not have derogated therefrom,
for by omitting it, he had thereby in some degree undervalued and despised such
an Office and Dignity, upon him bestowed by his Lord and Master, but far from
any thing like Supremacy and Superiority in the V. Chapter of his 1 Epistle, v.
1. he calls himself an Elder, who does not command, but like a Brother
Exhorts the Elders of the Church, whom he makes his Equals and Companions,
for he names himself (...), that is, Fellow-Presbyter, or Co-Elder, and he
exhorts them to feed and take the oversight of the Flock of God, not as being
Lords over Gods Heritage, but being Examples; he does not say, Dominion belongs
to me, as he then might, if it had been true, but he thereby excludes himself,
as well as them; let this be farther observed about him, how in Jerusalem, he
was called to give an Account why he went in to uncircumcised Men, in the House
of Acts 11.
Cornelius the Centurion? which could not consist with any Supremacy of his
over them, for only the least is accountable to the greatest, and not the
Superior to the Inferior. Then we find in the Council of Jerusalem, he did not
preside, as it had been his place to have done, cap. 14.15. v. 23.
if he had been the chief of the Apostles, but James was the Chairman, who
having an occasion to name him, calls him barely Simon: farthermore, the Decree
of the Synod was not made nor sent in his Name, but in that of the Apostles,
the Elders, and the Brethren; moreover, when he is named with some of the other
Apostles, his Name is not always the first, which should have been, if he was
the chief, we see they are thus set down, James, Cephas and John, here Gal. 2.9.
James is before him, and in another place both James and John; 1 Cor. 9.5.
Have we not power, says Paul, to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as
other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas; by the by, let it
be observed hence how the Apostles were Married; and in another place we read
of Luke 4.38.
Peter's Mother-in-Law, whom the Lord Jesus cured of a great Fever, Acts 21.8,
9.
also Philip the Evangelist was Married, for we read of four Daughters of his.

In the Texts quoted in the Margin, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
wherein St. Paul makes an enumeration of all the Offices by Christ Instituted
in his Church, he gives not in the least any such sign of any Dignity as
Supreme and vible Head, or Universal Bishop of the Church, bestowed either upon
Peter or any of the other Apostles, much less that there was to be a Succession
of any such Office, either in the Church of Rome, or any other, which he would
not have omitted, if such a thing had been; and in the distribution of Gifts
which he speaks of, Romans 12.
there is nothing at all about this Supremacy. God may, when he pleases, bestow
Gifts upon some, greater than upon others, but this may not argue any
Superiority of Office, when there is the same Lord and Master, the same Spirit,
the same Work and Ministry, and the same Field: we all along do find that
equality observed among the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension, which before his
Death he had charged upon them, even those who came after not excluded, which
made Paul say of himself, 2 Cor. 11.3.
I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, not only in Gifts, but
also in the extent of power and authority of his Ministry, Gal. 2.8.
For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles, therefore James,
Cephas and John, who seemed to be Pillars (observe how James and John as well
as Cephas seemed to be Pillars,) they gave to Paul and Barnabas, the right
hands of Fellowship, v. 9. whence appears the Equality we have spoken of, and
Peter speaks of him with esteem and respect, and calls him 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.
Our beloved Brother Paul; this desire of Superiority is a pernicious thing,
which another Apostle condemns in the person of Diotrephes, 3 John 9.
who loves to have the preeminence; therefore, it is a damnable thing (as Pride
was the sin of the Devil, and of our First Parents,) for any to attempt
bringing into the Church an Office which Christ, (who alone has Right to it)
has not Instituted, or to bring in a Superiority, when he has appointed and
settled an Equality; so that if Peter had no such a Superiority as Popes, his
imaginary Successors pretend he had, and from him to be derived unto them, it
follows there is in them no such thing, but it is a mere Imagination and
Usurpation of theirs. At first Rome being the Seat of the Empire, the Christian
Church in it was provided with Bishops or Pastors, Men of Piety, Learning, and
best qualified as could be found, and upon that account Men might set a great
value and esteem upon them, show them a greater respect and obedience, because
they highly deserved it; but in aftertimes, those who came, being a quite
different sort of Men, very short of their Piety, Virtue and Parts, yet out of
Pride and Ambition, that which had been rendered to the singular and
extraordinary Merits of the Persons, they looked upon as due to the Place, and
so pretended to the same Honor, which they were not worthy of; and as Ambition
is never satisfied, and Pride never says it is enough, the Father of Pride
infused it more and more into their Hearts, and suggested ways and means how to
attain to, and promote their ambitious ends.

Now I come to my third Point, which tends to show, That the Popes are no
Successors of Peter. The Church of Rome was gathered out of the Gentiles not
out of the Jews, though there might happen to be some few; now Paul, not Peter,
was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter of the Jews, for says Paul, Gal.
2.7.
The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the
Circumcision was unto Peter, and in his Epistle he calls the Romans Gentiles, I
speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans
11.13. That is, he was chiefly and specially sent to Convert the Gentiles, and
the other the Jews, though when occasion was offered, they omitted not to Preach
it to both, if Peter was to Convert the Jews, then he was not to go abroad to
the Gentiles, but to converse with and continue among the Jews, as we see his
Epistles are written to them; Paul on the contrary, having upon occasion said
to the Jews, Acts 13.46.
It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you,
but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; and in another place, Chap. 18.6.
He shook his Raiment, and said unto them, your blood be upon your own head, I
am clean, from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles, and so he did, going
from Town to Town to Preach the Gospel, and so we see his Epistles generally
written to the Gentiles, among others, that to the Romans, whereby we see how
that Church was within his Province, not of Peter's.

But let us come to particulars, on this account there may be a twofold
Succession, the first of Doctrine, the second of the Chair or See: now I say,
Popes are Peter's Successors in neither. First, not in Doctrine, for indeed,
except the first and second Articles of Christian Religion, about the most Holy
Trinity and Divinity of Christ, wherein they are sound, they have corrupted
most of the rest of the true Christian Apostolical Doctrine, which I am sure
St. Peter taught; all their corruptive Alterations and humane Superstructures
of their own Invention, as Invocation of Saints Worshipping of Images,
Veneration of Relics, Pilgrimages, Indulgences, Purgatory, and many more;
besides, their overthrowing the three Offices of our Lord and Savior, with
making other Kings and Heads to Rule over his Church, other Prophets, who teach
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and bring in their Traditions to the
prejudice of his Holy Word, and then Instituting other Priests than him, and
other Sacrifices than his, and setting up new Sacraments, and other things
which are well known, and 'twould be too long for me to Insert: But, Madam, If
you please to be informed about several of the chief, as Transubstantiation,
taking away the Cup, against eating of Flesh on certain days, the Marrying of
Priests, these I have spoken of in a Tract of mine, called A Seasonable
Discourse about Religion, in this present Conjuncture, Printed in 1688. which I
refer you to; for here, for Brevity sake, I will meddle with nothing but what
relates to my present purpose.

However, Madam, before I proceed farther, I take it to be necessary to pull
off the Vizard of the Church of Rome's pretended Succession to Peter. In order
to it, you must give me leave to draw a true and natural Picture of that
Society: I hope you will own two things; first, That the true and right
Succession is in the Doctrine. Secondly, That Peter's Doctrine is the same, and
not at all different from or contrary to that of the other Apostles and
Evangelists, as set down in the New Testament: Now the Romish Church, from the
first steps, does prevaricate and gainsay Peter's Doctrine, for he says, 2
Pet. 1.20, 21.
That no prophecy of the scripture, is of any private interpretation: for the
prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Here Peter attributes Scripture to the
Counsel of God and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, but the Romish Church Bellar.
de verbo dei l. 4. c. 4.
to the will of men, and particular occasions, without God's express command.
Nay, they say, Bellar. de verbo dei l. 4. c. 3.
the word of God contains not all things necessary unto Salvation, and so it is
insufficient, yet the Apostle says all scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproofs, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, and are able to make us wise unto salvation,
Perron cont. Tilen.
2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Now that which makes wise and perfect, as it is v. 17. to
Salvation, does contain all that is necessary unto Salvation, other Texts we
have to the same purpose: They also Bellar. de verbo dei l. 3. c. 1.
affirm Scripture to be dark and obscure, against what David says in so many
places, as Psalm. 19.28. And thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path. Psalm. 119.105. They see not that light because they turn their back
upon it; Paul declares, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them:
Though God's word be clear, Unbelievers cannot see it no more than the Blind, or
those who shut their Eyes can see the Sun, though never so bright: Nay they
Bellar. de verbo dei l. 2. c. 15. and Index lib. prohibit. Res. 4.
forbid people to read it, though in several places of the Old and New Testaments
there be an express command to read it, which for brevity sake I shall not
quote, only in my way, I shall take notice of an Interpretation of the words in
Psalm 91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and
Dragon shall thou trample under feet; a Prophesy relating to our Lord and
Savior, yet Pope Alexander the III. whilst he in the Porch of St. Marks Church
in Verice, was with his Foot treading upon the Neck of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, caused the words to be pronounced with a loud Voice, to which the
Emperor, as bad an Interpreter as the proud Pope was of Scripture, answered non
tibi sed Petro, this was not said to thee, but to Peter, whereunto the reply
was, Et mihi and Petro, to me and to Peter.

Before this Holy Word, they prefer, or at least make of an equal Authority,
their Traditions, their own ^nventions and Forgeries. For, Madam, give me eave
to say, That the Church of Rome is a great Impostor, and has been proved such,
by several Divines, both Foreigners and our own; yet Bellarmin in the same
Book, and Cardinal du Perron against Tilenus are for Traditions, contrary to so
many places of Scripture, whereof some are quoted in the Margin, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Exodus 25.40.
What things soever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it, and St. Paul says, Gal. 1.8, 9.
If any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have precahed
let him be accursed: the word in the Original signifies, besides what we have
Preached, there ought to be no dimunition, addition, or alteration.

But Madam, to avoid prolixity, which I see an enumeration of many of their
Errors would unavoidably engage me in, I shall in few words say, their
forbidding at certain times to eat some sorts of Meats, when Gods Word in so
many places speaks against it, and that, as well as the prohibition for Priests
to Marry, is called 1 Timothy 4.1. 2. Heb. 13.4.
Doctrine of Devils: when the Apostle calls Marriage Honorable, and the Bed
undefiled. How dare they to command that which God has forbidden, or to forbid
that which God has instituted, approved and commanded? Pope Pius the II. was
so sensible of the unreasonableness of this, as to say, that if Priests for
good cause had been forbidden to Marry, for a better they should now Marry:
Matt. 8.14.
We Read in the Word, how Peter, whom they so much pretend to follow, Act.
21.8, 9.
and others among the Apostles and Evangelists were Married: After this, what
shall we say of Campeggio, 1 Cor. 9.5.
one of the Pope's Legates at the Council of Trent, who openly maintained
there, that it is better for a Priest to keep a Whore than to Marry: Their
Mediators of Intercession, are an Injury to the Lord Jesus: The Error of
Transubstantiation, is contrary to Scripture, Sense and Reason, and attended
with Idolatry: And now, Madam, I shall be more plain than I was once, merely
out of respect for you, when, as you may remember, a Pragmatical Priest at
Table, vexed some Body, whom you know, and with a Brazen Face, denied the
Romanists to Worship Images and other Creatures; for it is known how all your
Priests are downright Idolaters, first they make their Wafer, God; for says
one of them, Gab. Biel. Can. Miss. 4.
He who Created me without me, is now Created by me. I say, the Priest first
makes his God, then falls down and Worships it, and at last Eats it up: Is not
this as great an Idolatry as can be, to Worship a Creature of his own making?
The place where our Savior speaks of false Christ's, is remarkable, Matt.
24.23, 26.
If any man shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not, or
behold he is in the secret chambers, or little places which they have above
their Altars, where under Lock and Key they keep their Idol God, believe it not.

What manner of God is the Wafer God of Papists? of one or few minutes
standing, which by the pronouncing of five Latin Words, though in the Text there
be but four, This is my Body, is as it were by a Magical Virtue, changed into
the substance of Christ's Body, and so with them becomes God, and as such is by
them adored: What a poor Idol God is this, which cannot preserve it self from
being eaten up by Dogs, Rats, Mice, Spiders, and the like Vermin? and if it
does but slip out of the Priests Hand, when he holds it, is like Dagon before
the Ark, broken in pieces: And the Priest, when such an accident happens, as it
does sometimes in the Street, with a Rope about his Neck, to show how for his
Idolatry he deserves to be Hanged, does scrape up the Crumbs with the Dirt,
when it happens to fall into it, and lays it up. Of this Wafer-God may well be
said, what Elijah in a mocking way, said of Baal, He is a God, who is either
talking or pursuing, or he is in a journey, or he sleeps, and must be awaked:
For let the Popish Priests, as well as Baal's, cry from Morning till Evening,
as loud as they can, there shall be no Voice, nor any to Answer, because the
Wafer-God is as much a Dumb Idol, as Baal's Image was, 1 King. 18.26, 27.

Upon this matter of the Wafer-God, I must not omit taking notice of a thing,
which gives their Transubstantiation and Corporal Eating of Christ's Body, a
deadly blow, and that with a Weapon of their own, for in a French Translation
of the Bible, Printed in Antwerp, by Martin L'Empereur, in 1534, with Charles
V. his License, Dated, Brussels, the 21st of November 1533, in the 6th Chap. of
John's Gospel, over against these words, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. There is a Marginal Note in
these words, To eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, is to believe in
him; whereby their pretended Corporal Manducation is quite overthrown, and it
perfectly agrees with the Doctrine of all Reformed Churches.

As to the taking away the Cup from the People, in the Sacrament, it is
positively contrary to what our Savior said, Matt. 26.27.
Drink ye all of it, and one of the Evangelists observes how they all drank of
it, and the Canon of the Council of Constance against it, does them more harm
than good, for in the Preface they own thus, Licet Christus instituerit, etc.
that is, Mar. 14.23.
Though Christ instituted and gave after Supper the Sacrament in both kinds to
his Disciples, and though in the Primitive Church, it was Administered in the like
manner, yet the Council for certain reasons, does command that the Sacrament be
otherwise Administered. Sess. 13.


But to come close, the Romish Society, we charge it with Idolatry and
Superstition, it is a Religion Bloody, Damnable, Traiterous, Blind and
Blasphemous; and Madam, I go upon sure grounds, for I well know their
Doctrines, having Read them in their chief Authors, and by way of Discourse and
Disputes with their Priests, etc. and as for their Practices, I have been long
enough at Rome among them, and in other Places, to observe them. I come to
prove the Charge; first, their Religion is Idolatrous, because it gives the
Creature, the Dead and Images, the Honor due to God alone; the Images and
Wafer-God of Papists, are Dumb Idols as well as those of the Heathens. Their
distinction of Latreia and Douleia is idle and frivolous, for in Rev. 22.
Scripture the Servants of God, which adore him, are called (...), so Paul
calls himself Romans 1.1.
(...), Servant of Jesus Christ, and in Rev. 19.10. the word there to adore, is
not derived from (...), but from (...): but these things I must not trouble you
with. Now to Pray to Saints, to the Dead, to Adore the Wafer, to Worship
Images, is not all this to give the Creature the Worship due to God alone? and
is it not to pay Relics Divine Worship, as to fall down, kneel before, and
kiss them, to go in Pilgrimage to their Shrines and Sepulchers, and to expect
help from them.

Secondly, It Is a Superstitious Religion, upon the account of innumerable vain
Fopperies in their Devotions, wherein they place Religion, as the Virgins Milk,
Peter's Beard, Christopher's Tooth, the Head, Rib, Arm, Finger, etc. of such a
Saint; such things Rome is full of, and hardly any of their Churches but has
some such things to show: What are their Holy Water, Salt, Spittle, Holy-Oil,
Beads, Whippings, Fish-days, Nunneries, Pilgrimages, Baptising of Bells, Fonts,
Crossing themselves, etc. Now let us look into their Rituals, and by their
Practices judge of their Belief, and we shall find whole Almanacks full of
Saints of their own making, I dare say of some who never were in the World, and
of others who perhaps are now Tormented in Hell; they have many more Saints
than there are Days in the Year: To these they pay the same Ceremonies, in the
self-same words, attended with the same bowings and kneelings as they do to God
himself: Farthermore they directly to them offer their Prayers, Consecrate
Churches, appoint Holy Days, and make Vows to them, which are but Creatures,
now Dead, and lying in their Dust and Ashes; if this be not Superstition and
Idolatry, I cannot tell what is so.

Thirdly, It Is a Bloody Religion, witness their many Massacres of the
Waldenses, Albigenses, and others; their Bartholomew-Eves in France, Cruelties
in Ireland, and in so many other parts of Europe, their Principles and Canons
of some of their Councils, their Inquisitions and Congregations de Propaganda
fide are well known. Fourthly, That Religion is Damnable, for it overthrows the
very Foundation of Christianity, for their Transubstantiation destroys the
Truth of Christ's Human Nature, their Expiatory Sacrifice or the Mass, his only
Sacrifice for Sin, offered once for all, their Doctrine of Merits, his Merits;
the multitude of Mediators among them, makes void the only Mediator between God
and Men, the Man Jesus Christ; their Sacrificing Priest overthrows Christ's
Priestly Office, as their Traditions do his Prophetical; so is the great
Article of the Forgiveness of sins, and free Justification through Gods Grace
in Jesus Christ, by their Doctrines of Merits, Pardons, Indulgences, Treasures
of the Church, and Works of Will Worship. Fifthly, It Is Blind, which is plainly
made out by their Doctrines of blind Obedience, and implicit Faith: according
to them, it is enough for one to be a good Christian, to believe what the Church
believes, though he knows not what the Church does believe. Sixthly, It Is a
Treacherous Religion, for they teach, That the Pope may Depose Kings, and
lawfully Absolve Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance. Lastly, we charge it
to be Blasphemous, because the peculiar Excellencies of Divine Majesty, and the
Prerogatives of our Lord Jesus Christ, it ascribes to the Virgin Mary, whose
Psalter by Bonaventura does contain abundance of Blasphemies, for all the
Glorious things in the Book of Psalms, spoken of the Son of God, they
blasphemously apply it to the Blessed Virgin, who is but a Creature, and that
which is proper to him, they give not only to the Virgin, but also (to multiply
their Idolatry) to other Creatures, both dead and alive, as to their Popes, to
whom and to their Priests, they attribute a power to forgive Sins, which is a
downright Blasphemy, for who can forgive sins but God alone? Mark 2.7.

Now I come to the second part of the Non-succession, and show that Peter was
no Bishop of Rome, or else he had been a Non-Resident, and he never was at
Rome; herein to be ingenuous, we shall say we have no positive proofs, but next
to that we have that which is as good; neither can they with true and good
Authority show that ever he was there, though they make use of Legends and
spurious things: and those who hold the Affirmative, ought to prove it, though
they which are for the Negative should not; yet we hope to demonstrate he never
was Bishop in Rome.

After our Saviors Ascension, Peter for several Years together continued in
the Land of Judea, and thereabouts, for in the Book of the Acts we read of him
in Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. (though in this not particularly named, but
contained under the Name of the twelve) 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. when, having by the
Angel been miraculously delivered out of Prison, he left Jerusalem, where we
find him again in chap. 15. for he was present at the Synod or Council, where
Luke who followed Paul, and in the rest of his Book gives an account of Paul's
progress in Preaching the Gospel, leaves him: Now the Council was held in the
15th year after Christ's Resurrection, and the 48th after his Birth, till which
time we cannot find he at all stirred out of Judea, except when he was in
Antioch. where when for fear of the Jews, he withdrew himself from the
Gentiles, Gal. 2.12.

Now let us compare times; Paul was Converted in the year of our Lord 35. and
two years after his Ascension, when going to Damascus, out of which City he was
by night let down by a Wall in a Basket, Acts 9.25. thence he went to
Jerusalem, v. 26, 27. and was by Barnabas brought to the Apostles, he speaks of
another Journey which Gal. 1.18.
three years after he took to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him
fifteen days; and in the 2 Chap. v. 1. he says how fourteen years after, he
went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, at which time he also met there with
Peter, v. 9. and not long after at Antioch, v. 11. It were not to my purpose to
follow Paul in his Journeys, nor to speak of his abode in several places, as a
year and a half at Corinth, Acts 18.11. three years at Ephesus, chap. 20.31.
etc. we shall bring him up to Jerusalem, where, upon the account of an uproar
against him, he fell into the hands of the Romans, when Faelix was Governor of
Judea, and Glaudius Lysias chief Captain in Jerusalem, and he Acts 23.
was kept a Prisoner till Portius Festus came into Foelix's room, Acts 24.27.
and having been heard by him, and appealed unto Caesar, was soon after sent to
Rome, where he arrived in the year 58. and was Martyred in the year 68. which
was the 10th after.

Now as to Peter, undeniably he and Paul were at Jerusalem at the time of the
Synod in the year 48. as observed before, and they would have them both to have
been Martyred in Rome in 68, that is 20 years after, yet they assert Peter to
have been Bishop of Rome, for 25 years, so that there are plainly 5 years
discount, besides the time that he might have spent in and about Judea, for
after that, as I already marked, we find him in Antioch; as for Paul, he was
brought to Rome but 10 years after, which was but 10 before his Martyrdom,
which in case Peter had come thither about the same time, had lessened in all
15 of the 25. Peter's first Epistle was written to the Jews strangers, scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithinia, from Babylon in the
56th year of our Lord, which was but 12 before his death: his second Epistle to
the same Jews, is supposed to have been written in 67. that is a year before
his death, which he therein speaks of as near at hand, 2 Pet. 13.14.
there being no place named, we may well suppose it to have been written from
the same whence the other was; yet therein no mention of Rome, no salutation
thence, no mention of Paul as being there, though he therein speaks of him chap.
3.15. But to leave off Chronology; after the Synod of Jerusalem, Paul does
mention Peter's being in Antioch, but we find no where that he went or so much
as purposed to go to Rome, which being a place of the Gentiles, he had no call
to invite him thither; but as already observed, we find his first Epistle
written from Babylon (a City so remote from Rome) for he gives the salutation
of that Church, 1 Pet. 5.13. except they would have Rome to be called Babylon,
as we read it is in the Book of the Revelation; but on such occasions the Names
of places are set down as properly they are.

That Paul was at Rome, we read it in Gods Word, but no such thing of Peter; is
it likely that he was 25 years Bishop of Rome, and yet no sign at all of his
being there? I say, if ever he was there, it must be either before Paul came
thither, or after, for with him he went not; not before, because certainly some
mention would have been made of him; we read how when some of the Brethren in
Rome had heard of Paul and his company, Acts 28.15.
they came thence to meet them as far as Apppii forum and the three taverns,
yet not a word of Peter: if he had been among them, he being so considerable
would have been named; well, but if it had been too much for him to go so far
as to meet a Fellow Apostle, who once Gal. 1.18.
went up to Jerusalem to see him, and abode with him 15 days, and so was no
Stranger to him, what is the reason when Paul was come to Rome, he came not to
see him? if he had then been at Rome, doubtless Paul would have gone to visit
him, and not forgotten him when Act. 28.17.
he called the chief of the Jews together, and gave them an account of the
cause of his coming thither; if then Peter had been Bishop in Rome, the Jews
would not have gone altogether without his knowledge, and their answer shows
that Peter was not there, for Ver. 21.22.
they said unto him, we neither received Letters out of Judea concerning thee,
neither any of the brethren that came, showed or spoke any harm of thee: but we
desire to hear of thee what thou think, for as concerning this sect, we know
that every where it is spoken against: If Peter had been at Rome, Paul and his
Doctrine about the Gospel of Christ, could not have been such a Stranger, and
unknown to them, let the rest of the Chapter be Read, and it is said, v. 30.
that Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that
came in unto him. What, all this while, not a word of Peter? we look upon Luke
as an exact Writer, who in his Book of the Acts, mentions so many other
particulars, and who all that while attended on Paul, and would he have omitted
making some mention of Peter, if at that time he had been in or about Rome?
Therefore we must conclude he was not there before Paul's coming.

Neither came he thither after, for Paul in those Epistles he has Written from
Rome, to the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, II. to Timothy and
to Philemon, which contain several Salutations from Men inferior to Peter, yet
not a word of him, if he had been there, Paul would have acquainted him with
his Writing, as he did others, whose Salutations he mentions, then Peter would
not have failed (to speak in their own words) to have sent his Apostolical
Blessing, as now Popes do. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, is accounted to have
been written within the 56th Year of our Lord, and 12 Years before his and
Peter's Death: Certainly if Peter had then been Bishop of Rome, according to
their computation, of 25 Years, he must need have been there 13 Years before,
and if in Rome at that time, how came it to pass, that Paul, in his Epistle to
the Romans, among his Salutations to so many, much inferior to Peter, omitted
him. When the whole Chap. ib. is almost full of the Names of those whom he does
Salute, and begins with a Wife and a Husband, of whom we Read Acts 18.2, 3. who
by their Occupation were Tent Makers, and he being of the same Craft, wrought
with them. Of these he says to the Romans v. 3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila my
helpers in Christ Jesus. Certainly if Peter had been in Rome, and being an
Apostle, in that Epistle Paul would, have taken notice of him. Therefore we
look upon it as a mere Forgery that Peter for 25 Years together was Bishop of
Rome, for it had been contrary to the Office of the Apostles, which was not to
settle in one place, but to go over the World, to Preach the Gospel, as we Read
of Paul, who from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, fully Preached the
Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.19. according to the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
the Apostles divided the Work among themselves, as we Read James, Cephas and
John, do with Paul and Barnabas, Gal. 2.9. So all went into several parts of
the World, which in ancient Records, are named: as to Peter, about whom is the
Question, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1.
the Ecclesiastical Histories say, that he, a long time Preached the Gospel to
the Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia and Asia, whom he did write
to, as we have it in his 1 Pet. 1.1.
first Epistle, so that if ever he went to Rome, 'twas at the most only about
the latter end of his Life. But what Paul says, is very remarkable, 2 Timothy
4.16.
At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me. Certainly if
Peter, who for the same cause laid down his Life, had been there, he would not
have forsaken him, but this is a proof he was not there: What Romanists say of
a Contest between Peter and Simon the Sorcerer, and several other things to the
like purpose, is all fabulous: I know, in Rome they show some places, with
pretty Stories of their own Invention, as of Peter's Prison, and of his meeting
with Christ, when stealing out of that City, to avoid Martyrdom; he asked him
Domine, quo vadis, Lord, whither go thou, and the answer Romam ut ibi iterum
Crucifigar, To Rome, there again to be Crucified; all forged and by Tradition
transmitted to these very times: So that all this well considered, it does not
in the least appear, that Peter came to Rome since Paul was brought thither,
and never, as we may conclude, according to what they say, that both suffered
there at the same time: This Truth, Blondel, one well known for being versed in
the ancient Ecclesiastical History, had promised the French National Synod at
Charenton, which thereupon encouraged with dispensing him from his usual
Pastoral Duties, invincibly to prove; and whilst People were in expectation to
see that Work of his come forth, instead of his promised Book, having (as
informed by a Worthy, Learned and Ingenious Man, who had known him, Named M. la
Sigogne Ingrand of Poictiers, whom in my way through that Country, I happened
to be acquainted with) been gained by Cardinal Richelieu, he published his Book
about Pope Joan.

After what I said, the supposed Primacy of Peter is come to nothing, and
consequently the Supremacy of Popes and Church of Rome thereupon grounded, is
blown up: So that one Pillar being pulled down, the other, namely the
Infallibility, cannot stand; and therein to proceed, I shall alter the order of
my discourse, for in the matter of Supremacy, I began against their
Superstructure before I meddled with the Foundation, that is, I showed how the
pretended Supremacy of the Romish Church, is but a Chymera, and then that Peter
had no Superiority over his Fellow Apostles, nor Dominion over God's Heritage,
for indeed all the Power which the Lord has given his Ministers, is not to
Curse and Anathematize, as Popes and Councils have taken upon them to do, which
is contrary to the Pattern and Rule given by the Apostles in the Synod of
Jerusalem, but as Paul, one of the chief of them, declares in several places,
that 2 Cor. 13.10.
Power is to edification, and not to destruction. But now I intend, by the
Grace of God to demonstrate, first, that Peter was not Infallible, and then,
that in the Romish Church, is no such Infallibility as they pretend to be
derived to it from Peter's.

However, we own that Peter's Doctrine what he Preached, and whatsoever is
written in his Epistles, is infallibly true, for what he speaks of, how 2 Pet.
1.21.
in old time, holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, is
true of him and of the other Apostles, but this Infallibility is lodged not in
their Persons, but in their Doctrine, it did not lie in Peter, but in the
Guide, who directed him, the Holy Ghost: Now the promise of Christ that Mat.
16.18.
the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, is to be understood of
a freedom from Destruction, but not from Error, seeing himself foretold of
Chap. 24.24.
false Christ's and false Prophets that shall arise, and show great signs and
wonders. And even in his School, which was the Figure of the Church, was a
Judas, a Traitor, and so have his Apostles Prophesied of Heresies in the
Church, and of grievous Wolves that should enter into it, Act. 20.29, 30.
even among themselves should men arise, speaking perverse things.

Farthermore it ought to be taken notice of, how great a mistake it is in the
Romanists, to apply unto Peter what our Savior said, Mat. 16.18.
Upon this rock I will build my Church. He meant not Peter's Person, but the
Confession he had made of him, that he was the Christ the Son of the living
God: The thing is plain enough, if we consider the occasion of the discourse,
which was this, who Christ was? Peter said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God. Now this truth owned by Peter, namely that the Lord Jesus is the
Son of the Living God, the Church of Christ is built upon, for upon Christ is
the Church founded, 1 Cor. 3.11.
And other foundation can no man lay, says Paul, than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. Besides that, no where in Scripture Peter is called a Rock, Chap.
10.4.
but the Lord Christ is; therefore it is a gross Error to misapply to Peter that
which belongs to Christ: This very Truth, what Christ was? Peter of himself
could not know, for says our Savior, Flesh and blood has not revealed it
unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven, v. 17. and indeed this is the
Fundamental Truth of Christian Religion, that Christ is the Son of the Living
God.

But before I leave that Text, I must take notice of another Error which the
Romish Church would ground upon it, it is this, that the Power of the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, namely of binding and loosing, was bestowed only upon
Peter, when it also was upon the rest of the Apostles, which were a Collective
Body: Now to find out the truth of what I say, we must look upon the 13. Verse.
of this Chap. 16. of Mat. When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi,
he asked his disciples saying, whom do men say, that I the son of man, am? and
they said, some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. Now seeing none of these Opinions of Men
about him were true, he asked their Opinion, for, he says unto them, but whom
say ye that I am? The Question is put to all his Disciples, ye. So Peter in
whom we commonly find a readiness to speak, as may be an effect of his temper,
answered here in the name of all, thou art Christ the Son of the Living God,
whereby he showed an infinite difference between the Lord Jesus and all that
were named before: But the better to see how the promise of the Keys, was not
made in particular to Peter, but to the College of the Disciples, we must read
the conclusion of that whole Conversation, as it is in ver. 20. Then charged he
his disciples, not Peter alone, that they should tell no man, that he was Jesus
the Christ, which implies, that though Peter alone had said so, yet thereby all
his Disciples had owned him to be Christ the Son of the Living God, and as
their Confession concerning him was general, so was his promise. This on my way
I thought fit to take notice of, to show how ill grounded is the Romish Church
in her pretensions.

Now I return to Peter's pretended Infallibility as to his Person, and say,
that if ever he was infallible, it must be either before our Savior's Death,
or after his Resurrection, and after he had been restored to his Apostleship,
but neither of the two: First, not before the Lord's Death, no Infallibility
tied to his Person, since Scripture mentions some gross failings of his, as his
Ignorance in the Transfiguration, for when he spoke of making three
Tabernacles, the Evangelist observes of him, Luke 9.33.
Not knowing what he said. A Man who knows not what he says, is not
infallible, nor he who wants Faith, wherewith Christ upbraided him, when he
said to him, Mat. 14.31.
O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt: Again certainly Peter was
not infallible when in the forequoted Chap. Mat. 16. the Lord having foretold
his Death, Peter took him and began to rebuke him, saying be it far from thee,
Lord; this shall not be unto thee, when for that same end he came unto the
World, and without it there had been no Salvation, which drew upon him this
sharp and unusual reproof of our Savior, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an
offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men. This passage by the Evangelist, is related immediately after
what had been discoursed between our Savior and his Apostles, concerning what
he was, v. 22.23. may be thereby to destroy all inferences that might
afterward happen to be drawn on Peter's behalf, to the prejudice and exclusion
of the rest of the Apostles, for therein any pretended Primacy and
Infallibility are overthrown, and that circumstance of time makes it
remarkable: But if there was no other proof against his Infallibility, but that
sad Denial of his Lord and Master, even with an Oath to confirm a Lie, yea,
Cursing and Swearing, and that thrice together, it were too strong a proof
against his Infallibility before our Savior's Death.

But I say also, he was not infallible after our Savior's Ascension, Witness
St. Paul, who in Gal. 2.11, 12, 13.
Antioch withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed, and therein
it is expressed in what, namely for his Dissimulation, a thing so contrary to
Faith, Truth and Sincerity: Besides that, after his Conversion Peter was a
Sinner still, and no Sinner is infallible, wherefore says another Apostle,
speaking of himself as well as of others, Jam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all; and long before, a great and a wise King had
said, 1 King. 8.46.
There is no man that sins not: And I suppose a thing which is not, that one
Man could be found, who in his whole Lifetime had committed but one Sin, yet,
says the same Apostle, Jam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. So then Peter was not infallible in the state of Grace, and after his
Repentance.

Much less has any such thing as Infalibility, been entailed upon any that
were to Succeed him, (granting that which is not, the Popes to be his
Successors,) for there is not the least step thereof in Scripture, and
Experience teaches with a Witness how Fallible were his pretended Successors.
Before Men can well Dispute about a thing, the Question must be Stated, so
before we come to Discuss this Matter of Infallibility, let them first agree
among themselves where to Lodge it, which hitherto they could not; for some
would have it to be in the Council, others in the Pope, and others in both Pope
and Council together. The Council of Constance, which was held in 1414. Decreed
the Council to be above the Pope, which is also a Lash against his Supremacy,
but in Italy this is accounted an Heretical Doctrine.

But why, to talk of Infallibility, a thing not be found in the World? To Lodge
it in any Man, is to make a Contradiction, and Nonsense, for no mere Man was
ever Infallible. Hence it is, that Scripture mentions flaws and failings in the
best and most Holy Men, to begin from Adam, whose Fall Mankind has cause to
Remember, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Joseph, Moses, Job, David, Solomon, Jonah,
Elijah that zealous Servant of God, of whom James says, he was subject to the
like passions as we are, Jeremiah, Peter, Paul, Barnabas. In few Words, Human
Nature is attended with such frailties, as render any Man subject to error and
mistakes; How then can Peter, or his pretended Successors, even in Cathedra, as
they term it, claim an Infallibility? By Virtue of what Privilege, and
whereupon grounded? Now let there be a Council of Men, and every one fallible,
how then can the Council be Infallible? Can the number of Men alter Human
Nature, when sometimes as many Men as many Minds? Does not experience show, how
grossly Councils have Erred? We find them one set against another. The first of
Nice condemned the Arrian Heresy, which that of Arimini approved of. Yet though
Men and Councils have Erred, we own there is an Infallible Rule, which if they
follow they shall not Err, but not the Persons, but the Rule is Infallible,
because it is the Word of an Infallible God: Now these immediate Inspirations
of the Holy Ghost, are not necessary, ast hey were at first, when the Gospel of
Christ was Published by the Ministry of Men, for then Men were to be convinced
who it came from, and was approved by Heaven, but now it is settled, and has
been confirmed by so many Signs, Wonders, and Miracles, and by the effectual
and immediate working of the Holy Ghost, we need it no more to demonstrate that
truth which has so often been proved, only we are to follow that Rule which
Christ and his Apostles have left us, wherein he himself speaks as from Heaven.

If then Councils be Fallible, why shall not those Men whom they consist of be
so too? Which reason is by woeful experience confirmed in the persons of Popes,
in whom others would Lodge the imaginary Infallibility of the Romish Church,
among whom their own Authors as Platina, Baronius, and others, own to have been
Sorcerers, Blasphemers, Whoremongers, Incestuous, Sodomites, Profane,
Blood-thirsty, and the most abominable Wretches, Monsters, and Villains in
Nature: How can men so notoriously wicked in Life and Conversation, be Holy and
Infallible in their Church about Spiritual things? Ask where was the
Infallibility when at the same time there were several Popes, who Cursed and
Excommunicated one another? At once the Council of Constance Deprived three,
and did set up a Fourth one: Thus that pretended Infallibility of the Romish
Church does Reside in Popes no more than in Councils.

How then can Council and Pope, when together, be Infallible, if not so when
asunder? Can that junction alter their Nature? No more than a thousand Sick Men
can make one Healthful Man. This opinion tends only to Trim between the other
two, perhaps to please them both, but things of this Nature, require more
Sincerity, and less Policy: But this is the Spirit which Men of that Party are
Generally acted by, as not long ago it plainly appeared beyond Sea: Lying,
dessembbling and the like, Piae Frauds, the Pious Cheats which they allow for
the propagating their Religion; in France to promote the ruin of the
Protestants, they made use of several different ways to make Proselytes, a Bait
they had for every kind of Fish, to the Covetous they offered Places of Gain
and Profit, to the Needy, Money to buy Bread, and actually they made Bargains
and gave more Money to some, and less to others, to make them Change Religion
as they did, which verified the Merchandise which Babylon is said to make of
Souls of Men; Rev. 18.13.
to the Ambitious they offered Honors, and to the Voluptuous, Means wherewith
to supply their occasions in that kind: And because there was a sort of People
who had someting more of Honesty than others, for these also they had a Bait;
and this has been the Method of the Bishop of Meaux, tending to remove the
abhorrency which some Protestants had against many of their Doctrines,
therefore to take away, or at least to conceal the ugliness and offense by many
things they have among them, he Plastered and Painted some over, as to others
he left it to their liberty to believe what they would concerning them: Only he
Invited them to come in, with promise of Liberty for such a persuasion as they
were led in to by their own Judgment, they should be free from going to
Confession, and to their Communion, if they would but come to their Churches,
they might Read the Bible in their Houses, and such like things; all which
indeed, ended in making Hypocrites; and it is well known what Place that way
tends to. But some of their Zealots declared openly, they cared not, whether or
not, the Fathers and Mothers were Damned, if they might but make good
Catholics of the Children; thus to bring upon them the Woe our Savior
pronounced against the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.15.
Hypocrites who compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is
made, they make him twofold more the Child of Hell than themselves. So against
the Rules of Christianity and Charity, any ways, tho never so wrong, are good
enough, if they can thereby compass their ends. Thus in the Indies the Jesuits
were content to see those Infidels set up their Idols and Worship them, if
somewhere behind they could lay a Crucifix, which they must need thereby to
Adore together with the rest. To all this I shall add, the great want of
Sincerity in the French Government, for whilst in that King's Declarations, he
affirmed he would have the Edicts to be observed, at the same time the
Dragoons, by his Order, were upon their March to force the Protestants to go to
Mass.

Now Madam, I found by your Discourse, how you are much guided by the Method of
the Bishop of Meaux, and therefore I here beg leave to say, how what upon some
of those Matters he has Published, Is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
from which he receded upon a Public Account, and only for that time, to lay
Snares for weak Consciences; the Doctrines of the Romish Church are contained
in the Canons of the Council of Trent, and in the Writings of Bellarmin, and
such Authors of Note amongst them, which I can assure you, are contrary to
several things Written by that Bishop of Meaux, whose opinion in those things
will not in Italy, pass for the Doctrines of the Church of Rome: And among
others, I shall take notice only of one, about which you seemed to agree with
me, and it is concerning the Worship of Images, which Meaux would fain put a
fine Gloss upon, and you would be against it, but Madam, you therein differ
from the Romish Church, (and I wish it were so in every thing else wherein they
are in the wrong) for as to that Point, the Council of Trent does refer it to
the Canon of the Second Nicene, which says, that whosoever affirms that the
Images of Saints are only to be Honored, not Adored, let him be Anathema.

But, Madam, not to exceed the due bounds of a Letter, and to conclude, I say,
there is no such a Superiority in the Romish Church, or Primacy of her Bishop
over other Churches and Bishops, and that the Titles of his Holiness, Vice-God,
God's Lieutenant, God upon Earth, which all are Antichristian, and names of
Blasphemy, and all such Offices, are unnecessary in the Church: In the State,
indeed Princes need Lieutenants, because they cannot be every where, and stand
in need of being informed, but it is not so of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus,
the Head and King of his Church, who sees and knows all, of and by himself, and
is present every where, therefore needs no Vicar upon Earth: And the Title of
Visible Head of the Church, is Presumptuous and unnecessary: And seeing also
there is no Infallibility either in Councils or Popes, or in any other Man, for
we find Council against Council, Pope against Pope, Doctor against Doctor, why
then will you pin your Faith upon such Sleeves: You may see how those two, by
them accounted unshaken Pillars, cannot Support it, therefore I pray, Madam,
give God the Glory, with your returning into the Bosom of the Church you have
forsaken, wherein the Voice of Christ alone is heard, his Word alone is the
Rule, and the Holy Ghost the only Guide, according to that Rule; for, Madam,
the Word and the Spirit of Christ may not be separated, for they go together,
there you will find Peace, Comfort, Assurance, and Rest unto your Soul in
Christ, whom we own to be the only Mediator and Savior of the World: And so
leave that Popish Church, which is a confused Babel, defiled with Inventions
and Traditions of Men, when in ours Christ alone Reigns, his Word and Voice
alone is heard, known and followed, and he is our only High Priest, who once
upon the Cross, by the Sacrifice of himself, made atonement for our Sins, and
now in Heaven, at the Right Hand of the Father, makes Intercession for us, he
is our All in All, and the desire of our Souls, which can neither hope in or
trust to any Creature: Wherefore, Madam, break out with these Expressions, I
will go and return to my Mother Church, for then was it better with me than
now: You have forsaken Christ the Spring of Life, in whom alone is Salvation,
and run to the Creatures Dead and Alive, which are not able to help you nor
themselves. God has given you time to come to your self, and to return to him,
in the way of Repentance; and to hasten you, he has been pleased to set a mark
upon you, therefore pray loose no time.

I hope, Madam, you will not take ill my Freedom and the plainness of Speech I
use, for therein, without any Bias, Self-end, or Worldly Consideration, I aim
only at the Glory of God, bearing Record for the Truth, and promoting the good
of your Soul, which is the earnest desire and humble Prayer to God, of

Your Ladyships, etc.

THE END.

