Good Nevvs for the Nation,
Or, The Citys joy and the Countries Happiness.
Plainly showing the great satisfaction and content, that all Loyal Subjects do
^njoy, by the new Election of members of Parliament, whom God preserve, and
direct, that they may Act for the good of their King, and Country, and the
benifit and Happiness of all true English Protestants.

Tune of Digbys farwell, Or Packintons pound.


COme all loyal Subjects of every degree
Lay sorrow aside and come listen to me,
For we have good tidings of late come to town
Our friends they shall rise and our foes be cast down,
The Parliament House is again to be filled
With brave sollid members all of them well skilled,
Then let us rejoice with a Loyal consent,
And all for the choice of our New Parliament.
We need not to murmour but give God the praise
For now we do hope for to see better days,
Our fears they will vanish no more we will repine
The Sunbeams of comfort upon us will shine,
A Summer of joy is approaching at hand
To bring satisfaction unto the whole land.
Then let us rejoice with a Loyal consent,
And all for the choice of our New Parliament.
Each City, and Borough, and Corporate town
Have chosen brave persons of gallant renown,
Such men as have gained their Countries love
And from honest principles scorn for to move,
The laws of the land they will bravely maintain
And put all our Nation in order again,
Then let us rejoice with a Loyal consent
And all for the choice of our New Parliament.
'Twas fine in the Country to be at the choice
When each man was free for to give in their voice,
They whoop and they holl^w they crow'd and they pother
Whiles some cries for one man and some for another,
They cast up their caps and they thunder about
They rally a while and again they do shout.
Then let us rejoice with a Loyal consent
And all for the choice of our New Parliament
The second Part
to the same tune
MArch beer and strong ale are as plenty that time.
As if it were water, and so is good Wine,
Where every freeholder does take off his dish
And each man does Tipple and drink like a Fish,
When they are well liquord to polling they go
Their voices shall carry it it there must be so.
Then let us rejoice with a loyal consent
And all for the choice of our New Parliament.
When they have Elected they homeward repair
Well pleased with their pains and their noble good fare
Now that they have chosen such men as will serve
And seek the whole Nation in peace to preserve,
They follow their callings without any fear
And in their own houses enjoy happy cheer.
Then let us, etc.
Now what can our enemies say in this case
Whilst that we have union in so high a place,
No difference in Parliament after shall be
Like peaceable members they all shall agree:
Their votes they shall pass and good laws they shall stand
And all they shall Act for the good of the land.
Then let us, etc.
The Papists they now may despair of their hope
And send up these tidings to Rome to the Pope,
They now have no friends in the House for to sit
We have no occasion for them nor their wit,
Tdeir plots and contrivances now will be found
Though carried on never so deep under Ground.
Then let us, etc.
Then cheer up good Neighbors and be not dismayed
We now are in hopes for to have a brisk trade,
By Sea and by Land there employment will be
That all in their Stations may live happily
For those that have money shall not be in fear
for to lay it out now the coast it is clear.
Then let us, etc.
Though we have been wearied with troubles and fears
We now shall have time for to wipe off our tears,
Since by this great blessing we are in the way
Again to live happy who ever says nay:
God bless our good King and defend him from wrong,
That he may in safety reign over us long,
And let us rejoice with a loyal consent
And pray for the good of our New Parliament.
With Allowance.

London, Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in West-smithfield.


