Good news from Ireland or a Brief Relation of the Great Battle fought
near Rosse the 10, of March 1642, with a List of the Commanders slain and
taken prisoners.
M. Wriglisworth.
I have received your Letter dated the fourteenth of March, I understand
thereby of your pains and care you have took therein for which I am obliged
unto you for. I hope John Bettson is in London by this. I thought good to give
you notice of the great victory and deliverance which God has given our Army
here the first of March, they marched out of town about 4000 horse and foot,
the Chief commanders was the Livetenant General, the Lord Lile, Sr. Frances
Willowby, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Richard Greenefield, Collonell Hunks, Collonell
Cromwell Colonel Munke, Collonell Gibson, with six pieces of ordnance: First
they assaid Timlin Castle they refusing quarter the castle was taken, and three
hundred put to the Sword, from thence they marched to besiege Rosse, after the
besieging for four days General Preston came upon them with seven thousand
foot and eight hundred horse, all his army were the choice men of the Kingdom
thinking verily to vanquish our army, a new hot battle they had, insomuch
that they came to the sword; the Chief of them showed themselves mighty
valerous insomuch that they went so far on, that they were not able to get
off against, the common sort the General forgetting to sheckle them, they all
ran away and left their assisers to the mercy of our men, weich showed them but
little, at the last it pleased God to give our army the day: it is credebly
reported that there was killed of the chief commanders and assisers about
three hundred besides, the commons, some say a thousand. I have sent you a list
of some of the chief Commanders which were taken prisoners and slain, the
most that any man says were killed of our men were not above twenty and never a
man of note but Marshall Burrowes, but we had several hurt, as Sir Thomas
Lucas cut in the head with a pole-axe, and Major Morris, and Major Hammon shot
they came home the seven and twentieth of March, 1643. The Lord Marbuesse
behaved himself very valiantly and so di all the rest. I pray remember my
service to your partner, and give him thanks for his intelligence, I pray show
him this, with my love to your self I rest and am.

Dublin this 29. of March, 16^3. Your loving friend, Jer. Raddams.

A List of prisoners taken and slain at the bettaile near Rosse the tenth day
of March, 1643.
Prisoners.
Lieutenant General Cvllen, Serant Major Butler Cap. Gelale fitzgerald Cap.
John Butler Cap. fitzgeral of Blake-hall, Cap. Masterson, Cap. Dally Cap. Synod
Ancient Synod Master Newgent Master Edward Butler. Dallowg Marckemorow.

Slain.
Coll. Preston, son to John Preston. Coll. Archibold. Lieutenant Coll. Brown.
of Mulrankin. Cap. Brean. Cap. Tobit. Butler. Cap. Scurlocke. Cap. Henry
Bagnall Cap. Butler. son to the Lord Donboyne. Captain Archibold. Captain
Ewstace. Cap. Long Turlowgh O Dempsijr Quarter Master general second son to
the Lord Dempsiy Sir Morgan Cavanah. M. Tho. Butler son to S. R. Butler. M. Ed.
Butler of Tully M. Walter Butler B. Butler, Edmond Ric. Buteler son to the Lady
margaret. besides 300 more of the best Commanders and Gentlemen slain.

London, Printed for L Chapman, 1643.


