The Fame, Wit, and glory of the West, Here in this Song shall fully be
expressed.
A Caveat for young men wherein they may behold,
how a youngster gave away his Mistress and his Gold;
And Maids likewise may here a lesson learn,
wherein good from bad they may discern;
Learn but this damsels, wit, and then you will find,
a way to fit all suitors in their kind.
To a pleasant new Tune, Called the glory of the West.


A Fair and comely creature,
as ere was framed by nature,
Lived in the west and the glory of the same;
Her maiden life and carriage,
Until her day of marriage;
I of it needs must wright unto her lasting fame,
Most galants did admire,
her beauty with desire,
To enjoy her company.
and her virtues for to try;
But alas poor fools their labor was in vain,
the glory of the west, they never yet could stain;
Your courting, and your complements she would say,
is not the way to win me, I longer mean to stay.
Perhaps you may admire,
and have a great desire,
To know why she was called the glory of the west;
then give but time and leisure,
And to fulfill your pleasure;
her virtues here shall fully be expressed,
She was proper tall and comely,
no parts about her homely,
She had no rolling eye,
nor never used uncivility,
But an amoreus sweet and lovly piersing sight,
her cheeks and her lips was pure red and white,
Her other parts can better be expressed,
by him that now injoyes the glory of the west.
So rare she was and witty,
they called her famous Betty;
Not far from Bristow this gallant spark did live;
her Father was a Cavalior,
And lost his life in service there,
her mother was grown poor, and no portion could her giv^
Which made those gallants think that she
would soon yield up her honesty,
Quoth they we will venture,
her royal fort to enter,
But all their time they spent, alas it was in vain,
the glory of the west, they never yet could stain,
Quoth she you are deceived it is not my poverty,
shall ever make' me yield to your uncivility.
My vergins life i will keep quoth she,
until such time that man I see,
Which I can affect and chase him for my mate;
when that gallant once I find,
That to virtues is inclined
and I can but fancy him, I care not for estate;
If a royal heart he bear,
and can love a Cavelier;
That same promise he must make,
for my noble fathers sake,
Which lost his life and fortunes in the field,
and to no other side my maidenhead I Will yield,
If that he be a Cavalier, tho he be near so poor,
I Will love him, I Will serve him, and honor him the more
GIve ear and listen to my Song,
and I shall tell you are be long,
How she has obtaind a husband to her mind;
a usurer that lived hard by,
Left his Son when he did dye,
Great sums of money, with goods and land behind;
That youngster hearing of this girl,
vowed if either gold or pearl,
Would this damsels favor win,
then he weigh dit not a pin.
Hang money quoth he, my Gold I will let fly,
my father he is dead, I have enough lie by,
A conceit I have now comes into my breast,
which I hope shall obtain the glory of the west.
A kinsman poor I have quoth he.
shall make up this same match for me,
And a hundred pounds on him I will bestow,
he is a comely youth and young,
And knows well how to use his tongue
and he will obtain her for me I do know;
So forth he set this youngster brave,
with money and what else he would have,
For to try his utmost skill,
to obtain this maids good will;
Spare not quoth he it is no matter what you spend,
do the best you can, and be faithful to your friend;
That I will says he, but mark now the Jest,
he consened his kinsman of the glory of the west.
When first he came unto this Maid,
with courteous words he to her said,
Fair damsel I must court you in my kinsmans name;
his father being of his life bereft,
Great means behind him he has left,
and now this youngster injoyeth all the same;
Which on you he will bestow,
if you please it shall be so;
Sir you have spoke enough quoth she,
he is but a fool I plainly see.
Do you present his person, and let him keep his Gold,
now you have your answer, that Riddle pray unfold;
Your Riddle fair Mistress. I quickly understand.
my person and my service shall be at your command.
This gallant damsel fair and bright,
in whom so many took delight;
With this prodigals kinsman was taken so in love,
which when he did perceive and see,
He slipped no opportunity,
but couzened his cozen as afterward did prove;
Sweet heart quoth he I am poor indeed,
which made me fearful to p^ceed;
But what I want in wealth fair maid,
shall be in love and service piad;
Speak no more quoth she, few words I like the best,
if you can love a Cavalier, no more shall be expressed,
Sweet soul says he it is known both far and near,
I have lost all I had, for being a Cavalier.
These lovers being united,
his kinsman was invited;
Over to her house, and he thought to get the less,
but sure a fool he needs must be,
When once he did the Mistress see;
to marry with her maid as after comes to pass,
Qouth she unto this prodigal,
now you have obtained all;
By your kinsmans means quoth she,
pray sweet heart tell to me,
What you will bestow upon him for his pain,
my maid he would marry if a portion he could gain;
He hearing of her words, drew forth a purse of Gold.
and said sweet heart content him as long as it will hold.
Five hundred pound is in it says he,
the rest I freely give to thee;
A Ring likewise he bought her, and a fam^
one thing of you qaoth she I crave,
Our loves so secret I would have;
I would not have it blazed abroad about(...)
So for that time he went a way.
until the appointed marriage day;
Where in private they did meet,
at a Church in Bristow street;
And there his kinsman served him like a clo^
the Mrs. wore the maids clothes, the ma(...)
The Mistress had her Maiden bravely dres^
this fool he did take her for the glory of the (...)
They vales before their faces had,
so eager was this simple lad;
In all the haste he married needs must be^
which being done his kinsman led,
His Mistress and unto him sed,
this maid you must give me which he di^
His Gold he freely gave away,
and his Mistress ^oo I say,
But yet he had enough beside,
his Ring his gown, likewise a bride;
It was too much for such a fool as he,
for to maintain a kinsman his luter for to be;
The clown got the Bride that was so bravely (...)
but his kinsman bore away the glory of the (...)
So from the Church away they went,
this clown at first was well content;
Thinking he had married with the glory of the w^
so homewards then he went apace,
He never looked upon her face,
but took her for her Mistress, she was bravely
His kinsman and his pretty mate,
went smiling after in conseit,
Thinking what the fool would say,
when their vales were took away,
It Is no matter what he said, they had his money^
the maid and the gown, it seems fell to his lot;
I never before did hear of such a pretty Jest,
as here was brought about by the Glory of the w^
Brave gallants went to meet her,
and kindly they did greet her;
But thinking to salute the glory of the west,
they were struck with admiration,
To see such alteration;
but pluking off there wales. they soon perceived (...)
This youngster when he did behold,
he had lost his Mistress and his Gold;
Faith I might a look quoth he,
before that I had leapt so free;
But now the proverb you may plainly see,
marriage and hanging goes by destiny;
Thus unto you I freely have expressed,
The wit and behavior of the glory of the west,
This Song a warning well may be,
to young men when they do it see
If once they go a wooing not to trust another,
and maids if they this Song will learn,
Good from had they may discern,
and this girls behavior they may choose above all oth^
This couple lives most brave they say,
^n Bristow at this present day;
Ever since they did agree,
both in peace and unity;
She never yet would give him cause of strife,
I do wish that every man could say so by his wife;
Young men and maids, this Song (...)
so the glory of the west now bids you (...)
London printed for R. Burton, at the Horse-shooe in Smithfield, 164^


