The Christianity of the People called Quakers Asserted, by George Keith: In
ANSWER to a Sheet, called, A Serious Call to the Quakers, etc.
Attested by Eight Priests of the Church of England, called, Dr. Isham, Rector
of St. Buttolphs-Bishopsgate, Dr. Wincop, Rector of St. Mary Abb-Church, Dr.
Bedford, Rector of St. George Buttolph-Lane. Mr. Altham, M. A. Rector of St.
Andrew Undershaft. Mr. Bradford, M. A. Rector of St. Mary-le-bow. Mr.
Whitfield, M. A. Rect. of St. Mart. at Ludgate. Mr. Butler, M. A. Rector of St.
Mary Aldermanbury. Mr. Adams, M. A. Rector of St. Alban Woodstreet. And
Affirmed by George Keith, or the New Sworn Deacon.

It Is a marvelous thing, that these Men have no other way to oppugn the
Quakers, but by gross and horrid Lies, and false Calumnies, and mere Abuses;
like unto the ways that ever the worst of the Adversaries of Truth have used
against the True Witnesses of it, says G. K. in his Presb. and Indep. Visible
Churches, p. 222, 230. But It never yet has been proved, nor ever will, That
the Religion professed by the sincere and faithful People called in scorn
Quakers, is either Paganism, or any other thing, than Real Christianity, says
G. K. in his Preface to his Serious Appeal.
MEeting with a Sheet, Entitled, A Serious Call; wherein are several
Quotations, already replied unto, in a late Book, Entitled, The Creed-Forgers
detected, etc. Yet seeing they are said to be Attested by the Eight Priests
aforesaid, and Affirmed by George Keith; Exactly to Agree with the Books out of
which they are taken, as Cited in the Margent. We therefore have examined these
following, and find he is mistaken, and so are his Brethren, the eight Priests
aforesaid, as those that will examine his 4th, 6th, 20th, 21st. Quotations may
find; but we know, as to G. K. it is not the first false Affirmation he has
made, both before and since his Ordination, and to gratify his new Brethren,
and to show his Enmity, is licking up, and casting forth again, those things
against us, many of which were cast upon us before ever he was called a Quaker,
although he was about 30 Years or more amongst us, and has not yet granted
that he was Erroneous in any of the Articles of Faith, commonly called, the
Simpliciter Credenda; for he says in his Antichrists and Sadduces, p. 43.
Antichrist. and Sadd. p. 43.
I know no Principles I now hold, but I am able to prove, I have held them ever
since I came among the People called Quakers, as touching all the Articles of
Faith, commonly called the Simpliciter Credenda. Ibid. p. 42.
-- And indeed the greatest Mistakes that I find I have been under, were my
misunderstanding these places of Scripture, Matthew. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 11.26.
For, says he, I remain Constant to my former Principles, Retract. p. 41.
with respect to these great Doctrines of the Christian Faith.

I do therefore, says G. K. Serious Appeal, p. 6, 7.
make this Solemn Appeal to the more Sober, Impartial and Judicious People, to
whose hands this may come, whether Cotton Mather is not extremely uncharitable,
and possessed (as G. K. is) with a Spirit of Prejudice, and envious Zeal (to
use R. Baxter's Phrase) against the Quakers in General, and me in Particular,
as guilty of manifold Heresies, Blasphemies, and strong Delusions, to the
rendering us no Christians in the lowest Degree or Rank (while I suppose he
has some Charity to some in the Church of Rome, called Papists; and to
Lutherans, Arminians, and diverse others that differ widely from him) yet agree
in the aforesaid Fundamentals, when we hold the same Fundamentals of Christian
Doctrine and Faith, notwithstanding C. Mather's strong Asseverations (or G. K's
we may now say) against us, as if we denied almost all, or most of the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian and Protestant Faith; yet he shall never
be able to prove it, That we are guilty of this his so extremely rash and
uncharitable Charge, either as in respect of the Body of that People, called in
Scorn Quakers, or in respect of any particular Writers or Publishers of our
Doctrines, and Principles, and Preachers amongst us. Ibid. p. 7.
-- And it suffices me (and we may say us) and I hope, does to many others,
that according to the best knowledge I have of the People called Quakers, and
these most generally owned by them, as Preachers, and Publishers of their
Faith, of unquestioned esteem amongst them, and worthy of double Honor, as
many such there are; I know none that are guilty of any one of such Heresies
and Blasphemies, as he accuses them. -- And I think I should know, and do
know, these called Quakers, and their Principles Writ 1692.
, -- having been Conversant with them in public Meetings, as well as in
private Discourses, with the most noted and esteemed among them for about
Twenty Eight Years past, and that in many Places of the World, in Europe, and
for these diverse Years in America.

And now concerning Infallibility.
We affirm, said G. K. p. 7.
That the Spirit of God in us, and all Believers, in every Discovery it gives,
is Infallible; yet we have never judged our selves absolutely Infallible; nor
did we ever place or fix an absolute Infallibility upon any Man -- but on the
contrary, that the Dictates and Leadings of God's Spirit in us, Truth's
Defense. P. 65.
are Infallible, and have a direct tendency to Lead, Guide, and Move us
Infallibly.

And if G. K. now thinks it is a vile monstrous Error for any to speak and write
from God, and Christ, Immediately and Infallibly, and that those that have only
gotten the words, and have not the Spirit of God and Christ, are not under the
Curse, and in another Spirit than the Apostles were in, let him.

See Serious Call.
And if he does not, Why does he quote G. F. and esteem it a vile Error, Note.
G. K. did, whilst among the Quakers, vindicate these very Persons, in the same
Doctrines which he now calls Vile Errors; and thereby renders himself
Insincere, in pretending to be ignorant of them.
for his saying, viz. And Thou and You, all that Speak and Write, and not from
God Immediately and Infallibly, as the Apostles did, and Prophets and Christ,
but only have gotten the words: You are all under the Curse, in another Spirit,
Ravened from the Spirit that was in the Apostles.

If this be a vile and monstrous Error, will and does he Assert the contrary,
viz. That all that only have gotten the Words, but are in another Spirit, than
Christ, the Prophets and Apostles were in, do all Write and Speak from God
Immediately and Infallibly, and are not under the Curse, nor ravened from the
Spirit that was in the Apostles: If so, and this be now his Doctrine, he is
changed from what he was when a Quaker, when he Vindicated their Doctrines in
the Name of the Lord; and when he held, as the Quakers still do, all the
Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Faith.

Concerning the Scriptures.
' Geo. Fox says, as quoted, The Scriptures are not Infallible nor Divine, but
Humane. Note. (...)
there are no such words in the place Cited, although it is elsewhere,
notwithstanding the Attestation of the three Doctors, and five Masters of Art,
and Rectors, and G. K's Affirmation to the Truth as Cited: However hear G. K.
G. K 's Truth's Defense, p. 53.


I Answer, That not only the Old Testament, but even the Writings or Letter of
the New Testament, may be called a Killing Letter to those that remain
alienated from the Spirit that quickens, even as Origin has formerly Taught,
in his Commentary on Leviticus. Not only (says he) in the Old Testament is
found the Killing Letter; there is also in the New Testament the Letter which
Kills him who does not spiritually attend unto the things which are spoken.
Now if any go from the Spirit, that only makes the true Gospel Administration,
and set up the Letter or Writing of the Apostles, in the room of the same;
these Writings of the Apostles do eventually become a killing Letter, no less
than that of the Law, and can no more give Life, or make Perfect, than the
outward Law could. --

Ibid. 59.
The Translations of the Scripture (the which Translations are commonly called
Scripture) have diverse Additions, which Men have added without any pretense to
Divine Inspiration. -- The Letter or External Form of the Writing is not
properly the Word of God. 54.
-- By the Word of God in the Scriptures, is not understood the Letter, but
Christ. 49.
Thus far G. K.

And will he now say, Only the bare Writing or Characters, consisting of Ink
and Paper, is properly the Word of God, 47.
and are Infallible, Divine, and not Humane? If G. K. will now so assert, let
him.

Concerning Christ's Coming to Judgment. Is quoted G. W. as follows.
Call.
What is the Glory of the Father, in which Christ's Coming is? Is it visible to
the carnal Eye, and 'where is that Coming to be? Is it now to be looked for
outwardly? G. K. says, G K 's Rector Cor. p. 16.


I do seriously and truly tell thee, as I faithfully believe that Christ did
locally Ascend upwards into the Heavens, whence also he shall Descend at the
time of the Restitution of all things.

And if G. K. has Retracted this, the Quakers see no cause to Retract, nor yet
to affirm that Christ's Coming is Visible to the carnal Eye.

Concerning Heaven and Hell.
Call.
There is none have a Glory and Heaven, but within them: And in Answer to this,
and what W. Penn says, hear G. K. says, Rector Cor. p. 14.


This is no great Riddle nor Paradox to the least Child of the New Jerusalem;
Paul indeed was before in Heaven, and so is every Regenerate Man Note, If every
Regenerate Man is in Heaven, then he has a Heaven within him, or has a Peace
and Joy in him, from Christ.
at present.

Concerning doing Servile Work on the Lord's Day, and the Moral Law.
We might wave till G. K. brought plain and express Scripture, and proved by
plain and express Scripture, and in express Scripture Terms, that the doing of
any Servile Work on the 1st Day of the Week, called here the Lord's Day, is
forbid; and by express Scripture, proves the 1st Day of the Week, and none of
the other Days, is called the Lord's Day, and that Christ is not the Life of a
Christian, or the true Christians Life; and does by express Scripture, and in
plain and express Scripture Terms, prove that it is an Article of Faith or
Doctrine, in common to be believed; but he may expect some Quotations to that
Head; and seeing in this Sheet use is made of a Quotation out of an Appeal, as
it is said, out of a Quakers Book, concerning the Church of England's Ministry,
we refer the Reader to a Sheet, Entitled, Mr. Geo. Keith's Account of a
National Church, and the Ministry of the Church of England; and to the
Animadversions thereon; and also to the Book, Entitled, The Portraiture of Mr.
Geo. Keith, wherein it does appear, what Account G. K. gives concerning the
Ministry of the Church of England, and the Dissenting Ministry; and let him
now, if he will, own or deny them to be Heretical and Antichristian, so far as
they reflect upon the Persons of our Opposers, and most Heretical.

From the foregoing and following Quotations it will appear, what G. K's Belief
was, and the Quakers is, concerning the Ten Articles.

1st, Concerning Infallibility, G. K. says. G. K 's Truth's Defense p, 64.

How unreasonable this Consequence is, I leave unto sober Men to Judge; as to
Conclude, because Men are It Is supposed this should be Fallible.
Infallible, that therefore the Dictate and Light of God's Spirit in Men is
Fallible also; Was not Peter Fallible in some Cases? Yea, Did not he fail
sorely (as well as G. K.) when he denied his Master? Does it therefore follow
that the Dictate or Light of God's Spirit in him was Fallible?

To say that they have no Infallible Spirit, the plain English of which is,
that the Spirit of God, and 'God himself, is Fallible; says G. K. in his
Presb. and Ind. Visible Churches, p. 47.

Concerning the Holy Scriptures, and their being the Only Rule of Faith and
Practice, or to try Spirits, etc. G. K. says. Truth's Defense, p. 65.

It Is no Repugnancy, that one and the same thing be Superior and Inferior in
different Respects,and as it respects different Subjects. But there is no
necessity to understand the Dictate and Light of God's Spirit in diverse Men to
be Superior and Inferior, when it Examines and is Examined, for one equal may
be a Measure or Rule to another, yea, one thing may be said to be a Rule unto
it self, according to that common Maxim or Principle, Linea recta est norma sui
and Obliqui, i. e. A right Line is a Rule of it self, and also of that which is
Crooked. -- The Power of God is the Rule -- For none know truly the Scriptures,
p. 68.
but they who know the Power of God; and therefore that Power which is Life,
Light and Spirit, is the more Principal and Original Rule.

Concerning the Trinity, G. K. says. G. K 's Serious App. p. 2.

The only Exception we have, is against that Unscriptural Term or Phrase of
Three Persons, or a Trinity 'of Persons.

And therefore let all Men know, G. K's Presb and Ind. visib. Churches, p. 58.
to whose hand this may come, That the People called Quakers never denied, but
on the contrary faithfully believed, and do still faithfully believe, whatever
is Recorded, in the holy Scriptures, of that great Mystery; to wit, That God is
One, and that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is that One Only True
and Living God, the Creator and Upholder of all.

Concerning Christ and his Blood.
G. K. says, Ibid. p. 58.
The Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Apostles preached, that died for our Sins, and
rose again for our Justification, is ascended and gone into Heaven, is that
alone Son of God, and that his Body was Crucified, and Buried, did not see
Corruption, that the People called Quakers own.

G. K. says farther, Truth's Defense, p. 228.
I grant neither our Souls nor our Virtues merit Heaven nor Redemption, as
Merit signifies Equality: But seeing God has counted our Souls so dear, as to
give so great a Price for them, as the Blood of his dear Son, they may at least
be said to have some Dignity or Worth (which is to say, Merit) in them,
otherwise God would never have given so great a Ransom for them, if the Souls
of Men, in respect of their Nature and Being, had not been of great Value;
which is all I understand by the word Merit, as used by any of us.

Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
G. K. says, of their Two Sacraments, called Baptism and the Supper: G. K's
Prseb. and Ind. visit. Chuhches.
As for the Term or Word Sacrament, it is no where to be found in all the
English Translations of the Bible, received among Protestants; neither is there
any Word either in the Hebrew or Greek, that does properly answer unto it,
unless they will Translate the Greek Word that signifies Mystery, to signify
a Sacrament; as the old Latin has it in Ephesians. 5.32. Hoc est magnum Sacramentum,
i. e. This is a great Sacrament: For which our English Translation reads,
more properly, This is a great Mystery. But if Sacrament signify Mystery, then
there must be as many Sacraments as Mysteries.

p. 179.
As for Infants Baptism, and Sprinkling a Child of Eight Days or more or less,
on the Forehead, and call it Baptism, it has no footing in all the Scripture,
neither of Precept nor Practice; as will easily appear, by considering the
places of Scripture they cite for it -- as Heb. 9.10, to 22. -- Genesis 17.9. --
we find neither Command nor Practice in all the Scripture, nor was the Practice
of Baptizing Infants in use for an Hundred Years and more after the Apostles
days, among Professors of Christianity.

Ibid. p. 182.
And as for Water Baptism in General, We say, It did only properly belong to
John's Ministry and Dispensation, and is expressly contra-distinguished from the
Baptism of Christ, both by John and also by Christ himself. -- And if any were
Raised up by the Lord, as John was, and could prove and instruct their being
sent to Baptize with Water, as he was; these, to whom they should be sent,
ought gladly to Receive it; but to do it by bare Imitation, or a mere pretended
Call, which they cannot prove to be either Mediate or Immediate, is great
Presumption, yea, Superstition; and to call that a Command of God, which he
has given them no Command to Practice,
is to set up the Precepts of Men in the Room of God's Commandments, as the
Pharisees did of old, and is a taking of his Name in vain, for which he will
not hold them Guiltless. And they can never prove, by all their Art and Skill,
that Water Baptism is Commanded by Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19.
For all God's Commands and Precepts, especially of Public Institution,
relating to the Church, are express, in so many express Words, and are not left
to be gathered by uncertain and doubtful Consequences.

p. 183.
When God sent John to Baptize with Water, Water was expressed; but in the
Apostle's Commission to Baptize, no mention is made of Water, nor no words of
institution commanded to be used.

p. 185.
We grant that Christ had an outward Supper with his Disciples, when he did eat
the Paschal Lamb with them; and this was a real Supper, and not like that which
ye now use, that is neither Substantial Supper nor Dinner, being only a little
Crumb of Bread, scarce so big as a Nut; and a Spoonful of Wine, or two, which
has little outward Substance, and no Inward and Spiritual Signification unto
you -- your Supper is a mere Shadow, and none of Christ's Supper, nor of his
Institution. With much more.

Concerning the Resurrection.
In the said Sheet it is said, They (that is the Quakers) deny the Resurrection
of the Body after Death.

G. K. says, G. K 's Serious Appeal, p. 9.
By W. Penn's words, it is clear to prove the contrary, of a Carnal
Resurrection.

G. K. also says, Presb. and Ind. visib. Churches, p. 227. 228.
That they (i. e. the Quakers) Deny the Resurrection of the Dead.

This is also a most false Charge, which they can never prove: But because we
deny their Carnal Conceptions of the Resurrection, and hold us to
Scripture-words, which is most safe, therefore they have so be-lyed us.

And for the more Satisfaction of the Reader, I refer him to a little Book,
called The Principles of Truth, published by some noted Men of the Quakers; in
which Book it is expressly Affirmed, That we (to wit, the Quakers) believe, That
the same Body which is laid down, shall be Raised up at the Resurrection of the
Dead, as much as a Natural Body can be the same with a Spiritual Body, or an
Earthly Body can be the same with a Heavenly Body, according to the Scripture's
Testimony; It is sown Natural, but raised Spiritual; and the Glory of the
Heavenly is one, and the Glory of the Earthly is another; and this may satisfy
any sober Inquirer. And Paul, writing concerning the Resurrection of the Dead,
says, That is not first which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural (or
Animal, and afterward that which is Spiritual) 1 Cor. 15.46. And verse. 49. As
we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly.

Concerning that called the Sabbath.
The Posts. also says, Ser. Call.
They, the Quakers, do allow doing Servile Work on the Lord's Day.

G. K. says, Presb. and Ind. visib. Churches. p. 190. 191.
Concerning that ye call your Christian-Sabbath, which ye say is the First Day
of the Week, -- but ye bring no sober Proof for any such Change, and the
Scriptures ye cite say no such thing, as Genesis 2.2, 3. Rev. 1.10. Exodus 20.8,
10. Mat. 5.17. For that outward Sabbath, that was enjoined unto them was a Sign
and Figure. -- And when the pure Gospel and Christian Dispensation did take
place, all these Figurative and Shadowy Sabbaths were changed to the Substance,
and that Substance or Body is Christ, according to Col. 2.17. With much more on
this Head.

And now, hear G. K. farther, in his Preface to his Serious Appeal.

Concerning the Quakers.
Preface to Serious Appeal.
It never yet has been proved, nor ever will be, i. e. That the Religion,
professed by the sincere and 'faithful People, called in scorn Quakers, is
either Paganism, or any other thing than real Christianity.

Concerning the Quakers Preachers, and Publishers of their Doctrine.
G. K. says, Serious Appeal. p. 7.
The People called Quakers, and these most generally owned by them; as
Preachers and Publishers of their Faith, of unquestionable esteem among them,
and worthy of double Honor, as many such there are; I know none that are
guilty of any such Heresies and Blasphemies.

Concerning G. Fox.
G. K. says, Rect. Cor. p. 111.
Whom the Lord has indeed made a worthy Instrument unto us, and among us, and
yet I hope shall unto many more, and who is safe in the Hand of Him that
holds the Seven Stars, and the Seven Golden Candlesticks in his Right Hand:
And all thy Malicious Reviling, and Slanderous Defamation of him, cannot
diminish any thing from that true Honor wherewith the Lord has Honored him,
and other Faithful Laborers with him, whom the Lord has raised up, in this
Day of the Appearance of his Great and Mighty Power.

Now can G. Keith in Truth and Sincerity say more of and for, 1st, That
Religion he now Professes. 2dly, Of those People he is now joined unto. 3dly,
Of the Preachers and Publishers of their Faith. 4thly, Of any Man or Men
amongst them, then he has of G. Fox, and other Faithful Laborers with him
among the Quakers? I'ts left to the Judgment of all Serious Christians.

'And all good Christians (as in the Postscript to Serious Call) are desired to
have this Sheet in their 'Houses, and to show it to their Neighbors as they
have opportunity, that they may see the Christianity of the Quakers, and G.
Keith also, Whilst a Quaker.
and enquire if ever they see, heard or read of any Man that has done like
him, that pretended to be so many Years sound, as to the Fundamentals of
Christianity, and all the Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and that has
made so bold with the Name of the Lord, and pretended to such Zeal and Concern
for God, to contradict himself, and feignedly to say, He judges it his Duty
from true Conviction, and out of real Love to Truth, to say and unsay, and so
confidently Assert he does it freely and humbly; Can you think this is a
Teacher sent or called of God, commissionated by Christ, guided by his Spirit,
and fit to Follow, or to Preach up that Dispensation, of which it is said, every
Man shall speak the Truth to his Neighbor? And are the so called Doctors, and
Rectors, and those that abet him, to be commended for their Wisdom? And do they
thereby Demonstrate that they have, are in, or are guided by, the Wisdom of
God, and his Holy Spirit (by which so many as are the Sons of God are led) in
their joining with this Man? It Is hoped, if you that follow George Keith. etc.
will duly and well consider these things, you will not only Renounce him, but
consider that his evil Works, and those that Join with him therein, ought to be
forsaken, and that it will be more for your Profit, and tend more to your Inward
Peace and Christian Reputation, to hearken to the Voice of Christ in your own
Hearts, and to mind that Light by which all things that are reproved are made
manifest, and believe in him who said, I am the Light of the World, and
exhorted to learn of him, who will teach you freely; and no longer to follow
him and such Preachers, if you would be Christians indeed, and then it is hoped
you will acknowledge, viz. as G. K. says, p. 230. of his Presb. and Ind.
visible Churches.

It had been more Manly and seemingly Christian, (for G. K. and his Abettors)
or any others of their Sect or Society, fairly to have stated the Quakers
Principles, and then to have refuted them by the best or strongest Arguments
they could find: But this none of them have done [and he truly has said, They
never can] nor did I ever see to this day, any one Writer, that did write
against the Quakers, that did fairly state their Principles, but miserably
be-lyed and abused them, (as G. K. has) either by affirming things to be their
Principles which were not, or by so unfairly Representing and Wresting the
words of our Honest Friends, by their Addings and Diminishings, that they could
not at all acknowledge them as such; all which is a manifest Evidence of the
Weakness and Badness of their Cause, as well as of that evil Conscience that is
in them, when they use such unlawful ways and means to defend themselves, or to
oppugn others. Consider, by what is herein, and what G. K. says, p. 15. of his
Exact. N^r. and Preface thereto, whether he has not proved himself an
Apostate, a great Hypocrite, stark Mad, and Crased in his Understanding.


Published on Behalf of the People called Quakers, by some of them.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
1700.


