The ghost of K. Charles and Serieant Bradsha. BEING A DISCOURSE Betwixt Charles
late King OF ENGLAND The Archbishop of Canterbury and Sergeant John Bradshaw.
Wherein the unjust Proceedings at the trial of the late King in the High-Court
of justice are justly discovered: the full manner of it d^bated and the whole
course of affairs from the beginning of the wars to these present times, fully
and most lively Represented. Together, with the means to preserve both Church
and State from the great and gaping ruins which do threaten to Devour t^em.



London Printed in the Year 1649.

The Discourse between the Ghost of King Chahles; the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and President John Bradshaw.
Charles. IS there such a Confusion then in England?


Arch-Bishope. Yes, and it please your Majesty.


King. But are you sure of it.


Arch-bish. As sure as God is the God of Order.


King. God indeed is the God of order, he made the world in order number and
measure, and if people could be but so kind unto themselves as to apprehend it,
so he will be worshipped, he will be worshipped according unto order, for, God
is the God of order, and not of Confusion: How happily was England governed in
the days of Queen Elizabeth? and of King James my father? How gently did she
fee the Reins of my command? until at last being full of high feeding she got
the Bit into her teeth and madly running away with Governor Government and
all, she desprately plunged her self into a Sea of all manner of Calamities.


Arch. And where now she may sooner find the leisure to repent then the means
to return to that happy condition which she first enjoyed.


King. How were her hands then filled with the blessings of peace, and her
heart with gladness? How were her chests filled with treasures, which feared
not so much to be then broken open by the hands of the spoylers as by a nearer
violence from their own abundance.


Arch. And yet how little could she contribute to your Majesty's growing
necessities out of them? the very demands of tunage and poundage, and ship-mony
were evry where cried down every where as a burden insupportable.


King. My Subjects longed after those Parliaments of which my father and I had
reason to be jealous and which the people afterward (who before idolized them)
did find so tedious unto them: But that was not all, there was another thing
which estranged their affections from me and for that in tr^th my lord in^o a
great measure (may complain of you.


Arch. Complain of me!


King. I of you my Lord: for when Archbishop A^bot lived he kept the Church in
such an order according to the true Protestant Principles, that having my
countenance in all things I did pe^rake in the same praise with him. Indeed he
managed the affairs of the Church with Circumspection, and judgment, and did
all thing in Rule, and as I may say was a man in print.


Arch. But of the Geneva Print.


King. Now my Lord, after that by Buckinghams persuasions, I first countenanced
you you were looked upon by all men to be Abbots successor, and to be inclined
unto those who professed the Religion of the Church of Rome, and many strange
presages were made what would become of the English Church under such a
prelate, and under such a King who was condemned by many to have as well
espous^d the Religion as the daughter of the King of France.


Arch. But in that I can vindicate your Majesty who have received from yo many
Orders for putting the Laws in practice that were made to take hold of the
Rescusants, and for the banishing of all Jesuits out of the Land, such only
accepted that were precisely to wait on the Queen, and to exercise their
Religion in her own Chapel.


King. My life and death can sufficiently witness my Religion to all the World
for though I affected the Queen most entirely, and made good in effect the
first words that ever J spoke unto her, which were that I would no longer be
Master of my self then I wa^ servant unto her, though J might be an example of
conjugall affection unto all the Land, yet J should be loath to be found so
uxorious as to offend my God, to please a Woman, and turn Religion into
Jdolatry* for whatsoever a man loves more then God be it Honor or Wealth, or
Wife, he makes it his Mahomet and his Jdoll: But to deal plainly with you my
Lord you were too indulgent to the superstition of the church of Rome, for
although J am confident you were no Papist, yet you gave too great a toleration
and countenance to many things which by degrees did threaten to Usher in all
the rest Do you remember the book which Pembroke brought me, and said it was
licensed by your Chaplain.


Arch. The Introduction to a devout life.


King. Yes, that methinks I hear him still swearing against it, the book was
indeed too blame, you transferred the faults thereof to your Chaplain, your
Chaplain to the Author who inserted those errors into it after that it was
licensed, but certain it is the book gave a just occasion of offense to m^n of
more sound and settled Judgments then ever Pembrokes was.


Arch. It was therefore by your Majesty's Command ca^^ed in.


King. And if it had been burned, it had been no matter but that is not all,
not lon^ afterward you brought in some alterations into the English Church,
the railing in of the Alter, the bowing to it, or to the Cushion on it, with
some other Novelties, were the powerful arguments which did set the peoples
tongues against you, and their tongues and hearts against me, believing that I
did not only privately allow of it but under hand did prompt, and encourage
you unto it.


Arch. I did no more then what was practiced in the times of the fathers of the
Church as I am able to justify by their own writings, both in Greek, and
Latin, before ever that the Name of Pope was heard of a Name which I never
stood affected to.


King. But to the Name of Patr^arch you have; The ^imes (indeed) we lived in,
were so toasty and touchy, that they would not endure to hear of any thing
which savoured of the least introduction of Novelty, but he alterations in the
English Church did not so much afflict me, as the innovations which you would
have brought into the Church of Scotland who being a people intracttable in
their Judgments, had their recourse presently unto arms and how dismal the
event has been, there are none can give a greater testimony of it then
Stafford, and you, and I.


Arch. Without all Contradiction the English Church as i^ was governed by
Bishops was the purest Church in Europe, many separatists from beyond the Seas
coming over to carps at their Pomp, and greatness departed from them admiring
at their order; The Keys were then kept in safe hands, which were no sooner
taken from them but Sacrilege, and prophanness unlocked the doors, and an Army
of H^^esies invaded the Temples, and the Chancells of God; I had well shoped
that England and Scotland being so happy, under one Governor, would agree
under one Church Government and that the more ^obs^ure would have yeileed to
the purer, and the more ^ough to the more beautiful.


King. Too late I find, that it is a safer po^icy to let a little imperfection
or disparity alone in a Church or State, th^n to go about to alter it,
especially when ambition, rapine and murder may be laid upon the account of
Relligion, then let the people look unto their libertyes, and the King unto his
Crown and Soveraighnty, or to his life more deer unto him then both; but see
who comes here.


Arch. I know him not.


King. But I do, it is Bradshaw, who at his high Court of Justice, condemned
me to lose my head.


Arch. How the shaddows flock about him as if the sight of such a Ghost was
strange in this place. It looks as if it would be spoken to


King. Friend! were not you my Judge.


Bradshaw. I will never ^drny under ground what I have done above it; King
Charles, I was.


King. And you would not give me leave to speak for my self, but now I hope I
may be heard both for my self, and my friends too.


Brad. Your Majesty may speak your pleasure, I shall answer as far as the
letter of the law shall direct me, Currat Lex is the Proverb that I looked
after.


Arch. You should then have looked to the beginning of the Proverb Serjeent.


Brad. What Is that?


Arch. V. vat Rex; Let the King live, and let the Law take its course; Then you
had done well, and neither the King nor you might peradventure have so soon
descended into these subterranean Countries. But what Law made you a Judge to
judge your King.


King. Answer to that Sir?


Brad. I was indeed drawn unto it with much Relactancy of Spirit, but having
once satisfy a my self I was resolved to go through with it.


Arch. Did not the sale of the Bishops lands present you with a hierarchy of
Angels to satisfy you, and confirm you in your pious Religion.


Brad. Knew of no other Angel but the good Angel within me, my Conscience
which by such an Act did promise much Peace unto me


King. Peace, O horrible, had Zimri peace who slew his Master? it was your
ambition that did tempt you to it, the Lordly title of a President and the
estate of the Lord G^ttington to be conferred upon you to maintain that title
besides many other Donations and improvements.


Brad. It was the high Court of justice and not I that sentenced your Majesty I
am glad to see your Majesty.


King. You use the very same Distinction on your self as you di^ on me when you
sentenced me to death, you distinguished between the Office of a King, and the
Errors of a King, and now to excuse your self for what you have done, you
distinguish between John Bradshaw Sergeant at Law, and John Bradshaw President
of the High-Court of Justice


Brad. Yes, Presiden of the High Court of justice.


King. J will tell you one thing, show me but such another Court in all the
Subterranean Kingdoms as your High Court of Justice, even in the most Dismal
and the most hideous plates of them, and J am not so much your Enemy but J will
do the best J can to make you President of it, because you are so glad (you
say) to see me.


Brad. After you were dead you were cailed the White King all England over, hus
now J see you are white indeed.


King. You would have me to thank you would you not for making me so.


Bradsh. There are a great (...) of tho Nobility and Gentry of the Land that
still do honor both you and yours.


King. Could they send none but you unto you to acquaint me with it.


Brad. And if your Majesty please J will declare their several Names unto you.


King. O by no means, the craft and courtesy of Hell, this is a new P^ot
indeed, for you even after death to cajo^e me, and to trappan my friends, who
being thus discovered and laid open by you will be exposed to the malice and
the Avarice of all their armed Advarsari^s ^b^y may thus be charged and charged
again.


B^rad Charged.


King. I sir charged, do you remember the unjust charge that you procured to be
read against me, for beginning a war traitorously and malliciously against the
Parliament, and for the same you adjudged me as a Tyrant traitor, and a
murderer to be put to death by severing my head from my body, when let any man
(as I pleaded) look upon the Dates of the Commissions, the Commissions which
the Parliament gave, and the Commisions which I g^ve a^ also upon the
Declarations which they published, and which I published and they w^ll clearly
see that it was they who began these troubles, and not I my self. Is a King to
be questiond who when his Subjects are in the field and determing his death
does put on arms to preserve his now life If that a crime in a King which is a
Virtue in a Subject. Is that unpardonable in me, which by the Laws of God and
man is commendable in all the world? Trust me sir, allthough I am dead, yet the
law will l^ve. It was no false expression which your Protector ma^e when after
some words of slovenly ind^gnation he told his Cou^sailers that he had more to
do to conquer two or thee musty laws then three Nations I shall repeat my
dying words, I am as much or m^re for the liberty of my people then any who
soe^er that have preten^ed for them I am sor^y at the ^eart to hear of their
d^struction, and burdens, and I b^seech God to ease, and reconcile them, J
beseech God to sened his Spir^t, amongst them which is the Spirit of Trut^ and
V^ity, J beseech God to vouchsafe them such a peace that b^ing all of one mind,
and one affection they becom^ as ^uch the envy of other Nati^ns as they are now
their scorn; These last words he exp^essed with so much candor, and piety, and
with such a ferventy of a d^vout desire that the Spirits of just and righteous
men, who did round in compass him, and who in Death do enjoy that peace which
on earth they did pursu^ did see^ to al them to partake with him in the same
integrity of affections and the Elysian fields d^d ring with the Acclamations
which they made.


The End.

