The Gelding of the Devil.
OR, The prittiesst Jest that e're was known,
How the Bakers wife her skill has shown,
Then listen a while, and I the news will tell,
Betwixt the Baker and the Devil of Hell.

To a dainty new Tune called, The Gelding of the Devil: Or, the Card Players.


A Pretty jest I will you tell,
Of the gelding of the Devil of Hell;
There was a Baker of Mansfield Town,
To Nottingham Market he was bound:
And riding under the Willows clear,
The Baker sung with a merry cheer;
And riding under the willows clear,
The Bakers Horse was lusty and sound,
Well worth in Judgment full five pound;
His skin was smooth and his flesh was fat,
His Master was well pleased at that:
Which made him sing so merrily,
As he was passing on the way;
Which made him sing, etc.
But as he rode over the Hill,
There met he with the Devil of Hell:
O Baker, Baker, then cried he,
How came thy horse so fat to be?
These be the words the baker did say,
Because his Stones be cut away;
these be the words, etc.
Thou shall Geld me before thou do go,
Then (quoth the Devil) if it be so,
First tie thy horse to yonder tree,
And with thy Knife come and geld me:
The baker had a Knife for the nonce,
Wherewith to cut out the Devils stones.
The Baker had a Knife for the nonce,
The baker as it came to pass,
In have alighted from his horse,
And the Devil on his back he lay,
While the baker cut his stones away,
Which put the Devil to great pain,
And made him to cry out amain:
Which put the Devil to great pain,
OH quoth the Devil, be shrew thy heart,
Thou do not feel how I do smart;
And for the deed which thou have done,
I will revenged be again:
And underneath this green-wood tree,
Next Market Day I will geld thee:
And underneath this green-wood tree,
Next market day I will geld thee.
The Baker then but little said,
But at his heart was sore afraid:
He durst no longer then to stay,
But he rod home another way;
And coming to his Wife did tell
How he had gelt the Devil of Hell:
And coming to his wife, etc.
Moreover to his wife he told,
A tale that made her heart full cold;
How that the Devil did say,
That he would geld him next Market Day:
Oh, quoth the good-wife without doubt,
I had rather both thy eyes were out:
Oh, quoth the good-wife, etc.
For then all the People far and near,
That knows thee, will both mock and fear;
And good-wives they will chide and brawl;
And stoneless Gelding will thee call:
Then hold content and be thou wise,
And i will some pretty trick devise;
then hold, etc.
I Will make the Devil change his Note,
Give me thy Hat, thy Band and Coat;
Thy Hose and Doublet eke also,
And I like to a man will go:
I Will warrant thee next Market Day,
To fright the Devil quite away:
I Will warrant thee, etc.
When the Bakers wife she was so dressed,
With all her bread upon her beast,
To Nottingham Market that brave Town,
To sell her bread both white and brown:
And riding merrily over the Hill,
Oh there she spied two Devils of Hell:
And riding, etc.
A little Devil and an (...)
As they were playing both together;
Oh, oh, quoth the Devil then right fain,
Here comes the baker riding amain:
Now be thou well or be thou woe,
I will geld thee before thou do go,
Now be thou, etc.
The bakers wife to the Devil did say,
Sir I was gelded yesterday;
Oh, quoth the Devil I mean to see,
And pulling her Coats above knee her,
And so looking upward from the ground,
Oh, there he spied a terrible wound,
And so looking, etc.
Oh, quoth the Devil, now I see,
He was not cunning that gelded thee;
For when he had cut out thy Stones,
He should have closed up thy wounds
But if thou wilt stay some little space,
I Will fetch some Salve to cure the place,
But if thou wilt stay, etc.
He had not rid but a little way,
But up her belly crept a Flea,
The little Devil seeing that,
He up with his Paw and gave her a pat:
Which made the good wife for to start,
And with that she let go a Rowzing Fart,
which made the, etc.
Oh, oh, quoth the Devil, thy life is not long
Thy breath it smells so horrible strong;
Therefore go thy way and make thy will,
Thy wounds are past all humane skill;
Be gone, be gone, make no delay,
For here thou shall no longer stay:
Be gone, be gone, etc.
The good-wife with this news was glad,
So she left the Devil almost mad;
And when she to her Husband came,
With joyful heart she told the same,
How she had cozened the Devil of Hell,
Which pleased her Husband wondrous well
How she had cozened the Devil of Hell
which pleased her husband wondrous wel^
(...)


