A Guide to DEVOTION: OR, THE Penitent Souls Daily Practice.

CONTAINING, Godly Prayers for several Occasions; With Heavenly Meditations,
and Graces before and after Meat.

Together with a short Catechism for the better Instruction in the Christian
Religion. Also the Holy Sayings of several of the Ancient Fathers of the
Primitive Church.

Very profitable for all people, and useful for Families.

portrait of the king

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on London Bridge

A Guide to DEVOTION: OR, The Penitent Souls daily Practice, etc.
Psalm. 5. ver. 2. O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King and my
God, for unto thee will I make my Prayer.
Directions for a Religious and Holy Life, and what Prayer is.
WHosoever thou art that read this Book, give me leave to set down how
necessary Prayer is, in order to a Holy and Religious Life; by the
consideration of our manifold wants, our Soul are lifted up unto God in Prayer,
to beg pardon and forgiveness for all our Sins and Transgressions which we have
committed. e^ther in thought, word or deed: and sin e our sins are more in
number then the hairs of our Head, the ^tars in the Firmament, or the Sand on
the Sea^hore; we ought to imitate the Prophet David, who says thus, In the
Evening and Morning, and at Noonday shall I pray, and that instantly, and he
will hear my voice, Psalm. 55. ver. 17. the Meditation of our own sins does
sufficiently show that we have of our selves no manner of Grace ^r Spiritual
Goodness: for Solomon asks the question in Proverbs 20. ver. 9. Who can say I
have made my heart clean, I am pure from Sin? Moreover, seeing that we are
daily assaulted with sundry Temptations, we have just cause to pray daily for
the contempt of all Earthly things, for the denial of our own sinful
Affections, for tranquillity of Mind and comfort in Adversi^y, for Heavenly
Wisdom to direct us in the various accidents that we meet with in this present
World: therefore create in us clean Hearts, and renew right Spirits within us,
that we may all obtain the end of our hopes, even the forgiveness of our Sins,
and the salvation of our immortal^ Souls.

A Prayer for Sunday Morning.
O Most Holy Lord God, I humbly beseech thee, pardon and and forgive all my
transgressions, and grant me thy Grace, that I man set my affections on things
in Heaven and no^ on things on Earth; mortify in me the lov^ of this World,
that the love of thee man increase; preserve me by the aid of thy holy Spirit,
and grant that I may always submit unto thy Will, and keep thy Commandments: O
Lord make me a Child of the light and of the day, that I may walk soberly,
chastely, and Honestly, preserve me this day from all evil; O Lord, I beseech
thee, keep my Soul, keep me from falling, and present me faultless before thy
great and terrible Tribunal, at the last day, for into thy merciful hands I
recommend my Spirit, my Soul, my Body, thou have Created them: O Lord thou God
of Truth, grant that whatsoever I shall hear this day with my outward Ears, may
be so grafted in my Heart, that it may bring forth inwardly the fruit of good
living, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior; Amen.

A Prayer for Sun^y Night.
O Lord my Heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, by whose providence
both the day and the night are governed, vouchsafe I beseech thee, as thou have
this day preserved me by thy goodness, so ^his night shadow me under the
blessed Wings of thy most mighty protection, and co^er me with thy Heavenly
Mercy, that neither the Prince of darkness may have power over me, nor the
works of darkness overwhelm me: pardon I beseech thee, my manifold Sins
committed against thee, especially my neglect of keeping holy this day past,
defend me from Satan that roaring Lion that seeks day and night to devour me,
arm me with thy defense, that I may be preserved from all adversities which may
happen to my Body, and from all evil thoughts that may assault and defile my
Soul; protect me this night from all dangers, when I lay me down in peace to
take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that make me to dwell in safety, grant
my Petition for the Merit of my dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Amen.

A Prayer for every Morning in the Week.
O Eternal and ever-blessed Lord God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, thou turnest
the shadow of Death into the morning, and renewest the face of the Earth, thou
do dispel the darkness by the presence of the light, and separatest the night
and bring in the day: O Lord blot out, for thy mercies sake all my
iniquities, and scatter thy transgressions as a morning cloud; vouchsafe to
keep me this day without sin, uphold me when I am falling, and lift me up when
I am down, let me do nothing that shall make my heart to ache, or be a scandal
unto me, but let my doi^gs be such that they may never hurt either my self or
Neighbors: preserve my going out and coming in, from this time forth and for
evermore, and prosper me thy Servant this day, and grant me mercy in the sight
of all I shall meet with, for the sake of my blessed Savior and Redeemer,
Jesus Christ my Lord; Amen.

Another Morning Prayer for every day in the Week.
O Eternal God, Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, with the Eyes of
compassion look down upon me thy poor afflicted Servant, laden with sin and
iniquity, and pressed down with the sense of thy Wrath, who comes not in my own
name or merits to prostrate my self before thee, but in the name and merits of
^hy dear Son our blessed Lord and Savior, in whom thou art well pleased, for
his sake, O most merciful Father, pardon all my sins that are past, and keep me
this day from committing any sin, or provoking thy divine Majesty, in thought,
word or deed, but so guide and direct me, that all my doings may tend to thy
honor and glory, to the peace and welfare of my own Soul, for the sake of thy
Son and my only Savior, who with thee and thy Holy Spirit lives and reigns
one God World without end: Amen.

A Prayer for every Night in the Week
O Most glorious Lord God, whose dwelling is in the highest Heavens, and yet
beholdest the lowl^ and humble upon Earth; look down I hum^ly bes^ech thee,
upon me a miserable sinner, who prostrate my self at the Footstool of thy
Mercy, confessing my manifo d sins and transgressions, that am by nature a^
Child of Wrath, and deserve to be plunged into e^erlasting Torments, but great
is thy mercy O Lord, and therefore I sue unto thee for pardon and forgiveness:
my sins are many in number, more then the hairs of my Head, the Stars in the
Firmament, or the Sands on the Sea shore, but thy mercies are without number:
let me O Lord. be absolved by the merits of my blessed Savior, pardon the
sinful course of my life past, and guide me by thy holy Spirit, for the time to
come, and keep me this night from all evil and danger, f r the sake of Jesus
Christ my Lord and only S viour; Amen.

Another Prayer for every Night in the Week.
O Lord God, most excellent and good thou art to them that serve thee, be
pleased to look down from Heaven upon me a sinful creature, which am not worthy
to take thy Holy Name with my poluted lips, vouchsafe O Lord to pardon all my
sins, for the sake of thy Son, my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and take
a care and charge over me this night, and preserve me from all dangers, that I
may lie down and take my natural rest, and arise safe and sound the next
morning, and serve thee with a true Heart, that all my doing may be acceptable
in thy sight: grant this and what else thou think requisite for my Soul or
Body, and that the power of Sin may dye daily in me, and that thy Grace may
increase and abound; seal in my heart the assurance of my Adoption, that my
Conversation may testify I am thy Child, weaning my heart from sin, purify me
with thy Spirit, protect me with thy grace, preserve me for thy self, prepare
me for thy Kingdom, for Jesus Christ his sake; Amen.

A Prayer for the King and Royal Family.
MOst Holy Lord God, thou art the great preserver of Princes, bless our most
gracious King James, grant him a long and happy Reign, and make his Throne as
the days of Heaven: Bless our most grac ous Queen Mary, Katherine the Queen
Dowager, their Royal Highnesses, Mary Princess of Orange, and the Princess Ann
of Denmark, and all the Royal Fam ly; govern them with thy Holy Spirit,
preserve them with the blessings of goodness, and grant them Everlasting
Felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior and Redeemer; Amen.

A Morning Prayer for a Family every day in the Week.
ALmighty God, we sue unto thee to have mercy upon us, who have violated thy
Laws and broken thy Commandments; mortifye, we humbly beseech thee, every day
more and more all sinful lusts and affections, and quicken in us all saving
Graces; increase our Faith, confirm our Hope, inflame our Charity; teach us to
imitate the life of Christ; teach us humility, patience, meekness, gentleness,
chastity, temperance: teach us to contemn all Earthly things, to deny our
selves, and to overcome the World; grant us consolation in adversity, victory
in temptations, a blessed departure out of this life, and a blessed
Resurrection unto life Everlasting. Bless every Family in this Kingdom,
especially this and all that belong to it, bless our Parents, Brethren,
Sisters, Kinsfolks, Benefactors and Friends, forgive our Enemies and show pity
and compassion to all that are afflicted and in misery, relieve thou them
according to their several wants and Necessities; Be thou a Father to the
Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, a comfort to the comfortless, a
deliverer to the Captive, and a Physician to the sick; Accept our thanksgiving
for preserving us ever since we were born, for defending us this last night
from all perils and danger, and for thy mercies renewed unto this morning; and
this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake; Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a Family every day in the Week.
O Almighty God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, we confess that thou made us
after thine own Image, thou did cloth us with Innocence as a garment, but
we have defaced and cast off our first covering; our Parents sinned against
thee, and we have sinned in them; they we corrupted, and we are inheritors of
their corruption; they were the Parents of disobedience, and we are their
unhappy Children, we lived in darkness and in the shadow of Death, till thou
gave us thy word to be a Lanthorn unto our Feet and a Light unto our paths,
that to walk in the way of truth we might attain everlasting life, but we have
loved darkness more then light, because our deeds are evil, our hearts every
hour imagine wickedness: in the day of health and Prosperity we forget thee,
and never think upon the day of Sickness and adversity; thy many benefits
heaped upon us, do not allure us to be obedient unto thee, neither do thy
Judgments inflicted upon others, make us afraid to offend thee; what could
thou. O Lord, have done more for us, then in sending thy Son in the fullness of
time, to take our Nature upon him to fulfill thy Law for us, and to be
Crucified for our sins; we have not followed the Examples of his holy life, but
have every day crucified him afresh by our sins; and now O Heavenly Father, we
humbly beg thy blessing upon us this night, and grant us a peaceable rest to
refresh our weak bodies, and thy Heavenly food to refresh our poor Souls: there
is mercy with thee O God, and that mercy we here implore for the merits and
mediation of Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior; Amen.

Heavenly Meditations to ponder with ones self.
OUr Life is a Warfare, and every Christian is a Soldier, the Army consists of
good and evil motions, whilst they contend, how is my heart strangely tossed
too and fro, yet cheer up O my Soul, and take courage in the reward that is set
before thee, so fight that thou may conquer; so run that thou may obtain;
let not the policy of the Devil dismay thee, nor thy own weakness discourage
thee, but laying aside all fear, trust in one that is mighty, fear not the
fiery Darts of Satan, nor be afraid of his Arrows that fly against you, but
press toward the great reward which is Eternal life, in a Kingdom where is
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore: Consider well for whom you contend,
it is for my God that you stand in defiance of my Spiritual Enemy and rebellious
lusts, who will not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able to bear, for
when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him. Iam. 1. ver. 12. And Rev. 2. ver. 10. Be thou
faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Thus may a good man
be comforted and encouraged to proceed in the way of Holy living, that when
this life is ended, he may live with Saints and Angels to all Eternity.

Several Graces to be said before and after Meat.
A Grace before Meat.
MOst Gracious God and merciful Father, we beseech thee, sanctify these thy
good creatures to our use, and make them healthful for our nourishments, and us
thankful for all thy blessings, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another Grace before Meat
LOrd, sanctify these thy good Creatures which thou have prepared f^r our use,
and make us truly thankful for all thy Mercies which we have received from
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

Another Grace before Meat.
GRant, O merciful Father, as thou have been pleased to grant us life unto this
moment, thou would feed our Bodies with these thy good Creatures, and our
Souls with spiritual food, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Grace after Meat.
O Heavenly Father, we give thee most Humble and hearty thanks for these thy
creatures bestowed upon us at this time, beseeching thee likewise to feed our
Souls with Heavenly food, for the sake of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Another Grace after Meat.
WE return thee thanks, O merciful Father, for these and all other Blessings
bestowed upon us; Lord grant and bestow upon us likewise Heavenly Food for the
refreshing our Souls, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Another Grace after Meat.
O Most gracious God and merciful Father, we give thee thanks for feeding our
Bodies with these thy good Creatures to this temporal life, beseeching thee
likewise to feed our Souls with thy Heavenly Mercies, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

A short Catechism for the better Instruction of Children in the Christian
Religion.
Q WHo Created the World, and the Creatures therein?

A. God.

Q. In what time were they Created?

A. In six days, for on the seventh God rested from his Labor.

Q. Of what was Man made?

A. Of the Dust of the Earth.

Q. How came he by a Rational Soul?

A. God breathed into him the breath of Life.

Q. Of what was Woman made?

A. Of the substance of the Man.

Q. How does that appear?

A. God cast Adam into a deep sleep, and took from his side a Rib, of which he
made Woman, and gave her him as a help meet.

Q. Was Man made in a state of Innocence?

A. Yes, and placed in Paradise the Garden of God, and all Creatures subjected
to him.

Q. How came he to fall from that blessedness?

A. By disobeying the Command of his Maker, and defacing by Sin his lively
Image stamped on him.

Q. In what did he disobey?

A. In earing the forbidden Fruit, which distinguished Good and Evil.

Q. How came he to eat?

A. By the suggestion of the Woman, whom the Serpent (or rather the Devil)
begu^led, with gilded allurements.

Q. What was their Punishment?

A. Death, and the loss of Paradise.

Q. Was there no hopes left?

A. Yes; The Great Creators promises in the Seed of the Woman.

Q. As how?

A. That her Seed should break the Serpents Head.

Q. And is that promise fulfilled?

A. Yes, in the Birth of our blessed Savior, that Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
that Star of Jacob.

Q. And was he the promised Seed that should redeem us from the Bondage of
Satan?

A. Yes, for laying aside his glory and brightness, in the fullness of time he
suffered himself to be born of a spotless Virgin, and so became perfect God and
perfect Man.

Q. Why was he God?

A. That he might satisfy his Fathers Justice for the Sins of Mankind, by
sustaining the weight of his Wrath, which as Man he could not not do.

Q. Why was he Man?

A. That he might be capable of laying down his Life to redeem us from Death.

Q. What was the Office of Christ?

A. To become a Mediator for us, and reconcile us to his offended Father, and
is styled a Priest, a Prophet, and a King.

Q. What benefit do we receive by his Death?

A. We are restored to a state of Grace and a possibility of Salvation.

Q. On what terms?

A. If through Faith we lay hold of him as offered in the Gospel, and receive
him upon his own terms of Salvation.

Q. What are they?

A. Repentance and obedience, a hearty sorrow for sin, and a resolution to
struggle with Temptation to the utmost.

Q. How is the Faith wrought in us, by which we receive Christ?

A. By the outward hearing the Word, and the inward motion of the Spirit.

Q. How is it increased?

A. By often hearing and meditating on the Sacred Promises in the Gospel, and
by Prayer and the like.

Q. How must we pray?

A. In Faith with Reverence, Fervency and Charity.

Q. What must we do after Prayer?

A. We must observe what answer we receive.

Q. Who can or may pray with hope to be heard?

A. Those that are unwilling to Sin and resolve not to offend, but are, as far
as human^ frailty will admit, conformable to the Will of God, revealed in the
Gospel.

Q. What else?

A. Above all, to observe those Vows pledged for us in the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the worthy receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which he
has enjoined us as a remembrance of him, till his coming at the last day.

Q. How shall his coming be?

A. With Glory and Power, as a Judge to Judge the World.

Q. Is the time of his coming known?

A. No, but we ought and are commanded to Watch and be prepared, least it seize
us at unawares, by coming like a Thief in the night.

Q. What shall be the state of Man after this Life?

A. Happiness or Misery, according as their deeds have been good or evil.

Q. When shall the happiness of the Elect be completed?

A. At the beginning of Eternity, when time shall be no more.

Thus far you have answered well, now let me hear you repeat the ten
Commandments.

Q. How many be there?

A. Ten.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am
the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House
of Bondage.

Q. Which is the first?

A. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Q. Which is the second?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in the Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the waters
under the Earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the
Lord thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my Commandments.

Q Which is the third?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. Which is the fourth?

A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of work; thou, and thy Son, and thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger
that is within thy Gates, for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

Q. Which is the fifth?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Q. Which is the sixth?

A. Thou shall do no Murder.

Q. Which is the seventh?

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery:

Q. Which is the eighth?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. Which is the ninth?

A. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. Which is the tenth?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Very well answered, now let me hear thee rehearse the Lords Prayer and Belief.

The LORD'S-PRAYER.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, give us this day our daily Bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that tresgass against us; and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil; for thine is the
Kingdom, and the power and Glory, for ever and ever: Amen.

The Apostles CREED.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the
V^rgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, he
descended into Hell, the third day he arose again from the Dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the Right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge both the quick and the Dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness
of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the life Everlasting; Amen.

Holy Sayings of several of the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church.
ST. Austin says, Though we labor in a Boistrous Sea, yet thou Lord art our
Pilot, etc.

St. Ambrose says, None can take Christ from thee, unless thou take him from
thy self, etc.

St. Chrisostom says, If thou desire to be Magnified and accounted
Honorable, despise Honor, and so shall thou be counted Honorable even of
all, etc.

St. Gregory says, He that makes Transitory Honor the Reward of a good work,
sets Eternal Glory at a low rate, etc.

St. Bassil says, Before we do any thing, be careful to Consecrate the first
fruits of the day, and the very beginning of our thought unto the service of
God, etc.

St. Chrisostom says again, Nothing is more Rich, then he that undergoes a
willing Poverty, and bears it with a Religious cheerfulness, etc.

St. Gregory expresses in the eighth book of his Morals, the valor of a just
Man is to conquer the flesh, to contradict his own will, to quench the delights
of this present life, to endure and love the miseries of this world for the
reward of a better, etc.

St. Hirome says, No labor is hard, no time is long, wherein the Glory of
Eternity is the Mark levelwe at, etc.

To Conclude, Rev. 2. ver. 7. To him that overcomes, I will give to eat of the
Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Back, at the Black-Boy, near the Drawbridge, on London
Bridge. Where any Chapman may be furnished with all sorts of Books and Ballads.
1. A Guide to Devotion. School of Piety. 3. Life and Death of Thomas Savage.
4. Righteous Man's Reward. 5. Dying Man's good Counsel: 6. Danger of Despair. 7.
Saints Everlasting Rest. 8. Gentlewomans delight in Cookery. 9. Crown Garland.
10. True Lovers Garland. 11. Art of Courtship. 12. Poets Jests. 13. History of
the London Prentice. 14. Canterbury Tales. 15. A Discourse between a Mother and
a Daughter concerning Marriage. 16. A Book of Merry Riddles.
Broad-Sides.
A General Description of Man's Life, from the Cradle to the Grave. A Prospect
of the seven Reigning Sins. A Tribute of Tears, or the House of Mourning.

