THE GLORIOUS AND MIRACVLVOS BATTLE AT YORK.
This Letter being directed to a Noble and honorable Lord, from the Scots
Leagour lying at York.
My LORD,
THese are to give your Lordship account of the victory. It has pleased GOD
to bestow on us far above our deserts. The way was thus, Prince Rupert
advancing for York, we brake up our beligering to meet him, having an order
(which we intercepted) from the ^ing, that nothing but impossibilities should
stay him from beating ^he Scots: As we were marching, he put the River of Ewes
betwixt us, so that he came to York without any stop, so that we lay four
miles therefrom, and on the morrow brake up the march to Todcaster to attend
his retreat.

Our Foot having the way, we were not one mile from it, the Alarm was sent us
by our Horse, that Prince Rupert was with his whole army advancing, which made
us presently march back to the bounds we had left, where we found him drawing
up in a plain field three miles of length and breadth; the fairer for such use
I had not seen (...) England, we finding him so near, and no possibility to
have our (...) in two hours, kept the advantage of a sleeke, and the hills
(...) our Horse, till the Foot as they came up was put in order: In ^^e mean
time we advanced our Canon, and entered to play on them on the left wing; which
made them a little to move; which they perceiving, brought up theirs, and gave
us the like. This continued (...) long, when it was resolved we should advance
down the hill (...) a great field of corn, to a ditch they had in possession,
(...) it pleased God so to prosper, they were put from it, so that the service
went on very hot on all sides: We losing on the right Wing, and gaining on
the left, they that fought stood extraordinar well to it; whereof my Lord
Lindesays Briggad being commanded by himself, was one. These Briggads that
failyied of the Vane were presently supplied by Cassels, Cowper, Dumfermling,
and some of Clydisdailes Regiment, who were on the battle, and gained what
they had lost, and made themselves master of the Canon was next to them, and
took Sir Charles Lewcas Leivetenant General of their Horse prisoner: These
that ran away show themselves most basely. I commanding the Battle, was on the
head of your Lordships Regiment and Bucleuches; but they carried themselves not
so as I could have wished, neither could I prevail with them: For these that
fled, never came to charge with the enemy, but were so possessed with a panatick
fear, that they ran for an example to others, and no enemy following them,
which gave the enemy to charge them, they intended not, and they had only the
loss. These that fought, God preserved them miraculously with no loss, we
have only the Lord Dudup prisoner, and Lieutenant Colonel Brison is killed,
two Captains, and some Soldiers: We have Sir Charles Lewcas, General Major
Porter, some Colonels, and other officers, with sundry of their chief
Officers killed. The number killed to the enemy as is estimate, is two
thousand, and above, with fifteen hundredth prisoners, twenty piece of Canon,
which was all they had, all their Amonition, all their Bagauge, ten thousand
arms, all their foot Colors, many Cornets, the horse on the right winge were
beat: My Lord Eglingtown not being well seconded, Sir Thomas Fairfax commanded
there in chief, a brave Commander, but his horse answered not our expectation
nor his worth, they gave some blame to the commanded Muscatiers that were with
him: My Lord Eglingtown commanded our horse there, who showed himself most
valiantly, his Son relieving his father, who w^ far ingagded, is sore wounded,
our left wing of horse, which was ^^^manded by Lieutenant General Cromvel, and
General Major David Leslie carried themselves bravely, and under God was a maine
occasion of our victory. I must not overpasse Manchesters Foot, who did good
service under the command of General Major Crawfurd; Our General being chief
Commander himself, Lieutenant General Baillie commanded the Vane of ours
under him, so Fairfax and Manchester of their own. So not troubling your
Lordship further, I rest.

At our Leigour at York, the fifth of July, 1644.
Here is another Letter written by a trusty Gentle man, to another Noble and
honorable Lord, in the Kingdom of Scotland.
My LORD,
AT our coming before York yesterday, the Town was summoned to render to our
General by a Trumpeter; we had this day a fair answer from Sir Thomas
Glenning, and the Mair of the City Master Cowper, which was neither a grant,
nor a refusal: But we hope since the Prince has left them, with a s^^^^ body
of horse, and our whole Caviliers is in pursuit of him, (...) that the Marquis
of Newcastle with our Country-(...) King, and all their good Officers are
gone: They will shortly accept of quarters, for as we understand, and by
certain intelligencers from (...) Town this day, they have not five hundred
Soldiers in the Town, b^side the train Bands, and the Burgars: So if they
render not upon (...) which we heartily wish to prevent more blood, we intend
by (...) assistance, to take it by storm: We were certainly informed from one
which came out of the Town this day, That the Prince brought scarce in with
him to the town of his Foot (confessed by Sir Charles Lewcas to be twelve
thousand) not five hundredth, but were either killed, or run away: The Papists
and Bishops, and their accomplices have all left the Town, Bag and Baggade: The
greatest loss we have was the spoiling of our Baggadge, and hor^^ (...)
battle, by our own men that fled, and our Ba^^^ (...) ^^^ses are estimed to
be in horse, money and clothes, abov^ (...) thousand pounds Scots: I hope some
of it shall be recovered, (...) losser my self above three thousand merkes,
and Sir James Lum(...)den two thousand. But we heartily dispense with the loss
of mean since God has prospered the work in our hands, I hope by Gods
blessing, this blow the Prince has gotten shall be a good means to bring all
the bussinesse here to a good hap^^e close, to Gods glory, (to whom only the
praise of the work is due) and the good of the three Kingdoms.

This battle was fought on twesday the second of July; a day ought never to be
forgot in the three Kingdoms, as one of the greatest acts of Gods great power
and mercy manifested to us, for which we have a solemn thanksgiving the next
Lords day: And as at is expected in all the Kingdoms will be the like, so
soon as can be expediently.

Gentle Reader, I crave your Patience concerning the drawing up of the
Briggads, because they were not altogether so perfect as I would have them: But
ye shall have them very shortly God willing printed in a perfect form.

Printed at EDINBVRGH. by James Lindesay, 1644.


