Gallant News from the seas.
Being a Relation of certain speeches made by Prince Charles, the Duke of
York, the Lord Montrosse, Seamen and Land-men, with their Resolutions:
Gathered together by a Seamen lately come from Sea,
and framed into a Song by him; whose name is Tom Smith.
To the tune of, The Fleat at Sea.


ROuse up your spirits and make haste away,
and cast away needless sorrow and care,
There is such a Navy of Ships on the Sea,
that has not bin seen this thousand years:
With tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra,
Tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra.
We Seamen invite you to help in each thing
you Land-men if ever you mean to be blessed,
From whom your joy and comfort does spring,
without whom your Land can never have rest,
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
With that bespake the Duke so bold,
follow my council every one,
You shall want neither Silver nor Gold,
in setting my Brother now on his throne:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
Then good Prince Charles did send them word,
that they should not too forward be,
O I am unwilling to draw my Sword,
I Would rather have them yield to me:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
My Lord Montrosse, did answer and say,
will you stand still and loose your right?
They do but laugh at your delay,
but we are resolved with them to fight:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
Your Sea-mens hearts are valiant and true,
they wish that right may now take place,
They Will spend their dearest blood for you,
so well they love your Royal Grace:
With tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra,
Tan ta ra ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.


WIth that bespake the Seamen then,
with good Prince Charles we will live and dye,
We Will show our selves right honest men,
fight for our Prince and liberty:
With tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra,
Tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra.
There Is none of them all though they be bace,
shall ever bring us to their Bow,
We Will stoop to none but to his Grace,
to whom true honor now is due:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
When the Land-souldiers heard these words,
their joy of heart did much abound,
Quoth they, while we have strength and swords,
we will not yield an inch of ground:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
^tand you fast brave Seamen we pray.
and we shall soon our Foes confound,
We will not rest by night nor day,
^ntill we make Prince Charles renowned:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
And when we bring him to his right,
we hope these Civil Wars will cease.
We shall have then no cause to fight,
if God and they conclude a peace:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
Here Is a Health to all by Sea and Land,
that does the Royal Cause defend*
That bravely for Prtnce Charles will stand,
to bring his troubles to an end:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
God send's the rule we had before,
'twill be the better for honest men,
'Twill be the better for rich and poor,
for we shall have no fals-hood then:
With tan ta ra ra ra, etc.
God bless the man that made this Song,
for he has honestly played his part.
It Is pity he should suffer wrong,
who loves the Prince withal his heart:
With tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra,
Tan ta ra ra ra, tan ta ra ra.
FINIS.
Printed for W. J. 1649.


