THE GREAT MEMORIAL: OR, A List of the Names of those pretended JUDGES who
Sat, and Sentenced our late Sovereign KING CHARLES the First, in the place
which they called the High Court of Justice, January 27. 1648. And also of
those Thirty five Witnesses Sworn against the said KING; The Sentence read
against him; With the Catalogue of the Names of those that Subscribed and
Sealed the Warrant for his Execution; and the Manner of his Cruel Murder.
C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Weep, Britain weep, help all to raise loud cry,
How Britains Glory and her shame did lie;
Who like a Lamb was to the Scaffold led,
And low as death stoop't his Anointed Head:
Who did a willing Sacrifice become,
To expiate who procured his Final doom:
And by Rude hands being brought upon the Stage,
Lost his own Life to please their Cruel rage.
The Names of the said Pretended JVDGES, who gave Sentence against the Late
KING, January 27. 1648. LXXII. in Numb.
JOhn Bradshaw Lord President. Oliver Cromwell. Henry Ireton. Sir Hardresse
Waller. Valentine Walton. Thomas Harrison. Edward Whaley. Thomas Pride. Isaac
Ewer. Lord Gray of Grooby. William Lord Mounson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Thomas
Maleverer. Sir John Bourcher. Isaac Pennington. Henry Martin. William Purifoye.
John Barkstead. Matthew Tomlinson. John Blakeston. Gilbert Millington. Thomas
Chaloner. Sir William Constable. Edmund Ludlow. John Hutchison. Sir Michael
Livesey. Robert Tichburne. Owen Roe. Robert Lilburne. Adrian Scroop. Richard
Dean. John Okey. John Harrison. John Hewson. William Goffe. Cornelius Holland.
John Carew. John Jones. Thomas Lister. Peregrine Pelham. Thomas Wogan. Frances
Allen. Daniel Blagrave. John Moor. William Say. Frances Lascels. James
Chaloner. Gregory Clement. Sir Gregory Norton. John Venn. Thomas Andrews.
Anthony Stapley. Thomas Horton. John Lisle. John Brown. John Dixwell. Miles
Corbett. Simon Meyne. John Alured. Henry Smith. Humphrey Edwards. John Frye.
Edmond Harvey. Thomas Scot. William Cawley. John Downs. Thomas Hammond.
Vincent Potter. Augustine Garland. Charles Fleetwood. James Temple. Thomas
Wait.
The Names of thirty five Witnesses produced and Sworn in the said pretended
Court, to give Evidence against the KING.
HEnry Hartford of Stratford upon Avon in Com. Warwick. Edward Roberts of
Bishops Castle in Com. Salop, Ironmonger. William Brains of Wrixall in Com.
Salop, Gent. Robert Lacie of Nottingham, Painter. Robert Loads of Cottam in
Com. Nottingham Tyler. Samuel Morgan of Wellington in Com. Salop, Feltmaker.
James Williams of Rosse in Com. Hartford, Shoemaker. Richard Pots of Sharpreton
in Com. Northumberland, Vintner. Giles Grice of Wellington in Com. Salop, Gent.
William Arnop of (...) John Hudson of (...) John Winston of Dornorham in Com.
Wilts. George Seeley of London Cordwainer. John Moor of Cork in Ireland Gent.
Thomas Ives of Boyset in Com. Northampton. Husbandman. James Cresby of Dublin
in Ireland Barber. Thomas Rawlins of Hanslop in Com. Buck. Gent. Richard
Bloomfeild of London, Weaver. John Thomas of Langallan in Com. Denbigh. Willam
Lawson of Nottingham, Maulster. John Pinegar of Damer in Com. Darby, Shoemaker.
Humphrey Brown of Whitsundine in Com. Rutland, Yeoman. David Evans of Neathe
in Com. Glamorgan, Gent. Robert Holmes of (...) Robert Williams of S. Hillary
in Com. Glamorgan, Attorney. Samuel Woorden of Lineham in Com. Wilts, Gent.
Thomas Read of Maidstone in Com. Kent. Gent. George Cornwall of Aston in Com.
Hereford, Forgeman. William Jones of Uske in Com. Monmouth, Husbandman. Arthur
Youg Citizen and Barber Surgeon of London. Diogenes Edwards of Carston in
Com. Salop, Butcher. John Bennet of Harwood in Com. Ebor. Glover. William
Cutbert of Patrington in Holdernesse in Com. Ebor. Gent. Richard Price of
London, Scrivener. Henry Gouch of Gray's Inn, Gent.
Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
KING, were
Doctor Dorislaus. Mr. Ask. Mr. John Cook Solicitor. Sergeant Dendy, Sergeant
at Arms. Clerks to the Court.
Mr. Broughton Mr. Phelpes
Colonel Humphrey, Sword Bearer.
Messengers, Door-keepers and Cryers, were these;
Mr. Walford. Mr. Radley, Mr. Pain. Mr. Powell. Mr. Hull. Mr. King.
The Sentence against the said KING, January 27. 1648. which was read, by Mr.
Broughton aforesaid, Clerk.
WHereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High
Court of Justice for the Trial of CHARLES STVART King (...) England, before
whom he had been Three times Convented, and at the first time a Charge of High
Treason and other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. as in the Charge which was read throughout.

To which Charge, he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer,
but he refused so to do; and so expressed several passages at his Trial in
refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public enemy, shall be
put to death, by severing his head from his Body.

The Sentence (says the President) now read and published is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the Members of
the Court stood up and assented to what he said by holding up their hands.

The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away,
and the Court broke up.

The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, according to the
Sentence given as aforesaid.
SIr Hardresse Waller, Colonel Harrison, Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
Dean, and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for
the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended)
High Court of Justice.

Painted Chamber, Monday January the 29. 1648.
UPon Report made from the Committee for Considering of the Time and Place of
the Executing of the Judgment against the King, that the said Committee have
Resolved, That the open street before Whitehall is a fit place: And the said
Committee conceive it fit, That the King be there e^cuted the ^orrow, the King
having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to drawn to that purpose,
which Warrant was accordingly (...) and agreed to, and Ordered to be engrossed,
which was (...) and signed and sealed accord^^^^^ (...) follows.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart King
of England, Jan. 29. 1648.
WHereas Charles Stuart King of England, is and stands Convicted Attained and
Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Sentence on Suturday last was
pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by the severing his
head from his body, of which Sentence Execution yet remains to be done. These
are therefore to will and require you, to see the said Sentence Executed in the
open street before White Hall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this
instant Month of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five in
the afternoon of the same day, with full effect: and for so doing, This shall
be your sufficient Warrant: And these are to require all Officers and Soldiers
and other the good people of this Nation of England to be assistant unto you in
this Service.

Given under our Hands and Seals.
To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and
to every of them.
Sealed and Subscribed by, John Bradshaw President. Thomas Gray. Oliver
Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John Okey. John Danvers. Mich. Livesey. John Bourcher.
Hen. Ireton. Tho. Maleverer. Jo. Blackeston. Jo. Hutchison. William Goffe. Tho.
Pride. Henry Smith. Vincent Potter. Will. Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. William
Cawley. Joh. Barkstead. Isaac Ewer. Val. Walton. Peter Temple. Thomas Harrison.
Joh. Hewson. Per. Pelham. Richard Dean. Rob. Tichburn. Hump. Edwards. Dan.
Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will. Purifoye. Adrian Scroop. James Templer. Aug. Garland.
Edmon Ludlow. Hen. Martin. Jo. Alured. Rob. Lilburn. Will. Say. Anthony
Stapley. Gregory Norton. Tho. Caloner. Tho. Wogan. Simom Meyne. Tho. Horton.
Jo. Jones. Jo. Moor. Hardresse Waller. Gilb. Millington. Chapter Fleetwood. Jo.
Venn. Greg. Clement. Jo. Downs. Tho. Wait. Tho. Scot. John Carew. Miles
Corbet. In all 58.

Ordered, That the ^^^ffold on which the King is to be executed, be covered
with black.



The Warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those
parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenor thereof about Two a clock in the afternoon, of the said 30. of
January, 1648.

The fatal day. of. the said Execution, being Tuesday, January the 30. 1648.

HIs Majesty continued in Prayer all the morning, and receives the Sacrament.
Just at Ten a Clock before noon, he was conveyed on foot from St. James' Palace
to Whitehall, guarded by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private guard of Partisans
about him, and Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one side, and Colonel
Tomlinson on the other; being come to Whitehall, he continued in his
Cabinet-Chamber at his Devosions, refusing to dine, only about 12 a clock he
eat a bit of Bread, and drank a glass of Claret Wine; from thence he was
conveyed into the Banqueting house, and the great window enlarged, out of which
he ascends the Scaffold, the rails being hung round, and the floor covered with
black; His Executioners disguised with Vizards, yet was his Majesty not
affrighted: He showed more care of the people living, then of himself dying:
for looking round about upon the people, whom the thick Guards of Soldiers
kept a great distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting
(probably) what he purposed to have spoken to them, therefore turning to the
Officers and Actors by him, he delivered himself in a short (but excellent)
Speech, which being ended, he meekly went to Prayers, and after some heavenly
discourse between him and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his
eyes to heaven, mildly praying to himself, he stooped down to the block as to a
prayer-desk, and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut off by
the Vizarded Executioner, which was suddenly done at one blow. Thus fell King
CHARLES, and thus all Britain with him.

FINIS.
EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by a Society of Stationers, in the Year, 1660.


