THE GENEALOGY OF THE Lairds of EDNEM and DVNTRETH, from the Year of God 1063,
to the Year 1699: And more Particularly of DVNTRETH, and the Families that
Married with DVNTRETH, during the said time.

GLASGOVV, ^^inted by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers, ANMO DOM.
1699.

The GENEALOGY of the Lairds of Ednem and Duntreth, from the Year of God 1603,
to the Year 1699. And more particularly of Duntreth, and the Families that
married with Duntreth, during the said time.
I. IN the Year of God 1063. The first of the Name of Edmonstoun called Sir
William Edmonstoun (Son to the Count de Edmont a Duke in Flanders) came in to
Scotland with Queen Margaret (Wite to King Malcom Kenmure) as his special
servant. This King Malcom gave the said Sir William Infestment of the Lands of
Edmistoun and Vmet for his good service: He married and had by her one Son,
called Sir William.

II. Sir William Edmonstoun the second Lord of Edmistoun married and begat one
Son, called Sir John Edmonstoun. King David gives to the said Sir William the
Lands of the Third of Niddrie Marshell, the Crowner-ship of Lothian and
Constablrie of Haddingtoun; and remains with the House as yet, with the Lands
of Rysland and Blackburn, holden of the King.

III. The third Lord of Edmistoun called, Sir John Edmonstoun, married
Margaret Stuart, Daughter to King Robert Stuart (Countess of Douglas) and had
by her two Sons, he got by her a Charter and Seasin under the Great-Seal of the
Barrony of Ednem, with the Gift of the Hospitality to Him and his Heirs.

IV. The fourth Lord of Edmistoun, called Sir William Edmonstoun, married
Margaret Maitland, Daughter to the Lord of Lethingtoun, and had by her three
Sons: King Robert Stuart gives to him a Charter and Seasin of the Lands of
Edmistoun, and Ednem to Him and his Heirs for ever.

V. William Edmonstoun (the first Lord of Duntreth) and second Son to the
Lord of Edmistoun, married Margaret Stuart, Daughter to King Robert the Third
(She was first Countess of Cassills. Secondly, Countess of Augus. Thirdly, Lady
Graham; and in her time the Lands of Duntreth were conquished) he had by her
one Son, and one Daughter, called Mould Edmonstoun, married to the Lord of
Caprington, and had by him one Son, and one Daughter, married to the Lord
Garlies.

VI. The second Lord of Duntreth, called Sir Archibald Edmonstoun, married,
Mauld Stuart Daughter to the Lord Evindale, and had by her six Sons, and two
Daughters; his second Son called James Edmonstoun, married the Heretrix of
Polmais: The third Son, called Mr. James Edmonstoun Parson of Kirknezie, and
Provoist of the Lady Kirkheugh of St. Andrews: The fourth Son called, John
Edmonstoun, married Stuart, Daughter to the Lord of Blackhall: His fifth Son
called George Edmonstoun: His sixth Son called. William Edmonstoun, was
Master-Houshold to King James the Second: His Eldest Daughter called, Mauld
Edmonstoun, was Lady Oliphant, and had Issue: His second Daughter called, Mary
Edmonstoun, married the Lord of Glengarnock, and had Issue.

VII. The third Lord of Duntreth called, Sir William Edmonstoun, married Janet
Shaw, Daughter to the Lord of Sauchie, and had by her three Sons, and five
Daughters, his Eldest Daughter called, Janet Edmonston, married to the Earl of
Montrose, who had by him one Son called, William Earl of Montrose and Lord
Graham; the said William Earl of Montrose, married the Earl Marshall's
Daughter, and begat on her three Sons and four Daughters, Alexander Mr of
Graham, and Mungo Graham, who married Margery Edmonston, Daughter to Duntreth,
and had Issue by her. William Graham Parson of Killearn, his eldest Daughter
called, Graham, married the Earl of Caithness, and had Issue; his second
Daughter called. Graham, married the Earl of Tullibardin, and had Issue: The
third Daughter called, Graham, married the Lord of Bovaird, and had Issue: The
fourth Daughter called, Graham, married the Lord of Knockdolian, and had
Issue: Alexander Master of Graham, married the Lord Fliming's Daughter, and had
Issue; he was slain at Pinkie: John Earl of Montrose, married Jean Drummond,
Daughter to the Lord Drummond, and had Issue; one Son, and one Daughter called,
Graham, and was married to the Lord Fliming, and had Issue: John Earl of
Montrose, married the Earl of Gowrie's Daughter, and had Issue by her: Katherin
Edmonstoun (second Daughter to the said Sir William Edmonston of Duntreth)
married the Earl of Eglintoun, who had a Daughter married to the Lord
Drumlanerk, and had issue: Robert Earl of Eglintoun, married the Earl of
Borthwick's Daughter, and had issue, Montgomery, Daughter to the said Robert
Earl of Eglintoun, married the Lord Bargeny, and had issue: Robert Earl of
Eglinton, married the Lord of Innerpafrey's Daughter, and begat issue: The
Master of Eglinton, married Campbel, Daughter to the Lord Lowdon, and had
issue: Robert Earl of Eglinton, married the Lord Boyd's Daughter, and had by
her one Son and two Daughters; his eldest Daughter called, Montgomery, married
the Lord Seaton, and had issue; his second Daughter called, Montgomery, married
the Lord Semple, and had issue: Heugh Earl of Eglinton died without issue:
Marion Edmonston (third Daughter to the said Sir William Edmonston of Duntreth)
married the Lord of Buchannan, and had issue: John Lord of Buchannan, married
the Lord Livingston's Daughter, and had issue: George Lord of Buchannan,
married the Earl of Monteith's Daughter, and had issue: John Lord of
Buchannan, married Erskine's Daughter to the Lord Cambskennell, and had issue:
Margaret Edmonston (the fourth Daughter to the said Sir William Edmonston of
Duntreth) married the Lord Ross, and had issue: John Lord Ross, married the
Earl of Lennox Daughter, and had issue: James Master of Ross married, and had
issue: John Lord Ross, married the Lord Semple's Daughter, and had issue; one
Son, and three Daughters, his eldest Daughter called Ross, married the Lord of
Craighall, and had issue; his second Daughter called, Ross, married the Lord
of Aicket, and had issue; The third Daughter called, Ross, married the Lord of
Blair, and had issue: James Lord Ross, married Raploch's Daughter, and had by
Her one Daughter called, Ross, married to the Lord of Keir, and had issue:
Barbara Edmonston fifth Daughter to the said Sir William Edmonstoun of
Duntreth) married the Lord Mushet, and had issue: Jacob Edmonston of Ballinton
(second Son to the said Sir William Edmonston of Duntreth) married Agnes
Riddoch, and had issue: James Edmonston of Ballewon (third Son to the said Sir
William Edmonston of Duntreth) married and had issue.

VIII. The fourth Lord of Duntreth called, Sir Archibald Edmonston, married
first the Lord of Lamington's Daughter. Secondly, Katherin Forest. Thirdly,
The Countess of Arroll, and had issue by all his three Wives; His second Son
called Archibald Edmonston, married the Lord of Bonhard's Daughter, and had
issue; His third Son called, James Edmonston Master of Horses to King James the
fifth, married Forrester, and had issue; His fourth Son called, Jacob Edmonston
of Newtoun of Down, married and had issue; His fifth Son called, Archibald
Edmonston of Cambusbyg married, and had one Son; His sixth Son called, Robert
Edmonston; His seventh Son called, Mungow Edmonston; His eldest Daughter
called, Margaret Edmonston, Lady Craigarnel and had issue; His second Daughter
called, Agnes Edmonston, married to Inchmahomo, and had issue; His third
Daughter called, Bessie Edmonston Lady Balvie; His fourth Daughter called,
Marion Edmonston.

IX. The fifth Lord of Duntreth called, Sir William Edmonston, married Stuart,
Daughter to the Earl of Lennox, and had by her one Son (who died but
Succession) and two Daughters: Secondly, He married Margaret Campbell, Daughter
to the Lord of Lawers, and had by Her one Son, and four Daughters; His eldest
Daughter by his first Wife called, Eliz. Edmonston, married Stirling of
Ballagan, and had issue; His second daughter by his first Wife called Janet
Edmonston, married Luke Stirling of Baud; His eldest Daughter of the second
Marriage called, Marjory Edmonston, married Mungow Graham of Ratherness, and
had issue; His third Daughter by the second Wife called, Issobell Edmonston,
married Stuart of Barscube, and had issue; His fourth Daughter by his second
Wife called, Annabell Edmonston, married the Lord of Glorat, and had issue;
His fifth daughter by his second Wife called, Marion Edmonston, First Lady
Nobleston. Secondly, Lady Bargarran, and had issue.

X. The sixth Lord of Duntreth called, Sir James Edmonston, married first
Helen Stirling, Daughter to the Lord of Keir, and had by Her two Sons and four
Daughters, Secondly, He married Margaret Colquhoun, Daughter to the Lord of
Luss, and had by Her one Son and five Daughters; His eldest Daughter by his
first Wife called, Mary Edmonston, first married to the Lord of
Cunningham-head: And secondly, She was married to the Lord of Braco Graham,
and Heir'd both the Estates: His second Daughter by his first Wife called,
Marjory Edmonston, married the Lord of Cochney: His third Daughter by his
first Wife called Helen Edmonston, married Lennox of Branshogle, and had issue:
His second Son by his first Wife called, John Edmonston, married and had issue:
Elizabeth Edmonston his eldest Daughter by his second Wife, married James
Edmonston of Broich, but had no issue; His second Daughter by his second Wife
called, Margaret Edmonston, married His third Daughter by his second Wife
called, Agnes, married His fourth Daughter by his second Wife called, Jean
Edmonston, married Likewayes the said Sir James Edmonston had a Daughter
called, Barbara Edmonston, married Campbel of Dowan, and had issue: Likewayes
his Son by his second Wife called, Robert Edmonston, went over Seas, and never
returned again.

XI. The seventh Lord of Duntreth called, William Edmonston, married Issobel
Hadden, Daughter to the Lord of Glennegies, and had by her five Sons and two
Daughters, his eldest Daughter called, Helen Edmonston, was married to John
Dolloway of Bellihill Esquire and had by her three Sons, Archibald Dolloway the
eldest, died without issue, Alexander Dolloway the second Son, married Anna
Sparks, Daughter to Mr. Sparks of Craigfergus merchant, and had by her one Son
(called, John Dolloway, who died but Issue) and two Daughters, Helen Dolloway
the Eldest, married to Mr. Andrew Clemens, and had Issue; Mary Dolloway his
second Daughter, married Anthony Car, merchant: Robert Dolloway, the third Son
married, Lettice Dolloway, Daughter to Captain John Dolloway, and had by Her
two Sons and two Daughters; His Eldest Son called, Alexander Dolloway, married
Anna-Helena Edmonston, Daughter to Duntreth, and had by Her two Sons, Robert
Dolloway the Eldest, and Archibald the second; His Eldest Daughter called,
Helen Dolloway, married Stuart Esquire, and had Issue; His second Daughter called,
Anna Dolloway. Likewayes the said Helen Edmonston, Eldest Daughter to the said
William Edmonston o^ Duntreth married again, Colonel James Wallace of the
House of Achans but had no Issue: The second Daughter of the said William
Edmonston of Duntreth called, Jean Edmonston married, Sir Robert Adair of
Kinhilt, and had by him four Sons and three Daughters; His Eldest Daughter
called, Issobel Adair, married the Lord of Logan, and had Issue; Anna Adair
the second Daughter married, Mr. Kennedie Minister, and had Issue; Jean Adair
married, Mr. Adair Minister, and had Issue: His Eldest Son called, Sir William
Adair married first Jean Cunningham, daughter to the Lord of Cunningham-head,
but had no Issue by her. Secondly, He married, Anna-Helena Scot, Daughter to
Colloned Scot of Hartwood-burn, and had by him one Son called, Sir Robert
Adair, who married Martha Colvill, Daughter to Sir Robert Colvill of Galgorum,
Knight and Barronet, and had by Her one Son called, William-Roberts Adair; Mr.
Archibald Adair, second Son to the said Sir Robert Adair, the Elder married and
had by her one Son called. Adair; The third Son called. Mr. Alexander Adair,
married first, Anna Cunningham, Daughter to the Lord of Cunningham-head.
Secondly, He married Agnew, Daughter to the Lord of Shochen, but had no Issue
by either of his Wives: The fourth Son called, Robert Adair, married and had
one Son called, Robert Adair. James Edmonston second Son to the said William
Edmonston of Duntreth, married Jean Cunningham, Daughter to the Lord of
Cunningham-head, and had Issue by Her: John Edmonston third Son to the said
William Edmonston of Duntreth, married Eliz. Edmonston, Daughter to James
Edmonston of Broich, and got with her both the Lands of Broich in Scotland, and
the Lands of Bellibantro in Ireland; and had by her four Sons and five
Daughters; William his Eldest Son. James his second Son, Robert his third Son,
and Edmonston his fourth Son: His Eldest Daughter called, Issobel, married to
Crawfurd of Wallston, and had Issue; his second Daughter called, Jean; his
third Mary; his fourth Helen; and his fifth Agnes, married to Andrew Adair, and
had Issue. Secondly, The said John Edmonston married, Katherine Cunningham of
the Family of Glengarnock, and had by her five Sons and two Daughters: The
Eldest Son called, Archibald; the second John; the third Son James; the fourth
Son Robert; the fifth Son Alexander: His Eldest Daughter called, Katherine, and
Anna his second Daughter. William Edmonston Eldest Son of the said John
Edmonston by his first Wife, married Jean Buchannan of the Family of Buchannan,
and had by her six Sons and four Daughters; William, John, Archibald, Robert,
James, and Archibald; his Daughters, Eliz. Mary, Jean and Anna-Helena: James
Edmonston the third Son to the said John Edmonston by his second Wife, married
Margaret Lindsay, Daughter to the Lord of Dov-hill in Fyfe, and had by her two
Sons and five Daughters; John and Robert, Katherine, Anna-Helena. Margaret,
Eliz. and Lettice: The fourth Son to the said William Edmonston of Duntreth,
called, Robert Edmonston, and his fifth Son called, Andrew, both Died without
Issue.

XII. The eight Lord of Duntreth called, Archibald Edmonston, married Jean
Hamilton, Daughter to the Lord of Hallcraig, and had by her two Sons and two
Daughters; his Eldest Son called, William; his second Son, Archibald; his
Eldest Daughter called, Helen, married to Thomas Neivin of Monkreddin, and had
Issue, two Sons; his second Daughter called, Issobel, Died young.

XIII. The ninth Lord of Duntreth called, Archibald Edmonston (second lawful
Son to the said Archibald Edmonston) married, Anna-Helena Scot, Daughter to
Colonel Scot of Hartwood-burn (who was first married to Sir William Adair of
Kinhilt) and had by her four Sons and five Daughters; his Eldest Son called,
Archibald, his second, Walter, his third, William; (all these Sons died young)
and his fourth Son Archibald, now present Lord of Duntreth; his Eldest
Daughter called, Elizabeth, married to James Montgomery of Rosamund Esquire and had
by her two Sons, William and Heugh; and three Daughters, Anna-Helena Eliz. and
Martha: The second Daughter to the said Archibald Edmonston, called Jean, and
the third called, Margaret; and the fourth called, Issobella; all these died
young: his fifth daughter called, An-Helena, married Alexander Dolloway of
Belli-hill Esquire: and had by her two Sons called, Robert and Archibald.

XIV. The tenth Lord of Duntreth called, Archibald Edmonston.

FINIS.

