JOHN HENRY WRENN.
modern bookplate

THE GREAT FEAST At the Sheep-shearing of the City and Citizens, on the 7th. of
June last: Consecrated for an Holy Thursday in Memorandum of St. Thomas, and
St. Oliver; Solemnly holden at the Grocers Hall, London, 1649.

To the Tone or Garb of the Counter Scuffle.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

The great Feast, at the Sheep-shearing of the City and Citizens, on Thursday
the 7. of June last.
MY Reader must not here suppose
That I will waste good Verse or Prose
On Fairsax face, or Cromwels nose,
Or Atkins savoury breech;
Nor Skippon (that almighty Major)
Or Ireton (commissary Rager)
Nor will I write (I Will lay a wager)
Like Pembroks Learned speech.
The famous Acts of Noble Hero's,
Great Englands brave Renowned Nero's,
And all their Stout Biberius Mero's
Behold their entertainment;
And if with patience you will read,
(If God be pleased to send good speed)
It Is thought the fates are all agreed
To further their araignment.
Now for the Feast, I hold it fit,
(Although my self had not a bit)
That something of it should be writ
For after imitation;
Therefore I Will show the cause wherefore
This Feast was eat, paid for, and more,
And not one penny set oth' score,
(A worthy commendation.)
These costs were spent to cannonize
Those mighty mortal Dieties,
Then stroke your beards, and wipe your eyes
If you will behold their splendour;
Then (Ecce signum) these are they
Who laid King Charles as cold as clay,
And by that Act most fit they may
Be called no Faiths Defendor.
These Worthies have fought for the Cause,
For our Religion, Lives, and Laws,
And set us free from Tyrants claws,
Now truth and right bears sway:
All Taxes now are laid aside,
Plenty of all things, far and wide
Folks may in peace, both go or ride,
The clean contrary way.
These, these are they, whose Noble Actions
Purged Church and State from putrifactions,
Cured our distempers and distractions,
And set us all in quiet:
And have they done for us all this,
As the only Authors of our bliss,
We held it therefore not amiss
To give them some good diets
True Citizens, are Cities sons,
Whose wit and coin, in plenty runs,
Their hogsheads empty many tuns,
They are such kind of folks;
For all our troubles they are graced,
And in the foremost rancks are placed,
And all true Pallats them do taste,
Like Eggs that have no yolks.
This Army, and this Parliament,
Has been the Appointed instrument
To save them all from detriment
By cowing of their courage.
They kiss the rod, and love the threaters,
They are enamourd of their cheaters,
And humbly beg them to be eaters
Of Venison, Wine, and Burrage.
But for this feasts great preparation,
And how 'twas kept with Acclamation,
I will not wrong your expectation
With more delays or fables.
They all prepared to cleanse their sin
By Owens Preach, and Tom Goodwin,
In Christ Church which has never been
Like other Churches stables.
But Christ Church was for other beasts
Then Horses, or horn wanting creasts,
Though Bucks or Stagges be at the feasts,
Yet sure there were not any.
There might be Athiests there perhaps
(Who fear not Heavens great thunder claps)
Nor think hells all devouring chaps
Will swallow half so many.
Yet at these Preachments and sweet prayers
There were Beasts, Tigers, Wolves and Bears,
And greedy dogs with pricked up ears,
But not one Royal Lion:
Some asles and some crafty Foxes,
Who hide stolen treasure in their boxes,
And some that pleased their dells and Doxeys
With music like Arion.
The Preachers very zealously
Mocked God (with thanks for victory,
And Popham came triumphantly
Well beaten from Kinsale.
But after three hours long digressings,
The Levites salved all Trangressings,
And gave them Independent blessings
By whole sale and Retale.
The Pomp of these most Pompous sinners
From Heavenly food to Earthly dinners,
Gazed on by Oyster wives and Spinners,
And Porters in abowndance.
Fine silken fools, brave golden gulls,
Some modest maids, some shameless Trulls,
And Trumpeters near split their sculls
With noise would make a Hownd dance.
The Marshall mounted on his Steed
(With care Prudentiall, and good heed)
Ushered the Heard where they might feed,
Of people made two hedges:
Next whom the Grocers Livery men,
The Common Council followed then,
Which all appeared (to myken)
Like Beetles, Blocks, and Wedges.
The Officers and Squires before,
(With needless creatures many more)
And one a Cap of Maintenance wore,
And in his hand a sword,
Which never man in anger drew:
For had they drawn it just and true,
Then never had the damned crew
Destroyed our Sovereign Lord.
Next that the Mayor of London rode,
His Horse and He had each their Load
Whose Lordships both, gave many a nod
To people as he passes.
His Scarlet gown his beck did bear,
And 'bout his neck he then did wear,
A bunch of Jewels rich and dear,
Hanged in a collar of Asses.
The City music sweetly fidled,
And Bells (in Changes) rung and ridled,
Whilst on their Palfries they down didled
Through Cheapsides famous street.
I tell you that the like wasn'er
Since Williams reign (the Conquerere)
And never will be the like I fear,
It Is better fortune greet.
Then followed Englands Pompey (Tom)
And his Commander ( Well com Crom)
Whose sights the people (thither com)
With four hours stay expected,
But they with the Speaker and the Mace,
Disdained the multitude to grace
With one good glance of one good face,
Which made them disaffected.
For some said Toms was black and blue,
And Nols was of a crimson hue,
And each of them looked like a Jew
That murdered had their Christ.
For sure they can have no excuse
For their inhumane base abuse,
Their Kings and good men's blood to since,
The Dee'l them all entis'd.
Thus they in triumph past along
Through dear Cheapeside, and all the throng,
Whilst thousand curses was the song
Which blessed them as they went;
At Grocers Hall, they grocely fed,
With which their paunches out were spread,
Whilst thousands starve for want of bread,
Let Us thank the Parliament.
Near forty Bucks, these Holy Ones
Devoured, and left the dogs the bones,
And Music graced with Tunes and Tones,
This Bacchanalian Feast:
And after that, a Banquet came
Of sweet meats of rare form and frame,
Of Castles, Towers, and Forts of Fame,
More then can be expressed.
But one thing now to mind I call,
They lackt a Marchpane like White Hall,
^^^e which a Scaffold square and tall,
And on it a good King;
And there his head to be off chopped,
And all his Branches bravely lop'd,
How three great Kingdoms bliss was crop'd;
This had been a fine thing.
Thus with the Ordnance thundering rore,
My muse is mute, I must give ore,
Whilst Englands woes good men deplore,
Whilst Tyrants feast with joy;
But I desire, that every one
Would humbly pray to God alone
To set the second Charles on's Throne,
And all our Griefs destroy.
FINIS.

