CUR PERCUSSISTI?
OR BALAAM REPROVED, FOR Cudgelling the Ass.
ALas! the Ass is cudgel'd in good sadness:
Why so I pray? To show the Prophets madness.
Patron of scandal and of ignorance;
From which we prayed a deliverance.
This was the sum of the Petition,
Which guilty Balaam terms sedition.
Who, but a soul empty of grace, and reason
Would think this cry preparative to treason?
At vices Orthodox the poor Ass greives:
Not at the Cassocks or the reverend sleeves.
These are, by Canon, decent, yet I shall
Think constant preaching more Canonical.
Are Mitres, Cassocks of so near a kin
To sloth and drunkenness, that beastly sin,
That who the Clergy warnes these sins to flee,
^oth mean, Bishops and Priests there, must not be?
^he Crown and Mitre are so happily twisted,
The last infringed, the first is then resisted.
^^t both with equal zeal disown they do
Factious Preachers, and bibbing Readers too.
Where Is the sedition then? it is in a dish
Cook't up, yes the water turns pork to fish.
Ill manners it is sure, soft, the man's well bred,
His belly is not empty, but his head.
Foul Patriot, scandal and vices support.
Kicked by an Ass, thou put'st him into Court.
A Priest well drench't, the Constable did seize on,
'Twas cried, hold factious Officer, it is treason.
At length the Prisoner swears, 'twas said, swear on,
This Parish is full of sedition.
It Is an Essay to Church and States confusion,
To show the Larck's grief, or Priests collusion,
There needs no Cham, these secrets to betray,
Darkness cannot hide what is done in the midday.
Is this the man of God? or is he sent
To drink and swear, for the Gospels ornament?
Revived impieties, Black mouthed debaucherie,
Never can be whit'ned with thy Poetry.
Unhappy solecisme, when was it true
That Sin's ruin would make the State to rue,
Or Church? whose noble growth and lasting age,
Decay of vice increase of grace presage.
Arm then (ye Mitred Lords) be clothed with power,
Full charge your Canons and then let them Roar
Against Scandal, Ignorance, and Laziness,
Against saucy pride, and factious peevishness.
Hophni and Phinehas, their fatal doom,
Should startle those that succeed in their room.
The Sacrifice was then abhorred, they are slain,
Eli falls too, 'cause he did not restrain.
Long live King Charles, prosper in Grace and Glory,
Let Us Name be written in Eternal Story.
By H. G.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1661.


