The Gentlewomans CABINET UNLOCKED. Wherein is Contained, many Excellent
Receipts for the Neat Dressing of Diverse Sorts of Meats, both Flesh and Fish,
with their proper Sauces. ALSO, Directions for the best way of making Pancakes,
Fritters, Tansies, Puddings, Custards, Cheesecakes; and such like fine Knacks,
and other Delicate Dishes, which are most frequently used in Gentlemen's Houses.
The 7th. Impression, with New Editions.

London, Printed by E. C. and are to be Sold by John Williamson at the Bible
and Sun on London Bridge 1675.

The Gentlewomans CABINET Unlocked.
To make Rice Milk.
TAke a Quart of good Milk, two handfuls of Rice-flower, beaten very small, and
a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and put them into the Milk; then take the Y^lk
of an Egg, beat it with a spoonful or two of Rose Water, then put it into the
Milk, and stir all these together, and put it over a quick fire, keeping it
continually stirring till it be as thick as water pa^.

To make Fritters.
Take nine Eggs, yelks and whites beat them very well, then take half a pint of
Sack, a pint of Ale, some Ale Yest; put these to the Eggs and beat them all
together, put in some Spice and Salt, and fine Flower: then shred in your
Apples, and let them be well tempered, and fry them with Beef Suet, or half
Beef and half Hogs-suet dried out of the Leaf.

To make a good Cake.
Take half a Peck of Flower, three pound of Butter, some Nutmeg, Cloves and
Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger, and a pound of Sugar ^ mingle these well together with
the flower, then take four pound of Currants well washed, picked, and dried in
a warm cloth, a little Ale-Y^st, twelve Eggs, a quart of Cream or good Milk
warmed, half a pint of Sack, a quartern of Rose Water, knead it well and let it
be very lith, lay it in a warm cloth, and let it lie half an hour against the
fire, then make it up with the white of an Egg beaten with a little Butter,
Rose Water, and Sugar: put it into the Oven; and let it stand an hour and an
half.

To Pickle Cucumbers.
Take an Earthen Vessel, and lay therein first a lay of Salt and Dill, then a
lay of Cucumbers, and so till they be all laid: then put in some Cloves and
whole Pepper, and some Fennel-seed, then fill it up with Beer vinegar, and lay
a clean board with a Stone upon it, to keep them in the Pickle and so keep them
close covered: and when the Vinegar looks black pour it out and put in fresh.

To pickle Broom Buds.
Take your Buds before they be yellow on the top, make your Pickle of Vinegar
and Salt, which you must do by stirring it till the Salt be dissolved, then put
in your Buds, and stir them once every day, till they be sunk within the
Vinegar: And be sure to keep them close covered.

To Pickle Clove Gilliflowers, for, Salleting all the Year.
Take your Clove-Gilliflowers, and slip of the leaves, then strew some Sugar in
the bottom of the Gally-pot (that you to them in) and lay a Laying of
Gilliflowers, and then a Laying of Sugar, and so till you have laid them all,
then your on as much Clarretwine as will cover them, and lay a piece of thin
board on them to keep them down, then tie them close, and let them stand a
Month in the Sun, and use them as you have occasion.

To make Black Puddings.
Take your Blood while it is warm and stir it well, and put some Salt in it,
and when it is cold put in your Groats, and let it stand two days, stir it
often, then put in your Herbs well shred, as Rosemary-tops, Winter-savory,
Pennyroyal, Time, and Fennel; then make it sort with putting of Cream to it
hot, until the Blood looks pale, then beat some Eggs and mingle it, and season
it with Spices, and put in good store of Beef Suet not minced to small, fill
your Skins therewith and boil them: Or else you may boil it in a bag, Which you
please.

To make a Tansie.
Take fifteen yolks of Eggs, and six whites, beat them very well, then put in
some Sugar, and a little Sack, and a about a pint of Cream, then beat them
again, then put in Tansie, Spinnage, and Primrose-leaves, or the like, chopped as
small as possible may be, and bent them all well together, then put it in a
Skillet, and set it over the fire, stirring it continually till it be pretty
stiff, then put it into a Pan, and Fry it with sweet Butter: And make Sauce for
it with Rose Water, Butter and Sugar.

To make Furmentie.
Take a quantity of Cream or Milk, as much as you please; put therein Mace,
Cinnamon and Nutmeg, set it over the fire, and let it boil; then take your
Wheat (being first Boiled very tender in Water) and put it into your Cream or
Milk, and boil it well, then beat same yelks of Eggs, with a little cold Milk
and fine flower, put them in to thicken it, keep it stirring that it burns not
to the bottom: when it is boiled, sweeten it with Rose Water and Sugar,

To make Stewed Broth, or Plumb-pottage.
Take a Neck of Mutton, or rather a Rump of Beef, let it boil, and scum your
Pot clean, then thicken it with grated Bread, putting in some beaten Spice, and
a pound of Currants, two pound of Raisons of the Sun, a pound of Pruins: when
it is boiled put in a quart of Clarret, and a pint of Sack, and as much Sugar
as will sweeten it, and then serve it up.

To make a good Baked Pudding.
Take grated White-bread and fine Flower, with Eggs, Sugar, and Spice, then
take as much Cream or Milk, as will temper it about the thickness of
Pancake-b^tter: shred your Suet small and put into it: butter your Pan, and
bake it: so serve it up: casting Sugar upon it.

How to make Paste for a Venison Pasty.
Take almost a peck of Flower, knead it with two pound of Butter, and as much
Suet, the yelks of eight or ten Eggs, make reasonable lith Past, then roll it
out, and lay on Suet: first lay a paper under your Past, then lay on your
Venison, close it up, pinch it and wash it with Butter, and bake it: when you
draw it out wash it with Butter again.

To make a Custard.
Take good store of Eggs, put away one quarter of the Whites, beat them well,
and then mix them with the thickest and sweetest Cream you can get: then season
it with Salt, Sugar, Cinnamon, Cleves and Mace, and a little Nutmeg then raise
your Coffins of goo^ tough Past, and strew the bottoms ove^ a good thickness
with Currants, an^ Sugar, then set them in the Oven t^ Bake: when they are
Baked draw them out, strew Sugar on the tops, and serve them us.

To make Puff-paste.
Take the f^nest wh^a^ flower, after it has been a little bak^d in a Pot in
the Oven, and blend it well with Eggs whites and ^elks altogether, and after
the Paste is well kn^aded* role out a part of it as thin as you can, t^en
spread cold sweet Butter over the same, then upon the same butter role another
leaf of Paste as before, and spread that with Butter also, thus role leaf upon
lea^ with Butter between, till it be as thick as you think good: or else make
Paste for Venison. Florentine Tart, or what dish you please and so bake it.

To make a Pippin Tart.
Take Pippins and pare them, then divide them in halfs, and take out the cores
clean, then having told the Coffin flat raise up a doxge of an inch high,
laying the Pippins with the hollow sides downwards as close as they will lie,
and lay h^re and there a Clove, little bits of Cinnamon, then cover all clean
over with Sugar, and so cover the Coffin, and b^ke it: and when it is baked,
heat Rose water and Butter and anoint all the Lid over therewith, and strew
good store of Sugar on, and so serve it, in like manner you may make a Codling
Tart.

To make a Cheese-cake.
Take three Eggs and beat them very well, and as you beat them, put in as much
fine Flower as will make them thick, put in them three or four Eggs more, and
beat them all together: then take a quart of Cream, and put into it a quarter
of a pound of sweet Butter, and set them over the fire, and when it begins to
boil, put in your Eggs and Flower: stir them well, and let it boil till it be
thick, then season it with Salt, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Currants, ane bake it in
Paste as you please.

To make a Quaking Pudding.
Take a pint (and somewhat more) of thick Cream, ten yelks of Eggs, with three
whites: beat them very well with two Spoonfuls of Rose Water: Then mingle three
spoonfuls of fine Flower with it, but mingle it so well that there be no lumps
in it, put it all together and season it with Salt and Spice, then take a thick
Cloth and butter it well, then put your Pudding therein, and let it boil for
half an hour as fast as you can: take it up, and make your Sauce with Butter
and Rose Water and Sugar, and serve it up.

To make an Oatmeal Pudding.
Take a quart of Oatmeal beaten to Flower, a pint of Cream, four Eggs beaten, a
good quantity of Sugar and Nutmeg, a pound of Beef Suet well minced: mingle all
these together and so bake it.

To make a Sack-Posset.
Take a quart of Cream, and boil it well with Sugar, Mace, and Nutmeg, and take
half a pint of Sack, and as much Ale and boil them well together with some
Sugar: and when it has stood cooling a little while, put your Cream into a
Basin to your Sack, then heat a Pewter-dish and cover your Basin with it, and
let it stand by the fire two hours are you eat it.

To make a Candle.
Take what Quantity of Ale you think meet, and set it over the fire, and when
it is ready to boil, scum it well: then cast in large Mace, and take the yelks
of two Eggs for one Mess or Draught, and so (...) or less according to the
q^antity of your I Will: b^at them very well, and take away the skin of the yelks,
(...) the ^le boyls put them in, and (...) continually: and when it ha^h (...)
a while; sweeten it with Sugar; and if it be to eat, cut two or three tosts of
(...) to bread, t^st them dry, and put them to the Caudle, but if it be to
drink pu^ in ^on^

To Stew Beef.
Take a good Ru^p of Beef cut from the bones, shred Turnips and Carrets small,
with Spinnage and Lettice, put all in a Pan and let it stew four hours with so
much Water, and a quart of White Wind as will cover it, some Pepper and Salt:
when it is stewed then put in a wine-glass full of good Eld^r Vinegar, and
serve it with Sippits.

To Boil a Gammon of Bacon.
Water your Gammon of Bacon twenty-four hours, then put it into a deep Kettle
with sweet Hay, let it boil softly fix or seven hours, and then take it up with
a Scummer and a Plate, and take off the Skin whole, then stick your Gammon full
of Cloves, and strew on some gross Pepper, then cut your skin like s^ppits to
garnish your Gammon: and when you ser^e it, stick it with Bay Leaves.

To Boil Brawn.
Water your Brawn twenty-four hours, wash and s^^^ye it four or five times,
then take it out of the water and lay it on a clean Table, and throw an handful
of Salt on e^^ry Co^lo^, then ^ind them up as ^ast as you can with Hemp or
Bass, an^ put them in your Kettle, when the Wa^er boyleth, and the scum
a^iseth, take it w^y: Let it boil so ten^^r that yo^ may ^^^ust a straw through
it, then let i^ cool till the next morning, and (...).

To make a White-pot.
Take the best and swee^^st Cream, and boil it with good store of Sugar and
Cinnamon, a little Rose Water: then take it from the fire and put into it clean
picked Rice, but not so much as to make it thick, and let it steep therein till
it be cold: then put in the Yelks of six Eggs and two whites, Currants, Nutmeg
and Salt: then put it into the Pan or Pot, as thin as if it were a Custard, and
so bake it, and ser^^ it in the Pot it is baked in, strewing Sugar on the top
thereof.

To make Mince-Pyes.
Take a Leg of Mutton, and cut the best of the flesh from the Bone, and perboyl
it well: then put to it three pound of the best Mutton* Suet, and shred it very
small, then spread it abroad, and season it with Salt, Cloves, and Mace beaten:
then put in great store of Currants and R^ysons, a few Dates sliced, and some
Orange Peel sliced: then being all well mixed together, put it into your
Coffins, and so bake them: and when they are served up, open the Lids and strew
good store of Sugar on the top of the Meat, and upon the Lids. In like manner
also you may make Minced Pyes of Beef, or Veal, only the Beef should not be
parboyl*d, and the Veal will require twice as much Suet.

To make a Warden, or Quince Pie.
Take of the fairest and b^st Wardens, or Quinees, and pare them, and core
them, cut the sharp ends flat, then boil them in White Wind and Sugar, till the
Sirrup grews thick: then take the Wardens or Quinces from the Sirrup, lay them
in a clean Dish and let them cool, then set them into a Coffin of good tough
Paste, stick Cleve^ in the tops with little st^cks of Ciunamon and good store
of Sugar, then cov^r it with a Lid, only leave a vent hole th^n bake it when
you draw it, put the Sirrup (that the Wardens or Quinces were boiled in) at the
vent hole, shake it well, and melt some Butter with Rose Water, to anoint the
Lid, and strew store of Sugar on the top of the Wardens, or Quinces, and the
Lid: and so serve it.

For Dressing of Fish.
Take an^ (...) Fi^h whatsoever, as Pike, Bream, C^rp, Barbel, Chu^, or such
like* and draw it, but scale it not: then take out the Liver and R^fuge, and
wash you^ Fish* Then take a pottle of fair water, a pretty quantity of
White Wind, good store of Salt, Vinegar, and a little bunch of sweet Herbs, and
set it on the fire, and as soon as it begins to boil, put in your Fish, and
having boiled a little, take it up into a fair Vessel, then put in the Liquor,
some Gross Pepper, and Ginger: and when it is boiled wa^l, put in more Salt,
and set it to cool, and then put your Fish into it: and when you serve it up,
lay Fennel thereupon.

To boil small Fish.
First boil White Wind and water together with a bunch of choice Herbs and a
little whole Mace: when all is boiled well together, put in your Fish, whether
Roches, Dances, Gudgeons, Flounders or the like: and as the scum arises take
it clean of, then put in the sole of a Manchet, a good quantity of sweet
Butter, and season it with Pepper, Salt, and Verjuice: so serve it in upon
sippits, and adorn the sides of the Dish with Sugar.

To make a Broth for any fresh Fish whatsoever, whether Pike, Bream, Carp,
Barbel, Eel, or the like.
You must boil Water, Verjuice, and Salt, together with a handful of sliced
Onions: then you must thicken it with three or four spoonfuls of I Will Yest: then
put in a good quantity of whole Barberies, as also pretty store of Currants:
when it is boiled enough. Dish up your Fish and pour your Broth upon it, laying
your fruit and Onions uppermost.

To roast a Cows Udder.
Take a Cows Vdder, and first boil it well, then stick it over with Cloves, and
when it is cold, spit it and lay it to the fire and apply it well with basting;
and when it is well roasted and brown, bread it and draw it from the fire; take
some Clarret-wine and grated bread, and set it on a Chaffingdish of Coals, and
boil it till it be thick; then put to it good store of Sugar and Cinnamon: and
putting it in a clean Dish, lay the Vdder therein, and trim the sides of the
Dish with Sugar, and serve it up.

To Roast Venison.
Take your Venison and Lard it either with Pork or Bacon, and stick it full of
Cloves on the outside; then spit it and Roast it by a soaking fire: then take
Clarret-wine, Vinegar, grated bread, and some of the Gravey that comes from the
Venison, and boil them well, then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, and
Salt? and serve the Venison upon the Sauce when it is enough.

To make Sauce for a Roasted Capon.
Take Onions; peel and slice them, then boil them in fair Water, with Pepper,
Salt, and a few White-bread crumbs, then put into it a spoonful or two of
Clarret-wine; ye juice of an Orange, three or four slices of Lemon peel shred
small: All these mixed together, pour it upon the Capon when it is cut up, This
Sauce (leave out the Bread) will also serve for a Pheasant.

To make Sauce for a Quale, Rail, or any fat big Bird.
Mix Clarret-wine and Salt together, with the Gravey of the Bird and a few fine
Bread crumbs; boil them, and pour it on the Birds when you cut them up.

To make Sauce for Pigeons, Stock-Doves, or the like.
Mix Butter and Vinegar with Parsley Roasted in their bellies, and shred small:
So serve it up with the Pigeons.

To make Sauce for Wild Foul Roasted.
The most General Sauce for all ^ind of Wild Fowl Roasted, as Duck, Mallard,
Teale, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plover, Puete, Gulls and such like; is only Mustard
and Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuce mixed together: or else an Onion, Water, and
Pepper: Some use only Butter melted without any thing else.

To make Sauce for Green Geese.
Take Sorrel, stamped it, and strain it, and mix the juice thereof with Sugar,
and a few Scalded Gooseberries; and so serve it upon sippets.

To make Sauce for a Pig.
Take Sage and Roast it in the Belly of the P^g* then boil Verjuyce and Butter
and Currants together, take and ^hop the Sage small, and mix the Brains of the
Pig with it.

To make Sauce for a Turkey.
Take Water, and set it over the fire, ^hen slice good store of Onions, and put
unto it, also Pepper and Salt, and good ^ore of Gravey that comes from the
Turkey, and boil them very well together, then put to it a few fine crumbs of
^rated bread to thicken it, a very little ^ugar and some Vinegar: and so serve
^ up with the Turkey.

Sauce for Roast Mutton.
Some use only Onions sliced in fair Water and Salt? Some use Broom-^uds
pickled: Some pickled Cucum^ers: But the best Sauce is Clove-gil^^-flowers
preserved in Clarret-Wine.

as before I showed you.

Sauce for Veal.
Take all kind of sweet Pot-hearbs, and chop them very small, with the Yelks of
two or three Eggs; boil them in Vinegar and Butter, with a few White-bread
crumbs, and good store of Sugar: Then season it with Cinnamon, a little Pepper
and Salt; and pour it upon the Veal; with some slices of Oringes and Lemons
about the Dish.

To make Rice-Puddings.
Take half a pound of Rice, and steep it in new Milk a whole night, and in the
morning drain it, and let the Milk drop away, and take a quart of the best,
sweetest and thickest Cream, and put the Ric^ into it, and boil it a little,
then set it to cool an hour or two, and after put in the Yelks of six Eggs, a
little Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, Currants, Sugar, and Salt; and having mixed
them together put in good store of Beef Suet smal^ shred, and beat it well; so
put it into the Farms or Skins, and boil them: An^ serve them up; after a day
old.

To make Links.
Take the largest of your Chins o^ Pork, and that is called a List, and shred
them small, and mix the Fat and Lean exceeding well together; then take good
store of Sage, and shred it very small, and mixed it with the flesh; then give
it a good season with Pepper and Salt, Cloves and Mace, then take yt farms or
Skins in their whole length, not cut into pieces, as for Puddings: First blow
them w^ll to make the Meat slip, then fill them; which done, divide them with
Threads into small Links as you please; then hang them up in the Corner of some
Chimny (clean swept) that they may take the air of the fire; and let them dry
four or five days ere any be eaten: And when they are served up, let them be
fry^d, or broyled on a Gridiron; or Roasted about a Capon.

To make an excellent Sullabub, without Milking under a Cow.
Take Sider and good store of Sugar, and a little Nutmeg, stir it well
together, and put in as much thick Cream as you think will serve, by two or
three spoonfuls at a time, as hard as you can (as though you Milkt it in) then
stir it together exceeding softly once about, and let it stand two hours (at
least before it be eaten: for the standing makes the Curd.

To make a Fool.
Take two Quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boil: then take the
Yelks of twelve Eggs, and beat them very well with Three or Four spoonfuls of
cold Cream: as the Cream is heating over the fire, take five or six spoonfuls
and put to the Eggs, stirring them well together: and when the Cream boyls,
strain the Eggs into it, keeping it stirring continually, that it may not burn
to the bottom, and let it boil a little after the Eggs are in: then take it off
and let it stand and cool, then cut some sippits and lay in a dish, and pour
Three or Four spoonfuls of Sack upon them, setting them to dry: and when they
be Dried, so that they hang to the Dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour it into
the Dish softly, that the sippits rise not up: Keep it till it be cold ere you
eat it.

To Hash a Calves-head.
Take it and half boil it, then take it and slice it in small pieces: then take
sweet Herbs, and shred them small, and take some Clarret-wine, and the yelks of
four Eggs, and set a stewing, and shake it well together.

To Hash any cold Meat.
Slice your Meat and set it a stewing, and put in sweet-Herbs, some whole
Pepper and Cloves; and when you serve it up, put in some Butter and Vinegar.

For a Frigacie.
Take your Rabbets or Chickens, and cut them in pieces, and break the bones
with a Roling pin, and let your Pan be very clean, and take sweet-Butter, and
keep them shaking, and slice a little Lemon: and when it is almost ready, put
in some Eggs and Cream well beaten, and two or three spoonfuls of Rose Water,
or Sack, and stir them well together: and when it is ^ryed enough, serve it up.

To make Sauce for boiled Rabbets.
Take Onions and boil them in a cloth and boil Currants, and beat your Butter
and Vinegar very thick: and serve it up.

Sauce for boiled Chickens.
Take Parsley and Sorril scalded and shred, then melt your Butter thick, and mix
them together with a little Sugar: and send them up.

Sauce for Calves Feet.
Boil a little Bread and ^^^er, and take the Yelks of three or four Eggs, and
two or three spoonfuls of Sack or Clarret, and a little Sugar: beat them
together, and serve them up.

Sauce for a Boiled Leg of Lamb.
Take Gooseberries sc^lded and Butter, beat with Vinegar and Sugar, and a
little Lemmon and Orange: so send them up.

Sauce for Roast Mutton.
Take three or four Anchodis st^wed in Clarret-wine, over a Chaffing-dish of
Coals: and as much Gravey as you can save: so serve it up.

To make a Chicken Pie.
Take your Chickens and season them with Cloves and Mace, and a little Salt,
then lay them into your Coffin, and lay some large Mace upon them, and an
indifferent quantity of Butter: and leave a a bent hole in the top: so bake it:
and against it is baked, make a Candle of Musk^dine or Sack, b^yled with Mace
and thick^ed with Eggs, and store of Sugar, and fill it up: and serve it either
cold or hot. This is the new Fashion to make a Pigeon Pie.

FINIS.

