A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Asses Complaint against Balaam;
Or the Cry of the COUNTRY AGAINST Ignorant and Scandalous Ministers.
A Vaunt ye smooth-Tongu'd flatterers of the age;
Praesto ye mealy-mouthed Prophets; clear the Stage;
Enter the Ass again, who (though he Kneel
Unto the Higher Powers) lifts up his Heel
Against all those who make Gods house a Den
Of It has been a Den of Lay Thieves too long already.
Clergy Thieves; Have at them once again.
-- But hark; I hear a Country Parish cry,
"Were ever Christians in such slavery?
"Must we be taught by an Illit'rate Bear?
"He Preach? He Will only teach our Boys to swear.
-- Is then your Priest a Swearer? Hah -- must he
That taunts a Bishop taste a Pillory?
And it is but Just, and right; Yet who controules
Him who Blasphemes the Bishop of our Souls?
What? Is an oath less poenal then a word?
Or is the Servant greater then his Lord?
No; He that swears commits the fouler Sin,
And more deserves to lose his ears then --
-- It Is true Seditious Spirits, that Deny
Obedience to the Sacred Hierarchy,
Merit Severe Correction, let them hae't;
They Are the Disturbers both of Church and State;
Yet Praelat's Zeal would be much better shown
In striking Gods offenders then their own,
-- Nay, Gods are theirs; for he that wears lawn sleeves
Like Christ is murdered 'twixt a brace of Thieves,
Both show their enmity, but Diverse ways,
The Presbyter Denies, but This betrays;
Now tell me (gentle Reader) which were Greater,
The sin of Judas, or the crime of Peter?
-- Then let the Bishops cast them out, for thus
They do but Justice to themselves and us;
Like the wise Mariners, who, to appease
The fury of the raging Winds, and Seas,
Threw Jonas overboard; such was hi^ ^
There was no Cannon Law to keep him in.
Nor is it reason all should be maintained
In The Church, who took Degrees, and were Ordained;
For He that after proves a Drunken Beast,
Degrades himself from Man, much more from Priest
And such they were who caused our Bloody War,
When Levy's tribe were kicked by Issacar;
For though Men speak with a not so my Sons,
Yet God reproved them with the voice of Guns.
Phanaticks, those Philistines, wan the field,
Whilst our poor Israel were forced to yield;
For Eli's boys had lost the Ark of God,
Each Phinehas begat an Ichabod.
Then Oh ye Bishops heal these sad disasters,
We do not call for Rectors but for Pastors.
A Priest should lead his Parish as a guide,
Not leap upon their galled backs and ride,
For it is our Mother Church's grand disgrace,
That these black patches stick upon her face.
Written by Lewis Griffin.

