Liber cui Titulus, The Sacred Diary, etc.

Imprimatur.

George Thorp Revmo. in Christo P. and D. Dom. Gulielmo Archiep. Can. a Sacris
Domesticis.
Ex aedibus Lambethanis, Julii, 29. 1678.
THE Sacred Diary: OR SELECT MEDITATIONS FOR Every part of the Day, and the
Employments thereof: WITH Directions to Persons of all Ranks, for the holy
spending every ordinary Day of the Week.

Propounded as Means to Facilitate a Pious Life, and for the Spiritual
Improvement of every Christian.

London, Printed by J.D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN HOBART, of Brickling
in the County of NORFOLK, Baronet; AND TO WILLIAM WINDHAM of Felbridg in the
same County, Esquire; AND To the Virtuous Ladies their Wives.
Right Worshipful,
PLato accounted him not worthy the name of a Philosopher, that studies not to
know God. Divines go farther, and account him not worthy the Name of a Man,
that studies not to fear and serve him. To do this, is totum Hominis, the whole
of Man; Parisiens.
totum Officii, totum Conatus, totum Faelicitatis. In Scripture, this Fear of
the Lord is often called the beginning of Wisdom; because an awful Reverence of
the Divine Majesty in our Hearts, makes us industriously careful to know his
Will, and to do it. And these Phrases are frequently coupled together, To fear
the Lord, and walk in his Ways, Deuteronomy. 8.6. and Chap. 10.12. This holy Fear of
God will make Men meek and humble, and careful in all things to walk worthy of
the Lord unto all pleasing: It will command our Thoughts, bridle and govern our
Tongues, and regulate all our Actions. This will quicken us to holy Devotion,
and reduce all our devotion to Practice.

In all Actions, St. Bernard would have us put these three Queries, An liceat,
an deceat, an expediat; Whether it be lawful, whether it be that which becomes
us to do, whether it be expedient to be done. All our actions in passing pass
not away, for every good Work is a grain of Seed for Eternal Life. We should
say with Xeuxes, that famous Painter, Aeternitati Pingo, I Paint for Eternity.

It is very necessary for us to follow the Counsel of our Savior, and work
whilst it is Day. A long Night will shortly cover us with its shadow, in which
we shall neither have ability nor opportunity to Work.

Much Honored in the Lord,

We have at this present many Books which echo one another. This Age is as
fruitful in Words, as barren in Works; enclining to speak much, to do nothing:
Yet in matters of Devotion, one cannot say too much of that which we can never
do enough. I present you with this Sacred Diary; I hope it may be useful to you
to carry it in your Hands, as the Clock which a great Prince wore in a Ring: It
strikes every Hour of the Day, and agrees with holy Scripture and Reason, as
Dials with the Sun. By frequent reading it, and doing what it directs, you
shall the better know what this Treatise is. For my part, I should not have
been so bold as to make an offering hereof unto you, did I not persuade my
self, that you would have less regard to the Hand that presents it, than to the
Affection which renders me,

Sept. 18. 1679. Your Worships most Humble and Affectionate Servant in the
Gospel, W. Gearing.

TO THE READER.
THe Scripture calls upon us to redeem Time: Now to redeem Time, is, 1. To
see that we cast none of it away in vain, but use every minute of it as a most
precious Thing, and spend it wholly in the way of Duty. 2. That we be not only
doing good, but doing the best good we are able, etc. 3. That we do the best
things in the best manner, and in the greatest measure, and do as much good as
possibly we can. 4. That we watch for special Opportunities. 5. That we
presently take them when they fall, and improve them when we take them. 6. That
we part with all that is to be parted with to save our Time. 7. That we
forecast the preventing of Impediments, and the removal of our Clogs, and the
obtaining of all helps to expedition in Duty. This is the true redemption of
Time, according to the judgment of a Reverend Divine.

And indeed the consideration of the shortness of our time in this World,
should hasten us in the Work and Service of God. I must work the Works of him
that sent me, (says our Savior) whilst it is Day; the Night comes when no
Man can work, John 9.4. I have but a short Day, the time of this Life, to do
the Work which my Father has sent me to finish here upon the Earth; and now I
must hasten it, for the time is at hand, I shall shortly be delivered into the
hands of Sinners to be Crucified. When the Master of the Vineyard saw some
standing idle at the eleventh hour, he checketh them for it: Why stand ye here
all the day idle? Do ye not know, that it is but one hour to Night, eleven
parts of your Life are already gone, there is but one of twelve remaining. Is
it not a shame for you yet to be idle? How ought ye now to hasten, when but the
twelfth part of your short Life yet remains?

A great part of this short Life is taken up in that manner, that little of it
is well spent. All the time of our Life, till the time of our Conversion, may
be laid by, as no Time, or Life to us: And after our effectual calling,
sleeping takes a large part of our time; eating and drinking another part, and
far more of it is spent in doing nothing, or in doing that which is evil. Let a
Man be as frugal, and as thrifty of his Time as he can, yet much of his Life
will go this way. In our old Age many weaknesses draw on, and when we would do
good, we are disabled by Age and Sickness. We are long ere we begin to do the
Work of God, and are soon weary of well-doing. Our Glass is almost run, before
we begin to live indeed; and at the entry of our Spiritual Life, we begin to
die by Infirmity: So that by a just survey of our time, we shall easily find,
that God who craveth the Tithe of our Substance, scarcely gets the hundredth
part of our Time, and that of those who best spend their time.

Consider we the greatness of the Work that every Christian has to do in this
short time. How great a work is it to get a broken Heart, our Hearts being
naturally hearts of Stone? How great a task to get an established assurance of
the Love of God, we having such evil Hearts of unbelief? How great a work to
get forward and grow in Grace, our Hearts being so full of corruption, eating
out and wasting the strength of Grace, so inclined to Backsliding and
Declining; having so many things to press down, so many weights hanging on? How
great a task to escape the Corruption that is in the World, and to escape so
many Snares as are set in all places? How great a work to get a free and
enlarged Heart? How hard to walk constantly in the Spirit? How hard to do the
Work, and perform the Service of God, in the Power of the Spirit? How difficult
to walk in a constant communion with the Lord? What diligence then ought we to
use in the Service of God, being so much straightned with time, and having so
much to do, and so great a task laid upon us?

Moreover, the shortness of Life, compared with the greatness of the Account
that is to be given up at the end of this Life, should move us with great
diligence to hasten in the Work and Service of God. A great account is to be
given up to God after a short Life, and therefore great diligence must be used,
that it may be an happy and joyful Account, and that we may be sure to have all
our Sins crossed out of the Account, and to have many works of Obedience, many
pleasing Services acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, put upon the
Reckoning. Every Master calls his Servants to account for what they put into
their hands, as to the improvement thereof. And God will call every Man to a
reckoning for every Talent they have in their hands, how they have improved
them; what they have done for the Glory of God, for the Interest of Christ, and
for the good of their own and others Souls. All our Talents are written down;
our using, our abusing them; our spending, our mispending them: All the times
of God's Patience, Forbearance, and Long-sufferance, are registered in God's
Account-Book: All the Mercies and Blessings we have received; all the
Ordinances of God, and means of Grace we have enjoyed; all the powerful Sermons
we have heard, all these are written down in the Book of God's Remembrance, and
in the Book of our Consciences. We shall all be called to give an account, Mat.
25.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Let us all mind the day of Account, and not put it far
from us, in hope that our Master will defer his Coming: But let every one
labor so to do, as he desires to be found at his Coming.

Furthermore, Consider that everlasting Estate which follows upon so short a
Life, and which shall be according to this short Life, and suitable unto it.
Now when everlasting Life follows upon a short Life, well spent to the Glory
of God; and everlasting Woe and Misery upon a Life, spent according to the
course of this World, by those that live in the Flesh, Oh what Speed, Industry,
and Diligence should Men use in improving their short lives in the Service of
God, that they may inherit everlasting Life, and escape everlasting Torment!

Finally, After this short Life, we shall have no more such opportunities (as
now) to glorify God here on Earth; we shall hear no more Sermons, enjoy no
more Sabbaths, his Spirit shall strive with us no longer. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no Work, nor Device, nor
Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave where thou go, Eccles. 9.10. Death will
take away those opportunities which the life of Man affords; therefore every
Man ought to put forth his might and best strength in improving his short life
to the Glory of God.

How may this reprove our prodigal and lavish mispending of our short Lives.
Men that have but a little store of such and such things, are sparing and
thrifty in dispensing and disposing them: Scarcity of any sort of Provision,
moves Men to make spare of it. What is more scanty than time? What has a Man
less store of than of Life? No Man knows how little he has, and he that has
most, has but little. Many reckon upon many Years of Life to come, who perhaps
have not so may Days, it may be not so many Hours as they reckon Years. The
truth is, no Man is sure of any more than the present time of his Life. All the
time past which was ill-spent, is lost; and whether any be yet remaining to
thee, thou art uncertain: And if any be, it is as like to slide away from thee
without profit, as that which is past, if now thou be lavish and careless in
losing and casting away the present time. How easily may Satan lead thee on
step by step to Hell, whilst thou please thy self with thoughts afar off for
Heaven, with remote purposes for Heaven and newness of Life? Have thou not
passed over many Weeks and Days already, when thou had a purpose to have
turned unto the Lord, and to have broken off thy Sins by Repentance? Thou have
the same deceitful Heart still, to flatter thee with hopes and purposes of
Repentance for time to come. The same Devil there is still to draw thee on from
Day to Day, from Week to Week, to persuade thee from time to time to take
longer Day, until the days of thy short Life waste away, and thou perish in thy
Sin, and find no place for Repentance.

Oh how should this make Men tremble! Thy whole Life is but as an Hand-breadth,
Psalm. 39.
a short space of time. Oh then think how wretchedly lavish thou have been
already of this short precious time! It may be thou have not so many Weeks
behind, as thou have lost Years already; and all the Days of thy Life which
thou have spent in a state of Impenitency and Unregeneration, are lost; and
thou have no fruit of them in respect of Salvation. The longer thou have lived
in the Flesh, and have not been led by the Spirit, thou art the nearer Hell and
Condemnation; and all this while thou have been heaping up Wrath against the
Day of Wrath. And is not this time woefully cast away? Howsoever thou have
thrived in the World, increased thine outward Estate, gotten Things about thee,
etc. yet all thy time is lost; and it were better for thee never to have seen
those Days, if thou have lived an Impenitent and Unregenerate Life. Oh then
waste no more of this precious time, of this short Life! There is so much of
this precious Oil spilt on the Ground; there are but a few drops left to
nourish the flame, and to keep light in the Lamp: Take heed lest that also be
spent and consumed, and thy life go out like a Candle with a stinking Snuff,
and end in perpetual Shame and Misery. If yet thou art not turned unto the Lord
by sound Repentance, and have not yet begun to do the Work of God, then now
whilst it is called to Day, hearken to the Voice of God, and speedily turn unto
him; defer not thy setting about this Work till to morrow: Lose not so many
precious hours about the World, spend not so many in carnal Delights and vain
Pleasures, in idle Talk, or in doing nothing; so many in Eating, Drinking, and
Sleeping more than thy weakness requires: redeem time from all these; and the
rather, because ye know ye have but a few steps to your Grave. Whosoever of us
is appointed in the seeret Counsel of God to live longest here, yet the Day is
not long, the night of Death is hastening upon us. The longest Summer's Day is
soon at an end, and the longest Life upon Earth passes away, as a Tale that is
told. Let us then endeavor this short Life so, that it may be lengthened out
with everlasting Life and Blessedness. God has given us time to make our Peace
with him; and if that be neglected, all is lost, and we are undone for ever. It
is reported of Alexander the Great, that when he marched against any City, his
manner was to set up a Lamp burning, and made Proclamation, That whosoever oame
in, and submitted whilst this Lamp was burning, should find Favor, and have
his Life: But whosoever staid till this Lamp was out, he was but a dead Man,
and must expect no Mercy. -- Know ye, O Christians, that God has set up a
Lamp, and our life is this Lamp, and God proclaims, Whosoever comes in, whilst
this Lamp is burning, shall find Mercy; but if you stay till the Lamp is out,
till your life be consumed, there is nothing but eternal Woe to be expected.
Now this Lamp of your lives, may not only go out on the consumption of the Oil,
but it may be put out by accidental means; and if this Lamp be once out, and
your Work not done, ye are lost and undone for ever. Eccles. 11.3. In the place
where the Tree falls, there it lies. Which way thou fallest when thou die,
that way thou shall lie to Eternity; if toward God, then God is thine for
ever; if toward Sin, the Misery and Destruction is thine for ever. There can be
no repenting nor believing after Death; the Soul and Body being parted, the
whole Man is not capable of a Work of God upon it.

Index Rerum.
SECT. 1. The Introduction to this Work. Sect. 2. A Soliloquy at waking. Sect.
3. Directions how to begin the Day. Sect. 4. Meditations of the dawning of the
Day, and rising of the Day Star. Sect. 5. Meditations at the breaking forth of
the Light. Sect. 6. Meditations of the springing of the Day, or rising of the
Sun, showing how the first and second Coming of Christ is compared to the
Dayspring, or Sunrising, in many Particulars. Sect. 7. Meditations at a Man's
rising out of his Bed in the Morning. Sect. 8. Quickening Meditations for one
that is sluggish, and loath to rise out of his Bed in a morning. Sect. 9.
Meditations when you are putting on your Clothes, and putting away your old
Clothes. Sect. 10. Meditations when you are about to dress your selves. Sect.
11. Meditations when you are beholding your Face in a Glass, dressing your
selves by it. Sect. 12. Of our Dedicating the Morning to God. Sect. 13. Of
retiring our selves in the morning to Pray, and giv^ Thanks. Sect. 14. Of
Thanksgiving; and for what we are more especially to be thankful. Sect. 15. Of
preparation to Prayer. Sect. 16. Of reading the holy Scriptures. Sect. 17. Of
Meditation, and the fittest Season for it. Sect. 18. Of Petition. Sect. 19. Of
offering our selves to God every Morning. Sect. 20. Of Contrition. Sect. 21. Of
Family Worship. Sect. 22. A Calling, and Business of what Importance, with
diverse directions concerning it. Sect. 23. Considerations for the Nobility and
Gentry, and those that are in Preeminence above others in the Body Politic.
Sect. 24. Directions to a Master of a Family for the Government thereof, for
the choice of Servants, and his Carriage toward them. Sect. 25. Rules about
Eating and Drinking. Sect. 26. Of Recreations, and how to use them. Sect. 27.
Of the Conversation of Parents and Elders. Sect. 28. Of the Carriage of
Children, Servants, and Inferiors. Sect. 29. Shows, how every one is every
day to embrace all Opportunities of doing Good. Sect. 30. Of the improvement of
all Means, Gifts, and Abilities, inward and outward, and what they are. Sect.
31. Of Holy Watchfulness against Temptations, and diverse Preservatives against
them. Sect. 32. Of Exercising our selves daily in the work of Mortification.
Sect. 33. Of daily growing in the Knowledge of Christ, and in Grace. Sect. 34.
Rules about the Government of our Tongues. Sect. 35. A Meditation on the
Miseries of this Life. Sect. 36. Of returning to FamilyWorship in the Evening.
Sect. 37. Of ones taking a review in the Evening of the Actions and Mercies of
the day past. Sect. 38. Of providing in the Evening for the day following.
Sect. 39. A Meditation in putting off your Clothes to go to Bed. Sect. 40. A
Meditation when you lie down in your Bed at Night. Sect. 41. A Meditation when
you compose your selves to sleep.
THE Sacred Diary.
SECT. I. The Introduction to this Work.
IT is good for Man to draw near to God, as the Psalmist says concerning
himself, Psalm. 73. ult. This Gloss put upon any thing, commends it unto Man;
for naturally since the Fall there is so much left in Man, that he has an
inclination to that which is good; but when he comes to particulars, here is
the Mistake, he seeks Light in the way of Darkness, and Happiness in the way of
Misery, and Life in the way of Death, being hurried the contrary way by the
violence of his impetuous Lusts. But yet there is a natural tendency in all Men
to that which is good, (as some of the Heathen have observed) from the
Principles of Nature, there remaining this general Foundation of Religion in
all Men. Good has a magnetic Force, and is of a drawing Nature, and
answerable to the Discovery of Good or Evil in the Understanding, there is an
Embracing or Aversation in the Will of Man, which is that part in the Soul of
the Man that cleaves unto Good discovered. It is good to draw near to God, who
is summum Bonum, the chiefest Good. The Goodness of a thing is the Reason why
we desire it. It is the Philosophers Definition of Good, That is Good which all
things do desire. Bonum est quod omnia appetunt.
Now then, what is more desi^^ble is more excelling in Goodness, and what is
chiefly desirable is the chiefest Good. All Creatures do naturally desire their
chief Good, their Happiness, their Perfection. And it is the Happiness of Man
to draw near to God, his Creator.

The Mind of a Christian may sometimes slip from God, and for a time be taken
up with other things, but it cannot long be kept from him, because God is its
Center; and it is as natural for a Spiritual Mind to move toward God, as for a
Needle touched with the Loadstone to point toward the North Pole. I have set
the Lord always before me, says David, Psalm. 16.8. Where God has no place in
our Minds, we have no Interest in him. A pious and devout Man must be
continually with God. If the hungry Man cannot forget to eat, nor the thirsty
Man to drink, then cannot a Man forget God. Who lives under a continual sense
of the want of God, his Soul is still breathing and panting after God. Love
causes an emission of the Thoughts, it will not suffer him to dwell at home,
but to be where it is best of all to be. There Is a Necessity a Man should mind
what he most affects, and a Man that loves God cannot live in a Course of
Forgetfulness of God; either (as an holy Man notes) Want brings him, or Love
constrains him, or Christ draws him; and Christ will not be long from his; if
their Hearts come not up to him, he will come into them; and if he be there,
all is taken up with attending upon him.

SECT. II. A Soliloquy at Waking.
HOw precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the Sum of them!
etc. When I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.17, 18. O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for
thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is; To see thy Power and thy
Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Because thy Loving Kindness is
better than Life, my Lips shall praise thee. Thus will I bless thee while I
live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name. My Soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips; when I
remember thee upon my Bed, and meditate on thee in the Night-watches. Because
thou have been my Help, therefore in the shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice. My
Soul follows hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me, Psalm. 63.1, to 9.
O God, my Heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my Glory.
Awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early; or in the Morning, [I will
be up first, and raise the Morning out of its Bed, that I may come to the
Celebration of thy Praises]; Psalm. 108.1, 2. My Soul waits for thee, O Lord,
more than they that watch for the Morning, I say, more than they that watch for
the Morning, Psalm. 130, 6. [He waited for the Lord more than they that watch
for the Morning] either (as one Expositor says) more than they who in the
Sanctuary of the Lord heedfully observed the Morning watch, that they might
offer the Morning Sacrifice in due season; or more than they that are appointed
to keep watch all Night, do watch and long for the Morning, as another
Expositor has it.

SECT. III. Directions how to begin the Day.
GIve GOD your first waking Thoughts: Suffer no Wordly Thought to enter, till
God first come in. The First Fruits of the Mouth and of the Heart are to be
offered unto God, Primitiae oris and cordis Deo offerendae. Ambros. in Psalm.
119.
says St. Ambrose. So all evil and vain thoughts either will not dare to
intrude, or shall more easily be kept out. The Mind of Man is never idle, it
will be always active, either about God or the World, Christ or Vanity, Good or
Evil. It is always busied in thinking, devising, pondering, on somewhat or
other. Therefore it is necessary, that first of all in the Morning we set our
Minds to the Meditation of Divine and Heavenly Objects. How will the Devil busy
himself in injecting Multitudes of other thoughts into your Minds, to divert
your Minds from the sweet Meditation of God, if you give not God your waking
thoughts? Multitudes of thoughts will run into your Minds, like People running
to a Bull-baiting, or to see some strange Sight, but you must watch against
them, and drive them away, as Ahraham did the Fowls from his Sacrifice.

2. Lift up your Hearts to God in a reverent manner, and give him thanks for
the rest of the Night past, that his Compassions have not failed you, but are
renewed every Morning, that even in the Night you have received an apparent
Evidence of his Love, and whereas for your Sins committed the day before, God
might even in the dead of Sleep have taken your Souls from you, and so have
suddenly brought you to your account, bless him that it has been his good
pleasure yet to spare you.

3. If God's Glory be dear unto you, you will or ought to begin every Day in
this manner, before you do any thing, by offering to God's Glory what ye are
about to do, setting before him premeditately the Actions of the ensuing Day,
in this or the like manner,

My God, whatsoever I shall this day speak or do, yea, whatsoever I shall
think, I offer wholly to thee; these Prayers, these Meditations, these Alms,
these Devotions, this Fasting, these Works, these Businesses, these Actions,
these my Affairs, I dedicate and consecrate unto thee, nor desire I any thing
else, than what I shall perform this day may turn to thine Honor.

How sweet is it in the beginning of the day, before a Man takes any new Matter
in hand, to lift up his Heart to God, and to say thus within himself, Lord, I
will undertake this or that Action by thy help, and for thee this day, for thee
will I labor, I will think this for thee, for thee now will I hold my peace,
and now I will speak for thy Honor and Glory; I will cast my self on thee for
the following Day.

Use your selves constantly to this Course, that your Consciences may check you
when you neglect it. Such a constant Course will keep off diverse Temptations
that may otherwise surprise you, and engage your Hearts to God for all the day
following.

SECT. IV. At the Dawning of the Day, and Rising of the Day Star.
MEditate how the Gospel is tanquam (...), as a Day Star; and the Work of the
Spirit enlightening the Mind, is as the dawning of the Day, or rising of the
Day Star in the Heart of a Christian. So St. Peter commends those to whom he
writes for making use of the Old Testament, (of the Truth whereof they were
assured) in the mean time, 2 Pet. 1.19.
until by a further Work of the Spirit of Illumination, their Hearts and Minds
are more effectually instructed, and more strongly assured of the Truth of the
Gospel of Christ. The Old Testament is as a Torch-light in a dark Room; the New
Testament revealed by the Spirit is as the Dawning of the Day, or Rising of the
Day Star, in comparison of that Light which shall appear at Christ's second
Coming, which shall be as the bright Rising of the Sun of Righteousness.

Consider, that as the Dawning of the Day is in respect of the Night, so is a
Soul enlightened with the saving Knowledge of the Gospel to one in his natural
Blindness. And,

First, If we compare such a Soul to those poor Creatures that want the outward
Means of Knowledge, it is manifest; for these have no Light offered them,
whereby to come to know God in a saving way; therefore in respect of this
Knowledge there is a mere Night of Ignorance among them. The Condition of those
that want the Means of Knowledge is plainly expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians.
4.17, 18. where he shows, that the Gentiles walk in the Vanity of their
minds, having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their Heart.
Where you may consider, that they are so far from having such knowledge as does
guide them unto Life and Salvation, that they are alienated from the Life of
God through the Ignorance that is in them. 1 Cor. 1.21. It is said, that the
World by wisdom knew not God. They had a kind of Wisdom wherein many of them
excelled, whereby they knew many Secrets of Nature, many Affairs of State and
Government, etc. But all their Wisdom for want of the Word did not teach them
the right Knowledge of God in a saving way.

Consider also, that as the Heathens that wanted the Word, so the Unregenerate,
that live under the Ministry of the Word, do remain in darkness, the Day does
not dawn unto them, nor does the Day Star arise in their Hearts, or elss, if
the Day do dawn in their Brains, it is dark Night in their Hearts; if they do
get some knowledge of the Gospel, and Mysteries of Salvation, yet this Light
does not pierce so as to win them to the Love of that Truth and Light which
appears unto them, and to subject their Hearts unto the Power of it.

Now in the Regenerate, the Gospel being revealed to them by the Spirit, is as
the dawning of the Day, and the rising of the Day Star in their Hearts, in
comparison of that Night of Blindness, which was in themselves before
Regeneration, and is yet in others that are unregenerate; for first, the Day
dawns in their Understandings, and then the Day Star arises in their Hearts;
then the Night begins to wear away, and the Day breaks and dawns upon them,
then they begin to see what they could not see before, and to see that far more
clearly and effectually, which they saw in some imperfect measure before. Now
the Spirit having caused the Day to dawn in their Understandings, he proceeds
also to enlighten the lower Region, and to cause the Day Star to arise in their
Hearts; as in the Night time, when the Sun is on the other side of the Earth,
it shines brightly, and enlightneth the Stars, as we see, yet the Body of the
Earth being between the Sun and us, makes it dark here below; so when the
Spirit enlightens the Understanding of an unregenerate Man with the knowledge
of the Gospel, even at the same time there is a Body of Death in his heart, and
a Mass of sinful Corruptions, which casts a Shadow, and keeps the Heart and
Affections in miserable darkness. Now as every Coruption is a degree of
Darkness, so every Grace is a Beam of heavenly Light; for God is Light, and
every Grace is a Part of the Image and Likeness of God, and so is Lumen de
Lumine, Light issuing from the Fountain of Light. Consider what St. Paul says
to the faithful Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.8.
Ye were sometimes Darkness, but now ye are Light in the Lord, their present
Condition. Ye were Darkness, dark all over, dark Understandings, dark
Judgments, dark Hearts and Affections; they had a dark Vail of natural
Blindness upon their Judgments, a dark Cloud of worldly and fleshly Lusts and
Corruptions upon their Hearts: but now they are Light in the Lord, lightfom
Understandings, and lightsom Hearts and Affections.

SECT. V. At the Breaking forth of the Light.
COnsider with thy self, that there is a fourfold Light spoken of in Scripture,
and that God is called Pater Luminum, the Father of Lights, James 1.17.

1. There is Lux materialis, a material Light, that which God created in the
beginning, and of which he made the Sun and Moon to be as Fountains and
Vessels, that with the Beams proceeding from them the World might be
illuminated. Consider, how God was the Father of this in the first place, Genesis
1.3. God said, let there be Light, and there was Light. He commanded Light to
shine out of Darkness, says the Apostle. And it is said, Genesis 1.15. He set two
Lights in the Firmament of Heaven, a greater Light to rule the Day, and a
lesser Light to rule the Night.

2. There is Lux naturalis, that which we commonly call the Light of Nature,
and it is that same knowledge and Conscience that was at first planted in the
Mind of Man, by which he was made able to distinguish between Good and Evil. Of
this also God is the Father, it is he that has created in us Understanding to
discern, and Conscience to bear witness of Good and Evil.

3. There is Lux supernaturalis, or spiritualis, that which we commonly call
the Light of Grace, and from this there arise two Beams,

(1.) That which shines into our Hearts, to dispel the darkness of Sin in us,
of which I have spoken before. It is in this sense that the Children of God are
called the Children of Light, and the holy Conversation that they lead is said
to be a walking in the Light. Now of this also God is the Father; it is he that
by his Spirit enlightens our Hearts with Grace, as I spoke before.

(2.) There is a Light that shines in our hearts, to cheer us with the
assurance of God's Love and Favor: Light is sown to the Righteous, and joy to
the upright in Heart, Psalm. 27.11. Light and Joy are sown together in the same
Furrow: Of this also God is the Father, it is he only that can make us to hear
the voice of Joy and Gladness. So David prays, Lord, do thou lift up the
light of thy Countenance upon me. The light of his Countenance, is the light of
his Favor; where the light of his Favor shines, no clouds of Affliction can
darken our Joy; it will make our Hearts merrier than Corn and Wine.

4. There is Lux immortalis, or Coelestis, we may call it, the Light of Glory:
It is that same Light which God dwells in, the Light inaccessible, the Light
that none can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16. Yet that Light that God's Children
shall one day dwell in also. Light we may call it, for it is where Darkness
never made his Pavilion; a Light more glorious than the Sun or Moon: For it is
where though no Sun shall be, yet where no Night shall be: The Glory of God
lightens that place; and the Lamb is the Light of it, Rev. 21.23. Now of this
Light likewise God is the Father: He that Inhabits it, he Created it, and he
has prepared it to be an Habitation for his Saints, that as many as shall be
Citizens of the New Jerusalem, may rest under the Glory of it. The Sun shall be
no more thy Light by Day (says the Prophet) nor for brightness shall the Moon
give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee the everlasting Light,
and thy God thy Glory, Isa. 60.19.

Meditate also of the correspondence between Grace and Light,
1. The Light, ye know, does e Caelo manare, it flows and breaks out from
the Heavens: So does Grace too; it is derived and sent down from Heaven.

2. Light does tenebras fugare, it does dispel and drive away Darkness. So does
Grace too, dispel the darkness of Error and Ignorance.

3. Light does purge the Air from Mists and dark Fogs that choke it. Acts 15.9.
So does Grace purify the Heart with the beams of it, from the corruption of
Sin with which it is choked and defiled.

4. Light quickens the Seeds that are sown in the Earth, making them to spring
and fructify. So does Grace always quicken the seed of God's Word when it is
sown in our minds: If that be not there, it withers and dies, but Grace makes
it prolifical and fruitful.

5. Light does visum delectare, it pleases the Eyesight. Light is sweet,
says Solomon, etc. so Grace is pleasant to an Eye that is spiritually
enlightened. Even the Eyes of God himself are delighted with such objects: For
what be those Beauties and Ornaments of the Spouse, with which our Savior
Christ, in the Book of the Canticles, professes to be so much affected and
ravished, as endowments of Grace in which the Spouse excelled?

6. Light does Occulta manifestare, manifest things that are hid. In the Dark
there is no judging of Colors, but the Light makes all things manifest. So
does the light of Grace, it does manifest those things unto us, which before
were hidden from us; especially two sorts of things, Dei misericordiam, and
nostram indigentiam: God's Mercies, and our own Wants. As for God's Mercies,
without the light of Grace, we cannot judge of them as we should do: Either we
take no notice of them at all; or we ascribe not the having them, to him from
whom indeed we receive them. And as for our Wants, the more our Eyes are opened
to see them, the more has the light of Grace shined into our Hearts.

7. Light does Calorem generare; where Light is it does beget heat: So does
Grace in us likewise, it begets in us an heat of Zeal and fervent Charity: It
enlightens us not with Knowledge only, but warms us with Zeal also, to make us
contend for God's Truth, and for his Glory.

The consideration hereof, should teach us to love Grace, and to hate Sin: We
naturally hate Darkness, and love Light. Darkness is a thing horrid and hateful
to Nature; but woeful is the condition of those that love Darkness rather than
Light, John 3.19. it shows that their deeds are evil: And every one that
does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds should
be reproved: Like Owls and Bats, they shun the Light, for Light is a
discovering thing.

SECT. XVI. At the springing of the Day, or rising of the Sun.
HEre consider, that Christ in his coming into the World, was as the Dayspring
from on high, or the springing or rising of the Sun from on high, Luke 1.78.
Consider how his coming is most fitly compared to a Dayspring, or to the
rising of the Sun, in diverse respects.

1. The Sun does (as it were) issue out of the Night, as appears to our Eyes:
He seems to spring out of the womb of Darkness: The rising of the Sun
follows the darkness of the Night. So our blessed Savior at his coming, did
seem (as it were) to spring out of Darkness; he lay hid before under the Veil;
he was covered with Shadows, Types, Ceremonies, Mystical Representations, Dark
Figures, etc. yea, the Prophecies which did bear witness of him had much
darkness in them, though they were so clear, that they showed the way to Christ
unto all the Faithful: Yet the Light was but dim, in comparison of that which
followed. And at that time especially there was much darkness overspreading the
Face of the Church, even about the time of our Saviors coming. Then was that
true which is spoken, Psalm. 47.9. We see not our Signs, there is no more any
Prophet, neither is there among us, any that knows how long. And besides the
want of this Light, there were special causes of darkness, viz. blind Guides:
For such our Savior himself charged the Pharisees to be, who sat in Moses's
Chair; and being blind and ignorant themselves, took upon them to lead the
blind, and instruct the Ignorant, and so no marvel, though both stumbled in the
dark, and fell into the Ditch; and ignorance in these bred Errors in the
People, and caused an increase of Darkness.

But now consider, That Christ was not sent for the salvation of the Jews only,
but of other Nations also; and so consider what darkness was on the World in
general. The Nations of the World were all Regions of darkness, and of the
Shadow of Death; and St. Paul calls those Ages Saecula tenebrarum, Ages of
Darkness. Even the learned Athenians worshipped God as a Stranger, and their
Altar had this Inscription, To the unknown God. Now out of this Darkness (as it
were) the Dayspring issued, Christ came and manifested himself to the World.

2. The Dayspring, or Rising of the Sun, removes the Darkness, so Christ
manifested in the Flesh did chase away that Darkness, which was upon the face
of the World, and soon after Christ's coming there was such an Alteration, as
if there had been a new World created, as it is expressed of the Land of
Nephtali and Zabulon, so the like Change was also in many parts of the World,
The Land of Zabulon, and the Land of Nephtali, by the way of the Sea beyond
Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles; The People which sat in darkness, saw great
light; and unto them which sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, is Light
sprung up., Mat. 4.15, 16. Thus it might be said of the World in general.

The Dayspring or Sunrising is beautiful and glorious. Psalm. 19.5. David
compares the Sun at his rising to a Bridegroom coming forth of his Chamber with
all his Ornaments. Christ's manifestation to the World was glorious, and full
of heavenly Beauty and Majesty. Many glorious things appeared in him at his
Birth, and in his Life many Miracles, Signs and Wonders; and among other
things, the Beauty of his perfect Holiness and Righteousness was such, that
even the malicious Eye of his Adversaries could see no spot or blemish in it:
but especially in that more glorious manifestation at his Resurrection and
Ascension, and sending down the Holy Ghost, by whom his Apostles were led
abroad to carry the Light up and down in the World, his Beauty, Excellency, and
Glory did appear.

4. The Dayspring, or Sun rising yeildeth special Refreshment to the
Creatures, Men, Beasts, Birds, etc. So the Coming of Christ yielded special
Comfort and Refreshment to the People of God, yea, and to those who formerly
were not the People of God, Hos. 1.10. Many poor Gentiles after a tedious Night
of many hundred years of woeful Darkness and Blindness, were now most sweetly
refreshed by the manifestation of Christ, as a glorious Dayspring, and a most
blessed Sun of Righteousness arising with healing in his Wings, whereby they
saw the way of Peace, and the means of Reconciliation with God, and everlasting
Salvation by the Remission of their Sins in the Blood of Christ.

5. Consider, that the Dayspring or Sun rising is a Cause of Health. The Night
is cold and moist, and for want of heat to purge the Air, is the Cause of many
thick Fogs and Vapors; but the Sun arising cleanses the Air, and overcomes
those foggy Vapors. So consider what is said of Christ, that he being the Sun
of Righteousness, should arise with healing in his Wings, dispelling those
unwholsom Vapors, which the Devil, the Prince of Darkness, had raised to
poison the Souls of Men and Women. This Sun of Righteousness did by the
Sovereign Balm of his most precious Blood cure the Wounds of Guiltiness which
were upon their Consciences, and by the precious Sunbeams of his Spirit did
heal them of those Corruptions, and Soul-sicknesses, giving them Spiritual
Health, even the Spirit of Love and Power, and of a sound Mind.

6. The Dayspring, or Sunrising, calls Men out of their Beds, and rouzeth
them from their Sleep: so Christ by his manifestation unto the World does call
Men from sleeping in Sin, to awake unto Repentance unto Righteousness. This St.
Paul shows plainly, Acts 17.30, etc. The times of this Ignorance God winked
at; but now commands all Men every where to repent. That Nightime, which
was before the Dayspring, and coming of Christ, God winked at, but now
commands all Men every where to repent. It was the time of Sleep, and God
suffered the World to lie sleeping and snorting in Sin and Wickedness, he
winked at them, and awaked them not; but now he calls upon to awake, that is,
to repent, now it is Day, the Night is past; yea, says he, he commands all
men every where. The Lord sent his Messengers from Nation to Nation, from City
to City, to awake the World at the Dayspring, and at the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness.

7. The Dayspring, or Sunrising, gives Men light, and shows them both how
to walk and work: He is that Light which enlightneth every one that comes into
the World, John 12.35, 36. Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the
Light with you, walk while ye have the Light, lest darkness come upon you; for
he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have the
Light, believe in the Light, that you may be Children of the Light. Christ's
coming shows the way wherein we must go, if we will be saved. The World for
want of this Light, groped, and lost the way to true Happiness.

8. The Dayspring, and Sunrising, does cause those things that are harmful to
hide themselves. The wild ravening Beasts that prey upon others, use to get to
their Caves and Coverts, at the Sunrising, shunning the light. Thieves and
Murderers, which in the Night, use to break through and steal, do retire
themselves, and refrain at the rising of the Sun. So at the coming of Christ,
Herod and his company were troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. The Scribes
and Pharisees were troubled, and the Devil himself especially, that Prince of
Darkness, and that great Worker of the works of darkness was troubled, and
cried out, Art thou come to Torment us before the time?

9. The Dayspring, or Sunrising is welcome to those who are well busied, and
diligently walk in an honest Course of Life. So the coming of Christ as a
Dayspring, and Sun of Righteousness, was very welcome to those that walked
uprightly before the Lord; it was the time which they had long looked for, more
than they that watch for the Morning: Therefore their Eyes were upon this
Dayspring. So Zechary, Elizabeth, Joseph, Simeon, Anna, the Godly Shepherds,
and the rest, flocked about our Savior, like a company in the dark about a
Torch, or Candle: Yea, the Wise Men of the East, by a lesser light, were
brought to this great Light, by the light of a little Star were conducted to
Christ, the great Light of the World, John 8.12. I am (says he) the Light of
the World; he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the
light of Life.

II. Meditate how his second and glorious Coming shall be like the Dayspring,
or Sunrising.
1. Meditate on the brightness and glory of that Day, which shall spring (as it
were) out of Darkness. What darkness possesses the World at this Day, in
comparison of the Light of that great and glorious Day? How great and gross is
the Ignorance of Men in comparison of the knowledge which then shall be
revealed? How many things now lie hidden, like things covered in Darkness? How
many things concerning the Mystery of Christ, are yet unknown, and many things
imperfectly known? How many reasons of things that fall out in the World, are
now hidden from Men? How many secrets are there in the ways of God's
Providence, and his dealings with the World, and with his Church, which in this
Nighttime of blindness and darkness we cannot see? Yea, how little do we see of
the Excellency of Christ, of the beauty of Heavenly Things, and of the Glory of
his Kingdom? These are dark Times, and little of these things is discovered.
Yea, how little do Men see into the Vanity, Vileness of Earthly things? Who
sees the exceeding sinfulness of Sin, and odiousness of it? How many secret
sins are now committed every hour, which are hid in darkness? These are Times
of darkness which now we live in before the last coming of Christ.

2. Consider, That Christ's last coming like a Dayspring, shall remove this
darkness of the World, and lay open things that were hidden, and dispel all the
dark Clouds that now hide the Light from us: It shall remove the Ignorance of
heavenly things from the minds of Men; Christ himself shall be the Light of
that Day. Then the things which are now imperfectly, shall then be perfectly
known; then shall the Saints put away childish things, imperfect beginnings of
Heavenly Knowledge, and shall have the understandings of Men in them; a
perfection of Light, not seeing through a Glass darkly, but Face to Face. How
clearly shall the light of that Day show unto the Saints, the Beauty and Glory
of Christ, and represent him to his Church as a most glorious Bridegroom?
Consider how that Day shall declare the equity of all the Lord's proceedings in
dealing with his Creatures? How shall it cause all doubting and objections
against it to vanish as a Mist? How shall it lay open the folly and vanity of
Men, in cleaving to the things of this World, and in following their Lusts? How
evidently shall it make it appear, that the Godly have chosen the better part;
that they were truly wise that preferred the Gospel of Christ, the Glory of
Christ, yea, the Reproach of Christ, above the pleasures of Sin, or the
greatest things in the World? How shall this Day set forth all secrets in the
clear Light? How shall all Sins not washed away by true Repentance, be set
before the eye of the World? How then shall the Righteousness of the Upright be
brought forth, after it has been many years hidden by Slanders and false
Accusations? How shall all their works of Faith, all their labors of Love, and
all the fruits of the Spirit be laid open and manifested? There are no false
lights that can have any place at that Day, to make bad Wares seem better,
every thing shall then appear as it is. O my Soul! how should thou labor in
thy most secret places, and in thy most secret thoughts, to bear in mind the
light of that great Day, when Christ shall appear as a Dayspring unto the
World! Will these thoughts which I cherish in my Heart, these Affections, these
Words, these Deeds, be able to abide the great light of that Day, when Christ
shall come? Are they such as may be presented with boldness before the Face of
Christ, and offered to the view of the holiest Angels and Saints in Heaven, and
be brought to the open Light, when the Son of Righteousness shall shine in his
Strength?

3. Consider, That Christ's second coming shall be in Power and great Glory.
Matthew. 24.30. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. He shall sit
on the right Hand of Power, and come in the Clouds of Heaven. Mat. 26.63. He
shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his Angels, Mat. 16.27. The glory
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, when they shine most gloriously, is nothing to
this Glory of Christ, which at that Day he shall show forth to the World. O my
Soul! labor now to behold his Beauty, and Glory in the Spirit by Faith, and by
that glimpse raise thy thoughts to consider of that height and brightness of
Glory, wherein Christ shall show himself at that Day; and how thine Eye, and
thy Soul shall be filled with a most sweet delight in his perfect Beauty and
Glory. Could our Hearts be thoroughly taken up with Christ's Glory at that great
Day, it would be a means to mortify our fond desires toward these things,
wherewith our fleshly Eyes or Hearts, are apt to be ensnared. It would greatly
support us under Afflictions. What, should not I suffer with patience, who look
to see the Beauty and Glory of Christ at the last Day? Yea, to see the glorious
Face of Christ turned to me in love, might I not pass through Troubles,
Prisons, Famine, Nakedness, Banishment, Fire, Sword, any thing, in hope to
behold the Beauty and Glory of Christ, and to enjoy the light of his
Countenance for ever, when he shall come as a Dayspring from on High?

4. Consider how Christ at his second coming, shall most sweetly refresh all
those which ^^roughout the World belong unto him; he shall give them
everlasting rest from all their Labors, which here they have undergone;
everlasting peace from all Cares, and Conflicts with the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, freedom from all Troubles, deliverance from all Persecutions; when
many millions of Souls shall throng about him, and appear in his sight; being
such as have believed him, and cleaved to him in sincerity: Some of them having
been sawn asunder, burnt to ashes, some slain with the Sword, some kept in
Bonds and Irons; some mocked, some scourged, some driven out of House and Home,
and spoiled of their Goods, tossed to and fro, persecuted from City to City,
some destitute, afflicted, tormented, for his Namesake; he shall sweetly ease
and refresh them as a Dayspring, when they shall appear before him. And for
those of his Saints that have been burdened with much Sickness, painful
Diseases, with Poverty and outward Wants, not having whereon to lay their
Heads, nor wherewith to fill their Bellies; to them shall he give to drink of
the full River of his Pleasures, yea, he himself shall be their Refreshment,
and they shall so fully enjoy him, that they shall need nothing which may make
them truly and perfectly happy.

5. Consider, That Christ as a Dayspring at his second coming, shall Cure all
the Sicknesses both of the Souls and Bodies of his. He shall deliver the very
brute Creatures from the Bondage of Corruption. Romans 8.19. For the earnest
expectation of the Creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God;
for the Creature it self was made subject unto Vanity, etc. Ver. 21. The
Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: For we know, that the whole Creation
groaneth, and travelleth in pain until now. Where you see, that the whole World
is sick and diseased, by reason of the Sin of Man, it is pained, and groaneth
as a Woman in Travel, longing for the time of Deliverance; and that is the time
of Christ's coming, when this Dayspring shall appear from on high. An
universal Corruption, and (as it were) Contagion, has overspread and seized
upon the whole body of Nature, and all the Limbs; the whole World, and all its
parts, and all the Creatures in it, and that by reason of the Sin of Man: Now
Christ's coming shall refine all the Creation, and shall set up a new Heaven,
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. The Beasts, Birds, Fishes, the
Corn, the Fruit of the Vine, etc. shall no longer be abused to Gluttony,
Drunkenness, and Epicurism, and to be as Fuel to cherish the flame of unclean
Lusts. The wedg of Gold, or bag of Silver, shall no longer be defiled, so as to
be made an Idol to the dishonor of its Maker, to carry away the Heart from
him: Other Metals and Minerals shall be no longer defiled so, as to be turned
into Instruments of Death and Cruelty, and to be stained with Innocent Blood:
Other Creatures shall not be abused so, as to set forth the Pride of Vain Men
and Women. Christ shall heal the Sickness and Corruptions of the World, and
free it from the bondage of Corruption; his coming shall heal the World, much
more shall it heal all the Infirmities of his Members. At the last Day the Lord
at his coming will heal the Sick, and Diseased; give sight to the Blind,
strength to the Lame and Weak; hearing to the Deaf, beauty to the Deformed;
yea, he shall cure them of Death and Mortality it self; Death shall no more
hang about them, nor have to do with them: Much more shall his second coming
bring perfect and perpetual health to their Souls; Sin shall then be fully
Cured, and the Soul shall be made altogether sound; and no Sin shall pain the
Soul with the remembrance of it, nor afflict it with fear of Punishment: And
sense of Guiltiness shall be taken away, as if Man had continued as holy as the
Angels, and had always kept his first Estate.

6. Consider, That this Dayspring at his second coming, shall awaken all that
sleep in the Graves, and in the Sea,, and in all places whatsoever; all the
Dead, from Adam to the last Day, all that lie sleeping in their Graves from one
end of the World to the other, shall be awakned. All Kings and Princes, and
other great Men, who shall be found sleeping in their sumptuous Tombs and
Monuments, and all that are buried any where: The Trump shall sound, and the
Dead of all sorts, degrees, Ages, Nations, shall awake, live, arise, and come
before the Son of God coming in his Glory. O the wonderful Change that shall be
at that Dayspring! When those Eyes that have been shut up so many hundred Years
shall be opened, and those Bodies that have been long buried in a silent Grave,
and covered with the darkness of death, shall be brought forth into the Light
of the great and glorious Day. O my Soul! awake thou beforehand, that then I
may awake full of Joy and Comfort, and be satisfied with the Image of my
dearest Savior, and lift up my Head to behold my most glorious Redeemer, and
the bright and blessed Day of my full Redemption. The Angels Trumpet shall then
awaken the most secure Conscience, that ever composed it self to sleep in Sin,
yea, then all their sins will awake with their awakened Conscience, and rage
fiercely against their Souls. Awake then, O Sinner, to Repentance; awake to
Holiness, and Righteousness, that thy Conscience may be at peace with him, and
thy sins may be abolished for ever, that Christ may not find thee sleeping at
his coming.

7. As the Sun at his rising, causes harmful Creatures to hide their Heads; so
this last coming of Christ is grievous to the Wicked; it will make them to call
to the Mountains to fall upon them, and upon the Hills to cover them from the
Wrath of the Lamb, and from the Presence of him that sits upon the Throne;
then they would be glad to hide their Heads in the center of the Earth, when
the Light of this Dayspring shall appear. O my Soul! do thou now cast off the
works of darkness, and then the Light of that Glorious day shall not be
grievous unto thee, which none of the Children of darkness can behold without
confusion of Face.

8. Consider how welcome the second coming of Christ will be to the Godly. The
Faithful are described by this Property, that they love his Appearing. It is
said, That every one is a Friend to him that gives Gifts. Oh! how welcome
shall Christ be to all the Faithful, when he comes with both his Hands full of
rich and precious Gifts, such as surpass the thoughts and understanding of Man:
When Christ comes to bestow a Crown of Immortal Glory, an everlasting Kingdom;
Oh! what Heir of the Kingdom would not with a glad Heart bid him welcome? But
chiefly, Christ shall be welcome to them in respect of himself, for then they
shall see him as he is. Consider, what a blessed sight will this be, O my Soul,
to see thy dear Savior, who has died for thee, loved thee, and washed thee
with his own Blood, to see him now so Glorious: To see him on the Throne, who
was nailed to the Cross; to see him Reigning and Judging, who was Judged and
Condemned; to see him most Blessed, who was made a Curse; to see his
Righteousness shine forth to all the World, who was numbered among
Transgressors, to see him in such excellent Majesty, and fullness of Glory, this
will be most welcome. Oh! how blessed is the condition of that Soul, who being
fitted for Christ, has a longing desire of his coming, and can from his Heart
say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

9. As the Dayspring shows Man his work and his way, so the glorious coming
of Christ shall show unto the World which way they have gone, and to what issue
their way and works are come. Many now do imagine, that they go the way of
Salvation, and the way of Life, and that they shall have Peace, and will not be
convinced otherwise by the Word: But this Day shall declare it; it shall show,
that many such have trodden the Path of destruction, and have been going down
to the Chambers of death; yea, now the end and issue of all will appear to be
Death, and Condemnation; on this Day the Lord will show, who is Righteous, and
who is Wicked; he will show by the Light of that Day, who are Wheat, and who
are Tares; which are for the Fire, and which are for the Gardner; which are for
the right Hand, and which for the left.

SECT. VII. Whilst thou art yet lying in thy Bed.
REmember that Almighty God is about thy Bed, and that he observes all the
secret thoughts and workings of thy Heart: Commune with thy Heart upon thy Bed,
Psalm. 4.4. Consider, That we lie in our Beds, as it were within our Graves; and
the Sheets between which we lie, may put us in mind of our Winding Sheet. It is
good to remember God upon our Beds, as David's practice was, and the Law of God
was his Meditation by night as well as by day. When he meditated on God in the
night Watches, he was as one satisfied with Marrow and Fatness, Psalm. 63.5.
Meditation and Prayer may best be practiced, Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 3.
when we are freest from disturbance, in the Night, or upon our Beds after we
awake, no Body then is troublesome to us; then we have a greater freedom and
tranquillity of our Thoughts, when we are not molested with Business, when
there is none that can hinder us from having access to God, when our mind
knitting it self together, is able diligently to make reference of all to the
Physician of Souls. At midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang Praises unto
God, being thrust into an inner Prison, having their Feet made fast in the
Stocks, Acts 16.24, 25. Behold, the Doctor of the World (says Chrysostom) fast
in Prison, praying notwithstanding at midnight with Silas. Neither the renting
of their Clothes, nor their Stripes and Bonds, could hinder them from it, nay,
they did so much the more show their fervency toward the Lord. I have remembered
thy Name, O Lord, in the night, says David, Psalm. 119.55. The Night presents
us with many opportunities of deeper Meditation. Ambros. de bono Mortis. p. 245.
We more sincerely in the Nightime, and upon our Beds, do bethink our selves,
says St. Ambrose.

Beware of plotting ill designs upon your Beds. It is said of the Wicked man,
that he devises mischief upon his Bed, Psalm. 36.4. he there employs his time
of rest, and freedom from business, to devise wicked acts, to execute the next
day. Take heed of abusing your Beds to satisfy your Lusts, and to draw others
unto Adultery and Wantonness. Remember, that the Bed undefiled is honorable,
but Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge.

SECT. VIII. When thou risest out of thy Bed in the Morning.
THink then how Almighty God can as easily raise thee out of the Grave in the
morning of the Resurrection, from the sleep and bed of death, as he has
awakened thee in thy Bed, and raised thee up in health and safety this Morning:
When the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of
the Archangel, and the Trump of God, the sound of this Trumpet shall be heard
over all parts of the World, and with this Trumpet shall he summon all Nations
to come to the general Judgment.

This is that fearful Voice, whereof Saint Hierom speaks, saying, Whether I
eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, I seem always to hear that Voice sounding in
mine Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment.

Oh! Who shall appeal from this Summons? Who shall be able to avoid this
Judgment? Whose Heart shall not quake and tremble at the sound of this terrible
Voice? This Voice shall take from death all her Spoils, and cause her to
restore again all that she has taken from the World. The Sea shall give up the
Dead which are in it: and Death and Hell deliver up the Dead which are in them,
Rev. 20.13.

Think with thy self, O Christian, when thou art rising out of thy Bed, what a
wonderful sight that shall be, to see the Sea and the Earth bring forth in all
parts such variety of Bodies, and to behold so many huge Armies rising out of
their Beds of death and darkness, and so many sorts of diversities of Nations
and People gathered and assembled together: To see the most mighty Princes, and
most puissant Potentates of the Earth, raised out of their Tombs, and appearing
with another manner of habit and behavior, and with other kind of thoughts,
much differing from those that they had in this Life.

Think then with thy self, that all the Children of Adam shall meet together,
every one to give up an account of his own Life, and to be judged according to
his Works; yet shall there be a great difference between the Just and the
Unjust, at the day of Resurrection: Some shall rise to everlasting Life and
Glory, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt, Dan. 12.2.

Consider what a joyful meeting there will be of the Souls and Bodies of the
Just at the general Resurrection. With what joy shall the Soul then embrace the
Body? And (as it were) say thus unto it: O my Body, and faithful Companion,
that have holden me in obtaining this glorious Crown, that have so often
Fasted, Watched, and Prayed, that have suffered with me the necessities of
Poverty, the cross of Afflictions, the reproaches and contradictions of
reviling Tongues? How often have thou stripped thy self of thine own Raiment, to
cloth the Naked? How often have thou denied thy self, renounced thine own right
and title, being unwilling to break Peace, and be at Variance with thy
Neighbor? Wherefore it is meet, that thou should now be partaker with me of
this my Glory, as thou have been my companion in all my Labors and Sufferings.

Think also with thy self, of the grievous and woeful meeting of the Souls and
Bodies of the Wicked, at the day of their Resurrection. The Soul of such an one
shall then say to his vile Body: O cursed Body, the cause of my woe and misery:
Now I take thee no more for my Companion, but mine Enemy: Now art thou no more
my Helper, but my Persecutor. O cursed Taste, how dearly now do I pay for thy
delicates, and delights! O stinking Flesh, how have I by yielding to thy Lusts
and Pleasures, plunged my self into these endless Torments! Is this the Body
that scarce must touch the Ground, that would not endure the Wind to blow upon
it, that Body which I spent so much time in Dressing and Adorning it. Is this
the Flesh which I so often glutted and pampered? Were these the delights of
this Body, for which I cast away my self? Was it for this stinking Dunghill,
that I have lost for ever the Kingdom of Heaven? O ye infernal Furies, rise up
now against me, and tear me in pieces! Cursed be the day of my unfortunate
Birth, seeing for a few short Pleasures, I must suffer everlasting Torments.

These, and other more desperate words thou may think (Christian Reader)
shall the miserable Soul speak unto that Body, which she loved so exceedingly
in this Transitory Life. I will set down the words of a Devout Man, in this
kind. Tell me, O miserable Soul, why do thou now so much abhor that thing
which heretofore thou lovedst so well? Is not this Flesh thy dearly beloved? Is
not this thy Belly which thou made thy God? Is not this the Face which thou
did keep so charily from Wind and Sun? Is not this the Visage which thou
did paint with so many Artificial Colors? Are not these the Arms and Fingers
which glistered with Rings of Gold, Bracelets, and Diamonds? Is not this the
Body, for whose sake search was made both by Sea and Land, to furnish a Table
for it, with all dilicate and dainty Dishes? To have a soft and stately Bed, to
procure curious and sumptuous Garments? Who has now so changed thine
Affections? who has now made thy Body to appear so horrible and deformed,
which before seemed so amiable and beautiful?

Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection; on such the
second Death has no power, Rev. 20.6.

SECT. IX. When thou art sluggish, and loath to rise out of thy Bed in the
Morning.
THink then with thy self, O Christian, that thou hear the Voice of Christ
calling to thee, as sometimes to his Spoufe, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my Love, my
fair One, and come away. Consider what Saint Paul says to the Romans. Romans
13.11.
It is high time to awake out of sleep. Awake unto Righteousness, and sin not,
1 Cor. 15.34. It is not enough that ye affect Righteousness, and to have the
Heart bent toward it in some sort, but you must awake to it; as Men's Spirits
are fresh and renewed, and made more quick and active, when they awake out of
sleep, awaken and quicken your Souls to Righteousness and Holiness, as if you
were to begin the work again, that so your Spirits may be fresh, and your
Hearts active and lively in the Service of God.

See how David stirs up himself. Awake Psaltery and Harp; I my self will
awake early. [Awake Psaltery and Harp.] Does David speak to these dead
Instruments? Does he not rather speak to his own Affections, that they might be
awakned, and quickened, to make Melody to the Lord in his Heart, whilst he
played with his Hand upon the Psaltery and Harp. He knew, the Harp though never
so well tuned and managed, would make but dull and flat Music in the Ears of
the Living God, if the Heart were not tuned, and the Affections stirred up and
quickened. Raise up thy Heart to God, and the love of the World will little
prevail with it, the more able shall thou be to discern the excellency of
Heavenly Things. This is a special Help against Temptation, and a means to
prevent it; and hereby thou shall be fitted for a more free Communion with the
Lord, and the more able shall thou be to feel the Power of God in his
Ordinances, and shall abound in every good Work, and shall find great delight
in the Service of God.

SECT. IX. When thou art putting on thy Clothes.
1. Consider, that our first Parents in Innocence had no Garments. A Garment is
both the Cover and the Witness of Man's Perfidiousness and Treachery against
God his Creator. Vestimentum est primae hominis contrae Deum perfidiae
tegumentum and testimonium, cum antea homo nudus fuerit. Buxtorf.
The Innocence of our first Parents was then a Garment to them; as they were
without clothing, so they wanted no clothing; they were naked, and knew not
that they were naked; but after they had sinned, their Sin made them sensible
of their Nakedness, and they made them Aprons of Leaves, seeking to hide that
from their Eyes, which did displease their Souls, and not being able to shun
themselves, they endeavored to cover themselves. But God himself, who was
indulgent to them, cut out their first Suit, and clothed them with the Skins
of Beasts. This is one use of Apparel, namely, to cover our Nakedness, and to
hide our Body, which began to be shameful, when it ceased to be innocent.

The second Use of Apparel is to shelter us from the Injury of the Seasons, and
to free our Bodies from the rigor of the Elements; for Man no sooner violated
God's Commandment, but all the Creatures rebelled against him; and those four
Bodies, whereof all our Bodies are composed, declared War one against another
to afflict us, and breaking the Bounds which Nature had prescribed them,
intrencht one upon another, to the end their Division might be our Punishment.
Now Man was bound to make him clothes, he hunted wild Beasts, and clothed
himself with their Skins, and robbed his Subjects, that he might defend himself
against his Enemies; and learned to his cost, that no Apparel is proof for all
seasons, but that of Innocence. Here then let every Man see his own Fault in
his Apparel, which is a sensible Token of his Disobedience; and would he govern
himself by Reason, he would (as it were) chastise his Body as often as he puts on
his Clothes. And yet many now seem to have a design to outbrave Divine Justice,
to glory in its Punishments, to make that serve for their Glory, which ought to
serve for their shame. Adam was never so ashamed as when he was forced to
cloth himself, the Skins he wore were the Apparel of a Penitent; he never
clothed himself, but he bewailed his Innocence; and when cold Weather made him
put on more Clothes, he considered how the Irregularity of the Seasons was the
Punishment of his Sin. In sordibus agebat Eva, ipsam se circumferens lugentem
and panitentem, ignominiam primi delicti, and Invidiam perditionis humanae omni
satisfactionis habitu expiabat. Tertul. de habitu Mulier.
His Wife knew not as yet the Art of trimming and decking her self; all her
Daughters Eloquence could not persuade her, that that which was a Punishment of
her Disobedience should add unto her Beauty. If thy Clothes or Ornaments are
commendable, the Praise is rather due to those that made them, than to those
that wear them. Whosoever prides himself in a Suit of Apparel, intrencheth upon
his Tailor's right; and who values himself the more for the Stuff or Silk that
he wears, injures the Worms that spun it, or the Workmen that wrought it. Our
Glory ought to be within us, In homine laudandum quod ipsius est Seneca.
(says Seneca); and we ought not to be proud of a thing which we forgo as often
as we put off our Clothes.

2. When you are putting on your Clothes upon your Bodies, let this put you in
mind of putting on Christ, as St. Paul exhorts, Romans 13. ult. Put on Christ
by Faith in Justification for Righteousness, for he is made unto us of God,
wisdom and Righteousness. As many as have been baptized into Christ, they have
[thus] put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. This is our best Clothing, even our
Wedding Garment. Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall
be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the Garment of Salvation; he
has covered me with the Robes of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom decks himself
with Ornaments, and as a Bride arrayeth her self with her Jewels. Happy are
they who are thus clothed, for they shall never be found Naked.

3. When you are putting off your old Clothes, see that ye put off the Old Man
with all his Works, Col. 3.9. That ye put off concerning the former
conversation the Old Man, Ephesians. 4.22, 24.
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. Look as it is in Apparel,
we must first put off an old Suit, before we can draw on a New; so here, we
must put off the Old Man, that is, the old quality of our whole Nature.

Here meditate, That you are covered with Sin, as with a Garment: As a Garment
covers us, so Sin covers us: But it is not this or that Garment; not like an
Hat that does only cover the Head, nor like a Glove that does cover the Hand
only; or like a Boot that does cover the Leg only; or like a Skirt that does
only cover the Loins, but it is like a Garment that covers us allover Head
and Hands, Loins and Legs. As Children are swadled and lapt over in Clouts, so
are we in Sin, and that from the Crown of the Head to the Soles of the Feet, as
the Prophet speaks. Now seeing we are covered with Sin as with a Garment, as
we would cast off a Garment, so must we cast off Sin. The Prophet Isaiah
speaking of our Righteousnesses, calls them filthy Rags; how filthy then be
our Sins? We must strip our selves of them, and instead of them get to have
fair Robes put upon us; as Joshua the ^igh Priest came out first in filthy
Garments, but those being taken off, fair Robes were put upon him.

We must not lay our Sins aside, as we use to lay our Garments aside; we lay
our Garments off at Night, and put them on usually in the Morning: We have our
Sabbath Day Garments, and our Working-day Garments; those we wear one day in
the Week, these all the Week long; we must not do thus by our Sins. And yet I
would there were not those that did thus, they lay off their Sins, as they lay
off their Garments. Indeed they go off at Night, so long as they are asleep
they think not of them, but in the Morning they go on again, and walk
familiarly in them; or they shall off upon the Sabbath Day perhaps. When their
Sabbath Day Clothes are on, then they go as if they were covered with Zeal and
Devotion; but with their Weekday Suits, they put on their Weekday sins, and
then day after day, they as commonly practice the one, as they wear the other.
As we are exhorted to put on Christ, so having put him on, we must keep him on,
and not when we list put him off again; we are not so to put off Sin, as when
we list to put it on again; rather put on Shame, than put on Sin. In a word,
Though you are to cast off Sin like a Garment, yet not like a wearing Garment,
for then you will one time or other get it about you again; but like a rotten
Garment, like a menstruous Garment, like a leprous Garment, like a diseased
Garment, like a Prison-Garment; as Joseph left his Prison Garments when he was
brought before Pharaoh, and when they were once put off, never put them on
again. So should we leave off our Sins, not only seponere, but deponere, not
only lay them apart, but quite cast them away, never to resume them any more.

SECT. X. When you are going to dress your selves.
THink with your selves, how Pride, and the vain Fashions of the Times, do draw
many into such a garb of Attire, as makes them long in dressing them in the
Morning; and this do you resolve against, and do you wear such Habits as may be
soon put on. Our first Parents were clad in Beasts Skins; the Prophets wore
rough Garments; and John Baptist was clothed in Camels Hair; and many of the
Ancients say, That the Blessed Virgin had a mean Habit, only to cover her
Nakedness, not to adorn her Body. The Lacedaemonians had a Law, that none but
Harlots might wear rich Apparel, that honest Women might be brought out of love
with Bravery, and not spend much time in decking themselves. It is a piece of
great folly, to spend so much time in the Morning in decking and adorning the
Body, that must ere long be a dish for Worms, and pass away many Days, Weeks,
Months, and Years, altogether neglecting the Soul that must live for ever. If
Saint Paul durst not glory but in the Cross of Christ, how dare thou to pride
thy self, and spend much time about these Vanities?

Consider with thy self, what is the design of those who delight in sumptuous
Apparel, and spend so many Hours in trimming themselves, is it not to please
those who look upon them, to entangle Souls in their Nets? Indeed Women do not
care to Dress themselves when they are alone; Solitariness is an enemy to Pomp:
as Peacocks close up their Plumes, when no body beholds them; so these do
neglect their Dressing when no body admires them: And when they have neither
Spectators to observe them, nor any to flatter them, Self-love is not of force
enough to make them long or curious in Dressing themselves. It is better to go
in our Habits as the wild Indians, than have those precious hours of the
Morning (especially on the Lord's Days) to answer for, as too many Ladies and
other Gallants have; yea, and those that affect to wear fantastical Habits
above their degree. It is dearbought Bravery, that must every day take up an
hour, or half an hour of our precious time extraordinary, as one notes.

SECT. XI. When you are beholding your Faces in a Glass, and Dressing your
selves by it.
1. COnsider, That the first use of Glasses was, that thereby Men and Women
might the better know themselves; that the most amiable Persons might learn to
shun all infamous things, and not defile the dignity of their Persons with the
deformity of their Manners. But our Glasses now have lost their primary
Institution, and make many Persons to forget themselves, and like Narcissus, to
dote upon their Faces, thinking that every one that sees them, wrongs them that
does not admire them.

2. Consider also, That there are diverse Glasses that we may look our selves
in, to observe and see what manner of Persons we are, or ought to be.

The Glass of Nature. The Glass of Example. The Glass of Conscience. The Glass
of God's Word.
1. The Glass of Nature: That is a Glass which the Heavens and the ^arth, and
every Creature do hold up unto us. There is never a Creature that we can look
upon, but we may behold in it (as in a Glass) either the Face of God's Glory,
of his Wisdom, of the eternal Power and Godhead, or may see the Image of that
Obedience and Duty which we owe to God.

2. There is the Glass of Example: For what are the Examples of those Saints
that we see before us, and those which are recorded in Sacred Scripture, and in
the Acts and Monuments of the Church, but so many Looking-Glasses, by which we
may learn to fashion and compose our Lives, according to the holy Patterns
which they do give us? How many lively Examples, and Clouds of Witnesses are
set before us, in whom (as in so many Glasses) we may behold the admirable
Graces, and ready Obedience of the Saints, in those things whereat the Flesh
and Nature do stagger and draw back; yea, Obedience in those things which might
seem Ridiculous unto Men, and in such things as seemed contrary to Natural
Affection, contrary to their Profit, and in such things as made against their
Safety: The sight of those holy Examples, should make us cry out: Oh Lord our
God! How wonderful are thy Works which thou do by the hands of thy Servants!
How wonderful are thy Graces which thou causest to shine in their Lives!

3. There is the Glass of Conscience. Though we wanted other directions, yet if
we would but daily look into this Glass, if we would but reflect upon our
selves, and turn our Eyes inward to view our own Consciences, then should we
find a Glass of Good and Evil in their right forms and colors represented to
us. If a Man look frequently into this Glass, he may cry out with the Psalmist,
Who can understand his Errors? Who can count, and number up the blemishes of
his Soul, and the errors of his Life?

4. There is the Glass of the Word of God. That which of all other is the
clearest and perfectest Mirror, both to show us what indeed we are, and what
we should be, to discover our Spots and Blemishes to us, that we may see them,
and also to direct us how we may amend them.

The Glass of Nature has a power of Conviction; whosoever looks not into it,
and therein observes not God's Power and Wisdom, is an Atheist. The Glass of
Example has the power of Direction, whosoever looks not into it, is negligent and
perverse. The Glass of Conscience, has the power of Accusation; whosoever looks
not into it, so as to discover and bewail his Sins, is an Hypocrite. The Glass
of God's Word has the power of Conversion; whosoever looks not into it to learn
the Will of God, and to reform himself by it, is an Infidel.

In a Glass we behold the Lineaments of our natural Faces, and the outward form
of our bodily Structure. So in the Glass of God's Word, we may behold the
Spiritual Face (as it were) of our Hearts and Lives, and whatever inward
corruption does cast any stain upon us, we may thereby discern it, and judge of
it. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin, says the Apostle, Romans 3.20. viz.
1. Generally, because it makes us to know what Sin is. 2. Particularly, because
it makes us to know how far forth we are guilty of it. But when the eye of our
Judgment, or the eye of our Affection is blinded, or dimmed, though we stare at
our Spots and Blemishes, yet we do not epsy them: Therefore we must earnestly
beg of God, that the veil that lies upon our Minds, may be taken away, that
when we come to look into this Glass, we may clearly see what it will show us,
and represent unto us. Whosoever looks into this Glass, it will represent unto
him the true Image that he carries, and not delude his Eye with any false
shadow. We must not labor to see our Corruptions by the Glass of the Word, but
when we see them, to reform them.

In Exodus 38.8. We read of a Laver that Moses made of the Looking-glasses that
the Israelitish Women brought unto him, to be set into the Tabernacle. Devout
and Religious Women, were content to bestow those Glasses by which they were
wont to dress their Bodies, toward the making of an Instrument, whereby through
Faith they might sanctify their Souls. This Laver served the Priests, both to
look in, and to wash in: It was clear, that they might see themselves in it;
and if they had nay Foulness about them, they might also wash themselves with
the Water that ran out of it. Such a Vessel is God's Word, it is a
Looking-Glass wherein we may see our Selves, and our own Corruptions in it; but
a Laver too, to wash our selves in it. Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse
his way? The answer is, By taking heed thereunto according to thy Word.

If you are Persons of Quality, you may employ some one about you, to read a
Chapter in the Bible whilst you are d^essing you: Or the time may be employed
by you in some profitable Meditation, or godly Conference with those about you,
as far as your necessary occasions do permit. And when you Deck your selves
with Jewels, and rich Ornaments, take heed of being proud of them, or setting
your Hearts upon them; beware of vain Affectation in wearing them, and of
wasting your Estates upon them: For no Persons are to bring Poverty upon
themselves and their Children, to make themselves fine. All your Ornaments are
but as marks of your Sin and Misery: And as a Footman, who wears a gaudy
Livery, makes but his Servility more visible; so those that trim themselves
finest, make but their Shame more public.

Let Men and Women use what Art they can to excuse their Vanity, they cannot
deny but that their most gaudy Apparel are the spoils of Beasts; that their
Ornaments are sought for in the bottom of the Sea, or in the bowels of the
Earth. What is the matter whereof so many different Silks are made, but the
Drivel of Worms, and the Sepulcher which those little Animals make unto
themselves when they die? What is Purple, which was wont to be the Badg of
Sovereignty, but the Blood of certain Fishes? What are Pearls, but the Warts of
certain Shellfish, and the thickest part of the Foam of the Sea, which could
not be turned into its substance? What are Diamonds and Rubies, but Water
congealed within Rocks? And what is Gold, which Men disguise into so many
Shapes, which is sought for with so much Labor, gotten many times so Unjustly,
and kept with so much Care, but the Excrement of the most barren Soil, to which
the Fire gives Luster, and humane error Valuation? And what is the finest
Linen wherewith multitudes of People are so much covered, and wherein the
greatest part of their Vanity consists, but a kind of Herb and Grass, which
grows up and flourishes in the Fields, withers and dies in a short time,
which passes through Women's hands, which is wetted with their Spittle, turned
with the Spindle, stretched upon the Loom, wrought with the Shuttle, whitened in
the Dew, and at last cut out into several sorts of things wherewith the Bodies
of Men and Women are adorned? Must not that Man or Woman have lost their
judgment, that shall be proud of such Trifles? I deny not but it is lawful for
some Persons to wear Ornaments, for we may not only wear that which serves for
a covering to the Body, but also that which may adorn it: For as all may wear
Clothes to hide their Shame and Nakedness, so some may wear Robes and
Ornaments, to show their State and Greatness. But their Adorning must not be so
much that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, and of
putting on of Apparel, as the hidden Man of the Heart: Yet in times of great
Calamity and Afflictions, even great Persons must lay aside their Ornaments,
when the Wrath and Displeasure of God is broken out against a Land, or People.
So the Lord said unto the People of Israel: Put off now your Ornaments, that I
may know what to do with you, Exodus 33.5. At such times we should rather appear
in Rags than in Silks, with Dust upon our Heads, and Sackcloth about our Loins,
than with Ornaments upon our Backs, and Chains of Pearl about our Necks.

SECT. XII. Of our Dedicating the Morning unto God.
GOD commanded the Children of Israel, Exodus 23.19. The first of the
First Fruits of the Land, thou shall bring into the House of the Lord. God
would not only have the First Fruits, but the first of the First Fruits; if
there were any ripe sooner than other, God called for them. Which instructs
us, that we must not only give God the First Fruits of the Day, but the
earliest time in the Morning, which is the First of the First Fruits of the
Day. This was the practice of holy Job, in the behalf of his Children; He sent
and sanctified them, and rose up early in the Morning, and offered
Burnt-Offerings according to the number of them all, Job 1.5, 6. As it is God's
due, so it is our Duty, to dedicate the Morning, the first and best of every
Day to God. Psalm. 5.3. David says unto God, My voice shall thou hear in the
Morning, in the Morning will I direct my Prayer to thee, and will look up. As
the Morning is a good friend to the Muses, so it is a great friend to the
Graces; as the Morning is the best studying time, so I judge the Morning to be
the best Praying time. So Bildad speaks unto Job, Chap. 8.5. [If thou would
seek unto God betimes.] In strictness of Translation, it may thus be rendered,
If thou would seek unto God in the Morning; or, If thou would morning God:
be with him early in the Morning; which is the first part, or beginning of the
Day, then pour out thy Heart unto God in Prayer. It was an ancient Course to
seek God early in the Morning. And the very Heathens by the light of Nature,
took this Course in their Profane and Superstitious worship. Herodot. lib. 10.
Plin. ep. 57. ad Trajan. Tertul Apolog.
Herodotus relates, that the Persian Magi addressed themselves early in the
Morning, to pray unto their false Gods. And the Primitive Christians were
wondered at by the Heathen, for their early Devotions. Pliny, in an Epistle of
his unto the Emperor Trajan, and Tertullian in his Apologeticks for the
Christians, do report of the Assemblies of the Christians before Daybreak, to
pray and call upon the Name of God. And there has been, and still ^s, a
superstitious abuse of this among ^he Papists, who call their Morning^rayers
their Maitins, because they begin early in the Morning. Seek first the Kingdom
of God, says our Savior, Mat. 5.33. First in Time, notonly principally, but
in the first place, seek it early ^n the Morning; put it not behind to the
latter end of the Day, or in the latter end of your Employments. It is best
every Day to begin with God. It is the advice of a Reverend Man: If more
necessary Duties call you not away, let secret Prayer by your self alone, or
with your Chamber-fellow, or both, go before the Common Prayers of the Family;
and delay it not causelessly, but if it may be, let it be first before any other
work of the Day: Yet be not formal and superstitious to your Hours, as if God
had absolutely tied you to such a time, etc. That hour is best for one, that
may not be fit for another. Private Prayer is most seasonable unto most, as
soon as they are up and clothed: To others, some other Hour may be freer and
fitter. And those that have not more necessary Duties, may do well to pray at
all convenient opportunities. Thus he.

SECT. XIII. Of retiring our selves in the Morning to Pray, and to give Thanks.
IT is good to retire our selves into our Closets every Morning betimes, to
Pray, and give Thanks unto the Lord. Here you may give thanks unto God for all
Benefits received in general, and particularly for those you have received the
Night past, and at that instant, which at that time you are to set before you,
that you may season the Action with some new relish. But more especially, when
the Lord has vouchsafed you any special, and (perhaps) unexpected Favor, it
does not beseem you (as vain Worldlings) to look big, scorn every one, to whom
the Lord has not opened the Hand of his Bounty so wide as to your selves; but
rather in an humble sense of your unworthiness, and admiration of God's
Goodness, to retire your selves early, and pour out your Hearts in Prayer and
Thanksgiving before the Lord.

So when the Lord has given you special Testimonies of his Presence and
Favor, and revealed his Love unto you more fully then ordinarily, it is a fit
time for you to enter into your Closets, there privately, and so the more
freely, to open your Hearts unto the Lord, and to confirm your acquaintance
with your Beloved; to endear your self unto Jesus Christ, and to cast your
selves into his embracements. The Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, speaking to the
Church of Israel, says, I passed by thee, and thy time was a time of Love. So
a Christian should be watchful to observe the Lord passing by, and presenting
himself, and take notice of the times of Love, and then it will be his wisdom
to spend some time in private Prayer, Meditation, and Thanksgiving, and so to
take his fill of Love: and to that end I commend the Morning as the fittest
time for this purpose: If we are frequent in this Course, we shall grow more
inward and entire with the Lord: Wherea when the Lord daily expresses Love and
Kindness to us, if we should show our selves coy, unkind, and regardless of his
Love; this were the way to make him more strange unto us. And indeed, the
reason why we have no more communion with Christ for the most part, is because
we give him no better entertainment when he comes. A Man of place and quality,
if he shall come to visit a Friend at his House in the Morning, and shall hear
that he is yet in his Bed, and will not rise to keep him company, or perceive
that every small trifle will keep him out of sight, he will not be an ordinary
Guest at that House. Now God is said to visit us every Morning, that is, as
soon as the Day breaks, or the Sun is up, God is visiting. What is Man, that
thou should magnify him, and set thine Heart upon him, and visit him every
Morning, etc. Job 7.17, 18. Our visits are usually in the Afternoon, it is an
extraordinary thing to visit one in the Forenoon, especially very early in the
Morning. God's visits are extraordinary, he visits in a Morning, and visits
every Morning; as often as the Morning returns, so often does he come and
visit us. God visits us (as one says) in a Morning as a Shepherd visits his
Flock, lest any should be hurt, or strayed away. As sure as the Sun rises, or
the Morning comes, so God visits us with Mercies: Therefore his Mercies are
said to be renewed every Morning, Lamen. 3.23. Or fresh every Morning.

SECT. XIV. Of Thanksgiving.
THis is very necessary to be performed every Morning, considering the benefits
we receive continually from the Hand of God. We should not be like the Clouds
that obscure the Sun that raised them, but (as one says) let us rather imitate
the Looking-Glass, which returns the Image as soon as the Face is represented
to it.

In the time of the Law it was commanded, that the Fire on the Altar should
never go out, but be always kept burning. By that same Fire, Phil^ says,
Thankfulness was fignified; for as the Fire still ascends upwards, so
Thankfulness lifts up our Hearts, and makes them ascend unto God: And it is
fit that the Divine Benefits should never be forgotten, as the Fire of the
Altar was never to be extinguished. It well becomes the Righteous to be
thankful, Psalm. 33.1. That which becomes us well, we are apt to like well: Any
Habit, any Dressing, any Fashion or Gesture that makes us graceful and comely
in the places where we are. Now Thank fullness, says the Prophet, is a comely
thing: It renders us lovely and amiable, both in the Eyes of God and Man,
whereas Unthankfulness on the other side, like some sordid Disguise, or like
some ugly Blemish upon the Body, makes us Monstrous and Deformed in the eyes of
the Beholders.

The Creatures teach us the retribution of Thankfulness. The Air draws us up
vapors out of the Earth: When it has turned the vapors into Showers, it
pours them into the Earth again, and moisteneth the dry Womb of it. The Earth
has Seed cast into her Bosom, she keeps it not long, but she returns it back
again with Profit to the Husbandman, Interest with the Principal, thirty,
sixty, an hundred fold. You know what Solomon says of the Sea, All Rivers go
into the Sea, Eccles. 1.7. to note the place whence they return and go. St.
Bernard has a Meditation upon it, That God is as the Sea, and we should be as
the Rivers: All Blessings come from God, as Rivers from the Sea; and as Rivers
to the Sea, so we should return our praises to him. Indeed, that is as much as
we can do, and so much we should do.

This Act (as one notes) consists in three things. 1. In the Memory, which
represents to the understanding the benefit received; and this Understanding
considers the Hand that gives them, and to whom, and how, and by what ways and
means, and in what measure. Thereupon an affectionate acknowledgment is made in
the Will; which not able to continue idle, spreads it self into outward Acts,
to testify the fervor of its affection. Now to practice this well, it is
requisite that we should make and keep a Catalogue of all the Benefits of God.
Bless God especially for the benefits of Creation, Preservation, Redemption,
Vocation, and for all other secret Benefits particularly received.

1. For the benefits of Creation, consider what thou wast before thou wast
Created, even no more than very nothing, and that from the very beginning thou
wast nothing; and that nothing could not make it self any thing. Now he that
drew this great Universe, out of the Chaos and Darkness of nothing, to the
light of Being and Life, it pleased him out of his mere Grace, to show upon
thee his Almighty Power, to bring thee to a being, and make thee something. And
(as St. Augustine says) not every somewhat, not a Stone, not a Bird, not a
Toad, not a Serpent, but even a Man, one of the most noble Creatures in the
World; he made thee as a little Miracle of Nature, with the adornments of so
many pieces well compacted together, to bear in thine aspect the Beams of his
own Majesty. He framed this thy Body, and beautified it in all parts, both with
Members and Senses; and that with such curious Art and wonderful Providence,
that every one of them (if they be well considered) is of it self a great
Wonder, and a great Benefit. This Job humbly and thankfully acknowledges.
Thine Hands have made me, and fashioned me together round about, etc. Job 10.8,
9, 10, 11.
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the Clay, etc. Have thou
not poured me out as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese? Thou have clothed me
with Skin, and Flesh, and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews, etc.

Our making and natural constitution, are to be reckoned among the great
Benefits received from God: I will praise thee, says David, for I am fearfully
and wonderfully made.

The greatest wonders of Man's Creation are unseen. God has packt many
Rarities, Mysteries, Wonders, in Man's Chest. All the vital Instruments and
Wheels, whereby the watch of our Life is in perpetual motion, from the first
Hour to the last, are locked up in a curious internal Cabinet, where God
himself prepared the Pulleys, hung on the Weights, and wound up the Chime, by
the Hand of his Infinite Power, without opening of any part: As a learned
Anatomist of ours, has elegantly instructed us in the Preface to his sixth
Book.

Consider what usefulness and commodiousness, Beauty and Convenience do meet
together in every part. What Beauty is stamped on the Face? What majesty in the
Eye? What strength is put into the Arms and Back? What activity into the Hands?
What Music and Melody is in the Tongue? Nothing in this whole Fabric could be
well left out, or better placed, either for Ornament, or for Use.

But the excellency of Man consists in his Soul: And as Man was the principal
part of the Creation, so the Soul is the principal part of Man. God by a Divine
Breathing, communicated this fountain of Life, which heavenly form without
noise or delay, diffused it self entire into the Body, remaining nevertheless
whole in every part. The frame of the Body is an exquisite frame, but the frame
of the Soul, the faculties and powers, motions and operations of the Soul, are
far more exquisite. The Inhabitant is more noble than the House, and the Jewel
than the Cabinet: And so great is the capacity of the Soul, that all the things
of the World put together, are not able to satisfy it. Besides, there is no
ability, no perfection in any Creature here below, but that a Man has the same
in him in a higher and far greater perfection, and by the capacity of his Soul
he is able to attain unto it; whereby it is manifest, that God by giving us
this thing alone ( viz. our Soul) has given us therewith at once all things
together. The consideration hereof, should ever make thee thankful to thy most
Gracious and Bountiful Lord, for this surpassing great Benefit.

2. Be thankful to him for thy Preservation, and the Benefits thereof.
Consider, that God has not only created thee in so great Glory and Dignity,
but it is He also that preserves thee; for thou art not able to live one
moment, nor to move one step without him. Consider also how he has created all
things in the World for thy use and service; yea, he has appointted the very
Angels in Heaven to be thy guard and defense. They are all Officers in this
great House and Family of God, unto whom is committed the defense and safeguard
of Men. Here consider the particular favors received from God in your Birth,
Nourishment, Education, Instruction, in gifts of Soul and Body, in Means and
Conveniences, in Health, Strength, Life, Sustenance, and all other Temporal
Helps and Succors; in Friends, Allies, Kindred, in thy Calling, Profession,
and estate of Life, in a continued Protection, in deliverance from so many
Dangers, and freedom from manifold Miseries, into which thou see others to
fall every Day; and thou thy self might also have fallen into the same, had
not Almighty God of his great Mercy preserved thee: In guiding thee through the
degrees of Ages, wherein every one in his own particular, may acknowledge
infinite passages of the Divine Providence. How should the consideration
hereof, together with the Circumstances of each Benefit, make thee to cry out
with the Prophet David: Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my House, that thou
have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18.

3. Be exceeding thankful for thy Redemption. We are all by Nature in miserable
bondage to Sin and Satan, and we have all sold our selves for naught, Isa.
52.3. and by this felling our selves to Sin and Satan, we have put our selves
out of our own, into their Dominion, and during that estate, abide wholly to be
disposed at their pleasure. They are now become our Lords, and no drudgery must
we refuse, be it never so irksome or burdensome, whereabout they shall list to
employ us. Now, how should all God's Redeemed Ones, ascribe Honor and Glory to
their God, acknowledging the infinite Love, and abundant Grace of God, in
procuring Redemption for poor Bondslaves, Captives, Prisoners; that he has
appointed and anointed a Redeemer to preach Glad-tidings unto the Meek, to bind
up the Brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of
the Prison to them that are Bound, to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord;
to proclaim a Jubilee, a Year of release to Prisoners and Bondmen! Isa. 61.1,
2. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his Mercy endures for
ever. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand
of the Enemy. It was a custom among the Romans, when any of their Commanders
had gotten a great Victory, and obtained the honor of Public Triumph, if he
had delivered any of his Countrymen by this Victory, who before were Captives
among the Enemies, these redeemed ones used to attend the triumphant Chariot of
the Conqueror, when he entered the City, thereby to do him Homage, and to set
forth the glory of his Victory. In this case it becomes those whom the Lord
has redeemed from Sin, from Satan, from the Curse of the Law, and from
everlasting Destruction, to wait upon their Triumphant Redeemer, and do him all
possible Honor, and give him all Praises and thankful Acknowledgments for
their Redemption, procured by his Victory over all those Enemies and Evils.

4. Bless the Lord for thy Vocation, that he has called thee out of Darkness
into his mavelous Light by his Word and Spirit; that he has taken thy Soul
to be his Spouse, and decked it with the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit. What
had become of thee if thou had been born among Infidels, who are without
Christ, being A liens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
and strangers from the Covenant of Promises, having no hope, and without God
in the World, who wanting the knowledge of the true Living God, worshipped
Stocks and Stones for God. And among many that perish in Ignorance and
Profaneness, that are under the found of the Word; To whom the Gospel is hid,
whose eyes the God of this World has blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4.
lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them. Bless the Lord, that it pleased him, that thou should
be born in the lap of the True Church, and be nourished there with the sincere
Milk of the Word, and with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ. Consider how
long God did wait for thy Conversion, giving thee space to Repent, and how he
suffered thee so long to continue in that state of Sin and Wickedness, and did
not cut down such an unfruitful and unprofitable Tree that cumbred the Earth,
and received the influence of Heaven so long in vain. Consider likewise how
many good Inspirations and holy purposes he breathed into thy Heart, even in
the midst of thy very Sins, and wicked Life; and that he persisted in calling
thee so long a time; and at length to bring thy great stubbornness, and
obstinate resistance so long continued, to an end; and to call thee with such a
mighty, loud, and effectual Voice, that thereby thou might rise from Death to
Life, and come forth as it were another Lazarus, out of the dark and obscure
Grave of thy wicked and sinful Life, and not with thine Hands and Feet bound,
but loosed and set at liberty out of the stinking Prison and Thraldom of the
enemy of Mankind. Praise the Lord for granting thee not only pardon for thy
Sins past, but also. Grace from that time forward, not to return to thy former
Bondage; and likewise that he has given thee a sweet taste and savor of the
things of his Spirit, which before seemed very unsavory to thee, and withal a
loathsomness and misliking of the things of the Flesh, and of the World, which
before were very delightful to thee. Then think with thy self, unto how many
has God denied this Benefit, which he has so freely granted unto thee? And
whereas thou being as unworthy of this Calling as they, yet it has pleased God
to suffer them to continue in their Impenitency and Obstinacy, and to call thee
unto the state of Grace and Salvation: Oh what thanks and service do thou owe
unto him for this inestimable Benefit!

5. There be other Benefits that are given to particular Persons, which none
other knows but he has has received them, for which we are bound to give
thanks unto the Lord, as for the more general, for as much as they are more
certain Tokens of the special and particular Love and Providence that the Lord
bears toward us. Such Benefits as these cannot be written in Books, but every
one is to write them in his Heart, and so to join them with the other general
Benefits, and to give most humble thanks unto the Lord for them. There are also
other Benefits more secret which are unknown, or scarce observed by the party
which does receive them. These are certain Snares and privy Dangers, which the
Lord does often prevent and disappoint by his Providence, he knowing what great
prejudice they might do unto us, did not he prevent them, and disappoint them.
Who is able to recount how many Dangers he has escaped, from how many
Temptations God has preserved him, from how many occasions of Sin he has
delivered him, how often he has stopped the passages, and taken out of the way
the subtle and deceitful Snares of the Devil, our vigilant Adversary, that we
should not fall into them? Likewise, a Man may have many secret Sins, which the
Person that commits them, knows not. Wherefore as touching these secret
Sins, we ought daily to pray with the Psalmist, Cleanse me, O Lord, from my
secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. Even so it is requisite every day to yield him most
hearty thanks for this kind of Benefit.

SECT. XV. Of Preparation to Prayer.
BEfore we enter upon Prayer, or Thansgiving, it is very requisite, that there
be first a Preparation of our Hearts to this holy Exercise; doing herein as
Musicians, who use to temper and tune their Lute, Viol, or other Instrument,
before they play upon it. Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, Ecclus. 18.23.
lest thou be as one that tempts God, says the Son of Syrach. In our
Savior's platform of Prayer, the Petitions are not set down abruptly, but a
solemn Preface is prefixed, like a fair Porch to a beautiful House, to teach us
to set our Affections in due order, before we draw nigh to speak unto the Lord.
God has also expressly commanded: Be not rash with thy Mouth, nor let thine
Heart be hasty to utter a thing before God, Eccles. 5.2. It is a dangerous
thing to babble out unadvised and undigested words in his Ears. Prayer and
other holy Duties call for holy Preparation. I will wash mine Hands in
Innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord, was David's resolution,
Psalm. 26.6. Joh sent and sanctified his Children, that is, he sent solemnly to
his Children to prepare themselves, warning them not to come to the Sacrifice
except they were fanctified. So Samuel said to the Elders of Bethlehem,
Sanctify your selves, and come with me to the Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 16.5. This
Sanctifying was a preparing of themselves, was a fitting of themselves, that
they might be ready for the Sacrifice. The very Heathen had this Notion, they
would not admit any to come to their Religious Services, unless they were
prepared, therefore they had one that cried out to the People, when they came
to Sacrifice, All ye that are unclean and profane; go far away from these
Sacrifices. Prepare your felves unto Prayer, by considering the Greatness and
Majesty of that God to whom you go to speak in Prayer: For this Consideration
will teach you, with what great Humility and Reverence it behooves such
miserable Creatures, to speak unto a Lord of so great Majesty, as Almighty God
is, concerning a matter of so great importance as is your own Salvation. How
close shut ought ye to have the gates of your Understanding and Will at the
time of Prayer, from the cares and thoughts of the World, and open unto God
alone, that in case he come to enter therein, he be not driven back again,
finding the Gates shut against him, or the Lodging-Chambers taken up and
pestered with other Guests!

And to this end you may pray to be prepared and enabled to Pray, in this, or
the like manner:

Almighty God, I beseech thee, be pleased to prepare my Heart, and quicken mine
Affections in this holy service of calling upon Thy Name. Make me to consider,
that Thou into whose Presence I am come, and have to do, art a God clothed with
Glory and Majesty, and that I am Dust and Ashes, and a most vile and unworthy
Sinner. I beseech Thee possess me with an amfal reverence of Thy Glorious
Majesty, that I may watch over my Thoughts, and have regard to my good
behavior before Thee, lest my presumption, and want of due respect to Thy
Majesty, should turn my Prayers into Sin. Give me a lively sense of my own
Wants, and a clear apprehension of those Blessings I have received from Thee,
and of those Mercies which in Thy Word Thou have promised to bestow, that I may
be furnished with matter both for Request and Thankfulness; and may be able to
pour out my Soul abundantly before Thee. Let Thy Spirit of Supplication
sanctify my Thoughts, guide my Tongue, and help mine Infirmities. Give me
faith in Thy Promises, that I may come boldly unto the Throne of Thy Grace, and
let me find it is good to draw near to Thee (my God) in Prayer. Let the end of
my praying be Thy Glory, and make me as ready to give thanks for Blessings
obtained, as to be earnest for Mercies I stand in need of.

With this Preparation may thou draw near to God in the Morning, imploring
God for the assistance and succor of his Grace, whereby thou may the better
bestow the day following in his Service: And be earnest with God in thy
Preparation, to instruct thee how to do thy Duty therein, and to direct thee to
speak unto him in Prayer with such Attention and Devotion, with such
recollection and closeness of Mind, and with such A we and Reverence, as is to
be used before so great a Majesty; and withal, entreat him that thou may so
spend that portion of time in this exercise of Prayer, that in the end thou
may arise from the same with new force and strength, to do all such things as
appertain to his Service.

And that thou may the better fit thy self for thy Morning-prayer, go to Bed
with the thoughts of it over Night; like those that intend to bake Unleavened
Bread the next Day, do use to lay the Leaven over Night. So may a Christian
over Night, think on what he will recommend unto God the next Morning, and
as soon as he awaketh, busy his Mind about it, before any other thing do enter
therein; that so his Heart having endited a good Matter, his Tongue may be as
the Pen of a ready Writer.

And for as much as the Prayers of the Righteous are acceptable with God, you
shall do well to consider in your Prayers both Morning and Evening, what a
number of God's faithful People, both Men and Women, in this World, be at this
time at the Throne of Grace, humbly confessing their Sins to the Lord, and
craving Pardon for them, and begging such Graces and Blessings as are needful
for them; with which Persons you ought to join your selves, that the present
sweet remembrance of them, may be a Spur to your Devotion, causing you to
persevere in this holy exercise of Prayer. Moreover, whenever you shall find
your selves cold and remiss in this Duty, you may be ashamed, and check your
selves by the example of so many Pious and Devout Persons, which with so good
carefulness and diligence, have continued so long a time in this exercise of
Prayer without ceasing, daily offering up their Bodies and Souls unto God in
Sacrifice.

SECT. XVI. Of Reading the holy Scriptures.
AFter Preparation follows Reading; which ought not to be done lightly, nor
passed over in haste, but with great deliberation and attention, applying
thereunto your Understanding to conceive such things as you read, and chiefly
your Affections to taste those things which you understand. Before you pray in
the Morning, first read a Chapter, or some select portion of Scripture out of
the Word of God; and when thou come to any place that may inflame thine
Affections, and raise thy Devotion, thou shall do well to stay and pause a
little upon it, and to make there (as it were) a station in thinking upon that
matter which thou have read, and in making some short Prayer upon it: according
to the Counsel of St. Bernard, saying, It is requisite oftentimes to gather and
procure a little Spirit and Devotion out of the matters that we read, and to
break off the course of our reading with some kind of Prayer, by means whereof
we may lift up our Hearts unto the Lord, and talk with him according as the
sense and matter of such things as we read do require.

Here let me Advertise, Let not thy Reading be very long, lest it take up too
much time, which ought otherwise to be employed: For as St. Augustine says, It
is good both to read and pray, if we can does both the one and the other.
After thou have read a while, think with thy self how many choice things thou
can pick out of it.

Consider what holy Counsels and Exhortations to a godly Life. What Threatenings
against such Sins. What dreadful examples of God's Judgments upon such and such
Sinners. What Blessings and Rewards God promises to such Graces and Virtues.
What wonderful Deliverances God has wrought for his Church in Times past, and
what singular Blessings he has bestowed upon his faithful Servants. Bring home
these things to thine Heart; and do not read them as matters of Historical
Discourse, but as so many Epistles sent down to thee from God out of Heaven;
and read them with that Reverence, as if God himself stood by, and spoke these
words unto thee. It is written of a certain devout and godly Bishop, that he
would always read the holy Scriptures kneeling upon his Knees. And whatsoever
thou thus read, let it be either to confirm thy Faith, or increase thy
Repentance.

SECT. XVII. Of Meditation, and the fittest Season for it.
WHatsoever the thing be that we are to meditate up on, Granat. Meditat.
whether of the Life and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, or of any other
thing that may be figured by Imagination; as of Death, the Day of Judgment, of
Heaven, or Hell, we may then represent every one of these matters in our
Imagination in such manner as it passed, as if in the very same place where we
are, all the same passed before us in our presence. This manner of meditating
serves to this end, that by means of such a representation of these things, we
may have the more lively consideration and feeling of them in us. Imaginary
Meditation is commonly a great help to keep in the mind more closely
recollected, by causing it to attend to her Work, after the manner of Bees,
which work their Honeycomb within their own Hives.

Some commend the Morning as the fittest time to busy our minds in holy
Meditations, for these Reasons:

1. Because they find it was the Practice of David, that Man of Meditations:
Psalm. 139.18. says he unto God, When I awake, I am still with thee. That is,
when I awake in the Morning, I am taken up with Meditations of God. Divine
Meditations were daily David's waking and first Thoughts.

2. Because then the Mind, a Man's intellectual and cogitative Faculty, is
fresh, and more free from the hurrying businesses of the World, which fall out
every Day, and are apt to distract the mind in this holy Duty.

3. Because if the Mind be first seasoned with holy Meditations, it tends much
to keep both Mind and Conversation in an holy frame, all the day after; for
oftentimes what a Man's first thoughts are, they become his frequent thoughts
on that Day. If a Man begins the Day with vain, worldly, or revengeful
Thoughts, they are apt to lodge in his Heart all the Day long; such thoughts are
intruding and abiding Guests.

4. Because God restores to us his Mercies every Morning, new Mercies do
attend us every Morning; and these renewed Mercies should oblige us to renew
our Thoughts and Meditations on God, every Morning.

Thou may here Meditate on Jesus Christ, who is called the Hind of the
Morning.] He is shadowed by the Hind with respect unto his Sufferings, for he
was hunted as an Hind with Hounds, with Bloodhounds, with the Hell Hounds of
this World, the worst of wicked Men. Therefore it is observable, that in the
XXII Psalm, which is throughout a Prophecy of Christ, (the first words being
spoken near to his Death, as he hung upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?) The Title of that Psalm is, To the chief Musician upon
Aijeleh Sahar, that is, The Hind of the Morning. It is usual for Hunters, to
single out that special Deer, Heart, or Hind, early in the Morning, when they
intend to hunt that Day; signifying that Jesus Christ was an Hind hunted, not
only very fiercely, but very early by wicked Men to Death.

SECT. XVIII. Of Petition.
IT is the Honor of God, that all Creatures sue unto him, and depend upon him,
that all need his help, and that so many petition him for it from day to Day.
He is the God of hearing Prayer, therefore unto him shall all Flesh come. The
highest Glory that God has on Earth, is, that so many thousands come daily
thronging to, and knocking at the Gate of Heaven. A certain great Emperor
coming into Egypt, to show the Zeal he had to the Public Good, said to the
Egyptians, Draw from me, as from your River Nilus. But what can be drawn from a
Man but hopes, which swell like bubbles of Water till they burst? It is from
God that we must draw, for he is a Fountain which perpetually distilleth; who
quenches the Thirst of all the World, and has but one Thirst, which is (says
Gregory Nazianzen) that all Men should thirst after his Bounty.

Our Savior having taxed the abuses in Prayer, sets down a perfect
Platform, Matthew. 6.9. etc. where ye have, 1. A Command. 2. A Pattern. After
this manner, or thus, pray ye, (...): Which may have reference as well to the
Matter as to the Manner, yea, to the Order and Method. But here we understand
it not according to the Method, as though we were bound to order our Petitions
always thus. We have some short Prayers elsewhere, specified in the New
Testament, where we find not this Order, and therefore that I think is
Arbitrary: Therefore this may have reference chiefly to the matter of our
Prayers; let this be the matter of your Prayers: And to the Affection, pray
with such affections as are intimated in this Prayer.

So that here are condemned all wicked and unlawful Requests, as when Men wish
Mischief unto others out of private Malice; when they wish the accomplishment
of their unlawful desires; when they pray for those things that tend to the
dishonor of God, and the damage of his Church: And on the other side when they
pray not with such Affections, as are insinuated in the Prayer.

In the Preface which makes way to the Prayer, ye may see, I. Who must pray, we
must Pray. II. To whom we must Pray. III. For whom we must Pray. IV. Through
whom we must Pray. V. How we must Pray.


I. Who? The Question may have a double meaning.

1. Who ought to pray? To which I answer, All: Because All owe unto God all
Service, Honor, Worship, whereof Prayer is a special part. In him all live,
move, and have their beings. Yea, Nature teaches. Man to acknowledge, and seek
to a Deity for supply of its Wants. All owe this Debt, though all cannot pay
it, and none so as is required.

2. Thus: Who may, and can pray in an acceptable manner unto God? I answer,
Only Believers. They alone can truly call him Father. They only have received
him by Faith, John. 1.12. How can they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? Romans 10. This shows the misery of an Unbeliever, he cannot come to
God.

II. For whom must we pray? I answer: Not only for our selves, but for all the
Household of Faith especially; more largely for all that belong to God, whether
Called, or Uncalled; more generally for all Men; as St. Paul says, and our
Liturgy after the Apostle, (though it be therefore taxed) seil. All sorts and
conditions of Men, especially for the King, and all that are in Authority under
him, our Pastors, Church Governors, Ministers, all that bear Rule in the
Church, or Commonwealth, and for all the Members of the Catholic Church; for
our Parents, Masters, Children, Servants, and those that be nearest unto us,
and Men that in special do want our Prayers, in public and private Calamities.

Object. But we must ask according to the Will of God.

Resp. Yes, according to his revealed Will: We must not, cannot look into his
secret Will, to see who are there excluded from his Mercy; but those who are
excluded in his revealed Will, we must not sue for; as the Devils, and those
who have sinned against the Holy Ghost, if we knew them.

Object. But do we not worship God in vain, when we pray for whom the Lord will
not hear us?

Resp. I answer, No: Our Prayer shall return into our own bosoms, as it was
with the Psalmist, when he prayed for his Enemies.

III. To whom must we pray? I answer, Unto God, who is there called a Father; a
Word of Nature, or Person: In the former sense taken for the Holy Trinity; in
the latter for the First Person. Here ye may understand it both ways, in a
compound sense. 1. That you are to direct your Prayers to God, the whole Divine
Nature, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And then withal to the Father first in
order, through the Son, by the Holy Ghost. All are here condemned, who pray
unto any other: None is to be prayed unto, but whom we may call our Heavenly
Father, which is not due to any Creature.

IV. Through whom?] I answer, Through Christ alone: For through him, and none
other, is God become our Father: By Him we have the privilege of Adoption, and
are made Sons and Daughters. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, who is the Prepitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2.1. None can be
our Mediator of Intercession unto God, but He that is the Propitiation,
appeasing him, and satisfying his Wrath due unto our Sins; and therefore no
Saint nor Angel must be employed in this Office. There is but one Mediator of
Redemption and Intercession between God and Man, even Christ Jesus, who is both
God and Man.

V. How we must pray?] Resp. 1. As to a Father. 2. As to a Father which is in
Heaven. And therefore, To one that is willing and ready to help, infinite in
Majesty and Sovereignty, seeing and knowing all things, our Hearts, our Wants.
This should teach you to pray with Boldness, Confidence, Reverence,
Understanding, Sincerity. Pray with Boldness, as to a Father; with Confidence
and Reverence, as to an Heavenly Father; with Sincerity and Understanding, as
to him that sees your Hearts.

The things that we are to pray for, every Morning at least, one reduces them
to these Heads, viz. That you may not offend God this Day. That you may not
want Grace, Light, and Courage, to resist those Temptations which most assail
you, and those Sins to which you are most inclined. That you may practice those
Virtues which are most necessary for you. That you may be guided this Day by
God's good Providence, in all that concerns your Soul, Body, and Estate. That
you may obtain new Favors and Assistance for the Necessities of your
Neighbors, which you may then set before him.

This kind of Supplication (among other Commodities) has this withal, that it
daily renews in the Soul some good purposes and desires of Virtues, and
moves it to be the more earnest to do that thing, which he has so frequently
and so earnestly desired. Chrysostom says, Such as pray earnestly in very
deed, will not suffer their Hearts to commit any thing that is unseemly for
such an Exercise, but ever have their Eyes upon God, with whom a little before
they talked, and were conversant. And so by that Cogitation they put away from
them all the Suggestions of the Devil, when they consider what an heinous
matter it were, that he that had a little before talked with Almighty God, and
desired of him Chastity and Holiness, with all other Virtues, should
immediately run to his Enemies side, and open the Gates of his Soul, to receive
in filthy and dishonest Delights; and suffer the Devil to place him self in
that Heart, which a little before was the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

A form of Petition, composed by Thomas Aquinas.
O God, give unto me, and unto all those whom I commend in my Prayer, an
understanding to know Thee, and affectionate devotion to seek Thee; a Wisdom to
find Thee; a Conversation to please Thee; a Perseverance boldly to wait on
Thee; a Faith happily to embrace Thee. My God, so order it, that I may be
wounded with Thy sufferings in Repentance, that in this Life I may use Thy
Blessings in Grace, and enjoy in the other Eternal Joys in Glory. Amen.

SECT. XIX. Of Offering our selves to God.
ONe act of true Devotion, is, That a Man should every Morning offer up, and
make a Resignation of himself unto God, which is an absolute parting with
himself, and a putting himself under the Power, Wisdom, and Sovereignty of God,
to be commanded, ordered, and disposed in all things by him according to his
Will. This work of Resigning our selves to God, must be always doing whilst we
are in this World. When God has wrought upon the Heart by effectual
Persuasions, and by his mighty Power, the Lord says to the Soul, I am thy God;
and the Soul answers in truth, And I am Thine. (As David, Psalm. 116.6. O Lord,
I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant). Now is the Resignation actually made. But
though this be done, yet it is still always doing whilst we are here upon
Earth, nay, to Eternity: For it is a thing that consists of an iteration of
multiplied Acts. As Wedlock is not one single Act of Persons giving themselves
each to other; but if they live as Married Persons ought, there is a daily
giving of themselves each to other: Their Hearts go out every day with
Complacency and Delight, willingly renewing the Bond, and making the Contract
yet firmer and firmer.

The end of this Resignation of your selves to God, is that in all things you
may be Commanded, Ruled, and Governed by him: to have the Will of God to be
your Bounds, and to have it for your Rule and Pattern: To be Bounded by God, is
to do nothing, but what God does either Command or Warrant. All things are not
Commanded a Christian that he may do: But Commands and Warrants are the utmost
Latitude of that Liberty which is left us; we have no further to go, and we
need not, there is scope enough to keep within these Limits. Psalm. 119.16.
Says David, I have seen an end of all Perfection: but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad. It is as if he had said, I have walked over the fair Plains of
every Creature, I have viewed the extent of all Excellency in them, and I could
look beyond it: But when I look upon the Commandment of God, as it is either
Mandatory, or Promisory, it is of so vast Dimensions, so exceeding great, that
it exceeds all things in the World; there is room enough for the Spirit of a
Man, that is in true subjection unto God. Now as we need not step beyond this
Bound, so if we do, it is dangerous; it is but as a Man that steps out of a
Way, and falls into a Pit; or one that steps from his House, and falls into a
Prison. For this very thing God threatens Israel, because they had withdrawn
from him, that he would feed them as a Lamb in a strange Place, Hos. 4.16. That
is, like a Lamb not kept within its Fold and appointed Pastures, under the care
of a watchful Shepherd, but left to ramble at its own Will.

And as to have the Will of God your Bounds, is to do nothing but what agrees
with his Will; so it is to do all that he requires. This is that which the
Lord thy God requires of thee, to do all these things that he has commanded
thee, says Moses. When you give your selves to God, to be commanded and
governed by him, it is to a Subjection that is absolute, and not conditional.

Moreover, to be under his Command and Government, is for you to make the Will
of God your Rule and Pattern; Namely, not only to do the things that are
commanded, but to do it in that manner as they are commanded.

You must also be willing to be disposed by him according to his Will: To be
contented in every Condition wherein God sets you; and though your Case seem
hard, and there is much in it that is grievous to Nature, yet lie down quietly
under the Hand and Will of God. That Is one branch of our Willingness to be
disposed by God, to be contented in every Condition wherein God sets us. A
second Branch of being willing to be at God's disposing, is an indifferency of
Mind in respect of any possible Change, whereunto you are called according to
the Wisdom and Will of God; as a holy Man well notes, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. When
Zadok was by the Ark, King David said unto him, Carry back the Ark of God into
the City: If I shall find favor in the Eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it, and his Habitation. But if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee: Behold, here am I, let him do to me, as seems good unto him.
Let this be thy Language, O Christian: if thou ownest God as thy Sovereign, and
daily resignest up thy self to be disposed by him in all things, Consider, That
thou art as a Sheep before the Shepherd, that must change thy Pasture at the
Shepherd's pleasure; and as a Soldier, that must March hither and thither at
the Command of thy Captain, or General: Or as a Vessel in the House, that
stands to be filled or emptied at discretion; or as a Servant, that must come
and go as he is bidden, and not to go to, or stay in any place at his own will.

Let it be your care every Morning, to consecrate all your Affections and
Actions unto God, to offer up all your Faculties, Senses, Thoughts, Words, and
Works, and all that you are, remembering that saying of Chrysostom: That it is
the most wicked Avarice, to defraud God of the Oblation of our selves. You may
offer your selves to God in this, or the like manner.

The manner of Offering our selves to God.
O Lord, I am not mine own, but Thine, I have engaged my self unto Thee; I have
felt thy Power conquering and subduing me; and I yield my self to be Thine for
ever. I should account it high Injustice in me, to arrogate any Liberty to my
self, seeing I have so solemnly parted with it into thy Hands. I think it best
to resign up my self to Thee, and esteem it a great Mercy Thou will enter into
a new Contract with me. I recommend the small Service which I shall do this day
to Thy merciful Conduct, and Assistance. O Blessed Savior! Oh set it from
henceforward before thine Eyes, to Direct, Correct, and Perfect it! I offer it,
and all that I am to thee, with my whole Affection, both for my self and all
the Faithful, in the union of that most perfect Intention, which Thou had,
when Thou prayedst on Earth to Thy Father in Heaven.

SECT. XX. Of Contrition.
WHen thou come into the Presence of God in the Morning, having considered
the multitude of thy Sins, and seen thy self overcharged with the burden of
them, see that thou humble thy self, and let thy Heart be pierced with Godly
Sorrow, Contrition, and Compunction of Spirit: For the furtherance whereof,
thou may help thy self with a very devout consideration of an Ancient Father,
which I shall set down with some little Variation.

Behold, I a vile Wretch, have greatly offended thy Divine Majesty, I am afraid
to lift up mine Eyes to Heaven; I desire to strike my self with that Publican
in the Gospel, that God may be merciful to me a Sinner: I desire to enforce my
self, and to take Arms against mine own Wickedness; and to judge my self, that I
may not be judged of the Lord. If my Blessed Lord and Savior has been so
reproachfully handled for my sake; If he has suffered such grievous Pains and
Torments for the Sins that I have committed, why should not I abase and abhor
my self, being the very Person that has sinned? I am he that has despised
Almighty God; I am he that has endeavored to crucify afresh the Son of God:
And methinks that the whole frame of this World cries out against me with
open Mouth, saying* This is he that has offended and despised our Common Lord:
This is that wicked Wretch that has rather been moved with the guileful Baits
of the Devil, than with the great Benefits of Almighty God. This is he that
could never be induced to Virtue and Goodness, with the Cords of Love, and
sweet entertainments of Almighty God, nor ever be afrighted with his terrible
Threatenings, and dreadful Judgments. This is he that (so much as lies in him)
has defaced the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the Lord, and cast Contempt
upon them. This is he that has been more afraid to offend a weak mortal Man,
than that God that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell. This is he that has
been more ashamed to commit a filthy Act before a rude Country Peasant, than
before the Presence of the All-seeing God. This is he that has preferred the
Dung and Dross of the Earth before Heavenly Treasures. Wherefore all Creatures
do cry out against me, after this manner, and say, This is that lewd Caitiff
that has abused us all: For whereas he ought to have employed us in the
Service, and to the Glory of our Creator; he has made us to serve his Lusts,
and the will and pleasure of the Devil, perverting all such things to the
Injury and Reproach of the Creator, which he had created for his Service. His
Soul was adorned with the Image of God, and he has disfigured this Divine
Image, and clothed it with our vile Image and Likeness; he has been more
earthy than the Earth it self, more unstable than the Water, more mutable than
the Wind, more enflamed in his appetite than the Fire, more hardened than the
Stone; more cruel to himself than the wild Beasts, more spiteful and venomous
against others than the Cockatrice: He has neither feared God, nor regarded
Man: He has not been contented alone himself to be injurious to God; but would
have many others to be partakers with him in sinful Practices.

Now what shall be said of his other abominable Practices? Such has his Pride
been, that he refused to be in subjection unto God; he would not submit his
Neck under the sweet yoke of his Obedience, but would rather live as he listed,
and fulfill his own Will in every point, rebelling against the Lord, vexing his
holy Spirit. How exceedingly was he enraged, if God did not grant him all his
desires, or if he sent any Crosses, or Troubles, for his Trial and Exercise: He
loved to be applauded in all his doings, whether good or bad.

And now consider, O my Soul, whether all Creatures may not justly cry out
against thee, and say, Come, let us destroy this wicked Wretch from off the
face of the Earth, that has done so much wrong to our Creator. May not the
Earth say, Why do I bear such a cumbersome Wretch? May not the Water say, Why
do I not drown him? May not the Fire say, Why do I not burn and consume him?
May not Hell say, Why do I not swallow him up, and torment him? Alas! miserable
Wretch that I am! What shall I do? Whither shall I go, seeing all Creatures are
in Arms against me? Where shall I hide my Head? Who will receive me, who have
offended all Creatures? The great God I have despised, the Angels I have
grieved, the Saints I have dishonored, Men I have offended and scandalized,
and all Creatures have I most wickedly abused. Whither then shall Iflie for
shelter, for as much as I have made all things to become mine Enemies: I look
round about me, and can see nothing that will take my part; yea, even mine own
Conscience barketh against me, and all my Bowels do accuse me, and rent me in
pieces.

Wherefore, weep continually, O my Soul, lament thy wretchedness like a poor
miserable Creature, never cease weeping so long as thou live in this Vale of
misery! be still in expectation when thy merciful Savior will vouchsafe to
turn the Eyes of his Compassion toward thee; and with all possible humility
and shame, cast thy self down at his Feet, and cry out, Oh! where can I find
Punishment enough to be avenged on my self, and Tears enough to wash away mine
offenses? O Lord, I am that great Enemy of thine, which has committed most
wicked and abominable Offenses before thy Face, I acknowledge my self guilty
before thee. I beseech thee, O Lord, to cast the Mantle of thy Mercy over me,
thy poor, wretched, miserable Creature, and let the greatness of thy Goodness
overcome and cover my wickedness. Let the most sweet loving Father rejoice at
the coming home again of his Prodigal Son: Let the good Shepherd rejoice at the
recovery of his lost Sheep. Oh! how happy and joyful shall that Day be, when
thou shall cast thine Arms about my Neck, and give me the sweet embraces and
kisses of Peace! I will now take Arms against my self therefore, and be more
cruel and rigorous against my self than any other; I will loath and despise my
self, and from henceforth the face of Sin shall be more hideous to me than
Hell; and I shall desire to be despised and punished of all Creatures, for as
much as I have despised the Creator of them all. I am contented that all
Dishonours, Reproaches, and Punishments, do run upon me on every side, so that
by them I may be brought to my most Sweet and Merciful Lord. And as for all
Honor, Pleasure, and Worldly Delights, they shall be quite banished away from
me, in so much as the very Names of them shall be heard no more in my House; I
will seek nothing else but the Honor of my Lord God, and the Contempt and
Confusion of my self. Hitherto, or almost to this effect, are the words of that
Devout and Ancient Father.

SECT. XXI. Of Family Worship.
HEre I shall commend unto you the advice of a Reverend Divine of ours. Let
Family Worship be performed constantly and seasonably, twice a Day, at that
Hour which is freest from Interruptions, not delaying it without just cause.
But whenever it is performed, be sure it be Reverently, Seriously, and
Spiritually done. If greater Duty hinder not, begin with a brief Invocation of
God's Name, and craving of his Help and Blessing through Christ, and then read
some part of the holy Scripture in order; and either help the Hearers to
understand and apply it: Or if you are unable for that, then read some
profitable Book to them for such ends, and earnestly pour out your Souls in
Prayer, etc. Pretend not necessity against any Duty, for it is but
unwillingness, or negligence, that makes Men remiss in Family Worship. The
lively and constant performance of Family Duties, is a principal means to keep
up the power and interest of Godliness in the World, all which decays when
these grow dead, slight, and formal.

Those Families wherein this Service of God is performed, are (as it were)
little Churches, yea, even a kind of Paradise upon Earth. And for this purpose,
Philem. 1, 2.
St. Paul writing to Philemon, Greeteth the Church that is in his House. And in
like manner he sends Salutations to the Church of Corinth from Aquila to
Priscilla, and the Church that was in their House, 1 Cor. 16.19. On the other
side, where Family Worship is not used, but either for the most part, or
altogether neglected, those Families may be termed no better than Companies of
profane and graceless Atheists, who as they deny God in their Hearts, so they
are described by this Note, That they do not call upon the Name of the Lord,
Psalm. 14.4. And the Prophet prays thus unto God: Pour out thy Fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name,
Jer. 10.25.

Many Parents take care only to enrich their Children, to make them great and
honorable in the World, to leave them large Portions and Estates, to provide
rich Matches for them, but take no care to bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord: Nay, many Parents are afraid their Children should
prove Religious: Some Parents cannot abide their Children, whom they see to
look a little toward Sion. Such Parents (as one says) are the Devil's
Children. But every Parent ought to say of his Natural Children, as St. John
does of his Spiritual Children ( Epist. 3.4.) I have no greater joy, than to
hear that my Children walk in the Truth.

SECT. XXII. A Calling, and Business, of what Importance.
IT becomes every one to be truly Diligent, and well employed in some lawful
Calling. God himself (both Father and Son) are said to Work, John 5.17. and
will admit of no Loiterers, or Idle Persons. He that will have his Penny, must
work in his Vineyard, Mat. 20.6. And he that works, receives Wages, and
gathers Fruit unto Life Eternal, John 4.36. No Man therefore must be idle, or
ill employed: He must work the Works of God, that is, such as God sets him
about, and approves, without picking and choosing his own Work: He must work
while it is Day, before the Night comes, wherein no Man can work.

Let me advise thee, O Christian, to improve Time and Business, that even thine
Idleness (if I may so call thy vacant Hours) that is, thy necessary rest, thy
leisure, may not be without some Diligence, because it tends to fit thee for
Business. When thou lie down to sleep, let it be to this end, that thou may
rise, and go about thy Work, not to pamper Sloth: If thou eatest, do it to the
same end as Elias did, to walk in the strength of thy Food the way that God
sends thee, not to gratify thy Belly, or thine Appetite. And when God puts
thee at any time upon doing his Will, be thou never better pleased, than when
God gives thee thy Hands full of work, nor more restless, than when God does
not employ thee.

It is the diligent Hand that makes rich: Prove. 10.4. and cap. 13.4.
And the Soul of the Diligent shall be made fat. If thou walk in God's Way,
thou art in God's keeping. But if thou stragglest from the way of Duty, thou
art like enough to meet with a Lion, 1 Kings 13.24.
as the disobedient Prophet: Or with a Storm, a Wrack, a Whale, as Fugitive
Jonas, Jonas 1.17.
to swallow, not to save. But if thou walk diligently in thy Calling, thou
art within the Hedge and Pale of Providence, Psalm. 34.7.
and under the Guard of the holy Angels. Idleness is the enemy of Health, the
consumption of Thrist, the foil of Virtue, the hindrance of Wisdom, and the
hatred of God; as a Reverend Divine of ours terms it.

No Man ever had larger Possessions than Adam, who was the only absolute
Monarch of the whole World; nor was any mere Man more Noble, for he is styled
the Son of God, Luke 3.38. If any exceeded him herein, it was only Jesus
Christ, the Natural Son of God, and Heir of all Things: Yet God would not that
either Adam in Paradise, in the state of Innocence, or his own Son appearing in
our Flesh, should be without a Calling, or idle in it.

How many are there of the Gentry, that are possessed with this Opinion, that
they must live at the height of their Estates, and spend all their time in
Pleasures and Idleness, no way conducing to the Common Good, but much to the
Prejudice of it; as if God, like Augustus, had built an Apragopolis, a City
void of Business, and a Nursery of Idleness and Profaneness.

Multitudes there are in the City, that like the Athenians, find little to do,
but to busy themselves to hear and tell News. Others spend most of their time
in Plays, and in Visits, in the study of the Times, Fashions, Modes, and
Compliments, etc. erecting (as it were) an Academy of Idleness, to busy all
vain Persons; like that Office set up at Rome by Tiberius, styled, A
Voluptatibus. But this will be the Doom of all Idle Persons, Cast the
unprofitable Servant into utter Darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing
of Teeth, Mat. 25.30. Every one (though never so Great and Honorable) stands
in God's Family as a Servant; as David professes himself to be, Psalm. 116.16.
Moses was faithful in all God's House as a Servant, and Servants are not idle.

Every one must serve in some particular Calling, wherein he must abide with
God, whether it be in the Magistracy, ruling with God, (1 Cor. 7.21.) that is,
for God, and being faithful with the Saints, ( Hos. 11.12.) and so he must be a
Servant unto all. Thus as David, he may serve his Generation by the Will of
God, Acts 13.36. Or whether it be in the Ministry, so he is to be a Servant of
Jesus Christ. Thus St. Paul, in the behalf of all faithful Ministers, We preach
not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5. Yea, the Master of the Family must be a Servant to the
Family, else the Family will not abide in good Estate and Order. He that is
idle, and neglects the care of his Family, is worse than an Infidel.

See that you do not only labor, but that the thing you are diligent in, be
worth your Labor; join Choice with Diligence, and see that you guide all your
Affairs with Discretion. Meddle with nothing, till you are able to answer your
selves that Question, Cui bono? What is it good for? Is it my Calling, or
within it? or in the way to it? Does it prepare me for it, or quicken me in it?
Does it make me work more cheerfully, or fruitfully?

See that ye do your own Business, as St. Paul advises, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. I do
not mean that ye should refuse to do Business for others if they desire it, and
that it may be for their Good; but look, that what ye do for your selves, or
others, be confined within the limits of your Duty, Place, and Calling. Meddle
not with things beside your Calling. God furnishes every Man with Abilities
suitable to his Calling; because therein he works for God, but not with
sufficiencies for another Calling; because therein he works for himself, or
rather indeed against himself; as a Reverend Divine notes: For he that steps
out of his Calling, offends God, and so runs himself into danger. He is as a
Soldier, who having his Station appointed him by his General, goes to another:
Or, as a Bird wandering from her Nest where she is safe, becomes liable to be
caught in Nets, to be shot, or made a prey to other ravenous Fowls.

As Christians, ye must seek the Kingdom of God in the first place, and do
God's Work before your own; but in business of your own particular Calling, see
that ye not only abide with God, as not starting from him, or it; but labor
for God, that so ye may please him that has called you.

Among all Businesses, set upon that which most concerns you to look after,
having an eye to God's Command, and the good of Humane Society: And in the
midst of outward Employments, labor to have your Conversation in Heaven; and
to do your earthly Business with an heavenly frame of Heart: Let not your
Hearts be taken up, nor taken away with the things of the World, but set your
Affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth. And when ye are
most diligent in the works of your Callings, aim at the gaining of Time and
Liberty for vacancy to holy Duties. In your Working-days Labor, prepare for
the Sabbath's rest, and daily so endeavor, that you may gain time to solace
your selves with the Lord, in Reading, Meditation, or Prayer.

See that ye manage all Businesses without overmuch Carking and Vexation. I
have read of a certain Prince, of whom it is said, That he seemed always vacant
in his most serious Employments.
Care and Diligence may be accompanied with Tranquillity of Spirit, but not so
with Carking Vexation. Be careful then in all Affairs committed to thee by the
Lord, but vex not thy self about them; for that will cloud thy Reason, disturb
thy Judgment, and hinder thy doing of any thing well. The Wasps and Droans make
more noise than the Bees, yet make no Honey, but Wax only. So they that perplex
themselves too much about Worldly Business, perform not any thing well. And in
all thy Affairs rest thy self chiefly upon God, whence all our Business should
begin, commit all thine Affairs unto God, trust in him, and have an eye still
unto him: [As those that sail at Sea, who that they may attain to the Land they
desire to come unto, do look more up to Heaven than down to the Sea,] then God
will go along with you, and bless and prosper you, that you shall not only get
Provision for your own Families, but be able also to minister to them that are
in need.

SECT. XXIII. Considerations for those that have the Preeminence above others
in the Body Politic.
THat Man has no small Business, who has many under his charge. It is an high
point of Honor to be Head and Lord over others, it is also a high point of
Service. Here it may not be impertinent to set down the words of a Grave
Divine, and Devout Spaniard to his great Lord, Avila's spirit Ep. 15. p. 130.
which are these: Look (says he) upon the Lord of Men and Angels, whose Person
you represent. It is but reason that he that sits in the place of another,
should have the Properties of him whose place he represents. A Lord of Vassals,
is a Lieutenant of God. There is nothing to which great Lords ought to attend
so much, as truly and cordially, (and like Men who live in the Presence of God)
to remain ever faithful and firm to him, without enclining either this way, or
that. And this will be easily performed by that great Man, who shall
attentively consider, that he is but the Minister of God, as one who but merely
executes, and must not exceed the Commission which is given to him. God places
not great Lords in the World, to the end that they may do and undo what they
list; but to execute the Laws of his holy Will. And though they may account
themselves Lords, yet are they still under the Universal Lord of all, in
comparision of whom they are more truly Vassals, then their Vassals are theirs:
And their Power is as truly limited as their Vassals power is, for as much as
concerns the dispensing with what he ought to do.

Your Lordship must consider, Ibid. page 131.
that as you are set as an Eye in the Body, so has he placed you in the Eyes
of many, who take that to be a Rule of their Lives which they see you do, make
account that you are seated in an high Place, and that your Speech and Fashions
are seen by all, and followed by the most Men. Take it for a point of
Greatness, to obey the Laws of Christ our Lord; doubtless inferior Men would
hold it an Honor to do that, which they saw practiced by great Persons, etc. I
beseech your Lordship, that as you are a particular Man, you will look into
your self with an hundred Eyes; and that you will look into your self with an
hundred thousand Eyes, as you are a Person upon whom many look, and whom many
follow. And take care, to govern both your Person and your House so orderly, as
the Law of Christ requires, that he who shall imitate your Lordship, may also
imitate Christ our Lord therein, and may meet with nothing to stumble at. The
Vulgar is without doubt but a kind of Ape. Let great Men consider what they do,
for in fine, that will be followed, either to their Salvation, if they give
good Example; or for their Condemnation, if it be evil.

I will add one thing more, namely, the Speech of Sarpedon, to his Brother
Glaueus, which is worthy to be observed by all Great Men. Come on Brother, we
are Lords over others, accounted Gods upon Earth; let us show that we are so in
Deed, and not in Name. Our Work must evidence our Worth. They who are the
highest Lords, must in point of good Service to their Country, be the lowest
Servants. They that are above others in Place, must shine before others in
Virtue: They that eat of the fattest, and drink of the sweetest, and so have
the best Wages, must by the Rule of Proportion, do the best Work. And the
rather, that our Underlings (such who are inferior unto us) may have cause to
say; These are honorable Persons, and they walk Honorably; they are prime and
principal Men among us; and they are (as their Preeminence in place imports.)
the first and formest in every good and honorable Action. So Sarpedon
encourages his Brother, That as two worthy Persons, they might do worthily;
which is worthy every Man's knowledge that has Preeminence above others.

SECT. XXIV. Of the Government of a Family.
THe Master of the Family is a Person in whom rests the private and proper
Government of the whole Household, and he comes not to it by Election, as it
falls out in other States, but by the Ordinance of God, settled in the order
of Nature: As one has well observed. To the Paterfamilias, the Father and
Chief-head of the Family, the true right and power over all Matters domestical
do belong: And to this purpose, if thou art in that Place,

1. See that thou set up and further the Worship of God in thy Family. It was
the resolution of Joshua, I and my Household will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
And to this end, do thou both pray for, and with thy Household, and also
instruct them in the holy Scriptures, and catechize them in the grounds of
Religion, that they may grow in Knowledge, and may profit by the public
Ministry. Thus God commanded the Children of Israel to walk in their Families.
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall rehearse these things continually unto thy Children, and
shall talk of them, when thou tarriest in thine House, etc. And, ver. 20. When
thy Son shall ask thee -- What mean these Testimonies, and Ordinances, and
Laws, which the Lord our God commanded you? Then shall thou say unto thy Son,
We were Pharaoh 's Bondmen in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt with
a mighty Hand. This Testimony God gave of Abraham before the Law was given,
Genesis 18.19. For I know Abraham, that he will command his Sons, and his Household
after him, that they may keep the Way of the Lord. To this purpose, August. in
Joan. Tract. 51.
St. Augustine says; That the Master of the Family does after a sort, and in
his measure, perform the Office of a Bishop within his own House.

2. See that thou make Provision for thy Family, both Food and Raiment. If
any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he has
denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. The Lambs are for
thy Clothing, and the Goats are the price of thy Field; and thou shall have
Goats Milk enough for thy Food, for the Food of thy Household, and for the
maintenance of thy Maidens, Prove. 27.26, 27.

3. Look that ye keep good Order, and exercise good Discipline in the Family:
If Children be stubborn, and Servants disobedient, you are to correct them, and
chastise them according to the nature of their Offense, and the state and
condition of the Person, having first admonished them.

4. See that you perform all Duty about your Servants conscionably. Which
consists in two things, I. In respect of your Choosing them. II. In respect
of your Carriage toward them.


In the Choice of Servants, have regard to these things.

1. As to the number of Servants, see that it be proportionable to your Estate,
Revenues, Calling, and Employments. It is great folly to make Ostentation of
many Servants merely through Vanity. A Man is no way the happier by having many
Servants.

2. As to the quality of Servants, you must either take good Servants, or
labor to make them such. If one Achan troubles a Land, how may one
irreligious Servant trouble an House? God blessed Potiphar and Laban, for
Joseph's and Jacob's sakes: You should beware of entertaining such Servants,
who have neither Conscience, nor the fear of God, and by whose wicked
Conversation your Children may be soon corrupted.

3. For Capacity; It is necessary that in a Servant there should be Ability to
discharge his Office; for every one that is Honest, has not Ability to undergo
all kinds of Business. Our Abilities are limited as well as our Minds, and
every one has his particular Talent, which must be known by those that will
make use of him. To this end enquire where they have lived, get good Testimony
concerning them, and try before you trust.

4. See that you take such Servants as are faithful. Faithfulness is one of the
Qualities which the Gospel gives of a good Servant: You have reason to require
it, and discreetly to make trial of it, not by suspicions and jealousies, which
only serve to provoke such as have a disposition to do well. A Man is
oftentimes made Faithful, by being thought Faithful; and many through continual
fear to be Cozened, have taught others to Cheat and Cozen, justifying their
Deceit by their own Distrust: As the Roman Philosopher says; You must allow
your Officers what command and freedom their Charges do require, not
quarrelling with them every minute for Trifles: Notwithstanding you must
carefully reserve the state of your Affairs for your private knowledge; for it
is an equal Fault, indifferently to trust all, or to distrust all.

II. As to your Carriage toward them.
When you have made a good choice, the government of them is not hard: For St.
Augustine says, Nothing is so easy as to persuade those unto Good, who have a
great desire to put it in practice.

1. Banish all Vice and Scandal from your House, let not Wantonness and
Uncleanness come near it: Let not Surfeiting, Drunkenness, or Excess know so
much as the gate thereof; suffer not proud Persons, Liars, Slanderers, and
workers of Deceit to dwell with you, cause froward and wicked Persons to depart
from you. This was David's practice, Psalm. 101. For as Nebuchadnezzar made the
Pages that attended on him, learn his Language; so the Devil teaches those of
his acquaintance, his Dialect.

2. And having exiled Vice, accustom your Family to some Devotion, cause them
diligently to hear the Word on the Lord's Day, and on other occasions offered;
bring them to the Church, or public Congregation, and see that they do there
both religiously and reverently behave themselves, during the time of the
public Worship: And that being ended, and the Congregation dismissed, examine
them touching what they have heard, that they may profit both in Knowledge and
Obedience: Invite them also to frequent the holy Sacrament, according to their
Condition and Capacity: Assemble them at the Evening, or some convenient time
in the Day, to some Devout and Pious Exercise; see likewise how they are
instructed in the Articles of Faith.

3. Behave your selves Wisely and Sincerely before your Children and Servants;
for your Example will do more than all your Words; the Life and Conversation of
a good Master and Mistress, is a good Monitor in a House. We live in an Age
wherein we have more need of Patterns than Precepts. Servants adhere to the
Pillars of an House, as Ivy to great Trees. It is good that ye be liberal
according to your Means; in ordering your Family, be honorable in such
Expenses as are requisite both for Necessity and Decorum: For if Nets be useful
to take Fishes, Liberality is a Golden Hook to take Men. Manage your Dignity
and Place in such a way, as is neither, Harsh, Imperious, nor Arrogant: But let
your Carriage be Mild, Affable, and Communicative: Show Love and Tenderness to
your Servants. A Christian Servant must be in the place of a beloved Brother,
or Sister, and so to be received. Philem. v. 16. Think also how you may do them
good, as well as how to be benefited by their Service. God required the
Israelites, that they should not rule over their Servants with Rigor, Levit.
25.43. Ye must temper your Power with Mercy, laying aside threatening to your
Servants, Ephesians. 6.9. that is, Huckster-like, menacing of them for every
Trifle: For many severe Masters and Mistresses can scarce speak to their
Servants, but they must call them Knave, Rascal, Queen, Drab, etc. threatening
to throw something at their Heads, to give them that which will stick by them,
etc. This kind of threatening their Servants the Apostle does forbid. But on the
other hand, take heed lest through Indiscretion, ye run out of one extreme into
another; for he that brings up a Servant daintily, shall have enough of it.
Let me advise you also, to retain a decent and moderate Gravity in your
Deportment, that the Stamp which God sets on those he calls to Offices and
Places of Government, may not be debased.

Finally, In all your Affairs, invoke God's Assistance, and to give you Wisdom
to know what is pleasing to Him, and that you may put it in Execution. If your
Project or Enterprise have good Issue, give the praise unto God, and an example
of Modesty unto your Neighbor: But if Business keep not time to your Will,
learn you to keep time to the Divine Providence, which makes all Harmony in
the World; as one advises: Though you may have power over your Designs, yet ye
have no power over their Events. But above all, look into your Self, as the
first piece of your Government; let your Conscience be pure and peaceable, and
herein do you exercise your selves, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Men, speaking and doing every thing with much
Consideration, and never slighting or despising the Counsel of those, that are
able to advise you. Keep the thoughts of God's Presence always in your
thoughts, and testify it by the desire you have to please him in all Places,
Occasions, and Actions: Dedicate all your Works to him before you begin them;
and having finished them, remember always to set upon them the seal of
Thansgiving due to his Divine Majesty.

SECT. XXV. Rules about Eating and Drinking.
IN Eating and Drinking beware of Excess, either in reference to the Quality,
or Quantity of Meats and Drinks.

As to the Quality, or kinds of Meats and Drinks, be content with those that
are necessary and useful, for the preservation of the Health and Strength of
your Bodies, and do not insatiably desire those Meats which do not befit your
Calling. The Children of Israel in the Wilderness lusted after the Fleshpots,
the Leeks, the Onyons, and Garlic of Egypt, saying, Now our Soul is dried
away, and there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our Eyes. Number.
11.4, 5, 6.
See how contemptibly they speak of that Manna, which God had in a miraculous
way rained down from Heaven among them (which is called the Corn of Heaven, and
Angels Food, Psalm. 78.24, 25.) but this was not good enough for their Palates,
they must have more rare and choice Provision. Thus says Tertullian, Primus
populus primi Hominis resculpsit crimen; pronior ventri, quam Deo deprehensus.
Tert. contra Psychieos.
The Men whom God owned as his first People, did (if it may be so rendered)
re-print the Sin of our first Parents, and set it forth in a new Edition,
complying more with their Bellies, than their God. The Lord satisfied their
inordinate Appetite, but it was with the execution of Vengeance on them: For
whilst the Flesh was between their Teeth, exe it was chewed, the Wrath of the
Lord came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen
Men of Israel, Psalm. 78.31.

Seneca tells us, That he is the Wisest Man not who has a faculty of making
Rooms to feast in with the greatest Artifice, and is skilful in adorning them
with the most luxurious variety of Dishes; but he who teaches himself and
others, that Men may have such Provisions as are necessary for them, Senec. Ep.
90.
if they are content with the things quae Terra posuit in summo, which the
Earth does with an open and ready hand afford unto them; such as required but
little Cost or Toil to procure, or Art to dress them: Quae si audire humanum
genus voluerit, tam supervacuum sciet sibi coquum esse quam militem. Which
Doctrine (says he) if Mankind would hearken and give good credit unto, a Cook
would be as needless a thing in the World as a Soldier, who certainly would be
a very useless and superfluous Creature, if the World were as Wise, as Good,
and Peaceable, as it should be.

Solomon advises us, not to be desirous of Dainties, for they are a deceitful
Meat, Prove. 23.3. Pythagorus enjoined his followers to abstain from all sweet
and costly Meats. Epictetus would have Men take so much care for the things of
the Body, Meat, Drink, Clothing, etc. as is necessary to make it serviceable to
the Soul; and (says he) Whatsoever serves for Ostentation only, or
Deliciousness, he would have Men to abandon. Plutarch complained, That Men kept
such ado about seasoning the Flesh of living Creatures (which they killed for
Food) with Oil, Wine, and Honey, Plutar. Xeno. apud A heneum. lib. 3.
with Syrian and Arabian Sauces and Spices, as if they meant to embalm them in
order to an honorable Burial in their own Bodies. And Xenophon tells us, Such
fare is longed for only by Wanton, Diseased, Effeminate Persons, and that they
who eat their Meat most heartily, need no such Sophistications.

To feed upon variety of Dishes, is very prejudicial to our Bodily Health.
There is not so much harm proceeding from the substance in it self of Meat, and
quality of it, in ill Dressing and Preparing, as there is from the quantity,
disorder of Time and Place, unseasonable Use of it, Intemperance and overmuch
taking it. That of Pliny is most true; Simple Diet is the best, heaping up of
several Meats is pernicious, Homini cibus ^utilissimus simplex, acervatio
ciborum pestifera, multos morbos multa fereula ferunt. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 52.
Avicen. dec. 31. cap. 2.
and Sauces worse: Many Dishes bring many Diseases. And Avicen says, That
nothing is worse than to feed on many Dishes, or to protract the time of Meats
longer than ordinary: From thence proceed our Infirmities, and it is the
foundation of all Diseases, which arise out of the repugnancy of gross Humors.
Thence (says Fernelius) come Crudities, Fernel. path. lib. 1. ca. 14
Wind, Oppilations, sudden Death, and what not? As a Lamp is choked with too
much Oil, or a little Fire with overmuch Wood, quite extinquished; so is the
natural heat with immoderate eating of variety of Meats, strangled in the Body.
Hippocrates himself tells us, That impure Bodies, the more they are nourished,
the more they are hurt; for the nourishment is putrified with vicious Humors.

2. As for the quantity of Meats, we should be very sparing and moderate. It
was the complaint of Cardan in his time, Cardan, l. 2. de Com.
Man alone (says he) eats and drinks without Appetite, and uses all his
Pleasure without necessity, animae vitio; and thence come many Inconveniences
to him; for there is no Meat whatsoever, though otherwise wholesome and good,
but if unseasonably taken, or immoderately used, more than the Stomach will
well bear, it will engender Crudity, and do much hurt. Therefore Crato advises
his Patient to eat but twice a Day, and that at his set Meals, by no means to
eat without an Appetite, or upon a full Stomach, and to put seven Hours
difference between Dinner and Supper. Which rule did we observe, it would be
much better for our Healths than it is.

Temperance is a Bridle of Gold, as one calls it, and he that will preserve
his Health, and avoid those Inflations, Obstructions, Crudities, Distentions,
that proceed from full Feeding, must feed sparingly, of one or two Dishes at
most, and have ventrem been moratum, as Seneea calls it; for by overmuch
eating, or feeding on variety of Meats, we choke up our selves, and stifle
Nature. Hilberius writing the Life of Berengarius, Hilber. in vit. Barengar.
says of him, -- Cui non fuit unquam,
Ante sitim potus, nec cibus ante famem.
That he never drank till he was athirst, nor eat till he was hungry. But now
it is otherwise, Men wear their Brains in their Bellies, and their Guts in
their Heads; as Cornelius Agrippa taxed some in his time, who are ingeniosi ad
gulam; if they are witty in any thing, it is to seek ways to please the Palate,
and satisfy the Gut: And although eminent Danger, and deadly Diseases be ready
to seize upon them, Edunt ut vomunt, vomunt ut edant, they Eat that they may
Vomit, and Vomit that they may Eat again; Eating till they are ready to burst
asunder.

Temperance must continually be practiced, no Time, never a day in the Year is
allowed for Intemperance, Surfeiting, or Drunkenness. It must not only be
shunned, when Men are full of Business, or the like, but at all Times, even at
Feasts, at Weddings, at Fairs, at the meeting of old Friends and Acquaintance,
or the like, at such times when many make account they may take liberty. Our
Savior allows thee not one hour in thy whole Life, for Surfeiting or
Drunkenness, Luke 21.34. Take heed (says he) lest at any time, your Heart be
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Now this Temperance in Meats and
Drinks, is such a sober use of the Creatures, as does not hinder, but further
us in the Service of God, and in the necessary Duties of our Calling: Which
agrees with that general Rule of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. These things therefore
must be so used, as that they may fit you to glorify God in your general and
particular Callings. God's Glory must be the end of all, and all must be
referred to it. Now if this Rule were both rightly understood, and duly
observed, how would it guide you in the use of the Creatures, that you should
not abuse them, nor defile your selves in the use of them. How shamefully do
Men cast off all due consideration of this Rule, when partly by stupifying
their Senses, and clouding their Understandings, by letting loose their Hearts
to Carnal Contentments, they make themselves unfit both for the Service of God,
and for the Business of their lawful Callings. Such Men aim not at the Glory of
God, but the pleasing of other Men's vain humors with whom they converse, the
satisfying of their own carnal and sinful Appetites, or the like, to the great
Dishonor of God, and taking his Name in vain.

Labor therefore to shun and abhor Intemperance and Drunkenness, as that which
will abase you below the Beasts that perish; and which as one (who in his time
was eminent above the most in his Kingdom, for Wit and Parts) says, will make
a Man Contemptible, and despised of all Wise and Worthy Men. Take heed
therefore (says he) that such a cureless Canker possess not thy Youth, nor
such a beastly infection thy old Age, for then shall all thy Life be but as the
life of a Beast; and after thy Death thou shall only leave a shameful Infamy to
thy Posterity, who shall study to forget that such an one was their Father.
Thus he, and much more for the disgracing of that Sin. Abridg your selves
therefore of some of your lawful Delights: For suppose it be lawful to desire
after the most pleasant Food, and to feed on variety of Dishes at your Tables,
yet may ye do better to deny your selves some lawful Contentments, than always
to go to the utmost bounds of your lawful Liberty, or to do all that is not
simply unlawful. You shall not readily fall in things unlawful, if you warily
restrain your selves sometimes in things lawful. If one be addicted to
Intemperance in Eating, he shall with more facility overcome this Vice, if he
abstain from those Meats that are most pleasing to his Palate; even such as are
lawful for him to feed upon, and if he abstain from them at such times as he
may lawfully use them. This is one of the most forcible remedies to overcome
this Vice, that any Man can use.

Begin all your Refections with Prayer, and feed your Minds with holy
Meditations whilst ye are eating and drinking, As of eating Bread in the
Kingdom of Heaven, of laboring for the Meat that endures to everlasting Life,
of feeding on God by his promises by Faith; then does God prepare a Table for
you, when ye thus Eat and Drink to his Glory. To this purpose some of the
Ancients used to have a Chapter read out of the Bible, whilst they were
Feasting, and feeding at their Tables. Tertullian tells us, what were the
Banquets of the Primitive Christians. Our Feasts (says he) express what they
are in their Names. They are called (...) (Charities) because they are
Instituted for relief of the Poor: Our Table resembles an Altar, and our
Supper a Sacrifice: We mind not the Expense, Tertul. in Apolog.
to spend in the name of Piety is gain. Our Table has nothing savouring of
Baseness, Sensuality, or Immodesty; we feed by Measure; we drink according to
the rules of Temperance; we satiate our selves as much as is necessary for
those who must rise at Midnight, to offer up their Prayers unto God: We speak
and converse as in the Presence of God; our Hands being washed, and Candles
lighted, every one repeateth what he knows out of holy Scripture, and from
his own invention, to the Praise of God. Prayer, as it began the Banquet, so it
concludes it: From the Table we go unto the exercise of Modesty and Decency;
you would say, if you beheld us, that we were not at a Supper, but at a Lecture
of Holiness.

SECT. XXVI. Of Recreations, and how to use them.
COncerning Recreations, it is the judgment of many Grave and Learned Divines,
that it is an unchristian and unwarrantable Course, to spend a great part of a
Man's time in Recreation, as if it were one half of a Man's Business, or
perhaps more. It is only so far allowable, as it carries a respect to the
Glory of God, and no more; so far as it is serviceable to a Man's Calling, and
makes him the more fit to discharge the Duties thereof to his Glory. I
confess, it is necessary that sometimes we recreate our selves, both our Bodies
and Spirits; and it is too rigorous a thing not to give our selves any
Recreation; nor to suffer others that are under our Charge, to take any. To
walk Abroad to take the Air, to entertain the company with pleasant Discourses,
to Ring, to Shoot, to play on some Instrument, or the like, these are
Recreations so honest, that to use them well, needs nothing but Discretion,
that gives to every thing its Order, Time, Place, and Measure.

Many use the Tennis, Batoon, Palmally, running of the Ring, Chess, Bowls, and
Tables, which are Recreations commendable enough in themselves; but therein ye
must beware of Excess, be it either in the time employed, or in the Money
hazarded; for if we employ too much Time therein, it is no more a Recreation,
but an Occupation, that neither recreates the Body nor the Spirits, but rather
dulls and distracts them. Besides, if much Money be hazarded, it disorders the
Affections of the Gamesters; and it is an unjust thing to lay great Wagers upon
the industry and abilities of so small Importance, as is the hazard of all
Games. But above all, take heed of placing your Affection on any of them: For
be the Recreations in themselves never so honest, it is a Vice to set your
Affections on any of them. But thou may take Recreation in playing for the
time thou playest, otherwise it would be no Recreation; but thou must not
eagerly desire or long after them, nor yet study on them, nor vex thy self
about them. And when thy Recreation withdraws thy Mind from walking in an
honest Calling, or eats up the Time which might be far better spent, in doing
those things, as might tend to the good of thy self, or others, either in
respect of this Life, or the Life to come, it is a manifest Intemperancy, and
want of Moderation. And if so strict an account must be given of idle words at
the Day of Judgment, as our Savior tells us, how strict a reckoning must be
rendered of idle Actions? And all actions of Sport are idle, when they are
Immoderate. All Christians are bound to redeem the time, not thus idly and
vainly to trifle and pass away the time. And Heaven is appointed as a place for
Men to rest in from their Labors; not for those to sit down in, who have here
spent a great part of their days in Sports and Pleasures.

Ye may see the lawful use of outward Comforts, Recreations, and Pleasures,
allowed to the Godly, and the ungodly Man's unlawful and voluptuous course of
living in Pleasure, shadowed forth to us; in the difference that is between a
Bird's and a Fish's using of the Waters.

1. The Bird does but touch the Water, and sips only for refreshment; but the
Fish wallows and tumbles in it, and delights to drench, and cover her self
therein.

2. The Bird only touches the Waters, but rests not upon them, but quickly
speeds her self away again; but the Fish resideth in them, as in its proper
Element.

3. The Bird as she flies, lights down, and takes up a little Water in her
flight by the way; but the Fish lies continually swilling and sucking in it.

So he that lawfully uses those things which God has given for our Delight
and Refreshment, in a Christian moderate way, he takes them more sparingly;
whereas others do even glut and cloy themselves with them God's Children do
take but a little of these, and but by the way as they are in running the Race
that is set before them, as they are in their flight toward Heaven, their
Souls being then upon the wing, and raised to Heavenly-mindedness, when they do
taste of the sweetness of these things. And if they herein transgress, and
sometimes glut themselves too much with these things, their Failing does more
trouble them, than their Pleasure does refresh them. On the other side, He that
lives in Pleasure, as the Fish in the Waters, he is then at rest when he is
enjoying some sensual Delights, he is then in his proper Vbi, and Element, when
his Heart is even drenched and immersed in some such Pleasure, as is adapted to
his Sensual Affections. And when he is in the Service and Worship of God, he is
like a Fish on dry Land, out of its place; he is in such a Course as is not
pleasing to him; his Heart acquiesceth in the midst of his Delights, being not
at all exercised in any Heavenly Employment, his Heart is not any way born up
with any lively and Heavenly Affections.

SECT. XXVII. Of the Conversation of Parents and Elders.
EVery one in the Family ought to serve God according to his Abilities, as his
Place gives him occasion or advantage. Many a one, if he were Head and Master
of a Family, (as he is but an Inferior) would do more good than there is done.
Therefore they that have such advantage of place, should glorify God
accordingly: And they should be like those Wheels in the Clock, which move
first of all, and carry round all the rest with them: They should be Leaders in
Praying, in Reading, in Meditation, in holy Conference, in Humility, in Zeal,
in Sobriety, in Admonition, in an Heavenly Conversation.

Parents should pray earnestly unto God to heal their Childrens Souls. They
should also be very careful to purge out the vanity of their Hearts and
Conversations; that so albeit they could not prevent the running Issue whereby
they conveied Sin to their Children at the first, yet they may take heed of
increasing it by an evil example. By a vain and evil Conversation, thou do no
less than confirm, and even water those roots of Sin, which thou thy self have
planted in them. 1. Evil Examples are most dangerous, which are practiced by
Men that have most Authority. Now the Child, especially when he is young in his
Childhood, when his disposition receives its first shape, looks upon his
Father as his Prince (as it were,) he fears and regards more than any
Prince; and so his Look, his Word, and especially his Example, is a Law unto
him, and he looks for no better Warrant. Maxima debetur pueris reverentia.
It has been said, Much reverence is due to Children. We say (and that truly)
that Children owe great Reverence to their Parents and Elders: And it is as
true; Parents and Elders should carry it reverently toward Children, because
their Example emboldens Children to imitate them in a likeness of Speech, or
Behavior. 2. That Example is most dangerous, that is most commonly in sight.
Now the Child looks upon the Father and Mother almost every Day, when they
rise up, lie down, go forth, come in, talk, eat, drink, etc. he is still with
them: Other Men's Courses he sees but now and then, these always. Now when
unmortified, unrestrained Vanity shall break out in every passage of their
Lives, and their Children be witnesses of it, is it not likely that they will
be followers of it also? The Child perhaps hears a Neighbor Swear once in a
Week, or Month, but when he shall hear his Father every Day dishonor God this
way, this is very dangerous. 3. Evil Examples are most dangerous in those whom
we specially love; for Love is a cover for many Blemishes, in Persons and
Things that are beloved. Now whom does the Child love so much as Father and
Mother, therefore their evil Examples will foon take with them. That which is
evil in Parents, seems good to their Children, because of their Natural Love
toward them. Therefore ye Parents, how careful should ye be of your Carriage in
regard of your Children. Ye would have your Children love you, and so they
ought: But take heed lest ye make their Love to you, an occasion of Destruction
to them. That were a most wicked unnatural Parent, that knowing his Child
should love something as should poison it, would purposely lay it in his
Child's way, that he might swallow it down: So when a Parent knows his Children
love and embrace him, and that which he does, his Courses and Actions; what a
woeful thing is it, if he shall defile himself and his actions with Sin and
Wickedness; and so occasion his Children by embracing him in love, to take into
their Hearts and Affections, their Sin and Wickedness also, whereby he and his
Actions are poisoned. 4. The evil Examples of those are most dangerous, on whom
we depend most. Now upon whom on Farth does Children most depend so much as on
their Parents? They look for Meat, Drink, Clothes, Protection, Portions, from
them, therefore their Examples are even a Law unto them. Therefore Parents
should walk unblameably before their Children, that their Sins may not be
Stumbling Blocks, and occasions of falling to them. 5. Those Examples are most
dangerous, which are of such Persons as have a special nearness and likeness to
us in Natural Dispositions. Now whose Natural Tempers are commonly more like,
than the Child's to the Father's and Mother's? And when they being of like
temper to the Children, shall walk before them in a vain Conversation, this
will be a dangerous means to draw them after them. Therefore ye that are
Parents, take heed, let not your Children learn of you to Lie, Swear, to be
Drunk, to Cheat, to profane the Sabbath, to scoff at Piety, to speak Filthily,
to be Malicious, to be Revengeful, to be greedy on the World, to be Proud, to
be Wanton, to be Obstinate, to be Idle, to contemn the Word of God, to neglect
the Worship of God, or to perform it carelessly. It is little thought what
mischief Fathers and Mothers do to their Children in this regard. When the poor
Child not yet knowing the right Hand from the left in matters of Religion, nor
what belongs to Salvation and Damnation, shall see the print of his Father's
foot in the way of Sin and Death, will he not be apt to make his Father's
footsteps his Direction? Ezekiel. 20.15, 16. Fathers by giving evil Examples to
their Children, give evil Statutes to their Children. The Lord says, Walk ye
not in the Statutes of your Fathers. This he spoke unto the Children. Their
Fathers gave them Statutes, viz. They gave them their evil Example as a Law and
Rule unto them. The Lord charge them to walk in his Laws, and keep his
Statutes, and not to make the evil Ways and Examples of their Fathers a Rule
unto them.

Therefore ye Parents, be ye very careful of your Conversation, even in regard
of your Children; for be you sure of this, that if you perish in your Sins, and
by your Example bring your Children to the same place of Torment, every one of
them shall add exceedingly to your Woe and Misery. On the other side, in tender
pity toward them, and your own Souls, labor all ye can, by Exhortation,
Example, and by all good Means, to set your Children in the way of Life, that
they may be a Crown unto you at the last Day. Blessed are those Parents which
so walk before their Children, and blessed are those Children, which so follow
such Parents, as they follow Christ.

SECT. XXVIII. Of the Carriage of Children, Servants, and Inferiors.
Children, and Servants, and Inferiors, must not slack their pace, if they
should perceive much backwardness to do that which is good, by those that are
above them, but they must stir up the gift that is in them, and labor to go as
far before others in the Ways of God, as they are behind them in place and
dignity: For although their Superiors should outrun them in Zeal and
Holiness, yet they have no Warrant to tarry for them, when they see them to
loiter. Ahab should have been more careful than his Servant Obadiah, in saving
those hundred Prophets from Jezehel's rage: Yet though Obadiah see his Master
rather yield to his Wife, than fear the Lord, he will not learn to stand still
by his example, but hides them by fifty in a Cave, and feeds them with Bread
and Water. Nabal should have been more ready to have relieved David's wants,
and more provident in saving his Family from danger, than his Wife, the weaker
Vessel: But when Abigail sees him fail in both, she does not sit still, and
put all to the hazard, but supplieth in both that wherein her Husband was
defective. The zeal of an Inferior Person ought to be attended with Humility,
and comeliness of Behavior; yet must he not under color of Humility, Modesty,
or keeping distance, neglect his Duty. Young Elihu, Job 32.18. ver. 6, 7.
though he was so full of Matter, that he was ready to burst, yet would not
speak before his Elders had said what they could: Yet when he saw the Ancients
silent, he thought their unseasonable silence a warrant for his younger years
to speak those things which they ought to have delivered.

SECT. XXIX. How every one is every day to embrace all Opportunities of doing
Good.
OPportunity is many times a special means which a Man of Gifts and Place has
to do good above others, and above himself at other times. Sometimes things
fall out so fitly to a Man, that they even put him upon some Service tending to
the Glory of God, whereas others have not the like. In such cases the Rule is
that which is given to one in the holy Story; Do as thine Hand shall find: Do
as occasion shall serve, do as opportunity shall inuit thee. Many are called
by the Lord's Providence giving them opportunity, to do somewhat for his Glory,
whereunto others have not the like occasion. And when Men fail herein, they
show some neglect, or disobedience toward the Lord's Calling; and therefore
when God offers an opportunity, we must not stand a questioning or muttering,
Why do not such, or such, go before us? Why do not such do it rather? As Moses
in his weakness told the Lord, [Send him whom thou should send.] But every
one should think thus with himself, This is my Work, the Lord puts it upon me,
and I must do it. This falls out in many Cases, for which there is not a full
Direction to be looked for.

Thus it may happen that a Man may sometime by opportunity, be put upon a work
of Mercy, to relieve one in Wants, when we meet him through God's Providence in
case of Extremity, and we have something at hand whereby to help him. This was
the Samaritan's case, who found in his Journey the poor helpless Man, Robbed
and Wounded, and so as occasion was given, he menifully relieved him. Now this
Opportunity, that he came by him in this Extremity, and had something about him
to help him withal, did both enable him to relieve him, and was a calling to
the Work which others had not, that came not that way.

So again, When Men's cases are more clearly made known to us than to others, by
familiar conversing with them, or by some other means, and thereupon special
suit is also made unto us. So David's case was specially made known to Nabal,
by the familiarity passing between him and Nabal's Servants in the Wilderness,
and special suit was also made unto him by all the Rich Men thereabout; and
therefore he had a special opportunity and calling to have relieved David, and
was more specially bound to it than some others.

So sometimes a Man shall have a special opportunity given him, to admonish
another of his Sin; He may meet him alone, he may perhaps have some advantage
of him in some kind, and may make him beholden to him some way or other, and so
have occasion to deal the more boldly with him. As Moses, when Pharaoh stood in
need of him and his Prayer, to remove the Plagues which came so thick upon him,
made use thereof, and amonished him of his unfaithful dealing, and hardness of
Heart.

I have read, that when a great Persecutor of the Protestants in France, was
smitten with a most grievous Disease, and was forced to make use of a
Protestant Physician that feared God, the said Physician took this as an
opportunity to tell him closely of the great Sin, in shedding the Blood of his
Saints, and that this Disease was God's revenging Hand upon him. And when our
Savior had made the Blind Man especially beholden to him for the cure of his
Blindness, he took the opportunity to give him a seasonable Admonition, Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Thus when another has need of thine Alms, thy Counsel, thine Help any way,
and Opportunity is given thee to deal plainly with him for any special Sin that
thou see him lying in; so perhaps thou find him in a better temper than he
uses to be. Thou may then think the Lord has fitted, and made him ready to
thine Hand, and given thee an opportunity to work upon him, and thou must think
thy self bound to take it. There are many Cases, and great variety of this
kind, which a Man shall ordinarily meet with, and which every one must
watchfully observe and take for the Glory of God, and his own furtherance in
the Ways and Work of God.

Finally, All Christians truly sanctified, are enabled with heavenly Means and
Graces, far above those that are in their Natural Estate. The wise Man says, A
living Dog is better than a dead Lion. The meanest Christian, of the weakest
Capacity, and ordinary Natural Parts, being raised to the new Life of Grace, is
better able to do the Service of God, than he that is dead in Sin, though
enriched with higher natural Endowments. Russin. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Ruffinus, in his Ecclesiastical History, tells us a memorable story, That when
the Emperor Constantine the Great, had caused the Clergy to come together to
dispute about the Opinion of Arius, there came unto the Assembly diverse
Philosophers, and Logicians, that were exquisite in their Faculty, and were
highly conceited of themselves. Among the rest there was one that was very
famous for a Logician, and every day he disputed with the Bishops, that were
good Logicians also. Many very learned Men came to see and hear those
Conflicts, nor could the Philosopher be put to silence: Nay, so cunning he was,
that when he was thought most of all to be caught and taken, like a slippery
Eel he would slide away from them. But that God might show, that his Kingdom is
not in Word, but in Power, there was among the Bishops, one of the Confessors
standing by, a Man knowing little save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, who
when he saw the Philosopher insulting over the Bishops, and boasting himself
upon the skill that he had in Arguing and Reasoning, desired of all that stood
by to give him room, that he might talk with that Philosopher. The Bishops and
their Party, that knew the simplicity of the Man, and his unskilfulness in that
kind, were afraid and blushed, lest that Holy Simplicity of his should perhaps
be exposed to the Scorns of those crafty Companions. But the Old Man persisted
in his purpose, and thus began: O Philosopher, (says he) in the Name of Jesus
Christ, hear thou those things which are true. God that made the Heavens and
the Earth, and gave Man a Spirit; whom he framed of the Dust of the Earth, is
One: He has by the Virtue of his Word created all things both Visible and
Invisible, and strengthened them by the Sanctification of his Spirit. This Word
and Wisdom, whom we call the Son, taking pity upon humane Errors, was born of
a Virgin, and by the passion of his Death, has delivered us from everlasting
Death, and by his Resurrection has given us everlasting Life, whom we look for
to be the Judge of all we do. O Philosopher, said he, believe thou this?
Whereupon the Philosopher, as if he had never learnt the Art of Contradiction,
was so astonished at the words which were spoken, that being mute to all that
was alleged, only this he was able to answer: That what the Old Man had said
seemed so to himself indeed, and that there was no other Truth than that which
was delivered by him. Whereupon the Old Man then replied, Why then, faith he,
if thou believe these things to be true, arise, and follow me to the Church,
and take thy Baptism, the Seal of this Faith. Hereupon the Philosopher turning
to his Disciples, or to those that were present, and came to hear, said, O ye
learned Men, hearken unto me; Whilst this Matter in hand was performed by
Words, I also opposed Words unto Words; and those things which were spoken,
able I was to confute by the Art of Speaking: But now that instead of Words,
Power is proceeded from the Mouth of him that speaks, neither can Words
resist that Power, neither can Man withstand God: Therefore, if any of you here
present, can believe those things that have been spoken, as I do believe them,
let him believe in Christ, and follow this Old Man, in whom God has thus
spoken: And so at length the Philosopher becoming a Christian, was glad that he
was thus vanquished.

Now then all ye that are made alive to God, consider ye what the Lord
requires at your Hands; is it enough for you to keep pace in the Ways of God,
with those that are asleep, yet dead in Sin? As if a Man should not arise from
his Bed, nor set upon his Work, until he sees the dead Corpses in the
Churchyard rise out of their Graves, and walk abroad. It is you that have
wherewithal to serve the Lord: It is you that have your Eyes opened, to see the
Ways and Works which he has ordained, that ye should walk in them: It is you
that have Faith to rest upon him, whereby to receive an encouragement from him
in his Services, upon the apprehension of the Crown of Glory. It is you that
have the Spirit of Prayer; it is you that have cast Anchor within the Vail; it
is you that can see an open passage for your Prayers and Services to the Throne
of Grace: It is you that have felt the Fire of God to fall upon your Hearts,
whereby ye might offer up an acceptable Sacrifice unto God, like Elijah, whilst
Carnal Men, like the Priests of Baal, may beat, cut, and force themselves (as
diverse of the Papists do) beyond others in outward shows and needless
Superstitions, and yet have not one spark of Fire from above, to set their
Offerings on fire. It is not a body of Sin that will make a pleasing Sacrifice
unto God, but a Body and Soul washed by the Blood of Christ.

Therefore you to whom God has thus given, you must offer up your selves to
him; as our Savior says to his Disciples: To you it is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. So I say, To
you it is given to pray, to you it is given to read the Scriptures, and to
hear the Word of God; To you it is given to meditate on the Word; To you it is
given to see and conceive aright of Heavenly Things: Ye have tasted of Love and
Mercy, and therefore to you it is given to show Love and Mercy. Think ye of
your Talents, and of your Receipts unto whom God has given much, look what ye
have received, mind your Account, tender his Glory, whose Love in all Eternity
was so tender to your Souls above many thousand others.

SECT. XXX. Of the Improvement of all Means, Gifts, and Abilities, inward and
outward bestowed upon us.
LEt every one labor to improve all inward Gifts, Means, and Abilities,
bestowed upon them.

1. Whosoever has a larger Understanding, and a more searching Head than
others, God requires the more of such an one; his Brains should not be busied
in hatching crafty and mischievous Plots against God and his Service, against
the Church of God, or against his Neighbor. God did not allow that great
Politician Achitophel, to use that wit he had given him to invent, nor his
Tongue which was an as Oracle, to deliver a pestilent Counsel against his
Anointed, a Man after God's own Heart, not to teach the Son how to kill his
Father. This is the height of Satan's wickedness, that whereas the Lord made
him a glorious Angel of Light, and endued him with an admirable understanding
and knowledge, he on the other side abuses it most wickedly to the Dishonor of
God his Maker, to oppose his Glory, to ensnare his Servants, and weaken his
Kingdom.

Some Men have notable Heads, and great Apprehensions, but they fill them
merely with Earth, the World possesses them altogether; they are wholly busied
in laying plots for Gain, or in compassing and grasping more of the World than
they can well rule when they have it; as if God had given them more Wit than
others, that they may be greater Drudges and Slaves to Mammon than others. Some
again do abuse their Wits in frothy Jesting and Scoffing at others, in wanton
and licentious Rhimes and Poems. A witty Poem of one Licentius, a young Noble
Man, coming into the hands of St. August. Epist. 39. ad Licen
Augustine, (whose Scholar he had sometime been) the said Father perceiving he
had wickedly abused his Wit therein, writes to him in this manner: I have read
this Poem of thine, and I know not with what Verses to lament and mourn over
it, because I see a pregnant Wit in every Line, but such an one as I cannot
dedicate unto God. Then he exhorts him, Da te Domino meo, etc. Give thy self
unto my Lord, who has given thee this excellent Wit. If thou had found a
Golden Cup, would thou not have given it to some public use? God has given
thee a Golden Wit, thy Understanding is a Golden Cup, and will thou let thy
Lusts drink out of it? Or will thou drink thy self to the Devil in it? Know
thou, that Satan seeks to make thy Wit an ornament to him, and thy Parts the
credit of his Court and Cause. The best Wits are fittest for the best and
highest Employments: It is pity that Men of excellent understandings, should be
set to dig in the mines of base Employments. They should use them in searching
the Scriptures, and in gathering Knowledge out of the Word of God, who does not
require of the unreasonable Creature that it should know his Will in his Word,
but of Man to whom he has given a more excellent Spirit. But this is to be
lamented, that Men that naturally have notable Understandings, quick Wits, and
solid Judgments, are very blind and shallow in the knowledge of God's Word. How
will these stand before the Lord at the last Day, when he shall say unto them,
I gave thee a great Understanding, but thou knew any thing rather than me,
whom thou should have labored to know above all things. How have thou busied
thy Wits? Did thou not think me worth thy knowledge and acquaintance? Thou
knew the way to thrive and get Wealth, to please and get the good will of
Men; but did not care to know the way to please Me, to find out the way which
I had ordained for thee to walk in: Thou knew how to speak unto Men, but
did not care how to call upon my Name. Then will thou cry out, Oh! that I had
had a saving knowledge of God and his Will, although all that had known Me, had
derided me for a Fool, and contemned me for want of Worldly Wisdom! Oh that I
had known Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, though I had known nothing else! Oh
that I had thoroughly and spiritually known the Scriptures, which would have
made me wise unto Salvation, though I had not known my right Hand from my left!
Woe is me, that I busied my Head about Trifles, and cared not to know the Way of
Life, and everlasting Peace! Alas! all my Wit, my Craft, my Policy, now fails
me; it will not serve to help me with one excuse, whereby to shift off the
Wrath and Justice of God, it does me no good now that I am to appear before my
Judge. Labor then for such knowledge, as may tend (some way or other) to your
furtherance in Godliness; and use your Understandings also, to bring things
about as well as ye can for the promoting of God's Glory: For, as the Lord does
by his infinite Wisdom defeat, and bring to naught the crafty malicious plots
of Satan; so also he would have his Children (to whom he has given better
Understandings, and more Wisdom than to others) to oppose their Wits against
the Craft of wicked Men, and use their best skill to uphold Religion, and to
overthrow the strongholds of Satan. Thus was Hushai among all David's
followers, chosen out to match Achitophel, and to be a means to defeat his
crafty Counsel, and turn it into Foolishness.

And as for those that have not so good Natural Understandings as these, yet
according to their measure they must use their Talent, for which they are
accountable to the Lord: Even weak natural Parts may be excellently perfected
and bettered by Grace, and raised to an higher degree than could be expected;
therefore none must give over exercising their Gifts, although they cannot
match some that are more excellent.

II. In the second place as to the Memory, some Men have a great Gift this way:
They can remember things even to the admiration of others, who cannot come near
them in this respect. These must glorify God according to this Ability. It is
your duty, O Christians, to treasure up store of Heavenly Things, which ye may
read and hear; and be helpful unto others, whose Memories are not so firm and
faithful; but do not contemn those to whom less is given in this kind. It is
lamentable to consider how many notable Gifts of this kind are abused or
neglected. If a Man could look into the Memories of some that are naturally
strong and firm, such as will hold Water, what should a Man see there but
Ballads, wanton Songs, Play-books, Romances, idle News and Stories, old
Grudges, Wrongs and Injuries of many years standing, or some things like to
these? Yea, many a Man makes his Memory a mere Counting House, it is as it were
a Shop-book full of Reckonings: But it is empty of Heavenly Things; it has let
slip the things which he has heard in that kind.

O Man, the Lord did not give thee thy Memory for such ends, but that thou
should remember thy Creator, remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, remember
your latter end; and remember that for the actions which you do in this Life,
God will bring you to Judgment.

Come we to some Persons, and enquire of them concerning such points of Faith
and Religion, as they have heard many times, they remember nothing of it; the
thing is gone from them, as Nebuchadnezzar spoke of his Dream; and their-excuse
is, They are not Booklearn'd: But ask them about some Worldly things, which
they never heard nor saw more than once perhaps, and they will give you a ready
answer; the reason is, these things suit with them, their Hearts are toward
them; these take with them, so do not the other; therefore these stick and
abide by them, when the things of God slide away out of their Memories. Put
clean Water into a Vessel that has but a little chink, and it will soon get
out; whereas that which is thick and muddy is not so apt to leak. The Word of
God (compared to Living Water in Scripture) is soon lost and forgotten, because
it is pure and holy; whereas those muddy things, of which we should rather
cleanse our Memories, than keep them there, are apt to abide in us.

But know ye, that the Lord who fearcheth the Heart, and every corner of it,
will see what is in your Memories and Affections. God is not unjust to forget
your labor of Love, says the Apostle; so God is not unjust to forget your
forgetfulness of Him and his Truth, when he has given you excellent Memories,
and such as might be of great use in his Service. Lord, remember me (says the
repenting Thief unto our Savior) when thou come into thy Kingdom. As ye
desire that God should remember you for good at the last Day; so do ye remember
him now and his Word, otherwise it will be utterly in vain for you to call for
Mercy, or Remembrance at the last Day. Many Persons are now wilfully and
affectedly forgetful, and it is just with God to punish them in this Life, with
a final Stupidity and Sottishness, who to give satisfaction to their own vile
Lusts, did cast his Word behind their backs, and willingly let the Devil steal
it away from them. Look to it in time, and take heed that you do not provoke
God by a wilful Carelessness, to bring upon you a fearful Sottishness. Take
heed of those Sins that intoxicate the Brain and the Memory, especially
Drunkenness, Filthiness, etc. How many able Bodies, active Minds, pregnant
Wits, flourishing Memories, have these overthrown!

But for those that are forgetful by any accidental Casualty, or natural
Infirmity, I would rather say somewhat to comfort them, than to reprove them.
Doubtless many of God's dear Children are subject to this defect, and daily
complain of their Forgetfulness, and how weak their Memories are to retain any
good thing that they hear. -- But grant it be so; yet perhaps thou
understandest more than thou art able to express; this is to be born withal.
Perhaps thou remembredst the Matter, though thou can not remember the words
of a Sermon, This makes some amends: Perhaps thou remembrest it not to make
Repetition of it, yet thou remembrest it to make Practice of it; this is best
of all. Tully commends two excellent Orators, for their excellent Memories,
Lucullus and Hortensius; but he commends Lucullus most, because he remembered
Matter, the other but Words. If thou can remember the Matter of a Sermon,
though thou can not remember the Words: Or if thou can remember to practice
it, though thou can not remember it, thou have the less cause to complain.
But if thy Defect be as great as thou complainest, it may be some comfort to
thee, that thou have an Heart to complain of it: The complaining of a Burden is
some easing of it. How many thousands be there in the World, have their Sin lie
heavy upon them, yet it is no matter of trouble to them: Ever remember, that it
is a good sign, to be sensible, either of the burden of Sin, or of the want of
Grace. There be four things about which your Memories should be daily
exercised; your Sins, that you may daily confess and bewail them; Death, that
ye may prepare for it; God's Justice, that ye may fear; and his Mercy, that ye
may not despair.

III. Another gift of the Mind is Courage, wherein some naturally go beyond
others. These Men then are bound to make use of this to the Glory of God. If
thou have a resolute Spirit, the Lord requires that thou should show it on
his side, and not in opposition of Him and his Ways. When a Prince has a
Soldier, or Captain, of tried and approved Valor and Courage, he relieth more
on him, looks for more notable performance from him, than from others who
have not that Spirit and Courage which he has. So when the Lord has given
some Men more Courage and Resolution than others, he requires they should be
valiant for his Truth, and not hide their Heads, and yield to his Dishonor. It
is strange to see how stout Men are in their own Quarrels (right or wrong) who
are afraid of every Bush almost, when God's Honor is concerned, and have no
Spirit to plead for God, or to appear for his Gospel and Glory.

When Gainas the chief Commander of the Forces of the Emperor Arcadius, being
an Arian Heretic, desired one of the chief Churches in Constantinople, to be
assigned unto him for the exercise of his Blasphemous Religion, the Emperor
wanting Courage to deny him, (he, it seems, being too hard for him, as the
Sons of Zerviah were for David) Chrysostom being then Bishop of the place,
undertook to give him his answer in the Emperors presence, which he did with
admirable Zeal and Courage. And when he heard him propose his Demand, and plead
Merit, and tell what great service he had done for his Prince, the Bishop told
him plainly, that the Emperor's rewards had been far greater than his Merits;
and that his Service to the Emperor was far below those Riches and Preferments
he had received; and told him withal, That whilst he had Life, and continued in
that Bishopric, he should neither have the chief Church, nor any other in that
City, wherein to blaspheme his Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and to deny his
eternal Godhead consubstantial with the Father.

Courage in a Christian, takes its rise and wing from Faith. Witness Gideon,
Barak, Sampson, Jephtab, Samuel, David. Heb. 11.33, 34. Who through Faith
subdued Kingdoms, -- stopped the Mouths of Lions, -- out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Much
Faith, and much Courage; and Men of little Faith ever shake hands with the
Pusillanimous. Courage is a goodly Grace, wherein God greatly delights, and
whom can it so well become as a Believer, who has more reason and better
ground to be Valiant, than the greatest Spirit in the World that wants Faith.
Those falshearted Spies, and cowardly Israelites, at the sight or news of
Giants in Canaan (notwithstanding God's Promise and Presence) counted
themselves but Grasshoppers in comparison of the Anakims, Numb. 13.33. And all
the Congregation fell a howling, as if God and Moses had betrayed them: Whereas
Joshua and Caleb, Numb. 14.9. looked on the Giants but as Bread for one
Breakfast for the People of God. So great is the odds between Faith and
Infidelity, in cases of difficulty.

IV. Quickness and Liveliness is another gift of the Mind, wherein there is
much difference between Men and Men. Some are even naturally of lively,
stirring Dispositions, whereas others are more slow by Nature, more heavy, and
not so ready and present for any thing they go about. Now if God has given
thee this quickness of Spirit, thou must use it to his Glory. As John was more
nimble than Peter, so he used this Agility of Body, and came sooner to our
Savior's Sepulcher than Peter did. So if thou have a more quick and active
Spirit, thou must use it in out-running others in the Ways of God's
Commandments. If a Master have a Servant whom he knows to be quick, and can
travel well, he looks that he should make more haste when he sends him in
Business, than one that is Lame or Sickly. So if thou art of a quick and lively
Disposition, the Lord requires thou should every Day show it in his Service,
and be more forward and affectionate than those which are of slower Spirits.

But we see that many who boast of the quickness of their Wits and Spirits, and
do despise others Dullness, are themselves Dull, yea, altogether dead in the
Service of God: Many that go most nimbly about their Profits and Pleasures,
that are full of Mettle (as they say) bring them to the Service of God, and put
them upon any thing tending to the Glory of God, set them in a course of
Holiness, and how slowpaced are they? They are as if they had no Life in them,
the Services of God are a deadning to their Spirits. Natural quickness is of
good use, when it is seasoned by the quickening Grace of the Holy Ghost, and the
Spirit of a Man becomes fervent serving God, when the Heart is lively, and
full of feeling in Prayer, Meditation, Reading, Hearing, etc. otherwise it will
be a means to increase such a Man's Condemnation, if being naturally quick and
stirring, he remain spiritually Dull and Dead: But where activeness of Spirit
is put forth in God's Service, such a Man will not let the Fire go out, but
blows up the Coals; it makes a Man put on Zeal as a Cloak, and not only to wear
this Livery of Christ, and go in his Errand, but to mend his pace; and not only
do his Work, but do it with all his might.

Of the improvement of External Gifts, Means, etc.
Not only in regard of inward Abilities, but also in respect of outward gifts
of Body or Estate, Men ought to serve the Lord.

1. First of all, Health is a great Blessing, and a special means to enable you
for the Service of God, and accordingly as the Lord has given you Health, so
he requires Health to be given up to his Service. Assure your selves, the more
Health ye have, the more Work ye are to do for God; and God requires more of
you that are Healthy, than of those that are sickly and Diseased. When a Master
knows his Servant to be in Health, he suffers him not to lie long in Bed in a
Morning, but calls him up to his Business, whereas he that is Sick, sits, or
lies still, without a Check, though his Master looks upon him.

Ye that are Healthy, be wise and careful for the preservation of your Health;
do not throw away your Health upon your Lusts, do not expose your selves to
lasting Pains and pining Sicknesses, for the satisfying a wanton sensual
Appetite. The health of the whole Body is more worth than thousands of those
vanishing Delights.

Yet how many are there that run themselves to the Graves Mouth, and into the
thickest throngs of destroying Diseases, for the taking up of such poor and
perishing Pleasures? Who to please their Flesh for a few moments in Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness, bring many Days, yea, Months and
Years, pain and torment upon their Flesh, and shorten the number of their Days,
as to what they might probably have had by the course of Nature.

There are many others who make their Health even a privilege unto them to
neglect the Service of God, thinking the through performance of God's Service
never in Season, till they are on their Sick-beds, and see Death at hand. Such
are all those without exception, who put off their serious and sound
Repentance, until the time of Sickness. Health is one of the best outward
Abilities for the Service of God, now when this is bestowed on the service of
Sin, it is not without much robbery against God. To give unto God only the
services of our Sick-beds, when he requires the best performances of our
Health, is as if Abraham should have offered the worst Lamb in his Fold, when
God called for his beloved Son Isaac.

Ye have no assurance, if ye neglect God in your Health, that he will accept
your sickly Devotions. But on the other side, if whilst ye have Health, ye
dedicate that to God, then when Sickness shall come, ye may be assured, that
the Lord will accept your weak, because sincere endeavors. God will then say,
such a Man served me in his best Health, when there were no apparent signs of
Death near him; he remembered me his Creator before the evil Days came,
therefore now I receive him as mine own, and I will make his Bed in his
sickness; I will support and strengthen him, I will cherish him now in his
Sickness, as well as I accepted him heretofore in his Health.

They also that are Sick must think of the Service of God when Health is gone.
The want of Health, and vigor of Spirits, must needs be a great disadvantage
wherever it lights; yet where Grace is, and rules, the Heart is lifted up
to God, the Soul breaths after him, and his bodily Infirmities are an help to
Mortification, to Patience, to the neglect of Worldly Things, and a provocation
to long for his Salvation, as old Jacob did upon his Deathbed. David attained
to the best temper and measure of Spiritual Health, when he was most overlaid
with Bodily Sickness.

2. To Health we may join Bodily Strength, which is a great help to Spiritual
Assaults, which work more upon Weakness, Age, etc. than upon others, in whom
Nature sanctified, can afford more helps to the inner Man assaulted by
Frowardness, Timerousness, or the like; as one well notes. Young Men have more
strength than others overworn by Age; and if they have the Word of God abiding
in them, they are strong indeed to overcome the evil one. Many Men out of their
strength of Body might spare more time from their sleep to spend in Religious
Duties, which others of weaker and feebler Bodies cannot spare, who if they
should miss of sufficient refreshment in this kind, would be unfit for any holy
performance. Many occasions also may the strong take in travel for the doing of
many good Services, which cannot be so well performed by the weaker sort: Yea,
such Men may wrestle the more earnestly with God in Prayer, and in performing
other holy Exercises may be the more vehement, which weak Bodies are unable to
perform.

But it is sad to see wicked Men, notwithstanding their bodily weakness, to be
never the weaker Servants of Sin. The Adulterer rolls over his sin in his
Heart, though disabled by his own Wickedness as well as by Age, from the actual
committing of that Sin; he is a filthy person still, as in his greatest bodily
vigor, and a greater teacher and provoker of others to the same Wickedness. So
Witches, and other envious Persons, Malice in them supplieth the defects of
natural abilities, or want of power or opportunity: And rather than fail, they
summon in Satan to assist them in their hellish designs. So others in time of
their Weakness, grow more cross and froward to all about them, and being more
impatient, do murmur against God, and are ready to Curse and Blaspheme, because
they have not Health, Limbs, Strength, as well as others. These are not unlike
the Vassals of Antichrist, justly suffering extraordinary Plagues for their
voluntary Slavery, That gnawed their Tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God
of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their
deeds. Rev. 16.10, 11.

But the weakest Body must labor to be strong in Spirit, that the power of
God's Spirit may be manifested in its Weakness, whilst the inner Man is renewed
day by day, though the outward Man decays.

3. Youth also is an advantage in the Service of God: Young Men have more
abilities and helps than Old Persons, their Wits being fresh, their Affections
lively; all the powers of Nature are then in their prime, and God requires
more of them in regard of outward performances. Let young Men now remember
their Creator in the days of their Youth, and the prime of their Days, [while
the evil days come not.] The days of Old Age are evil Days; but thou must serve
God in thy best Days: give him not the dregs of thy time, let him have the
principal and choicest of thine Age; think thy best days not good enough. The
Years will approach, wherein thou will say, I have no pleasure in them. Do
thou think God will delight, and take pleasure in that Age of thine (if thou
then begin to serve him) when as thou thy self can find no pleasure in it?
The Lord is to be served with gladness of Heart for the abundance of all
things; and will thou hope to serve him, and be accepted of him, if thou begin
not till then, when thou thy self shall take contentment in nothing, when Old
Age shall take away the joy of thine Heart, and comfort of thy Life?

Yet must the Aged labor to excel in a settled Constancy, in Gravity, in holy
Examples, in ripeness of every Grace and holy Affection. But the Younger sort
must do more than the Aged can do, in regard of the exercises of Religion, and
that in many respects.

4. So also in respect of outward Estate, and therein in regard of Wealth;
Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and with the first fruits of thine
Increase, Prove. 3.9. St. Paul bids Timothy, Charge them that be rich in this
World, etc. that they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come. Where ye see the Lord requires an open
Hand and Heart in them who are enriched with outward Blessings. Every one is to
lay by him, as the Lord has enabled him. There be many things here required of
the Rich, which the Poor cannot do, as to maintain the preaching of the Gospel,
where Means are wanting; to relieve the Poor and Needy; to strive against the
danger and deceitfulness of Riches; in the possessing and enjoying these
outward things, to be as if you possessed them not; being as ready to leave all
for Christ, as they that have least; and to be ready according to your portion
of Wealth, to set forth the Glory of Christ; to make Riches the fuel of your
Graces, and the instruments of your Duty toward God and Man. To have the House
full of Riches, and the Heart full of Grace, this is an happy Conjunction, and
causes matter of great admiration. It is an evidence of much Grace, when a Man
is very holy in the midst of abundance of outward Riches. As Pineda speaks of
Job: That the holiness of Job, Exingentibus Jobi divitiis valde locupletatur
ejus sanctitas. Pineda.
was enriched by his great Riches. But usually Riches do impoverish the Soul,
and devour all care of Heaven; they make Men to forget God, yea, to kick and
spurn against him, as it is said of Jesurun. They are often made the Bellows of
Pride, the fuel of Luxury and Wantonness, the instrument of Revenge, and cause
their owners to contemn, despise, and oppress their poor Brethren; and to make
no other use of them, but to satisfy their Lusts, and clog their Souls,
fastening them to the things below.

5. Hereunto we may add Respect and Esteem from the World: wherein some Men
have a greater part than others, and (if they would rightly use it) a greater
advantage to glorify God; and so accordingly the Lord requires more at their
hands, than can well be performed by others.

First of all, Some have favor with great Men: So Nehemiah had with the
Persian King, and he might be bold to speak for Jerusalem, the City of the
Lord, when it lay desolate; and so he did. An ordinary Israelite had not the
like opportunity. This shall be laid to the Charge of many, who being in favor
with great Princes, and seeing many things amiss, will not make use of this
their Interest, nor glorify God according to those Means, Advantages, and
Opportunities which they have. Many such might be heard if they would speak,
and have many fit times to speak, which others have not. So many a Man has
some special relation to some inferior Magistrate (suppose a Justice of Peace,
or some other) he might prevail with him perhaps for Reformation of some Abuse,
for punishing of some scandalous Sins, which are committed and continued in
despite of the World; he might speak in some poor Man's case, and speed too:
He might prevail in the behalf of some innocent and faithful Person, that is
like to be trodden under foot by one that is mightier than he. Such Advantages
should be improved.

So even the Favor of the Multitude is many times an help to a Man in some
cases, for the furtherance of God's Glory. A Man being gracious with them, may
sometimes draw them from some sinful Custom, overruling them in some sort, and
persuading them against some ungodly Course. But commonly Men that are thus in
favor with the Multitude, as they got their Love by fawning upon them,
humouring them, and saying as they say; so they will seek to keep it by the
same means, and rather let God lose his Honor for them, than they will
adventure to lose the good will of the People, by crossing them in any degree.

How may you see those Men that can do any thing with the People, to make use
of them for their own ends! they can carry any Business, and it is their glory.
But if it comes to a matter that concerns the Glory of God, the reforming of
some sinful Abuses, etc. wherein God is dishonored. These great minions of the
Multitude, stand still with their hands in their Bosoms, like Gallio, they care
for none of these things. Yea, it were the more tolerable if that were all:
But themselves many times are the most dangerous Engines of the mischiefs done
by the Multitude; they either set them on work, or else countenance them in
their wickedness, and let them know so much of their mind, that they find them
pleased with their doings.

That Town Clerk of Ephesus shall rise up in judgment against many such, who
though he were an Idolater, and subscribed to their Cry, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; yet he used his best endeavors to stay their Rage, and to still the
Uproar which they made against St. Paul, and his Fellows. So Gamaliel, (though
a Master- Pharisee) yet shall condemn many others, who wisely and peaceably
prevented the danger of the Apostles, being one that had great Authority among
the People. And to him (says the Scripture) they hearkened.

SECT. XXXI. Of Holy Watchfulness against Temptations.
MAN is the only Creature whom Satan hunts and pursues, of all Creatures: It
concerns us then every day to have an eye unto Satan, that although he pursue
us, he do not make a Prey of us. Ye will think it strange perhaps, that seeing
God would redeem his People from the hands of Satan, he would notwithstanding
give so much liberty to Satan, in the pursuing and tempting of them. But let no
Christian think strange of it. He did not only permit it for the exercise of
his Children, that with the more Conflicts they might have the greater Glory,
and Satan the greater Foil.

Our condition in the World, is much like the condition of the Israelites. When
they came first into Canaan, it is said, When God had brought them thither, he
suffered diverse of the Jebusites to remain still in the Land, and would not
drive them out all at once, because he would keep his People in Exercise, and
not have them live there Slavishly and Slothfully. And it is certain, that they
were often Prickles in their Eyes, and Thorns in their Sides. God deals so by
us. He has redeemed his Israel out of Satan's hands, brought them out of a
state of Sin, into a state of Grace, as out of the Land of Egypt, into the Land
of Canaan; yet still he suffers the Jebusite to dwell in our Coasts: He
suffers Satan, the enemy of our Peace, by his assaults and temptations to vex
and trouble us, because he would have us held in Exercise, and be ever careful
to do as they did, to keep our Weapons by our Sides, that when we meet with any
Affronts, we may be prepared for resistance.

How much does it concern every Christian, with all the Policy and Prudence
that he can, to avoid the Oppugnations of Satan, and to get rescue from the
danger of his Assaults. He is in a desperate Estate, that knows he has an
Enemy, yet is careless to prepare for him.

It concerns you then to be at no time secure, but to be very watchful over
your selves in all Places, in all Companies, at all Times. Ye are in the midst
of Devils, that watch all opportunities to draw you to Sin, that endeavor your
Destruction. When Sampson was lulled asleep in the lap of Dalilah, then the
Philistines came upon him. Whilst Men slept, the envious Man sowed Tares. Watch
and pray (says out Savior) that ye enter not into Temptation. Whilst we are
praying, we had need to be watching, for whilst we are praying we may be
tempted. I may say too, Watch, and hear the Word of God; watch, and Meditate;
watch in thy Study and Closet, watch and work in thy Shop, watch and walk in
the Field: keep a Watch when thou art alone, watch over thy self in all
Companies, Times, Places, Duties; expect Temptations, be watchful that ye
stumble not, and fall.

The Devil is watchful to tempt, diligent in tempting, subtle in his
Temptations; thy Corruptions are strong, thy Heart prone to be ensnared with
the Charm of the Charmer; and thou know not at what time he will come to
tempt thee. Be watchful over these four things:

1. Over thy Thoughts. In all keeping, keep thy Heart, Prove. 4.23. Sin most of
all begins with Thoughts: Cleanse thy Heart from evil Thoughts: kill these
Conceptions, before thy Thoughts bring delight: And then delight brings in
desire to commit, and thy desires will put thee upon the practice of Sin.

2. Watch most where thy greatest Weakness is. The greatest Watch is kept,
where the Enemy is most likely to make Invasion. The strongest Watch must be
set at the weakest part of the Walls of a besieged City. Be ye watchful over
that Lust to which you are prone, whether Pride, Passion, Revenge, etc. set
your Watch there. Remember that Satan is most of all busy with your beloved
Corruptions; he loves to cast his Angle into such waters where the Fish bite
most.

3. Be watchful over your selves after the vanquishing of Temptations, for then
thou art apt to grow secure. Although ye may by resisting put the Devil to
flight, yet he returns again, and will as violently assault you as before. The
Lord will shortly tread Satan under your feet, but he stands his ground for the
present.

4. Be watchful after thy Falls, lest a worse Temptation than a former befall
thee. If Satan sees a Man stumble and fall, he will keep him down if he can.
When he had drawn David to commit Adultery, he put him upon Murder. When he had
made Peter to deny Christ once, he proceeded in his Temptations.

Here let me propound diverse Preservations against Temptations, that ye may not
be overcome by them.
1. Preserve in thy Heart settled thoughts of God's Omnipresence. Seneca would
have Men to think upon grave Cato, that he was always beholding them, to keep
them from Looseness. If the presence of a Man, then much more the Presence of
God will keep a Man from Sin. Wicked Men take liberty to Sin, because they say,
Tush, Thou God see us not. But God looks upon you, not only when you are
Fasting, but Feasting; not only when you are Praying, but Playing; not only in
the Fields, but in the House; not only in the Parlour, but in the Bedchamber,
yea, in the Closet. Were this Consideration still in you, God sees us; what
Temptation could prevail against us? It is said of an holy and reverend Man,
that he had this written before his Eyes in his Study, Sin not thou, though
never so secret: God sees thee, and the Angels stand by thee; the Devil is
ready to accuse thee; thine own Conscience to give evidence against thee, and
Hellfire to torment thee. Be thou in the fear of God all the day long, Prove.
23.17.

2. Maintain in your Hearts thoughts of the strict account which ye shall one
Day make of every Sin: Answer all Temptations thus; Oh, I cannot answer for the
Sins I have committed already! And shall I now make work for the great Day? Is
not mine account great enough already? Oh! How can I answer God for one of a
thousand Sins that I have already committed?

3. Let the Word of God dwell plenteously in your Hearts. To hide the Word in
your Hearts, is the way to be kept from Sin, Psalm. 119.9. Christ by Scripture
vanquished the Devil, Avoid Satan: It is written, Thou shall not do thus or
thus. Set home the Commands of God, the Threatenings of God, the Curse of the
Law upon thy Soul, whenever thou art tempted to Sin.

4. Oppose Eternity of Torment to thy sinful Pleasures, and say, What advantage
is it to win the whole World, and lose my Soul for ever? What! shall I
adventure to lie under the Wrath of Almighty God for ever, for a few momentany
Pleasures? Profits and Pleasures are the gilded Baits of all Temptations.

5. Lodge holy thoughts in your Hearts, and obey all motions of God's Spirit. A
Mind fraught with holy thoughts, will not admit vain thoughts. Intus existens
prohibit alienum.
When Satan finds the heart void and swept of good thoughts, then he enters
with evil Suggestions: So whilst thou art following the motions of God's
Spirit, this will quench diabolical motions.

6. Pray fervently and frequently, that God will be thy Guard: Complain often
to God, that thou art in the midst of Enemies, always vexing and enticing thee.
Thou can go no where, but the Devil is at thy right Hand: Beseech the Lord
that he will rebuke Satan: If God be thy Shepherd, he will rescue thee out of
the Paw of the Bear, and out of the Paw of the roaring Lion.

Finally, Let me advise you, to take heed of throwing your selves into the
Lion's Mouth, and into the Paws of the Bear: It is a provoking tempting of God
to give us over. If Children will be meddling with Fire, it is wisdom in the
Parent to let them burn their Fingers, to prevent greater mischief. No Man has
need to tempt the Devil to tempt him to Sin, He is watchful enough to devour;
when a Man rusheth upon Temptations, he tempts the Devil to tempt him; when a
Man will adventure upon keeping company with the Wicked, he tempts the Devil
to tempt him.

SECT. XXXII. Of Mortification, and the daily Exercising our selves therein.
DAily exercise your selves in the work of Mortification of Sin. As the Poets
write of that many-headed-Monster Hydra, that Hercules encountered with; that
still the more Heads he cut off, the more did repullulate, and spring up in
their rooms: So we shall find it true of that uncouth monster of Sin that is
bred in our Natures, the more Corruptions and Temptations we vanquish and
subdue, the more will multiply upon us still, and reinforce their Assaults. It
will be every Days-work, and all our Lives-work to mortify all our Sins. We
must take all our Spiritual Enemies that we can light on, and give Quarter to
none that we take in Battle, putting them all to the Sword; as God commanded
Saul to destroy All the Amalekites. And so careful ought every Christian to be,
to rid the Field of All, that he must stand armed in the Field, after he has
beaten and vanquished all that appeared, and prepare for such as are
undiscovered. As David, that endeavored not only to subdue all his known Sins,
and to be kept from presumptuous Sins, but prayed also to be cleansed from his
secret Sins: Not from those which he cherished knowingly (for of this sort he
had none) but which he had not yet discovered in himself, or not understood to
be Errors. Labor ye by the power of Grace, to charge through and through the
whole body of Sin, that ye may cast down not only the Actings, but the very
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of
God, and bring into captivity every thought to the Obedience of Christ. Leave
no Member unmortified, no Sin unsubdued, even when the relics and remains of
Sin be not wholly grubbed up.

Let every Christian every day endeavor to mortify all his Corruptions. By
endeavoring to do it, ye shall obtain thus much, that though Corruption does
grow in your Nature, yet it shall not overflow in your Nature. A
quick-springing Well, that has Water continually bubling and rising up in it,
yet being continually laded out, and emptied still as fast as it fills, the
Current of it though it be not kept dry, yet it shall be kept shallow, and not
suffered to swell above the Banks. So it is with our Nature; it is a Well that
has a quick Spring, there is filthy Water that ever bubbles out of it, but let
us ever be pumping at it, and lading it out, now some, and then some, that as
fast as it fills, we may empty it; this will be a means to keep it shallow,
though we cannot keep it dry, that it shall with no great danger swell above
the Banks. St Paul's Lesson is plain, Romans 6.12. Let not Sin reign in your
mortal Bodies: Though Sin remain there, yet let it not reign there, at least
not reign like a King, though it reign like a Tyrant, that we should be
obedient to the Lusts of it. There if it will be, let it be like a Gibeonite to
an Israelite, a Drudg, a Slave; not a Sarah, but an Hagar; a Servant, not a
Mistress; let not Sin lose ground in one place, and gain in another. Mortify
your earthly Members, Col. 3.5. or Affections. Draw mortifying Virtue daily
from the Death of Christ, and that will have its influence upon the whole Old
Man within you, although perhaps ye employ it more especially against some
particular members of the body of Sin: As when Christ cursed the Fig Tree, in
more special reference to the Branches that bear no Fruit, the whole Tree
immediately withered. This mortifying Virtue will not only tame, and bring
under all Sin in you, that it cannot domineer and rage as formerly it did, but
it will receive its mortal Wound, languish and consume away more and more,
Nullis medicabilis herbis, as being past all recovery; and hasten not only to a
Dissolution, but also as it were to a total Annihilation.

SECT. XXXIII. Of growing in the Knowledge of Christ, and in Grace.
Labor every Day to grow more and more in the Knowledge of Christ. Now there
are two degrees of the Knowledge of Christ.

1. Historical, or Doctrinal. 2. Experimental, and Effectual.
1. As to the former, it is the knowledge of the Person, Natures, Birth, Life,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Kingdom, Offices of Christ, Priestly, Kingly,
and Prophetical, as these things are laid down in the History and Doctrine of
the Gospel. And these contain abundance of glorious Mysteries, and wonderful
Revelations, which all the Wisest Men under Heaven could never have found out,
no nor the holy Angels of Heaven, if the Lord himself had not revealed them by
his Spirit. Christians must grow in the Knowledge of these. But an Historical
Knowledge, or a bare Understanding of these things is not enough, 1 Cor. 13.
though a Man had all Knowledge, that is, of this degree, or kind. But,

2. Labor for an inward experimental knowledge of Christ, and to increase
therein. With St. Paul, count all things but loss for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus; labor daily to know Him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, and to be made conformable
to his Death. Our Understandings are very weak, and it is but little that we
can discern at one view; we have but weak and childish Capacities in respect of
Heavenly Things, therefore we must endeavor to grow more and more in the
Knowledge of Christ. Moreover, there is an admirable Depth in the Mystery of
Christ, and you can never come to the bottom of it, although ye should be
diving into it all your life long.

Look over all the objects of Knowledge, and can ye find a more pleasing, a more
joyous, a more comfortable Object to study, than the Knowledge of Christ, and
his Love toward Sinners? What St. Augustine said of the Joys of Heaven, Tanta
est dulcedo; so great is the sweetness of it, that if God should let fall one
drop of Heaven's Joy into Hell, it would turn Hell into Heaven, it would turn
the Lakes of Brimstone into Rivers of Joy; we may say as much of the Knowledge
of Christ, and of his Love toward us: So great is the sweetness of it, that it
can turn an Heart full of the sorrows of Hell, into an Heart full of the Joys
of Heaven.

The more inwardly ye grow acquainted with Christ, the more shall ye delight in
Him, and admire Him. The Queen of Sheba knew Solomon by report, and she admired
him so far, that she took a long Journey to visit him; but when she was an
Eyewitness, and an Ear-witness of his Glory and Wisdom, she admired him much
more. So when a Christian has some acquaintance with Christ, he admireth and
loves him, but when he grows more inwardly acquainted with him, he sees
much more cause to admire and love him. Such is the inward Excellency,
Sweetness, and Perfection of Christ, that the nearer any one approaches to
Him, the more Admirable and Lovely he appears. The more ye grow in the
Knowledge of Christ, the more will your love of the World, of your Selves, of
your Sins, wear away, and die in you. If ye find your Souls to increase in the
Knowledge of Christ, ye will find your Beloved so far to surpass all other
Lovers, that ye will grow more and more out of love with them. Labor ye daily
more and more to partake of the comforts of his Spirit, for Christ will shine
forth brightly in these to your Souls. This Comfort is called, The Light of his
Countenance, (Psalm. 4.) and therefore as the Light of the Sun shows the Sun
unto us, so that we see it by its own Light: So the Joys and Comforts of
Christ's Spirit, (which are the Light of his Countenance) do discover Christ in
a clear and excellent manner to Believers. These show Christ in his Beauty, and
make the Soul to admire him, and cleave unto him. The darkness of Hell it self
cannot hide Christ from you, when he does thus discover himself unto you by his
own immediate Light.

Labor also daily to grow in Grace. Creseens is a fit name for a Christian,
because he ever is, or ought to be in a growing state; Grace having the same
efficacy upon the Soul, as the Soul has upon the Body. Whilst the Body is in a
growing condition, the Soul enlarges the Body in all the parts and dimensions,
that the Members may not only fill more Clothes, but take in more Nourishment,
and so become stronger and more serviceable. In like manner labor ye, that
your inner Man may truly grow up in Christ, in all things by the working of the
Spirit of Christ, as the soul of that new Life that is within you, that ye may
be meet Instruments of Righteousness, to bring forth Fruit unto God. Be still
advancing, still ascending, always going forward unto Perfection, not only in
Knowledge, but growing in solid Grace; not in external Profession and
Formalities, but in all good Works, which are more and better at the latter end
than at the first. Endeasour to be still on the thriving hand, that ye may
bring forth more fruit in old Age, than at the beginning; that ye wither not,
nor decay, but still be fat and flourishing: And this may be your comfort,
although the outward Man decay, yet your inner Man is renewed day by day. And
when ye cannot perform so much outward service, as when younger and stronger in
Body, yet your thriving Soul will glory more and more in your God, even to see
others to stand up in your stead, whom by holy Counsel and fervent Prayers, ye
may further in the Work of the Lord.

Labor every Day to grow more Spiritual, see that your Knowledge become more
judicious, your Zeal more discreet; your Love more active and substantial; grow
more to God, and less to your Selves and the World; settle your selves more and
more in a good Course; and although ye seem not so fair outwardly, yet inwardly
labor to be sound at Heart.

SECT. XXXIV. Of the Government of your Tongues.
HE that offends not with his Tongue, is a perfect Man, James 2.3. He comes
near to Perfection indeed, who can subdue those Corruptions, which not only
profane Men cannot subdue, but hardly those that be Religious. It is one of
our Masterpieces in Religion, to govern our Tongues well, very pertinently and
accommodately. Three ways many Men do offend with their Tongues.

Per Multiloquium, Stultiloquium, Praviloquium.


1. By much Speaking: For he that is a Prodigal and lavish Talker, bridleth not
his Tongue. To bridle the Tongue is a token of Wisdom: But to be full of Words
is a note of Folly. In many words there cannot want sin: but he that is wise,
will refrain his Lips, Prove. 10.19. Sometime the occasion may require, that a
Man must speak much, and though it be much, it is no more than necessary. He
that speaks but what is needful, let not him be taxed for speaking much. Absit
ut Multiloquium deputetur, quando necessa ia dicuntur. August.
But sometimes though the Matter he speak be good enough, yet ye may be taxed
for speaking too much; either because not needful, or not seasonable. The
Beasts in Ezekiel's Vision are said to have Wings, and Eyes in their Wings. You
must not only have Wings, but Eyes too; Eyes of Discretion, as well as Wings of
Zeal or Devotion. I say, Eyes of Discretion, to accommodate circumstances of
our Speech, as Times, Places, Persons, Occasions do require. They that are
affected with Loquacity and much Speaking; Lavat. in Prove. 10.19.
it is impossible (as Lavater says) but they must, vel falsa dicere, vel
superflua, vel utraque; either speak things that are false, or superfluous, or
both: Howsoever it is an argument of Indiscretion and Vainglory.

2. Men offend by foolish and vain Speaking, when their talk is idle and to no
purpose; either such as edifies not, or such as concerns us not. St. Paul
says, Our speech should be to the use of Edifying, and minister Grace to the
Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. If there be no Edifying in it, better conceald than
uttered. In Col. 4.6. he bids that our words be seasoned with Salt. They should
have Salt in them; at least some seasoning, and relish of Wisdom and
Discretion. Excellent are Solomon's Comparisons to this purpose: One while he
compares the Tongue of a wise Man to a Tree of life, Prove. 15.4. Another while
the Words that he speaks, unto choice Silver, Prove. 10.20. [The Tree of life,]
there is Grace and Edification. [Choice Silver,] There is Wisdom and
Discretion. In foolish and vain Talking there is neither of these, for that is
both empty and useless. Not like a Tree of Life, but like an heap of Chaff; so
it is empty. Not like choice Silver, but like refuse Dross; so it is useless.

With this same (...), the Apostle joins (...), with Foolishtalking he joyneth
Jesting-talk. Foolish talk and jesting, let them not be so much as named among
you; for they be things not convenient. Erasmus translates it, Vrbanitas, but
improperly; for there is an Vrbanity, that is Facetious and Ingenious. And as
it savoureth of Wit, so it is no enemy to Grace; but Christian Sobriety may be
kept, and yet that used. The word rather signifies Scurrilitas, a parasitical,
and base kind of Wit, compounded of Jest and Scorn: When either to please
himself, a Man will rather lose his best Friend, than his worst Jest: Or to oil
the Ear of his Epicureal Benefactor, will not care what Disgrace he puts upon
his Christian Brother. This is foolish talk, which profits not.

There is Foolish-talk also that concerns us not, and that is curiousmedling
with other Men's Business. In 1 Timothy 5.13. St. Paul taxes certain. Widows of
Ephesus, that among other ill qualities, they had this for one, to go Gadding
from House to House, and to play the Pratlers, and Busybodies. Solomon says,
It is an honor to a Man to cease from Strife, but every Fool will be meddling,
Prove. 20.3. To be meddling with other Men's Business that concerns us not, is the
part of a Fool.

3. By wicked Talking: And this reaches either to God or Man. The several
Branches of both, ye may find out by the several Branches of the Moral Law.

1. Against God. There is the Tongue of the Atheist, of whom David says, He
says in his Heart, there is no God; yea, and perhaps he does not forbear to
say so with his Tongue too: For tell them, that God knows and sees what they
do, they scoff at it; What, Can God see us? Can he look through the dark Cloud?
Or tell them, he will one Day come, and be avenged of them for what they do:
they scoff at that also, as St. Peter says, They ask with scorn, Where is the
Promise of his coming? Such Promises and Threatenings as these, they count but
as Fables. There is the Tongue of the Heretic, that spreads abroad false
Doctrine of God, that persuades the People to follow Vanities, and to go after
Lies. There is the Tongue of the Schismatic, that sows the seed of Debate and
Contention, that breaks asunder the Bond of Unity. There is the Tongue of the
Blasphemer and Swearer, that speaks irreverently and profanely of God and his
Attributes, his Word and his Ordinances, and fearfully threatens Heaven with
Oaths and Execrations. These are Tongues that speak wickedly against God.

There be Tongues also that speak wickedly against Men. There is the Disloyal
and Disobedient Tongue, that mocketh the Father, and despises the instruction
of the Mother. There is the Bloody Tongue, that speaks words of Hatred and
Malice, that threatens (as Esau di^) Mischief and Revenge against the Life of
others, upon the undue apprehensions of suspected Injuries. There is the
Obscene Tongue, that pours out rotten and unsavory Communication, delighting
to talk impurely, and unchastly, that solliciteth to acts of Lust and
Uncleanness; as Potiphar's Wife did Joseph; or as Amnon solicited Tamar. One
of the Philosophers hearing a beautiful Young Man speak some words of
Immodesty, Asked him if he were not ashamed to draw a Leaden Sword out of an
Ivory Scabbard? We may ask so of those whose Profession is fair, and their
Communication filthy, whether they be not ashamed to draw such unseemly words
from under so sacred a Calling? There is the Deceitful Tongue, that coyns many
a false Lie, that swears many a false Oath, that venteth many a false
Protestation, to pin ill-favored Bargains upon others, though he quilt up a
deal of worse Gain to himself. But as Solomon says of false Balances, we may
say of false Tongues, they be an abomination to the Lord. There is the
Slandering and Backbiting Tongue, that wounds the Reputation of those that be
absent, of those that be Dead, to make them odious. There is the Censorious and
Scoffing Tongue, that delights in talking of whatsoever is said or done, and
then Carping at whatsoever it pleases to dislike, with some scurrilous Frump.

Let all therefore, but especially those that seem to be Religious, take
special care every Day to the well governing of their Tongues, to bridle their
Tongues. A Bridle has a Rein belonging to it, and a Bit; the Rein to give
Liberty, the Bit to Check in. Thus learn ye to do by your Tongues; you must
learn when to give them the Rein, when the Bit; when to let them loose, when to
restrain them. Solomon says, There is a time to Speak, and a time to keep
Silence. To this purpose there are diverse Circumstances, which are carefully to
be observed of us, both in our keeping Silence, and in our Speaking. We must
consider, The Persons, to whom we speak. The Matter, what we speak. The Manner,
how we speak. The End, why we speak. The Place, where we speak. The Time, when
we speak.


1. The Persons are to be considered, to whom ye speak; for you must not speak
every thing to every Body. To some it were a folly to do it; to some it were
dangerous to do it; it were like Hezekiah's opening his Treasures to his Enemy,
which was little better in effect than the betraying of his Kingdom. Observe
the Condition and Quality of the Person, and accordingly learn to speak, or to
be silent.

2. Observe the Matter that ye speak of; for according to that, ye should speak
more freely, or more sparingly. My Heart is inditing a good Matter, says
David, and my Tongue shall be the Pen of a ready Writer. If it be a good Matter
that we are to speak of, we may let go the Rein of the Bridle, and give our
Tongues more scope and liberty: But take heed of those profane Bablings that
St. Paul speaks of, that increase to more Ungodliness, 1 Timothy 2.16. Those
unnecessary Bablings that St. Peter speaks of, to meddle as Busybodies in
other Men's Matters, 1 Pet. 4.15. St. Augustine gives good advice to this
purpose; Thou will not give thy Stomach bitter Meat to feed on: and will thou
give thy Tongue wicked talk to feed on? Cibos amaritudinis non das ventri, and
cibos Iniquitatis, dabis Linguae, August.
As thou art choice of what thou Eatest, so be choice of what thou Talkest.

3. Observe in what Manner ye speak. St. Paul would that all your words be
seasoned with the salt of Discretion, Col. 4.6. You must learn when to use an
Admonition, when a Reproof, when a Comfort. If ye be to deal with a Superior,
use the more Humility; if with one Equal, you may use the more Formality; if
with your Inferior, ye may exercise your Authority. Some Natures must be
handled with Mildness, some with Sternness: Some Faults are to be privately
reproved, others to be publicly rebuked. Some Offenders must be saved with
fear, others rescued with Violence, and as it were with plucking out of the
Fire. According to the several Occasions and Dispositions that we meet with, so
must our Speech be tempered.

4. Consider what end ye have in speaking: For though your Mouth be as the
Oracle of God, speaking things Heavenly and Excellent: Though your Admonitions
be never so holy, your Consolations never so refreshing, your Reproofs never so
zealous, yet perhaps your End may not be sincere. Let your End therefore be
always to aim at the Glory of God, and at the good of your Brethren; Piety
teaches the one, Charity the other.

5. Consider the Place where ye speak; for there is a difference to be put
between private Places and public. A Sage Philosopher sitting at a Feast, was
by some of the Guests requested to enter into some Philosophical Discourse; he
answered, Inter pocula non est Philosophandum: That was no fit Place for him to
discourse of Philosophy. Some will never talk of Religion, but when they are in
a Tavern, or upon an Ale-bench; fit Chairs for such Doctors. I do not speak as
if God might not any where be talked of; I speak only to condemn the indiscreet
Folly of those, who choose unfit Places, or unfit Meetings for their
Discourses: It is to do as the Scribes and Pharisees did, to pray in the
Marketplace, and to buy and sell in the Temple.

6. You must have respect to the Time when ye speak; Words spoken in due
season, are like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. The Prophet notes it as
a special part of Wisdom in him that has the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a
word in due season. Thus Abigail dealt with Nabal, she would not tell him of
his folly and danger in his Drunken Fit, but when the Wine was out of his Brain.

Now for the better Learning of all this, I will recommend to you a few Rules
of Direction.

1. Be careful to keep a continual watch over your Tongues, and to take
diligent heed to the words that pass from you. I said, I will take heed unto my
ways, Psalm. 39.1.
says David, that I offend not with my Tongue. It is with your Talking, as
with your Walking: If ye do not take heed to your Feet when you Walk, you may
happen to stumble. So if you do not take heed to your Tongues when you Talk,
they may happen to run wild.

2. With Watchfulness join Prayer: Pray heartily and frequently unto God, that
he would restrain your Tongues from evil-speaking, and open them in uttering
the things that be good. Thus did Agur, Remove from me Vanity and Lies, Prove.
30.8. Thus did David, Set a Watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, and keep the door
of my Lips, etc. As ye must beg Pardon of him, when ye have offended in the
misgoverning your Tongues, so for the guiding and wellgoverning of them, ye
must be Petitioners to Him: Only He that has given them to you, can teach you
how to govern them.

3. Learn Humility in observing your selves, that will teach you Sobriety in
speaking of others: For whence is our Curiosity in observing, our
Censoriousness in condemning others, but merely from an opinionative Self-love,
and a proud Conceit that Men have of themselves: Tamdiu quisque sua peccata
ignorant, quamdiu curiose aliena considerat. Bernard.
So long a Man is ignorant in seeing his own Faults, as he is curious to pry
into other Men's. And to this purpose, Chrysostom gives good advice: Enter into
thine own Heart, says he, and let thine own Conscience be thy Judge; bring thy
self to a reckoning, Chrysostom. Homil. 43. in Math.
and ponder in thy self the manifold Sins that thou know thy self to have
committed; think of the Punishments that are due unto thee for them, and ask
thy self the question, How thou dare do this, or that? If thy Conscience then
offer to fly back, and to baffle thee with other Men's faults, Dic ad ipsam,
non ego Judex in alios: Answer her roundly; God has not made thee a Judge of
others, thou have enough of thine own to answer for.

4. Learn ever to be more ready to Hear than to Speak. So Elihu says, That he
was careful to do. Thus he speaks to Job and his three Friends, Behold, I
waited for your Words; I gave ear to your Reasons, whilst you searched out what
to say, etc. Job 32.11. Indeed, that is the way to get Wisdom, to hear much,
and speak little. He that hears much, shall learn much; he that talks much
shall learn little. If you desire to speak much, Seneca says, you should do it
by a Soliloquy, Minimum cum aliis loqui, plurimum vobiscum: Speak little to
others, most to your selves. It is the same the Apostle teaches us, We should
be swift to hear, slow to speak, James 1.19. Yea, we should be twice as swift
to hear as to speak; because Nature has given us but one Organ to speak with,
two to hear with.

SECT. XXXV. A Meditation on the Miseries of this Life.
IT is good for a Christian every Day, to Meditate seriously on the Miseries of
this Life. And here,

1. Consider of the shortness of it. Job says, Man's days are determined, the
number of his Months are with God, and that he has appointed his Bounds that
he cannot pass, Job 14.5. The days of our Years are threescore and ten: And if
by reason of Strength they be fourscore Years, yet is their strength Labor and
Sorrow, for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. And hereof you cannot well
reckon the time of your Infancy for any part of your Life, for in that Age
there is nothing either learnt or done, that may well beseem the Dignity of a
Man.

And as touching the time that is spent in Sleep, I see not how that can well
be called the time of Life; seeing the principal part of our Life, is to have
the use of our Senses and Reason, which then are (as it were) suspended in us,
and dead. Therefore a Philosopher said, that in the half of Man's Life, there
is no difference between the happy Man and unhappy, for as much as during the
time of Sleep, all Men are equal, because they then be as if they were dead.

For this cause a certain Poet terms Sleep the Cousin-germane of Death. And
another called it the Brother of Death, yea, Death's Elder Brother: For there
is a near resemblance between the one and the other. Multitudes of People do
sleep the third part of the Day and Night, which is eight whole Hours (and some
more) whence it follows, that a third part of our Lives is consumed in sleep,
and so consequently that during that time we do not live.

That Philosopher had good reason to do as he did, who being demanded what he
thought of the Life of Man, turned himself about before them that made the
Demand, and suddenly departed out of their sight; giving them thereby to
understand, that our Life is very short, and but as it were a turnabout. And in
a very short time after a Man's Death, the very remembrance of him perishes.
Some of the Ancients call Man's Life a Dream; yea, the dream of a Shadow.

But compare this small remnant of Life we live here, with the Life to come,
and how little will it appear? What is this Momentany Life, compared with Life
Everlasting, but as it were a drop of Water compared with the whole Ocean? If a
thousand Years in the sight of God, be no more but as it were Yesterday, which
is now past and gone, what shall the Life of seventy or eighty Years seem to
be, but only a very nothing, compared to Eternity?

Christian Reader, Think then with thy self every Day, what greater Folly and
Madness can be imagined, than that Men and Women for the enjoying of this short
dream of such vain Delights and Pleasures, should plunge themselves into
everlasting Torments? and what sottishness has possessed Men, that they should
take so much Labor and Pains to provide so many things for so short a Life,
and not to make any provision at all for their Souls, which shall live for ever?

II. Meditate also of the uncertainty of your Life. As our Life is very short,
so it is also uncertain. Eccles. 9.12. Man knows not his time: As the Fishes
that are taken in an evil Net; and as the Birds that are caught in the Snare,
so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon
them. How often are Men surprised with sudden Changes, as Birds in a Snare, and
Fishes in a Net?

Watch ye therefore, and be always in readiness, because ye know not the Hour
when the Son of Man comes; because ye know not the Year, be therefore always
in readiness every Year: And because ye know not the Month, watch every Month;
and because ye know not the Hour, watch every Hour. I will give you a
Comparison brought to my Hand by a Devout Man. Suppose there were set before
thee upon a Table, thirty or 40 several Dishes of Meat, and thou were told by a
special Friend, that there was Poison in one of them, thou would scarce
adventure to eat of any one of them, although thou were much an hungered, for
fear peradventure lest thou should light upon the Dish that was Poisoned. Now
perhaps thou may think, that thou shall live thirty or forty Years. Well
then! If it be certain that in one of these Years thou shall die, and thou
know not in which of them, why art thou not then afraid in every one of
them; and do not every Year, yea, every Day make preparation for Death?

Why do Soldiers keep a continual Watch in the Castle that stands in the
Frontiers, upon an Enemies Country? Is it for any other cause, but only for
that they know not when the Enemies will come to Assault it? Surely for none
other. Oh then, seeing you know not at what hour Death will assault you, you
had always need to be Watchful; thy Soul is of greater value than all the
Castles and Kingdoms of the World, and thou have greater Enemies that do
endeavor Day and Night continually to assault it, and thou art altogether
ignorant of the Day and Hour of thine Assault, and the whole matter of the
Salvation or Damnation of thy Soul, consists in this Point, whether thou be
taken provided or unprovided in that dreadful Hour.

III. Consider the frailty and brittleness of Man's Life, no Glass is so
subject to knocks and breaking as the Life of Man. Some lose their Life by the
vehement heat of the Sun; the Eyes of some are able to bereave others of their
Life. Some die by drinking a draught of cold Drink in a Sweat, or by Surfeiting
at a Supper. Some die of excessive Pleasure or Grief. Some seem to go well to
Bed, and there are found dead in the Morning. We may not wonder how soon Men
end their Lives, as how they endure so long, the Workmanship of their Bodies
being so tender, and the Matter and Stuff whereof they be compounded, so frail
and weak. God bids the Prophet cry, All flesh is Grass, and all the glory
thereof like the Flower of the Field: The Grass withers, the Flower fades,
etc. What is the Grass, but the Earth's Summer Garment, which is put off before
Winter comes?

To Day thou may see a young Gallant in the flower of his Age, strong and
lively, jetting up and down in rich Attire, and with a lofty Countenance; and
to Morrow a violent Disease surprising, may strangely disfigure and alter him.
Some are sore broken with Adversities, others are pinched with Penury and
Poverty. Some are distempered with delicate Meats, and sweet Wines; others are
debilitated with Age. Some mar their Complexions with Artificial Paintings, and
Riotous Behavior, so that their Flesh withers like Grass, and the Flower
thereof fades away.

May ye not to Day see some descended of Noble Parentage, of a very Ancient
House and Family, well Friended, and keeping a great House, attended with a
great Train of Tenants and Servants, and Commanding the whole Country where
they live; and within a few Days after ye may see the same Men forsaken of all
their Friends, despised by their Equals, and little reguarded of all the World;
utterly disgraced, and thrust into that Prison, where perhaps they not long
before had Imprisoned others, and there to end their wretched and miserable
Life? O sinful Man, thou that drinkest down Iniquity like Water, that wallowest
daily in sinful Delights and Pleasures, do thou not plainly see, that
whenever the Thread of this frail and short Life of thine breaks in sunder,
that if thou continuest still in this thy wicked Course, thou shall fall into
the bottomless Pit of Destruction? How then can thou Sing, Laugh, Play, or
Sleep, and take any Rest? How is it that thou art so senseless of thy Peril and
Danger, who art ready every moment to drop into the Pit of Hell?

IV. Meditate on the variableness of this Life. The Camelion changes himself
often into diverse colors, and the Moon into diverse shapes: But who is able to
reckon up the alterations that are in Man? Now he smiles, anon he frowns; now
he is pleased, but by and by displeased; now he is merry, anon he is sad and
pensive; now he is well, by and by he is sick: sometimes contented, sometimes
discontented; sometimes full of Hope, sometimes in Despair; sometimes pleased,
sometimes angry. That which is past is irksome to him; that which is present is
troublesome; and that which is to come disquiets him. He is careful in getting
Goods, fearful of losing, and sorrowful in parting with them. And how does
Man's Life continually move and waste away; for every minute he is going a step
further toward his Death?

Job says, that his Days were swifter than a Post. Job 9.25.
He that rides Post, though his Message require never so much haste, yet
sometimes necessity causes him to stay; but our Life never stays one moment.
St. Hierom says, Whatsoever I take in Hand, whatsoever I write, whatsoever I
read over again, and correct, each thing takes from me some part of my Life.
And look how many points and minims the Notary writes, so many are the losses
and decreasings of my Life: Insomuch, that like as they that sail in a Ship,
whether they stand or sit, are always going and sailing, and do ever approach
nearer to the end of their Navigation: Even so all the time that we live here,
we walk and pass on forward still, approaching nearer and nearer to Death, the
common Haven at which we must all Arrive.

V. Meditate on the Treacherousness of this Life; it is full of Deceit and
Guile. O Man, do thou perceive (says the forementioned Father) when thou
wast made an Infant? Can thou tell when thou wast made a Stripling? Or when
thou came to Man's Estate? Or when thou did begin to be Old? We Die every
day, we are in Deaths often, and yet vain Man would persuade himself he shall
Live for ever.

This made the Megarenses raise such stately and sumptuous Buildings, of whom a
certain Philosopher says, That they builded as though they should live for
ever, and they lived as though they should die the next day. Wherefore do Men
labor so much in gathering Riches, and in purchasing of Lands, and make so
little preparation for Death, is it not because that they do persuade
themselves, that their Life shall long endure? This false Conceit makes them
believe, that they shall have time enough for all things: That they shall have
time for their Pleasures, Lusts, Vanities, and Worldly Businesses; and that
after all this, they shall have time enough also before they Die, to make their
Account ready, and to make their Atonement with God.

This vain persuasion is not grounded upon any Reason, or true Foundation, but
only upon Self-love, which as it naturally hates the thoughts of Death, so
will it not believe, that it will come soon to his House as to another Man's;
most Men are loath to believe a thing, that may be an occasion of so great Pain
and Grief unto them as the same would be.

VI. Meditate on the manifold Miseries of this Life: So many are the Calamities
and Miseries of Man's Body and Mind, as that it deserves rather the name of
Death than Life. Were your Eyes opened to see your own case, you would always
lament and bewail your Estate, as Men condemned by God Almighty, to endure such
Miseries. Consider first the External Miseries of the Body; Who is able to
count them? What pains and toil do Men take to get Food, whereby to sustain
their Lives, either by the sweat of their Brows, or the sweat of their Brains?
The Beasts of the Earth, and Birds of the Air, are fed without any Labor or
Pain: But Man is constrained to labor Day and Night, and to turmoil by Sea and
Land, to get his Living. And as the Spider labors Day and Night in spinning
her Web, wasting even her own Bowels, and consuming her self to bring it to an
end, which serves only for a Net to catch Flies in; even so all Man's Travel
serves to no other end, but only to catch Flies, to procure Trifles, and things
of little Value.

Who is able to reckon up the infinite diversities of Diseases, to which the
Body of Man is subject? Physicians in their Books write of abundance of
Diseases, and Remedies for the same; and yet their Science is enlarged every
Day by the eruption of new and strange Diseases, which the Physicians of old
were altogether ignorant of.

And even those Complexions that have been free from these Miseries, yet are
they not exempt from other Calamities, and Mischances. How many thousand Men
has the Sea swallowed up? How many has the Sword devoured? How many has the
Fire consumed? How many have been killed by the falling down of Houses, Walls,
Towers? How many with the strokes and stings of Venomous Beasts? How many Women
die in Travel of their Children, and dearly purchase their Childrens Lives with
their own painful Deaths? The very brute Beasts that were made to serve us, do
rebel against us: And among all other Creatures, Man is most cruelly bent
against Man.

What abundance of Engines, Artillery, Weapons, and Munition have Men devised
for their own defense, and to offend others? In so much as when we are not
molested with the Air, nor the Elements, Men become Wolves and Devils to one
another. Tully speaks of a notable Philosopher, who wrote a Book concerning the
Deaths of Men, wherein he recites the occasions of Men's Deaths that have
happened in the World, as by Inundations, Sword, Famine, Pestilence, diversities
of Diseases, destructions of Cities, concourse of Wild-Beasts, which rushing in
suddenly upon some Nations, have utterly devoured them: And yet in the close of
all, he concludes, That a far greater number of Men have been destroyed by
Men, than by all the other kind of Calamities, though they were all joined
together. But if in this Discourse I should run through all the Miseries and
Calamities that are incident to all the Ages and Conditions of this Life, Men
might yet find themselves in a far worse case: And here we should never make an
end, if we should set forth the little satisfaction that is to be found in each
of these, and that eager desire that every one has to change his Condition
with the State of others. The consideration whereof made St. Bernard say, That
he thought this Life little better than the life of Hell it self; were it not
for the hope that here we may have to attain to the Kingdom of Heaven.

VII. Lastly, Meditate on Death it self, which succeeds after other Miseries.
Who is able to declare the manifold Miseries that are included in this Misery
alone? At present consider what an holy Father says, by way of Exclamation
against Death; O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee? How suddenly
do thou steal upon us? How secret are thy Paths and Ways? How doubtful is thy
Hour? How universal is thy Dominion? The Mighty cannot escape thy Hands; the
Wise cannot hide themselves from thee, and in thy presence the Strong lose
their strength. Thou accountest no Man Rich, for no Man can ransom his Life of
thee for Money; Thou go every where, Thou searchest every where, there is no
place where thou art not. Thou witherest the Herbs, thou drinkest up the Winds,
thou corruptest the Air, thou changest the Ages, thou alterest the World, thou
stickest not to sup up the Sea. All things do increase and diminish, but thou
continuest always at one stay. Thou art the Hammer that always strikest; thou
art the Sword that never blunteth; thou art the Snare whereinto every one
falls; thou art the Prison whereinto every one enters; thou art the Sea
wherein all do perish. Thou art the Pain that every one suffers, and the
Tribute that every one pays.

O cruel Death, why have thou no pity of us, but stealest suddenly upon us, to
snatch us away in our best Times, and interrupt us in our best Affairs? Thou
robbest as much from us in one Hour, as we have gained in many Years. Thou
cuttest off the succession of Kindreds and Families; thou leavest Princes and
Kingdoms without any Heirs; thou fillest the World with Widows and Orphans;
thou breakest off the studies of great Clerks; thou overthrowest good Wits in
their ripest Age; thou joynest the End with the Beginning, without giving place
to the Middle. Thus He. How should the consideration of these things make us
willing to part hence, when Death shall sound the Retreat? Chrysostom says
elegantly, Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Epist. Pau^i ad Col.
This Life is a Nest framed of Straw and Mortar; we are the little Birds, shall
we putrify in the stench of this filthy Nest? If Devotion has made us Wings,
why are we slothful? Let us soar aloft, and take that flight which our Eagle
tracked out to us in the Day of his Ascension. Remember that the quintescence
of all Wisdom is the Meditation of Death. It is a business we should learn all
our Lifetime, to exercise it once: The faults therein committed are
irreparable, and the loss without recovery.

SECT. XXXVI. Of returning to Family Worship in the Evening.
LEt every Christian return to the Worshipping of God in the Family, and in
secret, in the Evening as in the Morning. Under the Law a Lamb was offered up
Morning and Evening, Exodus 29.38.
R. Menachem. fol. 115.
Day by Day continually. Of this the Hebrew Doctors say, The continual
Sacrifice of the Morning, made Atonement for the Iniquities that were done in
the Night: And the Evening-sacrifice made Atonement for the Iniquities that
were by Day.

This should teach us daily to renew the application of the Sacrifice of Christ
(typified by the Lamb) once offered to the Father for us. Receive him, feed
upon him, and make daily Application of him, even Morning and Evening make an
humble confession of your Sins, with much holy Contrition and godly Sorrow, and
then present Christ and all his Merits unto God, and sprinkle thy Conscience
afresh with his Blood. Renew thy hold of him, and embrace him more strongly;
let your Faith be daily exercised upon Christ.

The Lord did meet with the People, and speak with them in the place where the
Lamb was offered continually, Exodus 29.42. So, if we daily, Morning and
Evening, by a true and lively Faith, do renew the Application of Christ's
Sacrifice to our Souls, we may be sure that Christ will meet with us there, and
speak with us there. Oh how do we wrong our selves when we withdraw, and do
not give Christ a meeting, when we absent our selves Morning or Evening, and
neglect those holy Duties wherein we should meet Jesus Christ, and hear him
speaking to us Peace and Pardon, Reconciliation and Salvation? What sweet
comfort is to be found in all Estates, when thus we shall draw near to the Lord
in these holy Duties? When we shall meet him, and hear his sweet Expressions of
Love by his Spirit to our Souls, it should make us loath to depart, even hard to
be pulled away from the Door of the Tabernacle, unwilling to end these
exercises, or turn our thoughts another way, were it not that other things must
be done. Therefore sanctify your selves every one, and come to this daily
Burnt-offering, Morning and Evening continually, that ye may meet the Lord, and
hear him talk with you words of Peace and Love. Many complain that Christ is
strange unto them, they cannot see him, nor hear any word of Comfort from him;
but the fault is in themselves, they fail to give him a meeting, or to come in
that holy manner as they ought.

Moreover, it is said, ver. 43. That hereupon the Tabernacle should be
sanctified by the Glory of the Lord, when they should come before him daily
with this continual Burnt-offering, and he should meet them, and speak with
them. In like manner, a Family, a Christian is sanctified by the Glory of the
Lord through this daily Intercourse with him. If ye daily meet the Lord in
Humiliation, in renewing the Application of Christ to your Souls, in calling
upon him for the accomplishment of his Promises; and he on the other side
meets with you, and speaks to you, then shall ye be sanctified by the Glory
of the Lord, ye shall see the light of his loving Countenance graciously and
gloriously shining upon your Souls. This has a Sanctifying Virtue and Power in
it. As the Sun shining brightly and gloriously from time to time on Trees and
Fruits, does give growing sweetness and ripeness to these Fruits: So Christ by
meeting us, and shining on our Souls with the light of his Counteance, when we
present our selves before him aright in the due and daily performance of his
Service, and offering of this Sacrifice, he does sanctify us by his Glory; he
does alter the temper of our Souls, he does change and fashion us unto his
likeness, in Righteousness and true Holiness, from Glory to Glory by his Spirit.

SECT. XXXVII. Of a Man's taking a review in the Evening of the Actions and
Mercies of the Day past.
IT is good before you lie down to Sleep, to take a review of all the Actions
and Mercies of the past Day.

If thou would know the Sins thou have committed the Day past, or the Week
past, or thy whole Life past, thou may briefly run over all the Commandments
of God, and thou may easily see what Commandments thou have Transgressed, and
so may be humbled for thy Sins, and may renew thy Repentance, and
resolutions for better Obedience. Look diligently into the whole state of thy
Life, consider what progress thou have made in Godliness, or how thou have
declined: What Words thou have spoken, what Works thou have done, and to what
end, and in what manner they were performed.

Consider thine Apparel, thy Service, thine Attendance, thy Table, thy
Conversation, thy Entertainment, and all thy Dealings and Demeanor, whether
they have not savoured of Pride and Vanity; and let this be matter of
Humiliation to thee.

Take a strict examen of thy Conscience every Evening: For if Conscience
condemn, God does much more Condemn: And if Conscience acquit and justify, by
the evidence of the Word and Spirit, God does Acquit and Justify, and we shall
have confidence toward God. What can more nearly concern us, than daily to make
a through and careful search of our own Consciences? Shall Men be so careful to
examine their Evidences, by which they hold Lands and Annuities, their Leases
whereby they hold Farms; and shall we be so careless as to let our Hearts and
Conscienccs lie unexamined and unsearched?

I have read a Story of a certain King, who after a long time of Bloody Wars,
which caused a great confusion in Men's outward Estates, in a public Assembly,
called upon his Subjects to show their Evidences, by which they held their
Lands; whereupon the Nobles being loath to have their Writings examined, drew
their Swords, and said, By these they held their Lands. So there are many that
cannot endure to search their Hearts and Consciences, because they have no
sound hope to find their Evidence good and clear to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Unless ye be justified by Faith in Christ, your Consciences when they be
indeed awakened and enlightened, will condemn you Guilty in the sight of God,
and will condemn the best of your Actions as not wrought in God, nor done in
the Name of Christ, not proceeding from the Love of God, nor intended for his
Glory. Now ere ye can find your selves justified by Faith in Christ through the
Gospel, ye must find your Consciences condemning you for Sin, and therefore
daily yield them to be searched and convinced by the Word of God.

Take a review every Evening likewise of all the Gifts, Graces, Blessings,
Benefits, God has bestowed upon thee, and consider after what sort thou have
employed them the Day past; and examine whether all these things, wherewith
thou should have done the more Service unto him who gave them, thou have not
made Weapons and Instruments, wherewith to offend him the more. Examine how
thou have used thy Strength, thy Health, thy Riches, thy Substance, thy Life,
thy Understanding, thy Memory, thy Will, thy Affections, thy Sight, thy Tongue,
thine Ears, thy Hands, and all the rest of thy Members and Faculties: And then
let the consideration of God's Benefits make thee to acknowledge him, and his
Goodness to love him: As we are not to slight common Mercies, yet extraordinary
Mercies must be more specially and particularly observed by us.

SECT. XXXVIII. Of providing in the Evening for the Day to come.
IT is good Advice that one gives, that a Christian should begin from the
Evening, the purpose of good Works which he is to perform the next Day; what
points he ought to meditate upon; what Vice he should resist; what Virtue he
should exercise; what Affairs he is to take in hand, to make all appear in its
proper time, with a well matured Providence. It is the Thread of Ariadne, which
guides our Actions in the great labyrinth of Time, otherwise all runs to
Confusion.

Some commend the Evening as a fit time for Meditation, viz. from the
Sunsetting to the Twilight. It is said of Isaac, that he went forth into the
Field in the Evening, to meditate and to pray. The Original Word signifies both
Duties. It is conceived by some Interpreters, that David penned the eighth
Psalm in the Night, occasioned by his meditation on the Works of God.

In the Evening, consider that every Morning has its Evening, and the longest
Day has its Night. So every Man's day of Life, will have its night of Death.
The longest day of Life, will have its night of Death. Think upon that speech
of our Savior, John 9.4.
I must Work while it is Day, for the Night comes wherein no Man can Work.
There is no working out your Salvation, when the night of Death is come.

If thou, O Man, have spent the Day in vain delights and pleasures, ask thy
self in the Evening, what satisfaction thou have found in those Vanities which
thou have so eagerly pursued all the Day before; and what comfort they now
afford unto thee? Ah! they are now gone and passed, and they have left but a
sad relish behind. But if yet thou resolvest to tread the same paths of Sin and
Destruction again, be thou well assured, that a Night will come which shall
never have Morning. When being covered with the shadow of Death, thou shall lie
down in everlasting Sorrow. Then will thou cry out in the anguish of thy Soul,
O what an unfortunate Wretch am I, that had time and opportunity to gain that
blessed State which Angels and Saints do enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
would not use the benefit thereof! O how idly and wickedly has the time of my
Life passed away, which shall never return again! And now for a few momentany
Pleasures on Earth, I must suffer intolerable and everlasting Torments in
Hell. O unhappy Pleasures! O cursed Change! O unfortunate Hour and Moment,
wherein I thus blinded my self! What a miserable Wretch am I! A thousand, yea,
ten thousand times unhappy, that have so fondly deceived my self! Oh, it had
been well if I had never been Born.

SECT. XXXIX. A Meditation in putting off our Clothes to go to Bed.
1. HEre consider, that Clothes do not make nor mar a Man: The Body cease not
to be a Body when the Clothes are put off, that the Body may take its rest in a
warm Bed. So it is not the Body that makes a Man, Animus cujusque quisque, it
is the Mind, or Soul of Man that is the Man. When the Body is laid aside in the
Grave, a Man does not then cease to be; but his Soul is then taking its rest in
Heaven, or tormented in Hell. Death is not an Annihilation of a Man, but only a
Dissolution.

2. Consider, That as a Man unclothes himself before he goes to take his rest
in his Bed; so Death to a Godly Man, is but an unclothing of him for Sleep and
Rest: And here meditate on the resemblances between Death and the unclothing of
our selves for Sleep and Rest.

1. Before a Man lays off his Clothes, he does ungirt himself, he unbuttons and
untieth his Garments, that he may put them off. Thus ordinarily before the Soul
is unclothed of the Body, God sends Sickness, one Disease or other to ungirt
and let loose the Body, so nearly united to the Soul of Man. Therefore St. Paul
calls it a Dissolution. I desire (says he) to be dissolved: Nisi se vinctum
putaverat, non optaverat dissolvi. If he had not thought his Soul bound and
girt to his Body, he would not have desired to been dissolved. Every Ach, Pain,
and Sickness that God lays upon the Body, is, and ought to be a forewarning to
thee, that it is almost Bedtime: It is death's Harbinger, and God's Servant,
sent it may be to fetch and carry thee to thy Bed, to thy place of Rest.

2. A Man cannot take such sweet refreshment in his Clothes, as when he is
Unclothed. So a Godly Man can never rest from his Labors whilst he is in the
Body; but he will be always burdened, wearied, and groaning in this Earthly
Tabernacle; he is born to Labor, as the Sparks fly upward: There is no hope
of resting from Sin, from Temptation, from Trouble, from Labors without, and
from Fears within, till a Christian lays aside his Body, the Garment of the
Soul; Death makes him to rest from all his Labors. While the Soul is in the
Body, it is absent from the Lord, the proper Rest of the Soul, the Saints
everlasting Habitation: But Death carries Lazarus into Abraham's Bosom.

3. When a Man puts off all his Clothes to go to his Bed, he lies not down
naked and uncovered, but takes a Covering upon him. Thus when the Soul leaves
the Body, it lays aside his Clothes, yet lies not he without a Covering: Man's
Bed is his Grave, and the Earth is his Covering. A Pious Man may think upon his
Burial in a Grave, as a Chest or Coffer, wherein his Body (the Apparel of his
Soul) is laid up till the Morning of the Resurrection: But a Wicked Man may
think on it as a dark Prison, reserving his Body (as his Soul is reserved in
Hell in chains of darkness) until the Judgment of the great Day.

4. When a Man puts off his Clothes, he lays aside all his rich Ornaments with
them. Thus when the Soul lays aside the Body, it lays aside also all a Man's
Honors, Preferments, Riches, Pleasures, and whatsoever the vain Heart of Man
prides himself in. We came forth naked into the World, and naked we shall
return out of the World. We came forth Naked, which shows Men were not born
to great Matters; and Naked we shall return, to show the vanity of Men in
looking after great Matters; for when the Rich and the Honorable Man die, they
shall carry nothing away with them, and their Glory shall not descend after
them, Psalm. 49.17. Oh consider, what a lamentable thing it is for Men to lay
aside these things at Death, and to have no Ornament but the ugliness of Sin to
appear before God in!

5. Men put off their Clothes in hope after they have refreshed themselves with
Sleep, to put them on again. So when the Soul lays aside her Body, it is in
hope of rising again, of a Reunion of the Soul with the same Body which a Man
did lay aside; so to put off the Body, as one that shall put it on again in a
more glorious manner, and never lay it aside more.

SECT. XL. When you lie down in your Beds at Night.
HAving recounted the Mercies of the Day, think on the dangers of the Night. It
is said of Thieves and Robbers, that in the dark they dig through Houses, which
they have marked for themselves in the Daytime, Job 24.16. The Word in the
Original, signifies to mark with a Seal, as if they did put their Seal upon
other Men's Houses for their own use. Thieves set their Mark upon such Houses in
the Daytime, which they intend to Rob at Night. Or (as some expound it) they
observe the strength of the House, the ways to it, what Company is in the
House, and where they may with most facility and advantage break into it.
Houses are marked out in the Day, and broken open in the Night; many Houses
also are fired in the Night, and how helpless is Man amidst these Casualties
and Dangers? If he be asleep, the Thief finds him bound to his hand; and if
Fire take his Chamber, how ready is the Fire to consume him in his Bed? At
midnight the Lord smote all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, from the
Firstborn of Pharaoh, etc. unto the Firstborn of the Captive that was in the
Dungeon, and all the Firstborn of Cattle, Exodus 12.29. It was in the Night
that the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, 2 Kings 19.35. Ishbosheth was slain at
Noon upon his Bed: but the Night has been fatal unto many.

Acknowledge it a mercy, that God affords you rest after Labor. Man goes
forth unto his Work, and to his Labor until the Evening, Psalm. 104.23. for so
(or rightly) he gives his Beloved sleep. Life and Strength would fail for want
of Rest, as for want of Food. A good Christian may go to Bed without fear. You
shall find many Promises in Scripture, about this Blessing. Prove. 3.24. When
thou lie down thou shall not be afraid, yea, thou shall lie down, and thy
sleep shall be sweet, Job. 11.18. Thou shall take thy rest in safety, thou
shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid. David says, Psalm. 3.5. I laid
me down, and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. Psalm. 4.8. I will both
lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou, Lord, make me dwell in safety.
Every Member of Jesus Christ is secure through Faith in him. The Shepherd wakes
when others are asleep, to keep his Sheep from the Wolf. God is the Keeper of
his Flock, he is always vigilant to defend them. Behold, He that is the Keeper
of Israel, shall never slumber nor sleep: the Lord is thy Keeper, Psalm. 121.4,
5. St. Peter feared not to sleep in Prison, Acts 12.6. Mr. Rogers, our
Proto-Martyr in Queen Mary's days, could scarce be waked, when the Keeper came
to warn him to prepare for the Fire, having been condemned to be Burnt alive.
When the Lord undertakes our Protection, we may sleep as our Savior did, in
the midst of a Storm and Tempest. As a good Nights rest is the Gift of God, so
it deserves daily acknowledgments by us.

SECT. XLI. When you compose your selves to Sleep.
HAving Prayed immediately before you go to Rest, offer your Rest it self to
God, in this or the like manner: My God! I desire as often as I shall draw
breath this Night, so often all my Respirations may praise thee. Drexel. de
rect. intent. lib. 2.
Drexelius advises a Christian to suppose that he hears Christ speaking to
him in these words: When any one will repose himself to Sleep, let him meditate
somewhat of Me, or confer with Me: For so, although he sleep in Body, yet he
shall watch in Mind unto Me: Yea, let every one which is ready to close his
Eyes, desire that I would receive every breath which he shall fetch that Night,
as it were to my exceeding Praise; and I who cannot be wanting to the holy
Wishes of a pious and loving Soul, will fulfill his desires in Truth. It is of
great advantage to a Christian, to reduce all things in this manner to the
Honor of God; and there is no moment of time, but we might be on the getting
hand.

It is good to empty your selves, before you sleep of all that troubles you. It
was Pythagoras his rule to his Scholar, Non te prius somno tradideris quam
diurna opera ter mente revolveris: Betake not thy self to sleep, till thou have
in thy Mind gone thrice over the works of the Day.

The sleep of a Godly Man is sweet; but the sleep of many wicked Men is very
troublesome. Richard the Third, King of England; after the murder of his two
Nephews, had fearful Dreams, and would leap off of his Bed, and take his Sword
in his hand, as if he had been seeking an Enemy. And Charles IX, King of
France, after the French Massacre, was laid to sleep every Night, and wakened
by Musicians.

But good Men sometimes through Grief and Pain, may find little ease, or
refreshing from their Beds. Thus Job amplifies his Sorrows, instancing in those
ordinary Ways, which give sick and distempered Bodies some abatement, or
intermission of their Pain, lying down upon their Bed, or Couch. When I say, my
Bed shall comfort me, Job 7.13, 14.
my Couch shall ease my complaint, then thou scarest me with Dreams, and
terrifiest me with Visions. As if he had said, Whilst I was all Day conflicting
with my Sorrows, I yet had some hope to find comfort at Night, that I should
find rest on my Bed: Or whilst in the Day my Spirit is overwhelmed within me, I
think sometimes to deceive my Pains a little, by taking a Nap on my Couch.

Consider here, That the most probable and proper Means, are unable of
themselves to minister any Ease or Comfort to us. A Man may go to his Bed, and
lie down upon his Couch in vain: unless God command a Bed to comfort us, it
shall yield us no Comfort; and unless he say to a Couch, Ease such a Man's
Complaint, it shall not do it. But if God will say to an hard Stone, give such
a Man rest, he shall rest and sleep sweetly upon it; as Jacob did when he
journeyed from Beer-sheba toward Haran, making Stones his Pillows in the place
where he lay down to sleep, Genesis 28.11, 12, 13, 14.
there dreaming of a Ladder set upon the Earth, the top whereof reached to
Heaven, and the Angels of God ascending and descending on it, and the Lord
standing above it, promising to give the Land whereon he lay, to him and his
Seed, and to multiply his Seed exceedingly; and that in his Seed all the
Families of the Earth should be blessed.

How often does God scare some Men with Dreams, and terrify them with Visions?
as Job speaks concerning himself. Sometimes Satan causes sinful and filthy
Dreams, August. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 30.
as St. Augustine bewails in the tenth Book of his Confessions: Sometimes
treacherous and deluding Dreams. Some conceive, that the Dream of Pilat's Wife,
Mat. 27.19. was from the Devil, because Satan would thereby have hindered the
work of Man's Redemption. She comes to Pilat, and desires him to have nothing
to do with that Just Man, For (says she) I have suffered many things this
Night in a Dream because of him. As our waking times are in God's Hand, so our
sleeping times. Sometimes God makes sleep an Affliction to us. Job's Dreams
were Terrifying and Scaring to him. Some Dreams are for Warning and Admonition;
The Lord warned Joseph in a Dream; the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a
Dream whilst he thought on those things, and gave him Counsel what to do, Mat.
1.20. Holy Meditations even upon our Beds, do many times meet with the Lord's
Messages. The Angels are at God's Service to assist his Saints, as here of
Joseph; he helps him out of his perplexed Thoughts. He was contriving how to
please God in that Business of so great Importance, and God sends an Angel to
assist him. No time is unseasonable for God to help his Children: No time but
he watches over them: When they are sleeping, when they think neither harm nor
good, then does the Lord watch over them for good. God can give us better
direction sleeping, than we can find out waking. Many a one has tasted more of
Heaven in a Night-dream, than in many Days attendance on holy Ordinances. Yet
this is no Pillow for Laziness: If we do our best while we are waking, God will
relieve us sleeping. Let us go to God, and not distract our selves, nor be
careless. Joseph thought what to do, yet his thoughts were not so distracting
as to break his sleep: God helps him sleeping. God will have us be doing, and
yet it may be, he will do his own Work without us.

Let every Christian labor to be well employed in the Daytime, for (as
Aristotle speaks) it is possible, that our Fancy in the Night may hold some
conformity with the Days employment: F^^ Four Mind in the Daytime be intent
upon good Employment, and well fixed thereon, our sleep may relish of the same
Employment also, and our Fancy may make return of something whereof we so
fastened on in the Day, as well as it will do in other Vanities. The Wise Man
says, In the multitude of Dreams, and many Words, there are also diverse
Vanities; but fear thou God, Eccles. 5.7. If thou fear God, thou need not
fear thy Fancy, nor thy Dreams. I shall Conclude with the Advice of Chrysostom,
Chryfost. in Genesis Sermon. 6.
Close thine Eyes with the thoughts of God and his Goodness, and thou shall
have sweet Dreams, thy Fancy shall not be troubled.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for, and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
FOLIO.
JOsephus's History of the Jews, with Cuts. Bishop Usher's Body of Divinity,
with his Life, and an Alphabetical Table, the seventh Edirion. Parthanissa, a
Romance.
In QUARTO.
Dr. Dillingham's Sermon at the Lady Alstons Funeral. Dr. Bate's Harmony of the
Divine Attributes. Dr. Jacomb on the 8th of the Romans. Dr. Tuckney, 40 Sermons
on several Occasions. -- His Praelectiones and Determinationes, Lat. now in the
Press. Mr. Haworth's several Pieces against the Quakers
In OCTAVO.
Mr. Tho. Gale his Philosophy. -- Anatomy of Infidelity. Mr. Baxter, more
Proofs for Infant Baptism. -- His Treatise of Justification. Mr. Whiston, his 4
Books in Defense of Infant Baptism. Mr. Wills, his 3 Books in Defense of
Infant Baptism, against Mr. Danvers. A Contest for Christianity: or, A Account
of two great Disputes between the Anabaptists and the Quakers. Mr. Barret, The
Christian Temper, or, A Discourse on the Nature and Properties of the Graees of
Sanctification. Mr. Shelton's Discourse of Superstition, with respect to the
present Times. A Catechism according to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
with Scripture Proofs at large, together with Directions for plain Christians
to pray on most occasions, and to receive the Lord's Supper, by the use and
knowledge of the said Catechism. A Catechism, or the Church-Catechism enlarged,
and the Doctrine proved by Scripture, for the use of such as were not Baptized
in their Infancy, or had no Godfathers and Godmothers. Mr. Ranew on Divine
Meditation.
In TWELVES.
Mr. Pearse's Great Concern, or Directions for a timely preparation for Death,
recommended as proper to be given at Funerals. -- The best Match, or the Souls
espousal to Christ. Mr. Case, his Treatise of Afflictions, useful for these
Times. Mr. Hook's Doubting Christian drawn to Christ. The Barren Fig Tree, or
the Fruitless Professors Doom. By John Bunyon. The Epitome of the Bible briefly
explaining the Contents of the Old and New Testament, penned in Meter for
better remembrance, useful for Children.

