The Glory of Dying in WAR: WITH A particular Application to the Death OF THE
Late EARL of SANDWICH.
Blessed Sandwich! Earth's envy! Heaven's delight!
Whom the Gods honored to die in Fight!
A Glory far beyond the power of Verse;
Only, for Mars, and Cannons, to rehearse.
It Is Nature's pride; Virtue's reward; a Bliss
Would make the Angels slight their happiness,
And Court this Death; Maugre the blind mistake
Of vulgar spirits, and those lean Souls, who make
It terrible; choosing rather to go
Ten years tormented with a Gouty Toe,
Or war against a Cough, their loathing tongues
Spitting the filth, out of their conquered lungs:
Or else their Corpse, with Salves and Sear-Cloths please;
Live rotten Monuments of their disease;
And carry pale-faced Death about to show,
Making a Grave, and stink, where e're they go.
Whilst thou, Great Sandwich, made a Nobler choice,
Not to be praised enough by humane voice.
Who in defense of King and Country di'd,
Have ever hitherto been Deifi'd.
The sharpest Teeth of Time could never skar
The Glory of a man was killed in the War.
If Advocates gain honor by a Cause
Concerning Trespass in the Common-Laws;
What merits he, who pleads with dint of Sword?
And may be killed, or kill at every word:
Who speaks with Lightning and with dreadful Thunder,
Making the Earth to shake, all Mortals wonder:
By whose success, Kingdoms or fall, or stand,
Has the fortune of Princes in his hand;
Nay, the worship of the Gods! nay, the lives
Of our selves, our servants, children and wives.
In this Concern stout Sandwich bravely stood,
Until he floated in a Sea of Blood:
Repelled the fury of the Hogen Might;
Shivered their Valor, banished 'em the Fight:
And then to make his Victory complete,
The Heavens stooped, and took him from the Fleet,
Leaving his Body on the gentle Bed
Of Neptune, where the Sea-gods honored
His Hearse, and with the Glories of the Main
Conducted it to shore; when with a Train
Of Honors it was met, and in great State
Placed amongst the Gods of the Second Rate.
Thus whilst his Corpse insults with Royal love,
His Soul is led in Triumph by Great Jove.
Heaven and Earth do both conspire to build
Trophies unto the man that dies in the Field.
Now come, ye cursed Diseases, that have led
Your Captive Coward to his dying Bed;
Show me what ease, what comfort you afford
The Proselyte you gained from the Sword.
It Is true, you give a little time; for what?
To make him feel his grief, or lie and rot:
A Cap, a Doctor, and a tender Nurse;
And so you plague his Body with his Purse:
Ye put him on a Rack; he never confessed,
Nor yet by flatteries, your Death was best.
Tell me, sick Clay, what Honor, what Renown
It is to die upon a Bed of Down?
No, no; the way to Glory does not lie
Thorough the pangs of a sad Malady:
Not he who is a Slave to Death, and stands
Ready to serve her Messengers Commands;
Submits to every disease, and falls,
When e're a petty Cold, or Fever calls:
That man's a man of life, and valor, can
Bid Death stand off; and when he please, come on;
That, for his Countries sake, dares single meet
All the Death-Heads of the Hogen Mogen Fleet!
Make Death serve him, in killing others, then
Commands it to return to him again;
And lift him from this doleful Vale of Tears,
(Without the help of Sickness, or of Years)
Unto Eternal Joy, and Bliss, and Glory,
Where Angels love to Chant, and tell his Story.
Thus did, thus lived, thus di'd, admired by all;
SANDWICH the Great, and Valiant Admiral.
London: Printed by J. C. 1672.


