Groans from Newgate OR AN ELEGY On the suspention of the Famous Thief Thomas
Sadler, Fifteen times Student in that Renowned College, who to the great
Regret of all his Assotiates, was Translated to Tyburn, March, 16th. 1677.
ILLustrious Muse! on thee we Call,
That do inspire at Pulchers Wall;
The pious Tinkler with an Art,
To stop with Ghostly Rhymes the Cart.
And with his Saints Bell full of grief,
Ring-out the Knell of passing Theif.
Whilst bussling Crow'd for pity sobbs,
And diverse Geld unguarded Fobbs.
Assist us now with doleful Glee,
TO Antipadize an Elegy.
And let each drop that dares to run
From wetshod Eyes, fill thrice three Tun;
That so we may with Mickle Tears,
(As he in Brandy) drown our Fears;
Who does not here how every stone
In Newgate cries, oh Hone, oh Hone.
And every tender hearted Louse
Belonging to that Mansion House,
Does strive in sable Robes to Crawl,
Close Mourners to his Funeral.
When Princess German made her Hubbubs,
And drew the whole Town to the Suburbs;
When brisk Duval, that French Latroon
Received reward of Pickaroon,
And put poor Ladies in a swoon;
Rhymesters their Goose-quills did Employ
As fast, as Clerks in Chancery;
And shall Sadler, Mercuries Crony,
Be hanged like Curr, Sans Ceremony,
It Is base, -- and if wit's to be had for money
If Ballad men will venture on it,
Or people Buy, when we have don't;
We Will Sing his Name in Loftier droll
Than Latin Pagan did Old Noll;
He was Protector too o'th Crew,
Domestic Castles to Subdue;
And by the aid of Trusty Betty,
Could force each Door, VVindow, and Jetty;
With dexetrous Crown could spring a mine,
And Pick-lock Engines so design;
Like second Hannibal they say,
He always found or made a way.
His Conduct of so brave a flight,
Taught the Wild Arabs of the night;
Intrigues they never would believe,
Or wanted wit how to Atcheive.
Bilking more Plate, If fame truth says,
Than the old Gilt called public faith.
And then for to complete his Race,
VVel-hop'd, as Badges of's high place
To bear away both Purse and Mace.
EPITAPH.
From making Bricks and moulding Clay,
To Break up VValls I found a way;
Long-tyme I thrived, till by mishap,
Atropos caught me in a Trap.
But that is no strange or wondrous thing,
I always loved to have my Swing.
Let this sad Tomb advise my friends,
Ill Lives must still expect Ill ends.
FINIS.
London, Printed for T. M. in the Year, 1677.


