THE MISCHIEFS, And Danger of the SIN OF IGNORANCE, OR, IGNORANCE ARRAIGNED,
With the Causes, Kinds, and Cure thereof.

As also, The Excellency, Profit, and Benefit of Heavenly KNOWLEDGE.

Largely set forth from Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.

By W. Geering, Minister of the Word at Lymington, in the County of Southampton.

London, Printed for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of
the Parrot in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful JOHN BUTTON of Buckland, JOHN BULKELEY of Burgatt,
AND JOHN HILDESLEY of Hinton, In the County of Southampton, Esquires.
Right Worshipful,
MArcus Antonius de Dominis confesses in that little book, M. Antonius de Dom.
Archiep. Spalat.
wherein he expresses the reason of his departure from the Church of Rome,
That the closing up of the Scriptures from the people, thereby laboring to
hold all in ignorance, gave him occasion to suspect their Religion, and to fear
his estate, and to think on conversion, freely professing three in these
terms, Scripturae summa apud nos ignoratio, that there is nothing whereof the
Papists are more ignorant, then of the Scriptures. And other Nations heretofore
have cast this as a reproach upon the English Nation, That the Nobility and
Gentry thereof were ignorant and unlearned; which aspersion has been well
wiped off, since the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: but I wish it
were not a just reproach, that did yet stick upon the body of our Common
people, that they are lamentably ignorant and unlearned in matters of the
highest concernment; what gross darkness is yet among us, notwithstanding all
the means vouchsafed to us from the Father of lights? and may not the Lord
complain of us, as sometimes he did of the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.28.
they are a Nation void of Counsel, neither is there any understanding in
them? Diverse of the Ancients have given us their testimony concerning the great
diligence that was used in all sorts of people in their times, in searching the
Scriptures, desiring nothing else but to attain to the mind of him that wrote
them, August. de doctr. Christian. lib. 2. cap. 5.
and so to the will of God contained in them. And what was more common to the
Fathers, then to exhort the people to get them Bibles, to read them; and to
examine what they heard by them? and how sharply did they reprove the
negligence of those that did it not? Theodoret, writing of his times, says,
You shall every where see those points of our faith to be known and understood,
not only by such as are Teachers in the Church, but even of all kind of
Artificers, and not men only, but women also, not they only which are
book-learned, but they also that get their living with their needle; yea
maidservants, and waiting-women, and not Cityzens only, but Husbandmen of the
Country are very skilful in these things: yea, you may hear among us,
Ditchers, and Neatheards, and Wood-setters, discoursing of the Trinity, Eusebius.
lib. 6. cap. 3.
and the Creation, etc. Origin from his childhood learnt the Scriptures, and
gat them without book, and propounded many questions to his Father Leonides a
godly Martyr, (who rejoiced much in it) about the difficult senses thereof. So
Macrina, Basil. Epist. 74.
Basil's Nurse, taught him the Scriptures of a child, and Hierome writes of
the Lady Paula, that she could say the Scriptures by heart, and that she set
many of her maids to learn them; and many of his writings are directed to
women, commending their industry in searching the Scriptures, and exciting them
thereunto, as to Paula before mentioned, Eustochium, Salvina, Celantia, etc.
The diligence of those times may justly reprove the great negligence of these
times: we have had the light of the Gospel clearly shining among us these
hundred years, we have had many excellent Teachers to unfold the mind of God
out of his word to us, and yet very few there be that are anointed with eye
salve, to see that which is called the secret of the Gospel, and to understand
that great mystery of godliness, which God has revealed in his word: we have
had the way of God (like Apollos) expounded to us more perfectly then our
forefathers; and yet the Lord may say to us, as sometime Christ to his
Disciples; Mat. 15.16, 17.
Are ye yet without understanding? perceive ye not yet? Have I been so long
time with you, and have thou not known me, etc. Joh. 14.9.

There be certain impediments of knowledge, Some natural, as infancy,
incapacity, unlearnednesse, the one of these is not suddenly, the other not
easily cured: Some are sinful, as Pride, Ignorance, and Averseness, for which
cause the Lord has not only given ^s the Scriptures, but also the Ministry
of his Pastors, and other means to remove these impediments: let an ignorant
man be locked up with a Bible, he will return forth as ignorant as he went in:
though the word of God be not obscure in it self, yet to an ignorant man, that
which is plain and that which is obscure is all one: but let the Book be
opened, the Text read and expounded, and then by the blessing of God upon it,
as Chrysostom speaks, the most unlearned man that is, shall understand. And
were there (...) constant preaching Ministry settled (as much as is possible)
in every place and corner o^ the land, and not only public preaching, but
also frequent catechizing in public congregations, and private families
enjoined, and effectually maintained against the manifold discouragements of
this Iron Age, the darkness of ignorance might soon vanish, and be expelled
out of our coasts. Now the consideration of the gross ignorance of most people
and congregations in this clear Sunshine of the Gospel, was not the least
motive inducing me to the study and publication of these Sermons, being also
importuned by diverse godly Ministers, and other Christian friends, to bring
them into the public view. My desire herein is to further the simplest of my
Contrymen in the knowledge of God, hoping they will not slight my poor
endeavors, for whose sake they were primarily undertaken; and those are all
ignorant persons, that have lived under the Gospel so long, that for their time
they might have been teachers, but by reason of their gross and dull ears,
are but babes in understanding, and have need to be taught the first principles
of the Oracles of God. Heb. 5.12.


And now (much honored Sirs) your good understanding in the mystery of Christ
your unfeigned love to learning and true Religion, your great respects showed
to all Gods faithful Ministers, which have the happiness (as my self have had)
to be acquainted with you, have emboldned me to present this Treatise to you,
upon whom God has stamp't his own image in an eminent manner, (as it were upon
his own Gold) more then upon many others of your rank. You deserve (I confess)
a greater testimony of my respects unto you, then this cluster or two of my
slender vintage; which I here offer to you, not so much to feed your appetite,
as to quicken it; but where power is wanting, I humbly entreat, that a sincere
affection may make the supply; and if by this tender of mine, you may receive
any little benefit, I shall crave this recompense of you, That you would be
earnest with God in my behalf, to make me faithful and profitable in my
function, to the end of my days. The value of Paper-presents is but small, and
the less to be esteemed of; by how much this Age of ours has made the number
of Books to be the purgation of distempered brains; I beg thi^ favor of you,
To have thi^ little piece of coin laid up i^ your closets, as an
acknowledgement of a greater obligation: and if after your many weighty and
public a^faires, you shall sometimes loo^ into this book, I hope yo^ may meet
with some passage therein, that may yield yo^ some content, and further ^our
growth in the knowledge ^^ our Lord and Savior Jesus ^^rist. And leaving this
Ma^^al with you as a testimony (...) that respect, which your ^orships many
ways chal^^ge from me, I remain

Your Worships in all respective Services to be commanded, W. G.

TO THE READER.
THese are days that abound in the means of saving knowledge, but few partake
of it: the most, like brutes, do altogether neglect it: others seek after it,
but not as for Gold; and many there be that prefer childish toys, and
trifling knowledge, before that wisdom that is from above. A natural man is apt
to affect things more or less according to the sense and understanding that he
has of them; now a natural man cannot understand the things of the spirit,
therefore he cannot truly affect them: the excellent knowledge of Christ, the
glorious privileges of the Gospel, are things transcending all created
understanding; the love of Christ is a love that passes knowledge, Ephs. 3.19.
says the Apostle; the Peace of God, a peace that passes all understanding;
Phil. 4.7.
communion with God in the Spirit, and joy in the Holy Ghost, these are things
that even the understanding of a spitual man cannot reach unto: but a natural
man is in darkness, and altogether blind toward them: Faith is the evidence
of things not seen, it discovers to a believing soul, things invisible. A
carnal man wants faith, therefore when the glorious excellencies of the
Gospel are presented before him, he wants an evidence to discover these
things unto him: visible things being presented; are to be seen with bodily
eyes, but spiritual and invisible things cannot be seen by those that want the
eye of Faith. Joh. 9.39.
For judgment, I am come into the world, says our Savior, that they which
see not may see, and they that see, may be made blind. As to the humble soul;
he sets up a light within, enabling it with Moses, to see him that is
invisible; but on the contrary, he leaves them in their natural blindness, who
are wise in their own conceits. It is the complaint of Solomon, Prove. 17.16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom: seeing he has
no heart to it? There is a rich price in hand, much means of knowledge, by
Preaching, Expounding, Writing, Catechizing, the things of God excellently and
clearly set out to us; but all this while, this price is in the hand of a fool,
one who (though worldly wise) yet wants the light of the Spirit to direct him
to true happiness, and to show him the worth of Heavenly things, and thereupon
it follows, that he has no heart to it. A similitude taken from a Man that
is going to a Town or City, where there is some great Mart or Fair, with money
in his hand to buy Commodities; but for want of judgment he passes by the
most advantageous Commodities, being ignorant of the goodness and
profitablenesse of them, and throws away his money upon toys and trifles,
that are of no advantage to him:

So there is a price put into the hands of the sons of men, to get Heavenly
Wisdom, but the carnal worldling remains a stark fool, he cannot see into
the excellency of Heavenly things, and thereupon has no heart to them but
passes by them, and embraces a thing of naught instead of them. God is to be
sought above all, and may be found of all that will seek after him, and take
any pains to know him: but the greatest part of the World have not a mind to
know him, and therefore doe^ not follow on to know him. Hos. 6.3.


When man will not use those helps that God has left him to search after the
saving knowledge of God; God justly suffers him to fall into diverse opinions,
and gross conceits, which shut him up in the bottom of a stinking Dungeon,
where he finds nothing but ignorance, error, and irksome uncertainties, as
filthy vermin, creeping round about him; where the darkness of ignorance
fills the mind, the Prince of darkness fills the heart. The Sepia or
Cuttle-fish, says Tertullian, Tertull. contr. Marcion.
when he is in danger to be taken, casts about him a black inkie matter,
wherewith he darkneth the water, that the Fishermen cannot see him: So many
people do seek to compass themselves with the dark clouds of ignorance, to
hide themselves and their wicked practices, which would appear to be very
odious, should they come to be viewed, and surveyed by the light of the Word.
And for many others, that are a little enlightened, they profess wisdom, but
they practice folly, and so their knowledge is no better than ignorance.

But he that has had experience of the freeness of Gods grace, and the riches
of his mercy, that has felt the lively workings of the Spirit of God upon his
heart, that man has an experimental knowledge of God; and this is, after a
sort, to eat of the Tree of Life: the more acquaintance he has with God, the
more he desires, and beggeth acquaintance with him: though every hour he give
him a fresh taste of his goodness; yet he ever finds a new and most pleasant
sweetness in it: the more knowledge a man has of God, the more he knows his
own duty toward him, and he that savingly knows God, dares not either
neglect his duty, or do it decitfully: he that has made proof of Gods
goodness, dares not make trial of evil, he knows, if he should, he should
do it to his cost.

What man can reckon himself a Christian, that is ignorant of God? without the
knowledge of God, all that we do is but in a customary or uncertain way: hereby
we know whom we serve, and the great advantages we shall reap by his Service,
and are sensible of our estate in Grace, measuring Gods gracious presence with
us, or his absence and with-drawings from us, and our own strength, and
weakness; it is the earnest of our Heavenly Inheritance, the first fruits of
the Beatifick Vision, our acquaintance with his face in this Life, and our
Heaven upon Earth.

And now (Reader) if thou art in an ignorant estate, and one who art willing to
be brought to the sense of thy ignorance and blindness, and so to come to him
who is the Light of the World; Then say I to thee, as Jehu to Jonadab. Give me
thy hand, and thou and I shall quickly accord, and thou shall be a fit, and
welcome Reader, to this poor Treatise; and I hope I have written that which
shall be both for thy satisfaction and comfort.

I have here labored for such plainness, as might best inform thy judgment,
and affect thy heart; purposely avoiding that unnecessary artificialnesse,
which might make it like those Spiders webs (to which one once compared Logic)
which are said to be much in workmanship, (...).
but in profit nothing.

My hearty desire is, (if the will of the Lord be so) to do a double good, with
these my poor labors, and therefore to write the same things which at first I
Preached to my own Congregation, it is not grievous.

I have here (for the Common good) changed my tongue, Solet apertior esse sermo
vivus qua^. scriptus Bernar.
into a pen, though a dead letter be of less effectual persuasion, than a
lively voice: The scope of this Treatise is, to bring men out of darkness,
into the true light, and to show them how to walk in the direction of that
light.

That is the best knowledge which is of God, the chiefest good, a knowledge
that suffers least alteration in the hour of death, but only admits of a
graduall change, advancing to perfection; All other knowledge, then, will
vanish away: this is the knowledge according to godliness, whereunto I labor
in this small Treatise to stir thee up; that knowing God in a saving way,
thou may live in him, and walk in communion with him.

The knowledge of God in Christ is the pith and marrow of Christian Religion
and Profession; which whosoever wants, he is but the shadow of a Christian,
though he abound with all other knowledge.

If this that I have now done, shall be acceptable to the Church and People of
God, and be any thing (though but Goats hair toward the Lords Sanctuary) I
shall rejoice, and give God the glory, and the Reader may expect a Treatise
from me on another Subject, in some short time, the Lord assisting me.

In the mean time, if thou reap any benefit to thy soul, by these my Labors;
let God have all the glory, and me a share in thy prayers.

I shall conclude with that of Austin, who having in his Books of Christian
Doctrine propounded the Rule of Christian Faith, yet notwithstanding thus
concludes: To such as understand not what I write, I answer, they must not
blame me, if they conceive not these things, as if I showed them with my
finger; the Moon, or a Star which they would see, being not very clear; and
if they have not eyes to see my finger (much less a Star) they must not be
offended at me, if they see it not: So they who reading these things, cannot
yet see the things which in the Scripture are dark and abscure; let them cease
to blame me, and rather pray to the Lord to give them eyesight; for I may
point with my finger, but cannot give them eyes to see the things that I point
to.

Now that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
the Father of Glory, may give unto you, the spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him, the eyes of your understanding being opened, that you
may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of
his Inheritance in the Saints, I shall not cease to pray, and rest,

Thine in the Lord. W. G.

Errata.
IN Epist-Dedicat. line 13. read there. l. penult. r. may. page 13. l. 1. r.
he. p. 47. marg. r. ut -- facundi. p. 48. l. 1. dele 2. p. 49. l. 4. r. hearts.
p. 77. l 29. r. slight. p. 80. marg. r. Tit. p. 81. d. (^) p. 91. l. 26. r.
servants. p. 98. l. 15. r. she. p. 104. l, 8 r. the. p. 106. l. 1. r. my. l. 8.
r. dye. p. 111. l. 8. r. Hilkiah. p. 115. l. 7. r. will be. p. 127. l. 9. r.
Lalius. p. 151. l. 9. r. croffe. l. 11. r. wickednesses p. 156. l. 6. r.
knowing. p. 172. marg. r. Samuelis educatione. p. 187. l. 26. r. sins. Some few
literals more there be, but so obvious, the Reader may pass them over without
prejudice, or correct them at his pleasure.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF IGNORANCE.
From Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of Knowledge.


IN the three foregoing Chapters were typical Prophesies; in this fourth, and
in the following Chapters are plain Oracles and predictions, not covered with
Types. This Chapter is a sharp Sermon to the ten Tribes, the beginning whereof
consists:

1 In a citation of them to Gods tribunal: Hear ye the Word of the Lord, ye
children of Israel: for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of
the Land, v. 1. as if he should say, Seeing ye set at naught, and lightly
esteem all the admonitions of the Prophets, I cite you by Gods appointment to
his tribunal, to hear the controversy which he has with you, and most of the
inhabitants of the land.

2. In an accusation of them for their sins, he accuses them for their sins
against their Neighbor, and against God.

1. He charge them with their sins against their Neighbor, which he sets
down in two things; want of Truth, want of Mercy, There is no truth nor mercy
in the land, ver. 1. Righteousness is there understood for truth by a
Synecdoche, There is no truth, (that is, there is no righteousness and
justice) in the land: and by mercy is understood bountifulness and liberality
to those that are in misery; this also was not to be found in the land, though
there were many objects of mercy, yet there were none that would put on bowels
of mercy.

2. He charge them with their sins against God, and the first and leading
sin, is, their Ignorance of God, there is no knowledge of God in the Land: in
this sixth verse, the Prophet aggravateth this sin of theirs, showing that
ignorance is the cause of their destruction, My people are destroyed for lack
of knowledge;

In the words there are three things to be observed.

1. The persons of whom the Lord speaks, his own people, not strangers, but his
people, that were in covenant with him, not of his elect people neither, but of
those that were his people in outward profession.

My people] whether it be referred to God or to the Prophet, some make a
question; but whether that affix [meus] be referred to God or to the Prophet,
an opposition is here and elsewhere made to other people that were not Gods
people, and had not the Prophets for their Monitors. This word (my) signifies
propriety, they are called Gods people.

1. Because God had called them to be his peculiar people from all people of
the earth, Amos 3.2.
and the Lord had entered into covenant with them, to become their God, etc.

2. They had the Word and Sacraments. and sacrifices among them, and to them
were committed the Oracles of God; they (and they only) had the knowledge of
the true God among them. Romans 3.2.


3. Of them came many holy Prophets and Patriarchs that were men in great
favor with the Lord.

4. The Lord wrought many signs, wonders, and miracles among them.

5. They had many visions, prophesies, dreams, and revelations from God.

6. The Messiah was promised to descend of that Nation, and in particular of
the Tribe of Judah. These were the privileges of the people of God, which the
Gentiles were destitute of, or else he says, [ My people] to put them in mind,
what they had bin, or should be.

2. Here is the judgment or punishment threatened unto them, which is
destruction; they are destroyed. Perdetur populus meus. Vatab. Excisus est
populus meus. Rivet. Conticuit, Vulg. Alii, ad silentium redactus est populus
meus.
Vatablus renders it, My people shall be destroyed. Rivet. thus, My people are
cut off. Some read it thus, My people are brought to silence. And Zanchy says,
that Verbum pereundi, tam ad spiritualem, quam ad carnalem, and politicam
mortem refertur, Zanch. in loc. This word [destroyed] has as well relation to
their spiritual, as to their carnal and politic death.

And it is said here, they are destroyed or cut off, to denote the certainty of
the judgment, they shall as surely be destroyed, as if they were already cut
off and rooted out.

3. Here is expressed the cause of their destruction, and that is ignorance,
for want of the knowledge of God. This people were not destitute of knowledge,
as the Gentiles, who had not the Law of God: but therefore were they without
knowledge, because when they had the Law, they neglected the use of it, and
when they were admonished by the Prophets, they contemned their admonitions,
and therefore perished, because they would be destroyed. Mebeli hadaat,
signifies, absque scientia illa, without that knowledge. Vatablus refers
that knowledge to the knowledge of God, which the Land is said to be destitute
of, v. 1.

This speech of the Prophet, in the name of the Lord, is an astonishing speech,
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: as if he should say, it were no
wonder if other people should want the knowledge of God, and so be destroyed,
but that my people should be destroyed for lack of knowledge, this is matter of
astonishment: the Lord had shown his word unto Jacob, Psalm. 247.19 20. Deuteronomy.
4.6.
his Statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he had not dealt so with any
Nation, nor had they the knowledge of his judgments: This people were esteemed
in the sight of the Nations to be a wife and an understanding people, therefore
Israel, Gods people could have no plea for their ignorance, having the Law of
God, which the Gentiles had not: they were destitute of knowledge, because they
wilfully shut their eyes against the light that shined upon them, therefore
their punishment was most just, in that they were cut off, that they should not
be further accounted for the people of God. I proceed to the point of
Instruction.

That ignorance is the main and principal cause of a peoples destruction: I do
not say, it is the only cause, but it is a principal cause of a peoples ruin:
the Apostle Paul says, that destruction and misery are in the ways of wicked
men, and then adds this as the reason thereof, Romans 3.16, 17.
and the way of peace they have not known; the Lord accounts them poor and
foolish that know not the way of the Lord, Jer. 5.4.
and the judgment of their God; and the mouth of the foolish is near to
destruction, Prove. 10.14.

1. Jer. 5.
It brings many outward calamities upon a people: My people are gone into
captivity for lack of knowledge, says the Lord, a rod is for the back of him
that is void of understanding, says the wise man, the whip of Gods wrath is
their due, the rod and not reason must prevail with them, they must be
instructed (...), non (...).

2 It brings everlasting ruin upon a people that live and die in it, God will
pour out his wrath upon them that know him not, and Christ shall be revealed in
flaming fire against them that know not God, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power.

In the handling of this Doctrine, let us inquire,

Ignorance?

Ignorance is a great blot upon man's nature or a want of that clear and perfect
light that was in man at his first creation, being made after the image of God,
which principally consisted in knowledge: Tric^ tem (...) lo^^ (...) scilians,
re^^^^ (...) se factarum and Creat^ris, and sui, I (...). Seneca^. lib 2.
Distinct. 23.
this light being much darkened, Gods image in man is much defaced: God, at the
first, gave man perfect knowledge of all things, so far forth as he was
capable of ( for no infinite thing can be fully comprehended of a finite, says
the Philosopher) his knowledge was very great in natural and supernatural
things: Adam was both a perfect Philosopher and a perfect Divine. Consider him
first as a Philosopher, he knew himself, he knew his own condition, he knew
what manner of person he was made, he understood how he ought to walk, what to
have done, what to have avoided; he had a singular knowledge of the nature of
all creatures, giving them names suitable to their very natures. Adam could not
choose but know himself, when as he knew the nature of stones and plants, and
beasts, and all other creatures, but now the eye of man's understanding being
obscured by sin, we see natural things no better then the man in the Gospel
that was blind, who had but a little glimering of light, that could not
discern between men and trees. Scholars in their studies are like Sailers in a
troublesome Sea, M^^ima pars (...) quaestimum, minima pars eorum quanes ^^^
Plato.
that fail along where they cannot see their way: Socrates that was judged
wifest by Apollo, said, he knew this one thing, viz. that he knew nothing. And
Aristotle that knew as much of natural things, as man could know by the height
of reason, says of all things, Videntur esse, they only seem to be: and the
Platonists do hold this Paradox, That nothing can be known as it is; so that
all man's natural knowledge now is but as a spiders web.

Having considered man as a Philosopher, let us see what a Divine he is. In the
state of innocence man knew God, so far forth as a terrestrial creature could
know his Creator, he perfectly knew so much of the will and mind of God, as it
concerned him to know, and was necessary for him; he had an inbred knowledge of
God; but now if our eyes be so blind in natural things, what are they in
supernatural? Ephesians. 4.18. Ephesians. 5.8
the understanding of man is darkened through ignorance and blindness of the
heart, says the Apostle; natural men are said to be darkness, and to sit in
darkness, not as if the natural faculty of light or seeing were quite extinct
by the fall of Adam: no, there is some inward light still in the understanding
of natural men; therefore when the Scripture taxes all people for being a
gross and dull people, it is not for that they are altogether void of
understanding, for they are wise to do evil, says the Prophet Jeremy, Jer.
4.22. Luc. 16.8.
and our Savior says, that the children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light, they are eagle-eyed in the things of the
world, and in sinful matters still, but to do good they have no knowlodge. Man
has by a natural light, still the knowledge of God; so the Gentiles by the
book of the creatures knew God: Romans 1.21.
and they had a moral knowledge of God, having some moral principles within,
engraven upon their hearts, by which they understand both good and evil: but
they are deprived of an higher light, a spiritual knowledge, a divine light,
lumen fidei, the light of faith, 1 John 2.8.
a supernatural light, this is called the true light by the Apostle: so that
natural or moral light, is but a false, or dim light, in comparison of that
which directs a man the way to true happiness, and this true light is called
in Scripture, the light of Christ. Ephesians. 5.14. and the light of life. John
8.12.

causes of ignorance?

cause is the corruption of man's nature, the understanding of man is corrupted,
and turned away from this light, unto blindness, darkness, error, ignorance,
unbelief, and misbelief; Ephesians. 4.18
the understanding of man is darkened, being estranged from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in him, because of the blindness or hardness of
his heart: corruption and pravity has blinded the eyes of his understanding,
so that he cannot (by reason thereof) savingly see the things of God, 1 Cor.
2.14.
the natural man receives not the things of the spirit, nor can he know them,
because that corruption on the faculty, has blinded the eye of his
understanding, turning it away from the chiefest good; Acts 17.
man does now but grope and feel after God, man is so stupefied, that though he
hear never so often, yet understands not in a saving way, like the people
that live near the river Nilus, that are made deaf by the fall of the waters of
that river, for videndo non vident; (in seeing, men do not see,) Romans 1.23
and intelligendo non intelligunt, in understanding, they do not understand; as
evil stomachs turn good nourishment into bad humors, so evil men turn the
truth of God into a lie.

The corruption of our natures has deprived us of all those principles of
saving truth, that should be in the understanding. The Lord looked down from
heaven, Psalm. 14.2.
to see whether there were any that did understand and seek God, says David.
There is no principle of light in a natural man, that gives him a supernatural
knowledge of God. God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 46
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, etc. So that till the glorious Son of righteousness shine into our
hearts, the heart has not one principle of of heavenly light there, and is no
better then a lump of darkness. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, it is as it were at deadly feud
with the wisdom of the Spirit, for it will yield to, or grant no more, then it
can see ground for in natural reason, therefore must needs be stark blind in
matters of faith: An instance of this, we have in Nicodenus a Ruler of the
Jews, and (no doubt) a great Rabbi, and well skilled in all humane ^earning,
yet cannot he understand the doctrine of regeneration, and though our Savior
had told him of the necessity of it, and ^llustrated it by an excellent
similitude of the wind blowing where it lists, Joh. 3.
and yet says he, how can these things be? the reason was, because he looked
upon it, through the thick spectacles of reason, and wanted the pure and clear
eye of faith. Christ spoke spiritually, and he understood him carnally. Another
instance you have in the learned Athenians, who in Paul's time were as great
Scholars, as any in the world, yet when he preaches to them the resurrection
from the dead (a doctrine crossing the principles of natural Philosophy, which
maintains for an Axiom and Maxim, that a privatione ad habitum nullus est
regressus, a natural body resolved into it is first elements and matter whereof
it was made, Acts 17.32.
cannot possibly resume the same, and live again after death) they therefore
mock at him, thinking him to teach impossibilities, and to set abroach some
strange Paradox. Now as it was with Nicodemus and the Athenians in these two
points; so it is with all natural men (be they never so learned) in the
mysteries of Religion, that are above the reach of carnal reason the light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. John 1.5.

cause of ignorance is the Devil, helping forward the corruption of man,
plunging him every day further and further into sin, and casting thick fogs and
mists before his eyes. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4.
in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe
not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the image of God,
should shine unto them. Two ways is the corporal sight offended, either by
injection of exterior dust into it, or by interior humors, stopping the
optic nerves within: So Satan either blinds the eyes of natural men with the
dust of worldly things, which he casts into them, or by their own gross and
carnal affections; he stops the Conduits of their sight, that they shall not
have any true knowledge of God: likewise Satan bestirreth himself, and spares
no pains to blind the eyes of men, by endeavoring to keep them from the means
of knowledge, or to increase in them the darkness of ignorance; and from
thence he labors to lead them to the darkness of sin, from one sin and
error to another, as from one dungeon to another, till at last he bring them
into his own den, the dungeon of utter darkness.

cause is God himself: and that in diverse respects.

1. When denies men the means of knowledge, as

1. The Word and outward Ministry: Psalm. 19.8.
thus they are said to sit in darkness, that are without the word, Psalm.
119.105.
and the means of knowledge: the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening
the eyes; the word is a lamp or ^andle to my feet, and a light to my paths,
says David: and the Ministers of the word are called the light of the world:
Matthew. 5.14.
therefore where God denies a people these outward lights the means of
knowledge, that people must needs sit in the dark dungeon of ignorance.

2. By denying or not giving in the inward light of the Spirit: Job 32.8.
it is the inspiration (...) the Almighty that gives understanding, not only
the opening of the Scriptures, but also the opening of the heart, Luke 24.32.45.
and of the understanding is the work of the Spirit; till there be an inward
operation of the Spirit, the outward means is uneffectual. It is true; Lumen
innatum and illatum.
the word of God is like a light, and like a candle, as was said before, but
what benefit reap blind men thereby? and such are all men till God be pleased
to open their eyes by the key of the spirit, and anoint them with eye salve,
Rev. 3.18.

2. By holding in the eyes of men's understandings: as it is said of those
disciples to whom Christ appeared after his resurrection, their eyes were
holden that they should not know him. Luke 24.26. and afterward it is said,
their eyes were opened, and they knew him: thus when God holds the eyes of men's
understanding, they cannot discern the mind of God, but remain ignorant of his
will and counsel, Job 17.
and so he hides understanding from men: so Moses says of the Israelites, the
Lord has not given them eyes to see: Deuteronomy. 29.4.
they had sensitive eyes to see, and rational eyes to understand, but they
wanced spiritual eyes to apprehend and improve what they saw: it is God that
gives ability to each part and member, power and faculty of the soul and
body, to execute and exercise their several actions and operations, which if
he withdraw, the Organs be no more then dead instruments, for we can no more
see nor understand savingly of our selves, then an instrument lying upon a
table, or hanging by the wall, can sound till it be blown and played upon

ignorance is a sin, how then can God blind men's eyes, or be a cause of
ignorance, and not be the author of sin?

corruption; the instigator unto spiritual blindness is the devil; and God as
a just judge blinds men's eyes, Isa. 6.10. and hardens men's hearts, Exodus
9.12. God blinds the eyes of many men judicially, that shut their eyes
wilfully against the light they have received: Job 24.13.
wicked men are said to re^ell against the light; of these things they are
willingly ignorant. 2 Pet. 4.3. when men have the means of knowledge and will
not know; God says in judgment they shall not know. Wicked men are blind and
brui^ish, this blindness is from God as a Judge: ^lindnesse and ignorance is
in wicked men a ^in, but so is it not from God, but from the devil and their
own naughtiness, yet is it the punishment of former sins by which they have
brought and increased this blindness upon themselves: for they were secure
despisers of God and his word; Romans 1.28. Quia cum loquebutur perspicue,
noluerunt intelligere jam loquitur obscure. Muscul. in Mat. 13. Malum ingenium
impiorum nunquam clarius deprehenditur, quam ubi lux veritatis splendero
incipit. 15.
therefore God most justly punishes sin with sin, giving them up to a Spirit
of slumber, to a mind void of judgment, that perceives, and understands not
the things of God. Musculus says: It was a just judgment on the Scribes and
Pharisees, because they would not understand when Christ spoke clearly,
therefore to their punishment he speaks in Parables, speaks obscurely: when
did the Jews bewray greater blindness, then in the times of the Prophets, of
Christ, and his Apostles: the evil disposition of wicked men is never more
clearly discerned, then where the light of the truth begins to shine.

When Jesus Christ that great light came into the world, when he professed
himself the Messiah, and would have instructed them in the highest mysteries
of the kingdom of heaven, then does their rage and malice the more break out
against him, the more light they had, the more their blindness does appear.
It is a great judgment, when men have eyes and cannot see with them: the
wicked Jews had eyes to see, Corticem legis, the bark and outside of the Law,
sed non penetrabant oculi eorum ad medullam, but their eyes pierced not to the
marrow thereof: when God gives men eyes to see, and they abuse their light, God
in judgment blinds their eyes, Qui privati sunt oculis non possunt videndo
seduci.
or casts such a mist upon their understandings, that now they cannot see
though they would, their eyes are so distempered, that the sight they have
(like the fight of a pur-blind man) not only fails them, but deceives them,
making them think they see rightly what they see not; their eyes being thus
darkened, they cannot understand with their hearts. The Gospel is the best means
to bring us to the true knowledge of God, but if Gospel Light be abused, God
then says to his Ministers, Go, Isai. 6.10.
make the hearts of this people fat, shut their eyes that they may not see.

Qui per ignorantiam peccat, perniciosissime peccat. Ambr.


Ignorance is a destroying sin, and the chief cause of ruin to a people,
because it is a mother-sin, and the root of many other sins, ignorance is a
leading sin: there is no knowledge of God in the land, says our Prophet, in
the first verse of this Chapter, and see what a troop of sins do follow this
blind leader, verse. 2. swearing, lying, killing, stealing, committing adultery,
and blood touches blood: therefore he that sins through ignorance, sins most
perniciously. Under the Law the sacrifices offered for the ignorances of the
people, showed it to be a great sin: the Author to the Hebrews puts it for
all manner of sins whatsoever; for having spoken of the ordinary services and
sacrifices performed by the ordinary Priests in the first Tabernacle, Heb. 9.6.
he tells us, verse. 7. that into the second Tabernacle went only the Highpriest
once every year, and that not without blood, which he offered for himself, and
for the ignorances of the people; Shegioth a Shaga; per ignorantiam peccare.
Pagnin.
where by the consent of Expositors, ignorance is put for all sorts of sin, and
Beza says, that Shegioth which is equivalent with (...), signifies as much
coming of Shaga, which signifies to sin through ignorance, as the Learned note.

I will instance in some particular sins, and thereby you will see ignorance to
be a mother-sin.

1. It is the root of pride, De ignorantia venit superbia. Bern. in Cantic.
Ignorance of God, and of a man's self puffs up the heart with pride; he that
is wise in conceit, is a fool in proof, the more we know God, the more humble
shall we be in his presence, and the more we know our selves, the more vile
shall we be in our own eyes; when men are proud, it is either because they know
nothing of God at all, or know nothing of him in a saving way, not knowing him
as they ought to know: the more ignorant a man is of God, the more does pride
prevail upon him; now Ignorance being the root of pride, it must be the chief
cause of destruction to a people, for pride goes before destruction, says the
wise man, Proverbs 16.18.

2 Ignorance is the cause of Rebellion against God, to this purpose the Lord
complains of his people, I have nourisht and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me, and the reason of their rebellion against God, is their
ignorance of him, the Ox, Isai. 1.2, 3.
says he, knows his owner, and the ass his Masters crib, but Israel does
not know, my people does not consider. Thus when Moses comes with a message
from God to Pharaoh, thus says the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve
me. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, Exodus 5.2.
that I should obey his voice? etc. I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go: Ignorance is the root of disobedience: this sin was that which
brought swift destruction upon Pharaoh and his people, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15.
when Peter would have men like obedient children, he bids them not fashion
themselves according to the former lusts of their Ignorance.

3. Ignorance is the root of persecution:

1. It makes men persecute Christ himself, when Christ called to Saul from
heaven, as he was persecuting, and making havoc of the Church, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? like one wholly ignorant of Christ, he said, Who art thou,
Lord? Acts 9.5.
the Lord answered, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. It is said by the
Apostles, Act. 2.17. 1 Cor. 2.8.
that none of the Princes of this world knew Christ, for had they known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.

Matthew. 21.38. that they did know who Christ was, when they saw the Son, they
said among themselves, This is the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize
on his inheritance, and they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and
slew him: in this place it is evident, that they did know him, and in the other
place, that they did not know him, for they would not have crucified him, if
they had known him: how shall these places be reconciled?



First, In regard they may have a general knowledge, and yet be ignorant in the
particular application of what they know.

Secondly, in regard they may have a particular knowledge, and yet be ignorant
in regard of an effectual knowledge, and this kind of ignorance is a
destroying sin, a man may know what is to be done, and in particular, that such
a thing is to be done, and yet this knowledge is uneffectual, if it change not
the will and affections to yield obedience, and so it is no better then
ignorance; 1 John 2.4. 1 Samuel 2.12.
He that says, he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar;
the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, and it is said of them, They knew not the
Lord, though they were the Priests of the Lord, whose lips should preserve
knowledge, Malachi 2.7.

And as ignorance makes men persecute Christ himself; so it makes them
persecutors of the faithful messengers and members of Christ. Ignorant men love
not their teachers, that be eyes to guide them, seers to go before, though they
stand in danger of their own lives to save theirs; and if the seers were once
out of the way, into what error would not the blind multitude suddenly fall?
were there no faithful Ministers to lead them, or speak to the people from
God, they could not choose but fall to every sin against God: our Savior
tells his Disciples a little before his departure out of this world: If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you, Joh. 15.21
but all these things they will do unto you for my names sake, the reason
follows, because they know not him that sent me: and he tells them further,
that they should put them out of the Synagogues, yea the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service: and gives the
reason of it: These things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the Father nor me. John 16.2, 3. Psalm. 14.4.
Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as bread;
the Prophet Hosea shows, Psalm, 74.20.
where there is no knowledge of God in the land, there is no truth nor mercy in
the land: the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty;
that is, of cruel men; men that have no true knowledge of God among them, are
ready to act ay manner of cruelty against the people of God.

4. Ignorance is the cause of Idolatry, the Prophet Isaiah showing the dotage
of idolaters, he sets it down thus; Isai 44.17.18.
he falls down to his graven image, and worshippeth it, and prays unto it,
and says; deliver me, for thou art my God: then he shows the root of it to
be their blockish ignorance, they have not known nor understood; Ignorance of
the true God, makes men adore any fantastical deity. Ignorant men (like bruit
beasts) are ready to run into any sin and danger.

the breach of Gods Commandments, and especially the first Commandment,
mandment, he that is ignorant of God, is so far from worshipping God as he
ought to be worshipped, that he is an enemy to God; an ignorant man walks in
darkness, and he that goes in the dark is apt to stumble at every stone, and
fall into every ditch, he that knows not the way to life, must needs walk in
the way that goes down to the chambers of death; he that is ignorant of him who
is the Way, will soon wander in a wilderness where there is no way, where
there is no plain and beaten path; an ignorant man runs out of Gods way, viz.
the way of his Commandment, and walks in his own ways, and runs into extreme
danger every moment; Prove. 4.19.
an ignorant man is blind, he knows not what he does; his way is darkness,
he knows not at what he stumbleth, and having often stumbled, at last he
falls into the pit of destruction, from whence he shall never see his way
out; if a man be ignorant, he knows not where he goes, John 11.35.
and he that walks in darkness, kno^eth not whither he goes, as our Savior
says.

stupifie and harden men's hearts, they are in a miserable and damnable
condition, and are not sensible that they are so, they see not their misery,
therefore seek they not out for a remedy. The Church of Laodicea was in a blind
and wretched estate, but being ignorant, she knew not that she was wretched and
miserable, Rev, 3.17.
poor, blind, and naked. The five foolish Virgins in the Parable slumbered and
slept as well as the wise, that is, Mat. 25.5.
(as I conceive) they thought their condition as good as that of the wise: none
are so confident as those that are most ignorant; and this confidence of theirs
undoeth them: ignorance of God, makes a man an opposer of the word, Prove. 13.13.
which is the means of knowledge, and who so despises the word shall be
destroyed.

Luke 23.34.
for thus it runs. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: and
Paul making confession of his mis-demeanors, says, that he had been a
blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious; 1 Timothy 1.13.
but says he, I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly; etc. and under
the Law, we read, that if ought were committed by ignorance, without the
knowledge of the congregation, Number. 15.25 28.
etc. that the Priest should make an atonement for all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and it should be forgiven them, for it is ignorance, etc.
and the Priest was to make an atonement for the soul that sins ignorantly,
when he sinned by ignorance before the Lord to make an atonement for him, and
it should be forgiven him.

places, cannot be said to be medium impetrationis misericordiae, the means or
cause of obtaining mercy and forgiveness, but only shows the extent of
mercy: so we find that sin is said to be forgiven upon our confession of sin;
Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.
not that repentance or confession are apt or innate in themselves to procure
pardoning mercy, but only that the Lord has been pleased to prescribe this as
a way how to dispense his mercy to us; so when it is said that Paul, and the
Israelites obtained mercy, because they sinned through ignorance, it sets
out but only the order, and not the cause of mercy.

simple ignorance of the mind of God does excuse a tanto, though not a toto;
for our Savior says, that he that knew not his Masters will, and did commit
things worthy of stripes, should be beaten, though with fewer stripes, then he
that knew the will of his Lord, and did it not: and in this respect the Heathen
are said to have known God, and so were inexcusable, because they were bound to
have known more of him; God having at first imprinted the knowledge of himself
upon man's nature: Biel. sent. 2. distinct. 22. Quaest. 5.
and man having lost it through his own default.

The School men make three sorts of ignorant men, either such as know not their
Lords will, 2 Pet. 4.3, 4.
because they will not know it, their ignorance is ignorantia affectata, an
affected ignorance; when men are wilfully ignorant, wilfully refusing to know
such things as might hinder them from sin, or further them in godliness; this
is ignorantia voluntaria, men being willingly ignorant, that they may walk the
more freely after their own lusts, and our Savior tells us it is the nature of
wicked men to love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil,
Joh. 3.19: 20. Vt liberius pec^ent, libenter ignorant, vel sciendi incuria, vel
discendi desidia, vel inquirendi verecundia, vel non credendi veritati. Bern,
and to hate the light, and not to come to the light, lest their evil deeds
should be reproved, i. e. manifested thereby to their consciences, as the thief
and the adulterer love the twylight, and the darkest night, because it hides
their wickednesses; So profane sinners, and close hypocrites do not desire the
knowledge of Gods ways, and would willingly be ignorant of their duty toward
God, because the dark dungeon of ignorance hides many a beloved lust from
them, which they are not willing to forsake, and could not so quietly commit,
were it clearly made known unto them; such men as these do bring swift
destruction upon themselves.

2. Ignoranti^ crassa, and supna.
There is a second sort which know not their Lords will, because they care not
to know it, their ignorance, is a gross, idle, and negligent ignorance: it is
not imputed to negligence, if a man know not those things which he cannot know,
but that is negligence, when a man cares not to know that which he might know,
and ought to know, nor uses any care to know those things which appertain to
salvation, August. ad Valent. Negligentia est, qua homo desiderat non scire
quae deberet scire, nec adhibet sollicitudinem ad sciendum ea quae pertinent ad
salutem. Ignorantia Crassa provenit ex superbia, quae est primum vinculum
diaboli, cum quo ligatur impius, qui non solum, non scire desiderat, sed etiam
scire contemni; requisita ad salutem noluit intelligere, ^t been ageret.
and such an ignorance is a great sin. Thence one of the Ancients says;
Although it be a more grievous thing to sin knowingly, then to sin ignorantly,
yet must we not therefore fly to the darkness of ignorance, as therein to seek
after an excuse, for it is one thing not to know, another thing to neglect the
means of knowledge: for a man not to know those things which exceed the
strength of his understanding, having a desire to know, this ignorance has
some excuse, but when men neglect to know things knowable, which are necessary
to Salvation. This proceeds from pride, which is the chiefest and first bond
of the devil, with which a wicked man is bound, who not only desires not to
know, but also contemns the knowing of those things that are requisite to
salvation, and this is an unnatural kind of malice, seeing every man naturally
desires knowledge, and such n^ughtinesse does make a man indispose himself to
know, and to give himself to vain pleasures, and carnal delights, which do
ind^spose him for the knowledge of those things which he might know. A wicked
mind hates knowledge, and fears to understand his duty, lest conscience
compel him to do what he understands: of such a one David speaks. He bath
left off to be wise, or to understand and do good. Psalm 36.3. Such men as
these shall be beaten with many stripes.

3. There are such as know not their Lords will because they cannot know it,
and this ignorance the Schoolmen call an invincible ignorance, not because it
is simply so, but because it remains after a man has taken much pains, used
much means, and done all that he can to remove it. The Schoolmen say (most of
them) that this ignorance does simply excuse a man from sin, non solum in
tanto, sed in toto: but this is their error: and stands convicted by that
speech of Christ already produced, Perkins Treatise of Conscience. Nescire
malum est Horat.
the servant that does not his Masters will, by reason he knows it not, shall
be beaten with stripes, though fewer; now this ignorance shall not wholly
excuse a man, because every man is bound to know God by a positive command, and
whether we know Gods laws, or know them not, they still bind us, as Master
Perkins does observe. Adam had the perfect knowledge of God, and lost the same
for himself and his posterity: no man therefore for this is to complain against
the justice of God, since that our first sin has merited a greater punishment;
I say then that this sin may excuse for the degree and measure of the sin, but
not from the sin it self.

I come now to make use and application of the doctrine.

Is Ignorance the principal cause of a peoples destruction?

The first use shall be for lamentation: what cause have we exceedingly to
lament the great ignorance that is among us, though God has delivered us from
that blindness and darkness, with which our forefathers were overwhelmed:
Time was, men were wholly ignorant of the true God, and of his worship, even in
this our land; where in diverse places thereof were Temples and Altars, erected
to heathenish Idols. viz. In Bath the Temple of Apollo, Stow: C^^den.
in Leicester the Temple of Janus, in York where Peter's now is, the Temple of
Bellona, and in London the chief and head City of our Land, where Paul's is
now, the Temple of Diana: and if there were such gross idolatry in these
principal places, what hope can there be of better things in country villages?
all our Priests were Painims, our Religion was superstition, our worship
idolatry; our Gods were dumb Idols, or Dii stercorarii, dunghill deities; we
were all as Paul says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.8:
sometime darkness; the night of that heathenish ignorance is past, and the
clouds of that error scattered by the Sunbeams of the Gospel preached among
us: and therefore it is much more sad and lamentable, now to see men blind and
ignorant under the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ: what swarms of
ignorant people are there every where? ignorant congregations, ignorant
families, ignorant parents, ignorant children, ignorant Masters, ignorant
servants, there ^^ no faithful Minister that labors to know the state of
his flock, but may sadly witness with me the truth of this thing, how ^ew of
our people and Congregations, if you ^ome to them, that can render a sound
rea^^n of the hope that is in them: Beloved, let ^e tell you, that this is a
woeful sin in this ^ear light of the Gospel, and it is one of the ^^ns for which
God has a controversy with he land this day: and it is a sin so much the ^ore
dangerous, and the more to be lamen^ed by all that fear the Lord, because it is
carcely apprehended to be a fin: for a man ^^ be a swearer, a lier, a drunkard,
a whore^onger, an oppressor; these fins partly by he light of nature, and
partly by reason of ^he odiousness of them are granted by the ^ost, to be
sins, but ignorance of God and of is word, and of those points, which are as it
^ere the very life and marrow of Religion, his is hardly taken to be a fin: no
man ^^inks himself the less wicked, because he ^^ ignorant: this I say is the
more dangerous, because it passes away unregarded and un^bserved by us: yet
this is the fin that is the ^rincipal cause of a peoples destruction, a fin
against which the Lord will proceed, when ^e comes to judgment; Hos. 4.14.
the people that do ^^t understand shall fall: This was Je^usa^^m's fin, which
drew tears out of the eyes four blessed Savior, when he drew near, he beheld
the City; Luke 29.41.
and wept over it, saying; if thou had known, even thou at least in this thy
day, etc. where you have

1. Our Savior Christ's lamentation for this finful City, before he goes into
it. Luke 19, 41,

2. A prediction and prophecy of her destruction for her sins, and principally
for her contempt of him and his Gospel, verse 43.

3. The ground of this their hardness of heart is their ignorance of Jesus
Christ, if thou had known, even thou in this thy day: there can be no greater
grief to true faithful and painful Pastors, Isai. 49.4.
then to bestow pains to no purpose, lose their labors, and not prosit their
people; how does he bewail their ignorance of himself: Psalm. 43.1, 2: Psalm.
87.3. Psalm. 132.13, 14. Act. 13.27.
if thou had known [thou] who art the City of God, the seat of the great
King, the joy of the whole earth: [yea thou] whose gates the Lord has loved,
and concerning whom most glorious things have been spoken, [thou] whom God has
chosen for his habitation and his rest; [thou] who have often heard these
things out of the Prophets, and therefore thy ignorance is gross and palpable,
not to be excused or extenuated, not being simple, but affected, and therefore
thy sin and misery is the greater.

If thou had known the things that belong to thy peace] i. e. if thou had
known, and would acknowledge me, my benefits and blessings, that I now offer
unto thee, and would bestow upon thee; for by peace here, after the manner of
the Hebrews, we must ^nderstand affluentiam omnium bonorum, abun^ance of all
good things; it is like enough that ^his unhappy city, and her inhabitants
knew, and were cunning in many quirks of the law, ^ut they were not well
catechized in this one ^eedful and necessary point of the Gospel, that Jesus
Christ was their peace, as S. Ephesians. 2.14. Acts 4.12.
Paul told ^he Ephesians: nor that there was Salvation ^o be had or hoped for
by no other means; and hinc ^llae lachrimae, this was their sin, and this
occa^^oned his sorrow, Dolor cor constringit, it a ut dolentes non p^ssunt
eloqui, quae concipiunt, and lingua moerentis, and excandescentis. soepe
faucibus haeret.
which he expresses most ^^vely, emphatically, and pathetically; by this
Aposiopesis, this abrupt speech, and imperfect ^entence, if thou had known in
this thy day: for ^^s joy does dilatare cor, enlarge the heart, and ^ake men
eloquent and fluent in speech: so, ^n the contrary, sorrow and grief binds up
the ^eart, so that sorrowful persons cannot speak ^ut the things which they do
conceive; and ^oth the tongue of a sad person, and of an ^ngry person, does
often cleave to their jaws; ^or anger, see an example of the young man ^n the
Comedy; see how abruptly he speaks. Egone illam? quae illum? quae non? and for
grief; ^ have read of an old man that grievously la^enting the untimely death
of his hopeful ^onne, and being demanded the cause of ^is mourning, was not
able to express himself, but so well as he could utter his mind, ^e thus by an
abrupt and imperfect speech ^nfolded it: Filius, unicus, habilis adolescens,
ingenio pollens, etc. leaving out the verb which should have made all known:
and this is usual, as the Philosopher long since has observed.

Light cares do speak, Curae leves lequuntur, ingentes stupent.
but great ones do^ stupify and astonish. So here, when our Savior says, if
thou, even thou had known, etc. somewhat must be supplied. O daughter, Sion,
and Jerusalem, if thou knew as well as I do, what a woeful case thou
stand in, thou would weep as well as I, or if thou knew who I were,
and what I offer thee, thou would willingly receive me, and not wilfully and
obstinately reject me; yea, tho^ would obey my doctrine, and so prevent
thine own destruction.

And have not we as much cause to lament the great ignorance that is among our
people at this day, notwithstanding all the plentiful means that God has
vouchsafed unto us; how many of our people are in the dark dungeon of
ignorance, and yet perceive it not. True it is! there is much weakness of
understanding, and dullness of apprehension in the best, but multitudes o^ our
people have not a mind to know the Lord, Heb. 6.1.
as it is. 1 John 5.20. they do not follow on to know the Lord, many know not
the grounds of Religion, and are ignorant of the doctrine of the beginning of
Christ: many o^ people mind nothing, but the honors, riches, and pleasures of
the world, and these they follow after with all their might, but they have no
saving knowledge of God, and living and dying without understanding, become
like the bruit beasts that perish. Psalm. 49.20, Tit. 1.16.
-- And further, many there are, that do profess they know God, when in their
works they do deny him, this is a practical ignorance; of such Jude speaks, in
what they know naturally: Jude 10.
as bruit beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves: their knowledge
seems to be according to a natural light, therefore they are said to know
naturally, but they act more like bruit beasts, then like rational men, and so
in their actions do cross their knowledge. Though man has more sublime rules
of instruction, then the light of nature to walk by, and in this regard
attaineth to higher, and more transcendent knowledge, then bruit breasts do,
that are led by a natural instinct; Jer. 10.14. In scriptura sacra illa
ignorari censemur, quae cognita nullum nobis usum attulerunt, quomodo dicimus
illa non audire quibus non obedimus. Sanctius.
yet he may be said to know even as a beast, or to have but a bestial kind of
knowledge; as the Prophet speaks of such in his days, man is brutish in his
knowledge: when a man's knowledge arises ex principiis scientificis, from
certain principles, and his actions are according to ignorance, this is to be
brutish in knowledge: I shall conclude this use with the words of the Apostle
to the Corinthians, awake to righteousness and sin not, or awake righteously,
as the Greek has it; with all your might labor after righteousness, 1 Cor.
15.34. for some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame: and
may not this be spoken to the shame of most people and congregations, that
after such clear revelation of the mind of God in Scripture, and such
plentiful preaching of the word among them, yet men should be so grossly
ignorant of God and his truth; many that for time and means they have had,
might have been teachers of others, and yet themselves have need to be taught
the first rudiments of Religion.



1. It serves to confute and reprove the doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome, Ignoratio Mysteriorum Ethnicorum est illorum venerati^. Propterea, Nocti
creduntur mysteria. Synesius. Sed non ita in coelestibus mysteriis.
bearing the poor people in hand, that ignorance is the mother of devotion, and
therefore persuade them that it is enough to have fidem implicitam, an
implicit faith, and to believe as the Church believes; therefore they bar
them from the use of the Scriptures, either not suffering them to read them at
all, or at least with the Popes spectacles, so that they may find nothing
there, but what he will have there, in which dealing they tread up and down the
steps of Herod, who being an Idumean by birth, yet having usurped upon the
Kingdom of Jury, and intruded himself into that place, by colloguing with
Augustus the Roman Emperor; scraped together all the Genealogies of the Jews
from Abrahum, and burnt them, lest any thing might there be found, that might
convince him of strange blood, (...). Vid. Causab. exercit: ib: cap. 43. p. 550.
and so in time prejudice himself or his posterity, in the succession of that
Crown and Kingdom; so the Papists, wheresoever their furies have prevailed,
have either burnt the holy Bibles in whole, or mangled them in part, putting
in, and putting out at their pleasures, as has best fitted their purposes, not
suffering the people to have them in their Mother Tongue, lest by them, as by a
candle, they might discover their bad dealings, whereby they betray their
cause, and bewray the badnesse thereof to the world, Non inter nos audiantur
haec verba: ego dico, aut tu dicis; sed sic dicit Dominus in Scripturis.
August. John 5.39.
because they will not abide the light, and suffer the Scriptures to decide
their doubts contrary to the practice of the ancient Fathers in the Primitive
Church. Augustine being to dispute with Petilian the Donatist, says thus; let
there not be heard among us these words, I say this, or thou say this, but
thus says the Lord in the Scriptures. Much stir do the Papists make, to prove
the people ought not to have the Scriptures in a known tongue, and so not
knowledge. When we object to them that command of our Savior, Search the
Scriptures, and justly complain of their spirit contrary to Christ's; Dureus
denies this to be spoken to all Christians, for, says he, How should the
ignorant and unlearned search them? we answer, if Christ only had then spoken
to the learned, his exception had been just, but Christ then preached to the
whole people of the Jews, and if to all the Jews, then the same exhortation
does concern all Christians; and both Jews and Gentiles by the Scriptures must
have the knowledge of Christ, and of Eternal life; therefore all must search
the Scriptures. Acts 17.11
When we urge that the Bereans searched the Scriptures, whether those things
were so. Bellarmine answers, that was because they doubted whether he was an
Apostle, or no. But I answer, the matter is not why they searched the
Scriptures, but that they did search them, and are commended for it by the Holy
Ghost, that they compared his doctrine with the doctrine of the Prophets. 1
John 4.1
Then ought all Christians thus to do, to try the spirits; for now more doubt
may be made, then at that time, and no search can be but by the Scriptures, and
the knowledge of them: thus do the Papists keep the people from the knowledge of
God, John 7.49.
and so bring the curse of God upon them: this people who know not the law are
accursed: therefore they must partake in the woe denounced by Christ against
the Lawyers; Luke 11.52.
Woe be to you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; Mat. 22.13.
ye entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, you hindered.
Matthew says, You shut the gates of heaven to those that were entering in.

door, John 10. so he only has the key of David. Revel. Isai 22.22.
3.7. he has the key of knowledge.

Christ indeed has it originally, and by his own power, and authority, Luke
24.45.
and he is said to open the Scriptures, and to open the understandings of the
disciples; and his Ministers have the key of knowledge by deputation, Mat.
16.19.
as a Nobleman commended his treasury to his Steward: 1 Cor. 4.1. now this key
they hid away.

1. Privatively, by hiding their talent in a napkin, and and not opening and
expounding the Scriptures, and teaching men the way of salvation, as their duty
was; Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and the people should seek the Law of
God at his mouth: but

2. Which was worse; they hindered others from entering, as Joh. 9.22. they
agreed, that if any man did confess Christ, he should be put out of the
Synagogue: and thus do the Papists, their true successors, who regard more
their earthly preferments, then look after an inheritance in heaven, and they
keep out those that would enter in, by vexing all those that will not with
themselves receive the mark of the beast upon them. The Lord complains that
the leaders of his people do cause them to err, Isa. 9.16.
and they that are led of them, are destroyed. i.e. they are ^ed into error
and vanity, and destroyed for lack of knowledge.

This may serve to reprove all such as are ignorant, 2. Repr.
and care not for true knowledge, such as hate the light, and love darkness,
it is the property of fools to hate knowledge, and love simplicity. Prove. 1.22




general: all they that do despise Gods Ordinances, do despise knowledge: but
more particularly.

1. All those that reject the word of knowledge, they that reject the reading
and searching of the Scriptures, do reject knowledge, or if they read them
sometime, will not meditate upon them, Col. 3.16.
that will not let the word of God dwell in their hearts richly, and in all
wisdom: as Owls and Bats fly not in the day time, but come abroad only in
the night, because all the Birds of the air will come about them, and chatter
at them by reason of their deformed shape, so because wicked men know, that if
they should frequently look into the glass of the word they should see the
ugly deformity of their own shapes, and be brought to abhor themselves as the
most stupendous monsters i^ the world; therefore it is, that they kee^
themselves in the dark dungeon of ignorance and hate the light: but this their
way i^ their folly; they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is
in them? says the Prophet Jeremy. Jerem. 8.9.


2. All those that do reject and despise the faithful Ministry of the word,
these do reject knowledge, when men like the deaf adder stop their ears against
the voice of the charmer, forfear lest they should be charmed by the power of
that voice, out of their works of darkness: the Priests lips should keep
knowledge, and they (i. e. the people) should seek, the law at his mouth, for
he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: he must so keep knowledge, as like
the wise and faithful Steward in the Gospel, Mal. 2.7. Nomine legis continetur
omnium ad been vivendum necessariorum cognitio. Cyril.
he may give to his fellow servants, every one their portion in due season. Now
the people are bound to seek the law at his mouth: In the name of the Law,
says one of the Ancients is contained the knowledge of all things necessary to
well living: the reason follows, because he is the messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. Therefore all those that live under a powerful ministry, and resort
not to the public congregations, or judge it unnecessary to frequent those
places, where the word is to be had from the mouths of Gods faithful
Ministers; they are despisers of knowledge, because they despise the messengers
of the Lord of Hosts, whose lips must preserve knowledge, and our Savior
says, he that hears you (speaking to those whom he sent out to preach the
Gospel) hears me, and he that despises you, despises me: therefore Christ
denounced a woe against Chorazin and Bethsaida, verse 13. They were Cities near
the lake of Genesareth, or Tiberias, where Christ had preached many Sermons,
Mat. 4.
done many miracles, whence he had chosen certain of his Apostles, saying, if
the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sydon, which have been done in you,
they had long ago repented, etc. and that it should be more tolerable for
Tire and Sydon in the day of judgemevt, then for them; he denounces a woe
likewise against Capernaum, and thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven,
shall be thrust down to hell, and then he adds, he that hears you, hears
me, and he that despises you, despises me: whereby it seems that those
places were notorious for despising Christ and his messengers sent unto them.
Capernaum was a City of Galilee, lying at the mouth of Jordan, a commodious
Haven, and Harbor of ships, a place where our Savior had often preached, by
reason of the great concourse of people that resorted thither, yea its thought
that he dwelt there, and so one of the Ancients says, that he graced Bethlem
by his birth, Nazareth by his education, and Capernaum by his habitation: and
so it is called his own City. Matthew. 9.1. By the phrase of lifting up to
heaven, he means, that it was much in request in the eyes of the world, not
only by reason of her great wealth and riches, but also because she had the
means of knowledge, and of salvation, having Christ daily conversing with them,
and preaching to them: and by her casting down to hell, he means, that she
should be abased, and have her pride plucked down in regard of her temporal
estate: which came to pass not long after, when it was ruined by the Romans,
and all such her inhabitants, as did reject the preaching of Christ, and his
messengers sent unto them, were condemned, and went to Hell eternally. Many
there are that dream of Anabaptistical revelations, and I know not what kind of
strange and immediate inspirings, despising the public teaching and ministry
of man: I know God can teach otherwise, but I have no ground to think that he
will: he that desires to Iodge among the wise, Prove. 5.31
let him prepare his ear to hearken to the instruction of life, says Solomon:
thou may never expect a blessing from him, who is a teacher of the heart; if
thou despisest him whom God has appointed to be a teacher of the Ear: as the
holy Scripture is the book of wisdom, out of which God gives subtilty to the
simple, so teaching by his Ministers, is the Pipe by which this heavenly wisdom
is conveyed to us from the Fountain; and no man is assured by the word of God
to attain this knowledge, but by this course.

3. All those that reject prayer, which is a seeking of God for a blessing upon
the means, whereby knowledge might be acquired. The Psalmist says, that the
Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any
that did understand and seek God; Psalm. 14.3.
If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding,
Prove. 2, 3.
etc. there are many that pray not for knowledge, nor for a blessing on the
means of knowledge, and those are such as despise knowledge. Paul speaks of such
as despise the Word, the Ministry, Prayer; and the means of knowledge, as if
their case were desperate, and says, 1 Cor. 14.38.
if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant, as if he should say, if any man
will despise the means of knowledge, and choose to be still ignorant, let him be
ignorant, to his own peril be it; he will run through inner darkness, to
utter darkness. I fear brethren, that the commonnesse of the word, and of
preaching, has bred the contempt thereof: I read, that when Elephants were
first brought into Asia, and two of them brought and presented to King
Antiochus, he made great account of them, and held them in high esteem, calling
the one Ajax, and the other Achilles, but in process of time growing common in
the country, by reason of their traffic into those places, whence they came;
notwithstanding, they were of no less use then they were before; Nay, in all
likelihood of more, because they were better acquainted with the use of them,
and knew better how to manage them, yet because they were common, they
contemned them, and called them Lucanian oxen: So doubtless the word of God in
the days of our forefathers in this nation, when the light of Gods truth
first brake out of that gross darkness of Popery: it was highly esteemed, and
the godly Ministry and Preachers of the word were valued as precious jewels,
but now it is just an hundred years, that we have had the Gospel among us, this
very year. 1658. therefore it is as odious and loathsome, as it is common, but
did men know the worth of it, they would not despise the means of knowledge.

Pharaoh to the Israelites, when they spoke of going out to serve the Lord; ye
are idle, ye are idle, and so increase their tasks: many ignorant Masters are
well contented with ignorant servants, with an ignorant family like themselves:
wicked wretches that are wholly led by the Prince of darkness, do labor to
hinder others from attaining the light of saving knowledge: Thus when Sergius
Paulus, a prudent man, called for Paul and Barnabas, defiring to be instructed
by them in the knowledge of Christ; Elymas the sorcerer withstood them, seeking
to turn away the Deputy from the faith: Acts 13.8. and for this, the hand of
God was upon him: the Lord smote him with corporal, who labored to keep others
in spiritual blindness, verse 11. and after the stubborn Jews had rejected the
word, the Apostles turn from them to the Gentiles; yet then the Jews stirred
up devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the City, and raised
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.
verse 50. and for this very cause the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
they filled up their sins, and the wrath of God comes upon them to the
uttermost.

exbortation, Let us all labor after knowledge, that we may be men of
knowledge: Prove. 10, 14.
wise men will lay up knowledge says Solomon, or store it up, as the covetous
man lays, or storeth up his bags of silver and gold. Wisdom is the principal
thing, Prove. 4.7.
therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding: many men
spend so much of their time about getting of the world, that they can find
little or no time to get wisdom and knowledge; they see the want of riches, as
they think, but they see not the want of spiritual knowledge. Diogenes had a
pretty answer to some that asked him, why Philosophers rather followed rich men,
then rich men Philosophers, why! that is no marvel at all said he, for
Philosophers know that they want rich men's wealth, but rich men will not
acknowledge that they want Philosophers wisdom. Job 11, 11
Most men hate the imputation of ignorance, vain man would be wise; so pleasing
a thing is knowledge to reasonable creatures, not too much degenerated; and
though men run a course tending to ignorance and error, yet they hate the
imputation of ignorance, as a thing very reproachful: and yet some such
monsters there are, that care not to acquire any more knowledge, then is
necessary to the keeping up of a poor sottish and halfe-brutish kind of life:
and for God they know him not, nor do they care to know him, and if you speak
of God to them, they presently cry out, like Pharaoh, who is the Lord?

Let therefore both ministers and people labor to be filled with knowledge.

1. But especially the Ministers of the Gospel should be knowing men. A
Minister must not be like young Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.4.
who knew not the voice of the Lord from Elies, when the Lord called him, nor
like Ahimaaz, that would needs run to carry the King news from the Camp, but
when he came, knew nothing: every Scribe that is instructed unto the Kingdom of
God, is like an householder, that brings forth of his treasury things both
new and old. Matthew. 13.52.
Ministers must be knowing men.

2. Because they are to be lights to others, therefore are they called the
light of the world they are to give the knowledge of salvation to Gods people,
Mat. 5.14. Luke 1.77
as Zachary prophesied of John Baptist: by giving of knowledge is not meant
infusing of knowledge, for this is proper to God alone, but to give notice, or
make to understand; so they are said to give knowledge, instrumentaliter and
organice, as they are said to give faith, 1 Cor. 1.5. and to confirm men in the
faith. Acts 14.22. he that will draw disciples to Christ, and prepare their
hearts for him, he must be acquainted with the Scriptures, and able out of them
to instruct his people in the knowledge of salvation: Job 33.23
Ministers are Gods Ambassadors, and therefore must be able to treat of the
affairs of the holy state; they must be able to publish the secrets of the
Gospel. Isa 50.4.
Ephesians. 6.19. they must have the tongue of the learned, to know how to minister a
word in season to a wearied soul: his lip^ must preserve, or be a storehouse
of knowledge; and Elihu says, such a messenger or interpreter, is but one of a
thousand; and Paul says, quis ad haec idoneus? who is sufficient for these
things? not quisquis, but quis.

Therefore the Holy Ghost at the Feast of Pentecost, fell upon the Apostles in
fiery cloven tongues, Acts 2.3. In linguis and in omni genere linguarum
faecundi essent.
to furnish them with zeal and knowledge, to instruct all Nations in tongues,
that they might be eloquent in all manner of tongues; and in fiery tongues,
that they might be inflamed with zeal: if Christ had only given his Apostles
cloven tongues, and not fiery tongues also, then should they have been full of
knowledge, but void of zeal; if fiery tongues only, and not cloven, they
should have abounded with zeal, but not according to knowledge: Vt fervor
discretionem erigat, and discretio fervorem regat. Bern. sermon. 23. in Cant.
Pecoris ignorantia est pastoris ignominia. Hieron.
but Christ who knew what was best in every respect, sent down the spirit both
in fiery and cloven tongues, that they might have the tongue of the learned,
and show themselves men of God perfectly instructed to every good work, that
their zeal might raise their discretion, and discretion govern their zeal. One
says, that Luthers zeal and courage, with Melancton's discretion, joined with
Calvin's eloquence, would make an excellent preacher; Every Minister must be
willing and able to teach, for the ignorance of the flock is the reproach of
the Pastor, if it be his fault especially.

A Minister is to teach like a man of knowledge, his mouth must speak of
wisdom, Psalm. 49.3. (...).
he must warn and teach in all wisdom. Col. 1.28. knowledge, and much wisdom is
requisite to a Minister.

1. In the choice of a fit matter, a Minister must teach, non inepta and
futilia, not with philosophical speculations, Jerem. 23.28.
lying legends, and frierly fables; for what is Chasse to the wheat says the
Lord? his doctrine must be like fire, full of light, to dispell the darkness
of ignorance, by enlightening the minds of his hearers with the saving
knowledge of Gods truth, and full of heat to inflame their affections with the
zeal of Gods glory: the word of God must only be taught by him, nec aliud, 1 Timothy 3.
nec aliter: he must teach no other doctrine. If we were to deal with the
Heathen, we might use humane testimony to convince them, as Paul does. Acts 17,
28. Titus 1.12. but yet sparingly.

The main scope of the ministry is to preach sound doctrine, Scripturararum
mamillas dum durius presserunt, sanguinem pro lacte biberunt. August.
and for this, much knowledge is requisite, for the right opening of the
Scriptures, that they may no^ mingle gold and dross, wheat, and chafe,
together; of which dealing an Ancient says of heretics, the harder they
sucked, and drew the breasts of the Scriptures, the more they drunk down blood
instead of milk.

2. In respect of the manner of his preaching, knowledge is requisite, for

1. A Minister is not rashly to run upon the handling of holy things without
deliberation, and due premeditation, and preparation; his heart must be first
enditing of ^ good matter, before his tongue can be the Pen of a ready writer;
whether in Sermons, Psalm. 45.
disputations, or the like. A grave Divine said, Deering. Lect. 27. in Hebr.
it were better men had neither tongues in their heads, nor parts in their
bodies, then so boldly and busily, many times to employ them in rash reasoning,
about Election, Predestination, and the sin against the Holy Ghost, without
serious consideration, and mature deliberation: and the second part of
Archbishop Cranmer's Preface before the Church-Bible, is for the most part
spent in reproving such persons: so also the 37. injunction appointed to be
publicly read, in Queen Elizabeth's time: for want of this wisdom and
discretion, men many times wrangle about what they understand not, like two men
meeting together, the one would be of Doctor Martins, and the other of Doctor
Luthers opinion, who were both one and the same.

2. As the scope of the ministry is to preach the word purely, Caeci Caecorum
duces: Matthew. 14.
so to apply it powerfully to the consciences of men, therefore he must not be
like Pope Bonifaces Priests, no Clerks, nor, as our Savior speaks of some,
that are blind leaders of the blind: a Minister must sometimes be a Boanerges,
a son of thunder, in denouncing the dreadful threatenings of the law against
obstinate sinners, and sometimes a Barnabas, a son of consolation, in
pronouncing the sweet and comfortable promises of the Gospel, to the broken
hearted penitent; he must be able likewise by sound doctrine both to exhort,
and convince gainsayers: Tit. 1 9. Mark 12.34.
he must be able to resolve doubts, and to answer questions, therefore our
Savior commended the Scribe for answering wisely or discreetly: he must
likewise deliver the word with authority and gravity: now to all these
purposes, wisdom and much knowledge is requisite in a Minister of the word.

3. Ministers are to teach manifestly, and evidently: God gave Pastors and
Teachers to the edifying of the Church, and to further it in the knowledge of
God: now how shall the hearer get knowledge, when the Preacher teaches
obscurely? he that prophesies, speaks unto men: 1 Cor. 14. the main work of
the Teacher must be the profit of the hearer. Jer. 3.15.
I will give you Pastors after my own heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding: what knowledge can a people reap, if they are
taught obscurely; we read, that when the Levites read in the book of the Law,
they caused the people to understand the Law, Nehem. 8.7, 8.
and the people stood in their place, so they read in the book of the Law of
God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the eading:
but what understanding can the hearer have, if the Minister teach obscurely?
let them call this learned obscurity that will: I take it rather to be
unlearned obscurity; for let learning appear, when it should appear. Let any
man show that either the Greek or Roman Orators, have been commended for
dealing obscurely; therefore let Ministers deal aperte and perspicue, in their
Sermons, that the hearers may be made to understand what they teach them.
Solomon speaks thus of himself, the more wise the Preacher was, he still taught
the people knowledge, Eccles. 12.9.
yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs: now to
preach so, as to make the people to understand what they hear, much wisdom and
knowledge is requisite. And here let me show, that humane learning righly used,
is very useful and necessary to a Minister of the Gospel.

1. It is very useful and necessary to the understanding, and expounding of
diverse places of Scripture; where mention is made of the motions, influences,
and operations of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, being celestial, and heavenly
bodies, which places are dark and difficult, and cannot be understood without
the help of natural Philosophy and Astronomy.

Also where there are allusions to, and similitudes, and comparisons from,
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Serpents, etc. natural Philosophy is also needful.

Item, in the description of Countries, and regions, with their several
Climates and Temperatures, and the natures and inclinations of their
inhabitants, there is use of Cosmography, Geography, Topography, and natural
Philosophy too.

2. For Logic, it can by no means be lacking in a Minister, for without it we
cannot in many things discern the truth, nor discover falsehood; both which,
both Pastor and people must endeavor to do, Ephesians. 4.14. Ephesians. 5.17. that we
may be wise, clearly to understand what the will of the Lord is, and not be
like children, t^ssed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of those that lie in wait to
deceive.

3. Learning is necessary to confute and confound pagans, Acts 17.28.
that are not acquainted with the Scriptures; therefore Paul made use of this
kind of learning at Athens, out of their own Poets, to confute them.

If one that had been born, bred, and brought up a long time under the earth,
should upon the sudden be brought into the clear light of the Sun, it would so
dazzle his eyes, as it would almost make him stark blind; so if one that has
been nuzzeled up all his time in ignorance, should at first be brought to the
bright shining light of the Gospel, it would so amaze him, as he would not
know, what to make of it: such therefore must be set in the Moonshine or
starlight of nature, before they be brought to the clear Sunshine of the
Scriptures, that so being overcome by common principles, whereto both sides
agree, and give consent, they may be forced to yield, being foiled at their own
weapons, as Goliath was slain with his own sword.

4. History and other things moving delight, Non ad necessitatem, sed ad
delectationem.
may be moderately borrowed from humane Authors, and inserted into Sermons,
and mixed with, and mingled among Theological discourses, as sauce, not so much
for necessity, as for delight. The Scriptures only be instar panis, like
bread, In his, and hujusmodi Philosophia Theologiae se submittat, ut Hagar
Sarae; patiatur se admoneri and corrigi. Sin minus pareat, ejice Ancillam.
Clem. Alexand.
as needful and necessary food to suffice and satisfy nature, and kill hunger:
and Philosophy and other humane learning, that may serve for sauce, both to
procure appetite, and help digestion. But here let me add this caution: Let us
beware, that there be not more sauce then meat, more humanity then divinity: As
Grynaeus reports of a certain Monk of Heidelberg, who when Melancion was a
young man lived in that University, and used to read and expound to the people
in their Mother tongue, a piece of Aristotle's Ethics, instead of a Sermon;
this was indeed to put Hagar in Sarah's place; and therefore by no means to be
endured.

2. Let people also look to it, that they be men of knowledge: Every one of you
profess your selves to be Gods servants, and the Lord to be your Master; now
it behooves every servant to know his Master's will: Luke 12.47.
Every servant of God must labor to know his will revealed in his word. A
loving and dutiful wife that should have a letter sent to her from her husband
out of a far Country, would not throw it into a hole, and there let it lie and
rot, but have it in her bosom, near her heart and hand, that she may often
peruse it, and inform her self by it; how she may the better order her
business, according to her husbands directions contained therein; O do not
rest your selves in an ignorant condition, nor content your selves with any
natural wisdom and understanding, such as was in the old Philosophers, who had
not the knowledge of God in Christ, but only a confused, a general knowledge,
which could not lead them to happiness. Nor must you rest content that you
have worldly wit and wisdom, to get and gather together things for this life,
of which Christ speaks, Matthew. 16.26. Labor not for that wisdom that is from
beneath, which is earthly, Jac 3.15. Exodus 1.10.
sensual, and devilish, such was the wisdom of Pharaoh, plotting to oppress
the Israelites, Come on, says he, let us deal wisely with them, but labor for
that wisdom that is from above, which as it comes from heaven, so (...)
^^^^ieth the soul that has it to heaven again, ^^tting the heart and
affections on things that are above, and let me tell you further, that it is
not enough for you to have other graces, but you must also have spiritual
knowledge and understanding.

And here I shall lay down and propound two great motives to labor after
saving knowledge.

1 Consider the great danger and mischief of ignorance.

2. The great benefit and excellency of knowledge.

1. For the danger and mischief of ignorance, I shall discover it in many
particulars.

1. Without knowledge a man cannot be good: An ignorant man cannot be a good
man; an ignorant man is apt to say, I have a good heart, and my heart is as
good as the best: thou art deceived, if thou art ignorant, thou can not be
good, I do not mean of natural goodness one toward another, but of being good
toward God. Prove, 19.2.
The Soul without knowledge is not good; says Solomon, it has not a dram of
goodness in it, i. e. of true goodness; and if a man's soul be not good, his
heart is naught; Prove. 10.20.
an ignorant man is a wicked man, and the heart of the wicked is little worth,
says the wise man; many ignorant people are ready to say, what though we be
ignorant, yet we mean well, our heart is as good as the best, and we hope that
God will accept of our good meanings and intentious: But how can men mean well,
when they know not how to do well? Psalm. 51.6.
then is the heart good, when a man can say as David, Lord, thou have taught,
or made me to know wisdom in the hidden part, Prove. 2.10.
or in the secret of my heart: when this wisdom enters into thy heart, and
knowledge is pleasant to thy soul, as Solomon speaks, when thy heart is
taught of God, then it is good. A man may have a good nature, a good
disposition, good natural wisdom and knowledge, but this is hateful to God, if
spiritual knowledge be wanting; Romans 8.7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God; and it is that which keeps a man
off from yielding subjection to the Law of God.

A man cannot be good in any relation without knowledge: A man cannot be a good
husband without knowledge.

Peter exhorts husbands to dwell with their wives, 1 Pet 3.7.
according to knowledge.

Knowledge is required of all husbands, and of all men before they be husbands,
because as soon as they have wives, they are charged to show their knowledge.
Husbands must set up the worship of God, and the exercises of piety in their
dwellings, Josh. 24.15. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
by instructing their wives and children in the things of God, and by talking
and discoursing of Gods Word upon all occasions, as also by praying together,
Jer. 10.25. Ephesians. 6, 4.
that so they may keep off the curse of God from them, which shall fall upon
them that know him not, and the families that call not upon his Name. A man
cannot be a good Parent without knowledge. Parents are required to bring up
their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: how can thou
instruct thy children, while thou thy self art ignorant of God and his word? a
man cannot be a good Master, nor a good Christian without knowledge; God who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, 2 Cor.
4.6.
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. says the
Apostle: the first thing that God created in the world was light, and the first
thing he creates in the soul of the new creature is spiritual light and
knowledge; so then unless we have the light of heavenly knowledge in our
hearts, we cannot be good.

2. Without knowledge we cannot do good. Psalm. 36.3. Desinit adhibere
intelligentiam, ad been faciendum. Junius. Cadallehaskil lehetib. Hebr. Noluit
intelligere ut been ageret. Hieron.
David makes it an indelible Character of a wicked man, to refuse knowledge; he
has left off to understand, and to do good. Geneva, he cease to use his
understanding to do well. Junius, he would not understand, that he might do
well, says Hierom, upon Psalm. 36.3. under the Law God rejected the blind
sacrifices, showing how he contemns blindness and ignorance in all those
that will serve him, Malach. 1.8. A good intention cannot make a good action;
if knowledge be wanting, it is but a blind offering, though done in obedience
to Gods command. As it is willworship, when things are done, which are not
commanded, and men think by them to do God good service, so likewise when men
do Gods commands for sinister respects, not knowing the force and ground of the
command.

1. Without knowledge a man cannot repent, how can a man turn from sin, unless
he know the nature and danger of sin, how can he turn to the Lord, unless he
know him: When Israel turns to the Lord, Hos. 8.3.
he shall cry to the Lord, My God we know thee, says the Prophet Hosea. If you
urge an ignorant man to turn from his sin, and turn to the Lord, he will answer
as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, I know not the Lord, neither will I let my beloved
lusts go: how can a man repent, till his conscience be touched, and how can
conscience accuse him without knowledge? Knowledge is the effect of a good
conscience, and a good conscience (like an haughty spirit) scorneth to lie in
the hovel of ignorance.

2. A man cannot pray to the Lord without knowledge: Ignoti nulla cupido Romans
3.10 Joh. 4.10. 3 Cor. 14.15. Alsted. Theolog. Catechet.
there is none that understands, that seeks after God, says the Apostle.
If thou knew, says Christ, to the woman of Samaria, thou would have
asked, etc. A man may say a prayer, or read a prayer, without true knowledge,
and the Lord regard them not; but he cannot pray with the heart, nor pray
spiritually without true knowledge; that prayer is right which is done in the
spirit, and with understanding. Scienter or at, qui novit quem orat, quid, and
pro quo.

3. Without knowledge a man cannot ^raise God for any mercy; Psalm. 17.7.
Sing ye praises with understanding, says the Psalmist, therefore the Saints
do honor God most with their praises and confessions, because they know more
of God and his goodness then others, and can report higher things of him.
Wicked and ignorant men speak of God only by hearsay, but they that know
him, by intimate acquaintance and experience, as the Queen of Sheba knew more
of Salomons wisdom by his mouth, then by his fame; he that has the most
inward communion with God, is able to render the more abundant praises to him.

4. Without knowledge, a man cannot be zealous for God and his glory; there is
a blind zeal like that of Popish votaries, Phil. 3.6.
there may be a zeal of God, where there is no knowledge of God, as the Apostle
Paul speaks of himself, before his conversion, that he persecuted the Church
out of zeal; the like he speaks of his Contrymen the Jews that they have a
zeal of God, Romans 10.2. Zelus absque scientia, qua vehement^us irruit, eo
gravius corruit. Bernard.
but not according to knowledge. It is good, says the Apostle, always to be
zealously affected in a good matter, Gal. 4.18. Now wisdom and knowledge are
good guides to zeal, to keep it within compass, that it run not out into fury,
in all pious actions let zeal be your spur, but let knowledge and wisdom be
your guide.

5. A man cannot truly worship God without knowledge, we must know him before
we can worship him; how can we reverence him whom we do not know; we know what
we worship, Acts 17.23.
says our Savior; but as for all ignorant persons (like the Samaritans) they
worship they know not what, and if they do him any outward service, they
ignorantly worship the true God, like the Athenians that set up an Altar to the
unknown God; this makes many persons to come into Gods presence, and carry
themselves so irreverently as they do, because they do not know him: Such as
our knowledge is, such is our worship of God.

3. Without knowledge a man cannot receive good.

1. Without knowledge a man cannot receive Jesus Christ, God first shines into
the heart with the light of knowledge, before Jesus Christ can be received by
the hand of faith: though Jesus Christ when he was upon earth spoke as never
man spoke, his preaching being with power and authority, and not like that of
the Scribes, yet multitudes of his hearers could not receive him, till the eyes
of their understanding were opened.

2. Without knowledge a man cannot receive the Spirit of God: John 14.17.
our Savior says, That the world cannot receive the Spirit of truth, because
it sees him not, neither knows him: many men make a mock and scorn of the
Spirit of God, because they do not know him; the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he
know them, 1 Cor. 2.14
because they are spiritually discerned.

A natural man may hear of spiritual things, but cannot be in a capacity of
receiving them, till he come to understand and to know them. They are riddles
to a natural man, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has ^ot seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into ^he heart of man to
conceive the things that God has prepared for them that love him; he speaks
there of the things of the Gospel: ^ut, says he, God has revealed them to us
^y his spirit, and we have the mind of Christ, verse. ult. A natural and
ignorant man is ^ike a corrupt stomach, where no meat will digest or nourish,
it does him no good, it turns to no good nutriment; so it is with an ignorant
soul, the spiritual things of God do him no good, they digest not in his soul,
they nourish him not, because he is full of darkness, corruption, and
ignorance.

4. Without the knowledge of God, we can ^ave no communion and fellowship with
him.

God is light, and the ignorant man is darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14.
and what communion has light with darkness? God is light, and in him there
is no darkness, and while thou art in the dark dungeon of ignorance, thou
can not converse with the Father of Lights. A natural man is a blind man, he
cannot see nor discern spiritual things: God takes no delight in such blind
fools. If you delight your selves in ignorance, and are unwilling to be taught,
as many children and servants are, how can you have any communion with God that
know him not? It is true, as a judicious Divine observes, Mr. Cotton on John.
there are many that desire knowledge, and cannot attain it, and of such, says
he, God will either accept their desires, or give them knowledge, but such as
please themselves with their ignorance, they have no communion with God, but
are sealed up unto damnation. If a man walks in darkness, and says he has
fellowship with God, he is a liar. A man can have no communion with God in the
spirit, nor in his ordinances, no^ in any thing as his, without the knowledge
of God; for while he lives in the darkness of ignorance, he is without God in
the world.

5. Col. 1.13.
Without the knowledge of God men are still under the power of Satan, the
Prince o^ darkness.

They are said to be under the power o^ darkness, i. e. of ignorance, and they
tha^ are under the power of darkness, are under the power of this Black
Prince: the Devil himself is bound in everlasting chains under darkness, and
he binds sinners with the chains of darkness, the darkness o^ ignorance,
and holds them under his power: Acts 26.18
therefore when a sinner is converted unto God, he is delivered from the power
of Satan, being turned from darkness to light, and being made a meet partaker
of the inheritance of of the Saints in light, he is delivered from the power of
darkness. Most men, while they are under Satan's power, they are held with this
chain: where ever an ignorant man goes, he goes like a fettered prisoner with
his Keeper at his back: let him go to the Congregation to hear the word, there
Satan either stops his ears, or blinds his eyes, or else choaks and steals away
the good seed of the word out of his heart. Those that are without the
acknowledgment of the truth, they are taken captive, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 6.12.
or taken alive by him in his snare, and wicked spirits are said to be the
Rulers of the darkness of this world: Oh tremble then, thou ignorant wretch,
to think to whom thou art in bondage.

6. While thou art ignorant, wanting the knowledge of God, thou art in
subjection to every base lust.

Paul speaking of the unregenerate State, Tit. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.14.
describes it thus: At that time we were foolish and disobedient, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures: Fashion not your selves, says Peter, according to
the former lusts in your ignorance. An ignorant man knows not what is good,
and what is evil, and often puts good for evil, Isai 5.20. Prove. 14.12.
and evil for good, puts darkness for light, and light for darkness; now
the will and affections do for the most part follow the understanding in things
that are good, I say for the most part, because the will and affections are
sometimes more depraved then the understanding: and in evil things, the will
and affections do altogether follow the understanding; now the understanding
being darkened, and putting evil for good, and good for evil, how can it be,
but a cause of diverse lusts, making the soul to serve diverse lusts and
pleasures? Ambition, Pride, Passion, Drunkenness, Revenge. Every sin and lust
will command them, so long as they are without the true knowledge of God: this
is a miserable slavery, to be led by their lusts, if they had eyes to see it;
one lust hurries them one way, and another hurries them another way; where
there is the knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue, 2 Pet.
1.3, 4.
such have escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust: there is
no escaping the pollutions and defilements of sin and lust, but by the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

7. Ignorance makes a man like a beast; A man without knowledge is like
Nebuchadnezzar, who had the heart of a beast in the shape of a man: an ignorant
man has the head and heart of a beast, an ignorant man is a very beast. For
what difference between a man and a beast? A beast has eyes, ears, legs, as
well as a man; sees, hears, goes, smells, tastes, Keckerm. Physic. 1.
as well as a man can do: nay, many beasts can do these things better then a
man can do: a man then differs only from a beast in understanding and
discourse. Therefore says God to his people, Be not as the horse or mule,
Psalm. 32.9. Mule nihil sentis, Epigram. 14.1
that has no understanding; as the Poet calls an ignorant man, a sottish
man, yea, a sottish mule. Ask an ignorant man what God is, what Jesus Christ
is, what his natures, what his offices are? ask him what the Spirit of God is,
what God requires at his hands, how he should serve him? ask him how he will
get faith? examine him about the doctrines of Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, what evidences he can show for everlasting life and salvation,
what marks of Christianity he can show, (...). Diogenes opulentum quendam
indoctum ovem aureo vellere dixit. Fortuna Craesum facit. Minerva Platonem.
Psalm. 49.20
what tokens of found conversion and sincerity in himself, what strange answers
shall you receive from an ignorant man? so that the bleating of a sheep, the
neighing of an horse, or the lowing of an Ox, is as much to the purpose, as
his answers are. Is he rich? he is a rich beast; as Diogenes Cynicus called a
rich man that was unlearned, a sheep with a golden fleece. Is he honorable? he
is an honorable beast, if ignorant; as one said of an ignorant and unlearned
King, that he was but a crowned Ass. Fortune makes a man rich, said an
Heathen, but it is wisdom makes a man; and let me add, it is the knowledge of
God, that makes a man indeed, that makes a true Christian: Man that is in
honor, and understands not, is like the beasts that perish: says the
Psalmist; when man was in his highest honor, he did affect to become like God
in knowledge, and therefore God made him like a beast that understands not;
God made him like the beast: and a godly Divine of ours well observes; it is
better to be a beast, then to be like a beast: for a beast in his own condition
follows the instinct of nature, but to be like a beast, is for a man to unman
himself, to degenerate to a baser condition, then that wherein he was created:
therefore be not in that sottish estate, as to be like the horse or mule that
has no understanding.

8. An ignorant state, is an estate hardly to be cured.

That is the reason why there are so many old men that are sottish and
ignorant, men that have lived sixty, seventy, or eighty years, and yet are but
children in understanding: Jerem. 4.22.
therefore the Holy Ghost calls an ignorant people, sottish children: so the
Lord complains, my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are
sottish children, they have no understanding. If a man be ignorant, the elder
he is, the more sottish and ignorant he grows. Ignorance in youth is
sottishness in old age; therefore people commonly call an old ignorant man an
old fool, and the Apostle Peter calls such ignorance, 1 Pet. 2.15.
the ignorance of foolish men.

1. An old man thinks it a great disgrace and disparagement for him to be
taught, or to learn: what says he, have I lived to this age, and must I now be
catechized?

2. Ignorant old men are very unteachable: if a fool be brayed in a mortar,
Prove. 23.9.
yet his folly will not depart from him, says Solomon: and if any man speak in
the ears of a fool, he will despise the wisdom of his words. Words and
persuasions are but spent in vain upon an old sottish man, who is wiser in his
own conceit, Prove. 14.23.
then seven men that can render a reason. A reproof will enter more into a wise
man, then an hundred stripes into a fool: it is natural for old ignorant
persons to frame many excuses; they are ready to say, they know enough, and as
much as any body can tell them, and they need know no more, and they think
themselves well where they are; they are in love with darkness, and hate the
light, Luke 7 30
and therefore like the blind Pharisees, they despise the counsel of God
against themselves.

3. Old men do usually hang upon some old custom or tradition of their
forefathers, and from that they will not be beaten, though they can give no
reason for it.

4. The older they grow, the weaker are their brains, and so the more unapt to
learn senex bis puer, an old man is twice a child. Covetousness for the most
part so possesses old men, Pluto the God of riches is feigned blind by the
Poets.
and this sin never waxing old, but growing green in withered and decrepit old
men, their hearts being so set upon the things of the world, that they have
neither heart, nor will to get knowledge.

6. Being old, and now ready to drop into the grave, they have but a little
time to be instructed, and so at length as they lived all their days without
knowledge, so they dye without wisdom, as Eliphaz speaks, Job 4.21.

You see then that an ignorant estate is very dangerous, Eccles. 4.13.
because hard to be cured. Better is poverty with wisdom, then folly with
riches and honor. Better is a poor and wise child, then a foolish King, who
will no more be admonished; let me close up this with that of the Apostle. 1
Cor. 14.20.
Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children,
but in understanding be men; or as the Greek has it, in understanding be ye of
a ripe (or perfect) age.

9. Ignorance makes a man to slight and despise all Gods works.

David meditating on the works of God, cries out: O Lord how great are thy
works! and thy thoughts are very deep: but then he adds: A brutish man
knows not: neither does a fool understand this. Psalm. 92.5, 6. who so is
wise, will observe these things. Psalm. 107.43. As Pearls cast before dogs or
swine, so are the works of God among ignorant persons: swine, or dogs, will
trample precious pearls under their feet in the dirt, but skilful Lapidaries
will use them carefully, and set them in gold, and rich attire. So ignorant
people that know not the works of God, and consider not the operation of his
hands, will contemn and despise, or at least neglect the excellent documents,
and fruitful instructions of Gods glory therein exhibited, whereby the Name of
God is much profaned. A man that knows and considers the works of God, uses
them aright, and glorifieth God in them. The Dung-hill-Cock as the Fable
morali^eth, does more esteem of a barley corn, then of a precious pearl,
knowing the profit of the one, and not the rich value of the other. So blind
and ignorant people, do lightly esteem of Gods glorious and wonderful works,
preferring the dirty commodities of this dunghill world, before the footsteps
of Gods Majesty imprinted in his works, thereby exceedingly dishonouring the
Lord himself.

And let me add hereunto, that ignorance makes a man lightly to esteem of God
himself, and of his word. An ignorant man is ready to pass by a King without
any reverence done unto him, and the Country Peasant (we know) does trample
many a wholesome herb under his feet, (which the skillful Apothecary does
gather up, and make good account of) because he is ignorant of the virtues, and
medicinable uses thereof, which the Apothecary knows: knowledge is a
necessary precedent to a reverent and high estimation of God and his word, for
to know the excellency of any thing, is a good preparative to a due esteem
thereof.

10. Ignorance is an inlet into all errors.

It is a fruitful mother of error: Praeteritae veniam dabit ignorautia
culpae. Ovid. Epist. 19.
An ignorant man is apt to be carried away, (...) with vain and empty words.
The Papists who would persuade the people they may be ignorant, and a little or
no knowledge is required of them; give great occasion to us to suspect, as if
they meant to make a prey of them, by seducing them with gross errors: for
then says Chrysostom, thieves go to stealing, when they have first pu^ out
the candle, and in dark shops, men use to utter their base and refuse wares. It
was ignorance of the doctrine of regeneration, and of the Scriptures, that made
Nicodemus conceive that carnally, that our Savior spoke spiritually. Joh. 3.3,
4.
It was ignorance of the Scriptures that made the Sadduces make a mock and
scoff at the resurrection, and afterward to propound their question about a
woman that had many Husbands, Whose wif^ she should be in the resurrection?
Matthew. 22.23. our Savior tells them that ignoranc^ was the cause of this their
error, ye err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God. verse 29. An
ignorant man is a prey for every impostour and deceiver, as Sampson was for the
Philistines, when his eyes were out. Psalm. 95.10.
If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch together: It is a
people, says God, that do err in their hearts, and the reason is given, they
have not known my ways: An ignorant man is the very map of change, and like
children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, being not well
grounded; an ignorant man like a child is apt to be taken with every new
fangle, soon growing weary of every thing. The most learned are subject to
error; for at the best, they know but in part, and do frequently err, because
not wholly sanctified: knowledge then is most necessary, that we may be able to
try doctrines that are brought to us, Prove. 28.11.
and to discern the spirits, whether they be of God or no: the rich man is wise
in his own conceit: but the poor that has understanding can try him, says
Solomon.

Lastly. An ignorant man is every moment liable to Gods wrath and vengeance.
They have not known my ways says the Lord, therefore I swear in my wrath;
that they should not enter into my rest. Psalm. 95. ult. Power out thy wrath
upon the Heathen, Jer. 10.25.
that have not known thee, etc. says the Prophet Jeremy: the like has David.
Psalm 79.6. Put all those together, and you may clearly see the danger of the
sin of ignorance, that we may be stirred up to labor after the true knowledge
of God in Jesus Christ. The case of ignorant men then is much to be pitied and
lamented; for if their case be to be lamented, who through corporal blindness
run into innumerable mischiefs, and at last fall into a deep gulf without hope
of recovery; much more are they to be pitied, who through spiritual blindness
plunge themselves into far greater evils for the present, and at last fall
into the pit of everlasting destruction, without recovery. Do you not pity
blind men, when you see them go out of the way, or stumble at every block, or
fall into every pit or ditch, or be misled by every false guide, or exposed to
the injury of every vile and malicious person: how much more then should we
sadly lament the case of those who are ignorant, lying under the punishment of
spiritual blindness, which is greater then bodily blindness, beyond all
comparison, and much more desperate.

2, The second thing by way of motive to this duty of getting knowledge, is the
great worth, Prove. 4.7. Phil. 3.8.
benefit, and excellency of knowledge: Get wisdom, says Solomon; for wisdom is
the principal thing: we read of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ
our Lord. And here consider

1. Knowledge is the principal thing wherein the image of God consists: Col.
3.10.
the new man is said to be renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that
created him; it is not our substance, that is Gods image, but true knowledge;
knowledge makes a man like unto God: this the Devil knew well enough, when he
tempted our first Parents, to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
Genesis 3.5.
telling them, that God knew, that in the day they eat thereof, their eyes
should be opened, and they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil: Ignorance
makes a man like the bruit beasts that perish, but knowledge is the renewing of
the image of God upon the soul. Pythagoras engraved in a stone with his own
hand these words, setting it before his Academy: He that knows not in his
measure what he ought to know, scil. in divine things, is but a beast among
men; he that knows what is simply needful, and no more, is a man among men,
but he that knows according to the helps vouchsafed him of God, what may well
be known; and so far as to direct himself and others aright in the way to true
happiness, Exodus 4.
is a God among men: Thus the Lord tells Moses, he should be to his brother
Aaron instead of God.

2. Knowledge is a most enriching thing; Col. 2.2, 3. Vnicum bonum scientia,
unicum malum ignorantia.
we read of the riches of the full assurance of understanding, and of the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; this makes a man rich to God: there is one
that is dives sibi, rich to himself; there is another that is dives Deo, rich
unto God: he that has only outward treasures, is rich to himself, but he that
has the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, is rich in God. God never charge
us to be rich in worldly things, but to be rich in knowledge, Col. 1.6.
to be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: where this treasure is wanting, the soul is beggarly and
bankrupt, base in Gods sight, as he says of the Church of Laodicea. Rev. 3.17.
Thou say, thou art rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked: A blind and ignorant soul, August. Sermon. 16. in Matthew.
is a poor, miserable, and beggarly soul. When thou buyest a Farm, thou buyest
a good one, says a Father, when thou marriest a wife, thou chusest a good one;
when thou desirect children, thou desire good ones: and when thou have all
these riches, thou art but poor, inter tot dona, amongst so many gifts; and,
malus inter tot bona, evil among so many good things; if thou want the
riches of true knowledge: men may welter upon their Gold like Heliogabalus, as
Lampridius, and Herodian report of him, and yet for spiritual knowledge, have
hearts like stones, and heads like beetles, and be beggars in the midst of
their abundance, destitute of all heavenly riches, Prove. 3.14
of riches toward God. The merchandise of wisdom is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine Gold: Merchants that
trade for silver and gold, bring in much profit, but the merchandise of wisdom
is better, and more profitable: My fruit is better then Gold, yea then much
fine gold; says wisdom: It brings in peace of conscience, it fills the
heart with unspeakable joy, Prove. 8.16
it comforts the soul in the greatest distress; this is the fruit that grows
upon the tree of Knowledge.

3. 1 Timothy 6.20. Haec scientiarum nobilissima, and scientia nobilissimorum.
It far transcendeth all other kind of knowledge, other knowledge compared with
this knowledge, is but, as the Apostle says, Science falsely so called; what
will it avail a man with the Grammarian to be able to speak and write purely,
and use elegant phrases in his words, if he want the knowledge of God to direct
him to live purely and holily; for want whereof, he commits many solaecismes
and absurdities in his works and actions? what comfort can it afford a man to
have been a fine Rhetorician, and eloquent Orator, and having used many
pleasing words to men, if in the mean time, he want a light within him, to show
him how to do those things that are pleasing to God? what will it help the
Musician to have had a tunable tongue with an untunable heart? what will it
pofit the Logician, to be able to dispute subtly, if he be gravelled, and set
Nonplus in the Devils sophistry? what will it help the Lawyer, to be able to
prescribe to others the rules of equity, and himself to live in the practice of
all iniquity? what good will it do to the Geometrician to know the measure and
compass of the whole earth, and not to know and consider that himself must
shortly return to the earth? what will it advantage the Astronomer to have his
eyes lifted up to heaven, if he be ignorant of the God of heaven, and his heart
be grovelling upon the earth? what will it help the Arithmetician, to be cunning
and skillful in numeration, addition, substraction, multiplication, division,
and all the several branches of that Science; Psalm. 90.12.
if in the mean time he forget Moses numeration, and never pray unto God to
teach him to number his days, and to apply his heart unto wisdom; or Zacheus
division in restoring what he had ill gotten to the right owners, and disposing
of what he had to spare, of what he had well gotten, to the poor and needy
members of Christ? what is a man profited with the Physician, to know the state
and constitution of other men's bodies, and yet be ignorant how it fares with,
and what shall become of, his own poor soul! In a word, if we were so well read
in histories, and had such firm and sure memories, as that we could discourse
of the affairs of all foreign and far Countries; as Turkey, Persia, the
East and West Indies, etc. and in the mean time be strangers at home, not
knowing how things go in that Microcosme, or little world of our selves, it
would but little profit us? what if we could describe as in a Map or Table, the
wars of the Trojans, Grecians, Romans, Turks, and Persians, and in the mean
time be ignorant, that we have a politic, powerful, mighty, and malicious
Adversary, to encounter with our selves, as Peter tells us. 1 Pet. 5.8. yea,
that he uses treachery and treason against us, being in league with our own
flesh, which he stirs up to rebel against the good motions of the spirit,
and make us yield our selves to be his Slaves and Vassals? Beloved, all these
knowledges in their kind, are good and commendable; and good ornaments to those
that have attained them, and may be means to fit, and furnish men to be more
serviceable to Church and commonwealth, but they must all be subordinate, and
stoop to this most excellent knowledge, the knowledge of God in Christ. Compare
this excellent knowledge, with other knowledges contained in the writings of
Philosophers, and other humane authors, Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in 1 Cor. ^ Vitrea
argumenta quae subtilitate lucen^ vanitate franguntur. August.
and you will find it so far to excel and exceed them all, as heaven does the
earth: for their discourses and disputations be but like spiders webs, many
times so subtle, as we scarce conceive the reason of them; yet withal so
light, as they yield no comfort or content, when we do conceive it; and as
Austin says, their arguments are glassy, which shine with subtilty, and are
broken with vanity: They discourse of knowledge, and dispute thereof, and yet
still remain blind and ignorant as Bats, or Beetles, in respect of the main and
chief knowledge, the knowledge of God and Christ? 1 Cor. 2.2.
Paul determined to know nothing else save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
These men discourse and dispute of happiness, and yet remain themselves most
miserable, being so far from enjoying it, as few or none of them ever truly
knew what it was, they talk of the truth, but many of them are liars, they talk
of virtue, and yet remain most vicious: briefly, we may say of all their
speculations, and curious Arts and Sciences, without the saving knowledge of
God in Christ, (which none of them ever attained unto by the Moonlight of
nature) that it was but docta quaedam ignorantia, Scientia optima, non solum
quae doctiores, sed quae meliores homines efficit. Bernard.
a kind of learned ignorance, or ignorant kind of knowledge, as Austin calls
it, at least nothing worth in comparison of this heavenly knowledge; for, as
Bernard has noted, that is the best knowledge, not only which makes men more
learned, but better and more holy. All riches in comparison of this, is but
dross and rubbish, all wisdom (in comparison of this) is but foolishness.

4. Knowledge is the Mother-grace.

1. It is the Mother of faith; If a man know God, he will believe and trust in
him: They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10.
we have known and believed, says the Apostle. 1 John 4.16. Bellarmine says,
Whosoever sees the Son, and believes in him, shall have everlasting life. Joh.
6.40.
that Faith ^ariseth from ignorance rather then from knowledge, because, says
he, Faith is the evidence of things not seen: but I say, we first know a thing,
before we can believe; now whereas the Apostle, Heb. 11.1. says, Faith is the
evidence of things not seen, you are to understand that the Apostle does not
there define faith, but only describe it by one of the effects of it, because
it makes things clear and evident which it never saw: as by faith we do believe
the creation of the world, though we never saw it: sight and knowledge is no
hinderance of, but a help to, faith; 1 John 4.8. Visus est prima amoris linea.
Quisquis te cognoscit, amat te, plus quam se, and venit ad te, ut gaudeat de
te. Hinc est, Domine, ut non tantum diligo, quantum debeo, quia non ptene
cognosco te: quia parum cognosco, parum diligo.
as Stephens faith was not any whit lessened, but rather helped by his fight of
Christ, sitting at the right hand of God.

2. Knowledge is the root of love: he that loves not, knows not God, says
the Apostle; he that knows God most, loves him best, therefore many men do
not love him, because they do not know him; there he two feet on which we must
walk to heaven, says one, if ever we mean to come there, viz. Faith and Love;
he that wants faith, is lame on the right foot, and he that wants love, is
lame on the left foot, and both these follow after knowledge. A man that
knows God in Covenant, and as an all-sufficient God, cannot choose but love
him: till a man knows Christ in the fullness of his perfections as Mediator,
he cannot truly love him. For as men naturally love the children of their own
body, so men are apt to dote upon the brats of their own brain, and to be in
love with their own imaginations, till they come to know the Lord: naturally
man has an operating fancy to set up somewhat in his understanding, and in his
heart, above and besides God, till he comes to a distinct knowledge of God in
Christ. It is true! it is not knowledge that makes a man a good man, but love
and sanctified affections; 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. August. Soliloqu. cap. 1.
for though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and though I have the
gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, etc. and
have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinckling cimball, and all
this profits me nothing; the devil and wicked spirits know much, and yet
have no love to God: yet there can be no love to God, where the knowledge of
God is not.

3. Knowledge is the root of obedience: as soon as Abraham knew the Lord, Genesis
12.1. Sit. 3.3.
he obeyed the voice of the Lord, when God called him to get out of his
country, from his kindred, and from his Fathers house: the foolish and
disobedient are put together by the Apostle; disobedience springs from folly,
as obedience springs from wisdom; what is the reason? 1 Cor. 2.14.
the natural man scorneth at the things of the spirit, and they are
foolishness to him; it is because he cannot perceive the excellency of them.
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, Job.
28.28. Haec irae impetum cohibet sisperbiae tumorem sedat.
that is understanding. After true knowledge, follows obedience of the heart
and life: the end of learning. The Commandment of God is obedience, for if the
end of all practical knowledge be obedience, then much more the end of the
commands of God: The knowledge of Christ is the only means to suppress sin and
vice.

5. Knowledge is the only way to true happiness: 1. Tim. 2.4, 5.
it is the will of God that all men should be saved, says the Apostle, but
how, may some say? he adds in the next words, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth: and it is not only the way to true happiness, but it is true
happiness inchoate; John 17.3.
this is life eternal to kno^ thee, the only true God, and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ, says our Savior. Moses first prays to God, Lord tell me
thy name; he beggeth acquaintance with God, and then says he afterward, Lord
show me thy glory, they that be wise, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the brightness of the F^rmament, says Daniel: Revel. 4.8.
there are no ignorant fools in Emmanuels land. Glorified creatures are said to
be full of eyes within, seeing eternal happiness consists in vision, they
must be full of heavenly light and knowledge: Now we know but in part, but then
shall we know as we are known. 1 Cor. 13.12.

6. Knowledge is very useful and necessary to the soul.

1. To direct and guide a man: as God has put the Sun and Moon in the
Firmament to rule the day and the night, so he has put knowledge into the
soul, to guide and govern men in their practices, and to dictate to them what
is to be done, what is to be avoided. A man without knowledge, is like a blind
man wanting a guide to direct him, if the understanding be clear and good, the
man is safe, but if the understanding be darkened, then he falls into the pits
of sin and error; Matthew. 6.22.
The light of the body is the eye, says our Savior, if therefore thine eye be
single, the whole body shall be full of light; but if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness: The meaning is, that as the eye is the
light and guide of the body, so is the understanding the guide of the soul:
and as the body follows the fortune of the eye, if the eye be single, (that
is, clear and good) the whole body is full of light, and every member will be
able to do its proper work, as if it had an eye in it: but if the eye be evil
or blinded, then the whole body is full of darkness, that is, every member
mistaketh in its operations, as the eye in the body guides the feet ^^w to
walk, and the hand how to work, and every member how to do his part and duty,
and the whole body to decline and avoid danger: so rectified reason, and a
single eye will guide our wills and affections, teaching them what to choose,
and what to refuse; and if the judgment be cleared from corrupt principles,
then the whole soul will be full of light, and the whole life of man will be
good: for as where the eye is clear, and quick-sighted, the body is well
guided, so where the understanding, and reason, and judgment is rightly
informed, there the soul is well ordered, otherwise there is nothing but
disorder and confusion. True knowledge will direct thy choice to forsake the
bad, and follow the good; to leave earthly things, Eccles. 9.15. Eccles. 10.6.
and cleave to heavenly; Wisdom is profitable to direct, says Solomon; even
as light directs him in his way: the knowledge of God in a saving way, will
make thee not to place happiness in pleasing thy humor with the ancient
Philosophers, but it will make thee content with Paul, to give over all to gain
Christ; Prove. 19.22.
true knowledge guides the tongue, understanding is a wellspring of life to
him that has it: the heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning
to his lips; that is, as if he had said, whereas a fools heart is upon the tip
of his tongue, to vent and utter whatever he knows at all adventures, a wise
man's tongue is ordered and guided by his heart, to keep and observe a decorum
both in speech and silence: And concerning actions, Solomon brings in wisdom,
speaking thus in her own person, saying; Prove. 8.19, 20.
My fruit is better then Gold, yea then fine Gold, and my revenue then choice
Silver; and then adds a reason saying: I lead in the way of righteousness,
and in the midst of the paths of judgment. Now on the other side, if thine eye
be evil, thy whole body is full of darkness; as a man that has an ill sight,
a pearl in his eye, or is pur-blind, is oftentimes, nay evermore deceived in
his choice, and misseth his mark: So he that has his understanding darkened and
dazzeled, wants a right judgment to guide him in the worship and service of
God: the corruption of his own heart and proud flesh, the sleights and
suggestions of Satan, and the evil examples of others with whom he lives,
being (as Gregory Nazianzen says) interposed between the eye of his mind, and
the light of the Gospel; as a thick cloud, or the shadow of the body of the
earth, between our eyes and the light of the Sun. Now where this evil eye is,
there is nothing but darkness, and the fruits of it, amazedness, horror, and
confusion: where understanding is wanting, the whole life must be nothing but
disorder: knowledge in the soul, is as a King in his Realm, the head to the
body, the eye in the head, a Pilot in a ship; yea in a word, as the Sun to the
world: now what truer mirror of misery, then a Realm without a King or
Governor, or whose King is a child, not so much in years as in discretion, as
Rehoboam was? and what can that body do that has an head blind without eyes,
or that is still distempered, fit for nothing but sleep? what can be expected
to become of a ship, whose Pilot and guide is still stark drunk, neither
knowing nor caring how to guide her at Sea, nor bring her to shore? and what
greater darkness is there in the greater world, then when the Sun (the eye
thereof) has run his race, and is gone to rest, until his rising again? as
great disorder, discomfort and confusion is there in a man without knowledge,
and spitituall understanding; nay far greater, unless Jesus Christ, the
Son of Righteousness, arise in it, and shine upon it, by the beams of his
grace and favor.

2. Knowledge is useful to strengthen a man, a knowing man is a strong man;
Eccles. 7.19.
a fool is a weak man: wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men
that are in the City, says Solomon: it will more support and strengthen a man,
then many great friends in Court or City, it will strengthen a man in great
straits; Friends may fail a man, and oftentimes do fail him: but true wisdom
does not fail a man in the greatest straits, it leads a man through the
greatest difficulties, and supports him under them: to this purpose the Apostle
prays, that the Colossians might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will,
Colos. 1.9, 10, 11.
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, and increase in the knowledge of
God, that they might be strengthened with all might according to his glorious
power, unto all patience and long-suffering, with joyfulnesse.

Wisdom strengthens us rightly to use our spiritual armor, both defensive,
and offensive, as it is best for us, and appointed to us.

When a great King besieged a little City, and built great bulwarks against it,
there was found in it, a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the
City: then said I, wisdom is better then strength: Eccles. 9.14, 15, 16. and
verse 18. he adds, Wisdom is better then weapons of war: the Devil is
like this great King, that comes against, and besieges the little City of the
soul, builds great bulwarks against it; but a poor Christian by wisdom
delivers his soul: a man that knows his own weakness, and wants, that
knows the necessity of grace, that knows Jesus Christ to be the Fountain of
wisdom and strength, he goes out of himself to Jesus Christ, making use of
the virtue of his death and resurrection, to overcome all temptations unto sin.

3. Knowledge does exceedingly encourage a man, and hearten him against all
discouragements: when a man knows God, knows his service, and knows what
God requires at his hands, this does exceedingly encourage a man upon the
performance of his duty. Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I am not ashamed of my sufferings for the preaching of the Gospel; and gives
this reason; for I know whom I have believed, and he is able to keep that which
I have committed unto him against that day. When a man knows the will of God,
and walks according to the light he has received, when a man knows the
promises, and his own interest in them, this does mightily encourage a man
under sufferings; when once we have gotten understanding of Christ and the
Promises, and Privileges by him, the heart is full of courage; he knows
then, let God cast him into what state or condition he will, that it shall go
well with him; this will make a man courageous in death it self: What though I
die? yet says he with Job, Job 19.25
I know that my Redeemer lives, and in that he lives, he lives for my good:
he is my life, Col. 3.4.
who is the life; My life is bound up in him, who is the Fountain of Life, Joh.
14.19
and because he lives, I shall live also.

4. Knowledge is sweet, and comfortable: Eccles. 11.7.
light is sweet, and it is a comfortable thing for a man with his eyes to
behold the light of the Sun: So when an ignorant soul is enlightened with the
true knowledge of God and his ways; this is very comfortable: What a comfort
is it to come out of the dark dungeon of ignorance, into Gods marvelous light?
the light of knowledge raises a drooping spirit; Ignorance of God, and of his
Word: ignorance of our selves also, is the cause of much trouble of spirit,
when we are ignorant of our own estate, and of our grounds of comfort; It is
the great design of the Devil, to blind our eyes in soultroubles, that we may
not see the Well of Comfort, that runs by us; as poor Hagar, that was ready
to perish for thirst, had not eyes to see the Fountain by her: Now true
knowledge leads the soul to the Promises, to the waters of Comfort, to the
breasts of Consolation, where he may suck and be abundantly satisfied: Psalm.
97.11.
Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart; when
gross darkness covers other people, light is risen to their souls: The
light of the righteous rejoices, Prove. 13.9
when the lamp of the wicked is put out. The knowledge of God in a saving way,
brings three grounds of comfort to the soul that has it.

1. It comfort the soul to consider, how many Wise and Learned men, are
blinded by the god of this World, that, God has hid Heavenly Mysteries from
the wise and prudent of the World, and has revealed them to poor babes: and to
such a poor ignorant creature as he was.

2. It comfort it to consider, what darkness it has sometime lived in, and
that now the Lord has called it out of darkness, into his mavelous light.
Oh! says such a soul, God has done as great a work upon my heart, as he did
when he commanded light to shine out of darkness, Choshec. panai Tehom.
in the beginning of the World: my heart was like the earth at that time, when
there was nothing but Tohu, and Bohu, upon it, Genesis 1.2.
and darkness was upon the face of the Deep, and then did the Lord make light
of it: It is with Gods people before he opens their eyes, as it was with
Abraham; the Lord sent on him a most fearful darkness, even then, Genesis 15.12.
when he was ready to communicate a most comfortable light unto him. The Lord
struck Paul with blindness, even then, when he came to open his eyes.

3. This further comfort such a soul, in that God shining into it has given
it the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, Act. 9. 2 Cor. 4.6
in Jesus Christ; glorious things are now revealed to the soul, the soul sees
that now, which it never saw before, and they clearly see, that which others
cannot know, nor discern: It is light in Goshen, where the Israelites are, when
there is no light in Egypt: men in the same City, in the same Congregation, in
the same Seat, in the same Family, sit in darkness, and cannot see; when
others in the same places, do clearly behold the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ. Now if this light of the godly be so glorious and comfortable in
this World, what shall it be in the World to come? when God and the Lamb shall
be their immediate light? here God enlightens us by candlelight, but there the
glorious Sun of Righteousness himself, will be our everlasting light: here our
light may be darkened and eclipsed, but there shall be an eternal light without
all darkness, there shall be no night there.

5. Knowledge is useful to resolve all doubts, and difficulties, which arise in
our souls; this makes a man of a full and firm resolution; a man is happy when
he can say, This I know to be the mind of God, and in this will I live and die;
this is the truth of God, and from this I will not be moved. Ignorantiae duae
pessimae filiae, falsitas and dubietas.
Ignorance is the mother of two filthy daughters; the first daughter of
Ignorance is called dubiety, or doubtfulnesse, which is a continual wavering in
opinion; a knowing man has a fixed spirit, and settled judgment, but an
ignorant man is a doubleminded man, though he be never so resolute and wilful
in his opinions. The other daughter of Ignorance is falsity, or error, which
setleth a man upon an unsound basis: he that is void of reason, will not be
convinced by truth or reason: when there were diverse opinions in the World
concerning Christ, who he should be, some said he was John Baptist, some Elias,
Math. 16.14.
others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets; this variety of opinions sprang from
ignorance: Some said he was Elias, propter zelum and amorem veritatis, for his
zeal and love of the truth; for as Elias could not endure to have Gods worship
mingled with idolatry; no more could Christ, as appears Joh. 2. by his
punishing and casting out of those that bought and sold in the Temple: others
said, he was Jeremias, propter patientiam in adversis, being like a lamb
before the shearer, not opening his mouth, however he was abused: and others
said, he was John Baptist, for his boldness in reproving sin, and this opinion
for the most part went current; and the reason why it was more favored and
followed than the rest, Divines observe to be, because a great man was Author
of it; as you may see Math. 14 2. for when Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame
of Jesus, he said unto his servant, this is John the Baptist, he is risen from
the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him: and then
no matter, whether it be true or false, if Herod be the Author of it; for if
Abimelech cut boughs from trees, Jud. 9.49.
to set the Tower in Sichem on fire, all the people will do so by his example.
Here you may see the dangerousnesse of ignorance, causing such various and
erroneous opinions concerning Christ; their ignorance of Christ, made way to
the entertainment of the Pythagorean opinion of the transmigration of souls
into other men's bodies, which occasioned all these errors; so grossly
ignorant were even the better sort of people in Christ's time, in a main
fundamental point of Religion, as viz. Whether he were the Messiah or no: Now
on the other side, knowledge resolves all doubts: though others doubted who
Christ was, yet Peter freely and clearly confesses him, he does not stay till
a Council might be called, and the question determined among the Jews; but
knowing who Christ was, like the foreman of a Jury, he brings in the verdict
of himself and his followers, saying, (as Matthew tells us) to our Savior,
Math. 16.16.
Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God. A man that has clear eyes in his
head, can discern the light if it be showed him, but blindness makes a man
incapable of seeing light offered to him: knowledge resolves a man, and setleth
his judgment; without knowledge a man cannot in diverse cases, discern truth
from error: as in the body of man, eyes are given to distinguish of colors,
ears to distinguish of sounds, pallats to distinguish of tastes; so is
knowledge very useful to distinguish of Doctrines, that are tendered to us;
that with David, we may choose the way of truth, and avoid the rocks of error;
2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
growing in the knowledge of Christ, preserves a man from being carried away
with the error of the wicked.

6. Knowledge is useful to adorn the soul: knowledge is the soul's greatest
ornament: wisdom (especially heavenly wisdom) makes a man's face to shine, says
the Wise man: Eccles. 8.1
it puts such a luster upon a man, as outshineth all the Diadems of the
greatest Princes of the World: Prove. 1.9.
It is an ornament of grace to the head, and chains about the neck. Persons of
Renown for wisdom, were wont to wear chains of Gold about their necks, Genesis
41.39, 42.
in token of honor done to them for their wisdom; for that cause Pharaoh put a
Golden chain about the neck of Joseph; and the like did King Belshazzar unto
Daniel, Dan, 5.29
who was so Renowned for his wisdom, that in those days, none were esteemed
wiser than he: therefore the Lord upbraideth the Prince of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28.3.
that was pufft up with the conceit of wisdom; Behold thou art wiser than
Daniel; that is, thou think thy self wiser than Daniel, there is no secret
they can hide from thee. How amiable was Solomon for his wisdom, when the Queen
of Sheba came from a far Country to hear it? and when she had seen it, said, 1
Kings 10.8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom: now those that are filled with heavenly
wisdom and knowledge, they wear more beautiful and glorious ornaments, than all
the golden Chains in the World, As a clear, quick, and piercing eye, is a great
beauty and ornament of the face of man, so a clear apprehension, a sharp
inspection and a sound judgment in the things of God, is the highest and most
becoming ornament of a Christian soul.

7. Knowledge fits a man for high and eminent Employments; the best and wisest
men are to be chosen to the highest places: thus upon the Tree that
Nebuchadnezzar saw, the birds are upon the boughs, the beasts below at the
root; that is, in a kingdom and commonwealth, men of worth and wisdom are to
be placed above in Authority to bear Rule, and others of meaner reach, are to
hold meaner places, and to be ruled and kept in obedience and subjection: for
Solomon tells us where and when it is otherwise, there is a great confusion,
Prove. 26.8. As he that binds a stone in a sling, so is he that gives honor
to a fool: the ordinary Translation is, As he that puts a stone, or a
precious stone, in a heap of stones, so is he that gives glory to a fool. The
vulgar Latin is, Sicut qui mittit lapidem in Acervum Mercurii, ita qui tribuit
honorem inspienti, As he that puts a stone to an heap of Mercury, etc. Lyra
expounds it two ways, and the first methinks very much strained, telling us
that it is a metaphor taken from such as cast accounts, whereof Mercury was the
God among the superstitious Gentiles: now as in casting of accomps, wherein
they anciently used little stones, the same stone sometimes lay for a penny,
and sometime for many pounds, and yet the value was the same, his place being
altered: So many times a fool by favor, and friendship is exalted, and
advanced to high place, much beyond his desert: Another exposition he gives us,
saying, that as he that puts a stone to an heap of mercury, that is, to
build him a Temple, and so set up idolatry; so is he that conferreth honor
upon a fool. He confesses also that the words in the Original tongue, may have
another sense thus, ut qui mittit lapidem in palmam fundae, as he that patteth
a stone into the hand of a sling, so is he that gives honor to a fool. And so
reads Junius and Tremellius; ut qui applicat lapidem Balistae, ita qui praebet
stolido honorem: and the Hebrew word Margemah, coming of Ragam, lapidare, or
lapidibus obruere, to strike or kill with stones, as Pagnine tells us, will
bear both, and signifies either an heap of stones, or a sling to hurl stones
with; and taking the words in the last sense: Solomon's meaning may be this; As
he that puts a stone in a sling, and hurleth it, forces it upward
violently, which would and should of it self go downward naturally, so he that
advanceeth a fool to honor, commits a soloecisme in nature, setting him
above in authority to rule others, whose proper place is to be beneath in
subjection to be ruled of others. Knowing and understanding men are fittest for
places of rule and government, therefore Pharaoh advanced Joseph to high
honor, Forasmuch, says he, as there is none so discreet and wise as thou art,
thou shall be over my house, and according unto thy word, shall all my people
be ruled. Genes. 41.39, 40.

And now before I give directions to get knowledge, I must remove diverse
objections thrown in my way (or rather in their own way) by ignoraut wretches:
for many sottish people are apt to frame many objections against their getting
of knowledge.

Object. 1. Many poor souls are apt to object and say, I am simple and
ignorant, and am not book-learned, I cannot read, and I am blockish, dull of
apprehension, and the like; how then can I understand the knowledge of the
Lord, or the mind of God revealed in his Word?

Resp. It is a very bad thing not to be book-learned, as you say, etc. but
there are three things in answer to this objection of ignorant men, that say
they cannot understand.

1. Poor souls! they say they cannot get this knowledge, but the reason is,
because they will not: now that they will not get holy knowledge is evident:
although they cannot learn the knowledge of God, they can learn other things
that are evil and vain fast enough: My people is fo^lish, they have not known
me, says the Lord: they are sottish children, they have no understanding: what
altogether void of understanding? no; Terem. 4.22.
they are wise to d^e evil, but to do good they have no knowledge: now this
proceeds from the evil frame and corruption of their hearts, the wisdom of
the flesh assisteth them in doing the works of the flesh, and in
counter-working the working of the Spirit; and our Savior says, Luke 16.8.
(...) pro ^^.
that the children of this world are wiser in their generation then the
children of light: they are not absolutely more wise and sagacious then the
children of light in every respect, but wiser in their kind of wisdom; and in
some respect; wiser for the world, and for worldly advantages: they can order
all their outward affairs with much discretion; they have strange inventions
to hook in a good bargain; they observe the fittest times of taking in; and
putting off commodities to the most advantage, they are given to oppression,
engrossings, fraud, and cozenage, and yet so cunning they are, that they keep
themselves out of the reach of the Law. Now if men would employ their wisdom
and diligence, in getting spiritual knowledge, as they lay out about the world,
they might not only be wise for the world, but wise to salvation also.

2. What though you are simple and unlearned yet God calls upon such to turn
unto him: Prove. 1.20. 22, 23.
Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets, etc. saying, How
long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? turn you at my reproof behold I will pour
out my spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you: wisdom calls
upon simple ones to leave their simplicity, with great affection he seems to
bewail men's simplicity, and kindly invites them to repentance: Gerunt secum
noctem suam, i.e. non tantum consuetudinem peccandi, sed etiam amorem peccati.
Aust. in Psalm. 5.
you have continued too long in your folly and simplicity, it is high time now
to think of returning to the ways of wisdom; it is a great weakness for a
man to be simple, but to be in love with simplcity is egregious madness; it is
the worst of evils to be in love with folly: hearken therefore to wisdoms
call, give ear to his reproof, and turn in to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
this wisdom here meant, and he has promised to pour his spirit upon you, and
to make known his words unto you, and then you shall be filled with all true
wisdom, and spiritual understanding; here then is Gods promise to the simple
and unlearned: mark what David says, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making
wise the simple; Psalm. 19 7.
the Lord not only gives wisdom, but subtilty to the simple, to the young man
knowledge, and discretion; young men, of all other, are most rash and heady, and
very unteachable, yet the Lord gives subtilty to the simple, and to the young
man knowledge and discretion. It was written over Pythagoras School-dore,
(...). Let no man ignorant of Geometry enter: but the Lord calls upon
ignorant persons, upon babes and little children to come to his School, and be
instructed in the doctrine of the beginning of Christ: the simplest that comes
to the School of Christ, learneth wisdom at his very first entrance there: the
entrance of thy words says David, gives light, Psalm. 119.140.
it gives understanding to the simple.

3. Consider, that many simple ones have attained to a great measure of
knowledge; who more simple then babes and little children, yet to such John
writes, 1 John 2.13. Basil Epist. 75. ad Neocaesan.
I write unto you babes, because you have known the Father. It did not a little
move our Savior, when they forbad little children to be brought unto him: and
when the chief Priests and Scribes took it ill, that the children cried out
after Christ, Hosannah, thou Son of Dvid: he told them it was written, Mat.
21.15 1 Samuel 3.7
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, have thou perfected praise: though
young Samuel knew not God, when he first called him, yet from that time
forwards he knew him: 2 Chronicles. 34.3.
Josiah began to seek after the God of his Father, when he was but young: and
Paul commends Timothy, that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures,
which were able to make him wise unto salvation: 2 Timothy 3.15.
It is the good will and pleasure of our heavenly Father to hide heavenly
mysteries, from worldly wise men, and those that are wise in their own eyes,
Matthew. 11.25. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
and to reveal them unto babes: and many that have been but children in
understanding, when they have applied their hearts to wisdom, and inclined
their ears, their thoughts, their desires, their affections to wisdom, they
have attained to a great measure of heavenly knowledge: Ruffin Eccles. Hist.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
when a Philosopher subtly disputed against Christ in a great Council; a
plain simple man (to look to) stands up and makes confession of his Faith: We
believe that Jesus Christ was incarnate, etc. O Philosopher says he, believe
thou this? The Philosopher was presently stricken with astonishment, and said;
I could answer the Philosophers with reason, but this man speaks so powerfully,
that I am not able to resist what he says; as it is said of the Libertines
that disputed with Stephen, Acts 6.10.
they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke. So
even babes and simple ones shall rise up in judgment against many men at the
last day (when they shall appear before the tribunell of Christ) even against
those that despised instruction, and hated knowledge, and set at naught holy
counsels, when as poor simple and ignorant men have attained to abundance of
knowledge: therefore let not your simplicity keep you off from seeking after
knowledge: the Lord now calls loud in your ears, O ye simple ones: Psalm. 94.8.
understand O ye brutish among the people, and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
Wisdom cries, O ye simple ones understand wisdom, Prove. 8.10, 11.
and ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart, receive my Instruction and not
silver, and knowledge rather then choice Gold, for wisdom is better then rubies,
and all desirable things are not to be compared to it.

Object. Some will be ready further to object, and say, We have lived many
years, some 30, some 40, some 50, some 60 years without preaching, and
without the means of knowledge, and we find we are well enough, and that there
is no such great danger in ignorance, as you would bear us in hand, and we hope
we shall do well enough, for time to come, without troubling our selves to get
knowledge.

Resp. Do thou think that because thou have as yet found no trouble in an
ignorant and sinful way for many years past, that thou shall therefore never
meet with any trouble at the last, alas! thou art much mistaken: read one place
of Scripture, and think seriously of it, and the Lord set it home on thy heart,
and then come and tell me what thou think of such flattering, and vain
delusions of thy poor soul. It shall come to pass that that man, when he
hears the words of this curse, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20, 21.
that he blesses himself in his heart, saying I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of my heart; to add drunkenness to thirst, the Lord
will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall
lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven, Deuteronomy.
29.19, 20, 21. and the Lord shall separate him unto evil, out of all the
Tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant, that are written
in this book of the Law. Let ignorant and profane wretches tremble at this
Scripture, who have lived in ignorance and profaneness for many years, and
let them take heed of blessing themselves in ways of sin and ignorance, for
the Lord will make his anger and his jealousy to smoke against such persons at
last: Do thou think thou shall do well enough in the end; thou art mistaken,
while thou art ignorant of God and his ways, thou art a wicked wretch: and God
has commanded his Prophets to denounce a woe against thee; Isai. 10.11
Say to the righteous, it shall be well with him; then it follows, woe to the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him.

2. Have thou been without the means of grace for 30 or 40 years past, and
lived in ignorance so long, and will thou refuse the means of grace now it is
offered thee in thy age? thy sin will be double, and thy condemnation will be
the greater; If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin, but
now they have no excuse for their sin, says our Savior; if thou had allways
been without the means of knowledge, thou might have pleaded; Joh. 15.22
Lord had I known thy will, I would have done it: but now Christ by his
messengers has spoken to thee, and yet thou art ignorant, and profane, thou
have no excuse for thy sin: it is the sadning of many a Ministers heart, to see
the blockish ignorance that is among their people, and that few or none will
come to them to be instructed; what thronging is there to the chambers of
Lawyers for their advice and counsel touching men's outward estates; what
running after great men to get offices and places of preferment? what posting
to Physicians for advice, if the body be sick, and a little out of frame? If an
indulgent Father have his only son lie very sick by him, how earnest is he in
enquiring of the physician, what he thinks will become of his poor child, and
whether there be any hopes of his recovery? but the precious soul that is more
worth then the whole world (as our Savior intimates to us) this is neglected,
and never looked after: when shall you see a man or woman come to a Minister and
say, O Sir, what shall I do to be saved? I am a poor ignorant creature, I pray
teach me good judgment and knowledge, and cause me to understand the fear of
the Lord, show unto me the way of salvation: but (with grief I speak it) we may
sit till we freez before people will come to us on such an errand: Most people
will never send to a Minister, till the Physician leaves them, and death stands
ready to take them, and then a Minister is called to come to them to speak some
words of comfort to their languishing souls: and what hard censures are past
upon a Minister: if he will not pronounce them then to be meet partakers of
inheritance among the Saints in light, who have walked in darkness all their
life: we dare not speak peace to those to whom God speaks nothing but wrath and
indignation, lest we bring that curse upon us: in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 27.18.
27.18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of his way: what a
terrible curse would light upon us, if we should now seal you up for Gods
Kingdom, when you know not one step of the way that leads thither; let me
tell you if you die without knowledge, you die in your sins, and as death takes
thee, so shall judgment find thee: and then they that said unto the Almighty
in their life, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, they,
I say, shall hear God saying to them at their death, depart from me, I know ye
not, ye workers of iniquity; or I never knew you to this day: you that have
hated the light of knowledge, and the light of grace, shall be for ever without
the light of life. We read in the Gospel of one that went not into the Vineyard
till the 11th hour of the day, but did he refuse to go into the Vineyard when
he was called? surely no: do you think it had been a tolerable excuse for him
to have answered Christ, when he was called, It is now too late, I am an old
man, at the last part of my life: the better part of my life is spent and gone,
I can do thee but little service now, and have but a little time to get the
saving knoweldge of thy will; I will therefore shift as well as I can for that
little time that remains, as I have done to this day; therefore trouble me
not now: you see he makes no such excuse, but as soon as ever he is called
upon to know and turn to the Lord, he goes into the Vineyard: And now if God
open thine eyes in thine old age, thou will bitterly lament, that thou wast no
sooner acquainted with God and his ways, August. Meditat.
as Austin did, who meditating on the knowledge of God, brake forth into such
words as these: Alas O Lord that I knew thee no sooner, I have begun very late
to love thee, a beauty very ancient, a beauty very new: Too late have I begun;
thou ^ast within, and I sought for thee without, and have cast my self with
such violence upon these ^reated beauties, without knowledge of my Creator, to
defile thy self daily more and more.

3. Do not thou think thy condition to be dangerous, because thou art not
sensible of thy danger? persons oftentimes in the greatest danger, are least
sensible of their danger, as men that are sick of a frenzy, will sometimes
laugh and sing, and those that are stung with an asp, they lie laughing, the
poison being of that nature, as it kills them without putting them to any
present pain; these men are insensible of the dangerous estate they are in, and
their friends knowing in what condition they are, do weep to see them laugh: so
it fares with them that are sick of the frenzy of sin and ignorance, and
poisoned with the venom of the old Serpent, they are many times at the brink
of the pit of destruction, they are at hell-mouth, and do drop into hell it
self before they fear any danger, and like the Syrian soldiers that were
smitten with blindness, in the midst of Samaria, 2 Kings 6.20.
before they knew where they were: he that should by night travel over a narrow
bridge, Sapientis est, non quae ante pedes sunt modo videre, sed etiam quae
futura sunt prospice^e. Seneca.
under which were a deep river, or go upon the edge of a very steep hill, from
which if he should have fallen, he must needs be drowned in the one, and break
his neck from the other; he goes on without fear, but let him be brought back
in the morning, and showed what danger he escaped, and it will make him even to
tremble to think of the greatness thereof, and then he will stand (like a man
amazed) and wonder he should escape so iminent a danger: so all the while thou
walk in darkness, thou know not where thou go, nor whither thou art
going. An ignorant sinner is every moment ready to drop into the infernal pit,
Judge 20.34.
and when he is near to destruction, yet (like the Benjamites) he knows not
that evil is near him: But if ever the Lord open his eyes by the light of his
word and spirit, then he will stand amazed and wonder at the goodness of God
toward him, he will then tremble to think of the danger he has escaped:
therefore the Apostle calls the light of grace mavelous ^ight; because when
God brings a man out of the dungeon of darkness into the true light, 1 Pet.
2.9.
every thing is then to the poor soul very mavelous, and full of admiration.

4. thou say thou art not sensible of any danger in an ignorant estate; no
mar^el! for thou art dead: and dead men are senseless men, the dead know
nothing. Paul tells us, Ephesians. 4.18.
that those that have their understanding, darkened, are alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them; there is no life in the
soul without knowledge; spiritual knowledge is as it were, the seed of true
life in the soul, and it maintains the life thereof; and as the body is dead
without the soul, so the soul is dead without saving knowledge: therefore being
spiritually dead, thou must needs be insensible of thy danger; and so thou
think thou art in a good estate: but hear, O thou dead and sottish soul,
what the Lord says unto thee this day, Ephesians. 9.14.
out of his word; Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light: he does not say, Christ shall give thee life; but
Christ shall give thee light; i. e. the light of knowledge, if thou will awake
from thy pleasing sleep and slumber. Let me beseech you then, if you love your
souls, labor to know God betimes, even in your youth: that is a commendable
youth, that is old in grace, and savoureth of the wisdom of the Ancient of
days; happy is he whom Gods effectual grace saluteth at his Cradle, whose
spirit is Gods candle to discern youthful lusts and vanities, so as to avoid
them. If we know God when we are young, we shall not be strangers to him when
we are old: see thou that thy lamp be ready whenever the Bridegroom passes
by thee; make not that the task of thy Age, which should be the practice of thy
whole life: you know by experience, that a ship, the longer it leakes, the
harder it is to be emptied; an house, the longer it goes to decay, the worse it
is to repair; a nail, the further it is driven in, the harder it is to draw out
again: and can we persuade our selves, that the trembling joints, the dazeled
eyes, the fainting heart, and failing legs, of a decrepit and indisciplinable
old age, is able to repair the many ruins which so many years ignorance have
brought upon us? Are there not twelve hours in the day, says our Savior? If
any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, John 11.9, 10.
because he sees, the light of this World: but if a man walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him. It is no wisdom to defer to get
the knowledge of God, Non semper manet in foro pater-familias. August. Greg.
sermon. 1. de sanctis.
till old age comes, which usually brings with it a bedroll of follies to
repent of: no wisdom to post off this knowledge to the last hour: the Lord of
the Vineyard is not always in the Market to set thee a work, says Austin; and
no marvel, says another Father, if that man at the last gasp forget himself,
who in all his life neglected to remember God.



are in the highest places, and have the management of the greatest affairs,
are charged to know the Lord, and to study his Word. Who has greater affairs
than a King? yet even Kings are commanded to know the Lord: thus David charge
Solomon his son, now entering upon the Regal Dignity; And thou Solomon my son,
1 Chronicles. 28.9.
know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with
a willing mind: Kings and great Personages, are to take care of Religion, and
Gods Service, which they cannot do, without the knowledge of the Lord:
therefore God charged Moses, that the King that should rule his people after
him, should take a copy of his Law, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 191
and write it in a Book, and keep it by him, and read therein, all the days of
his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the
words of that Law, and his Statutes to do them: So God commands Joshua, the
Captain and General of the Armies of Israel: The Book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein; Josh. 1.8.
for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good
success. And according to the direction of God to Moses, Samuel, upon the
election of Saul their first King, 1 Samuel 10.25.
having declared to the people the manner of the Kingdom, wrote it in a book,
and laid it up before the Lord, where no doubt the King might repair to it, or
have a copy taken out of it, for his private instruction. Herein doubtless,
Jehojada the Priest, 2 Kings. 12.2.
instructed King Jehoash: this Book surely had lien neglected by the space of
57 years, viz. the time of Manasses and Amnon, the Father and Grandfather of
King Josiah; for in his time we read that Helkias the High Priest told Saphan
the Scribe, That he had found the Book of the Law, which he took and read,
first by himself, and afterward before the King, whose heart melted at the
hearing of it, 2 Reg. 22.8, 9.10, 11
because his Predecessors had neglected the Law, and not hearkened to the
words of that Book to do it. Thus you see it is not weighty affairs that must
hinder men from the knowledge of the Lord. Therefore Christ upbraides Nicodemus
for his ignorance; Joh. 3.10.
Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? Ignorance of God,
and of the things of God, in them that are Rulers, is a very great sin: those
that rule over others, are to defend the true Religion, and the truths of
Christ, and those that are professors thereof; now this they be not able to do,
unless they have knowledge to discern between truth and falsehood. Now, as
weighty affairs, so neither must mltiplicity of business, hinder us from
attending on the means of knowledge: to this purpose our Savior gives Martha a
check, that she was cumbred with too much worldly business, Martha, Martha,
Luke 10.41, 42.
thou art careful, and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful,
Mary has chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her. 1 Pet.
4.9. Math. 25.34.
In which speech of his, he does not simply condemn Martha, for giveing him
entertainment, and a friendly welcome (for hospitality is a commendable
quality, as appears in Abraham, Genesis 18. and Lot, Genesis 19. and the Widow of
Sarepta, 1 King. 17. and the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.) but only lets us see, that
he had rather be entertained into our hearts, than our houses; Et attente
audiri, potius quam laute tractari: He had rather have his Doctrine hearkened
to diligently, than his person feasted daintily: and therefore he tells Martha,
one thing is necessary, Tempus audiendi and tempus agendi. Calvin.
viz. to hearken to his word, whereby she might be made wise to salvation;
there is a time of getting knowledge, as well as a time of getting riches;
wherefore else do we hear the word? but that we may learn to know what to do,
and to do what we know; now as Martha and Mary be Sisters, so they must not
justle, but help one another, says Macarius; Seek first the Kingdom of heaven,
and labor after that knowledge that leads to true happiness, let every thing
have its right place. Government and ordering houshold-affairs, I condemn not,
and making provision for temporal things; but every thing must be moderated,
and reduced to the right order.

2. Thou complainest thou want time to get knowledge: is not this a vain
plea in many men? they can find time enough to be Idle, time enough to go to
the Alehouse, and be drunk, time enough to keep vain and wicked company, and to
break the Sabbath, time enough to hunt after sensual pleasures, and vain
recreations, and when carnal and profane persons meet together, how much time
will they spend in idle, vain, frothy, and rotten Communication, and yet can
find no time for, but think it a disgrace, to talk and confer of, the word of
God? the Lord commands us to keep his words in our hearts, to teach them
diligently to our children, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
to talk of them in our houses, when we sit down, when we walk by the way, when
we lie down, and when we rise up.

What! have we time enough to eat and drink, and to rise up to play, and follow
our sports and recreations? have we time enough to provide for our bodies and
for our families? have we time enough to pamper our flesh, and indulge our
lusts? and cannot we spare a little time to get saving knowledge for the good
of our immortal souls? do you not know that Christ has said, if you first
seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and take care for the
good of your souls, that God will take care for all other things for you,
Matthew. 6.32, 33.
which you stand in need of; your heavenly Father knows that you need these
things; and he has promised if you seek Gods Kingdom first, these things shall
be added to you.

he that will get knowledge, must seek for it as silver, and dig for it, as for
hidden treasure: he must take abundance of pains to obtain it.

Peter speaks, of these things men are willingly ignorant, they are slothful
and sluggish, and not willing to take any pains to get the knowledge of God:
Prove. 22.13.
the sluggard cries out, there is a Lion in the way, I shall be slain in the
streets, and therefore he will take no pains to get knowledge: mark what the
wise man says, Knowledge is easy to him that understands, Prove. 14.6. or to
him that has a mind to know the Lord; it is very easy, the yoke of Christ is
easy, and his burden is light: So that it is a groundless fear in many men to
think, that the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of salvation, is a thing
so difficult to attain: let me tell you, that you must take some pains to get
knowledge, but if you be willing to put your hands and hearts to the work, Nil
tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat.
it will the more easy, if you watch daily at wisdoms gates, and wait at the
posts of her doors, then shall you find it more easy to you, then you can
imagine; what shall men spend much time and pains to get gold and silver out of
the earth, shall covetous wretches toil and moile to get a little worldly
riches, and shall we not take a little pains to get that which is better then
all riches, for the merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver,
and the gain thereof then fine gold. Prove. 3.14. the sweet pleasure and
inestimable profit that you will reap by it, will far exceed all your pains
and labor: let me add by way of encouragement to you to take some pains to
get knowledge, that if the salvation of your souls be necessary, then the
knowledge of God is necessary, without which you cannot be saved. If therefore
a man will take heed to what he reads and hears; Incline his heart unto wisdom
and understanding, and hide the knowledge of God in his heart, and powder upon
what he reads and hears, that were the way to get knowledge. It is
incredible to those that never made trial, to what abundance of spiritual
knowledge, a poor plain man, a common and ordinary person may attain unto,
Ephesians. 3.4.
and what understanding he shall have in the mystery of Christ; if he be
diligent in the use of the means to acquire heavenly knowledge.

Belief, and the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments; we know as much as we
need to know, and as much as all the preachers of the world can tell us, and we
know, and are told, that if we can but love God with all our hearts, and our
neighbors as our selves, it is enough; and this we are instructed in, and what
need we to know any more:

Artist; if he have not skill in such a mystery, his labor will be without
success, as his undertaking was rash and inconsiderate: so in the business of
Religion, we must be acquainted with the mysteries of godliness; there are
profunda Dei, and Spiritus, the deep things of God and of the Spirit, and
though to love God with all our heart, and to love our neighbor as our selves,
be the sum of the moral precepts, yet it is necessary, that we have a more
particular knowledge then the knowledge of these generals, that we know the
particular branches of the mystery of godliness, without which we shall
neither love God with all the heart, nor our neighbor as we ought: if thou will learn a trade, thou must first understand the rules and principles of it,
and every particular branch belonging to every mystery, so if thou will have
any understanding in the mystery of Christ, thou must be acquainted with the
rules and grounds of spiritual understanding, 2 Pet. 1.8.
so thou shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ.

John 1.18.
and no man has seen him, nor can see him; and God is often said in Scripture
to hide his face, how then can he be known by such poor creatures as we are?

Moses desired God to show him the fullness of his glorious Majesty, God tells
him, the granting his request, would be very hurtful to him, Exodus 33.10.
for (says he) there shall no man see me and live: the weakness of man's
frail nature, cannot bear the infinite glory of the divine presence, but is
swallowed up with the transcendent luster of the heavenly Majesty: even as we
see the sight of the eye to be dazzeled with the brightness of the Sun
shining in his strength: or a Crystal glass, to be broken in pieces with the
strong operation of the fire; but yet there is much of God that may be seen and
known, as the Lord tells Moses. Exodus 33.22. I will put thee, says he, in the
cleft of a rock, and I will cover thee with my hand when I pass by: after, I
will take away my hand, and thou shall see my back-parts, but my face shall not
be seen: where God speaks to us of himself, as of a man having face and back,
showing us hereby, that it is impossible for any man in this mortality to know
the nature and being of the most high. We know God here but in part, like the
sight of a man in transitu, as he passes along by us, whose face we discern
not, whose back-parts only we do behold: the more exact knowledge of him is
reserved for that time, 1 John 3.2.
when being changed into his likeness, we shall see him as he is, even face to
face: but yet much of God may be seen and known in this life, which he calls
his back parts, his wisdom, goodness, mercy, grace, his long-suffering, his
faithfulness and truth, his slownesse to anger, being provoked daily by the
sins of men, his readiness to pardon iniquity, transgression and sin: these
back-parts of Jehovah are clearly revealed in the word, And when God is said in
Scripture to hide his face from his people, it is not that we should not see
him, but that we should the more earnestly seek after him: the Lord is willing
to be known unto any, that have a mind to know him: God takes no delight in
hiding himself from us, but is willing to open and manifest himself to us; God
stands not upon State, as some great Princes do, that seldom show themselves,
but think their presence and converse lesseneth their respect: the more we know
man; the more we shall understand his errors and imperfections, as well as his
excellencies; but the more we know God, the more we shall ^dmire him: none
admire him so much as the holy Angels that see most of him, Matthew. 18.10.
that always behold the face of our Father which is ^n heaven: therefore the
Lord hides not himself, as though he were unwilling to be known, but he
desires to be known by us, ^e bids us seek his face; therefore if we do ^ot
know the Lord, the cause is not in God, but in our selves, that we are not
willing to know him, nor desirous of his acquaintance.



Isaias says to them, Isai. 27.11.
It is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor: if thou art
ignorant under the means of knowledge; thou art wilfully ignorant, therefore he
that made thee, will not save thee, etc. God will not be merciful to men
because they are ignorant, what then will he do to them? Prove. 30.31.
you may read it at large. Prove. 1. For that they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of my counsel, they despised all
my reproof, therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices.

But they are ready farther to say, Christ dyed, and we hope to have some
benefit by the death of Jesus Christ, for he came into the world to save
sinners.

I answer, No. You are like to have no benefit by his death, if you abide in
ignorance; this is the condemnation, That light came into the world, and men
love darkness rather then light: men that are in love with darkness and
ignorance shall be condemned.

If you shall yet say further, that the Apostle says, that God would have all
men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. then take in the next word following, And come to
the knowledge of the truth; so that all those that will not come to the
knowledge of the truth; there is no hope of their salvation: I may say, that
God wills not their salvation, that never come to the knowledge of the truth.
But yet they hope Christ will not condemn them for their ignorance; To that
purpose consider what the Apostle says, 2 These. 1.7, 8. That the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God; let every man then take heed of this sin of ignorance, for it is
a most dangerous sin.



what God now requires at our hand; let us leave them to the Lord to whom they
stand or fall, and let us (to whom God has vouchfafed greater light, and more
means of knowledge) look to it that we walk as children of the light: Cypr.
lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Cyprian speaks well to this purpose, If my Predecessors (says he) either by
ignorance, or by simplicity, have not kept and holden that which our Lord has
taught them by his example and authority, Doctor Sanders Sermon in Genesis 20.6.
the mercy of the Lord might pardon them, but (says he) we cannot hope for the
like, having better means of instruction then they had.

And a learned Divine of ours has well observed a vast difference, between
their estate and thine, between thine ignorance, and theirs: they had but a
small enjoyment of the light of Gods word, hid from them under two bushells,
under the bushel of a Tyrannous Popish Clergy, that if any man should be able
to understand the books he should not have them, and under the bushel of an
unknown tongue, that if any one should chance to get the books he might not
understand them: whereas to thee, the light is holden forth, it is set on a
table, and on a candlestick, the books are open, the language is plain, easy
and familiar, they had eyes but saw not, because the light was kept from them;
and the land was dark, about them, as the darkness of Egypt: but thou live
as in a Goshen, where the light incompasseth thee in on all sides, where there
are burning and shining lights in every corner of the Land; therefore thy
blindness is greater, and more inexcusable; for who so blind, as he that will
not see? They wanted the light, thou shunest the light: they lived in
darkness, thou delighest in darkness: their ignorance was simple, thine is
wilful and affected; therefore though the times of their ignorance God winked
at, yet thou have no ground to presume that God will wink at thee, who
rejectest the counsel of God against thine own soul: thus he: Many things,
says Austin, were tolerable amongst them, which now are not; because, says
he, many things are tolerated in the darkness, and dawning, which are not in
the day when the Sun is up: Act. 17.30
The time of this ignorance God winked at; but now God calls upon every man,
every where, to repent.



Harpaste nescit esse caecam: subinde paedegogum suum rogat, ut migret ait,
domum esse tenebrosam. Seneca, Epist, 51. ad Lucium.
labor to discover and find out your ignorance, and be sensible of it: when a
man is sick, the Physician labors first to find out, and to discover the
Disease, before he can give any directions for the cure thereof: So in this
spiritual Disease, you must first discover and find out your ignorance. The
state of one spiritually blind, is much worse than of one naturally blind; for
he that is bodily blind, will commonly be led by some body, his servant, wife,
dog, etc. but the spiritually blind, is commonly misled by the world, the
flesh, and the devil.

1. The bodily blind will have a seeing guide, but the spiritually blind
follows his own lusts, which be blind guides, like Ahab's false Prophets, and
Rehoboam's young Counselors, and so both fall into the ditch, and danger, as
Math. 15.14.

2. The bodily blind, will acknowledge his want of fight, Genes. 27.21.
and desire to supply it by some other sense, as Isaac did; but the spiritually
blind, will not be persuaded, but that they see purely and perfectly. Thus the
Pharisees, Joh. 9.40, 41.
when Christ told them, that for judgment he was come into this world, that
they which see not might see, and that they which see, might be made blind;
they said unto him, Rev. 3 17.
What, are we blind also? So Christ tells Laodicea, Multi ad sapientiam
pervenissent, nisi se put assent jam pervenisse. Seneca.
That she was blind, but yet she knew not, that she was so.

3. The bodily blind account it a great happiness to see, but the spiritually
blind despise the Seers. Have we not great reason then to labor to be sensible
of this our spiritual blindness? Many men, says an Heathen, In ipsis sanctis
Scripturis multo nesciam plura qua^^ sciam. August. Epist. 119.
might have attained to much wisdom, had they not thought themselves to have
had wisdom enough already: As those men will never come to the Physician to be
healed, of any malady, which think not themselves to be sick; so there are no
people more unapt to be taught, and to be eulightned by God unto salvation,
than those which think they understand, and know as much as any can teach them,
and that they see of themselves, when they are altogether ignorant, and
overwhelmed in darkness. The first Lesson a good Christian, that would attain
heavenly wisdom, should learn, is, 1 Cor. 3.18. Initium scientiae est. scire
quod nescias. Fulgent. lib. Mytholog.
To deny his own wisdom: If any man will be wise, says the Apostle, let him
become a fool, that he may be wise; a man must become a fool, in respect of his
own wisdom, and become a fool for Christ's sake; and the more-of the true wisdom
a man has, the more he is sensible of his ignorance: thus Agur cries out;
Surely I am more brutish than any man, Prove. 30.2 3. Credere se sapientem
primus ad stultitiam gradus, proximus est profiter^. Petrar. de remed.
utriusque fortunae.
and have not the understanding of a man, I neither learned wisdom, nor have
the knowledge of the holy; or know the knowledge of the holy: according to the
Hebrew: have you any spark of this knowledge in you? have mean thoughts
thereof. The first step to folly, is for a man to believe himself to be wise:
the second step is to profess himself to be so, says a Wise man: If thou were
truly wise, thou would not think or say so of thy self. Agur was a man full
of heavenly wisdom, and yet he says, Surely I am more brutish than any man,
etc. It were very well, if there were as many knowing men in the World, as
there are professors of wisdom and knowledge; the wiser any man is, the more he
understands his want of true wisdom and knowledge; he does not boast of it,
but more and more breaths after it; if thou will be wise, do not think thy self
to be so.



quot dolenda, quot pudenda, quot paenitenda commiseris, how many things thou
have committed that are to be lamented, that thou art to be ashamed of, that
thou have cause to repent of; and then call thy self a wise man, if thou dare.



It is one thing to speak wisely, it is another thing to live wisely; Aluid est
sapienter loqui aliud sapienter vivere.
It is one thing to be accounted, another thing to be a truly wise man. The
Romans do pronounce Lolius and Cato for wise men, and Grecia when it
flourished, is said to have had seven wise men; now these men did not assume
this title to themselves; but possessed it, being given to them by the erring
people; and there was but one Epicurus that was wise in his own judgment, and
he was the veriest fool of all: and those wise men before mentioned, 1 Cor.
1.21.
notwithstanding all their wisdom, were ignorant of God; for so says the
Apostle, the world by wisdom knew not God.

Labor to find out the cause of thy ignorance: It is not enough to find out a
Disease, but also to find out the cause thereof is most requisite: examine thy
self how thou came to be thus spiritually blind: the blind man in the Gospel
could tell that he was borne blind; This I know, says he, Joh. 9.
that once I was blind; enquire then (being once sensible of thy blindness)
why thou do continue in thy blindness? Surely the main cause is, because
thou have not all this while gone to the Physician for eye salve, to cure thy
blindness, Jesus Christ is the great Physician of Souls, and he would have
cured thy blindness, if thou would have gone unto him.

Go to Jesus Christ, and beg of him this eyesalve; beg of him that he will
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, Revel. 3.18. Nisi sit intus Spiritus qui
doceat, nil valet doctoris lingua. August. Cathedram in Coelis habet, qui corda
docet. Hominis est monere, sed solius Dei corda movere. Macarius.
that thou may see. Physicians say this eye salve is an ointment to purge
away all filth and fluxes, and ophthalmies out of the eyes, that they may
clearly see; pray to him to make the scales of ignorance fall from thine eyes:
buy of him this eye salve, as he advises Laodicea; by buying, we can
understand nothing but begging; for what price can we pay to procure this rich
purchase? Seeing therefore we are in our selves, either stone-blind, the light
of grace being quite extinguished, or at the least blear-eyed, the light of
nature being eclipsed and obscured, so that we cannot know the things that
behoove us, and belong to our peace: Have we not then great reason to sue to
Jesus Christ the Heavenly Surgeon, for the true eye salve, viz. the
enlightening of his Spirit? and therefore it is called an Unction from the Holy
One, 1 John 2.20.
whereby we know all things. If your eyes are anointed with this eye salve,
your knowledge will be more clear than other men's, you will see most clearly
into Divine Mysteries, like a man that sees at noonday: your knowledge of God
likewise will be more sure, and more experimental; you will see the creatures
emptiness, Christ's fullness, sins misery, and graces excellency; you will know
how Christ was formed in you, and how you have conceived him in your heart, you
will know the powerful and influential workings of the Spirit upon your souls.
Gal. 4.19.
You will then have such a distinct knowledge of Gods Promises, Job 32.8.
as to be able with comfort to apply them to your own sowls; The inspiration of
the Almighty gives understanding: then shall the eyes of the blind see out of
darkness, Esaias 29.18. The blind world walks in the dark shadow of death, and
is not acquainted with this Heavenly light. Pray to the Lord with David, Lord
open mine eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
that I may see the wondrous things out of thy Law: pray (as Paul does for the
Colossians) that your knowledge may abound in all wisdom: Col. 1.9.
pray to God likewise, to open the Scriptures to you, as well as your
understandings; for the Gospel is a Mystery which has been hid from Ages and
Generations, but is now made manifest to his Saints, says the Apostle: It is
sacrum secretum, as Lyra, a holy secret; or sublime arcanum, as Calvin, Romans
16.25. Ephesians. 1.9. Ephesians. 3 9, Col. 2.2, 3. 1 Timothy 3.16.

1. In which places it is said sometime to be hidden in God; because it was
kept close in his secret purpose and eternal counsel.

2. Sometimes hidden in Christ, because he was the Storehouse in which was
laid up, all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, all those Treasures that
concerned our eternal happiness and salvation, Col. 2.3. as also, because he
was the meritorious cause of it.

3. Sometimes hidden in the Word, because that is the Fountain wherein it is
contained, whence the knowledge thereof is derived and conveyed to us.

4. Hidden from the Gentiles, for the space of many hundreds of years, and
before their illumination, by the light of the Gospel, and all the while they
served dumb Idols, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
and had not the glorious Sun of Righteousness shining to them.

5. Mysterium hoc duplex. 1. de mittendo Christo in genere. 2. de vocatone
gentium in specie, and quid his praeclarius. Zanch.
Hidden from the Jews themselves comparatively, and respectively, because it
was revealed to them, but under shadows, types, and figures, darkly, and dimly:
the Promises and Prophesies were not so easy to be understood, as now they be.
Pray then to the Lord to open your understandings, that has the key of David,
that in some measure you may be able to comprehend Divine Mysteries, that they
may not be as a sealed book unto you, Esaias 29.9, 10, 11. Pray further with
David, Psalm. 8611
Teach me O Lord thy way, and I will walk in thy truth. As God has set a
course to the Heavens with all their Hosts, the Sun, Moon, and all the Stars,
and as he has set the Sea his bounds, which he must not pass, without his
permission, yea special injunction; So he has not left man at liberty to do
what he lists, but has appointed him a way to walk in, instructing him in
the knowledge of himself: this appears, in that presently after he had made
our first Parents, Adam and Eve, he gave them diverse directions, how to order
and carry themselves

1. By sanctifying a Sabbath, and resting from their labors the seventh day,
as God did from his, Genes. 2.2, 3.

2. By dressing and keeping the Garden, Genes. 2.15.

3. By abstaining from, and not meddling with, the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, Genes. 2.17. Then after their Fall, and expulsion out of Paradise,
he taught them how to worship him, and serve him; which instructions
(doubtless) he imparted to his posterity: else what can we imagine should move
his sons Cain and Abel, Genesis 4.
to offer sacrifice: and afterward he instructed Noah, before the coming of
the Flood, to prepare an Ark wherein to preserve himself and Family, with a
certain number of all kind of creatures, whereby the species and kinds might be
preserved, and the world renewed, Genes. 6.14. ad finem. Then after the Flood,
he instructs them, what they should eat, and from what they should abstain,
Genes. 9.3, 4, Afterward he instructs Abraham, and gives him as it were an
Epitome or abridgement of his whole worship and service, saying, I am God
Almighty, walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis, 17.1. Again, in the same
Chapter, he gives him particular instructions concerning Circumcision, and in
diverse other places about other matters: and thus in a continued Series, Rank,
and Succession, he has from time to time, taught his people; first by Moses,
and afterward by his other Prophets, as he tells us, Hosea 8.12. So Micah 6.8.
He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord does require of thee,
etc. Now, if any one shall demand, where this duty is showed, he may find it,
Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. You see then that from the beginning, man has not been left
to himself, but been instructed by God in the way, wherein he should go.

Be conversant in the Scriptures, which are the rules of knowledge; he that
will be a Physician must learn the precepts that teach Physic, he that will be
a Musician must learn the rules of Music; the Orator must learn the rules of
Rhetoric, the Plough-man the rules of husbandry, and so every man the rules of
his profession, or else he shall never be a proficient in his Art or Science,
nor be accounted a Crafts-man, that is ignorant of the principles of his Craft;
even so no man can attain to the practice of those duties that belong to a
Christian, that is ignorant of the rules of the Word: he that is ignorant of
the Scriptures, is ignorant of Christ, Qai Scripturam ignorant, Christum
ignorant. Hieron. praefat. in Isaiam.
says Hierome: It is a most happy ignorance (says Hilary) which rather
deserves reward then pardon, when a man trusts to the Scriptures in that he
cannot comprehend: therefore let me exhort you to study to read the Scriptures,
they are able to make you wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. read them
frequently: it is recorded of Alphonso King of Spain, that he read over the
Bible, with Lyra's gloss and notes upon it fourteen times, notwithstanding his
other employments; and of Anthony an Egyptian Monk, August. lib. 1. de doct.
Christ. Dom. 5. post. Epiph.
of whom Austine in his first book de doctrina Christiana, says, that though
he had no learning, yet by often hearing the Scriptures read, and meditating
upon what he heard, he learned much of them without book, and attained a
competent measure of understanding and knowledge: Comparate vobis Biblia,
animarum pharmaca Chrysostom. homil. adpop. Antioch.
Chrysostom thus exhorts the people of Antioch, Get ye Bibles, the Physic of
your souls, read them of ten, for there you may find a salve for every sore, a
medicine for every spiritual malady: here is the bread of life that must feed
our hungry souls; here is the light that must direct and guide us in the way to
heaven, as Bishop Cranmer in his Preface before the Bible. The Book of God is
the treasure of knowledge, Hieron. epist. ad Paulin. Singuli libri, singula
fercula, Anbros. offic. lib. 1. cap. 22.
as Hierom speaks: Convivium sapientiae, a banquet of wisdom, so many books, so
many messes: the Scriptures are (says Doctor Sutton) like to Tagus in
Lusitania, or Ganges in India, which the Scripture calls Pishon, whose very
sand and gravel is gold; but when an ignorant man seeks Christ in them, he
falls into many Labyrinths (like the Jews) and loses himself: when he should
feast at this table, his meat becomes his poison, the savor of it kills him,
because it is the savor of death to him, when he seeks for gold, he is
blind-folded, and falls into a pit, for the veil is over his face. 2 Cor. 3.5.
that which should be his Pilot, is like an ignis fatuus, to seduce and, mislead
him; most men desire to be conversant in those Authors, that treat of good
arguments, for the ripening of their knowledge, and therefore many are
delighted in history, which doubtless is a very commendable study; and the
more comendable, if men propound to themselve, the Acts of these famous and
honorable personages, of whom they read not only to be admired, but also to be
imitated, and followed, as occasion shall be offered: Some men are so given to
the search of antiquity, and finding out of nice quirks, and quaint
distinctions, as they will take infinite toil, to read Manuscripts, and rude
dunsticall Writers, whereby they have lost even the habit of writing, and
speaking handsomely themselves: others again, are so delighted and carried
away, with a delicate smooth phrase, and fluent style, as they will vouchsafe
even to read most obscene Authors, for their matter good for nothing, but for
the dunghill; to learn a good phrase, and composition of speech. Now if you
desire both excellent matter, and eloquent words, then read the Scriptures
diligently, and when you have so done, tell me what learning there lacks? To
begin with that which every one makes most reckoning and account of, and (how
deservedly I will not dispute) I mean the Law; if ever thou meanest to be a
good Lawyer, have recourse to the Law of God, the ground of all humane Laws;
and observe what Laws were moral, and perpetual, binding all people at all
places at all times? what ceremonial, concerning the Jews till the coming of
Christ, and what judicial, free either to be observed or let alone, according
to the discretion of every Lawgiver, and the state of his Country, whereto he
gives or makes Laws; in the knowledge of all these, the 5 Books of Moses will
furnish thee; Secondly, if thou art not of such an aspiring spirit, but can
as well be contented to wear a rugge gown, as a velvet Jacket; and do esteem
more thy mind then thy body, and therefore thou have set up thy rest to be a
Philosopher, then do but say, what part thou art addicted to, and there it is
ready for thee: if moral Philosophy, read the book of the Proverbs: if natural
Philosophy, read the book of Ecclesiastes, and some Chapters of Job: if the
Metaphysics, read the book of the Canticles, or if thou will be an Antiquary,
there thou may find what was done, as soon as any thing was done: the age of
the world, the time of the flood, the destruction of Sodom, the time of the
Israelites going down to Egypt, and coming up again, their being carried into
Babylon; the time of their abode there, and coming back again, or if you desire
to see the Acts of good and bad Kings; the diversity of Gods dealing with them,
the books of the Kings and Chronicles, will give you full satisfaction: in a
word, if you will make but the Law of God contained in the Scriptures, the
Looking-glass of your lives, you should be thoroughly furnished, both how to
speak, and how to live: therefore for the obtaining of all kind of most
excellent knowledge; it is most necessary to read the holy Scriptures: this
made David wiser then his Teachers, wiser then the Ancients (old men are
presumed to be the wisest) and wiser then his enemies.

very difficult, and hard to be understood; Which men that are unlearned, and
unstable, 2 Pet. 3.38
are apt to wrest to their own destruction. We are ignorant, and cannot
understand them.

Mat. 11.25.
our Savior tells us, that he hides these things from the subtle, and
opens them to the simple.

2. Let not the seeming difficulty of the Scriptures keep thee from reading and
studying them; you have heard, it gives wisdom to the simple; and David tells
us further, the Commandment of the Lord is pure, Psalm. 19.9.
enlightening the eyes, he does not say it blinds them that read it, and
could see before, it enlighteneth them that were blind before: Some say, of the
Beryl, a certain precious stone, that it has an especial virtue to preserve
the eyesight; whether this be so, or no, I know not: but this I am sure, that
the word of God is both a light to our eyes and to our feet; yea, though we sit
in darkness, and in in the shadow of death, yet it will give us both spiritual
light, and life, Greg. in Ezekiel. 47.
guiding our feet into the way of peace. Gregory tells us, that the Scriptures
are in some places so deep, that an Elephant may swim, and in other places so
shallow, as a Lamb may wade: and Austin tells us, in some places it is plain
and easy, that the simple might love it, and in others hard and obscure, lest
the subtle might loath it; Quae aliis lociso bscure and ambigue traduntur, in
abiis plan e and perspicue explicantur, Basil.
some places are hard and difficult to exercise the learned, and others are
easy to allure the unlearned to the study of them: and Basil says, that those
things which in some places; are obscurely and doubtfully delivered, are in
other places plainly and pespicuously explained.

All things needful and necessary to be known to salvation, are so revealed, as
they may be understood in the Scriptures, or if there be any hardness, it is
either in the hearts of the readers, John 8.47
or hearers, rather then either in the words or matter of Scripture. And
Chrysostom tells us, that it is very probable, that therefore the Scriptures
were penned, by Publicans, Fsher-men, Tent-makers, Shepherds, and Neat herds,
to the end that Artificers, Householders, Plough-men, Widows, Boys and Girls,
and unlearned women might read, and understand them.

3. It is a duty commanded by God, that thou should study the Scriptures,
and be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, Col. 1.9.
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; as it is vanity to enquire into
what God has not revealed, so it is great unthankfulness, tot to study the
Scriptures, Romans 15.4
which were written for our learning, as Paul says.

Object. But our adversaries, and the enemies of Scripture will tell us, that
Heretics abuse the Scripture.

Resp. If any do abuse the Scriptures, the fault is in themselves, not in the
Scripture, there is nothing but wholesome food, unless thou (spider-like) by
ill apprehension, or mis-application turn it into poison, and what if heretics
do abuse the Scriptures; must Christians therefore be afraid to meddle with
them? because wine and strong drink are abused by some, must they therefore be
used by none? because the Sun sometime hurts sore eyes, shall none have
liberty to look upon it?

Be diligent in hearing the word preached, wait at wisdoms gates: by hearing
the word preached, we are prepared for the knowledge of God: Incline your ears
to hear, and your hearts to understand; be swift to hear, as James speaks, it
is the property of a wise man to hear; a wise man will hear; and increase
learning: Prove. 1.5.
the Queen of Sheba came a great way to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and yet
many now adays will not go from their houses to hear the wisdom of a wiser
then Solomon. What shall we say to such as think themselves wise enough
already, they know as much as their Minister can teach them? Solomon says,
Prove. 26.12.
there is more hope of a fool, of a simple fool, then of such proud fools: let
them not be offended, to be so styled, for Gods Dictionary affords them no
better titles; there is a great necessity of hearing the word preached, we must
first hear, before we come to see: Psalm. 48.8. Sanet itaque auditus oeulum qui
turbatus est, ut serenus videat, quem turbatus non potuit, Bern. Cant. Sermon. 48.
As we have heard, so we have seen, says the Prophet, We lost much of our
knowledge, by not hearkening to the Lord, and we must recover it again by
obedient hearing of it: by hearing, we learn how to help our eyesight, that
the eye being made clear, it may see the Lord, whom it cannot see so long as it
is troubled. Gregory Nyssen has this observation, saying, that Moses of set
purpose caused the Hebrews to wear Earrings, giving them thereby to
understand, that their beauty and grace was in an obedient ear.

Non possum unum cagitare, quin trium fulgore confundor, nec tria p^ssum
dicere, quin subito ad unum referor. Greg. Nazian.
and too wonderful for thee, in earthly kingdoms, there he, mysteria regis,
which it is better many times to be ignorant of, then to know, as he knew well,
that being come to the Court of a great King, being asked by the King wat he
should do for him, told him that his desire was to know none of his secrets:
indeed there are some, mysteria Dei, that are, inscrutabilia, as Job 11.7, 8,
9. Can thou by searching find out the Almighty to perfection? It is as high
as heaven, what can thou do? deeper than hell, what can thou know? the
measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the Sea: there be
many things in the nature of God, as we cannot find out, as also concerning the
subsistence of three Persons in one entire Essence, of which Justin Martyr
says, he would believe it was so, because the Scripture taught and told him
so; but how it should be so, he could neither himself find, nor would he have
others too curiously to search: but though there be some mysteria regis, that
cannot clearly be known, yet there are mysteria regni, and these are necessary
to be known: To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven,
Luke 8.10.
says Christ to his Disciples: things revealed are for us, and for our
children. It pleases God out of his goodness to propound many things touching
the knowledge of himself to be believed, and not questioned, which
nowithstanding might naturally be known.



intellectum nostrum excedere; to these we are ordained, therefore we must
believe them: and it helps to the true knowledge of God; for we never know
God truly, till we know him to surpass whatsoever we can know or think of him.

2. Because otherwise, every man would teach and maintain what seemed true to
himself. This confuteth the error of Simonides, who said, that it did decere
hominem humana tantum, and mortalem mortalia sapere, Now the truth of faith and
reason are not contrary one to another.

1. The verity of Christian Faith, exceeds that of humane reason, but it is
not contrary to it, says Aquinas, the reason is, because nothing is contrary
to truth, but falsehood; therefore whatsoever things are known true naturally,
they cannot be contrary to Divine truth.

2. The same teacher will not teach contrary Doctrine, especially such a
teacher as God is: but God taught those things that are naturally known;
therefore they are not contrary to those things that are known by a
supernatural revelation, and received by Faith.

3. God would not be the Author of contrary knowledges, and these would hinder
the one the other, whereas they do not hinder, but help rather: therefore the
knowledge or verity of faith, cannot be contrary to the verity of reason: Illud
quidem quod veritas patefacit libris V. sive N. Testamenti, nullo modo potest
adversum esse. Ergo. August. Naturalia mutari non possunt, and contrariae
opiniones eidem inesse non possunt.
Indeed many mysteries of faith do exceed reason, but are not contrary to it;
and therefore whatsoever is brought out of natural reason, against the
documents of faith, it cannot be of the nature of infallible demonstrations,
but mere cavils and sophistications. Duplex est veritas divinorum, There is a
double verity of things divine, the one our reason may reach, the other it
cannot, that it may reach is probable, the other demonstrative; the one we must
prove by the other: Sicuti minus nota per notiora, As things less known, by
things more known: by the books of holy Scriptures, by the books of old
Philosophers, and by miracles; The first book considers God simply in
himself; the second the creatures, as they proceed from him; the third, as they
are again referred to him.

Be not then too curious in searching after hidden secrets concerning God:
Curiosity (says a learned man) makes more offenders in prison, then learned
in Schools, Nich. Caussin. holy court.
and ever the desire to know what God would have hidden, is paid with ignorance
of ones self: The Statue of Curiosity is on a moving Globe; what more
inconstant? it is full of wings, what lighter? its sprinkled all over with
eyes, what more watchful? its filled with ears, what more industrious in the
discovery of things? it has a mouth perpetually open, for is is no sooner
filled by the ears, but emptied by the mouth: its lodging is at the sign of
the Vacuum, for what is more vain? its attire is spiders webs, what more
frivolous? its table and viands is smoke, what more slender and hungry? her
officers are many liars and impostours, for such people are its favorites:
before it a certain itch of knowledge goes, Melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam
temeraria scientia. Aug. in verb. Apost. sermon. 20.
for it is the ordinary messenger thereof; at her right hand stands opinion,
for it is it that deceives her; at the left tattle, it is that which instructs
her; after her follows disturbance of spirit, ignorance, and misery, for it
is his inheritance in the end: Thus he. I shall conclude this with that of
Augustine; Faithful ignorance, says he, is better than rash knowledge.

Marcella a Hieronymo saepe quaerebat, non ut contenderet. sed ut quaerendo
disceret earum quaestionum solutiones quas opponi posse intelligebat. Hieron.
in prooem. Epist. ad Galat.
and yet thinks he has no need of the counsel of others, is no better than a
beast among men: If thou read the Scriptures, and can not understand
without an interpreter, go to Ministers, or experienced Christians, to any that
are learned in Gods Word, to know the meaning of it, as men do to Lawyers in
difficult Law-cases to be resolved by them: God gives more knowledge to some
than to others, that they might as Conduit pipes, pour out to others. It was
the practice of the Disciples in many things wherein they were ignorant, to
come to Christ, and desire to be instructed by him: as Math. 13.36. they say
unto him, Declare to us the Parable of the tares: and Mark 9.11. Why say the
Scribes, that Elias must first come? So likewise Nicodemus says, How can these
things be? Joh. 3.9. So the Eunuch to Philip, Of whom speaks the Prophet this,
of himself, or of another? Act. 8.34. When you read and hear the word, and
study and meditate upon it, and yet remain ignorant in many points, have
recourse then to your Minister, and Gods Messenger, whose mouth the Prophet
tells you, must preserve knowledge; you must seek the Law at his mouth. This
Austin tells us, was one cause, Vt diligentiam praestemus inquirendi potius,
quam temeritatem affirmandi. August.
why some things in the Scriptures were so hard; that we may rather show
diligence of enquiring, than rashness of affirming. Pythagoras says, that
those were the best of his Scholars, and the greatest Proficients in
knowledge, that were the most inquisitive, and asked the most questions. Yet
such is the sottishness of many people, that they will remain grossly
ignorant in many things, rather than they will ask questions to betray their
ignorance. (...). Heracl.
Sick persons are not ashamed to tell the Physician what their Disease is;
neither is it good to hide ignorance, but to bring it forth that it may be
healed, says Heraclitus: when John Baptist's disciples were infected with
envy, and repined at Christ, that he should outstrip and excel their Master
with the people, as is evident by the complaint they make, Joh. 3.26. where
they come unto him, saying, Rabbi, or Master, He that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, and baptizedst, behold now he baptizeth
more than thou, and all men come unto him: Hereby the holy Baptist perceiving
them to be infected with ignorance and infidelity, he sends them to school to
Christ, to correct their ignorance, that they might hear the words of his
wisdom; to correct their incredulity, they might see his Works of wonder:
therefore two of his disciples are sent to Christ with this question: Art thou
he that should come, Luke 7.19.
or shall we wait for another? Some think that John Baptist moves this doubt
on the behalf of himself; but this could not be: for first, John Baptist could
not be so incredulous, but believe what was testified by God the Father from
Heaven at his Baptism: Mat. 3.17.
This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Yea he testified of
him before he baptized him, and had born this testimony, That he was not worthy
to carry his shoes after him. Mat. 3.11. Joh. 1.29.
and again; Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. Now
John Baptist could not doubt of Christ, and give such large testimony of him;
nor was John inconstant and unsettled, like a reed shaken with the wind, as our
Savior testifies of him. Thus Elisha knew, and was assured, that his Master
Elias was taken up into Heaven, and yet for the satisfaction of the children of
the Prophets in that point, he is at last contented, 2 Kings 2.17.
that they shall send fifty men to seek him by the space of three days in the
mountains: So John Baptist, knowing his disciples to be too much infected with
the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, by reason of their too much
familiarity and correspondency that they had one with the other; he sends
them therefore to Christ, to be better instructed, and that they might be
satisfied, both concerning his person, that he was true man, their eyes telling
them, that he had the dimensions and natural properties of a true humane body;
and true God too, working such wonders as could not be done, without the finger
of God; and also for his office, that he was a most absolute Physician, both of
body and soul, yea the very Messiah and Savior of the World. Thus the
Publicans, the Soldiers, and the People, come to John Baptist, and say to him,
Master what shall we do? Luke 3.10, 12, 14.
being ignorant they come with a desire to learn of him; and here they ask a
profitable question: they ask not what God did before he made the World? what
Pharaohs Daughter, or the Queen of Sheba's names were? whether Solomon was
saved or not? whether Jonas were ever at Nineveh before he went thither to
preach? whether ever the Virgin Mary had any more children than Christ? but
they go plainly to the point, to enquire about a matter needful for them to
know: What shall we do to avoid the wrath, and enjoy the favor of God?

Thus you see it is our duty, not to conceal, Etiamsi senes magis decet
docere, quam discere; magis tamen decet discere, quam ignorare. Gregor.
but to discover our ignorance: To this purpose, one of the Ancients has a
good saying; Albeit it becomes old men rather to be teachers than learners,
yet it is more comely for them to learn, than to be ignorant. If a Minister be
well seen in Physic, or in the Law, his house shall be frequented and made
oraculum civitatis; but for Divinity, few will trouble him: which shows, that
men have more care of their bodies and goods, than of their souls. Let me
entreat you to frequent much the company of those that are godly-wise, such as
have the true knowledge of God and Christ in them; Prove. 13.20.
he that walks with wise men, shall be wise, says Solomon, but a companion
of fools shall be destroyed. The Queen of Sheba pronounced Solomon's servants
happy, which continually stood before him to hear his wisdom: though wisdom be
condemned by the foolish world for madness, Math. 11 19.
yet wisdom is justified, or commended of her children. Associate thy self with
the godly-wise, and thou also shall become more wise.

be thankful for that little: I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel,
Psalm. 16.7.
says David; if thou have received any glimpse of the saving knowledge of God
in Christ, then bless the Lord who has given thee counsel, and made thee to
understand aright: he that is thankful for a little, shall have more. It is
just with God to suffer their understandings to be darkened, who are not
thankful for the light. It is charged upon the Heathens, that when they knew
God, Romans 1.21
they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened: Unthankfulness for light
received, makes way for darkness, blindness, and ignorance.

Psalm. 25.9. Prove. 11.2. Jam. 4.8. Luke 1.53.
with the lowly there is wisdom, God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble; he fills the hungry with good things: Pride keeps a man far from
God, and makes him unfit to come near him, that which brings a man near is
humility, without humility it may be said to us, as Didimus said to proud
Alexander, that we want vessels to receive Gods gifts and graces: Hoc est
humilitatis miraculam ut elatio deorsum, humilitas sursum rendat. Aug. de
Civit. 4. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 13.
for as full vessels will hold no more liquor, so a soul stuffed with pride,
and vain glory, cannot receive in, nor hold Gods gifts and graces: the proud
shut their windows, and will not receive in the light of saving knowledge: God
is not so prodigal of his grace, as to cast it in upon those that are not
willing to entertain it; heavenly mysteries are hid from the prudent, but
revealed unto babes. This is a wonder of humility, (says Augustine) that pride
tends downward:, humility upwards: the more true knowledge a man has, the more
he is sensible of his want of knowledge; and that which he has, is nothing to
what he wants:

Quest. Now peradventure some may step in and ask me, what shall we do with our
knowledge, having attained to a competent measure thereof?

Resp. I shall show you what is to be done with it.

do what you know: put in practice what you know. In Paradise there was a Tree
of Life, as well as a Tree of Knowledge; and as one says well; Romans 2.20 Aliud
est habere legem Dei in cord. Aliud habere cor in lege; legem in cord habent,
qui veritatem sciunt, cor in lege habent, qui veritatem diligunt.
One apple of the Tree of Life, is worth twenty of the Tree of Knowledge. We
read in Scripture that there is a form of Knowledge, as well a form of
godliness: A form of knowledge is nothing else but an Idaea of truth floating
in the brain, that has no influence on the heart or life; like a Winters Sun
which shines, but warms not: knowledge is as the eyes to direct us, practice as
the hands and feet to perform that direction; knowledge alone is as the eyes
without feet and hands: and practice without a solid knowledge, is as strong
legs and nimble hands in a blind man: light and life are best together; if
naked knowledge be sufficient, (...).
then the Devil is a most perfect creature, who has one name from the
greatness of his knowledge: all men in the world do come short of him in the
knowledge of good and evil, he knows good, but not to love and seek it; he
knows evil; but not to hate and flee from it; his actions and affections are
set close unto his knowledge, (as Devils are called understanding spirits, Ephesians.
6.^2.
so also they are styled spiritual wickedness) his serpentine subtilty has
purchased him the name of an intelligent spirit, but his wickedness, calls him
Satan, an enemy to God. It is said of the Cherubins, that there were hands
under their wings. Ezekiel. 1.8.
The word Cherubin signifies light, intimating, where there is the light of
knowledge* there should be hands to put that light into practice. The Egyptians
in their Hieroglyphics painted a tongue, and an hand under it, to show that
knowledge and speech is good, when that which is known and spoken, John 13.17.
is put in practice. If you know these things (says our Savior) happy are you
if you do them, It is nothing for one to have the Trumpet at his lips, (as
Gideons soldiers) who has not the Torch in his hand, says a Father; Greg.
Naae.
the voice of Athanasius was a thunderclap, and his life a lightning flash,
says he; because words never thunder well, if examples enlighten not. True
wisdom is a prudence of works, not of words, says Cyprian. He that knows to
do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. It is a great sin not to know what
thou do, Jam. 4.17.
a greater not to do what thou know, says Ambrose, Grave est peccatum non
scivisse quod facias, gravius non fecisse quod scias. Ambr. de offic. lib. 2.20.
for as one says at the last day, we shall not be demanded; Quid legimus sed
quid egimus, nec modo quid diximus, sed quomodo viximus; what we have read, but
what we have done; nor so much what we have spoken, as how we have lived.
Bernard. Knowledge and practice must go together; for else, as the saying is
true amongst the Philosophers, that power is to none effect which is never
produced into act. So it is as true in Divinity, that it is a vain and idle
intention, Frustra est potentia quae nunquam producitur in actum. Scientia
contemplativa and practica, contemplativa quae docet ies sibi subjectas scire
tantum, and contemplari; cujus finis est ipsa cognitio, and haec sufficit in
Mefaphysicis, Physicis, and Mathematicis: altera practica, seu activa dicitur,
quae non s^lum d^cet scire, sed agere and operari aliquid eorum, quae
cagnoscimus; hujus finis est actio, and haec requiritur in disciplinis, Ethicis
Oeconomicis, Politicis. Perter. Physic. lib. 1. cap. 5. and August. 83. Quest.
that is never put in execution. The end of knowing Gods will, is to do it.
There is say the Philosophers, contemplative and practical knowledge,
contemplative or speculative is that which teaches a man to understand things
in their own nature, and only to contemplate, whose end is bare knowledge; and
this is sufficient in Metaphysics, Physics, and Mathematics: Practical or
active knowledge, is that which not only teaches a man to know, but to do the
things which he knows: the end of this knowledge is action, and this is
required in Disciplines, Ethics, Oeconomicks, Politics, and Religion
consists not in a bare naked profession, but in action and practice; all the
bells of Aarons garments ring out a loud peal of practice, and it is the common
tenent of all the Fathers, that Religion consists not so much in the fine
fair leaves of knowledge, profession, and good words; as in the sound and
savoury fruits of practice and good works. Yea, even some of the Heathen have
taught this truth: for Aristotle affirms that felicity or happiness
consists not in the Theory or Knowledge, but in the practice of virtue: a man
that has knowledge without practice, is like a man that carries a Lanthorn
behind him, to give light to others, but breaks his own shins, or like Noabs
Carpenters, Lyraglos. in Jac. 1.22.
that made an Ark to save others, but were drowned themselves. Lyra observes,
that as that Physic is vain that does not purge the bad humors, and procure
the health of the body, so that knowledge is no better that makes no amendment
upon the soul. Aristotle in his Ethics says, that such as content themselves
with the naked knowledge of moral virtue, and go no farther, caring not to
practice it, are not unlike to such, as consult with, and ask the advice of
Physicians concerning their bodily diseases, but care not for having them
administer or apply any thing to them to cure or recover them; and therefore no
marvel though the one retain unsound, unhealthy bodies, notwithstanding they
know their diseases; and the other have the corruptions and maladies of their
minds and souls remaining, though they have been discovered to them: to put in
practice what we know of Christ, is one great evidence of our love to him. John
14.21. Qui habet: in memoria, qui servat in vita; qui Sermonibus, qui Servat in
moribus; qui habet audiendo, qui servat faciendo. Aug. tract. 75. in Johan.
He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
says our Savior; upon which words one of the Ancients has this meditation,
he that has them in his memory, and keeps them in his life, which has them
in his speeches, and keeps them in his manners, which has them by hearing,
which keeps by doing them; how justly then are they here to be censured, that
think Religion to be nothing else but matter of speculation and discourse, and
that there is little else required of a Christian then an ear and a tongue? of
such Parisiensis complained in his time, when he said that many men were Solis
auribus Christiani; let me tell you, as we must have ears to hear, heads to
understand, hearts to believe, and tongues to confess, so we must have hands
to practice, else we shall but deceive the world with a vain show of of
profession, and deceive our selves without hope of salvation; it is not the
knowers and the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified; Jam. 1.21.
It is not every one that says to Christ, Lord, Lord, and so scrape
acquaintance with him that shall enter into heaven, but he that does the will
of my Father which is in heaven, says our Savior, etc. Psalm. 7.21.22.
And if to know and do the will of God, be the way to true happiness, this
then confutes the dreams and conceits of the ancient Philosophers, being much
troubled about this mattter, scarce two sects concurring in opinion; it also
sets down a speedy course, and short cut to find out what we all seek, though
in a different and diverse sort: and of most men Seneca says truly, that it
fares with men in this pursuit, as it does with men going to Physic, who
oftentimes seek, and pay dear for that which does them but little good; whereas
it is at home growing in their gardens, that would cure them, if they knew but
the virtue of it, and how to apply it: so (says he) many men weary themselves
in seeking felicity without themselves, whereas that that must lead them to
happiness, is within themselves; so I say true happiness consists not in
any outward thing, but in the knowledge and practice of Gods will, upon which
consideration Austine has this meditation, The Kingdom of heaven (says he)
is set to sale, stand thou not upon the price of it, it is worth much more then
thou shall pay for it, give but thy self for it, and thou shall have it. -- But
thou will say, thou art not good enough for it; and being evil, it will not
receive thee: he tells thee further how to help that, by giving thy self to it,
thou shall become both better to thy self, and fitter for it: if thou demand
farther how thou shall give thy self to it; I answer, by putting thy self to
School to Jesus Christ, and learning, and taking forth this one Lesson of
knowledge, and doing the will of God.

Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.9. Luke 17.10.
Here we know but in part, and our Savior himself says to his disciples, say
ye when you have done all these things which are commanded you, We are
unprofitable servants.

Praecepta Dei imperfecte tantum implentur in via; perfect, non nisi in
patria. Aquin.
Aquinas says truly, Gods precepts are imperfectly fulfilled in this life,
perfectly only in heaven; and of this imperfect obedience, God in mercy
accepts, dealing with his children, as Augustus Coesar was wont to do with
his young soldiers, commending their service not only when they performed what
they should, but also when they endeavored what they could: so Bernard tells
us, God reputes that for being done, Illud pro facto reputat deus, quod homo
quidem vere voluit, sed non valuit adimplere. Bern.
which man truly willed to to do, but was not able to perform: and now under
the Gospel, God measures men's actions, not by the thing done, but by the mind
of the doer; yea, the Lord is so well pleased with our willingness of doing
his will upon the knowledge of it revealed unto us, that it pleases him
sometimes to accept and account that as done, which indeed never was done: as
appears, Heb. 11.17. where it is said, that Abraham offered up Isaac, whereas
the plain Text, Genesis 22.12. assures us that he offered him not: obtulit
voluntate non re. Gorran. obtulit i. e. offerre voluit; He offered him, that
is, he was willing to have offered him; Lyra.
nisi divinitus impeditus and prohibitus esset; unless he had been hindered
and forbidden by God: and therefore the Lord accounted it as done, and the
Spirit of God guiding the hand of the Apostle, in writing this Epistle, bids
him set it down as done; and where there is but a little done with a willing
mind, 2 Cor. 8.11, 12.
he accepts according to what a man has, and not according to what he has
not; therefore the poor Widow that cast in but two mites into the Treasury, is
said by our Savior to cast in more than the Rich men that cast in their gifts
out of their abundance: they cast in out of their great plenty, and she out of
her penury had cast in all the living that she had: this little of hers, Luke
21.1, 2, 3.
is not Arithmetically, but Geometrically more, not simply in respect of the
gift, but comparatively in regard of the mind of the giver, and the acceptance
of the receiver, who measures the mind, not the matter, the quality of the
giver, not the quantity of the gift; the Rich men peradventure, out of their
ambition, as well as from their abundance, gave much; but she out of her penury
for mere devotion and pity, consecrated her little All to the service of him
from whom she acknowledged her self to have received all that she had, and for
whose sake, she showed her self willing to part with all again, doing it from
her affection, and not from affectation; Affectus saepe numero imponit nomen
operi. Ambros. Luke 1.6.
The affection many times imposes the name on the work: An example in this
kind, we have in Zachary and Elizabeth, the Parents of John Baptist, of whom it
is said, they were both just before God, and walked in all the commandments of
God without reproof: not but that God could have reproved them in the rigor of
his justice; Incedentes 1. viventes Beza. versantes Erasmus.
but because they endeavored to walk in all the Gommandments of God
blameless, the Lord would not, to show the riches of his mercy, and to
encourage others to follow their example: they walked in them all, they desired
no exemption from any, or toleration and dispensation for the breach of any;
but so far forth as God enabled them, they endeavored to keep them all
blameless, or without reproof. And to this purpose, Augustine says, that
peccatores conversi non sunt amplius peccatores: not that they have not sin
remaining in them; for so the best shall have so long as they are in this
world, but because sin reigns not in them, it shall not be imputed to them.
Thus the Scripture testifies of Noah, Genesis 6.9. Joh. 1.47.
that he was a man perfect in his generation; and of Nathanael, that he was a
true Israelite in whom was found no guile. Thus you see that it is not enough,
that we know what we ought to do, but also that we do what we know. You know
the doom that is passed on that Steward, Luke 12.47.
or Servant that knew his Masters will, and did it not, he should be beaten
with many stripes.

Having attained Heavenly knowledge, Keep sound wisdom and discretion, Prove.
3.21.
is ^he advice of the Wise man; the loss of heavenly knowledge is the greatest
loss, because thereby you lose all those excellent things, which the knowledge
of God pro^ureth for you. Men that have great parts and much knowledge, and
afterward lose ^t, may be compared unto those, that are ^itty to get money,
and spend it as fast as ^hey get it, being at the years end, not a ^eny the
better for all they have gotten: ^nowledge cannot be gotten without much ^ains;
and therefore let it not be easily ^ost, it will be your shame to lose that
carelessly, the obtainment whereof, has cost you dear; as men that have their
eyesight are very careful to preserve it, so we ought as carefully to preserve
knowledge, which is the eye of the soul. The eye of the body is very tender,
therefore God has guarded it with lids, which close and open most speedily at
the pleasure of a man. So it is with the eye of the mind, and therefore we
should much esteem the good that may preserve it, and carefully shun the evil
that may hurt it. You that are Parents will often call upon your children to be
good husbands, and keep together, and not to waste and squander away what you
have given them, or shall leave them; and you that are Christians should often
call upon your souls, to keep good judgment and knowledge, and not to lose it;
And let me tell thee, i^ thou keep sound wisdom and discretion, it will also
keep and preserve thee from many corporal dangers, and spiritual falls.

see what good thou have gotten by thy knowledge: ar^ thou wise? thou must be
wise for thy self, what ever thou know, thou must labor to know it for thy
good, as Eliphaz speaks, Job 5. ult. A wise man will labor to know the
goodness of every thing: The eye of the body can see any thing but it self;
but it i^ the glory of heavenly knowledge (which i^ the eye and beauty of the
soul) that it sees it self by an admirable reflection upon it self: Thus thou
should be often thinking with thy self, God has opened the eyes of my
understanding, he has shined into my heart, giving me the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; he has given me a
more piercing head, a more sublime speculation, a deeper insight and
penetration into divine Mysteries, than to many others: Oh! what am I the
better for it? do I find my heart more lifted upwards, my affections more
raised from the earth, and set on heavenly things? It is a spice of Atheism,
to look at any thing as good in its own nature, and not to extract some good
out of it, and get some good by it. How few men do worship God as they know
him? they can say that God is good, and yet never love nor seek him; that he is
just and powerful, yet fear not to offend him; that he is wise, yet submit they
not to his wisdom; that he is omniscient, and yet they breed, and feed wicked
thoughts in their hearts: they believe there is an hell for sin and sinners,
and yet go on in the way of sin: and that there is laid up a Crown of glory in
Heaven for well-doing, and yet they follow the multitude to do evil: such
knowledge as this, is no better than Atheism, and Infidelity. That is the best
knowledge that reduces all duties, promises, and threatenings, to our persons,
joying affection to light, and moving the heart according to things known, and
out of all, draws actions that serve to express that knowledge, doing all as
in the presence of the glorious Sun of Righteousness: where this care is, sin
finds a bridle, and grace a spur. They who walk in this light, enjoy the
unspeakable fruits thereof, whilst others are as void of them, as they are
strangers to the light it self.

Labor to grow in knowledge, according to the advice of the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3.18. do not show your selves children, by thinking you know enough already;
for he that thinks he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to
know: Brethren, be not children in understanding, but in understanding be men,
1 Cor. 14.20. the Apostle commends the Corinthians for abounding in
knowledge; 2 Cor. 8.7 Col. 1.9.
and gives thanks for the Colossians upon the like account. Solon was wont to
say, I grow old, always learning many things. It is written of David Chytreus
a German Divine, when he was even upon the point of death, that he raised up
himself upon his pillow, as well as he was able, to hear the discourses of his
godly friends that sat by him, and said, that he should die the more
comfortably, if he might die learning something. There is none so cunning in
Christ's School, but ^ay learn more: even David a prime Scholar, ^ of the
highest form, desires to be further ^nformed, Lord teach me thy ways, Ps.
86.11.

And so Solomon his son, though he were ^he wisest King amongst men, and the
wisest man amongst Kings, yet he pray^th to God for a wise and an understanding
^eart, 1 Kings 3.9.
that he might discern between good and ^ad. David was no Novice in Christ's
School, or mean Proficient in the study or ^ractise of Piety, he was surely a
man of much knowledge, and had many excellent ^atural parts, which doubtless
he augment^d by art being added unto them, and im^roved both by many years
study and in^ustry; nay (which was more) he was ^oubtlesse, endowed with a
great measure ^f grace from above; for he confesses and ^^ankfully
acknowledges that he had more ^nderstanding than his teachers, and
out-strip^ed all the Ancients, Psalm. 119.99, 100. yet ^ven he, thus excellently
qualified by nature and art, yea even as it were perfected by ^ace, still
prays for direction and instruction ^^ the ways of God, Psalm. 119.27, 33,
34, ^5, 36, 64, 66, 73. That we can attain to ^^ perfection of knowledge here
in this life, ^any places might easily be produced plain^^ to prove it to us: 1
Cor. 13.9. We know (...) part, and prophecy in part, and verse 12. Now we see
through a glass darkly, as old men see through spectacles: and Bernard says,
that here we see per angusta foramina, through narrow auger-holes, and non per
aperta ostia, and not through opened doors. Peter tells us plainly, 2 Pet 3.19
Theologia sive scientia and intelligentia viatorum inchoata tantum and
modificata dicitur, queniaem heminibus per modum and mensuram datur. Polan.
Synt.
that his beloved brother Paul, had written to the Jews, according to the
wisdom given unto him: Let us get as much knowledge as we can, we may say as
Job does, Lo these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of
him, and the thunder of his power, who can understand? Job 26.14. Therefore
labor to be filled with the knowledge o^ God: It is said of our Savior
Christ, that he was filled with wisdom, Luke 2.40. and the child grew and waxed
strong in spirit, and wa^ filled with wisdom, and the grace of God wa^ with
him: as he grew in age; so he increased in understanding, and the other gifts
of the mind. If any shall say he was wisdom it self Joh. 1.14. and Col. 3. and
how then could he be said to increase in wisdom and knowledge?

I answer, There was in him, a doubl^ wisdom: vid. his uncreated wisdom, qua^
tenus deus, as God, and his infused wisdom quatenus homo, as man: Now to the
fir^^ there could be no addition, or augmentation, he being even perfect wisdom
it self but in regard of the second, he increased, i^ sapientia, and naturali,
and acquisita, in nat^ral and acquired wisdom: in natural wisdom, the organs of
his body growing apt to exercise it, and express it, and in acquired wisdom,
getting daily by observation, more experience of things, and it is most
certain, as man he was in his infancy ignorant as other children are, and grew
in knowledge, in the same manner they do, though in an extraordinary measure;
the more therefore you increase in knowledge, the more you are like to Christ,
the storehouse of wisdom and knowledge. Dan. 22.4.
It was prophesied by Daniel concerning the latter days, that many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

See that you communicate your knowledge unto others: The ends of men that
desire knowledge, and use means to obtain it are diverse, says one. Some desire
knowledge only, that they may know, which is curiosity, some desire knowled,
that that they may be known, which is pride and vanity: Some only to make an
advantage of their knowledge, which is covetousness: Some again to edify
themselves, and to communicate their knowledge, and to do good to others, and
this is true wisdom. Bernard. Luke 11.33.
No man when he has lighted a candle, puts it in a secret place, neither
under a bushel, but on a candlestick; that they which come in, may see the
light; the maning is, whomsoever God has enlightened with knowledge, he must
not make a Monopoly of it, by concealing and keeping it only to himself, but
impart it to the use and benefit of others: 1 Cor. 12.7.
thus Paul tells us, that the manifestation of the spirit, is given to every
one to profit withal. The Sun and Moon, and Stars, as they are the greatest
lights in themselves, so they shine not for themselves, but for the benefit of
the whole world; on whom does not his light arise. Job 25. many men do bear the
general knowledge of God locked up in their breasts, as sealed bags of
treasures, that be neither told nor opened, of little or no use at all. As a
candle is luminis sui diffusivum and communcativum omnibus in domo,
communicative of its light to all that are in the house; so we ought to
communicate our knowledge to all with whom we have to do: some there are whom
worldly profits do keep from this duty, these do put this light under a
bushel, others are hindered by pleasure and vanity, Matthew. 25.18.24.
and these put it under a bed, and both are very dangerous: Take heed of
smoothering your gifts, and burying your talents with the unprofitable servant.
Plato the Philosopher tells us, that no man is born for himself, and surely
such as retire themselves to Monkish Eremetical and Anchorites lives,
altogether regarding only themselves, are reproved of the bruit creatures, for
Beasts, Birds, and Bees, labor not for themselves alone: we find in Scripture,
this holy disposition in all true converts, to teach and instruct others in the
ways of godliness: when Andrew had found Christ, he was restless till he had
called Simon, neither could Philip forbear, till he had brought in Nathanael:
when the woman of Samaria was instructed by Christ, she runs into the City, and
calls her neighbors: when Christ had called Matthew, he invited Christ to
his house, and made him a great Feast; and there were (says the Text) a great
company of Publicans and others: Luke 5 29.
it is not to be imagined, that they came into his house without his leave, or
that Matthew invited them with any other intent, then that they might get that
good by Christ, which his soul had already reaped. Some allegorize hereupon,
and say, that it was a great Feast indeed, because the Feast-maker himself was
here served in, and labored to bring others unto Christ: now with the very
reversion of this Feast, not only the needy on earth, but the very Angels in
heaven were made merry. Luke 15.7.
But I dare not strain it thus far with Stella. It was a great Feast says
Calvin, not so much for the multitude of guests, as for the variety of cheer
which doubtless he being of ability would provide to manifest his love and
duty by way of thankfulness to Christ, that had entertained him into his
service; as the manner is of servants inviting their Masters, and to this Feast
he inviteth many of his old companions, laboring to draw them also unto
Christ. So David first professes that he will praise the Lord himself saying;
I will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually, Psalm. 34.1.3. Cant. 1.3.
and then presently he adds, praise ye the Lord with me, let us magnify his
name together. So the Spouse in the Canticles, promises that if Christ would
draw her, she would procure company to go with her. True Christians are not
like Rayles; but like Partriges, that fly in companies together. This was
prophesied that it should be the disposition of those that should be brought in
by the Gospel into the Christian Church; one should provoke and call upon
another; come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord: Isa. 2.3. Zech. 8.21
and they that dwell in one City, shall go to another, saying; up, let us go
and pray before the Lord of Hosts. Joh. 7.38.
These are the rivers of water, that flow out from the belly of a true
believer. Psalm. 66.16
Come ye: hearken to me, says David, and I will tell you what God has done
for my soul. Therefore let everyone that has knowledge, communicate it to
others, labor thou according to thy calling, and according to the measure of
knowledge which thou have received, to work upon others by advice, and counsel,
by entreaty and persuasion, to bring them to the saving knowledge of God, and
his ways. Art thou a Magistrate, thou must labor to reclaim men from the works
of darkness. Art thou a Minister, thou must feed the flock, 1 Pet 5.1, 2
taking the oversight thereof, thou must feed them with the bread of knowledge,
and of understanding? thou must make it thy work to win souls, and to turn
the people from the ways of folly and ignorance: Art thou a husband, thou must
dwell with thy wife as a man of knowledge? husbands must instruct their wives
with the knowledge of God. Art thou a Master of a family; thou art to instruct
thy children and servants at home, and bring them out to wisdoms gates, to
Gods Ordinances abroad, that so, if it may be, thou may bring them to the
knowledge of God, that they may be saved. The Apostle exhorts Parents to bring
up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Fathers, Ephesians. 6.4.
provoke not your children too much by tyrannizing over them, Inutilis est
animadversio, ubi silent verba, and saeviunt verbera. Marlorat.
and immoderately exercising your authority over them; (using all correction
and no instruction) being silent in words, yet being more sharp and severe many
times then there is just cause, whereby the discipline is spoiled: but bring
them up in the instruction and admonition of the Lord: teach them how to carry
themselves toward God in the duties of his service, and in civility, and
courtesy toward men in the common affairs and dealings of the world, so
shall they keep a good conscience before God, and get themselves credit before
men. Now as Parents must not use too much severity and austerity, so neither
must they use too much lenity, whereupon as many mischiefs, and inconveniences
ensue, as upon the former: for as it is said of the Ape, that she having but
two young ones, kills one of them with overmuch kindness; so some fond and
foolish parents, if they do not kill, yet they spill their children by too much
cockering them, where of we have an example in old Eli toward his sons, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24, 25. 1 Reg. 1.6.
and in David, who was to blame too, both toward Adonijah, and Absalom. He
that desires a good crop of corn, must not only sow good seed, but also weed
it, and use other good husbandry about it; and he that desires his son may
prove a good man, and a profitable member in the Church and Commonwealth, must
procure him a good Tutour, and must himself be continually dropping good and
wholesome instructions, and directions upon him; for the soul of a child is, as
Aristotle says, tanquam abrasa tabula, as a smooth table, or like a piece of
wax, apt and fit for any impression: Thus have the godly done from time to
time; and so it seems Adam instructed his sons concerning the worship of
God, else what should move them to offer sacrifice. Genes: 4. Thus did Abraham,
God himself giving this testimony of him: I know Abraham, Genesis 18.19
that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do judgment and justice, that the Lord may bring
upon A braham, that which he has spoken of him: thus also Isaac, Jacob, and
the rest of the godly Patriarchs, and we may very well suppose, that they would
never have suffered themselves to be circumcised, had they not been formerly
instructed in the law of the Lord, and made acquainted, that it was the Lords
will and pleasure: So Joshua, I and my house, says he, will serve the Lord.
Solomon was taught by his Father David. Prove. 4.4. and by his Mother, Prove. 31.
2 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothies Faith was derived from his Grandmother and Mother; and it is said of
him, that from a child he knew the holy Scriptures. Every Master of a Family
has charge over the souls of his children and servants, this God commanded
the old Israelites: these words which I command thee this day, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
shall be in thy heart; and thou shall teach them diligently to thy children,
and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thy house, and when theu walk
by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: thus does King David
charge his son Solomon, telling him, that he was going the way of all flesh;
take heed to the charge of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and keep
his Statutes, and Commandments, and Judgments, and Testimonies, pressing him
with many words of the same signification, that he might the rather remember
the substance of his charge, 1 Reg. 2.2.
he adds a reason, that thou may prosper in all thou do, Josephus says
that the children of the Jews knew how many letters were in the Old Testament,
and that they could recite them as readily as their own names. Joseph. lib. 2.
cont. Appian. Chrysoft. Homil. de Anna, and Samueli tducationi.
and in every thing whereunto thou turnest thee, and 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou
Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and a willing mind: in both which places, he first gives him
charge of the service of God, before any matter of his Kingdom. Philo the Jew
reports to the commendation of the Jews, that they were liberorum cultores
and cultrices, and it is Chrysostomes simile, that as men will patch up their
own buildings, and piece up ruinous and rotten houses; so they should be more
careful of the Lords house: and if he punish the neglect of repairing his
material Temple, then will he be more offended and displeased for the neglect
of his spiritual, as our selves and our children be. 1 Cor. 6.19.

How justly then are those careless Parents to be reproved, who as if their
children consisted altogether of body, and had no souls, take care only to
scratch and scrape a little goods together for them, Dum esset diserius, non
curabat, licet esset Dei cul^ura deserius. Aug. lib. 2. confess. cap. 3. Majori
follicitudine me parturiebat Spiritu, quam peperat carne, parturivit carne, ut
in hanc temporalem nascerer, cord, ut in aeternam lucem renascerer. August.
but never care for having them taught how to use it: Austin confesses, that
his Father was not much better; for thus he says of him, that he spared no
cost that he might be learned, but he cared not much, though he were lewd and
wicked.

But for Monica his mother, in whose heart he says, the Lord had begun to
build his Temple, she ceased not to do her uttermost endeavors every way, that
he might be truly religious, and as well Gods child by grace, as hers by
nature: And surely where this duty is neglected, children neither know their
duty toward God, their Parents, or any body else: as appears in the History
of a certain old man of Athens, that came before Solon a Judge at that time,
and in that place, where he lived, and complained that his son was undutiful
and disobedient, which he knowing to be a foul fault, caused the young fellow
to be called in, to see what he could say for himself, and my Author says, he
was not able to deny it; whereupon he decreed, that because he had showed no
duty while he lived, therefore he should enjoy nothing by his Father when he
died; and so deprived the young man of his inheritance for his disobedience:
sentence being past, the young man answered for himself, that howbeit, he could
not altogether deny the fact, yet it, was not altogether his fault; but partly
his Fathers, because he never afforded him any education, instruction, or good
bringing up, whereby he might learn to do his duty, either to him or others;
which being likewise affirmed by the Son, and not disproved by the Father, he
punished him also, and deprived him of the solemnity of his Funeral.

It is not enough for Parents, to excuse themselves from this work of
instructing their children, saying they will do it hereafter; but they must
take the soonest time they have opportunity. We know, it is a practice among
Husbandmen and Gardeners, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu
--
to set and sow, both trees, plants, and seeds, in the spring of the year; so
we are to sow the seed of the true knowledge of God and of Religion, in
children, in the spring of their age. Teach a child in the trade of his way,
and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Prove. 22.6. That a child is
capable of instruction, may appear, in that he is apt to learn rude rhymes,
immodest songs, dances, and the like, as children are capable to mock and
scoff; 2 Reg. 2.
as the children that mocked Elisha, so also to cry Hosannah, as those did to
Christ, Math. 21.15. and though children do not so readily incline to good, as
to evil, yet childhood is not so corrupt as a riper age: and for any man to
say, it is not good to set an old man's head upon a young pair of shoulders, I
say that it is never too soon to learn good things; they that neglect it, when
they be young, are uncertain where they shall live to learn being old; Eccles.
11.6.
therefore it is good to make use of the present time: In the morning sow thy
seed. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.

1. It will be easy and familiar to them, Lam. 3.27.
it is easy for a man to bear the yoke from his youth, for thus by use and
custom (which is another nature) grave jugum, will become suave jugum, as our
Savior tells us, Math. 11.29. Tender twigs are easily bowed, but old trees,
sooner break than bend. The Lord commands a Parent, not to withhold
correction from his child; Prove. 23.13.
for if thou smite him with the rod, he shall not die; Now if they are to be
corrected betimes for vices, then also are they capable of instruction, and
ought betimes to be instructed. So God requires, that they should be taught
concerning the Passover: It shall come to pass, Exodus 12.26, 27.
that when your children shall say unto you, What mean you by this service?
that you shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed over
the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and
delivered our houses. And Exodus 13.14. It shall be, when thy son asks thee in
time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shall say unto him, By strength
of hand, the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage.

2. All men are to provide for their Families, and he that provideth not for
his family, 1 Timothy 5.8.
is worse than an Infidel. Now good nurture is as necessary to children, as
nourishment; and even as they cannot live without meat, so they cannot do well
without the knowledge of God, and his Word, which is Cibus mentis, their
spiritual food, as Gregory calls it; that Commonwealth neither, cannot well
stand, where the good education of children is neglected,

1. How justly are those Parents to be condemned, that let their children grow
old in years, but still be young in knowledge, like Rehoboam, and season them
not at first with good things, but cocker them, whereby they have as little
comfort of them, as Eli had of his sons, who were sons of Belial, and knew not
the Lord, and were destroyed. Negligent Parents only desire to have children,
and then no matter whether they be instructed in the knowledge of God or no,
and so good or bad, heirs of heaven or hell: whereas they should desire to have
a holy seed, to furnish the Earth with Saints, and Heaven with Citizens:
careless Parents that only desire to have children, and no more, are like ill
husbands, that cast their corn into the ground, and then never care what
becomes of it, whether the birds or beasts spoil it: Such Parents have commonly
as little comfort of their children being grown up, as they had little care in
bringing them up, in the knowledge of the Lord.

2. How are those Parents also to be reproved, that are so far from teaching
their children good things, Quorum vita turpu^ eis objurgandi libertas
eripitur. Plutar. Turpe est doctri. cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
as they teach them evil things, either by giving them evil example, or by
acting, or talking of what evil they have done with a kind of delight: for of
such it is true, as Plutarch says, They lose their authority of reproving
others, whose lives are filthy and vicious.

Clitipho in Terence, scorns his Fathers grave counsel, because he was apt now
and then to break out, and discourse of his own knaveries: for youths are apt
to think, that such men envy that to them, that age deprives themselves of.
Therefore the Romans would not have a Father and his son seen in a Bath
together; and Cato sharply censured a Senator for kissing his wife before his
daughter, because only it might carry a show of levity; though no dishonesty,
yet, by circumstance, indecency. What then shall we say of such Parents, as
teach their Children as soon as they can speak, to swear, and to swagger, to
dice, dance, and drink, and think these good qualities, for them to be like
their Fathers; surely, without the great mercy of God, they train up their
children to the devil; such children will curse their Parents at the last day,
and wish that they rather had been the offspring of a Toade, or a Dragon, than
the Children of such Parents; then will they cry out for judgment against them.

Let Parents therefore be exhorted to teach their children the principles of
Religion, to which no course that I can conceive is more fitting, then
catechizing, both by the Minister in the congregation publicly, Praestat
multum quam multa audire. Seneca. Mark catechized at Alexandria, then Clement,
and after him Origin. Vide Catechism. Cyril. Hierosol. and Catecheses mysiago^
cas.
and themselves privately, that they may be spiritually built in the knowledge
of the principles of Religion: having faith the foundation, in the Articles of
the Creed; the walls of hope in the Lords Prayer, and the roof of Charity in
the ten Commandments; that which Seneca says of reading, is true also of
hearing: It is better to hear, understand, and learn of one thing, then to hear
many things; and of them to understand, and know little or nothing: therefore
was the course and custom of catechizing first invented, which has been an
ancient custom in the Church, but little younger then the world, as I have
showed before: Vid, Tract. Angust. de catechizandis rudibus. Item Tract. de
Symb. ad Carechumenos.
this was the practice likewise of the Ancient Fathers in the Primitive Church,
to compile and compose Catechismes, or Introductions, containing the sum and
substance of Christian Religion. That the Apostles and their associates, did
urge those to give some evidence and testimony of their faith, and of their
purpose to walk with God in newness life, whom they drew out of Judaisme and
Gentilisme is apparent. John Baptist began, Matthew. 3. and the rest followed;
And some learned men think that the order of asking questions of the Baptized,
do thou believe? do thou renounce? is very probable to have been in use in
the Apostles time, whereunto that saying of Peter gives a good color; where
speaking of Baptism, he mentions the Answer of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21
the stipulation of a good conscience, the baptized affirming, that thus and
thus he believes, and thus and thus he engages. And in the Primitive Church
there was a certain form or rank called Catechumeni, who were first trained up
in the knowledge of the grounds of Faith, before they were babtized (they being
converted from Gentilisme) the chief of which grounds the Apostle sets down,
Heb. 6.1. terming them, the doctrine of Baptismes; because they were the heads,
in which they that desired to be numbered among Christians, were instructed
before they were baptized. And it is a general opinion, that the Creed was
digested into such a form as seems to be an answer to a question. The
baptized was demanded, what do thou believe? he answered, I believe in God
the Father, etc. And diverse Divines of later times have compiled short
Catechismes containing the heads of the Christian Faith; that hereby feeding
their people at first with milk, they might fit and prepare them for stronger
meat, wherein doubtless, they had been well advised, and taken the right
course: for to press deep mysteries of Divinity to an ignorant people not well
catechized or instructed in ground^ and principles of Religion, were but t^
build a great frame to an heavy burden upon a weak foundation, which will not
bea^ it -- It cannot be denied, but plain an^ ignorant people, coming to hear a
learne^ and eloquent discourse, may be moved an^ well affected therewith, but
they cann^^ profit half so well, as if they understood ho^ it were gathered
from Gods word, or to wh^^ point and head of Divinity, or Christian doctrine,
it belonged; and might be referre^ as Master Perkins proves in his Epistl^
before a little Treatise of his called T^^ six Principles of Christian
Religion: an^ surely the learning of short Catechism and especially the
shorter Catechism the late Assembly of Divines cannot but concern us all,
whether we be learned or ignorant, strong or weak Christians, if we be weak and
ignorant, we should hereby be taught and instructed, and hence get knowledge,
or otherwise, if we have some competent measure of knowledge already, then
hereby we may be occasionod to rub up our memories, and call to mind what
formerly we have learned, or at leastwise be called upon to practice what we
know already. And if any one shall object the hardness of learning good
things, Prove. ^.7.
let him labor to have the fear of God planted in his heart; The fear of God
is the beginning of knowledge: and let not the seeming difficulty of obtaining
it, hinder thee from using any good means to get it: It is said of Apelles the
painter, that drawing but every day a line, in a short space, he became an
exquisite and exact Painter, and surely if we could every day learn but one
line, or but some little short Lesson in Divinity, we should in short time
perceive our selves to have made some proficiencie. Thus you see that
instructions, and good directions, are very necessary for youths, and young
men, of whose Age, a witty man in his time said, that it is incredulous, and
and also unexpert, unable to direct it self, Javenilis aetas, incredula, simul
and inexperta est, and contemptrix alieni consilii, inops sui. Petrarc. de
remed. utr. fort. 1 Reg. 12.
and despising the counsels of others; the truth of which assertion is
corfirmed sufficiently, by that woeful rent, that happened in Israel; when ten
of the twelve Tribes revolted from Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, because he
refused the grave, and wise Counsel of the Ancient Nobles, that had attended
on his Father, and harkned to the rash advice of the green-headed youths,
brought up with himself, and of his own standing: when young men therefore do
excedere ex Ephebis, as the Poet speaks, or be adulti, as they say at the
Universities, they should remember what Plutarch says in his book de liberis
educandis, of bringing up of children, that they do not abjicere imperium, sed
tantum mutare imperatorem, i. e. being freed from the Ferula, and discharged
from subjection to a Tutour, that even they be left to the guidance of their
own discretion, 2 Timothy 2.22.
whereby they must follow Paul's counsel to his Scholar Timothy, to fly all
youthful lusts, and labor (being well instructed in the grounds of true
Religion) as they grow in years, to grow in wisdom and knowledge then shall
no man have cause to despise their youth, as the same Apostle speaks. 1 Timothy
4.12. But the wisdom of their young years shall be their Crown and Glory. As
Virgil said of Aeneas his Son, Sequitur Patrem non passibus aequis, he
follows his Father not with even and equal steps, so it may be said of
most of the children of faithful Parents.

Let me press this upon you that are old; to teach the young; do you not read
that the Psalmist speaks often, that the praises of the Lord should he declared
from generation to generation. Psalm. 22.31. Psalm. 79.13. And so the very
Heathen understood that it was the duty of the old to teach the young.

Jura senes norint, Praecipere mitem convenit pueris senem. Seneca.
and quid liceatque nefasque,
Fasque sit inquirant, legemque exanima servant. Ovid.
Old men are, or should be very knowing, it belongs to them to teach, and to
youth to learn of them: this is chiefly to be observed among Christians! hence
it appears, how grossly old men sin, if they who ought to inform others,
do themselves know little or nothing of those things that appertain to
everlasting salvation, and if they have neglected the means of knowledge, and
in their old age are so rude and ignorant, that they had need to be taught by
children the heads of Catechism (which sometime happens:) what will they be
able to answer to the righteous Judge of all the world, when he shall ask
them, how they have done their duty upon the earth.

Let every christian now be conscientious in this duty, to exhort and instruct
one another, to edify one another and provoke to love and to good works, to
stir up one another to the ways and work of godliness.

And to move you all hereunto, I desire you to confider.

1. The great benefit that will come to such as truly perform this duty, the
Lord has made a gracious promise to it; Jer. 23.22.
if we stand in his counsel, and cause his people to hear his words, i. e. if
we faithfully instruct them in the knowledge and fear of the Lord, then we
shall turn them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

Happy is that man that can turn a sinner from evil ways, and evil doings,
to the ways of godliness.

This is the Reason why the Apostle will not have the believing husband, or
wife, to separate one from another, because by dwelling together, they may
instruct and do good one to another: 1 Cor. 7.16.
for what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? or how
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife?

2. If thou can win but one soul to Christ, Isa. a. 28.
thou shall bring much glory to God. Solomon says, that in the multitude of
poople is the Kings honor; So herein is the great King of heaven honored,
when many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths: he that converteth a sinner, shall save
a soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins. Jac. 5.20.

3. It will bring in great peace and comfort to your own souls: what greater
comfort in the world, then to see those that sat in darkness, to have the
eyes of their understandings opened? to see those that were dead, translated
from death to lise; to be newborn, to be converted unto God? Oh what
abundance of comfort will this consideration work upon thy heart. However, let
Ministers do their duty, Parents their duty, Husbands their duty, Christians
their duty in their respective places, and then let the success be what it
will, we shall have comfort therein. Ezekiel. 2.5.
Ezekiel. 2. God commands the Prophet to speak to the people, whether they would
hear, or whether they would forbear; and thus says the Prophet Isaiah: though
I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught, Isa. 49 4, 5.
yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work, or my reward with my
God; though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the
Lord, and my God shall be my strength. Thanks be to God, says Paul, which
always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest by us the savor
of his knowledge in every place: for we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ,
2 Cor. 2.14, 15. Heb. 3.13.
in them that are saved, and in them that perish. Therefore exhort one another
daily, while it is called to day. Do not think it a duty only belonging to the
Minister, to instruct and stir up others in the ways of Religion; it is his
duty principally, Per hoc nal aliud est scientia nostra, quam culp^^. Salvian.
but it is thy duty also. Do not say with wicked Cain; Am I my brothers Keeper?
If thou see thy neighbor lying in the pit of ignorance, and thou have that
which might help him out, and do it not, thou art guilty of his perishing,
by this our knowledge is no thing else but a fault, says Salvian. Labor with
all thy might to help thy Wife, and Children, Servants, and friends, and
neighbors, out of this dark dungeon.

Ephesians. 5.8.
See that you walk as children of the light: If a man have never so much
knowledge, if he walk not answerable to it, it is but a glowworm light: if thy
head be full of light, and thy works be full of darkness, it is an evidence
that the light that is in thee is no better than darkness. The night is far
spent, says the Apostle, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, Romans 13.12. Pareus in loc.
and let us put on the Armor of light. Pareus by night understands our
estate of ignorance and blindness, before our effectual calling, and
conversion; and by day our estate of illumination and grace, after our
conversion: Let us therefore, says the Apostle, cast off the works of
darkness.

Sin may be called works of darkness.

1. Because (for the most part) they proceed from the ignorance of Gods will,
not revealed to such as are yet unconverted. Thus Paul says, That the Gentiles
walked in the vanities of their mind, having their understandings darkened,
Ephesians. 4.18.
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in them:
and did men know the dangers that follow sinners, they would be more wary of
their ways; yea doubtless we may say, when we see men run headlong into fin,
that either they see not what they do, which is pitiful, or else that they
wilfully wink and will not see, which is much more perilous.

2. Sins may be called works of darkness, because they be (for the most part)
done in the dark, and the doers of them still delight to be in the dark, and
are ashamed that their doings should be brought to light: for what Job says of
one sinner, Job 24.15.
saying, The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye
shall see me, and disguiseth his face. Our Savior affirms to be true of all
sin, and every sinner, saying, Joh. 3.20.
that every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
least his deeds should be reproved: or,

3. Because they are evermore suggested to us, either by Satan himself, the
Mint-master of all mischief, the Prince of darkness, or by some of his wicked
instruments, that be Amici Curiae, Proctours, Factours, and sollicitours of
that black Prince, in his Court of darkness.

4. Because they carry those that live and die in them, into Hell, the place of
utter darkness: Let us then that are enlightened with the true light, cast off
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light; that is, have our
conversation suitable to our profession. The Gospel is the day, Christ is the
light, Luther, in Romans
Faith is the eye which apprehends this light; therefore seeing the day is
come, and the light shines, let us walk as in the day, and in the light; the
eye of faith, and the foot of obedience (which two concurring, make an holy
life) are called armor of light: they be called armor, because thereby we may
defend our selves from the fiery darts of the devil: Ephesians. 6.16.
and they be called armor of light, for three causes.

1. Because they proceed from the Father of lights, James 1.17.

2. Because they make them that wear this armor, shine like lights in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, Phil. 2.15.

3. Because like true bred Eagles, they abide the light, and need neither care
nor fear, who looks upon them; as our Savior tells us; He that does the
truth, Joh. 3.21.
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God: viz. according to his will revealed in his Word.

1. Get in a lightsome principle therefore into your hearts, look that the
light that is in you be not darkness; do not act by men's courses, and by
precedents from others; but get a principle of light within to guide thee in
all thy actions.

2. Let all thy aims also be full of light, labor in all your actions to
approve your selves to God; and above all things aim at his glory. To have low,
ignoble and base ends, is not to act as a child of light; but to have high,
glorious, and supernatural ends and aims, to confide in his word, to trust
in his mercy, to rest upon his grace, to stay upon his power and faithfulness,
to adhere to his promises, to sanctify the Lord in your hearts, to glorify
his Name, to praise him for his goodness, to be zealous for his glory, to
walk in the light of his countenance, and to have communion with him in all
holy ordinances; these are the ends that become the children of light.

3. See that thou walk by a lightsome rule, let the Word of God be your rule,
let the Word be a lamp, Psalm. 119.105.
or candle to your feet, and a light unto your paths; all our deviations and
aberrations from the light of this bright-shining candle, are dark steps, or
steps into darkness; when men walk by a lightsome rule, their actions are
full of light.

Let us then walk decently, as in the day, abhorring all works of darkness:
you know discreet men in the night are careless of their attire, not regarding
what color, or stuff, or fashion it be, so it keep them warm, because they
know that the darkness covers both it and them; but in the day time, when
they mean to go abroad, or admit any body to see or speak with them, they will
be ashamed, unless they be in some good fashion, like men of their place and
rank, and therefore will have their apparel beseeming men of their qualities
and conditions. So let knowing Christians walk as becomes Saints, and avoid
whatsoever is of evil report: Let your light so shine before men, Math. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your heavenly Father, says
our blessed Savior.



1. Art thou a man enlightened with the knowledge of God? take heed how thou
sinnest against the light of knowledge which God has set up in thee to direct
thee. Oh the great wickedness that is in men's hearts in these days: the light
now shines more gloriously than it did heretofore, the word is more common,
more frequently, and powerfully taught; more and better helps to the
attainment of knowledge, than were in former Ages: may not we demand with the
Apostle, Have they not heard? Romans 10.18, 19.
Did not Israel know? Men are not ignorant, or may not be ignorant, what duty
they owe to Gods Sabbaths, what reverence to his Name, what respect to his
word; and yet men profane the Lords day, despise their teachers, contemn the
Word, Quo major est revetatio, eo magis est cognitio, and quo magis c gnitio
peccatum, and quo magis peccaum eo magis judictum. Bernard.
and sin against clear light, and act as if they were ignorant in the
mystery of Christ, and to seek in duties appertaining to God and their
neighbor: The sin of such men shall be more heinous, then many others, whom
God has not given to know so much as he has to them. Make conscience thereof
committing sins against conscience, and of thwarting those holy rules which
the Spirit of God by the preaching of his Word has written in thy heart: this
makes the ways of God to be evil spoken of, and the seeking after knowledge to
be condemned as the cause of all licentiousness, when men bring scandal upon
Religion, by walking contrary to what they know,

2. Art thou a knowing man, take heed of being proud of thy knowledge. 1 Cor.
8.1.
Scientia inflat, Knowledge puffs up, says the Apostle: men that know much,
are apt to know it, too much, and those that excel in knowledge, are apt to
swell with pride: the best men are apt to be tainted with this infection; Paul
himself was subject to be exalted above measure through the abundance of
Revelations: 2 Cor. 12.7
take heed of pride of gifts, learning wit, knowledge; for God has not given
us these things, to the end that we should set them a Sun-shining, or to make
sale ware of them, but that we may use them to his glory: the finest cloth is
soonest stained, and the finest wits are most subject to pride; for as worms
sooner engender in tender wood, then in knotty, and as mothes breed sooner in
fine cloth, than in course flocks, so pride and vain glory do sooner assault a
man of excellent parts, and great knowledge: then one of meaner gifts:
therefore pride may be said to be indengred of the ashes of all virtues.
Ministers, should in a special manner take heed of pride; their calling is
high, their gifts are or should be great, and they are apt to grow proud of
them: and the devil has great reason to besti^re himself, to puff them up
with their knowledge, for he knows.

1. If pride overthrow them, they fall not alone, but like blazing stars,
draw tails after them.

2. E^rore^ magni sins mag^io in^^^^^^ (...)
Because it is a means to ingende^ heresy and schistnes, great erreurs do
^^^er s^^ing up without great wits; and many men who seek not truth, but
triumph, will rather then not be singular, not be sound. O^nnes doctrinae
impietatis de superbiae radice proveniunt. August. Man is lighter then vanity,
and made of the dust, therefore a little wind will blow him high enough, and
though a man have never so much cause of abasement, yet knowledge is apt to
puff and lift a man up more, then the other will cast him down: A man of great
knowledge should not be like the Palm Tree whereof Pliny tells us, Plin. (...)
(...) 1.^. cap. ^ ^
that the more weight is laid upon it, the higher it rises; but like to the
Canes that are full of Sugar, the fuller they are, the lower they stoop; much
grace and knowledge should not make a man more high, but more humble: yet
notwithstanding there is a spiritual glorying in the knowledge of God, that is
lawful; a spiritual heart has a spiritual glorying in the knowledge of the
Lord, bred in him by the Spirit of God: (...) ^.^3, ^^.
of this the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
let not the ^^rong man glory in his strength, let (...) the rich man glory in
his riches, but let him that gloryeth, glory in this; that he understands and
knows me that I am the Lord. When a man knows the Lord to be his God and
portion, and himself to be the Lords, then may he glory in this excellent
knowledge, all other glorying is but vain: Augustine writing upon the fourth
Petition of the Lords Prayer, August in Orat. Dominic.
tells us that the greatest Emperor in the world is, a very beggar in regard
of God; and we know that beggars must be no braggers, we are but Stewards, and
Stewards must not be stately, we must not say of knowledge, and the rest of our
talents, as the Atheists of their tongues, Psalm. 12.4. that they be our own,
and that we will use them, or rather abuse them, as we list, what ever any
body says to the contrary: this is a false plea, and a flat Non-sequitur, for
we are but entrusted with them, and must one day be accountable for them: we
must not therefore use them at our own pleasure, but according to our Masters
appointment.

3. Is thy spirit the candle of the Lord, do thou know God and his ways?
then take heed of apostasy and backsliding: It is better not to have known the
way of righteousness: then after they have known to depart from the holy
Commandment given unto them. 2 Pet. 2.21
See that thy goodness be not as a morning cloud, or early dew, that soon
passes away. It is not enough for a soldier to have skill to use his weapons,
and to make a fair flourish, and gallant bravado, and then run away; but he
must double and treble his activity, till he has foiled his foe, and possessed
himself of the field: It is not enough for a Saylour to be expert in the Art
of Navigation, to weigh his Anchors, hoyse up his Sails, and go gallantly out,
but his skill appears most in coming safe home again. So it is not enough to
have some knowledge of Christ, and to come to him. Matthew. 4.28. But we must
abide in him, John 8.31.
and his word must abide in us, then we shall be his disciples indeed: In a
word, we must work till night in Gods Vineyard, if we will have our penny; for
that is not paid in the Morning, but at Even. Matthew. 20.8. He that endures to
the end, shall be saved. Matthew. 24.13. we must be faithful to the death, if we
will have the Crown of life. Revel. 2.10. Some enlightened persons are very
forward professors at first, Psalm. 70.57
but tire at last like the Asses of Armenia, that go apace in the morning, but
grow dull before noon; recoyling like a bad piece, or deceitful bow, or like
the foolish Galathians, Ga^. 3.3.
beginning in the spirit, and ending in the flesh.

It must not be with knowing Christians in the profession and practice of
Religion, as it was wont to be in the Jews banquets, to set forth their best
wine first, as our Savior tells us, John 2.10. whosoever are thus, are no
better then hypocrites, and their motion forced and violent, for that is still
swift at first, and slow at last. A good Christian is best at last, like the
Church of Thyatira, to whose commendation our Savior Christ says, that he
knew her works, that they were more at the last then at the first: whosoever is
not ever good, and best at last, was never truly good. They that have been once
enlightened, and have tasted of the gifts of Gods Spirit, H^b. 1.5, 6.
of they once fall away, it is impossible, or very difficult, for them to be
renewed again by ^^pe^tance.

FINIS.

