Great BRITAINS WONDER: OR, LONDONS Admiration.

Being a True Representation of a Prodigious FROST, which began about the
beginning of December. 1683. and continued till the Fourth Day of February
following. And held on with such violence, that Men and Beasts, Coaches and
Carts, went as frequently thereon, as Boats were wont to pass before.

There was also a Street of Booths built from the Temple to Southwark, where
were Sold all sorts of Goods imaginable, namely, Clothes, Plate, Earthen Ware;
Meat, Drink, Brandy, Tobacco, and a Hundred sorts of other Commodities not here
inserted. It being the Wonder of this present Age, and a great consternation to
all the Spectators.

depiction of the 1683 frost fair on the Thames Arundel House. Essex-Buildings.
The Temple.


BEhold the Wonder of this present Age,
A Famous RIVER now become a Stage.
Question not what I now declare to you,
The Thames is now both Fair and Market too,
And many Thousands daily do resort,
There to behold the Pastime and the Sport
Early and late, used by young and old,
And valued not the fierceness of the Cold;
And did not think of that Almighty Hand
Who made the Waters bare, like to the Land:
Thousands and Thousands to the River flocks,
Where mighty flakes of Ice do lie like Rocks.
There may you see the Coaches swiftly run,
As if beneath the Ice were Waters none;
And sholes of People every where there be,
Just like to Herrings in the brackish Sea;
And there the quaking Watermen will stand ye,
Kind Master, drink you Beer, or Ale, or Brandy:
Walk in, kind Sir, this Booth it is the chief,
We Will entertain you with a slice of Beef,
And what you please to Eat or Drink, it is here,
No Booth, like mine, affords such dainty cheer.
Another cries, Here Master, they but scoff ye,
Here is a Dish of famous new-made Coffee.
And some do say, a giddy senseless Ass
May on the THAMES be furnished with a Lass.
But to be short, such Wonders there are seen,
That in this Age before has never been.
Before the Temple there a Street is made,
And there is one almost of every Trade:
There may you also this hard Frosty Winter,
See on the Rocky Ice a Working- PRINTER,
Who hopes by his own Art to reap some gain,
Which he perchance does think he may obtain.
Here is also a Lottery and Music too,
Yea, a cheating, drunken, lewd, and debauched crew.
Hot Codlins, Pancakes, Duck, Goose, and Sack,
Rabit, Capon, Hen, Turkey, and a wooden Jack.
In this same Street before the Temple made,
There seems to be a brisk and lively Trade:
Where every Booth has such a cunning Sign,
As seldom has been seen in former time;
The Flying Piss-pot is one of the same,
The Whip and Egg-shell, and the Broom by name:
And there if you have Money for to spend,
Each cunning Snap will seem to be your Friend.
There may you see small Vessels under Sail,
All Is one to them, with or against the Gale,
And as they pass they little Guns do fire,
Which feeds some, and puffs them with desire
To sail therein, and when their Money's gone,
It Is right, they cry, the Thames to come upon.
There on a Sign you may most plainly see it,
Here Is the first Tavern built in Freezeland-street:
There is Bull-baiting and Bear-baiting too,
That no Man living yet e're found so true;
And Football play is there so common grown,
That on the Thames before was never known;
Coals being dear, are carried on Men's backs,
And some on Sledges there are drawn in Sacks;
Men do on Horseback ride from shore to shore,
Which formerly in Boats were wafted over:
Poor people hard shifts make for livelihoods,
And happy are if they can sell their Goods;
What you can buy for Threepence on the shore,
Will cost you Four-pence on the Thames, or more.
Now let me come to things more strange, yet true,
And question not what I declare to you;
There Roasted was a great and well-fed Ox,
And there, with Dogs, Hunted the cunning Fox;
Dancing of the Ropes, and Puppit- plays likewise,
The like before ue'r seen beneath the Skies;
All stand admired, and very well they may,
To see such pastimes, and such sorts of play.
Besides the things I named to you before,
There other Toys and Baubles are great store;
There may you feast your wandering eyes enough,
There you may buy a Box to hold your Snuff:
No Fair nor Market underneath the Skies
That can afford you more Varieties;
There may you see some hundreds slide in Skeets,
And beaten paths like to the City Streets.
There were Dutch Whimsies turned swiftly round,
Faster then Horses run on level Ground:
The like to this I now to you do tell,
No former Age could ever parallel;
There Is all that can supply most curious minds,
With such Varieties of cunning Signs,
That I do think no Man does understand,
Such merry Fancies never were on the Land;
There is such Whimsies on the Frozen Ice,
Makes some believe the Thames a Paradise.
And though these sights be to our admiration,
Yet our sins, our sins, do call for lamentation.
Though such unusual Frosts to us are strange,
Perhaps it may predict some greater Change;
And some do fear may a forerunner be
Of an approaching sad Mortality:
But why should we to such belief incline?
There Is none that knows but the blessed power divine
And whatsoever is from Jehovah fent,
Poor Sinners ought therewith to be content;
If dreadful, then to fall upon the knee,
And beg remission of the DEITY:
But if beyond our thoughts he sends us store,
With all our hearts let us thankful be therefore.
Now let us all in Great Jehovah trust,
Who does preserve the Righteous and the Just;
And eke conclude Sin is the cause of all
The heavy Judgments that on us do fall:
And call to mind; fond Man, thy time misspent,
Fall on thy knees, and heartily Repent,
Then will thy Savior pity take on thee,
And thou shall live to all Eternity.
Finis
Printed by M. Haly, and J. Millet, and sold by Robert Walton, at the Globe on
the North-side of St. Pauls-Church, near that end toward Ludgate; Where you
may have all sorts and sizes o Coppy-Books, and Prints, not only English, but
Italian, French, and Dutch. And by John Seller in the Wesh-side of the
Royal Exchange. 1684.


