ACT
The Faculty of Surgeon of GLASGOW, in Favors of the Poor Diseased People
within their Jurisdiction.
AT GLASGOW the seventh day of March, One thousand six hundred and ninety eight
ye^^ the whilk day, Doctor Peter Patoun Physician, Preses and Assessor to the
Faculty, Jan. Weir Chirurgeon-Apothecary present Visitor, and remanent Members
of the Surgeons (...) Pharmacians of Glasgow being Conveen'd, and taking to
their Consideration, that one of (...) (...)auses, for which His MAJESTY of
ever blessed Memory, JAMES the sixth King of Scots, by (...) (...)oyal Gift, of
the Date the penult day of November, One thousand five hundred and ninety nine
y^^^ (...)ranted in Favors of the said Faculty of Surgeons and Pharmacians,
the Privileges and Immun^^^ (...)ey now Enjoy; is, that the said Faculty
should, with the Assistance of a Physician Assessor, Com^^^^cate their Advice
Gratis, the first Monday of each Month in the Year, to every poor diseased
(...), who should apply to them, who had Residence within their Jurisdiction,
and had Testimonials from (...)eir Ministers or Elders, of the respective
Paroches where they Lived; With which the Members of ^^^(...)lty Residenters at
Glasgow, have not only heretofore Complied, and given Obedience to; But also in
(...)guard, there are diverse and sundry Members of Faculty, whose Residence are
promiscuously, through the (...)eral parts of the Faculties Jurisdiction in the
Country, who by their Admission, and Acts of Fac^^ (...) which they are
liable; are obliged to Communicate their Advice to the Poor of the respective
Paroc^^ (...)here they Live, the first Monday of each Month Gratis, which
heretofore has not been practicab^^ (...) the Country. And the Faculty being
resolved, that the Poor diseased in the Country, should not b^ (...)estitute
of Advice, more than these of the City of Glasgow. Therefore, it is Statute and
Ordain^^ (...)hat the Faculty at Glasgow, should not only Continue in their
Custom of Conveening, each fir^^ (...)unday of ilk Month of the Year, at
their public Hall, to Visit and give Advice to every poor Di(...)sed Person
(within the City of Glasgow, or the Faculties Jurisdiction) Gratis, who shall
apply (...) (...)em at their said Hall, within the said City for their Advice,
having Testimonials from the Ministers (...) (...)ders where they Live. But
sicklike, That every Member of Faculty living in the Country or any her Burgh,
within the Faculties Precincts (which Comprehends the Shires of Lanrick,
Dumba^(...)m, Ranfrew and Air: Comprehending Kill, Carrick and Cunningham)
shall be hereby Boun^ (...)d Obliged, to Attend the said first Day of every
Month in the Year, at their respective Dwelling (...)uses; And shall be
Obliged to Communicate their Advice Gratis, according to the Qualifications of
(...)eir respective Admissions, to the Poor so applying to them by Testimonials
as said is. And Ordains (...) Presents to be Printed and Published at the whole
Paroch-Churches within the Faculties Jurisdiction, at the Poor Diseased may be
advertised hereof.

Extracted forth of the Records of the said Faculty, by me Robert Robertson,
Clerk of the Facul(...)


