AN HEROIC POEM ON HER HIGHNESS THE LADY ANN'S Daughter to ye Duke of York.
Voyage into SCOTLAND: With a little Digression upon the Times.
Ungrateful England, cursed to that Degree,
Famed for Rebellion and Inconstancy;
All thy Possessions and Enjoyments spring
From Monarch's Cares, yet thou wilt obey no King;
To whose vain Humor Nothing is Delight,
Nor Rain nor Sunshine er'e can happen right;
False and unworthy to obtain alone
The greatest Blessing of the mildest Throne;
Yet, being richer than I can express,
Art justly punished with Unhappiness;
What thou art envied for, and all adore,
Thou throw'st away, and to thy self art poor,
And like the Miser that abounds in Bags,
Wallow'st in Wealth, yet love to go in Rags.
The stubborn Jews their Monarchs still adored,
They begged a King, and then obeyed their Lord;
But stiff-Neck'd England, just from Slavery saved,
Forgets and longs again to be enslaved.
Can Rebels ever be with Scepters awed,
Rebels that once did Sacrifice their God.
True Heirs in Malice to the Fiends of Hell,
Which first they practiced when from Heaven they fell,
And ever since taught Traitors to rebel.
And now lest they should fail to reach him there,
They stab him in his own Vicegerent here;
For though they do it through a Monarchs Name,
The Majesty of Heaven is still their Aim,
Is it thy Nature or thy Planet's spite,
Still to what is present to be opposite?
Wretched be then with vain Mistrust and Fear,
Banished the sight of the most Godlike Pair,
And the bright Daughter of his Highness here;
The Winds and Seas will far more faithful be,
And Rocks and Quicksands teach Men Loyalty.
Old Albany they now alone shall grace,
Scotland, whence sprung the Imperial Stewart's Race;
Scotland that boasts a mighty Duke and Name
Further than Parthia great Arsaces Fame.
PRepare you Heavens, disclose your brightest Ray,
All Day your Marble, Night your Milkie Way;
Urania comes, the Godess of our Isle,
Urania, that makes every Creature Smile;
All they were born for, and can wish for here,
Is but to bless her, and be blessed by Her.
Ten thousand Cupids guard her as she rides,
And of her golden Bark surround the sides;
Whilst Others fly aloft with Songs, and strew
Such Flowers as on the Beds of Eden grow;
For want of Winds, with Wings supply soft Gales,
And with gay Plumes deck all her Virgin Sails:
Ye frightful Storms retreat into your Cave,
Nor leave the Ocean wrinkl'd with a Wave;
There, whilst she Sails, entombed in hollow Earth,
Lie fettered close, and groan for want of Birth;
And Heaven and Seas strive to be most serene,
The Azure Blew, with the smooth glassy Green.
You Sea-Gods and you Nymphs prepare to try
Your skils, and with a Mask delight her Eye.
First, let the Sun send forth such kindly Heats,
As Winter's shine, or Summer when it sets;
No Icy, Cloudy, nor no soultry Day,
But all like Morning, and those Mornings May:
Then gentle Zephyr unlock all thy store,
And send soft Breezes from the Western Shore;
Such as Arabia Foelix has refined
With Trees of Spice fanning the precious Wind;
But just so much as she in State may glide;
And safe in her Neptunian Chariot ride:
Then thou Green God shall wait on her above,
As on Jove's Daughter, and the Queen of Love.
Let thy shrill Trumpeters, the Tritons, blow,
And summon all the Watery Powers below;
The Nayades, and Nereid's to appear,
Let all the Subjects of the Flood draw near:
Fair Cytheraea and her Waiters Call,
And your Sea Nymphs, to deck this Ocean's Ball;
Then let the lovely Mermaids come in Place,
Each Mermaid that so doats upon her Face;
Till they shall see how far above their own
Urania's is, and throw their Glasses down.
The lesser Fry in Shoals before shall run,
Like Clouds of Insects gathered by the Sun;
And nimble Dolphins wantonly shall play,
And hunt the Plain, like Spanniels in her Way.
Next, let the great Leviathans resort,
And not forget to make the Princess Sport;
But at a harmless distance head the Train,
And from their mighty Engines spout forth Rain.
Thus in such awful Manner let it be,
That wondering Angels may look down to see,
And make the Show more full of Majesty.
Thou Nereus, do this mighty Task with Care;
As much as was in Noah's Ark, is here:
For since that Patriarch, when the World was drowned,
The like was never in one Vessel found.
Her little Yatch and Squadron, as they ride,
Swell to a Fleet and Admiral, with Pride,
Lift up their Flags, like Piramids, on high,
And with their Rainbow Colors brave the Sky:
The Egyptian Galleys were not half so proud,
When Cleopatra was over Nilus rowed.
Thus gentle Neptune guard her over your Sea,
From faithless Albion to glad Albany;
Commit her safely to the longing Shore,
To her first Father's, ancient Fergu's Tower,
There, as in Heaven, her Wishes to obtain,
Till she return, and thou art blessed again.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, 1681.


