THE Young-man's Duty: OR Good Council for Young Men.

Showing the Happiness of being good betimes.

^ith an Alarm from the Eternal God, to Drowsy Saints and secure Sinners.

(...) also the Young-Mans Objections answered, and the Old-mans doubts
resolved.

By Roger Hough.

King 18.12. But I thy Servant fear the Lord from my youth.

^^overbs 16.31. The Hoary Head is a crown of Glory, if it be found in the way
of righteousness.

LONDON, ^^^nted by W. L. and T. J. for Phillip Brooksby, next door to the
Ball, in West-smithfield, near the Hos-pital-Gate, 1677.

THE Young Man's Duty.
Eccles. 11 Chap. 9 Verse. Rejoice, O Young Man in thy Youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart and in
the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment.


SOlomon in the Conclusion of this Chapter is Exhorting the Sons of Men to true
Religion; and the better to, and in order to the same, he minds them of Death
and Judgment, without which there cannot be planted in us a right Care and
Fear of God. From the Seventh Verse to the latter end, he has to do with Two
Sorts of Men.

First, With those that were glued to this life, and to the delights and
pleasures thereof; of: And thus he brings them in, speaking thus, Truly the
light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, verse 7. By light
there we are to understand the light of the Sun, shining on us, while we enjoy
this Mortal Life: This many men suppose to be a very pleasant thing; and they
overmuch content themselves in the same. These Solomon verse 8. refuteth by
three Arguments.

The First is this, that though a Man live many years, yet let him remember the
days of darkness. That is, That a time of death will come; a time when our Sun
will set and our light will turn to darkness, though we live never so long,
never so sweetly, never so pleasantly, though we enjoy the light of the Sun,
yet we should carefully remember that darkness abides in us,

Secondly, says Solomon, These days are.

His Argument is thus much, Let a man consider with himself, though he live
many years, yet notwithstanding the days and years of his life, cannot be
compared with the days and years of his death.

Now in the Word we have read, we have to deal with Young Men; and he is
altogether given to jollity, and Merriment: He forgeteth God, and the days of
darkness, and his later end. Rejoice, O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy
Heart cheer thee in the day of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart
and in the sight of thine eyes: but know this (there is a cooling Card) that
for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.

In the Word we will consider two parts.

First. What Young Men do.

Secondly, The Medicine of God, to heal young men of their default: that
young men do, is this, They give themselves over to an inordinate Carnal joy:
This joy is set out from the time of it; the days of thy youth: from the cause
of it, their hearts cheer them; from the kinds of it, they walk in the ways of
their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes.

Thirdly, The Medicine with which Solomon would heal young men of this
inordinate carnal joy, is this: Know (says he) that for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment: that is, It is a most Divine and infallible
truth, that every one should know and acknowledge, that whatsoever sins they
commit in their Youth, without repentance they must undergo the dreadful
judgment of God, beeause of them.

Doct. That it is a Sin of Young Men, to Rejoice inordinately, and carnally, in
the days of their youth, to walk after their hearts, and in the sight of their
eyes.
We Read concerning the Old World, that were Eating and Drinking and Marrying
and giving in Marriage altogether sottish and sensual, till the Wrath of God
came in the Flood, and swept them away, Isa. 22.14. Let us eat and drink for
too morrow we shall die. It is thought, this was not so much the Language of
Age, as of the Youth in Israel Hence Solomon gives a Caveat to Young Men,
Eccles. 12.1. To Bridle, and restrain from this jollity, and carnal Mirth:
Remember now the Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
And the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.22. Instructs Timothy to slye youthful
lusts, Tit. 2.6. Exhort young men that they be sober minded. Let us a little
consider the reasons of the Doctrine, whence it is that Young Men should be so
much misguided in their youth.

The first cause is, Natural Corruption that they have drawn by Propagation
from their Parents; a Spiritual Leprosy, and Malady; and a Disease, which as
it prevails for the most part upon age by covetousness, so it geteth ground
of youth, by sensuallity and voluptuousness: this dams up the ear against
reproof; this hardens the heart against instruction, and makes many young men
the Soldiers of Satan in sin.

Again, in the second place, Men in their youth forget the day of their
Reckoning and Judgment, they are not mindful of their later end, Deuteronomy. 32.22.
Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end: this precept is neglected both by youth and age, but
especially by those of younger years, for they think it is time enough to
repent, and turn to God, when they are old; and so they put off God from time
to time, till at last justice cuts them down, and throws them into everlasting
burning, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Again, in the third place, Young Men are not broken down by afflictions, the
Fallow ground is not Plowed up by afflictions; which through the grace of God,
are great means to fame Nature, and to subdue Pride, and to bring the Soul to a
right frame and temper. Before I was afflicted (says David) I went astray. And
Ephraim, says. J^r 31. I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yo^k. hou^
chastised me and I was chastisedst, I was ash med^ because bore the reproach of
my youth. But young men are free from aches, and pains and sickness, and
sorrow, much more then old age, and this is the reason why they are more
Licentious.

Lastly, Young Men want true Joy in God, therefore they betake themselves to
Carnal joy, for sure it is, a man cannot live without joy and contentment, if
he has it not from the Wells of Salvation. Now because men in their Youth
cannot take in the Spiritual Joy of that clear Fountain, therefore they drink
in the muddy waters of carnal joy.

The use of this point, is* in the first place an admonition to all Young Men
to take notice of those Maladies, and spiritual Diseases in themselves.

The first degree of our healing is, to see that we are sick: and till then
Christ Jesus the Physician of our soul, has no Commission to do us good. Let
Young Men observe in themselves, First, Their Carnal joy. Solomon here shows
that they rejoice inordinately. This may appear to themselves.

First, Because they rejoice not where they ought; they solace not themselves
in God, in whom is the Fountain of all true joy, nor in Christ Jesus, in whom
is the Spring of Joy, nor in the Word, where there is the Cistern of Joy; even
as a bone when it is out of joint, it must needs be a disordered bone. So the
Affeictions when they are misplaced, are disordered and then our joy and any
other affections are misplaced, when they are not set upon God and Christ. Now
if Young Men would deal uprightly with themselves, they should perceive that
for the most part, in their jollity and merriment they never think of God, or
dream of the World to come. Nay the serious apprehension of God Almighty, would
quench their joy.

Secondly, The Carnalness of the joy of young men, appears because they
rejoice where they ought not, in Riot, in Drunkenness, in Whoreing in all
manner of Voluptuousness, many time in Obscenity of Word and Phraise, in making
jest of the Holy Word of God: so we may say of this merriment, it is a mad
merriment; he is a mad man that rejoices in that, for which, except ^e betake
himself to serious and bitter mourning he cannot be saved.

Thirdly, The Carnalness of the joy of Young Men may appear in this: Because
they terminate and conclude not their joy in God: this follows on the former:
for it is impossible that what begins not in God, should end in God: When
joy begineth in sin, it cannot end in God, but in the Devil.

Secondly, Let young men take notice of themselves, how they walk after their
own hearts: the heart that says, come, put away pensive thoughts, trouble not
your self about the day of reckoning and judgment: Come let us enjoy the
present time, now let us sing and be merry, for we have time enough to repent.
Thus they are resolved to take their sill of pleasure, like the fool in the
Gospel, which says, Soul, take thine ease, for thou have goods laid up for
many years. Thus they judge: and thus they walk after their carnal hearts.

Again in the third place, young men walk after the sight of their eyes: that
is, they stand gazing at things temporal, and neglect things e^e^nal, they see
a beauty and luster in those outward things, and perceive no glory and
brightness in Christ Jesus.

Beloved, If we follow our own hearts, and our own eyes, it will be thus with
us as you have heard: but we should rather labor with J^b, to make a covenant
with our ^yes. Oh! how few Young Men are there that make a bargain and
agreement with their eyes that they shall not be as an open Casement to let sin
into the soul? Oh! how ^ew young men are there, that like Jeremiah, have their
eyes as fountains of water, to weep day and night for the afflictions of the
people of God? Oh! how few young men are there, that like Moses, have an eye to
the recompense of reward, that they may suffer afflictions with the people of
God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Now I beseech you
take a Survey of your selves in these things: these are vices and sins, and
deformities of young men, to be seen, and ^amented by all those that hope to
dwell in Gods holy hill.

Use ^. It is for exhortation to young men. They should labor to be reformed
in their affections, and hearts, away with this carnal ^oy we ought to cast it
out of us.

1. Carnal joy: would you know what the event of it will be; it will end in
carnal sorrow, and without repentance in hell it self. Woe unto you (says our
Savor Christ) that laugh now, you shall weep and mourn: the triumphing of the
wicked (says Zophar in Job) is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite is but for
a moment; though his excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his Head reach
unto the Clouds, yet he shall perish, as his own dung; they that have seen him,
shall say, where is he? He shall fall away as a dream, and shall not be found:
yea, He shall be chased away as a vision of the night. But not to give you this
in precept, but to show you how to reform your selves in these Vices, that
Solomon specifieth to bear sway in Young Men, let me lay you down these
following Directions.

First, You must betake your selves to mourning for your Sins, as St. James
says, Be afflicted, and weep and mourn, let your laughter be turned into
heaviness. If we be not reconciled to God, if we have not assurance that we are
interested in Christ, there is no time for us to rejoice, we should rather
betake our selves to bitter mourning, for the wrath of God is due to us, and we
know not how soon it may fall upon us.

In the second place, Consider how vain all things are, in which Youthful
Persons rejoice. If Young Men rejoice in Humane Wisdom and Understanding, this
is a vain thing, it is gotten with a great deal of trouble, and vexation of
Spirit, Eccles, 1.13. gave my Heart to seek and search out by wisdom ^oncerning
all things that are done under Heaven. ^his sore travel has God given to the
Sons ^f Men, to be exercised therewith. And in ^er. 18. In much wisdom is much
grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. God does so punish
the pride and boldness of ^he Wit of Men, even from the fall of our first
Parents,

In the second place, If Young Men rejoice ^^n Honor and Credit amongst Men,
this also ^s vain, Solomon has showed it, Eccles. 2.6. ^here is (says he) no
remembrance of the Wise, more than the Fool, for ever, for which now is, shall
in the days to come, be forgotten. Again, (...) a man rejoice in Honor and
Glory, he cannot Believe. So says Christ, John 5.44. How can you believe since
you seek Honor one ^f another, and not the Honor that comes of God only?
Joh. 40.43. Nay, farther the Apostle shows us that this is the cause of ^nvy,
Mal. 5.26. Be not desirous of vain ^lory, envying one another. Farther,
Young Men commonly delight in pleasures; these also are vain things. I said in
my Heart, (says Solomon, Eccles. 2.2.) Go to now, I will prove thee with
mirth, therefore enjoy plea^ures: and behold this also is vanity. All these
pleasures of youth shall cease: there will shortly be an end of your Wisdom,
Honor and Pleasures, 1 Cor. 7.29. The time is short; It remains that those
that have Wives, be as those that have none, and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not; they that buy, as though they possessed not; they that use
the World, as not abusing of i^; for the fashion of this World passes away.

Lastly, Our Savior Christ, in Luke 8.14. shows that the pleasures of this
life choke the Word of God, that it cannot bring forth grateful fruit to God.

Fourthly, If Young Men delight in Riches, and rejoice in the Estates that God
has given them: this lightness is a vain thing.

For, First, Many times wealth is gotten by deceit, and then God blows on it,
Jer. 5.27. As a Cage full of Birds* so are their Houses full of deceit,
therefore they are become great and waxen rich; shall not I visit for these
things (says the Lord) and shall not my soul be revenged on such a People as
this? says the Lord. Again, Wealth is kept with sorrow and vexation, Eccel.
5.12. The sleep of the laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much,
but the abundance of the Rich, will not suffer them to sleep.

Thirdly, Wealth is left with a great deal of sorrow and vexation, Rev. 18.18.
When ^he smoke of Babylon ascended up to Heaven, Oh, what Lamentation there
was! they cried out What City is like this great City? and they cast ^he dust
on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great
City, wherein were made rich all that had ships on the Sea, by reason of her
constliness: for in one hour (...) she made desolate. But suppose farther, that
a man should get and keep his wealth in ^he fear of God, yet these these things
are most uncertain riches.

Lastly, these riches cannot preserve your life, so says Christ himself, Luke.
12.25. Psalm. 62.9. and 49.78.

Thus I have showed the several things that Young Men rejoice in, and showed
^ou likewise, that their joy is founded upon vanity, and this is the second
means to heal young men of their inordinateness of their joy, to meditate with
themselves how vain and frivo^ous all things are, they delight in.

The third means, is to betake themselves to seek spiritual joy: the wellhead
of this joy is in God: the grounds of this joy are 2 fold.

First, The good things Exhibited.

Secondly. The good things Promised.

The good things Exhibited, That God has written our names in the Book of
Life. Here is a Fountain of Spiritual I^n to a true Christian. To rejoice
(says Christ) not that the Devils are fallen before you, but that your names
are written in the Book of Life.

Secondly, The other ground of Spiritual joy, is, The good things promised us;
and those may be reduced to two Heads.

God has promised: 1. That our afflictions shall be for our Edification.

And, God has promised deliverance from affliction, all in the best season.

Again, For the defects of Grace in us, (which indeed is a thing grievous to a
true Christian;) here we may rejoice.

First, In the promise of preserving of Grace.

S^condly, In the promise of augmentation an^ growth in Grace.

Thirdly, In the promise of bringing the weakest grace to perfection.

Here you have the Wellhead of joy, O^ that young men would know God, and
Jesus Christ and the Word of God, and the Promises, that they may leave this
sinful sottish joy, whereunto they are solicited, this is the means to be rid
of it by getting into their Souls the sense and feeling of the true joy of the
Children of God.

Again, In the second place; Young men should be exhorted, not to walk after
their own hearts: which is the next thing that Solomon notes as a fault in
them. The heart (says Jeremiah) is deceitful, above measure, and desperately
wicked, who would follow a false guide? and a desperate Wicked guide: so is the
heart of man.

Lastly, They should not walk after the fight of their Eyes. David Prayed, Turn
away mine eyes that I regard not vanity, and quicken me in thy Law. And again,
Open mine eyes, that I may see the Wondrous things of thy Law. There is much
danger in following our eyes. Eve was misled by her eye; She looked upon the
forbidden-fruit and saw it beautiful, and lusted after it. And when I saw
(says Achan) among the spoils, a goodly Babilonish Garment, and a wedge of
gold, then I coveted them, and took them, Josh. 7.21. David was defiled with
the glance of his eye: he saw Bathsheba from the roof of his house washing her
self, and then he lusted, 2 Samuel. 11.1. Holy Men have prayed to God, that he
would keep their eyes in a right frame and temper. These are the particulars
that Solomon gives to young men in direction, to take heed of Carnal joy: to
take heed of walking after their Hearts: these things (Brethren) I have
committed in direction to you.

The last part of this Doctrine I have reserved for Old-men: for if young men
may not rejoice carnally, much less may Old-men: youth may plead for it self,
in want of Wisdom and Gravity, and Experience, better then those of Age. If
young men may not have evil hearts and eyes, much less old men. Look to it, you
that hear me this day, that are stricken in age, (as the Scriptures says) that
are smitten in your limbs with age, that you cannot walk with activity, and
nimbleness, and are smitten in your senses with age, that you cannot well see,
and hear, and fast: Oh that your hearts would smite you for your sins: Oh,
would to God you did bethink your selves before it be too late: May not young
men rejoice in Pleasures, in Friends, in Honor, in Wealth? much less may old
age: must young men be careful to chase away all Carnal joy, and get Spiritual
joy, that begins in godly Sorrow? much more must old men: It is no time for
those that are Old, to rejoice in carnal things: a few days will make an end of
them, and lay them in the Grave: Oh the^ you that are of years, break off your
Sins by Repentance: and your iniquities by Mercy: Rejoice ye, in being good:
and in doing good, this joy will continue with you. But know thou, that for all
this, God will bring thee to judgment.

Doct. 2. That the Lord God will certainly bring men to Judgment for all the
Sins they have committed.
But know, thou must know it: you should always remember it: and whatsoever
thou take in hand, consider with thy self whether it will stand with thee at
that great day of judgment, Mal. 3.18. A Book of Remembrance was written
before God, for those that fear the Lord, and thought upon his Name. So the
Lord has a Book of Remembrance, wherein he writes down the sins of the Sons
of men and this shall be opened, Eccles. 12.14. God will bring every Work unto
Judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good, or whether it be evil,
2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad, 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with a voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God,
Jude 14. For the opening of this Point, I will briefly show you these two
things.

First, What is the reason that God will bring all these things to judgment.

Secondly, What manner of judgment this will be.

For the First, What is the reason that God will bring all these things to
judgment.

The First reason is, Decree, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men once to
dye, and after Death to Judgment. Even as it must needs be, that men must dye,
because God has appointed it, so it must needs be that men must come to
judgment, in regard of the purpose and decree of God.

Secondly, God will do this, in regard of his righteousness: He is a holy God,
a hater of iniquity: But many times in this World it is well with the Wicked,
and ill with the Godly: Lazarus he is in woeful misery, and Dives is in
abundance of prosperity. Now God will show his love to the Righteous, and his
hatred to the Wicked, in this judgment.

Lastly, the consciences of men may prove that there shall be a judgment: For
let a Man commit secret sins, that none knows of but God and he, yet many
times he feels hellish horror, which is a manifest proof, That Conscience
sees, and apprehends God, as the Supreme judge, That will call all men to
account for their sins.

Thus you hear the reasons why there must be a judgment.

1. It will be the last judgment, which declares the terribleness of it. In
this there is hope: Let the wicked forsake his ways and turn to the Lord, and
he will be gracious to him.

Again, It shall be a general judgment: which is the second thing, 2 Cor. 10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

3. It shall be a Manifest Judgment: Sometimes the Lord judges men secretly,
by raising up in them fears and horrors in their hearts, causing his Curse in
them, as Water in their Bowels, and Oil in their Bones: but then God shall open
his wrath against the Children of wrath, before all the world of men, and no
eye shall pity them.

4. It shall be a sudden judgment, even as the flood came upon the old world,
when they were sporting themselves, and deriding Noah, that preached to them of
the flood: this day shall come as a Snare, upon all that dwell upon the earth,
it shall come as a thief in the night.

5. It shall be a Righteous Judgment, Romans 2. God will tender to every man
according to his deeds.

Lastly, It shall be an eternal judgment So says the Apostle, Heb. 6.2. It is
not meant that God will fit for ever, but it is so called from the effects: for
the conclusion shall be this: the eternal weal and happyness of the Godly, and
the eternal woe and misery of the wicked, that shall be plunged by the Justice
of God into the severest torments.

The Use of this Doctrine.
Will God bring both Old and Young great and small, to judgment? then let this
be for instruction to all, to haste to repentance. Beloved, this is one of the
last things that God will do, and this is the greatest thing that the Minister
can say: God will judge you for your sins, Acts 17 31. God has appointed a
day, in which he will judge the World in Righteousness. Surely if this does not
awaken us, nothing will, nothing can. Art thou able to stand before God when he
is angry with us? oh, the hardness of Man's heart! that will not be awakened
though he hears that the Judge is at the door, but still goes on, treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath.

In the third place: this Doctrine that God will judge the world, should make
us Preserve in our selves a good conscience. Act. 24.16. The Apostle had hope
that there should be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust,
therefore he did exercise himself to have always a good conscience, void of
offense, toward God, and toward man.

Lastly, This Doctrine should teach us to fear God, and give Glory to him: As
St. John speaks in his Revelation: The Day of his Judgment is a coming,
therefore fear him, and give glory to him: and the Lord give you understanding
in all things.

FINIS.

