A SPEECH Delivered to the KING In the Name of the Foreign Churches Of ^his
REALM, for the ROYAL PROTECTION WHICH HIS MAJESTY Has been pleased to assure
^h^ (...) His late DECLARATION.

Pronounced at WHITEHALL, on Frid^ MARCH the 15th. 1665/6.

By LEWIS HERAVLT, Minister of the FRENCH Church in LONDON.

Published by Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Ratcliffe, for Octavian Pulleyn junior, at the Bible
in St. Paul's Churchyard over against the little North-door. M.DC.^. ^.

A SPEECH Delivered to the KING In the Name of the FOREIGN CHURCHES Of this
REALM, for the Royal Protection which HIS MAJESTY has been pleased to assure
Them of by His late DECLARATION.
SIR,
IT is in the Name of the Foreign Churches, both French and Dutch, who live
under Your Majesty's Royal Government, that this Day we have the Honor to
appear in Your Presence, to render unto Your Majesty our humblest Submissions,
and deepest Respects; and to Present you not Thoughts curiously upon, choice
Words, or an artificial composed Speech, but Hearts burning with Zeal,
fervently devoted to Your Majesty's service, and Souls breathing nothing else
but Thankfulness, Obedience, and Fidelity. No, SIR, this Speech is not a Speech
of Art, but of Nature. It is out of the abundance of the heart, Mat. 12, 34.
that our mooths do make this humble Acknowledgment to Your Majesty of all the
Favors we have formerly received from Your Royal Goodness; and in a more
especial manner, to render unto Your Majesty with all the sincerity of our
hearts, our most humble Thanks for this last great Favor which You were
pleased to add to the former, in following the Example of God, who does not
only take into his protection all Mankind, but more particularly all true
Believers: And according to St. Paul's Exhortation, who advises us to do good
to all men; 1 Timothy 4.10.
but especially to those who are of the household of faith. Gal. 6.10.
Your Majesty, by Your Declaration, published not long since, taking under Your
Royal Protection all the Strangers living in Your Dominions, and willing to
come into them for shelter, does declare a most kind and special care toward
those amongst them who have that advantage, and are so happy as to be joined
and united with Your Majesty in the same Bond of Faith and Religion.

SIR, by that Clause inserted in Your Declaration in favor of all Foreigners
in General, Your Majesty does most advanta^^ously show at once Your Humanity,
Prudence, and Generosi^^ (...) ^essing in this, according to its usual
practice, the Cha^ (...) truly Royal disposition, whose purpose it is to do
good (...) men and to do hurt to none: (...) Luke 22.
And so You may with right ^^ke upon ^^u the Title of Benefactor, which is
given to Kings in the Gos^ (...) in a more particular manner belonging unto
Your Majesty (...) and in that also. SIR, You show Your Self to be the true
Son, and worthy Successor of the late King Your Father, of glorious and
immortal Memory, who caused this excellent Motto to be engraven on a Medal,
^rasum ut prosim, I am a King only to do good: And in this respect it may be
said of Your Majesty, Carolus Quintus.
what was said of that great Emperor of the last Century, That with one hand he
made War, and with the other he offered Peace.

But also, because Your Majesty's Goodness amongst all Strangers in General, is
pleased more especially to consider those whom the purer profession of the
Gospel does force to seek here under the shadow of Your Royal Protection, the
Peace and Liberty of their Consciences; You give therein a manifest proof of
Your true Christian Piety, and show that You might have, without any
comparison, more right to assume, amongst Your Titles, that Motto, Adrian.
Pietas Augusta, the August Piety, than did that Emperor of Old. By it also You
do Declare to all the World, that most justly, and in a most august manner, the
glorious Title of Defender of the Faith, is Your just due, and that it is not
without a direction of Gods special Providence that it is fallen, as it were,
amongst the Lot of Your Inheritance.

By this means, it old Rome was praised and renowned for her Hospitality
toward afflicted Strangers, who did resort thither from all Corners of the
World, and to whom She was an Azylum, (...) a place of Reinge, and for this
reason was called the Center of all Nations; Your England, SIR, with a far more
just Title enjoyes that Cle^y, and deserves much more to be so called, having
been so happy for above an whole Age past, by the Bounty of the Kings Your
Predecessors, and of Your Majesty, to be likewise an Azylum, and a place of
shelter to many Thousands of the Faithful of several Nations, who being forced
to forsake their own Country, have, as it were, found it again here with
greater and more considerable advantages: Insomuch as of them, in some sort it
may be said, That they had been lost, if they had not been lost.

By this means also, SIR, after the Example of Him, whose Image You have the
Honor so particularly to bear, You draw them to Your Obedience and Service;
You tie and fasten them to You with a most strict Knot; You chain and link
their hearts, if I may so say, with the cards of a man, and with bands of love;
You Rule, SIR, not only over their Bodies, but chiefly over, and in their
Souls, in which You have established Your Empire and Dominion.

And hereof it is, SIR, that we now make a solem^ (...) station to Your
Majesty, humbly beseeching You with (...) foundest Humility we are capable of
to be fully (...) our entire Obedience, and steadfast and inviolat^ (...) Your
Service, from which we shall never depart i^ (...) there directly nor indirectly.

In this state and condition, SIR, we shall continue (...) to pray and beseech
the God of all Blessings, that it may plea^^ him to sanctify more and more all
those great Endowments, and rare and eminent Virtues, with which he has been
pleased to enrich Your Majesty, and for which You are at this Day by all the
World looked upon as one of the greatest Princes that ever wore a Crown, being
thus by God made a powerful Instrument in his hand for the accomplishment of
his work. We shall continue fervently to pray and beseech him, Psalm. 144.10.
who gives salvation unto Kings, and delivers them from the hurtful Sword;
who has already wrought so many Wonders in Your Majesty's behalf; and who
after many fiery Trials to prepare and frame You for his work, having showed
You great and sore troubles, has quickened You, and brought You again from the
depths of the Earth; Psalm. 71.20.
who having suffered Your Majesty to be as it were, for a time trodden upon by
Dragons, and covered with the shadow of Death, has at last br^^sed in pieces,
and trodden down those Dragons under his feet, causing their outrageous devices
to return on their own guilty heads, showing himself to be the God of Your
Salvation. To him, I say, we shall daily pray, that he will be pleased to take
more and more Your SaCRed Person in his Custody and Protection, Psalm. 17.8.
Isa. 49.16. Cant. 8.6.
delivering You from all hurtful Accidents whatsoever: To keep You as the Apple
of his Eye, to cover You under the shadow of his Wings: To have You always
graven as upon the palms of his hands: To set You as a Seal upon his heart, as
a Seal upon his arm: To encamp round about Your Majesty the Army of his holy
Angels: To be Your Van and Your Rear: To be Your Buckler, Psalm. 71.18. Psalm.
61.8. Psalm. 91.4.
and an impenetrable Shield of Defense against all Attempts and Enterprises.
Not to leave You, nor to forsake You, till You are Grey-headed, and that You
may abide before him for ever: That his Truth and Mercy may preserve You: That
it may be to You a Shield and a Buckler: That he will pour down abundantly on
Your Majesty's Head the choicest of his Blessings both of Heavens and Earth:
Psalm. 132.18. Psalm. 21.4. Psalm. ^ 16.
That he make Your Majesty's Diadem flourish on Your Brows, and Your golden
Crown on Your Head: That he satisfy Your Majesty with long life: That he
continue to show You his deliverance: That he in a full happiness add days
unto the days of Your Majesty's, and make Your Years to be as many
Generations: That he pour his blessing upon Your Royal Bed, that he make it
green and flourishing, that the Queen (...) Royal Confort be as a fruitful
Vine. To be short, that he (...) ^ed to give unto Your Majesty a long and happy
Life, a (...) ^ire, a firm and well ^stablished House, victorious Ar^ (...)
C^^^sel (...) ^edient People, a quiet State. Briefly, (...) a word, SIR, that
he be continually (...) You by the right hand, Psalm ^^ (...)
guide You by his Counsel, (...) ^eceive You into his Glory. Amen, SIR, Amen,

FINIS.

