Holland turned to Tinder, OR, ENGLANDS Third Great Royal VICTORY.
Being an exact Narrative brought by Captain Talbot Commander of the Elizabeth
a fourth rate Frigate of the Blew Squadron who on wednesday night came into
Harwitch, and sent an Express to the KING at White Hall, of all that had past
betwixt both the fleets, before and in the Fight: which news has been
continued since by other rersons from aboard the Royal Charles, who give
account of a total Rout given to the Dutch, and a great Victory obtained
against them, insomuch that they are beaten and blocked in their own Harbors:
All this was performed on Wednesday and Thursday 25. and 26. of July, 1666.

The Tune is, Packingtons pound.




THe weather is clear, which was late over cast
and our long expectation's are answered at last,
With News from the Navy, which I shall impart
Enough to rejoice every English-mans heart,
That Is honest and true,
(And is not a Jew)
but would give to God and to Caesar his Due,
This will be a joyful and Royal Relation
To such as love God, the King, and the Nation:
those D^tel Demigorgons, Gods power convinces
and makes them all Servant, yt aimed to be Princes.
On Wednesday last, the twenty fifth day of July
Came in this Narration which I Will tell ye truly,
From brave Cay* Talbot a man of stout carriage
That then brought a part of this News into Harwich,
Both Ruin and Rage.
(In brave Equipage)
Last wednesday at noone both ye fleets did engage
The winds were our friends, and did fly out our sails
With very fresh Northerly brave top-sail gales
We dined with the Hogens upon their own Coast,
You might a had Dutchmen there boild or roast,
At first both the Navies did fight in a Line,
Three hours with much fury and force (but in fine)
The Enemies Fleet into three Squadrons flew,
And Sir Jeremie Smith (Admiral of the Blew)
By lot was to face,
Pursue, and to Chase
out the Zelanders Squadron, ye strongest that was
They fought it out furiously, all the day after,
And fiercely incounter'd, like wildfire and water,
A Frigate of ours called the Resolution,
Was burnt by the Dutch in this depth of confusion.
The white and red squadrons did ply y^ two other
So fast yt they almost were choked with ye smother
They tugged very hard who should stand it out longest,
Our blew was ye weakest, the Zealand the strongest
And yet they fight,
'Till so late at night,
that powder and darkness deprived them of sight
The two Hollan^ squadrons both turned tail and fled
Pursued by the squadrons of our White and Red,
Upon thursday morning betwixt nine and ten,
The Zealand's were cripled and hopp'd home again.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.




TO aid ye blew squadron a thousand stout men
Were sent (in five frigates) by sir William Pen,
And Talbot does tell us ere he did retire,
On wednesday night he saw six Dutch ships on fire,
Two hundred almost
Of our men were lost,
such victories seldom are gained without cost,
The ^ealanders Admiral some think is gone
Unto his last home, when his stag was shot down,
It Is highly presumed by the best knowing men,
They nere will be able to fight us again.
The prestmen (well mingled with stout volunteers
Did drink away dolor and fight away fears:
Our small shot did stand to it with valiant desire,
Their Guns spit and sparkl'd like bay leaves in fire
Our Canons did roar
They sunk and they tore.
thousands that heard them will nere hear them more.
It is better far in a good cause to dye,
Then with a bad conscience to live great and high:
And in act: of honor there is no better thing,
Then dye a true Martyr for God and the King.
Our white and red squadrons Du Ruiter engaged
Five bouts, till at last his fierce fury aswag'd,
He fought as if he bad been Mars his own son,
From ten in the morning, till three afternoon.
Our Red and our White
Did dazel his sight,
they made him to turn and to run away quite,
For no other reason as some men suppose
But courage did fall from his heart to his hose:
Though bad men seek victory, and think to win it
It never will prosper, if God be not in it.
Our Frigots persued him, our Canons did roar,
Until they were come within two miles of shore*
Our great Ships persu'd, and continued ye slaughter,
So far till they were within six fathom water:
They durst not look back,
To see what we lack,
but posting for life, to their Harbors they tack;
Their Flags being struck, and not set up again,
It Is thought that Ven Trump and Du Ruiter is slain.
He that does protect us, will save us from evil,
In spite of the Dutch, the Dane, or the Devil.
Besides all the damage our Shipping has done,
To Vessels and men, in their fight, and their run.
Two very stout Ships we have taken and fired.
And in them five hundred and ninety men tired,
With tagging for that,
They cannot get at.
to make England stoop to their pittyful State;
When slaves are turned princes, no tyrants so evil
When beggars are mounted, they ride to ye Devil
No Souls so insulting as such sordid Slaves,
As climb to preferment on honest men's graves.
Our Generals and Navy, are all safe and sound,
The Prince; and the Duke have our foes in ye pound
They in their own Harbors are prisoners at ease,
The King of great Britain Commands where he please.
We ride on the Ocean,
And wait for the Motion,
to venture again they have no great devotion,
had they not crept in, they would been burnt to a cinder
And Holland by this time, had been turned to tinder
God bless King and Queen, with ye Duke, and all such,
As are friends to great Britain, and foes to the Dutch.
With Allowance.

London, Printed by F. Crowch, for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J Wright.


