(...)ELEGY On the (...) of the Most Illstrious PRINCE HENRY DUKE of
GLOUCESTER, Third Brother to our most Gracious Sovereign Lord KING CHARLES the
Second, Who Deceased this present LIVE the 13th* of September 1660.
TOGETHER W^^^(...) ^^^tation of all his Virtues and Religious Acts, Prudent
Counsels, and ^^^^ely Behaviors both in the R^^lm of England, and beyond the
Seas.
(...) Sacred Flame* What Glorious light?
(...) that left the World in such a fright,
(...) all were in a doubt
(...) when his Soul went out,
^
World was (...) Glory,
Of such an O^^entiall pearl,we know
Angels Enjoyed him, while we Mourn below:
For such a sweet and Lovely loss as he,
Youngest of years did Blush in his Maturity;
Whose Fragrant smiles, and Crimson colored Cheek,
In primest of beauties, all might far go seek:
And still will say, not finding such a one,
The prime Cornation of the Gardens gone,
The Earth surrendered him, he was to sweet,
An Orient Fabric, here with us to keep,
For Angels themselves, in Heaven they,
Made composition to take him away:
For whose rich Virtues sweet Society,
Need must they Crown him with Immortality:
O blessed Prince! who thought thy Coronation
Had been so near in this thy Transportation:
Unto a Heavenly Kingdom, all does know,
But could not we have Crowned thee here below;
Heavens said nay to that, and with Applause,
Advanct thy Soul, to sweet Halelujahs,
Heavenly Harmonies, Angelical Praise,
Circle thy Throne in most Glorious Rays;
Of Triumphant Graces, amongst the holy Dieties,
Whose wondrous Virtues, and Godly Pieties,
Exceeds a Solomon, the world does know,
That such a tender Branch, could virtue show,
In such abundance, and of such a prize,
The Worlds too little for to Equalize;
His admirable parts he had of late,
Which could give Counsel, to a Church and State:
To all good things, by Nature did Incline,
He sprung from such a good and Godly Vine,
Of Royal Decent, and Lineage of a King,
Peace, Virtue, and Religion well Grounded in:
His Sacred Flames, no less Divine then bright,
That Heaven it self unto him took Delight,
And in an instant opened on each side
That through the Air, most gently down did glide,
A Curious Chariot, of Azur cullered hew,
That Cherubins and Ceraphins most glorious drew,
Guarded by Angels Everlasting Smiles,
Clouds of Auroras culler bore the Wheels,
Whereon their Heavenly Banners did display,
To take this seemed Diety away:
And made a Coronis of Stars to be
His mortal Crown unto Eternity;
An Earthly one was not for his behoof,
Else Heavens did not think it good enough;
For to adorn him with an earthly praise,
Or wreath his sacred Head with laurel bays:
No no, to Heaven he must soon depart,
And leave a Mournful Realm without a Heart:
His loss with forrow does the Land involve,
But that the Royal State is not dissolved:
O^ he that truly would Mourn for such a Man,
To find him tears, should drain the Ocean;
And leave no more in it, with a grieved heart,
Then one Ararat under Noah's Ark:
But can tears cease us, or complaints renew
This Virtuous Prince, that Heavens will not do;
Except Celestial, then his purity
Transcends the crystal apple of the eye;
So then if grief by no means can revive,
'Twill be so happy to keep Fame alive;
And say blessed Prince of everlasting praise,
Thy Country gloried in thy youthful days:
O glorious Heavens! why were thou so prone
To extract his immortal Soul from us so soon;
That we more fuller all may here declare
Our plaints, we should lay by our tears which are
Too weak for such a loss; we now should slack
With a just sigh, the center and awake
The spirit of Grief, that so our Ancients may
Make our love known in what we mournful say.
Wee've lost our Prince, a glorious light we miss,
The very offspring and the root of Jess,
Which in the highest Heavens now in shrouds
All immortality above the Clouds,
Of eternal blessedness: O! may we find.
Joy in those Royal Branches left behind;
Since that Divine providence has it so,
Let grief befriend us, that we all may grow
Rich in thy Virtues, and be Noble bent,
To Honor thy Relics in thy Monument:
So ending in thy glorious splendid luster
Of Thrice Renowned HENRY Duke of Gloucester.
Tho. Howard. LONDON, Printed for W. Gilbertson.


