The High Court of Justice at Westminster, arraigned at the Bar in the Old
Bayley at the Sessions House; WHERE, Those that adjudged and murdered the
Royal Person, and Sacred Majesty of King CHARLES the First, are for that horrid
Fact brought to their Legal Trial, according to the known Laws of the Land.
To the Tune of, Packingtons Pound.
P I











THe manifold Changes that have happened of late,
To the rich and the poor, to the Church and the State,
To Princes, Plebeans, to Pesants and Peers,
Within the circumference of twenty years,
May teach us to see
In every degree,
There Is nothing is certain, but uncertainty,
For who would have thought in the time of the War,
The High Court of Justice should come to the Bar?
No power but the High Court of Heaven could tell
What fate should befall to that High Court of Hell,
Hugh Pe^ers, Jack Hewson, Cook, Carew and Scot,
Tom Harrison, Hacker, and Jones had forgot,
(As now it appears
In these latter years)
Gods High Court of Justice has overcome theirs,
In spite of Rebellion, Plots, Plunder and War,
Their High Court of Justice is brought to the Bar,
What Villains but they could have sentenced a King
In whom all the graces of Princes did spring.
Their hearts were more hard than Barbarians are
To bring such a Prince from the Throne to the Bar,
A Monarch that meant
All love and content,
Unto the Church, and the State, and Parliament,
Which they did cut off by a Council of War,
But now their High Court is brought down to the Bar.
It was a great sin against their conscience, I Am sure,
That no Law or Gospel could ever endure,
Although with a color of pureness they did it,
And under the Mask of Religion they hid it,
Jack Hewson and Jones
St. Hugh and his bones
To be the Kings Judges did sit upon Thrones,
But now they are coupled like slaves as they are,
And their High Court of Justice is brought to the Bar.
They set up a new Law for to murder him,
But it is a good old Law that shall hang up them,
These brave men of war and bold Champions must now
In Middlesex for it make a new randezvow,
Like Rogues they must rally,
And from Newgate sally,
Unto the sad Sessions House in the old Bayley,
And there to be tried, as all murderers are,
For their High Court of Justice etc.
Their many successes and victories got,
Upon the poor English, the Irish and Scot,
Persuaded them that they should live with their treasure
In freedom, in safety, in plenty and pleasure
That they could not fall
From places so tall,
Because they had gotten the Devil and all;
But now they do find that in spite of the War,
Their High Court of Justice, etc.
Your Sectaries that did all fight for our goods.
Renounce all your Actions, and leave you in the suds,
Your fasting and praying on other men's Lands
Have brought your necks under the hang-mans commands,
The people do moan,
The Gallows does groan,
Till you have ascended the three legged Throne,
Where you shall be mounted as Murderers are,
Whose High Court of Justice, etc.
Hugh Peter's lies terribly under the lash,
He now must forsake both the world and the flesh,
His Mistress and he must be parted, and then
The Butcher may have his own Brindle again,
The Gentleman you
Did call fool good Hugh,
At this time may question you who is the fool now,
Such politic knaves the greatest fools are,
When High Court of Justice, etc.
When you flattered Oliver up in his sin,
You did not suppose that the King would come in,
When you made Religion your Baud and your Punk
You scarce thought upon the Lord General Monk,
When for Wedding-Rings,
You fought against Kings
You little did think to be hagn'd in the strings,
From henceforth let all Politicians beware
Their High Court of Justice will come to the Bar.
They say Hewson's taken, I wish it be true,
He was a bold knave, give the Devil his due,
The three cornered Shop-stall he now must ascend,
Where Dun will prepare him a Coblers-end;
He rose up in haste,
But falls down as fast,
And now the blind Cobbler will lose Awl at last,
For such hasty risers, their punishment are,
When High Courts of Justice are brought to the Bar.
Bold Harrison (as the wild rumor does run)
Will justify this bloody fact he has done;
But let him take heed lest for such a great slaughter
His soul meet an High Court of Justice hereafter,
A Court that controuls,
I pity their souls,
And shall pray for them when St. Pulchres bell towls
God's mild Courts of mercy for penitents are,
When High Court of Justice, etc.
I wish they had never deserved this Trial
But bathing their guilty hands in the blood Royal,
I grieved when his Majesty lost his dear breath;
More than I shall joy at his Murderers death;
God bless our good King
From Treason soul spring,
And give him those Joys that are everlasting;
Rejoice and be glad all that innocent are,
For the High Court of Justice is brought to the Bar,
The Names of those bloody Persons, who sat, gave Judgment, and assisted in
that horrid and detestable Murder of King Charles the first, (of blessed
memory) whose Estates both real and personal are to be secured.
John Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law, President of the pretended High Court of
Justice, I. Lisle, W Say, O. Cromwell, H. Ireton, Esquires. Sir Hard. Waller,
Valen. Walton, Tho. Harrison, Ed. Whaley, Tho. Pride, Isaac Ewers, Esquires.
Lord Gray of Groby. Sir J. Danvers Knight. Sir Tho. Maleverer Baronet. Sir. J.
Bourcher Knight. W. Heveningham Esquire Isaac Pennington Alderman of London. W.
Purefoy, H. Martin J. Barkstead, J. Blackiston, Gilb. Millington, Esquires. Sir
W. Constable Baronet. Ed. Ludlow, J. Hutchinson, Esquires. Sir Mich. Livesey
Baronet. R. Tichbourn, O. Roe, R. Lilburn, Ad. Scroop, Rich. Deane, J. Okey, J.
Hewson, W. Goffe, Corn. Holland, J. Carry, J. Jones, Miles Corber, Fr. Allinn,
Pereg. Pelham, J. Moore, J. Aldreds H. Smith, Hum. Edwards, Greg. Clement, Tho.
Woogan Esquires. Sir. Greg. Norton, Knight. Ed. Harvy, J. Ven, Tho. Scot,
Esquires. Tho. Andrews Alderman of London. W. Cawly, Anth. Staply, J. Downs,
Tho. Horton, Tho. Hammond, Nic. Love, Vincent Potter, Aug. Garland, J. Dixwel,
G. Fleetwood. Sim. Meyne, Ja. Temple, P. Temple, Dan. Blagrave, and Tho. Wait
Esquires.

The Names of those exempted from Pardon.
John Lisle, William Say, Jo. Barkstead, Cornelius Holland.

FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Grove on Snow-hill, Entered according to Order.


