To the best of MONARCHS, His MAJESTY of GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
CHARLES THE SECOND, A GRATULATORY POEM On the most happy Arrival of His most
Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, who landed at Dover, Friday, May 25. 1660. to
the most unspeakable Joy of His Subjects.
Heaven at the Last has heard my Prayers, I stand,
Full of fair hopes to kiss my Princes hand,
And need no flames that may new heats infuse,
Zeal can create a Verse without a Muse;
The wounds I have received, the years I Have spent,
The months l've told in long imprisonment,
I look on now with Joy; who would not be
One day in Chains, to be for ever free?
My Prayers are heard, the King Himself is come,
The Grace and Glory of all Christendom.
It Is He repairs our Breaches, and restores
The Land to safety, and does heal our Sores;
It Is He that strokes our Griefs, and wipes our Eyes,
Sets us in order, and does make us wise:
For never was Nation so before misled,
To court the Tail, and make the Rump their Head.
Where are the Saints now that would fain be known,
To have no other Holidays but their own?
Where are our cruel Regicids, and all
That petulant crew we ANABAPTISTS call?
Whose wild Religion, and whose zeal does border,
On Faction, Ruin, Falihood and Disorder;
Whose Gospel speaks it is too hard a thing,
To honor God, and to obey the King;
And from their Bibles do expunge that Text,
As too obliging, or too much perplexed:
The day is now at hand that will declare,
What men of Conscience, and what Saints they are,
Who still pursue (oh most inhumane wrongs)
The Lords Anointed with their threatening tongues;
As if the Father slain, they had not done
Enough, unless they massacred the Son:
This to prevent, the King Himself draws nigh,
Full of His Cause, His Eye with Majesty,
His Brow with thunders armed, and on each hand
The Youth of Heaven in files unnumbred stand,
His glorious Guard; for to the world be it known,
That Heaven is pleased to make this Cause his own:
For who the King affront, the like would do
Toth' KING of Kings, could they come at Him too.
Now as the Sun when his absented light
Approaches nearer Day, does smile out right,
And the thick Vapors of the night do fly
In guilty Tumults from his searching Eye;
So now the King in person has begun
To show himself like the Meridian Sun,
To shine in all his Glories, and dispense
Throughout the Land his powerful Influence;
The clouds of bold Rebellion, the false light
Of falser zeal, and Meteors of the Night,
The sullen Vapors, and the Mists that made
A great Confusion in so great a shade,
Shall waste before him, as he comes our States
Extremes to temper; for it pleased the Fates,
Though others travaild in the work, yet none
Shall heal our Griefs, but who our hearts did own;
Nor shall the North regain their ancient worth,
But by that Monarch whom the North brought forth.
And Fame no sooner to our ears did bring
The welcome story of our landed King,
But all the Lords and Gentry of the Land
Made haste to wait upon his high Command,
So full their Trayn, so gallant their Array,
As if their splendour would outshine the day;
Who all as soon as they the King displayed,
Who can imagine what a shout was made?
The glittering of their clothes outvy'd the Suns,
Hats in the Air flew up, Guns roard to Guns,
And Trumpets deafned Trumpets, who'd have thought
These e're in arms against each other fought?
The outlandish that did mark it, and stood by,
In our behalf all out aloud did cry,
Was never Nation now more blessed than we?
Nor ever Monarch more admired then He.
How great will be our growing Joys we may
Presume will Crown his Coronation Day?
For to his matchless merit 'twill be more
Then ever King of ENGLAND had before;
At which, since Heaven and Earth with shouts doring,
Let Heaven and Earth say both, GOD save the KING.
S. HOLLAND.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


