GODS VOICE to CHRISTENDOM, OR, Alarm to Europe: By the Remarkable
Earthquakes, with the several kinds thereof, two hundred years before the Birth
of CHRIST. The Causes and Kinds, Antecedents, and Consequents, (Pestilence,
Sword, Famine) following there upon, the nature of Meteors, Effective, and
productive of an Earthquake.

Some part whereof was delineated by the great and Virtuous ROBERT BOIL
Esquyer, in the year 1681, relating to the dreadful Comet.

The Impendent Judgments and Causes of GODS Wrath against a sinful people,
seasonably and particularly applied to the Sons of LEVI.

Habbakuk 1.4.5. The Law of the LORD is slackned, the wicked compass about the
Righteous, wrong judgment proceeds forth: Behold I will work a work in your
days, which ye will not believe, tho it were told you.

By a Minister of CHRIST. Edinburgh Reprinted in the Year, 1693.

TO all Right, High, and Mighty Princes, States, and Earls of EVROPE.
Sacred writ confers on you the name and dignity of Gods, though ye must die
like men. Plutarch and Senica qualifies the lives of great persons to that of
the gods, who delight in actions of Benificence, the contemplation of which is
superior to all satisfaction loving Justice and Mercy; which made the Duke of
Calabria affix an Bell near his Chamber, to be rung by the poorest of his
Subjects. Kings of Old, indefatigably for fear, Sacrifysed your fear be
Christian, for vere magnus Deus Christianorum; Nor are you to be Priest riden
with a Vain bragg, God has spoken so, he did to Balaam a beastly Prophet, and
yet a propheiical Ass. The Greeks ascribe the ruin of their Church, rise and
progress of Mahomet, to the division of Christian Kings; which made the Goths
and Vandels ransact the Romans, outdared by the Hunns born of Witches, and
begot by Devils, who found a safe passage unto the confines of Europe, by the
chase of an Heart, which did invite these Clans and Rascalities to flock into
Europe whit their wits and Arm their Sperits, in one night 100000, by the help
of Bladders to swim the Danube, and murder so many Christians.

THO the Efficient and Matterial causes of an Earthquak be natural, yet the
Final is the signification of an Angry GOD, moved by the execrable Crimes of a
wicked people according to that of David, in the 18 Psalm, verse 7: The Earth
trembled and quaked, the foundation of the hills also shook and removed,
because he was wroth.

Fear chills our hearts, what heart can fear dissemble
When steeples stagger, and hudge Mountains tremble
The Romans in time past commanded by edict, that Prayers and Supplication
should b^ made in time of an Earthquake, but the must call upon no God by
Name, as on other Holy Days, for fear they mistook the GOD into whom it
belonged. And the mo^^ Ancient of the Graecians called Neptune, the Mover and
Shaker of the Earth, supposi^^ the Cause proceeds from the Fluctuatio^ and
Flowings of the Waters up and down^ the hollow places under the ground, or the
the Shaking proceeded from the downfall of Subterranian Caves, and that
sometimes whole Mountains sunk in and caused the trembling. But properly the
cause of a^ Earthquake happens when Air and Windy Spirits be shut up within
the Caverns of the Earth, or have such passage as is too narrow for them, they
then striving to break their Prisons, shake it, and make it tremble. Now this
Imprisonment is caused thus, Namly, when the Earth which is dry by Nature
happens to be Watered by continual Rains. Then not only the Pores and Caverns
thereof are stopped and closed up, but the Exhalations and Air within the Earth
are increased. To which purpose Dr. Fulk in his third Book of Meteors says,
The great Caves and Dens of the Earth, most needs be full of Air continually,
for there is no Vacuum in Nature, for when by the heat of the Sun, the moisture
of the Earth is resolved, many Exhalations are generated, as well within the
Earth as without; And whereas the places were full before, so that they could
hold or receave no more, except part of that which is in them be let out, it
most needs follow, that in such Country, where the Earth has few Pores, or
else where the Ait stopped with Moisture, that there I say, these Exhalations
striving to get out, do either rent the Earth or lift it up, that thereby, a
free passage may be had, or else room enough to abid therein, and as in other
kinds, so, also in this Subterranean fires multiply: Neither do we think that
the Sun is the only cause of shuting up of the Pores of the ground, for then
Earth quakes should be in a manner, as frequent as dryings after Rain.

The kinds of Earthquakes be various, some when the whole force of the Wind
drives to one part: there being no contrary motion to let or hinder it, many
Hills and Buildings, have been rushed down by that kind of Earthquake,
especialiy when the Wind causing it be strong, for if it be a feeble Wind, it
only looseneth or unfasteneth foundations: If less-feeble, then the Earth
without any further hand shakes like one sick of an Ague.

The second kind of Earthquake, is not so much Lateral, as Perpendicular or
upright, which is when the Earth with so great Violence rises up by and by
sinketh down again, for after the Wind that causes the Earth to swell is broke
out of Prison, the Earth returns to its old place, even as it was before.

The Third is a Gaping, or Rending, or Cleaving of the Earth, one part being
driven so far from another, that whole Towns, Cities, Hills and Rocks, Rivers,
Seas, and the like, are swallowed up, and never seen again. The Fourth, is a
shaking, that causes a sinking, and is far differing from the former, for now
the Earth splitteth not, but sinketh; This being in such places, where the
surface of the ground be solid, yet it has a salt foundation, which being
moistened with water, by the sorce of the stinking exhalation, is turned into
water also: Thus was the Antlantlck Ocean caused to be an Sea, which before was
an Island, according to the Testimony of Famous Plato 366 years before the
Birth of CHRIST.

The fifth kind of Earthquake, is contrary to the former, for as before the
ground sinks downso now it is cast up, like as in the second kind already
mentioned only this is the difference that now the Earth returns not into its
place again, but remains a great Mountain, yea, if such a rising be in the
Sea, it not only causes overflowings, but produces likewise many Islands,
such as was never seen before.

Thus absolutely have we considered the Case; Now relatively of the Antecedents
of an Earthquake. A great Calmness of the Air mixed with some Cold; the reason
of which is, because the Exhalation which should be blown abroad, is within the
Earth. 2ly. The Sun looks very dim certain days before there be no Clouds. The
reason of which is, because the Wind which should have purged and dissolyed the
gross Air, takes taken prisoner, and enclosed within the Bowels of the Earth.

Thirdly, The Birds fly not, but sit still beyond ordinary, tho there be no
Clouds; The reason of which is, either the Pent Exhalation sends some strange
alteration into the Air, which slenderly breath out of some insensible Pores of
the Earth, which it may do, tho the Exhalation comes not out; or else it is
that they are scarce able to fly for want of some gentle Gales for their Wings
to strike upon, It being a thing well known, that Birds fly more willingly and
cheerfully when the Air is of such a temper. 4ly. The weather is calm, and yet
the water of the Sea is troubled, and rages mightily: The reason of which is,
because the great plenty of spirits or wind in the bottim of the Sea, begins
to lay out for passage that way, and finding none, is sent back again,
whereupon, soon after it shakes the Land, this is a certain sign. 5ly. The
water in the bottom of the Pits and deep Wells is troubled, ascending and
moving as if it boiled, stinking, and is infected: The reason of which is,
because the Exhalation being Pentin; and striving to get forth, moves some
stinking minerals, and other Poisonous Stuff to the springs of those waters and
they with the struggling Exhalation, stir and attaint them. 6ly. There is a long
thin Cloud seen in the clear Sky either a little before Sun setting, or soon
after. Moreover in a quiet Sea, the waves float to their Shore 'long and
straight. 7ly. There is another infallible sign, the great noise and sound
heard under the Earth, like to a groaning or very Thundering, this noise being
made by the struggling of the Wind under the Earth. Hence follows the sad
effects, the first whereof is the ruin of Buildings, together with the Death
of many People. Lanquet in his Chroniele says, about the year 29, before the
Birth of CHRIST, was an Earthquake in Jury, whereby thirty thousand People
perished. In the 5th year of Tiberius, Empercur of Rome, 13 Cities of Asia were
destroyed in one night by an Earthquake. In the 66 year of CHRIST, three Cities
of Asia, were overthrown. And near Herapolis, Colosse a little after Paul's
Death, their Church and Clergy degenerating, some by open Prophanity, some by
horrid Hypocrisy commencing wickedness in CHRIST'S Name. In the year of CHRIST
79, three Cities of Cyprus came to the like ruin, and in the year following
there was a Death of many People at Rome. In the year 114 Antitoch was much
damnaged, the Emperor Trajan escaping very narrowly. About the year of CHRIST
181, the City Smyrna came to the like tuine. Eusebius tells us of an Earthquake
that was all the world over, to the damnadge of many Towns and People. In the
year 551, at which time a Quave of the Earth swallowed most part of the City
Milesia, where the voice of the Inhabitants was heard crying for Succor and
Help. In the year 1456, perished about Naples 40 thousand People. Fromond Hist:
says, in the year 1508, Constantinople was so sore shoken innumberable Houses
and Towers were cast to the ground, and Chiefly the places of the great Turk,
in so far that he was forced to flee to another place, 1300 perished in this
calami^y. 1531. in the City of Lizbon 1400 Houses and Churches were shaken to
the ground, attended with Pestilence. Thia was made an Island in the very sight
of the Mariners turning sea unto dry land, so also cutting the neck of the
Istmus from the contenent. Thus Britain was severed from France, Africa from
Spain, Sicily from Italy hence brake out Rivers and Fountains in new places
happening by the breaches of the Earth among water Springs by the violence of
the Exhalation, which poisonous fume infects the Air and the Air us, causing
the Earth became sick and steirl, Drachomera Queen of Bohemea murdered her
mother upon her knees at prayer, slew pious Prince Weneisluas mocked and
misused Gods servants, till the revenging eye of God made the Earth, swallow
her up, and all her company.

LET any judge whether this lower ball,
Whose endless greatness we admire so all,
Seem not a point compair'd with upper Sphere,
Whose turnings turn the rest in there Career,
Why then should man this nothing thus respect,
As be for it Heavens Kingdom do neglect.
If thou feeds well, if feet and back be cled,
What more to thee can Kingly Riches add,
Not house nor Land, nor heaps of Gold and Trersoure
When sickness of thy body does take Seasure,
Can thence remove it, neither can thou find
A force in them to cure a troubled mind,
Are all men Moral, are all men born to die,
Can none on Earth posses Eternity,
Sure he who looks upon the Worlds Frail Stage,
And veius the actions of this present Age,
Such Souls inspired with the Gales of Grace,
Esteem the witching World no resting place,
A place of travel not a place of stay,
Such well devoted Pilgrims count their way.
Rouse then thy thoughts think what it is,
To be partakers of Eternal bliss.
For when the dry land GOD did make appear,
Was not that man should think his Heaven here:
Hence the inferences are patenr: Inser, first, asholy writ, does well forewarn
and allarm, we ought not to be partaker of other men's sins, else we most share
of there plagues: Bradford the Martyer used to pray, to be delivered from other
men sins; the Apostle John, at Ephesius Alarmed the people to fly from the
great Inn (where Cerinthus, and that pestilent Crew of Clergy were spreading
there Blasphemy) before the Earth swallowed down the cursed Caball; The Earth
shall disclose its Blood, says Isay, and no more cover its slain, Put thy self
O Sword into thy Scabard, says Jeremiah, how can I do this till I be drunk
with the Blood of my Enemies: The Sword of persecution goes round from hand to
band. Papists drew Satan's Pleugh and wore that Sword near 500 years. Prelates
above 150 years. The indulged party disclaiming the Mediatory Chair,
declarative Glory of Jesus CHRIST a new swarm of Locust Lamb like with a Fox
Skin of policy, have taken it from both, their hands, Commence all there malice
in Jesus name, knock down all Learning in the fore head, perswad poor ignorants
to Communions that know not the Creed! Tho out faternity could never hold
Communion with them, nay not in hearing, conform to Dr. Ames, and Assemblies
acts. Os orare vale convivia mensa negatur.

Yet Hundreds are put to Hell, and thousands on their march, verefy the Motto
whose Veins are full of the Martyers Blood, arteers are full of pride and
error, their Bones hardened with a custom of Apostasy, so that one man is a
Wolf to another.

2, why do we dwindle away the time and blind our eyes eating dust with the
Serpent, picking out Desaesion prelacy, from two poor words Tit. 1.5. every
City, when Jerusalem 40 years after Christ had so few Christians that being
warned to God, to depart to Pella, a little Village contained them all Eusebius
lib: 3. Cap. 5. Lidda, Jemnia Joppa, were within three Miles of one another and
three Episcopal Towns, and as Bishop Langham said those Bishops had high Racks
and poor Mangers: there were 1000 Bishops in Armenia says Baronius 1143. And
Petraven says there were but 20 Cities in Armeinea, nay, come nearer there
were in Ireland 365 Churches founded by St. Patrick, and as many Bishops says
Nemius and Usher and yet still but 19 Citys in Austeins time there were 900
Bishops in Africa. Philippe a City not so big Edinburgh had several Bishops and
Deacons. Philippians. 1.1.

Infer 3io. The abounding Impiety of Jamaica, and the forementioned places
proclaims Magnalia legis, the great things of GODS Law: Morality and Charity
are still wanting, Faith Love, and Charity: Faith to possess God, and love our
Neighbor: which makes the Earth to reel too and fro, like a Drunkard:
flinging out its Inhabitants in some places in other places swallowing them
down. With the unseparable consequents of a rageing sword, and sweeping pesta
Besome of Destruction for ignorant and, pragmatick Levites and Hypocrital
Gospellers professing absolution by the blood of Christ, yet scorning ablution,
hating to be glewd by the blood of Christ, Janguine Christi conglutinari. Let
the Mofttes of Barbary, and Musslamen of Turkey be limned with our silly Clergy,
and their Paganism and Civility shall overreach, their Cristianity. Memorable
is the saying of a pious and learned Divine, the Bible suffers more abuse in
Scotland nor any Kingdom of the World. Our Clergy being these 30 Years, like
the Woodcoks of Denmark, long nibs, fat bellies little brains, and so delight
to be. Wittily replied the Indian King to the Spaniard, he would rather dwell
in Hell, as live him in Heaven, with such company. Where is the spirit of these
reverend Divines Mr. Alex-Handerson, Mr. Rollock Mr. Calderwood.

Who thundered in there Doctrine, and lightened in their conversation; terras
astraea releqnit! We cry out against, Cain, Judas, Julian, Sodom and Gommorah!
Alas they are but glasses to see our hearts. Magus believed Foelix feared,
Jesabel fasted, Pharisees prayed Herod listened, yet never the more reguarded,
they wanted the principle of Faith, motive of love and end of charity creating
Gospel unity to see one Egyptian smiting another is nothing but to see one
Israelit smiting another in most unnatural; seeing man created corrupted,
restored, is the design of Christianity. I know bitter verity begets me
emnitie in place of amity; to that I answer, there be causes of none union, tho
not of separation says Voet, si modo firma fides nulla ruina nocit Luther in
his day sounds the Trumpet. Were there as many Devils at Worms as Tyles on the
houses, I shall cry cleanse your hands ye sinners. Finaly, preachers and
Candidats be not content with laping of Divinity as Dogs at the River Nilus,
who cannot take a full draught least the Crocodil bite them; but Solomon tells
us, he that breaks over the Hedge a Serpent shall bite him.

FINIS

