The Maidens Nay, Or, I love not you.
To a pleasant new Tune.




I Spied a Nymph trip over the plain,
I lured to her, she turned again,
I wooed her as a young man should do,
but her answer was, Sir, I love not you.
I thought she seemed in every part
So lovely framed by Natures Art,
Her beauty soon allured me to woo,
but her answer was, sir, I love not you.
I told her all the sweet of love,
And whatsoever her mind might move,
To entertain a Lover true,
but her answer was, sir, I love not you.
I told her how I would her deck,
Her head with gold, with pearls her neck
She gave a frown, and away she flew,
but her answer was, sir, I love not you.
Not me (sweetheart) O tell me why?
Thou should my proffered love deny:
To whom my heart I have vowed so true,
but her answer was, sir, I love not you.
My sweet and dearest love, quoth I,
Art thou resolved a Maid to die?
Of such a mind I know but few,
but her answer was, sir, I love not you.
This is the pleasant Maying time,
This is the pleasant golden prime,
But age will come and make you to rue,
that e're you said, sir, I love not you.
O do not thou my suit disdain,
Nor make me spend my time in vain,
But kindly grant a Lovers due:
yet still she said, sir, I love not you.
Fair Nymph, quoth I, but grant me this,
To enrich my lips with one poor kiss,
I grant you that which I grant but few,
yet still she said, sir, I love not you.
The young man proffering then to depart
It grieved this Maiden then to the heart:
For having kissed, O then did she rue,
that e're she said, Sir, I love not you.
Wherefore with speed she thought it best,
To stay him by her kind request:
Whose coyness thus has caused her to rue
that e're she said, Sir, I love not you.
But now at last she did begin
With gentle words to lure him in:
The second part shall plainly show,
she changed her note of, I love not you.
The second part
to the same Tune.


KInd sir, quoth she, what needs this have,
With that a smile on him she cast,
Shame curbed her long, but affection drew
these word, I love no man but you.
I feel the force of Cupids dart
So deep has pierced my tender heart:
Believe me then for my words are true,
you will I love, sir, and none but you.
Do not deny my proffered love,
Nor think that I the wanton prove:
Though women seldom use to woo,
yet I will love, Sir, and none but you.
When women love they will it hide,
Until their Lover they have tried:
Though I say nay, as maidens do,
you will I love, Sir, and none but you.
Here is, quoth she, my heart and hand,
My constant love thou shall command:
And I do vow to be ever true,
you will I love, sir, and none but you.
Whilst golden Titan does display
His beams unto the cheerful day,
Whilst Spring the Winter does ensue,
you will I love, Sir, and none but you.
On thee my love is fixed fast,
On thee my love is firmly placed,
For thee I Will bid the world adieu,
you will I love, Sir, and none but you.
If Hero should Leander leave,
Fair Lucrece Collatine deceive,
Or Syrinx prove to Pan untrue,
yet I love you, Sir, and none but you.
Object no former thy reply,
Suspect no future constancy:
Accept my love as a tribute due
only to you, Sir, and to none but you.
The young man noting well her words,
This courteous answer then affords:
Give me thy hand, take mine in lieu:
my love I grant here, and so do you.
To Church with speed then let us hye,
In marriage bands our selves to tie:
Where enterchanging hands and hearts,
I Will love thee deerly till death us parts.
Mark well my Song you Maidens coy,
That count true love a foolish toy:
Do not disdain when young men woo,
but love them freely as they love you.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


