AN ELEGY UPON THE MOST LAMENTED DEATH Of the RIGHT REVEREND DR. JOHN CAUDEN
Late LORD BISHOP of WORCESTER; Who Deceased on Friday, September 19th. 1662. in
Worcester.
NOw Deaths Decrees seemed to be out of date;
But mark the spleen of Unregarded Fate;
No Learned Funeral had infam'd the Year,
Nor was the State yet pensiv'd with a Tear,
The throng of Coarses bid us only see
And Transiently view Mortality;
But this most sorrowed Hearse commands us Weep,
And sumd-up Grief as His Memorial keep,
And in the swollen Confluents of our Eyes,
Loves Universal Tribute to Comprize.
Here shall the different Opinions meet,
And their divided streams each other greet:
Here shall the Murmuring Floods in Grief Conform,
And their sad passions raise without a storm:
While to the Ocean of his Fame they run,
Not minding whence their Rivulets begun;
For in this Ceremony all Unite,
And join Devotions in his Funeral Rite:
Mixing their Sighs and Prayers in concent,
And tax the Parcae not the Parliament.
But let us parentate who know to mourn
The Churches sorrow in this Prelates Urn.
And is our Father, our Restorer dead?
Who Will Peace begin, or mediate in his stead?
On whose blessed Lips 3 Gasping Realms did wait:
And from his Oracle did receive their Fate;
He has resigned the Life he only breathed
The Use to us was long before bequeathed.
He that the Perplexed discords of our peace,
With his Harmonious Unison did cease;
He that the Gangreen of the State did cure, Medicastri, a Sermon preached
before the L General Monk and the Lord Mayor, etc.

First made it willing, able then to endure;
Opened the Splendor of the Dawning day,
And like the Baptist first prepared the way:
Him Orpheus, Galen, Prayers could not save,
Nor free the Captive from the Conquering Grave:
Time was Obliged; 'twas in vain to sue,
Blessed Restitution, thy First Fruits were Due.
For the heavenly powers when they held their hand
And crossed their Arms at Rebels bold command;
(When the Defencelesse Sword had lost it is Edge,
Against that scaly Monster Privilege;
When its continual Renascent strength,
Against single Loyalty prevailed at length;)
Proud with this Champion did the HOST defy,
(Conviction's greater far then Victory)
And having proved him to the wished event,
Withdrew the Hero to his Heavenly Tent.
Adieu great Chrysostom, our Danaan showrs,
Shall ever water thy Sepulchrall flowr's,
So Heaven PLANTS thee in a Diocese,
By thy TRANSLATION to eternal Bliss.
JAMES HEATH.

LONDON, Printed for W. Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspur-street without
Newgate, 1662.


