Hells Masterpiece discovered: Or Joy and Sorrow mixed together.
Being a breife and true Relation of the Damnable Plot, of those invetrate
Enemies of God, and the King; who intended to a mixed our Joy for the Nativitie
of Christ, with the blood of the King, and his faithful Subjects.

Being a fit Carrall for Royallist to sing,
That always fear God, and honor the King.
To the Tune of, Summer time.




YOu Loyal Subjects all give ear,
unto my sad and joyful Song;
A true Relation you shall hear,
For unto you it does belong.
The Devil and his Instruments,
has long been Plotting night and day,
For to destroy both King and Church,
and now they thought they had found ye way,
They would cut down both Root and Branch
and all the Shrubs that does belong,
About our Royal Garden plot,
as Fences to our Ceader strong.
The chief Ringleader of this Plot,
is Mazarine as I do understand,
The chiefest Enemy to our King,
when bloody Cromwell ruled this Land.
These Saint like Devils would bring in
the French or who they else could find,
To ruin King and Kingdom too,
for to revenge their bloody mind.
For in this Plot they did intend,
by fire and Sword to make their way,
Throughout the City to the Court,
and all they met for to destroy.
They would a saved the King they say,
but make him yield unto their will,
To Sign or Grant what they desired,
or else be sure they would him kill.
The Queen, the Duke, and Proginie,
and General Monck should all a dyed,
With most of the Nobility
and all the Royal part be side.
Those that they Caveliers did call,
but little mercy should have found,
And I believe that for their King,
their ^e^ts with swords both falls to ground.
I hope there is none that now wears swords
for to defend his Majesty,
If ever he should in danger be,
For quarter now they scorn to cry.
The number in this Devilish Plot,
it is not known, nor cannot be,
But seventeen thousand as it is thought,
should first begin this Masacree,
No doubt but desperate they would been,
if God had let them in it alone,
And thus those Saints, they call themselfs
by blood would make the Land their own
The second Part,
to the same Tune.




THis Devilish Plot was carried on,
it is thought in all the Kingdoms round,
So secret are they, now it is known
not many of them yet are found.
A Porter at first discovered all,
which once was Serjant unto White,
Which White was Major once of Foot,
at Portsmouth nere the Jsle of Wight.
He did belong to Morley too,
that kept the Tower a little while,
What side they are for there is none does know
for every side they did beguile.
All the Grand Rebels of the Land,
which many thought was e're in France.
Was here in London as it is thought,
this Hellish Plot for to advanse.
There Is Ludlow, Whaley, and Baxster too,
with Okey and Hewson that single eyed theif
With the Devil of the west called Disbrow,
and Overton these were the chief.
But Overton and Disborow's took,
and both are fast enough in hold;
Squier Dun never fears to charge them all
for all they think themselves so bold.
There Is thousands in this Land I feared
to whom the King does mercy show*
They are resolved for to be hanged,
whether his Grace he will or no.
Examples you see every day,
on most the Gates here in the City,
Now you have hanged your Masters up,
Dun vows on you he will take no pity.
And if you are troubled still (he says)
with the greedy worm still in your brains,
He Will ease you on it in half an hour,
or else have nothing for his pains.
But as your Friend I do desire
You Would pray to God to guide your hearts,
To fear the Lord and love your King,
and then you will act true Subjects parts.
If God had not revealed this Plot,
a bloody Christmas had befell.
Then civily pray drink on pot,
to one we often for to love well.
The Porter it is, who under God,
preserved the King, and all his Peers,
Be sure he will never be forgot.
by honest Royal Caveliers.
C. H.

A List of the Trators Names.
Robert Overton formerly called Major General Overton, Francis Elstone, John
Disborow formerly Colonel, John Hargrass, El. Hunt, Gabriel Hopkins, Will.
Kirk, Fran. Booth, C. Bagster, C. Babinton, W. Wright, Anthony Barushaw, Thomas
Millard, Tobias Hill, Rich. Dilling, Peter Thompson, Tho. Simcock, Frederick
Barnwel, Ric. Danie, Ric. Shoope^, John Luca^* W. Howard, Tho. Nicols, Henry
Limrick, Francis Gavill. Henry Simboll, James Eglefield, Jeffery Hookins, Sam.
Jepp, Isaac Benton, Rich. Young, John Steward, John Ward, Tho. Butler, Rich
Glover, George Thomas, James Sanford, To. Parker, Rich. Burt, John Decks, Owen
Davis.

London, Printed for Francis Grove dwelling on Snowill.


