A SATYR AGAINST BRANDY.
Written by Jo. Hains, as he says hims;elf.
FArewell Damned. Stygian Juice, who dos;t bewitch
From the Court Baud, down to the Country Bitch:
Thou liquid Flame, by whom each fiery Face
Lives witthout Meat, and blus;hes without Grace:
Sink to your native Hell, and mend the fire,
Or, if you rather choose to settle nigher,
Return to the dull Clime from whence you came,
Where Wit and Courage may require your flame,
Where they Carouze in your Vesuvian Bowls,
To crust the Quagmire of their Spunngy Souls.
Had Dives for thy scorching moisture cried,
Abr'am in mercy had his suite denied:
Or Bonner known thy force, the Martyrs blood
Had Siss'd in thee and saved the Nations wood.
Essence of Embers, Scum of melting Flint,
With all the Native sparkles floating in it.
Sure the black Chemist with the cloven Foot
All Aetna's Simples in his 'Limbeck put,
And double stilled, nay Quintessenc'd thy Juice,
To charcoal Mortals for his future use.
Fire-ship to Nature, who do doubly wound,
For those that graple thee, are burnt and drowned.
As when Heaven pressd the Auxil'arys of Hell,
A flaming storm on curse'd, Sodom fell.
And when it is single Plagues could not prevail,
Egypt was scal't with kindled Rain and Hail:
So Natures feuds are reconciled in thee,
Thou two great Judgments in Epitomy:
God's past and future anger breaths in you
A Deluge and a Conflagration too.
View yonder Sot (I do not mean Sheriff S --)
Grilly'd all over by thee from Head to Foot:
His drowzy Eyelids shoard above their pitch,
His Cheeks with Carbuncles and Rubies rich;
His Soull instead of Brains supplied with Cinder,
His Nose turns all his Handkerchifs to Tinder:
He breaths like a Smiths Forge, and wets the fire,
Not to allay the flame, but raise it higher:
His trembling hands scarce heave the liquor in,
His Nerves all crackle in his Parchment skin;
His Stomach don't concoct, but bake his food;
His Liver even Vitrisies his Blood;
His Guts from Natures drudgery are freed,
And in his Bowels Salamanders breed
He Is grown too hot to think, too dull to laugh,
And steps as if he walked with Pindar's Staff.
The moving Glass-house lightens with his Eyes,
Singes his Clothes and all his marrow fries;
Glows for a while, and then in Ashes dies.
Thus like a sham Prometheus, we find
Thou stealest a fire from Hell to kill Mankind.
But hold -- lest we the Saints dire anger merit,
By stinting their Auxiliary Spirit:
We hear of late, whatever wicked think,
Thou art reformed and turned a Godly drink:
And doubtless you are con-natural to them,
For both thy Spirit and theirs abound in Phlegm;
'Ere since the Public Faith for Plate did wimble,
And sanctified thy Gill with Hannah's Thimble:
Thou left'st thy old bad Company of Vermin,
The Drunken Porters, and the swearing Carr-men;
And the lewd Drivers of the Hackney Coaches,
And now take up with sage discreet Debauches;
Thou freely drop'st upon Gold Chains and Fur,
And Sots of Quality thy Minions are.
No more shall thou foment an Alehouse brawle,
But the more sober Riots at Guild Hall,
Where, by thy Spirits fallible direction,
The Reprobates stood Poling for Election.
If this trade holds, what will the wicked do?
The Saints sequester even their Vices too,
For since the Art of Whoring's grown precise,
And Perjury has got demurer Eyes;
It Is time, high time to circumcise the Gill,
And not let drinking be Philistian still.
Go then thou Emblem of their torrid Zeal,
Add flame to flame and their stiff tempers Neal,
'Till they grow ductile to the Public Weal.
And since the Godly have espoused thy Cause,
Don't fill their heads with Libertys and Laws,
Religion, Privilege, and lawless Charters,
Mind them of Falstaffs Heir apparent Garters,
And keep their outward Man from Ketches Quarters.
One Caution more (now we are out of hearing
Many have died of drinking, some of swearing;
If these two Pests should in Conjunction meet,
The grass would quickly grow in every street:
Save thou the Nation from that double blow,
And keep thy fire from Salamanca T O.
Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh at the Black-Bull in Cornhill, 1683.


