The credit of Yorkshire, or the Glory of the North, Or, A new way to pay the
Malt man.
To the Tune of the right Glory of the West.




OF late I heard a dity,
was sung in Town and City.
And it was called the Glory of the West;
of a pretty Cavelier,
That song was made as I do hear;
and in my conceit it proved a pretty jest,
But it you please to list a while,
This Dity sure will make you smile,
Wherein I will declare the same,
of a gallant Northern Dame;
Whose virtuous life, her constant love and worth,
makes me entitle her the Glory of the North,
Her hushand kept a Tavern and a noted Cavelier,
for being in Pomfret Castle it cost his purse full dear.
All the Gentry far and near,
resorted to this Cavelier.
Some for love of him and others for his wife.
Although content to all she gave,
Yet so she would her credit save;
her husband had no cause of jealousy nor strife.
All sorts of Sexes thither came,
for to view this comely Dame,
And some in zeal would try her skill,
to obtain their wanton will,
B^t it they were uncivell,
she^d cast them forth this jear,
I pray hands of sir, touch not a Cavelier.
though Caveleers are poor yet honest will be
And play our games so fairly we care not who do see.
Look what sive so ere you be,
you're welcome here be sure quoth she,
And such content as my house can afford
you shall have at your command,
But i would have you understand,
I shun your company and if you were a Lord
If you seek to wrong my Name,
or my credit do defame
By your base uncivelty,
then I shun your company;
For if you seek to wrong my honor o,
be sure I then must take you for my husbands foe
Coming or going a kiss i will not deny,
but otherwise it is troblesome and I do it defy.
Thus her virtues and her fame,
had gaind her such an honest Name,
Most of all that Country that lived both far and near,
that no Inn wheresoere they went,
Could give the Gentry such content.
as they could have with this Northern Caveleer.
Thus her credit's long set forth,
she is called the glory of the North,
For being such a virtuous wife,
and leading such a civil life.
But yet it cost her husbands purss full dear;
for being in Pomfret Castle was proved a Caveleer
It cost his wife all the money she could gain
her husbands liberty and freedom to obtain.
All the means that she could make,
it being for her husbands sake,
She thought it not too much that she did do,
when her husband she had gaind,
And his freedom had obtained,
thus was her love so constant firm and true,
Which brought them then in debt full sore,
and chiefly on the Maltmans score,
Who did on them no pity take,
but thought a prize on him to make,
Or on his wife; now mark this jest I pray,
the man af last was deceived in his play,
Her husband then in prison straight he cast,
but this silly Malt-man did pay for it at last.
The second part,
To the same tune.




HIs wife then hearing of the same,
unto the Malt-man straight she came,
And did desire him some course that he would take,
that her husband might be freed,
Quoth he, sweet heart it is agreed,
if that you will consent to the bargain I will make,
So straight he whispered in her ear,
and told her that she need not fear,
For her husband he would free,
if to him she would agree.
That is quoth he to lodge with me one night
I mean to keep it secret and your courtesy requite,
Your husband cannot know nor of it understand,
grant but this request Love, and here is my heart and hand.
Thus relating of his mind,
she thought she would fit him in his kind,
And out of prison her husband she would bring;
to any motion i will now consent,
This knave, it seems I must content,
and nothing else will please him unless it be that thing.
Quoth she my wits i will work about,
but sure i will bring my husband out,
And yet my credit I will save,
but make of him a silly knave,
Perhaps he thinks to make of me his whore,
but such a trick i^le show him shall pay a Maltmans score,
And teach such knaves more wit, when once they hear,
how this Maltman was served by an honest Caveleer.
Then to this Maltman she replid,
good sir your suit is not denied,
But which way I pray shall my husband sir be freed?
quoth he, ^weet heart I mean to make,
A free acquittance for thy sake,
grant but my request and it is done with speed.
Then come at such a night quoth she,
and drink a pint of wine with me,
Then to my Chamber you shall go,
none of my servants shall it know.
This bargin being made, she to the prison went,
and there she told her husband all her full intent,
Quoth she sweet heart come out with your keeper such a night
Come up unto my Chamber love and there clame your right.
The time being come the Maltman went,
and thought to give this wife content:
Then to her chamber he straight way was conveyed,
the quittance in his hand he brought,
To read it then she him besought;
but full little thought he poor fool he was betrayed,
With her he then began to play*
but she desired him for to stay;
I Would have you go to bed quoth she,
if that y^u mean to sport with me,
And such content ere long to you i will give,
just cause you^l have to think on me as long as you live
He then puts off his cloths and into bed did go,
this prity soul undrest her to but now begins his woe
Her husband straight began to call
quoth she we are undone now all;
The Maltman hearing that began to sigh for fear,
quoth he where shall I go to hide?
Here in this Chest quoth she abide,
for there is nothing in it but such cloths I wear.
Then in he went, but little thought
he to his shame should out be brought.
Her husband straight came to the door,
what are you going to bed you whore,
When I Am in prison cast and money want to spend,
my keeper here wants money and is my special friend.
Alas you know sweet heart that I have none quoth she,
i will search al these coffers here, but i will find some says he.
She opened all about the Rome,
but that which was the Maltmans Tomb.
Come open this quoth he, for here the treasure lies,
sweet heart quoth she ^rapy rest content.
If this you see I shall be shent.
the Maltman hearing this the tears ran down his thighs.
Before this Chest he opened*
the Maltman lay like one stark dead.
Quoth he here is a spirit here,
but with my sword I will him rear.
Keeper says he, here is mine enemy,
and i will be revenged upon him by and by,
If that you will spare my life sweet sir, I humbly pray,
from all your debts i will clear you sir until this present day
He then releast him of his debt,
this Spark was out of Prison let,
And well contented to i will warrant he was beside,
it is thought the Maltman dearly paid,
Because he had the Chest berayed.
how happy is that man has such an honest Bride
Near Pomfret does this couple dwell,
in London rode it is known full well,
The Maltmans friends did me entreat,
none of their Names I should relate.
But to conclude and make an end my Song,
consider of this jest you will say the Maltman had wro(...)
When Caveliers are poor, they by their wits must (...)
but let them still be honest like this Northern Ca(...)
Cha^les Hamond

London, Printed ^or Richard Burton at the Horse-shoo in Smithfield 16^9


