A HUE AND CRY AFTER The Earl of CLARENDON.
FRom Dunkirk-House there lately ran away
A Traitor, whom you are defir'd to stay.
You by these marks and signs may th'Traytor know,
He Is troubled with the Gout in feet below:
Pity it is, it vexed no other part;
It Is pity but long since 't had pained his Heart:
Had it, I Am sure 't had saved some thousand Lives,
And thousands that are Widows, had been Wives:
Thousands that Orphans are, so had not been,
But their dear Parents still alive had seen:
Dunkirk by England still had been possessed,
Instead of being turned into a Nest
Of Gallick Pirates: Those Ships that by Flames
Did lately perish, still had kept their Names.
Scotch- Cittadels had stood; and the stones that came
From Paul's, might have conduced to have stopped that Flame
That not long since that ancient Pile did burn,
And turned it into its own Funeral Vrn.
Ships that were captive led by hostile hand,
Had still remained the Bulwarks of our Land;
And we whom Conquered Foes did late invade,
Might unto us still them have subject made:
And might have kept, without much cost or pain,
Plantations, that will cost dear to regain:
This hopeful Blade being conscious of his Crimes,
And smelling how the current of the times
Ran cross, forsakes his Palace and the Town,
Like some presaging Rat the house ere't falls down;
Or like Sea Monster, when the Waves 'gin t'roar,
Retires, and waits until the Storm be over:
So he, presaging Storm, away is fled;
Knowing 't would cost him loss of Hide and Head,
Should he remain. It Is pity that the Womb
That bare him, did not also prove his Tomb.
It Is pity that this Cock'trice had not been
Crushed in the Egg, ere he the Light had seen:
Or that long since he had of Vital Breath
Bereaved been by some untimely Death;
It had been well for us: No Days that are
Marked with Red Letters in our Calendar,
Had more deserved Remembrance; hardly those
That Popish Plots against us did disclose.
But since he is fled, who ere can find him out,
And bring him back; an Action without doubt,
Grateful to England will perform; and he
Shall with three Nations thanks rewarded be:
If possible alive let him be brought,
That for those hellish mischiefs he has wrought,
He may be published in public view,
And Hangman with the Devil receive his due.
If not, 'twould be a meritorious Deed,
For any man to make his Heart to Bleed,
With Stab of Dagger; any way; soth' World
Be rid of him; so he to Hell be hurld:
Whither almost we may conclude he will go,
and stir up Feuds amongst the Fiends below,
Till a new hell for him they find: No times
Can instance in the like flagitious Crimes,
By any Person done: A thousand Lives,
And ruin of ten thousand that survives,
Lie on his Charge. Therefore when ever he
Shall perish, let a general Jubilee
Be kept throughout the Land, that all may know
Treason still works the Traitors Overthrow.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year of CLARENDON'S Confusion, 1667.


