The Indifferent LOVER, OR, The Roving Bachelor.
To a Pleasant new Tune, Sung in the last new Comedy, called Amphytrion, Or,
Fond Boy.
^ FOr Iris I sigh and hourly Dye, but not for a Lip nor a languishing Eye;
She Is fickle and false ^and there we agree, Oh! these are the Virtues that
captivate me: We neither believe what neither can say, and neither believing,
we neither betray.

(2)
It Is civil to swear and say things of Course,
We mean not the taking for better for worse,
When present we love, when absent agree,
I think not of Iris nor Iris of me;
The Legend of Love, no Couple can find,
So easy to part, and so easily joined.
(3)
I like not that Lover who will whimpering stand,
And wait a whole day to kiss Celias fair hand,
No Beauty in the Town, though ten times as fair,
Can ever, can ever with Celia Compare:
How happy am I, who hourly find,
Those fair as his Celia, as his kind.
(4)
I am still in the Fashion, or Mode-a-la- France,
I think not upon her, unless by a chance,
Iris when present I fancy the best,
When absent I praise her no more then the rest:
Iris and Phillis to me are all one;
So soon I can love, and as soon can have done.
(5)
I can love for an hour, fair Celia and then,
I am Cloyed of the Bliss, and Love Iris again,
Till tyered of Happiness I do depart,
Go the next way and give Phillis my Heart:
Till Cleo appears, whose delicate Eye,
For an hour or two makes me languishing lie.
(6)
I loved all I see when just in the fit,
Yet can in a Moment my Mistress forget,
Now Languish, now Love, now sigh and complain
Now love her, now hate her, and love her again.
I admire the Charms in Celias fair face,
Till Phillis appears to take up her place.
(7)
But of all the Beauties were ever admired,
Whose Company many fond Fops have desired,
Whose every Charm in their Faces so takes,
That several Coxcombs have died for their sakes;
I never see any whose faces could Charm,
So much by their Smiles or Frowns for to harm.
(8)
If Iris Loves me, then I can Love her,
If she loves me not, then I can prefer,
Another before her; Or her before another,
For I can Love one as well as the other;
My passion to all alike I Will discover,
And always ramin an indifferent Lover.
FINIS.
Printed for Chapter Bates, at the White-Hart in West-Smith-Field.


