ANGLO-JVDAEVS, OR THE HISTORY OF THE JEWS, Whilst here in ENGLAND.

Relating their Manners, Carriage, and Usage, from their Admission By Willian
the Conqueror, to their BANISHMENT.

Occasioned by a Book, Written to His Highness, the Lord Protector (with a
Declaration to the Commonwealth of England) for their Readmission,

By Rabbi Menasses Ben Israel.

To which is also subjoyned a particular Answer, by W. H.

Augustine de Civir^t. Dei, Lib. 22. Cap. 8. Quisquis adhuc prodigia, ut credat,
requirit, magnum est ipse prodigium, qui mundo credente non credit.

London, Printed by T. N. for Thomas Heath, in Russel Street, near the Piazza's
in Covent Garden. 1656.

To His Highness the Lord Protector Of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
I Had a while ago, an opportunity to meet with a Book come abroad in print,
written to your Highness (with a Declaration to the Commonwealth of England) by
Rabbi Menasses b^n Israel. Looking upon it, I easily discovered the scope
thereof, but made way to upon false grounds and reasons (as I conceived)
altogether dissonant to experience and truth. This persuasion was wrought, by
reason of my having had sometimes occasion to read such Authors as hold out
unto us the behavior of the Jews, whilst here formerly residing; which seemed
to be such, as the English Nation believed other things of them then
Profitableness and Faithfulness, having bought their experience at a very dear
rate. Upon a mere serious review and consideration, this opinion could not but
be confirmed; whereby the Rabbi appears either to be utterly ignorant of our
Histories (though a learned man), or else wittingly pass by, and deny that
which they clearly and fa^thfully enough make out unto us. And upon a religious
consideration are his motives and arguments the more impertinent; especially at
this time, when we stand least in need of their Religion to come amongst us;
too many having already taken up, if not their opinions, yet such as border
near upon their hold. Your Highness has not been so easy to be allured by his
great pretenses, as he might hope, and others idly, and (upon false and
presumptuous grounds) unworthily surmise, taking care lest their reduction
might prove dangerous to Religion, or the wealth and interest of the people.
But (to detain your Highness no longer with needless words) what is here
written in answer to him and debated calmly (which is all I can speak in behalf
of this Treatise) I humbly lay at your Highness feet, being ever

Your Highness's most humble and devoted Servant. W. H.

Anglo-Judaus. Or the History of the Jews whilst here in Endland.
THe Jews being a people favored especially by God, and chosen by him above
all others, on whom to show his grace, and in them on all mankind, have yet in
all ages shown abundance of ingratitude; for which, several ways and times they
have been scourged: No sooner were they freed from the Egyptian bondage, but
presently forgetting the mercies received, Exodus 16. Numb 20.
and the miseries lately suffered, they murmr against their deliverer; and
being settled in the Land of Promise, easily forgetting how they came thither,
change their God, and worship those Idols, which were not able to deliver the
former Inhabitants from their Invasion.

Then quarrelling against the dispensations of God, 1 Samuel 8. 1 and 2 Kings.
they desire the Government of Kings; under whom whilst they lived, partly by
their own depraved blindness, partly by their Princes carnal Policies, they
were still drawn in their Religion and Manners, after the customs of the
Heathen; to whom, after some few hundreds of years, they were left to be
subjected and inthralled.

And, though after the Babylonish captivity, they were not found guilty of so
gross Idolatry as formerly; yet ere long, they fell off from the purity of
Religion, and the inwards of it, Sadducisin. Pharisaism.
to that Corruption and Formality, which made way for that mist of Error;
which, overspreading their minds, and possessing their spirits, kept out that
light, which in the fullness of time clearly shone amongst them.

Many have been the ways, many the instruments, by which God has plagued their
disobedience. The carcasses of the rebellious ones fell in the wilderness; the
Nations were part preserved to be as thorns in their eyes, and goads in their
sides: And after the death of Solomon, Israel began to be against himself, and
did not only struggle with Esau after some 130. years from the rooting out of
the ten Tribes by Salmanasser: 1 and 2 Kings.
after many inroads made by the Babylonians, Egyptians and Syrians; Judah is
also carried away into Captivity, the City destroyed, the Temple burnt, and
nothing left of the face of a Commonwealth.

Neither did afflictions from Foreign invasions and captivities cease after
their reduction, though they were not clean removed from their Land. For what
multitudes were enthralled in their ancient house of bondage! One hundred and
twenty thousand being reported to have been set at liberty by Ptolomy
Philadelphus, at such time as erecting his renowned Library at Alexandria, he
sent for the Law of God, and 72. Josephus, Anriq. lib. 12.
Interpreters to translate it. How did Ptolomy Philopator or Physcon profane
the Temple? and gathering many thousands of them together, intended by
subjecting them to the teeth of Elephants, to feed his cruel and malicious
humor? And what they endured from the Syrian and Asian Kingdoms, especially
under Antiochus Epiphanes that vile person, the book of Maccabees, with other
Histories sufficiently declare; besides what tumults, broils, seditions and
slaughters arose, through the ambitious transactions of themselves for the
Priesthood, and royal dignity?

And the Scepter was departed from Judah when Shiloh came; falling out amongst
themselves, they were subjected to a Foreign power, called in to help.
Josephus.
Great Pompey had reduced that Kingdom to Roman obedience: aliens were placed
over them; Matthew. 1.
Herod the great was harassing them with his Tyrannies and Oppressions, when
Christ came; who by the special Providence of God escaped his hands: whilst
they rejected the Government of Christ, they were still under the Roman
Tyranny; maintained partly by Herod's offspring, partly by others sent from
Rome: crucifying the Lord of Life, rejecting the Gospel of Salvation, they were
spued up by their own land into all Countries, despised by all, and hated by
most.

The destruction of Jerusalem foretold by Christ some forty years before
(whose blood they had charged upon themselves and posterity) came to pass in
the days of Vespasian the Emperor by Titus his Son; Josephus lib. 7. de bell^
Judai^^.
who being for the especial sweetness of disposition, the love and delight of
mankind, was yet their overthrow, but that occasioned by their own
stubborness. Great was the concourse of people at that time, out of respect to
the season; their Superstition disarming themselves, put a strong weapon in to
the hands of the enemy; that City came the second time to desolation, being
consumed with fire, together with its ornament the Temple; some few pillars
only left to posterity, to testify the stateliness of what had been.

Of the remnant of this people, Idem ibid.
few were left behind in their own Country; eleven hundred thousand perished
in the Siege, and ninety seven thousand were taken Captives: they being
scattered abroad in diverse Countries, yet especially abounded in Egypt, Cyrene
and Cyprus, where after some fifty years continuance, they begin to commit
outrages in an unheard of manner; Dion lib. 9.8.
here 200000 there 250000 are butchered by them; they eat their flesh, besmear
themselves with their blood, wear their skins, saw them asunder, cast them to
beasts, make them kill one another. The Emperor Trajan wondering, and scarce
believing such horrid treachery, prosecutes them as so many Monsters and
enemies of mankind; an infinite number are offered up as a parentation.

Yet still they cannot rest. Dion lib. 69.
In his Successor Adrians days they must up again and try their fortune. That
Prince had built a new City where their Jerusalem stood, and called it after
himself Aelia, setting up a Sow over the gates thereof, in opposition to them;
giving free liberty to all Nations for the exercise of their Religion; such
injuries offered to their Superstition as they cannot digest: whilst he remains
amongst them they murmr; being gone, break out into open rebellion; join
battle with one of the most expert Captains in his time; Julius Severus.
which brings a bloody victory to the adversary, and a fearful slaughter to
themselves.

Those that remained, Joan: vasaeus, Chron. Hi^p. Anno 137.
Adrian transports into Spain, his own Country; and thence, or from elsewhere
we have nothing considerable of them, until the decay of the Roman Empire.
Papirius Nas. senus, lib. 1.
At last it comes to that pass, that Christians selling Church Livings for
money; the Jews buy Christians for their slaves; which being taken notice of by
Gregory the great, and Heraclius the Emperor proving their enemy; the Kings of
France and Spain are stirred up by him to their conversion or extirpation.
Ammonis l. b 4. Hist. Hisp.
Under Theodebert and Theodorick Kings of France they enjoyed the most serene
times; but Dagobert joins with Sesebodus of Spain to their undoing: Yea so
odious afterward became they to Christians, Pertrus Cluniacensis.
that some persuading Christian Princes to the recovery of the Holy Land out of
the hands of their brethren the Saracens; their goods are presently pointed at,
as most fit to pay the Soldiers wages: yea some flew so high to pronounce the
only way, Rodulphus vilis. Papirius Messonus in Lud. 7.
to obtain their ancient Country from the Infidels, was to take away their
lives here; as fighting more against the Cause by their superstition and
cruelties (which being suffered made God displeased) then the other by their
swords and military Engines.

A stop was given to this heady and rash sentence by the interposition of St.
Bernard and others. But as if such mischief nothing concerned them, some of
them seated about Orleance, in the year one thousand, sent an Embassage to the
Prince of Babylon, Papirius Messonus, ex Glabo.
stirring him up against the Christians. The Ambassador suspected and examined,
the truth is discovered; they are thence run upon, and destroyed as Monsters of
men, by the People.

Not long after they arrive here in this Island; Stow, Holins^. Baker, say they
were first of al admitted by him; if there were any before here in the Land,
they were but very few.
about the year 1070 first of all admitted by William the Conqueror, being
brought from Roan by him. Their good welcome in other parts was no cause of
their desire to see this Country. He had made room enough for them, by that
have he had made of the English Nation: little good will bare he to it; and
this was never taken by it as a sign of his contrary disposition. He and all
his Successors intended to use them to their own advantage, dealing with them
as spunges; suffered them to suck up the English treasure, which they then
squeeze out into their own Coffers. For in his fourth year, holding a Council
of his Barons, he summons up 12. out of each County; Roger de Hoveden in Hen 2.
Wilielmus rex. 4. anno regni su^, etc.
commands them to show their Laws and Customs, and agree upon that, which
afterward was held authentic. Here it is provided, that the Jews settled in
the Kingdom (as the title runs) should be under the Kings protection; that they
should not subject themselves to any other without his leave: it is declared
that they and all theirs are the Kings; and if any should detain any of their
goods, he might challenge it as his own.

Being here thus brought in and settled, they lose no time: by their great
extortion they fill their purses for the treasury, and the English treasure up
prejudice and heart-burnings against them; both which will be showed in the
sequel of our story; when, mixing the blood of innocents with their sacrifices,
they made so great impression on the Englishmens hearts, as scarce ever will be
worn out with the strength of time; and then never could be satisfied but with
their expulsion.

Indeed, in the days of K. William the second, little of transaction occurs in
reference to them, but what was caused by his own means. That Kings Skepticism
in Religion, Baker. Will. Malmsbu. in Will. 2.
or rather profaneness, did but increase the fury of their Superstition. Being
at Roan in Normandy, he takes upon him, for a reward, to reduce one who was
turned Christian to his former ways again; but being not able to perform his
promise, and put to a stand by his young adversary, he bids him be gone out of
his presence, but keeps half of the money to himself. And here at London he
makes a disputation be held betwixt the Christians and them. The Bishops
assemble, the King is present, and promises to pass into the Jews cause, if
clearly conquerors. They are said to have carried away nothing but confusion;
but this came of it, that afterward they became more confident; stiffly
affirming themselves not to have been overpowerd with reason, but faction.

The ^^solency of their carriage in this business wrought grudges in
Christians; Will. Ma^m.
which, joined with the natural enmity to them as Jews, might have done more,
if the joy conceived for the Kings stability, and their own victory, had not
something allayed the matter; and as yet scarce knowing one another: there
wanted experience of the Jews conditions, which time produced; when growing
secure through peace and plenty, they easily betrayed themselves.

Throughout the reign of Henry the first, we hear nothing of them. As yet they
were not so fully settled; coming over, removing from place to place, providing
themselves ways of livelihood; and were so active, as though they were not many
at the first, and scarce for a while residing any where but at London; yet
shortly they wre spread throughout the whole Land; no Town at all considerable,
but multitudes in it.

At the first they had this advantage, that through the English peoples
ignorance of their manners (for the generality) and the horridness of them
(which afterward appeared) they might have opportunity to conceal their malice
against the truth. Yet at length it is fully discovered; when in the year 1144.
and the ninth of King Stephen, all Laws of humanity broken, Fox Acts and Monum.
all ingenuity which ought to be showed by strangers toward them that harbor
them; in a malicious opposition against the truth, and furious despite against
Jesus Christ the Savior of the world: in the City of Norwich they lay violent
hands upon a poor infant; which, following the example of their Ancestors, they
most cruelly cruefie and murder.

What the Christians might think hereupon, we may easily judge; what
indignation and implacable hatred might arise: and that not only in respect to
Religion; but out of solicitation for the children of their own bowels, who,
living amongst them, might easily be ensnared, catched, and miserably
butchered: when any child was missing, suspicions and jealousies could not but
abound.

This they could not be ignorant of, and how by this means they dug pits to
fall into themselves. Fox Acts and Monum.
Notwithstanding, having got a taste of Christian blood, and delighting much in
that wretched cruelty, seventeen years after, and the seventh of King Henry the
second, in the Town of Gloucester, they act the former part over again, Stow in
his Survey of London.
crucifying another child in like manner, in scorn and derision of our Savior
and Profession. This together with clipping and spoiling the coin, might justly
have provoked more then we can read of. No great stir was made about it, though
such acts were not likely long to be tolerated with more then ordinary
patience. Yet this King, instead of taking such course with them as they might
deserve, rather strives, and bears with such enormities; takes away no
privilege, but adds unto them. For whereas ever before, for the space of 100.
years, they had had no burying place allowed them any where but at London; and
so were constrained to bring all their dead from the most remote parts hither:
Rog. de Hoveden in Hen. 2. Stows survey. Hollinsh.
he gives them leave upon their Petition at the Parliament at Oxford, to
purchase ground convenient for their service in all places; provided it were
without the Town walls.

In the year 1189. King Henry the second dies; Hollinsh. Speed.
and before this his son whom most unfortunately, as it happened, he had
assumed to the Government, and made partaker of his Kingdom: some think this
young King to have born no great good will to the Jews, and that he would have
manifested the same, had he survived his father. But he dying, Richard
succeeds, of that name the first. Now the people begun to be very weary of
these their guests: besides what is said, being grievously oppressed with their
usury. Now also were they reported to do mischief in companies where they came,
and poison men and women, as they had done the wels in Germany during the
troubles betwixt the Emperor and Pope. Whereupon King Richard the day before
his Coronation, Krantius Wandal. Hist. lib. 9.
forbids any of them by Proclamation, or their wives to come within the Church
or Palace, during the solemnity. They as yet having not experienced the fury of
the people, or expecting impunity for their presents, they intended to offer
approach near the Court gate: Chron. West.
whereof the Chieftain with diverse of his affinity enter. Hereupon a Christian
strikes one of them with his hand, bidding him stand further off, as the King
had commanded; whereat others taking occasion, as watching for an opportunity,
lay at them with stones and other things that come to hand; whereof ensues the
death of some, and hurt of many.

It happened, that one of them being hurt in the tumult, Matthew: Paris in Rich.
1. Holinsh.
desired to be baptized, which he was accordingly; but being brought before the
King and examined, renounced again the Christian Faith: Polydor. Virg.
whereupon the King looking upon the Bishops, and demanding what was to be done
with him; the Archbishop of Canterbury wisely replied; If he will not be a
child of God, then let him be a child of the devil; but others would have had
him dealt with after another fashion.

But the noise of what was done at Court presently arrives in the City of
London. Matthew. Paris, Speed, Holinsh.
Then the heady multitude, having got what they wished, presently make to the
Jews houses; but finding them entered, and the doors locked, some they break
open, pillage and rifle the houses; those that are too strong they set on fire,
the owners miserably perishing in the flames; and those that come forth are
unmercifully received on the points of swords and spears, by their implacable
and furious enemies. Tidings hereof being brought to the King, he dispatches
away Rich. de Glanvill his chief Justice, and other Ministers of State, to
appease the People; but they being little reverenced, and their authority as
little regarded, return again as they came, having only ventured their lives to
no purpose. This lasted from the noon of one day, to two a clock of the next
and then the rout broke up: inquisition was made for offenders, and some
executed; some houses of Christians having also perished, and much harm done.

This on the morrow draws out a proclamation from the King, Matthew. Paris,
Holinsh.
to the end the like for the future might be prevented; none under great
penalties are to hurt or molest a Jew. But the King having taken upon him the
Cross, and having crossed the Seas into France; upon his expedition into the
Holy Land, the people take occasion at his absence, having the memory of the
stirs at London fresh in their minds, to satisfy their greedy desires in the
Jews destruction, in diverse parts of the Realm.

Yet the occasion was given by themselves: Polidor. Virgil. Holinsh.
That freedom from molestation which was indulged to them by the King, they
will not bestow upon one of their own Nation. It happened in Lin, that one of
them turned Christian, and being for that mortally hated by them, they sought
occasion to take away his life, resolving to kill him where ere they meet him.
Accordingly meeting him on a time in the streets, they sell upon him. He to
save his life, betakes himself to the next Church; whither they also pursuing
him, break it open. Hereupon a tumult is raised by the crying out of the
Christians who earnestly endeavored to save the Convert; and with that, many
of the Inhabitants, and diverse Marr^nors (who were strangers) came in unto the
rescue. The Jews are beaten home to their houses; which the Sailers out of
greediness of gain, rob, rifle, and pillage; and setting them on fire, get them
to their ships, hoise up sails, and away they go. Thus God raises up even
strangers (who came thither to trade) to scourge this crooked and rebellious
people.

The next place which took the alarm was S. Edmundsbury in Suffolk, on the 15
of March, Holinsh.
and the 2 of the King; when they being no less hated for their cruel
oppression, are set upon by the people, plundered and slain. Things were sooner
composed here by the care of the Abbot, and the residue of the Jews expelled
the Town, never to return thither again. At Stamford, and at Lin also at the
same time, were great stirs, all places desiring nothing more, then to be rid
of these their guests.

But the greatest commotion was at York; Mat. Paris. alii.
when the hand of God severely punished their stubbornness and cruelty: There,
March the 17. in the same year, the people envying the happiness of those Towns
who so used them, set most violently upon them, forcing them for safety to take
their heels. Hence four or five hundred fly to Towers to save themselves; where
being besieged, and seeing little hopes to escape the danger, one of their
Rabbis makes an Oration to them, exhorting them rather to kill one another,
then fall into their hands who opposed their Law: He begins first, cuts his
wives throat (whose name was Anna) next his childrens, then his friends, and
lastly his own; the rest follow his example, throwing their slain relations
over upon their Christians heads. Some in another Tower, hearing what was
become of these, set the place and themselves on fire, calling upon their
companions hard by to do the like; but these esteeming better of their lives
then so, offer to yield, on condition, that for turning Christians, and being
baptized, they might have them spared.

This is agreed upon and concluded, but they coming out, were most perfidiously
and cruelly butchered, malice and passion breaking the bounds of faith given.
After this massacre, the people run to the Cathedral, get all their Bonds and
Obligations into their hands, by which they had bound many a man unto them so
unreasonably, as if the Authors were not of credit which report it, it were
incredible. But all these, a fire being made in the midst of the Church, they
reduce to ashes.

Now the King was beyond the Seas, on his way to Palestine; Mat. Paris and alii.
but receiving this news, hears it with great indignation, fretting that his
orders being so little observed, his authority should be so much infringed; as
also, for that he had received upon his setting forwards, great sums of money
from the Jews; wherefore he sends his commands to the Bishop of Ely, to see
these insurrections severely punished. The Bishop, according to these
injunctions, marches down to York with a great Army, but mist his prey, the
chief Actors in the Tragedy being fled into Scotland upon the rumor of his
coming. The Magistrates and chief Citizens excused themselves, as not accessory
to the fact, which was committed principally by the Soldiers (who being
crossed and gathered together, were to pass over to the King, and follow him on
his expedition) and other Country people, which flocked thither from the Towns
near adjoining. But the stout Bishop would not be satisfied with this put off,
but fleeced the Citizens, the multitude being pardoned, for that the
Ringleaders of the rout were fled away. The Inhabitants of Lin excused
themselves, laying the matter upon the Sailers, and had little said unto them.

In the sixth year of this Kings reign, 1194. Rog Hoved. in Rich. 1.
were Justices Itinerant sent throughout the Land in September. Amongst other
Instructions, this is given them in charge, to enquire diligently of murders
of Jews; of the Jews Pledges, Goods, Lands and Writings: Commissioners and
places are appointed to inroll all their Debts, Pledges, Lands, Rents, and
Possessions, and great penal^ies appointed to the breakers of these orders,
according to that abovementioned, that they and all theirs are the Kings.

All this while these several Kings bore with them, by reason of the profit
which redounded to their coffers; yet no great damage did they hitherto suffer.
But now their actions rendering them more and more obnoxious, as well as their
Religion; and having hoarded up abundance of wealth, to the undoing of the
subject, from henceforth they become a prey to the Prince, as often as his
necessities call upon him; who knowing where to have supply, forces them always
by strong hand to disgorge themselves; which provoking them for recruit to
double their diligence, the people come to pay for it at the last.

Now had King John succeeded his brother, Matthew. Westin.
a Prince sufficiently covetous and griping. Being in want, or at least
pretending it; in his eleventh year 1210 he commands all the Jews of both
Sexes, throughout his Kingdom, to be apprehended; imprisons them, and inflicts
great punishments upon them, that they might empty themselves to fill his
purse; some he commands to have an eye pulled out: one at Bristol, being more
resolute then his fellows, stands it out, refusing to redeem his liberty at so
great a rate as the King required. Matthew. Paris.
He to take a speedy and certain way with him as he thought, commanded he
should every day, as long as he refused to submit, K. John in the first of his
reign, granted them such a privilege as can scarce be paralleld, making one
Jocob of London High Priest, that so they might acrifice, which else could not
be done. J. ^cok.
have a tooth pulled out of his head. The poor man had but eight in all; stood
out seven days; then, having but one tooth left him, to save that, agrees to
the Kings demand, and pays the money.

By this time their iniquities were grown so high, that they were counted a
burden to the earth on which they trod; no rising, no stir, but part of it must
fall upon them. In the Wars betwixt the King and Barons, the City of London was
taken by the Barons men; who, presently breaking in, fall upon the Jews,
destroy them as the common plague, Stows survey.
and raze their houses down to the ground; of the stones of which Ludgate was
afterward partly repaired; as appeared by an inscription in a stone, when the
gate was builded the last time.

King John after this leaves this life, Speed.
and his Kingdom also to a child in a sad condition Now was Lewis the Dolphin
in England, and the royal prerogative in the hands of the Barons: yet by the
honesty and prudence of the Earl of Pembrook, all things were reduced to a
quiet state condition; the aliens expelled, and peace settled. The Jews during
his nonage were little molested; but in his 14. year 1230. they did
sufficiently smart. K. H 3. is for France, and wanting money, whither should he
betake himself, but to their purses; he gets the third part of all their
movables, Hollinsh.
and away he goes.

What people in the world would not have laid these things to heart, and
striven by the amendment of their lives to have hindered succeeding plagues? but
wretched is that people which commits iniquity by a Law, and whose very
principles of Religion prompts them to horrid and unlawful actions. They count
it no sin, but rather the contrary, even to commit murder, so they can but
thereby scoff at and deride the Christian profession. Some five years after the
Kings going into France, keeping his Christmas at Westminster seven Jews are
brought before him by one Tolie, Matthew. Westminster.
and grievously accused. They had gotten a child at Norwich and had
circumcised him, calling him Jeremiah; (...) 16. ^^at. Paris
kept him a year together, intending to crucify him at Easter, when they
should meet together for that purpose. The thing was confessed by them, and
they thereupon cast into prison, abiding there the Kings pleasure.

Now begun this Prince to be sore pinched with want. Coming to the Crown so
extreme young, Sir Rob. Cotton.
he wanted that experience which others might attain, who having not so much of
their will at first, by discipline, with years might gather experience. His
Minions cost him dear; he flew to that height in lavishments, that at last he
was constrained to break up house, and betake himself to the Monks, to take his
Commons. This could not but turn to the Jews cost and disquiet. He so orders
the matter, Baker.
that one Abraham, found to be a delinquent; redeems himself with 7000. marks:
and Aaron protests the King has since his last being in France taken from him,
at times 30000. marks, besides 200. of gold given to the Queen.

In the year 1239. they are grievously fined again; paying the fifth part of
all their movables. They had committed a murder secretly, and the King takes
hence occasion to empty their purses; employing Geofrey Templar, Mat. Paris
one of his Minions, in the Collection. About this time also they are reported
to have done over that at Norwich again, which they did some 4. years before;
circumcising another child, whom they called Jurnin, who is also destined by
them to the Cross. But the just God turned the mischief upon their own heads,
the child being in time discovered, whilst his father heard him crying in the
Jews house. William de Raele the Bishop, with other of the Nobility, being
enraged for the fact, apprehend all that live in the Town. The Jews pretending
the Kings protection, the Bishop answers, It belongs not to the King, but to
the Church, to Judge this matter of Circumcision: wherefore four of them, being
drawn at horses tails to the place of execution, Krantzius lib. 7. Wandal.
receive their reward. At Prague also they are said this year to have crucified
a Christian.

And that which showed their faithfulness sufficiently, and procured them
ha^red not in the least degree, Holinsh. Ex Eulog. and Fox Acts and Monum.
was, that in the year 1253. at Northampton they combined together, and that
for the destruction of that City, which first harbored them; preparing to set
even the City of London on fir^. This could not but enrage much; yet having
entered such courses as rendered them more then odious, they are resolved to go
on, though to their own destruction. But what they intended to do to the City
they suffer themselves; for many of them being taken in the same Town where
they hatched their design, are themselves reduced to ashes, in the time of Lent.

And this year also were they expelled out of France, Matthew. Westminster.
by command of King Philip, who then warred in their ancient Country. Matthew.
Paris.
The Saracens there expostulating with him for his violence offered to
themselves, who never injured Christ; upbraid him with the fostering them in
his realm, who were his murderers. The cause was religion, and he thought all
things reflecting upon it were to be removed: to stop therefore the Saracens
mouths, this people must quit their habitations.

King Henry was now about this time beyond the Seas, Matthew. Paris.
making a visit to his French Dominions; and there wanting money, sends over
his brother Richard to procure it. The Nobility, for the most part, plainly
deny to help him with any; but as for the Jews they are a sure refuge, they are
fleeced at all hands, and they might thank their purses that here they lived.
Not long after returning home; and having spent an incredible sum of money in
his journey, and thereby contracted a great debt; (being put off by his Barons)
he betakes himself again to his never failing treasury: he squeezes the Jews
again; and yet having pressed out almost both blood and moisture, turns them
over unto his brother. He pitying their condition, little molests them; but
upon pawns supplies the King with a great sum of money.

But what shall we say to a people that is given up to a reprobate mind? and
commits iniquity with greediness? whom neither fear of God, of the Laws, love
unto mankind, nor the dictates of humanity can bridle and restrain? whose
blindness is such, whose stubborness is so great, that no experience can
remedy, no affliction can lessen? They are not yet satisfied with Christian
blood, they will rather venture all, then not vent their malice against
Christian profession. They have another annual Tragedy to act, and Lincoln for
this year must be the Stage. There in that City in the year 1255. they get a
child into their hands of eighteen years of age; whom after many cruel
whippings, scourgings, Matthew. Paris, Holinsh. alii.
and tortures, they again crucify and murder: In derision of Christ a Pilate
is made, before whom he is brought, accused and condemned; suffering their
malice in the same manner as our Savior had done before, they imitating as near
as they can their ancestors in this their horrid and abominable act. Being dead
the child is thrown into a well, near the ho^s^ wh^re this butchery was
committed. The poor woman missing her son, and inquiring after him, finds he
was seen playing last, before that door with the Jews children: and hence upon
suspicion the well is searched, and the body found. The man of the house being
apprehended and examined by John Lexinton, upon promise of pardon, confesses
the murder, acknowledges it to be their custom every year to crucify a child,
but very secretly, and therefore not easy to be discovered. The King would not
suffer the man to live, but presently commands his execution, when coming to
die, he accuses most of the Jews in England as accessory to the Fact; it being
their custom (upon notice given) most of them to meet upon such a wicked
occasion. In November an hundred and two were carried up to the King being ^hen
at Westminster; and thence were commanded to the Tower; of these afterward 18.
were hanged, the rest remained long time in prison. The body of the child
(whose name was Hugh) was honorably buried in the Cathedral, and he ever after
accounted a Martyr.

About two years after, happened a thing in Teuxbury, Hollinsh. Mat. Paris.
which perhaps might as well be omitted as spoken of. It chanced there, that a
Jew fell into a Jakes on Saturday, which being their Sabbath, he would not that
day be drawn out for breaking of it. The Earl of Gloucester hearing this news,
forbids him to be taken out the next, on Sunday; for that neither (he said)
should the Christian Sabbath be broken by him; whereupon the poor man lying
there till Monday, miserably died. Of this story, I have read these verses
rimed, according to the Poetry of that age: Christian,
Tend manus, Solomon, ut te de stercore tollam.
Jew,
Sabatta sancta colo, de stercore surgere nolo:
Christian,
Sabatta nostra quidem Solomon celebrabis ibidem.


In the year, 1262. and of this Henry the 3. the 47. Holinsh. Stows survey.
a Jew little remembering into what a tickle condition their deserts had brought
them, wounds a Christian within Colechurch, in the Ward of Cheap. He is pursued
home to his house by the multitude, and there slain; with whose life yet they
would not be satisfied. But going on in their fury, they break up and pillage
the houses of that Nation, and kill diverse, so full were the Londoners of
prejudice and spite against them, that upon all occasions they could not bu^
discover it. But not only against their persons do they rage: The public
toleration of their Religion was also a great offense to them; running
therefore to their Synagogue at the west side of Olaves Jury (where they for
the most part lived) they utterly destroy it. The ground being afterward by
the King given away, became the seat of Friars, next of a Nobleman, then of a
Merchant, and since that of the Windmil Tavern. Sir Reb Cottor.


But now ere long the sparks of discontent and grudges betwixt the King and
Barons were quite blown up into a flame His lavishments and neglect in
administration of Justice, had subjected him to their plots and combinations,
and betwixt both parties sprung a more then civil War. The Barons had gotten
the hearts of the Citizens; who easily drawn with the promises of freedom and
reformation of abuses, took their part; but the Jews (loving neither in
reality) clave to the King, sufficiently knowing their own interest in this
matter, though at other times they could take no warning, but by their
abominable actions, drew still upon themselves, one plague at the heels of
another. But here they saw on whom they depended, what it was that kept them
here, and what they might expect if the Barons should prove victorious.
Holinsh. Ex Eulog.
Accordingly therefore in the year 1264. they that inhabit in London resolving
to do what they may, plot the destruction of Barons and Citizens altogether.
But nothing except desolation and misery attending them, they are detected
hereof, almost all slain, their houses ransacked, abundance of treasure being
therein found scraped up together.

But within a while providence had decided the civil quarrel, Holinsh.
giving the victory unto the King: whereupon a Parliament was called, and many
turned out of their estates being proscribed by Law. Diverse of those
disinherited Gentlemen being thus outlawed, and sore repining at their
condition, betake themselves to the Isle of Oxholm, whither resorts a multitude
of the baser sort, who rob and rifle the places near adjoining, and act
according to the custom of men carried by necessity and desperation. Now
Lincoln being not far distant, is taken and sacked by them; wherein not
unmindeful of the public enemy, the Jews, they run to their Synagogue, which
they burn, together with their Law; and many of them in it; thinking it even
sin if to their other robberies, they should not add this of spoiling them, who
in that place had broken the bounds of all humanity, and thereby deserved many
deaths.

And now we come to the last passage we meet with, during the long reign of
this King. Things seeming to be prettily settled, yet clouds begin to gather
again. The Earl of Gloucester is unsatisfied with affairs, and the efore must up
and make way for better fortune by his sword. He comes up to London, and gets
possession of the City. The Jews then, their wives and children, being sensible
of the approaching of their ruin with the Popes Legate, flock into the tower,
of which they have a part assigned them to defend. But things being after a
while composed, they also for a while enjoy quietness and security.

Now began the English liberty from these incroachers to draw on amain; for in
the year 1272. King Edward the first had ascended the throne, succeeding his
father. Their oppressions were now grown so in tolerable, that longer they
could not be endured, the people of England being almost ready to quit their
dwellings, and leave them their habitations. Math. West, Edv. rex ad
Parlamentum Westmonasterii ^mnes Nobiles regni sui jusserat congregari, in quo
Statuta multa ad utilitatem regni fuerunt publicata, inter quae Judaeis fuit
interdicta effraenatalicentia usurandi: Et ut poslent a Christianis discerni,
praecepit rex, quod instar tabularum unius palmaelongitudinem sign a ferrent in
exterinribus indumentis.
Therefore in the third of the King a Parliament is called; and in it, amongst
other things, their unreasonable usury is restrained by Law; and for that they
are accounted unworthy of any charitable thought, they are ordered to wear
plates in their clothes, clear to be seen, that every one might take notice who
they were.

But that they cannot get one way, they will have another; the measure of their
iniquities was not yet complete, and therefore they run on still to their own
destruction. Would any people under the cope of heaven, having had so many
warnings, undergone so many troubles, suffered such massacres, yet go on; as if
to make amends, and procure themselves safety, was to heap guilt upon guilt,
and add treachery to violence But in the year 1278. and the sixth of the King,
they wash, Matthew. Westminster. Paris.
clip, and counterfeit his coin, as they had done before in the reign of Henry
the second. Being apprehended, they likewise accuse the Christians as
accessory. At London nigh 300 are executed (amongst whom there were three
Christians) many being also put to death in other places.

King Edward, Holinshed.
according to the tenor of their hold here in England, and their obnoxiousness
to which their actions had reduced them, counted all they had his own; and for
non-payment of what was demanded, the whole generation scattered through the
whole Land, are shut up in one night, where they enjoyed no day, until they had
fined at his pleasure. The Commons now offered to the King the fifth part of
their movables to have them banished; (...)
but this Prince (having this opportunity his Predecessors wanted, of their
vying with one another) makes his own markets, takes most that is offered; and
so the Jews emptying their purses, purchase their continuance a little longer.
But vengeance pressed them at their very heels, they acting such an horrid
murder this year beyond the seas, as is scarce to be thought, and (if not
theirs) harder to be believed.

Doubtless the prejudice and antipathy betwixt the English Nation and them now
was such, as would not admit of any reconciliation, and thereupon might diverse
inconveniences proceed; but especially the disagreement of their Religion,
joined with great perverseness of disposition, plunged them into devilish and
unheard of wickedness. This year they were generally imprisoned here in
England, and (as we may say) as guilty (in approbation at least) of what their
Countrymen practiced in other parts, who at Munchen in Bavere stabbed a child
throughout his whole body with needles, Aventin. Boiorum annal. l. 7. p 442.
taking his blood in a basin, to use it, as the suspicion was then, in
sacrifice, for stanching that issue of blood wherewith this people (Christians
know why) is continually pestered. These butchers were detected by the drover,
an old Hag, taken in the very manner, while she was stealing a second for the
same purpose. The body of the former being found out by her directions, the
fresh print of infinite wounds filled with gore, imploring vengeance, as it
were with so many watered and blubbred eyes, so enrage the multitude, that they
could not expect the Judges sentence, but fall immediately upon these Jews,
notwithstanding the Princes servants, and their chief Magistrates earnest
endeavors to appease the tumult, conveying as many Jews as they could into
their Synagogue, which the people burning with fury, set on fire, and with it
burned 180. Jews. But this by way of digression, falling out in this year. Now
to return again to England.

The several Kings making their markets out of the Jews storehouses at all
occasions, the score was to be discharged at the subjects cost. Not content to
let them rob the Country by their unmerciful dealings, they must also upon
their wicked desires, give them security against justice it self, for a little
gain. It happened, that in the 15. year of this King, 1288. he being then in
Gascoin, a certain Knight sued a Jew for the unjust detaining of a mortgaged
Manor. The Jew shifts off the business, and for his discharge produces a
protection King Henry had granted him, that he should never be convented before
any Magistrate but himself alone. Thom V^a^ing.
Upon this the Knight goes over to the King, desiring justice against his
adversary avoiding the equity of Law, by such an unreasonable privilege. The
King answers, it would not stand with reverence due to the memory of his
Father, to make void that he had granted in this matter; but he would indulge
him also this privilege, that so he might be even with his adversary, that
what injury he or any other Christian should offer to that man, they should not
be bound to appear before any but himself alone, as long as the Jew should
stand upon his Charter. The Knight returns home with this answer; and his
honest adversary being acquainted with his success, was glad to come to what
accommodation Law would offer, no longer insisting upon his former grant.

This peoples honesty in this particular is very conspicuous. This man has an
intention to be wicked, and must have a privilege for it. But counting of
Christians worse then of Turks and Infidels, because more directly opposing
them in their way of superstition, what they might get any way, they counted it
their own, and honestly enough; fear of punishment, no conscience bridling
their malice.

But such like throws of their dishonesty, were but still signs of their
ensuing death, and of that delivery the Land was about to make of them; it
being radicated in the nature of things, to unite their spirits, and double
their diligence, against that which is shortly likely to work their ruin.
Their iniquity being now fully ripe, their time is also already accomplished.
King Edward is returned out of Gascoign, Thom Wa^sing. in. Edv. 1.
and being honorably received of the Cle^gie and Nobility, holds a Parliament
at Westminster; such as was likely to bring nothing but calamity to the Jews,
for whose expulsion so much had been before this time offered. The people in
Parli^ment are said to be resolved, rather to undo themselves once, then be
always undoing their Religion, safety of their Children, and the Kingdom, honor
and profit (which by the imbasing and clipping of its coin had gone to wrack)
call upon them; and a fifteenth is offered to the King to have them expelled.
Vide Holinsh. in Edw. 1.
It seems they did not now overbid, for the fifteenth was acceped and an Act
made, August 31, 1290. and the 18 of the King, Matthew. Westminster.
that upon pain of hanging, they, their w^ves and children, should before the
Feast of All Saints next ensuing, depart the Land. Some say, Wa^singham.
Holinsh. and alii.
they had only money given them to bear their charges over into France. Others
say, that all goods not moveable, with their Tallies and Obligations, being
confiscate, all other movables, as gold and silver, they were licensed to
carry over. The number of them when they departed, was about 16511. many more
then at their first coming; an increasing misery to the Land where ere they
come.

By virtue of this injunction, Holinsh.
and in obedience to it they prepare for their removal. Diverse of the richest
hi^e a great ship, and therein having put much treasure, are carried down the
Thames toward the mouth of the River, beyond Quinborough; where the Master
wickedly conspiring with the Mariners to rob them of their riches, they are
advised to go down out of the ship with him, and walk upon the sands, to take
the air. Having so done, and it being now flowing water, and the fands
beginning to be covered, the Master is drawn up by a cord on shipboard; but
they are then left exposed, to be swallowed up of the waves: Crying out for
help, they are inhumanely bid to call upon Moses for deliverance, and perish
miserably by the floods. This greediness of gain in the Master and Mariners,
was justly rewarded, he with others being arraigned and condemned by the
Justices Itinerants, and accordingly executed for so vile a fact, though little
pity was had (for the generality) of them that perished, Sir Ed Cook
being looked upon only as pursued by the hand of divine justice.

Now gone they are, and the English peoples disquiet with them; and never since
could they procure license to return. King Henry the third founded an house for
those of them that should be converted, in his 17 year; Cambden. Stows Survey.
which afterward in the 50 of Edward the third was again dissolved, and
appointed to the keeping of the Rolls, in which service it continues to this
day. King Edward the first also cleansing his Territories of the Jews, Matthew.
Westminster.
as so many locusts, had before commanded, whilst beyond the seas, that the
parts of Aquitain should likewise be swept of them.

Thus I have proceeded as an Historian, keeping close to that way, according as
I am informed by our Writers. And hereupon I am not ignorant that some there
are, and that not without reason, who may deny their assent to what is said
concerning their expulsion; being induced to believe the contrary, by greater
authority then this report: The Oracle of Law in his time, pronouncing no
Statute to have been made for their banishment. Judge Cook in the second part
of his Institutes upon the Statute De Judaismo, affirms there was none, but
only that which was for the taking away their Usury, upon which they left
the Land, as he conceives, being so deprived of their Trade, or way of life. I
have not arrived at that height of arrogance, as to oppose so great a man,
especially in his own way; but yet shall tender something to consideration, as
I am warranted by History, whereby I hope I shall escape the hazard of being
thought to break the bounds of modesty, being found only in that way, in which
at first I set forward. Our Historians all with joint consent, affirm them to
have been actually banished or expelled; many of whose words I shall first set
down, and then see only what they might seem further to hint unto us.

Matthew of Westminster, Vide Bale^^m descript. Aug.
and approved Augusti 31. Judaeorum exasperans multitud^ quae per diversas
urbes and castra fortia habitabat per retroacta tempora confidenter jussa est
cum uxoribus and parvulis suis una cu^ bonis suis mobilibus cedere circa festum
^mnium Sanctorum quod eis pro termino ponebatur, quem sub poena suspendii
transgredi non est ausa^quorum numerus erat ut credebatur 16511. Exierat antea
tale edictum a laud^bili rege Anglorum in partibus Aquitaniae, a qua omnes
judaei pariter exulabant.
Author in his Flores Historiarum, at the 1290. year of our Lord, has these
words, Aug. 31. Judaeo^um exasperans multitudo, etc. On the third day of
August, the exasperating multitude of Jews, which in times past had lived
confidently in diverse Cities and strong Towns, is commanded with their wives,
children and movables to depart England, about the Feast of All Saints, which
is set as the utmost limit of their continuance, which under pain of hanging
they durst not pass, the number of whom was thought to be 16511. Such a Decree
had gone out before from the commendable King of England in the parts of
Aquitain, out of which in like manner the Jews were banished. So he. Thomas
Walsingham, in his Hypodigma Neustriae, writes thus, Rex Angliaereversus de
Wasconia, etc. Rex Angliae reversus de Wasconia Londoniis solemniter reeipitur
a clero and omni plebe. Qui Judaeos omnes eodem ann^ expellens de Anglia, datis
expensis in Gallias, bona little reliqua confiscavit.
The King of England being returned out of Gascoign, is solemnly received by
the Clergy and all the people at London, who the same year expelling all the
Jews out of England, giving them to bear their charges over into France,
confiscated the rest of their goods; and Polydor. Virgil, in his seventeenth
Book, at the 1290. year of Christ, delivers the matter thus: Anno deinde qui,
etc. An^^ deinde qui insecutus est, Concilium L^nd^ni ad ^estmonasterium ha^^
^ur in qu^ imprimis agita^a est Ju^ae^um ejectio, quo^um erat per omnem Angliam
ingers multitudo, qu^ s^^ oves ab i oe^^is segregarentur. Itaque publico edicto
jussum est, ut intra ^^^cos dies omne^ abirent cum bonis illi jussis concilii
parent^s ili^ (...) dis^esserunt.
Then in the year which followed, a Council was held at Westminster, in which
first of all is debated the ejection of the Jews, of which there was throughout
England a great multitude that so the sheep might be separated from the goats.
Therefore it is commanded by a public Edict that within a few days all should
depart with their goods; they obeying the command of the Council went diverse
ways, thus far Polydor, who use^h the word Concilium for that we call
Parliament; it with other words being (as a great Sir R. Cotton.
Antiquary observes an usual term in ancient Authors for that thing.
Polych^onicon. lib. 7. cap. 38. says, the Jews were put out of England, and
never came again. Stow in his Annals writes, that this year all the Jews were
banished this Land; for which the Commons gave a fifteenth. In like manner
writes Holinshead expressly, that they were banished by act of Parliament, and
that a Fifteenth was granted to the King to have them expelled, that all their
goods not moveable were confiscate, with their Tallies and Obligations; all
their other movables of gold and silver, the King licensed them to convey with
them; that they could never since obtain a privilege to return; and with these
concurreth Speed, who tells us that the King to purge England (whither he was
now returned) from such corruptions and oppressions, as under which it gro^ned,
and not neglecting therein his particular gain, banished the Jews out of the
realm, confiscating all their goods, leaving them nothing but money to bear
their charges. Florilegus Dunstable.
Others might be brought who testify the same thing; neither is there any
Historian, that I know, who denies it.

Now strange it is, that all these should be misacquainted and mistaken, that
those of the near adjoining times to their departure should so grossly err, and
that those who lived in the same time, should deliver to posterity so great a
falsehood. For if any had reported their departure to have been voluntary, it
might have been found out by some of those who succeeded and had their
gatherings from them. Matthew of Westminster sets down the day the Act should
be made for their expulsion, mentions the time set as the utmost bound of their
continuance, and withal the penalty or punishment they were to suffer (even
hanging) if found hereafter; and that the King had made such adecree before for
banishing them the parts of Aquitaine; a strange thing that he should so grossly
err in so many circumstances. Walsingham writes that the King returned home,
that he was met by the Clergy and all the people, and that this year they were
expelled. Polydor Illi jussis concilii parents, alii alio discesserunt.
says it was by Parliament, by its public Edict, and that they obeying its
commands departed; hinting unto us the end, that so the sheep might be
separated from the Goats. Polychyronicon says they were put out of, Stow that
they were banished out of England; Holinshead and Speed use the same term, this
last adding also the Kings design, which was to purge the Land from such
corruptions and oppressions as under which it groaned; and also to fill his own
Coffers; which was done pretty well, partly by the confiscating of their goods,
which all or most mention, as also by the Fifteenth granted him by the Commons
to purchase their banishment, which some aver.

We read, that about the year 1286. the Commons before offered the King the
fifth part of their movables to expel them, and it cannot but be likely they
would also desire the same at this Parliament; for though usury was the main
thing under which they groaned, yet there were other things they could not but
be sensible enough of: viz. Crucifying of children, and their great spite to
Christian profession, with their late spoiling of the coin. And scarce could
this other Act against their usury only give them hopes sufficient that thence
they would be driven away; for as we see before in the third of the King, their
usury was restrained and bounded, and other ways of life they might take up,
and rather stay here with what they had already got, then by departing to lose
all, as it seems they did, though Judge Cook tells us, that there was provision
made that no subject should hurt or molest them; acknowledging also that the
forementioned fifteenth was given, Pro expulsione Judaeorum.
and that too for their expulsion.

This reverend Lawyer tells us this act de Judaismo was made in the 18. year of
the King, but a little after the Feast of Hilary, whence these (perhaps
imper^inent) thoughts have sometimes come in upon me; that if there was no
mistake of this year for the third of this King, in which formerly we read
their usury was restrained, then perhaps this same act de Judaismo, and the
other for their banishment might be enacted in several Sessions of Parliament,
viz. this last, the 31. of August after, as Matthew of Westminster mentions,
and the record lost, the act being omitted in the writings of Lawyers, as
deemed of no use. And for losing of the record I am easilyer induced to think
it possible, because I am credibly informed that that of the act for
establishing the use of the Common Prayer Book was also missing heretofore, and
thereupon some non-conformists escaped that which else had light upon them. And
this I desire to tender as an excuse for my keeping close to History in which
has lain the work of this relation, nothing desirous to impose upon the belief
of any, or hereby to contradict so worthy an Author.

Thus admitted by William the Conqueror, about the year 1070. they were
expelled in the year 1290. being here some 220. years (longer by five or six
then their Ancestors were in Egypt) during which time we may easily see the
English Nation was as in bondage. And by this History impartially (though
truly) related, may that Book sufficiently be answered, by occasion of which
this was written; the profit which redounded by them to this Nation, their
saithfulness also being sufficiently discovered upon which grounds the Rabbi
raises his short discourse. But because it may more clearly appear, and the
Case may be more fully debated; we shall descend to his particulars, and scan
them fully.

The Author, though perhaps learned enough in other histories, yet seems either
utterly to be ignorant of ours, or else wittingly to decline that, which he
knew would injure his cause sufficiently.

In his Epistle to his Highness the Lord Protector, he desires that all Laws
may be taken away, which stand in force against this innocent people made in
times, and during the government of Kings. But if he please to turn his eye
upon what has been written; he may easily see, that it was not innocence, but
the clear contrary that drew out these Laws against them; and for that he and
his Countrymen think this easier to be procured since the Kingly Government is
taken away; he may know that it was by the Kings alone they were kept here so
long. The people would gladly have been rid of them, an hundred years before
they were; and desired their expulsion above all things. Nay they offered a
fifth part of their movables, to have them expelled; but King Edward only
sucking sweet from them, and intending to make his Markets out of this
contention, upon their offering more, gave them leave to buy their continuance
for a little longer. And in the War betwixt Henry the third and his Barons, as
is above declared, they stood for him, conspired the ruin of them and the
Citizens of London, and that more for their own ends then out of any
faithfulness to him.

In his Declaration to the Commonwealth of England he acquaints us with the
motives of his coming over: the first is to obtain free exercise of his
Religion for his Countrymen. Here indeed it was anciently granted, but what
good came of it? Its the desire of this people to be fishing in troubled
waters; they may have hopes in this juncture of time, to catch proselytes; what
his own design may be, I shall not question; if we should trust him upon his
word, it might be unsafe to deal so well with all his followers. Their
Ancestors compassed sea and land to make a proselyte, and he confesses this to
have been the cause of their expulsion formerly out of Spain; but let us
descend unto his second.

In this I cannot but wonder at the Rabbi. Its believed that the time of their
redemption is near (says he) and that they must first be scattered throughout
the world. What then? therefore if this be true, they must first have a Seat
also in England. Why, they had a Seat here once before for the space of above
200. years, and must they needs come again, or else their dispersion (as to
this place) cannot be accomplished?

The third motive upon which he came over was for the benefit of our Nation,
which he so much desires, that which truly, if sincere, we cannot but applaud,
it being a thing not usual for us to be so loved by that people. We cannot but
thank him for his affection, but must a little question his grounds by and by;
when coming to his Book, we shall descend with him to particulars.

His fourth motive is no less to be approved of: His particular respect to this
Commonwealth is a motive to his solicitation for the readmission of his
Countrymen. He might easilier, if he so much love us, have leave given him to
continue; but we cannot but suppose, he can scarce promise the like affection
in all his brethren: and if he should, its sooner said then believed. And
whereas he commends hospitality and kindeness to strangers so much to our
consideration; our Nation was never unkind or churlish; but the Jews too much
familiarity with it heretofore, has put them out of the influence of
hospitality.

Now to come to the Book it self. Three things he proposes to his Highness the
Lord Protector, as making a people well-beloved or desirable amongst all
Nations: viz. Profit accruing from them, Faithfulnessin them, and Nobility of
Extraction; all which he attributes to the Jewish Nation. Profit indeed is the
thing that all Kingdoms and States much look after, and with good reason; for
money is the comfort of peace, and the sinews of war; but such profit is only
desirable, as is joined with glory to God, honor to the Magistrate and
Country, and the safety and prosperity of the subject. Upon which grounds, if
I should grant him the application of profitableness to themselves; yet should
I think it over-dear to be purchased with such effects as might accompany it.
God ought to be the beginning and the end; and Religion, the way of his
Worship, is principally to be regarded. Now toleration of that which is
contrary to it, or a receiving of them which would endanger it, which would not
only be a suffering of Superstition to be practiced by ooters, but be also an
occasion to the Natives of this miscarriage, is scarce to be warranted; however
there where as yet, it is not admitted. There be certain times and seasons,
which make that at one time dangerous, which might at another be admitted with
more security. The truth is apt to have not only fickleness and weakness
accompanying it, but also great differences and dissentions, although
incorruptible in it self; and many though not agreeing in all things, yet may
be contained within the verge of its necessaries and fundamentals. Where the
greatest power of Religion is, there the Devil is the busiest; sowing Tares
amongst the Wheat, and mixing the corn with his cockle. This we must confess is
the condition of our Country at present; and I fear the Jews too well consider
it. By so much the more therefore as they may desire to come in, doubtless in
this respect the State has as great to deny them.

Honor and Credit is the second thing by which a State ought to rule, and
according to which, order and bound its profit. It was a saying of that
renowned Lord Burleigh, Camb. in Eliz.
Lord Treasurer of England, when about his Charge in the Revenue, that nothing
was fit for a Prince, that was not also joined with honor; and that he did not
like that the Treasury should fill like the Spleen, when the whole body was
worse for it. Now what honor it would be to admit them, who were once Judge
Cook himself says, (...) Act De Judaeaismo was made in^^^^ionally to expel
them, and that the fifteenth granted was pro expals^^ne Judae^rum.
expelled before; of whose worth, faithfulness and profitableness we have once
experienced in our Ancestors, I cannot determine. But this second rule depends
especially upon that which precedes, and of this which follows.

I acknowledge, that whilst they were here before, much profit redounded to the
Kings of England from them: but in what way, has been declared; not from their
merchandising, upon which our adversary principally insists. Our country is
not so convenient for that way as others may be; and if they should be here
admitted again, and spread once more throughout the land, thousands there would
be, which could not have opportunity to exercise that way, through the
inconveniences of their habitations. They exercise themselves in that way of
life which most suits with their profit, and the commodiousness of the place
wherein they live. Usury was most practiced by them here; and is still in
Italy, and other parts, where they have not such opportunity of trading. But
grant that the trade is now enlarged, through the discovery of the ^ast Indies
by sea, and of America; as it is enlarged, so also more of our inhabitants
follow that course then formerly, being sufficient to satisfy for that
business: So that if the Jews be admitted to trade again, our Merchants must
needs be justled by them; and what would redound to the State in Custom and
Excise (the Land being already sufficiently furnished) would not compensate the
damage of the subject. If many should be suffered to trade, this could not be
avoided; and if not, then needs must they betake themselves (their number
increasing) to some other course of life, which might prove no less dangerous,
they being Perfida gens, agens quod solet musin pera, etc. Crantzius Saxon.
lib. 11. cap. 7.
noted to be as sucking Leaches where ere they come, in some way or other. But
if they should trade with other Countries, rather in way of Sale and
Exportation, less profit would the State receive from them.

He magnifies the skill his Countrymen have in all kinds of merchandise; and
that is occasioned, as he confesses, by the oppcrtunity they have (being every
where dispersed) to serve one another. And would not this turn to their own
advantage, more then to the benefit of their entertainers? Might they not
hereby ingross the Trade wholly to themselves, and serving one another, cheat
the Natives in their Traffic? And what would the English be better for their
trafficking with their Countreymens money who live in Spain? for larger their
banks would be, more they would engross the trading. And if the King of Spain
savv it profitable for him, he would so far dispense in the Inquisition, as to
give them no occasion of removing from or keeping this treasure out of his
Dominions. And what though they have not a Country to repair to, as other
strangers; and thereby (as he alleges) are not likely to take away their
riches? Can they not transport it as they do (he tells us) in Spain? They
shortly also expect (we see) their Messiah to come and restore them to the
Country of their Ancestors; and being aliens, they would little love the
Country, and so do little for it, tending (by their good wills) to any great
advantage.

If they be so well received, and live so happily all over (as he instanceth
for illustration of this branch or profit) why then are they not content to
keep them where they are already? It must needs be their own good or ours,
which they so much desire; or for that they must have a Synagogue here also,
not vvilling but that every place should be blessed with their Religion. This
he intimates expressly, that they might have leave here also to serve God. Is it
the soil or the air they desire their Religion should be seated in? why not as
well serve God where they are? There Is something more then this in the business.

But by whom is it they are thus received and entertained? he confesses the
people hate them generally, and must this be for nothing? In a fixed and
established State, where factions do not bandy (such as they are generally
where they live) scarce is any grievously hated, but there is some notable
cause for it. And if the King of Denmark has invited them into his Dominions,
or the Duke of Savoy, or of Modina; it is for some respect or other: Perhaps
they may be admitted for the same ends our Kings formerly so long retained
them; viz. for their own gain, though much to the Subjects discommodity and
trouble.

And if they chiefly abound in the Turks Dominions, its no wonder. All the
world knows the slavery of his Subjects; he counting all their goods his own,
and they made for him (not himself for them) its no wonder if he care not how
they be used, how pillaged, how oppressed. If he imploys the Jews so much in
gathering his money, he knows them to be fit instruments for his purpose. He
knows how to press and squeeze out of them what they have before sucked up. All
his Subjects leave him their heir at their death; no child having any of his
fathers estate, but what he bestows upon him. There they cannot but be
especially kept from risings and insurrections under that Government; which
having so many Officers subordinate to one another, and the Country
distributed to their charge, all Insurrections (except great indeed) may be
quickly dashed. The Author goes not about to reckon up, how many Bassa's
Beglerbegs, or Sansacks there are of his Nation: they are exempted, he says,
from going to war, and there is very good reason for it. For their Religion, the
Turks account of them worse then of Christians: not suffering one of them to
turn Turk, till he first be baptized. And when the Grand Signior dies, what
pillaging of them as well as Christians, uses there to be?

After this, he reckons what numbers of Jews there are in Germany, Poland,
Italy, Barbary, and the Low Countries, and how many are preferred to places of
great Trust and Influence; still always acknowledging, how they are despised of
the multitude. If they were profitable to these Countries (the contrary whereof
is seen for the most part by the grudges of the subject) he would scarce from
thence necessarily make it follow, that their reduction must also be convement
for this Nation. If they have such experience of them as this Land has had, if
gone, I believe they would scarce recall them. The Emperor of Germany and King
of Poland have tolerated that, which put to the voice of the people (for whose
good they are, and ought to reign) would soon be removed; and in Poland, and
those places, so odious they are, that, as once here in England, they are
distinguished in their habits, to be known from the Natives, being noted also
for that practice of Usury, of which our adversary would clear them.

The Pope (with other Princes of Italy) sucks not little profit from their
oppressing of the people; he fares well by their extortion, and therefore
willingly suffers them; especially since the Reformation of Religion, out of
emulation against the Prorestants, whom he hates worse then them or the Turks
themselves, as the Jew loves Turks above Christians. The Republique of Venice,
and so that of the Low Countries tolerates them, and they may have particular
reason for it. Their Government is such, that those who are Merchants, are also
Senators, and few but they are found in both these ways, who are any thing
considerable; and therefore what they may hinder them in Trade, it is supplied
in customs, and other duties, equally redounding to the profit of all: whereas
our Merchants being fewer in number, if the State should be something benefited
by their Trade, and others thereby be something eased, they alone would seel
the weight of the burden.

But neither in the Low Countries are they so exceedingly fond of their
company; though scarce can they with convenience (as things now stand) turn
them often, diverse of their families being matched to them; covetousness
procuring that, which might be abhorred by Religion. So are they likewise in
Portugal intermartied; the people being generally weary of their guests. Reason
of State makes the Dutchmen tolerate all Religions but the Popish. From whence
shall it not presently be concluded, that all their neighbors should do the
like.

And now I come to his second thing which he proposes as a motive to receive
them; and that is their Faithfalness and Honesty. I think I might well spare my
pams to answer this any further, then by what has been already showed. How
faithful they have been to this English Nation, ^et any impartial Reader Judge.
They who shall out of scorn and hatred of our Profestion, crucisie children,
lay violent hands on tender infants (and that by common practice) they who
shall clip, counterfeit, and mangle our coin, shall rise up and butcher 200000
with unheard of (...), send ^^^^ssages to Pagans to stir them up against the
common name of Christianity (wishing with Caligula, it had but one head) poison
fountains, and the like; shall we count them faithful. They took part indeed
with our Henry the third against his Barons; but it is no uncharitableness to
judge it done more for their own ends, then any faithfulness to the then
Magistrate. If they have done sometime that which is good in it self; yet they
have done it with such malicious minds, that God has given them but the reward
of wickedness. So in the year, 1421. they furnished the poor Christians of
Bohemia with money and munition against their Antichristian Persecutors,
Krantzius, l. 11 Saxon. cap. 7.
and therefore were quite banished out of Bavere, quite bereft of all their
money and coin. And lastly, banished all the Dominions belonging to Frederick
Duke of that Province.

Indignities offered to Religion in such an horrid way, as by the vile butchery
of poor innocents upon a cross. can no way come in upon the account of
faithfulness; and yet this they have ordinarily practiced in other parts, as
well before as since their expulsion. If they may find an opportunity, what
their will may be, we may gather from that their carriage, during the troubles
betwixt the Emperor and Pope; when hoping Christian Religion would have dyed in
those wars and seeing the state of Christendom deeply endangered in these civil
broils, Krantzius Wandal. Hist. l. 9. cap 23. Vide Baron. in Annal. ad ann. 28.
and 1320. and 13.48.
they according to their Jewish policy seek to thrust it over head and ears in
blood, poisoning the fountains throughout Germany, offering like violence to
the Sacraments, as they had used to do before.

And we may further see their faithfulness and carriage, what it has been
since their expulsion, to go no further then to the days of Queen Elizabeth. In
the year, 1568. and the ninth of her reign, they were expelled by Pius Quintus
the then Pope, Hieron. Rub. lib. 11. Histor. Ravenna.
and that even for their horrid and extravagant Usuries and Oppressions, for
their combining with Thieves and Robbers; for Sorceries or Magical Charms, in
winning women to their own and others lusts. And are we not satisfied with that
horrid and abominable Treason of Lopez, by whom we have warning enough never to
meddle with them more, as a people always working mischief to this Nation? This
Miscreant taken in by the Queen to be her Household Physician, conspires with
her Spanish Enemies for money, to work her destruction, and promises to poison
her. Cambden in Eliz.
Accordingly for that purpose he brings her a purge; but she having by the
special providence of God discovered his treachery (according to former
agreement) sends him with it to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, telling him that
he stood more in need of Physic. Upon this he carries it to the old man,
desirous at least to dispatch one of them: But he being too cunning for him,
demands what he has there, and upon answer, a purge, telling him he must be a
Physician to purge ill humors out of him, presently causes him to be
apprehended. Being convicted, and according to sentence, brought to the place
of execution, he there professed that he loved Queen Elizabeth as well as Jesus
Christ himself.

The argument of their faithfulness, as to the Rabbi, is but very jejune; and
therefore no wonder, if he produce so few examples. First he mentions how
faithful they were to the Kings of Egypt, and instanceth in the fidelity of
Antipater to Julius Caesar. For the first, they knew the power of the Ptolomies
continually able to crush them; and therefore if some stood to them, and proved
faithful, what did they herein but what their own advantage led them to, and
what the necessity of their State required. But how faithful were their Kings
to the Babylonian Monarchs, to whom they did more then promise obedience? would
they not always take their opportunity to rebel? And (because he speaks of
their fidelity to the Romans) how came, I pray, the War with Vespasian, and
Titus his Son? even, as before Zedekiah had rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar,
and that proved the destruction of the City, so came it also to pass the last
time. It was an opinion strong in those days through the East, that Jewry
should bring forth the Monarch of the world: in confidence of this, Vide Sueton
in Vespas.
the Jews rebel, slay the Governor, put to flight the Pro-Consul of Syria;
Vespasian is chosen General against them, there is chosen Emperor, and so the
Roman Writers account that saying to be fulfilled; and then Titus is sent into
Judaea, and finisheth the work begun by his father. How faithful they were in
Adrians time, we showed before in the Introduction; how they behaved themselves
also in Egypt, Cyrene and Cyprus.

Then the Rabbi instanceth some particular places and persons; as the Jews of
Bureos, who denied obedience to Don Pedro de Cruel, who had killed his brother:
how many Jews were made Tutors to Noblemens children; of Samuel Alvalensi; the
Jews carriage at the besieging of Mantua, and in the Signory of Brasil. These
were but a few, if twenty times more, in comparison of the nature and carriage
of the whole Nation, which how faithful it has been, generally, to the people
in all places, has already been sufficiently discovered. To insist no more
upon these few particulars.

The next and last two things he instances as arguments of their faithfalness,
are rather negative then positive; and therefore can conclude nothing for his
purpose when they were banished by Ferdinand and Isabel out of Spain, they made
no resistance: ergo, they were faithful; how will this rightly follow? and when
they were thence expelled; it was not for any unfaithfulness; therefore to
prove their fidelity is as good an argument as the former. If they had had
opportunity and sufficient warning (though they were half a million) I do not
much question what they would have done. And for their praying (which he urges
for an argument of their faithfulness) for the Commonwealths wherein they live;
so perhaps they did when they sent to the Prince of Babylon, to stir him up
against Christendom; when they conspired to fire the City of London; when they
sucked away the sap of the English prosperity by their extortions; when they
clipped and coined money, and so rather spoiled this Commonwealth; Did they not
then also pray for the prosperity of it?

As for any cruelty which might be showed toward them, when expelled out of
Spain and Portugal; I take not upon me to be a patron of it; neither of that
which might be exercised toward them, by our own n^tion, whilst here residing.
Many times they have been used most pitifully; but generally in all places,
they might thank themselves for it: their carriage (here especially) was such,
as upon the least advantage the people would show their hatred of it.

Lastly, for to meet with objections made against their faithfulness, the Rabbi
endeavors to clear his Countrymen from three aspaersions usually cast upon
them, viz. usury, killing children, and seducing Christians to their Religion:
I wish they were but aspersions, that they might the sooner be wiped off: but
that will not be, by all the skill their Nation has. Was not usury with great
extortion their continual practice ^ What it was in England and Italy we have
already seen; and that it is used by them in Germany, What it was in France,
see Baronius his Annal. ad ann. 1198 1223. 1306.1348. Ingenti foenore cives ita
sibi oboerato; habebant, ut eorum proediis ditatieim dias fere Civitates
vendicarent, alios in custadia penes se servarent, plerosque fortunis omnitus,
dissolvendi causa debiti spoliatos, mendicis non dissimiles efficerent, idem ad
an. 1198.
he himself confesses. Their principles of Religion do not forbid it then to
us; though amongst themselves. Besides he should have done well to declare,
what they do in Poland, Prussia and other places; especially where they cannot
have such opportunity of trading.

How they have used Christian children, enough and too much has been shown
already; it is not good any more to stir that puddle. Vide Socrat. i. 7 cap.
10. Krantzium lib. 10. Wandal. cap 18. Papir. Masson. lib. 3. pig. 335 Vide
Baronium in Annal. ad an. 1198.1236.1252.1287. ibid. 1305.1348.1410. Et Bzovium
ad ann. 1432.1475.1494.
Not only do our own Authors affirm this; but Foreign writers testify the
same also to have been done in diverse places: whose authority to question, more
then that of Manana of the Chronicles of the Xantes, and others, which he
brings as testimonies of their faithfulness (to which particulars we have
already answered) it is neither ingenuity nor modesty to do it.

For their persuading Christians to their Religion; we know it to be the
practice (as the ambition) of all parties, to draw as many as they can in
safety unto them; nay many further venture, then stands with their safety. Now
for the Rabbi to persuade us that this is not their desire (especially meeting
with such as may easily be drawn aside) he cannot but be convinced of its
impossibility. This was the cause, for which they were banished Granada and
Spain by Ferdinand and Isabel; having seduced some Noblemen of the Kingdom of
Andaluzie; which he confesses. And for their dravving Christians to their
Religion, see the Rabbi himself in a Book published 1650 called, The hope of
Israel, Sect. 17. Where he instanceth those of his Religion, who attempted to
draw, even the then Pope; Charles the fifth Emperor, and Francis the first, to
Judaism. See also Sect. 30.

The third and last motive for their readmission proposed by the Rabbi, is the
Nobility of their stock. His modesty in this, is the reason he insists no more
upon it it being also sufficiently known to all Christians. He might as well be
even as modest in his other two; and whereas he leaves it to others, for that
it is said, Let another man's mouth praise thee, and not thine own; in this
respect he might also better have left the other. For faithfulness is a greater
thing then outward extraction; and to be commended for virtue, is a greater
honor then for greatness of birth, seeing that virtus est vera nobilitas.
Indeed they are the off spring of faithful Abralam; to them were committed the
Oracles of God; of them (which is more their honor) as to the flesh came Jesus
Christ; but they have cut themselves off, by their rebellion against him; they
are fallen from the truth, and thereby have forfeited their former honor. Yet
it is the earnest desire of all Christians, to have them engraffed again into
the true stock (to which I cannot conceive their readmission hither can at all
conduce) and then their company would be more welcome because over and above
what would come in upon the score of Christian love, their principles would be
the safer.

Now by this time (by all that has been said in way of relation and answer) I
hope the case in hand is not far from being cleared abundantly and that it may
be seen what these motives amount to, which the Rabbi has tendered to
consideration. We cannot but see that the Jews at all times have so, for the
most part, behaved themselves; as that they have ministered to the Christians
occasion of dislike and prejudice; and that all the slaughters and massacres of
them may be laid at their own doors. Here in England, they first begun to
crucify children and oppress the people; before they were injured, to speak
on, or molested; they spoiled the coin in Henry the second his days; and yet
had the privilege of burying in all places of their abode granted. The first
tumult we read of raised against them was at the Coronation of Richard the
first; and that was occasioned by themselves, offering to come into the Kings
house, notwithstanding a proclamation to the contrary. And the occasion of the
tumult at Lin was, their endeavor to kill a Convert: their grievous extortion
at Stamford, York, and other places, drew upon them the inconveniences that
followed. After this the people enraged, prosecute them as National enemies;
yet they leave not off their extortions, make it their annual practice to
crucify children, conspire against City and people, still clip and spoil the
coin, as very earnest to undo themselves. The several Kings getting gain by the
bad usage of the subject, only take occasion to fleece them for their
miscarriages, and make their Markets out of the contention raised betwixt them
and the Natives.

We see how they have behaved themselves fince their expulsion: how mischievous
to this Nation, in particular they had almost been in the Treason of Lopez. We
see how they have been expelled by other Princes and States how these Princes
that still retain them, are more carried by their private profit, then the good
of their subjects, who in all places are weary of them; and how these States
with whom they live, have particular reasons and interests; and have that
advantage, which we, by the small number of Merchants, and want of convenience
of trading cannot obtain.

I cannot blame them for so earnestly desiring their reduction. this Land is
another Land of Goshen, a plentiful Land, and therefore very desirable in this
their long (and worse then) Egyptian bondage; but the last experience of our
Ancestors what guests they were, and the testimonies of other Nations, rather
may make us rejoice they are gone, then be glad to enjoy their company any
further.

Such is the antipathy in English hearts against these men; derived (with some
memory of their qualities) from their Ancestors, that though it be now more
then 365 years since their expulsion, yet not at all does it seem to moderate,
or be abated; an ill sign of their future agreement, if ever permitted to meet
again. Their memory still remains as a pattern of mischievous minds, either apt
to do, or fit to suffer any violence; the very name of a Jew serving this
people as a perfect measure, either to notify the height of impiety in the
agent, or to sound the depth and bottom of an abject worthless and forlorn
condition in any patient. Better we cannot express more cutthroat dealing then
thus, None but a Jew would have done so; lower we cannot prize any one of most
abject condition, then by comparing him to a Jew. For so in common speech men
use to exaggerate enormous wrongs. This had been enough for a Jew to suffer,
or, I would not have done so to a Jew.

And yet further, we shall see there is more in this then ordinary, if we look
back at what is said, and turn over the writings of foreign Authors; for scarce
in any other Country has there been (within so little time) so many
enormities committed by them, as in this; such opposition and implacable malice
showed by any against them, as by this people; from the Coronation of Richard
the first, to their expulsion. This seems to intimate a more then ordinary
repugnancy to each other; or some greater opportunity they have in this Land to
be wicked, then in other places. And can we conclude they have left their old
qualities? their hatred against Christ, and them that worship him, their
Gripings, Usuries, and cruel Oppressions? May we not judge them to be the same
as before? and if their actions be not so enormous as formerly, is it not for
want of opportunity, more by restraint, then any change of nature?

They were not indeed so much to be accused at first, when admitted into this
Island, submitting to the Laws (not concerning Religion) and acting according
to common Rules and Orders; and so without doubt they might do again, till time
and opportunity broaching their malice, it might be too late to wish they had
not been received. If they should act such horrid Tragedies over again,
imbruing their hands in the blood of young and tender infants (crucifying them
in scorn and derision of our profession) it might be easier to wish them gone,
then honorable to exile them.

Their faithfulness is sufficiently known, say what they will (however always
to the true interest of this Nation) and if they should for better terms, play
false with the State, hold intelligence with the enemies thereof, counterfeit
the Coin, clip the Money, set the Cities on fire, would not a safe prevention
have proved better, then a too late remedy? These things have been practiced,
and so may again: we have small encouragement (if opportunity should be had) to
hope the contrary.

For their Religion: we have no grounds but to think them as conceited and
stubborn in their Traditions; as great enemies to Christ and Christians as
their Ancestors: we hear of few that are really and unfeignedly converted. So
far is their Reduction from affording any hope of their Conversion, as we may
fear the great cause of their so earnest desire to be received, is their
ambition to draw others to them. Since the time they have been bolder to return
hither, its more then to be feared, they have made many Proselytes; and that if
they might with impunity show themselves, and had toleration of their Religion,
and an open way of their Worship granted, hundreds, if not thousands, would
then appear, who now are veiled under the name of Christians.

Now there is opportunity for perverters to stir, matter too much disposed for
them to work upon; such and so many opinions amongst us which have affinity
with their Tenants, as, denying Christ in reality, though not in words (by
taking away his Natures, Offices, and the Real History of him) there are but
few steps betwixt them and that wherein principally the Jews dissent from us.
What will not people now believe? to what will not this prevailing Skepticism
bring them? placing Religion in notions, and the power thereof rather in being
nothing (or any thing) then something. Unto what an height are our Quakers and
Ranters flown? who taking away, and destroying all foundations, make their own
fancies and deluded conceptions, originals and rules of truth; and so being
once poisoned, are impregnable. Its the policy of Satan to gild his pills, his
Emissaries now adays representing things under another notion then that to
which they naturally tend; and if the Jews should at the first not entice
formally to their own way, yet they too well know the meaning of that saying
(the truth of which our Religion of late has sadly felt) Divide and regnes.

What they would take as an advantage to seduce, the same would prove an
obstacle to their conversion; truth having such sad entertainment in this
world, as the Brats of her Enemy, if born near her, are always accounted to be
her Progeny. The Devil where there is most of truth, is always more envious, so
also most busy, and what he works of ill, and mixeth with it, that he makes
an occasion also to raise prejudice against to hide it, and conceal it. Our
present divisions would open the door to receive their harm; but rather shut it
against any counsel or other means for their conversion. Though God knows them
that are his, and will preserve them that belong unto him; yet means are to be
used to bring about the end: and man (not daring to pry into the secret counsel
of God) is bound to take the most likely way to produce an effect desirable.

That the Jews conversion draws nigh, is a greater truth, then that their
Reduction hither would be a means unto it. It is not probable that this people,
which has now been blind for above 1600 years, should be restored to sight by
any but extraordinary power, by any work but one miraculous. Its a nation that
is rather to be born at once, and whose conversion will be as the resurrection
from the dead. Yet there seems other work that is to be done first; it is not
probable, that they who live under (at least) the Turk and Pope, should be
converted before their downfall. And if a Protestant people be to do this great
thing by their enterconrse (as some may imagine) then there are such places
where they inhabit already of which, though we may not be apt to count so
well, as of our selves; yet at present, they are in a more fit condition to
perform it.

Some there are, who taking upon them to know that which was hidden from Christ
himself as man, and the holy Angels, will point us out the year of the fall of
Antichrist, and the Jews conversion; diverse believing that next year, viz.
1656. will bring these things to pass. But experience may teach us how to rely
upon these predictions; some who have determined the times already past, for
these accomplishments, being visibly mistaken: And what consequence is there in
the nature of the thing; that there should be just so many years from the birth
of Christ to the fulfilling of these things, as were from the Creation to the
deluge? Does God^ty himself to numbers of years, and always act according to
former presidents? But, as nothing is more deceitful then account of time; so
also is it to be feared, that men are generally mistaken in the true number of
years from the birth of Christ; being misled by him that was the Author of this
Ae^a. It was 532. years, according to the vulgar computation, before men used
this account, measuring their times before that, from the building of Rome, the
beginning of Augustus; by the Olympiads, Indictions of Constantine, the Era of
the Martyrs and others: so that Dionysius the Monk, who first brought up this
account, being deceived in the quantity of time that then was past, is thought
by the most learned Chronologers to have missed of the just and full number of
years. Some say he accounted above twenty too short; others find four years to
have been past over: Others conclude he missed two, Florentius Wigorniensis.
Vsserius in Annal (...) ^oseph. Scalig. de emendat. remporum.
mistaking the true distance of the birth of Christ from the battle at Actium.
Now, if we add but two years more, the foundation of the former opinion is
quite removed; this present year, viz. 1655. being the 1657. of our Lord; and
so doubtless, at least, is to be accounted.

To conclude, if the Jews were here settled already, and the Nation had
sufficient experience of their faithfulness and good behavior; there is none
that I know, would be so cruel, as to desire their expulsion: or if they were
so distressed generally, as to give them entertainment would amount to an act
of charity; their extraction might well move to commiseration, and more: but
seeing they are gone, and yet have left such a memorial behind them; seeing
generally they flourish so, and live so happily in other places, I hope to have
written thus much can show no evil will toward them; but that one may safely
wish (at least) the good of ones native Country, and yet heartily desire the
real and full prosperity of Judah.

FINIS.

