THE HAPPY LOVER: OR, Celia won by Aminta's Loyalty.
A New SONG in great Request at Court.
To an Excellent New Tune: Or, Why are my Eyes, etc*
Licensed according to Order.

^WHy are my Eyes still flow -- ing? Why does my Heart thus trembling move?

II.
Tell me no more of Glo -- ry, to Courts Ambition I Have resigned,
But tell a long long Sto -- ry, of Celia's Shape, her Face, and Mind:
Speak too of Raptures that will Life destroy, to En -- joy,
Had I a Diadem, Scepter, and Ball,
For that dear Minute I Would part with them all.
III.
Why am I not enjoy -- ing my self, delighting in thy Arms?
My painful Love destroy -- ing, with killing Pleasures from thy Charms:
Come, come, dear Celia, now let Storms be gone, and o -- verblown,
There Is no delight like thy transporting Love,
No Joy below, what ever there is above.
IV.
Why does my Heart thus grieve -- me, as I lie panting on my Bed?
Wh^ does my hopes deceive -- me, when cruel Fates pronounce me dead?
Speak, speak, dear Saint, and by those conquering Eyes, that -- surprise:
Give, give me favor in thy sight again,
Or kill me quite to ease my pain.
Her ANSWER.
V.
HOW can I seek to co -- ver a flaming Heart overwhelmed with grief?
See, see a constant Lo -- ver, thus fainting, plead for some Relief!
No, no, Aminta, cease now to implore, sigh -- no more:
Had I then Ten thousand Hearts in my Breast,
I Would part with all, to give my Love rest.
VI.
Why does Aminta sigh -- ing, thing I will coyly Love deface?
But can there be deny -- ing, to such a Person, such a Grace?
Ah! such becoming Boldness too is found, to -- be Crowned,
That no fair Nymph that lives upon the Plain,
Can have a Heart to give my Dear pain.
Aminta] VII.
Who can express the joy -- ing, that my poor Heart does leaping find?
Fly hence all heart annoy -- ing, and fatal grief, for Celia's kind:
Come then dear Celia, let us now enjoy,

Cel] Ay, dear -- est, Ay:
While we have Breach, set Mortals wonder this,
Envy they may, but not spoil our Bliss.

Printed for J. Blare, at the Looking-Glass, on London Bridge.


