The Excellent VIRTUES and USES OF THE GREAT ANTIDOTE OF Van Helmont,
Paracelsus, and Crollius; By them called the Elixir Proprietatis: Known by all
PHYSICIANS To be the greatest Cordial and only Medicine in the World for long
and sound Life: Restoring Nature even at the Point of Death, and effectually
taking away the Seeds of all Diseases.

Written by J. H. a Lover of Truth; And made Public for the Good of all PEOPLE.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1674.

The True and Excellent ELIXIR PROPRIETATIS: WITH Its Virtues, and Directions
for the Use thereof.
ELIXIR PROPRIETATIS is Compounded of three Excellent materials, as Myrrh,
Alloes, and Saffron, Psalm. 45. verse. 8. It Is the Spirit or Essence of these
three, whose Virtues by the Learned is much admired, to be both preservers, and
restorers of Bodily Health: First, Myrrh prevents Infection and Putrefaction:
Secondly, Alloes purges the Stomach of all cold and phlegmatic Humors:
Thirdly, Saffron chears the Heart, and much revives and quickens the Brain and
Senses, and causes Digestion: Paracelsus and Van Helmont have of this
admirable Elixir Proprietatis written very largely in commendation hereof,
commending it to be the shield of Nature, to defend her from whatsoever enemies
encounters or assaults her. It would fill a Volumn to set down the wonderful
Opperations and Excellent Virtues that are delivered by these and other Authors.

Consumption and Coughs.
FOr such who are wasted by lingering Consumptions, Hectic Fevers, and Coughs,
half a Spoonful taken in a good Glass of old Maliga Sack for 9 or 10 Mornings
together, will in that time find both Stomach and Strength restored in a
competent measure.

Dropsy and Scurvey.
FOr the Dropsy and Scurvey the like quantity of half a Spoonful or less taken
in half a Pint of Rhinish Wormwood Wine is a special Remedy, if so taken for 7
Mornings together, Fasting for two hours after, and Walking a Mile or two after
it.

Convulsions and Apoplexies in Old and Young.
FOr all manner of Convulsions, Apoplexies, and Palsies, Pains of the Head,
both for Old or Young, it is the most infallible Cure in the World: The
Fountain of which Diseases proceed chiefly from corrupt windy Obstructions that
hinder the course of Nature; Those who are Aged 'twixt 30 and 60, may take
above half a Spoonful, in half a Pint of Old Maliga Sack, when they perceive
the Fit coming, or when they are in it. It has been given to Children of 5
Days old, in their Convulsion Fits, giving them about 6 or 7 Drops in a
Spoonful of Sack, and by so doing, in three or four times they have been
perfectly Cured.

For Nurses who give Suck.
THerefore I advise all Nurses, who have Children that are inclined to
Convulsions, or the Rickets, never to be without it; and also to take of it
themselves, sometimes in a Glass of Sack: And if there be any defects in their
Milk, this will remove them.

And in these Convulsion Fits, or Apoplexies, it may be taken in Brandy, or
Anniseed-Water, where Sack is wanting.

For the Headache.
FOr those which are troubled with continual Headache, which is caused by
Obstructions or cold and undigested Matter, that remains in the parts of the
Stomach, which will in a few days be removed, if you take half a Spoonful or
less in a Glass of Sack or Renish.

For Agues.
FOr the Tertian or Third day Ague, this is an infallible Remedy; and is to be
taken in this Disease four times a day, half a Spoonful in a Glass of good
Sack, and as soon as they find the Cold Fit coming upon them, to put themselves
into a warm Bed; and in thus doing, you shall every time find the Fits to
abate, and in eight or nine days, following these Directions, it will be
perfectly removed.

Smallpox or Measles.
FOr the Small Pox or Measles, this is of singular Virtue to drive the
Malignances of these Diseases from the Heart and Liver: Let them not neglect
it. Take half a Spoonful in a Glass of Sack, 3 times a day, as soon as you
perceive this Distemper appear, if the party be near 20; but if a Child, then a
quarter of a Spoonful: This will bring the Patient to a Moderate Sweat, and
procure rest; for this Elixir corroborates and strengthens the Vitals to resist
the putrefaction of the Disease, that when they come forth, few or none will
ever Pit, or deform the Face, or Body, as Experience has proved.

For Fitts of the Mother, and Windy Distempers of the Spleen.
FOr those that are troubled with Fits of the Mother, and Windy Vapors from
the Spleen, this Elixir is an admirable Remedy, the Patient taking half a
Spoonful in a Glass of Sack, for five or six Mornings and Evenings together;
and also when they are in any Fit, then to take at least a Spoonful; which
Spoonful shall opperate more than a Gallon of other Physic.

Against the Plague or Pestilence.
AGainst the Plague or Pestilence, there never was a more excellent Antidote
found out, both for prevention and Cure. In the time of the late dreadful
Plague, 1665. many of which are now alive, able to give Testimony of their
wonderful preservation, by the Blessing of Almighty God, and the use of this
admirable Elixir, of which every Morning they took, about half a Spoonful in a
Glass of Sack, and went about their affairs in the City. Thus they which found
themselves to have any Symptoms of the Plague, had directions to take a
Spoonful at least in a Glass of Sack, or in Carduus Posset, and to get into a
warm Bed, where by gentle Sweating, the Malignancy of the Disease has been
removed, and in doing so three Mornings and Evenings together, have been
perfectly well, and able to go abroad.

Against Surfeits.
FOr such as have taken a Surfeit, either by over-charging their Stomachs by
ill Diet, or bad Wines, and are thereupon taken suddenly very Sick, let them
immediately take half a Spoonful of this Elixir, in a Glass of good Sack, the
which will infallibly so opperate in the Stomach, that either by Vomit or by
Stool it will speedily remove the cause; but this ever observe, that if the
first draught shall cause the Patient to Vomit, that he do immediately drink
another, the which will then so comfort and strengthen the Stomach, that it
will soon recover its former Vigor.

Colic, or the Griping in the Guts.
FOr such as are troubled with the Colic, or the Griping in the Guts, it has
been experimentally approved, by taking half a Spoonful in a Glass of Sack,
both at Morning and Night; 'Twill give ease both upwards and downwards in this
Distemper.

Green Sickness.
FOr young Virgins, who are most subject to the Distemper called the
Green Sickness, let them every Morning, for 8 or 9 Mornings together, drink
half a Spoonful hereof in Rhinish Worm-wood-Wine, and afterward to walk 2 or 3
Miles, shall find that it will produce Roses in their Cheeks, in a very few
Weeks.

For Women in Childbed.
THis Elixir, has been often approved to admiration, for a wonderful Cordial
for Women in Labor, to whom have been given half a Spoonful in a Glass of
Sack, in the height of their pains, the which has both revived and
Strengthened them, and much facilitated and hastened their Delivery.

Many other Excellent Virtues might be truly written, but this may suffice,
that many, who have had experience in one or two, and others that have not had
any, may be encouraged to the use and benefit thereof; which, through the
Blessing of God, will be to their good and well-being.

One quarter of a Spoonful may be effectual in diver^ Distempers.

This Medicine truly prepared, that neither the heat of the Sun, nor the
coldest Frost nor Age can hurt it, is to be had at this Authors House, at the
Sign of John Baptista Van Helmont in Crutched-Friers near great Tower Hill, the
second door in Chain Ally; at Mr. Horn's a Bookseller entering into the
Royal Exchange; at Major Nathaniel Brook's at the Angel in Cornhill; at Mr.
Hancock's at the Three Bibles in Popes-Head-Ally; at Mr. Nevil's at the
Gray-hound in St. Paul's Churchyard; at Mr Playford's Stationer in the Temple;
at Mr. Lound's Stationer over against Exeter House in the Strand, at the
Tobacco-Roll and Spur near Turn-stile Holborn; at Mr. Gavell's at the Faulcon
in Westminster Hall; and Mrs. Fleming's at the Lamb in White-chappel near the
Church.

Each Glass contains either One Ounce or Half an Ounce: the price being 5 s.
the Ounce, and 2 s. 6 d. the Half.

FINIS.

