THE HUMBLE PETITION Of the LORD MAYOR, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council Assembled, as it was Presented to His Majesty In
Council at Windsor, upon Monday the 18th of June 1683.
Together with the Lord Keepers Speech.
Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

SHOWS,
THat Your Petitioners are most heartily and ^lly s^^^y for the Mis-Government
of this Your City of late Years, whereby the Citizens have fallen under Your
Majesty's Displeasure: Which occasioned a Quo Warranto to be brought against
them; Upon which Judgment has be Pronounced for Seizure of their Liberties
and Franchises into Your Majesty's Hands.

That Your Petitioners are deeply sensible of, and thankfully acknowledge the
great Favor of this Opportunity of Application to Your Royal Grace, vouchsafed
them by means of Your Majesty's not Requiring Judgment to be immediately
Entered thereupon.

And now considering this our distressed condition, we humbly cast our selves
at Your Royal Feet, Imploring Your Princely Compassion and Grace to be extended
to this Your Ancient City, most humbly begging Your Majesty's Pardon for all
our Offenses.

And we do in the Name of our selves, and all the Citizens, humbly tender, and
Pray Your Majesty to accept the most Solemn Promises and Assurances of Constant
Loyalty and Obedience to-Your: Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, and of our
Regular and Dutiful Administration of Your Government of this City for the
future: Wherein we submit our selves to Your Majesty's good Pleasure, and
humbly beg Your Majesty's Commands and Directions: Which we will with all
Humility and Thankfulness Obey.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
After the Reading of which Petition, The Lord Mayer, Aldermen, and Citizens
were Commanded to withdraw; and being again called in, the Lord Keeper spoke to
them as follows.

My Lord Mayor,
I Am by the Kings Command to tell you, That He has considered the humble
Petition of the City of London, where so many of the present Magistrates, and
other Eminent Citizens are of undoubted Loyalty, and Affection to His Service,
That for their sakes His Majesty will show the City all the Favor they can
reasonably desire.

It was very long before His Majesty took Resolutions to question their
Charter: It was not the Seditious Discourses of the Coffee-Houses, the
Treasonable Pamphlets, and Libels daily Published and Dispersed thence into all
Parts of the Kingdom; the Outrageous Tumults in the Streets, nor the Affronts
to His Courts of Justice could provoke Him to it.

His Majesty had Patience until Disorders were grown to that height, That
nothing less seemed to be Designed than a Ruin to the Government both of
Church and State; For the Factious Party were not content with the Practice of
these Insolences, but endeavored to have them publicly countenanced by the
Magistrates, and for that end in all Elections they stickled to Choose the most
disaffected into Offices of the greatest Trust in the Government, and carried
themselves with that Heat and Violence, that it was a Terror to all sober and
discreet Citizens; and the City was so unhappily divided into Parties, That
there was no likelihood it could return to good Order, so long as the Factious
retained any hopes of procuring the Election of Magistrates of their own Party,
for their Impunity.

It was high time to put a stop to this growing Evil. This made it Necessary
for His Majesty to enquire into their Abuse of Franchises, that it might be in
His Power to make a Regulation sufficient to Restore the City to its former
good Government.

It was not for Punishment, but merely for the Good of the City that He took
this Course.

And now the King has obtained Judgment in a Quo Warranto, it is not His
Intention to Prejudice them, either in their Properties or Customs. Nay, lest
the Entering a Judgment upon Record might have Consequences Fatal to them, His
Majesty was so tender of them, That He caused Mr. Attorney to forbear the same
at present, that the City might have some time to consider their own Condition.

My Lord,

His Majesty's Affection to the City is too great to reject their Suit for that
Cause.

But for that Reason you will have the less time to Deliberat upon the
Particulars the King does require of you.

And indeed, There will be little need of Deliberation; For His Majesty has
resolved to make the Alterations as few and as easy, as may be consistent with
the good Government of the City, and Peace of the Kingdom. They are These;

His Majesty Requires your submission to these Regulations;

THat no Lord Mayor, Sheriff, Recarder, Common Sergeant, Town Clerk, or Coroner
of the City of London, or Steward of the Borough of Southwark, shall be
capable of, or admitted to the Exercise of their respective Offices, before His
Majesty shall have Approved them under His Sign Manual:

That if His Majesty shall Disapprove the Choice of any Person to be Lord
Mayor, and signify the same under His Sign Manual to the Lord Mayor, or in
default of a Lord Mayor, to the Recorder or Senior Alderman; The Citizens shall
within one Week proceed to a new Choice: and if His Majesty shall in like
manner Disapprove the second Choice, His Majesty may, if He so please, Nominate
a Person to be Lord Mayor for the ensuing Year.

If His Majesty shall in like manner Disapprove the Persons chosen to be
Sheriffs, or either of them, His Majesty may appoint Persons to be Sheriffs
for the ensuing Year, by His Commission, if He so Please.

Nevertheless, the Elections of these Officers may be according to the ancient
Usage of the City, with these Restrictions.

The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen may with leave of His Majesty, displace
any Alderman, Recorder, Common Sergeant, Town Clerk, Coroner of the said City,
and Stewart of the said Borough.

Upon Election of any Alderman, if any of the Persons that shall be presented
to the Court of Aldermen by the Ward shall be adjudged unfit, upon such
Declaration by the said Court, the Ward shall proceed to the Choice of other
Persons in the room of such (...) ^^^ed: and if the said Court (...) disapprove
such Second Choice, (...) appoint any others in their room.

The Justices of the Peace to be by the Kings Commission, which His Majesty
will grant according to the usual method, unless upon Extraordinary Occasions,
when His Hajestie shall think it necessary for His Service.

These Matters are to be Settled in such manner as shall be Approved by His
Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor General, and Council Learned in the Law.

My Lord Mayor,

The City should Look upon this as a great Condescension on His Majest^es part;
it being but in the Nature of a Reservation of a small part of what is already
in His Power by the Judgment: and of those things which will Conduce as much to
their own Good and Quiet as to His Service.

If the City should Look upon it with another Eye, and neglect a speedy
Compliance, yet His Majesty has done His part, and Demonstrated His Affection
to the City, by giving them this Opportunity.

And if there shall be any heavy Consequence of this Judgment, which it will
behove you well to Consider, The fault will lie at their Doors, in whose power
it now is, to bring this Affair to a happy Conclusion.

My Lord Mayor; Midsomer-day is at hand, when some of the Officers use to be
Chosen, whereof His Majesty will Reserve the Approbation; Therefore it is His
Majesty's Pleasure that you return to the City, and Consult the Common Council,
that He may speedily know your Resolutions hereupon, and accordingly give His
Directions.

That you may see the King is in Earnest, and the Matter is not capable of
Delay, I am Commanded to let you know, He has given Order to His Attorney
General to Enter Up Judgment on Saturday next, unless you prevent it by your
Compliance in all these particulars.

FINIS.
Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printed to H^^ most
Sacred Majesty; Anno DOM. 1683.


