INFORMATION For Lieutenant Colonel Forbes, and John Forbes Writer in
Edinburgh Agent for the late Regiment of Sir John Hill at Fort-William, Against
Captain Allan Cathcart, Captain Menzies and Captain Hamiltoun.
IT is manifest by what is Represented by the Colonel, that the said Captains
have no ground to crave any Money (under the cover of being the Remains of the
Retention) either from the Lieutenant-Collonel or Agent, and that both of them
ought to be Assoilied from the Complaint by all the Rules that can be called
Law or right Reason.

The Colonel as such has Right to the Superplus of the Retention, for
defraying the contingencies of his Regiment: Especially being in Garrison at a
Post where he was in some manner both a Civil and Military Governor, and
sustained the Charge of both with very notour prudence and Loyalty.

The Colonel Exercised his Right by Ordering this Money to be paid without
any other Rule or Restraint than his own Discretion. But his Generosity and
Indulgence in giving a part of it at such Occasions as he thought fit to his
Officers, would now be distorted by the Complainers; So as to Retaliat his
Goodness with his Loss, and the Damnage of the Lieutenant-Collonel, whose
faithful Services and Expenses for the common Interest, the Colonel did fairly
Re-pay or Advance.

Such a Precedent would reach Numbers of other Persons under pretense that they
had got Shares of the Retention: By which their would be a Foundation laid for
the Captains and their Successors against als many Receivers, and their
Representatives, as would make up a new Regiment.

But as the Colonel had not only the Sole Right, but likewise the Sole
Administration of the Retention Money, as appears by his being the only Person
who drew Orders on, and gave Discharges to the Agent thereanent, (the Captains
even when they got benevolences never having given one single Receipt) so the
said Colonel Employed the Lieutenent Colonel on the public Business, gave
him his Instructions, Examined his reports and Expenses, approved his
management, allowed his Bills, ordered his re-imbursement, and finally gave
Discharges to the Agent thereupon. Whence it is not possible even in
Imagination to make such a view of the matter as either the Lieutenant-Collonel
or Agent can be reahed.

Yet the Complainers have been pleased to give in a special Claim to the Right
Honorable The Committie of Council, (to whom the Affair was remitted)
alleging that the Excrescence of the Retention Money was not Divided as it
ought, and was in use to be done there being a great part thereof given to
Lieutenant-Collonel Forbes, whereof these ar^ the Particulars, viz. 1, In the
account of Retention from April 1694, to April 1695 (recovered from the Agent)
there is stated per Bills advanced to the Lieutenant Colonel 410 lib. 13. ss.
3. d. Sterling. 2. From April 1695, to April 1696, 227. lib. 10. ss. 5. ds.
Sterling: After which the Words as per Receipt are presently razed. 3. From
April 1696, to April 1697, 115. lib. Sterling given to him. 4. From April 1697,
to April School, by Bills to London 720. lib. Sterling. 5. By two of the Books
produced, the Agent Charges himself with the Lieutenant Colonels monthly Pay.
And then says, Item, 30. libs to, etc.
Which argues a fraudulent concealment, from whence they intend to conclude
that the Lieutenant Colonel ought to be Decerned to repeat, or the Agent to
make over again a second Payment: But at the same time these Gentlemen forget
the Lieutenant Colonels riding Post Four Thousand Miles in the Regiments
service and advantages to the value of more as Five Thousand Pounds sterling
obtained to the Regiment by his Means! Howevere.

It is Answered, that the Lieutenant Colonel, and Agent ought to be Assoilied
by all the Land marks of Law and Form, which our Predecessors have set for
ensureing the Safety of the Leidges. In so far as

1. All that can possibly be Claimed by the Captains, is comprehended either
under their ordinary Pay, or their pretense to a Share in the Retention.

Their pay is fully Discharged both by themselves and the Colonel: And the
Colonel has ever since the first Establishment Solly by himself given ample
Discharges of the Retention to the Agent: Which proceeded upon allowance of the
Articles Debursed to the Lieutenant Colonel, and consequently includes
likeways a Discharge to the Lieutenant Colonel, besides his separat
Instructions which he has thereof.

These Discharges are a Brazen Wall against which all Attacks are vain, and are
an Hercules Pillar beyond which none can go, till the Lords of Session do
Reduce them. For by our Law a valid Writ, not laboring of an Intrinsical
nullity must still while it stands take its effect, (especially when there is
no Riot or Breach of the Peace can be pretended anent it) ay and while it be
anulled by their Lordships, before whom Dyets not being perremptor, His
Majesty's Subjects will get time and means of Probation for Defense and Support
of their Rights.

It is not doubted, but if the Complainers had Informed their Lawyers of the
Tenor of these Discharges, whereby the Affair resolves purely into the
Discharging of private civil Rights, they would never have presumed to divert
the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, from the greater and
public matters of the Nation, either with Complaint or Count and Reckoning.
For however Officers in time of War, or while they stand undisbanded, may have
extraordinary Remeids that they may not be drawn away from their Posts; yet
these Gentlemen having returned to their private Stations, there is no Law for
exempting them from Common Rules; especially considering what they might have
known the Councils mind by their Lordships not allowing the Addresses on the
like account of the then Lord Lindsay, and Colonel Buchans Officers to be so
much as in the least insisted upon.

2. Suppose (which is a great postulatins) that the Colonels Right to grant
these Discharges were now to be canvassed: His Right to the Remains of the
Retention at the least after the Incidents of the Regiment are Discharged, is
fully Established by the nature of the thing, by His Majesty's Decisions, by
the Councils Authority, by the Common usage and custom not only here but every
where else; and finally by the inextricable absurdities that would follow in a
contrary event. Neither are their any Specialities that can distinguish the
present case.

The other Officers received all the Pay appointed to them by the Establishment
through the hands of the Colonel, who drew Orders and Precepts for the same on
the Agent: So that whatsoever is not expressly appointed to the Captains by the
Establishment, (as the Retention is not) Remains with the Colonel, and he may
retain it, and they have no Title to seek it.

The Common usage, even in this same Regiment, that all Orders for the Agents
paying of Money are given by the Colonel, that Accounts are made to him, that
Discharges are taken from him; That the Captains Discharges even of their
ordinary Pay are presented to him qua instructions: And that the Captains do
not so much as grant either Discharge or Receipt for Retention; yea, the
Gratuities they got of it were paid in Cash without Receipt: Lastly, that the
Colonel Dispensed the Remains of Retention, without any Bar to his
Inclinations, as to time, manner, or Persons: are more than sufficient
Evidences that what ever he bestowed of the said Money after the Services of
the Regiment, was ^^t of pure Benevolence.

If it were otherways, Colonels and those of the Leidges who deal with them
would of ^ll men be the most Miserable. For presently Captains and their Heirs
would not only ^^peat the whole Retentions any time within 40. years from the
Colonels and their Poste^ty: But likewise, any Conjunct or confident Person
that got Money from them upon Pre^epts on their Agents must lay down, unless
they have kept the Instructions of the onerous ^ause for what they Received.

Sir John Hills Captains themselves have ipso facto acknowledged, and
Homologate his ^y accepting unequal Shares from him, and by granting Bonds,
which a Man would never do for his own: as appears by the Instances set down in
the Condescendance of instru^tions subjoyned to the Colonels Petition: As it
is certain that while the Regiment stood, ^he Complainers never dreamed of
Challenging their want of former years Shares, which is a ^^st Defense against
them when ^it is Disbanded.

Without further reasoning on this Matter, it is known to the Lords of His
Majesty's ^ost Honorable privy Council, how His Sacred Majesty has always
thus Determined, and ^ow their Lordships did Reject the Petitions of the then
Lord Lindsay, and Buchans Officers beforementioned.

But the Complainers knowing that they want things must invent Names and call
their Case a speciality. Yet it is most certain that no Vail can cover it from
Justice.

It is indeed pretended, that tho in the common case the Colonel may have the
Retention, yet their honest Colonel has abandoned his Right by his use and
Custom of Communicating with them, which is Instructed scripto by two several
Writs, viz. One in 1694, whereby he says in regard my Officers have been at
great Expenses in Recruits after so many Draughts, and other considerable
Charges in this Dear and unwholesom place you are hereby Ordered, ( viz. the
Agent) to pay our the Sum of 1400 lib. sterling which is in your Hands of
Retention, according to an Agreement made concerning the same, (At which time
two of these Gentlemen were not Captains, and had they been, it is presumable,
their Proportions of the said Dividend had been but small considering the
onerous Cause of the said Gratuity, and the Complainers their deserts, which
are enumerat in Colonel Hills Letters, to my Lord High Chancellor, and my Lord
Teviot, but both good Nature, and Manners makes the Lieutenant-Collonel forbear
Particulars.) And Which Order of Agreement, Major Forbes will give you etc. and
on the Back thereof Major Forbes says, you are to pay the within written Sum,
200 lib. to the Colonel, 100 lib. to each Captain, except Stuart and Hunter,
whose Shares are to be burdened with 20 libs. to Caplain Cathcart, and 20 libs.
to Richardson, etc. The other in 1695, says I desire you to allow Lieutenant
Colonel Hamiltoun, 50 lib. sterling over and above the 100 lib. allowed to him
at the last Division of the 1400 lib. sterling among the Officers. etc.

But before making particular Answers, the Complainers would be pleased to
mind, that the Colonel in the first part of the foresaid order 1694, says,
That complaints were made to him, how several persons who had no right to draw
upon, or meddle with the Retention Money, do draw upon that Fond upon which he
was censured as guilty of neglect in that which was peculiar to his post:
therefore he requires the Agent that he answer no Bills, Orders, or make
payments of Money upon that Fond, but such as come to you from my self under my
own hand: with this assurance, that no other Bills or payments should be
allowed in Account. After which follows the precise words above set down anent
the 1400 lib.

Hence it is Answered.

1. That the alledgance is not instructed, but further, the quite contrary is
plainly proven. For the Colonel vouches his Right, and that non without his
special order shall draw on, or get any Money out of the Retention. They accept
of this Paper with this quality, and can never approbat and reprobate the same
Write. It bears that even the 1400 lib. was distribute upon a specific
Account, viz. Their Expenses about that time in Recruits, The Precept 1695, in
favors of Hamilton, calls what he got an allowance: and the division of the
1400 lib. likewise an allowance to the Officers; Which plainly implies that it
was only a temporary and precarius grant, quoad these particular Sums:
especially considering that it adds this shall be your warrant, without further
receipt.

2. It is a method of arguing that is indeed new (which is the only speciality
in the case) he that deals a part of his excresent rents in alms must give the
whole: And a weekly (...) day must be continued for ever: A given Horse
(against the old Scots Proverb) must (...) looked in the teeth. Gratifications
which were always esteemed to be strictly interpr^^^ must henceforth be
Stretched beyond the subject gifted, yea beyond all bounds. Lib^^^lity must be
frighted, by making it of all that a man has, if he let out any indication^
his generous mind. There must be no moresuch a thing as the Lawyers call res
merae faculi^^ but all now must run to nece^sity and bonds: 3. These papers do
sufficiently Interpret th^^ selves without any such comments as destroys the
Text. For the agreement mentioned the order 1694. is called an order of
agreement, and expressly referred to be told by M^ Forbes, and Major Forbes on
the back of the same Write tells and signs as is above rep^^sented,

There is another piece of new Logic introduced by the Complainers, viz. The
Ag^^ account of the Retention 1693, is docketed thus, 'I Captain James Stuart
being orde^ by the Colonel to revise the above-written Discharge, do certify
that I have examined Account and credentials, etc. As also the Colonel in a
docket of the Account from 1^ to School, says the above written Account being
viewed by my Officers, and perused me are found to be just and are allowed by
me. Ergo the Retention money belongs to (...) Officers,

It is Answered, the consequence is denied. And otherwise a compter might put
up Money in his Pocket, because he is employed by the master of the Money to
revise the count. In a word the Colonel is a good man, a lover not only of a
correspondence twixt Friends, but likewise of his own ease: and therefore it is
no marvel, that he took Officers assistance in that, as well as his other
undoubtedly peculiar business. But it is a^ monstration, that these very things
do prove the right to have been owned in the Coll^ in so far as, 1. The
Officers had orders from him, and he that does by another doe^ himself. 2. The
Write bears that they only viewed, but he alone allowed.


3. Suppose (which is still more and more) that the Discharges were to be
assaulted, the Colonels right not found to be good: yet neither Lieutenant
Colllonel nor Agent be liable, because quoad the Agent he has made bona fide
payment by his Constituents o^ and as to the Lieutenant Colonel suum recepit,
he has got but what was due to him by constituent, viz. The Colonel, and he
neither did nor was obliged to enquire, out what part of his Debitors Estate
(whither his own pay or other effects) this Cash did proc^^

For clearing whereof, it may be considered, that the common interest of
mankind (...) made this a principal in all Nations, mobilia non habent
sequelam. fluxile Movables, ((...) especially Money) passes without any burden
of the last Possessor, his personal oblidgments, commerce necessary betwixt man
and man requires, that there be not Floodgates open to Pleys for repetition of
Money pretended to be wrongfully disposed. This Money (...) not stamped with
the word (Retention) upon it, and whatever way the Colonel and ge^t might have
cleared among themselves, in placing Debursments to one Account, rath than
another: yet the Lieutenant Colonel is no ways concerned out of what Fond his
Expenses were furnished, and it had been Impertinence in him to have asked the
Colonel (...) Question.

As this principal is founded in nature and necessity, so the other that qui
suum recipit is (...) obliged to refound, Is no less plain in Law: as has been
lately cleared by the Lords of S^^ on in a famous Decision, upon a remit of
Parliament, betwixt Hope of Kerss and Mu^^ of Spot. But so it is that the
Lieutenant Colonel was employed by the Colonel, and (...) proven of him by
repeated approbations under his hand herewith produced, which cli^^ him in all
the undertakings which he went about with so much fatigue, and even superp^^
Expenses out of his own Pocket for the public good: and consequently he who
set (...) on work was bound to pay his Wages, and such an honest master did
never fail to (...) them.

Its no ways to the purpose, that the Lieutenant Colonel might have done some
of (...) own business in the intervals, but always without prejudice of theirs.
For no Sense or Reason can improbat any such industery for a man's self, when no
other is indamaged by it: a^ his imployer and Colonel has been so far from
thinking otherwise, that he has fully app^^ven the Lieutenant Colonels
faithful discharging of his Trust.

4. As to the particular condescendence, the Lieutenant Colonel and Agent are
no wa^ concerned to make any Answer thereto; because they most humbly conceive
that the three separat grounds before represented, are more than sufficient to
exoner them without entering to detail.

(...)


