IN MEMORY OF THE Truly Loyal, and Valiant Capt. John George.
Late Commander of Their Majesty's Frigatt the Rose. Being a Full and True
Relation of a Bloody Fight betwixt the said Frigatt and a Frenchman of War to
the Eastward of Cape Sables, Latitude 41 and 50. On Saturday the 24th. of May.
1690.
In a Voyage from New England in Company with 2 Mast Ships, to whom the
Rose-Frigat was Convoy.
By one of the Company.
ARe all Pens silent, is there none to tell
How the Brave George near Sables-Island fell?
Why such Ingratitude? his Merit's much
Better deserve, then thus a Verse to grutch
In memory of him, who for to save
His King's and Countries honor, found a Grave
In deepest Seas, yet shall his Memory,
Not thus be buried in obscurity.
Nor shall base -- Bostoners, cursed Sons of Cham,
Who with false lies, and tales mankind would sham
E're blast thy Glory, though their black mouth's said,
Thy Ship and Men, were to the French betrayed.
Say then my Muse, and faithfully relate
The time, and cause that ushered in his fate.
Near twice Ten years, betrusted with Commands
In Warlike Ships, in midst of Armed Bands
On all occasions he his Country served,
And from the Post of danger never swerved;
Always a Victor, and by Heaven's decree
Preserved till this his final destiny.
'Twas near the Americ strand when twice 12 days
The Glorious Sun had gilded with his Rays
Fair Maia's bosom. In the Frigot Rose
Ploughing the Ocean to seek out his foes,
And save his Convoy-Fleet, anon appears
A Lusty French Ship, after her he stears.
Twenty odd Guns on either side hawl'd out
Seamen and Soldiers full four hundred stout.
The Rose a Fifth Rate, not full thirty Guns,
Sixscore brave Lads, burden 3 hundred Tuns.
And when in Call demands, whence your ship, hoy?
The Frenchman cried, me tell you by and by
Strike to the King of France then forthwith cried
No, no, Monsieur, we will first well bang your hide,
Cried Valiant George, nor shall it e're be told
To England's King his Ship so cheap I sold.
Scarce said, when thundering Eccho's pierce the sky
From English Mariners, who French defy.
Shrill Trumpets, and loud Drums do now invite
The dull and timorous to a bloody Fight:
Then thundering Cannons mixed with Fire and smoke
Send pondrous balls, piercing well-season'd Oak,
Which in their passage to the briny deeps
Numbers of souls lull in Eternal sleeps,
From the Main-topps and quarter-Decks like hail
In showers of Lead, each other now assail:
Now might you see the Rigging cut in twain
And nimble fingers splicing it again.
Ten thousand splinters from all quarters fly,
The sayls hard Bullets pierce then pass toth' sky:
Some sponge the Guns, others dire powder bear,
Loading with chain-shot is another care:
All bent to kill, or take, or burn, or both,
No Room is left for Cowardice or sloth.
The Curled Ensigns now are cut in twain,
Straight, ^aring Sailers put them up again.
And now the affrighted fishes from the Deep
Their Scaly heads advancing up, do peep,
Above the waves, displeased at such distresses,
Amazed, return to their unknown recesses;
Mean while the Combatants with clamours fill
Heavens cieled Arch in crying out, kill, kill.
Then dying groans, with shouts commi^^ are heard,
And from the scoopers flowing blood appeared.
Thus for some time the success doubtful was,
When from the Main-top (oh! woe and alas!)
Some Common hand a Cursed ball did send,
Which brought the Noble George unto his end:
Fixed in his Breast, out goes his fleeting Soul,
Whilst in his hearts-blood, his pale Corpse does Roll:
Yet e're he went to the Elysium shade,
To his next Friends breathing his last he said,
God bless you all, I dye, I Am ill all over,
You're (...) a good Cause, play the Men therefore.
Stout Wiggoner the Ships chief Master fell,
With sundry more of whom if I should tell,
Too large would be the Theme, let it content
In The Be^^ of honor, they their dear lives spent.
Here should I end, salt tears bids stay my Pen,
But Common Justice prompts me on again,
To speak of Valiant Condon, and his Merits,
Since he the Captains place duly Inherits.
The sword strait he advancing, does cry out,
Brave Lads fight on, we will have the other bout.
Your late Commander's dead (brave George) it is true,
My life against the Foe I Will spend with you;
Do but your parts, we will make the Monsieur run,
Or Roast his hide, e're it be set of Sun.
Fresh Courage now revives in every breast,
Scorning to think of life or Interest:
Near one hour more they thump't the Frenchmans hide,
Such sort of treatment he could not abide.
His First, and Second in our view did fall,
His Ports were made as wide as door in Hall;
His Main-yard shot, his Men like Pigeons fell,
From the Main-top; In death's Embraces dwell
Some hundreds more: for in our view we saw
From bloody decks they their dead Men did draw.
But that the Poet may not Merit blame,
For he (as well as others) has some shame.
It must not be forgot how Valiant Capt. Ben. Clark of Wappin in the Europian
of London, a Mast-Ship.
Clark
With his ten Guns did prove a gallant spark,
And though desired forth with to fall astern,
And safe from blows himself no more concern
In Bloody Combat, scorned to be dismayed,
Hawl up the Main sail to his Men he said;
And from the Quarter Deck waving on high
His glittering sword the Frenchman did defy:
Come if you dare (he cried) we are ready for ye,
We Will bang your Jacket, or I should be sorry.
Stand by your Guns, it never shall be told
To my disgrace in England -- New -- or old
I feared a Frenchman, or would e're permit
My Captain to be wronged I feeing it:
Fire on his quarter, you will ^ach him now,
Place that great Gun exact against his Bough,
Ply well your small shot, let us do all we can,
What is the least, is not the worst of man.
Thus giving, and receiving on it goes,
Till the poor Monsieur thresh'd with heavy blows
Found he'de too much on it, strait about he wheels,
Finding his hands not half so good as heels.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed and sold by most Booksellers of London and Westminster.


