TO His Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the Comon-wealth of England,
Scotland, and Jreland. The humble Petition of Sir Job Harby Knight.
Humbly Shows:
THat Letters Pattents were made upon Sea-coales exported out of England,
Sunderland, and Wales, bearing date 11.th April, 13. year of the late King,
giving directions for the Collection of Four shillings on each Chaldron that
should be exported after the date of the said Letters Pattents, that the said
Impost by Indenture dated 2. July, 1634. Was demised unto your Petitioner and
others for their own proper Uses, it being without prejudice to the English
Nation; which said Grant was confirmed to your Petitioner for XXXI. years to
come upon the Consideration following, your Petitioner for his share having
paid 9000. pounds, and for the first 7. Years rent of 100. l. yearly to be
paid to the Crown, and 500. l. per Annum until the end of the Grant, and this
likewise under the broad Seal of England for the uses aforesaid, which said
Rent was paid into the Exchequer, so ^ong as enjoyed by your Petitioner, the
Grant was never found grievous but confirmed by the late Parliament in the
^ooke of Rates; howbeit your Petitioner has been deprived hereof ever since
the year 1642. when the Earl of Newcastle held that Town, nor could he ever
since be restored to his just Right, Sir Arthur Haslerigge having gotten the
same into his possession; upon which said Impositions there has been received
near 20. Thousand pounds, by what Power or Right is unknown to your
Petitioner.

The Premises considered, your Petitioner humbly prays that a Committee be
appointed to call those persons to an Account for the Twenty thousand pounds
received by them, and in particular Sir Arthur Haslerigge for those great
sums of Money he has taken out of the said Collection, and that he and they
may show by what Order they received the same, your Petitioner being always
well affected to the Parliament, and as a testimony thereof advanced
voluntarily on the Propositions and City Scale, the sum of Three thousand
pounds.

And your Petitioner further prays, that by the goodness and justice of your
Highness, he may according to Law and Equity re-enjoy the benefit of the
aforementioned Grant purchased by him as aforesaid, unto the full end and
expiration of his Lease, paying the Rent reserved to the State.

And he shall ever pray.

The first Reference.
HIs Highness does direct that the Committee for Inspection do take into
consideration this Petition and examine the Allegations thereof, and report how
they find the matter of fact, with their opinion to his Highness and the
Council, 23 Febr. 1653.

JOHN THVRLOE

By the Commissioners by Ordinance from his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Committee, for Inspecting the Treasuries, April, 28. 1654.
IN pursuance of a Reference from his Highness the Lord Protector dated 23.
Febr. 1653. upon the Petition of Sir Job Harby. Knight.

We do humbly certify, that we do find by Letters Pattents 11. April, in
the 10.th year of the reign of the late King, there was an Imposit. on of 4.
s. the Chaldron on Sea-Coales exported, which said Imposition was confirmed by
act of Parliament in the book of Rates, and by the said Letters Pattents Job
Harby Esquire, was made Collector of the said Imposition, and by Letters
Pattents dated July 2. in the 10. year of the reign of the late King, the
said Imposition of 4. s. the Chaldron on Sea-coales exported, was granted Henry
Lucas, John White, and Job Harby Esquire, for the uses of the Earl of Holland,
Earl of Dorset and Sir Job Harby Knight, upon consideration of services done by
the said Earls, and of payment of 8612. l. 15. s. 3. d. as by privy Seal dated
the last of August, in the 10. year of the reign of the late K. does appear,
and according to the said Letters Pattents the rent resetved therein was paid
into the Exchequer by Sir Job Harby and others till 23. October. in the 20. year
of the reign of the late King, as by Affidavit of William Day of London
Merchant does appear, we do further find that the said Sir Job Harby, has
not received any part of the profits arising on the said Imposition from 29.
July, 1642. to this present time, there being in the year 1642. received by
Order from the Earl of Newcastle, and after the delivery of the said Town to
the Scots to this time, received by Mr. Dawson of Newcastle who has paid the
same to the Scots, and Sir Arthur Haslerigge, as by Certificate under the hand
of Thomas Palmer dated April 10.th 1654. does appear. We do humbly offer as
our opinion, that it is just that the said Sir Job Harby should be satisfied
for his said part of 4. s. the Chaldron received on Coals exported since the
year 1642. and the said Sir Job Harby to be admitted to collect the said 4. s.
the Chaldron for the future, and to receive the third part thereof for his own
use durinn the term of years granted by by the said Letters Pattents yet
unexpired.

Geo: Bennet. Will: Roberts. Edw. Cresset. Will: Coffe. Exam. Tho. Smiths by
Secret.
Dated 28. April, 1654.
A Second Reference.
HIs Highness having considered this Report, referres it back to the said
Committees to examine by what Order and direction Mr. Dawson of Newcastle
received and paid the duty of 4. s. upon the Chaldron of Coals to the Scots
and Sir Arthur Haslerigge, and that they likewise consider what Orders,
Ordinances, or Acts of Parliament, have been made by the Parliament or
Committee of the Revenue concerning the said Duty, and upon Certificate thereof
to his Highness, he will be pleased to give such further direction thereupon
as shall be just.

JOHN THVRLOE

Mr. SCOBELS Certificate,
Die Martis 9. Febr. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Imposition
of 4. s. a Chaldron upon Sea-Coales, be continued till the Five and twentieth
day of March next.

Die Martis 11. September. 1649.
REsolved upon the Question of the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Imposition of 4. s. upon the Chaldron of Coals formerly taken at Newcastle, be
taken off and shall not henceforth be paid.

Upon Search made in the Iournall books, I find no Ordinance nor Order other
then this, touching any Imposition on Coals.

HEN. SCOBEL Clerk of the Parliament.

By the Commissioners by Ordinance from his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Council, for Inspecting the Treasuries, September. 21. 1654.
IN pursuance of a Reference from his Highness the Lord Protector, dated 3. of
August, 1654.

Ordered.

THat Mr. George Dawson Collector of the Customs and Impositions on Coals at
Newcastle, do Certify unto Us, by 3. October next ensuing; What Moneys he
has received since the time of his being first Collector upon that Account, as
also how the 11. Shillings four pence now paid on each Chaldron does arise,
whether upon a joint or several Account, or whether the 4. s. on the Chaldron
formerly received by Thomas Palmer in the year, 1642. or before, be not
included in the said -- 11. Shillings 4. d. and also whether any other 4. s.
the Chaldron above the said 11. Shillings and 4. pence have been since the
year, 1642. or before, received by himself or any other in the Port of
Newcastle; If so received, upon what Account and since he has not been so long
Collector, what he cannot Certify upon his own knowledge, he is desired to
doc by the best Information he can obtain from others.

George Bennet. William Roberts. Edward Cresset. Exam. Thomas Smithsby,
Secretary.

Mr. Dawsons Certificate.
In Obedience to an Order of the Honorable Commissioners for Inspecting the
Treasuries, dated 21. September, 1654.
THese are to Certify, that I cannot in so short a time as before the 3. of
October next, give an Account what Moneys have been received by me for Custom
of Coals, since the time of my being first Collector, but if longer time be
granted me, I shall observe Orders so much as in me lies: J do not observe by
the present book of Rates which is the Rule whereby J do collect the 11.
Shillings and 4. pence the Chaldron on Sea-coales exported, that it has any
other name then Subsidy, and so by the name of Subsidy or Custom I have from
the 2. day of December, 1644. and do still continue receiving the same under
that name of Custom, and not as Imposition, I cannot of mine own knowledge
Certify more then the book of Rates holds forth, how the said -- 11. s. 4. d.
does arise, but by credible persons in Newcastle, I am informed that before the
present book of Rates came forth, there was Collected in Newcastle for Coals
exported an Imposition of -- 6. s. 8. d. the Chaldron by the Deputy of Sir John
Trevor, etc. and an Imposition of 4. s. the Chaldron by the Deputy of Sir Job
Harby, and at that time also the Farmers of the Customs their Deputy did
Collect -- 8. d. the Chaldron as custom; There has been since Nevember, 1644.
diverse Imposts laid upon Coals Shipped out of the Port of Newcastle, but they
were laid on first by the English and Scots Commissioners that came in with the
Scots Army, and confirmed by the then Parliament, and taken off by them at the
Scots Armies return for Scotland also there was an Impost for 4. s. per
Chaldron laid on by Sir Arthur Haslerigge and the Committee for the Militia in
these parts in the year 1648. for the maintenance of the Garrison of Tinmouth
and Newcastle, in time when supply came not from the Committee for the Army,
which was also approved on by the Parliament, and taken off by them in
September, 1649. Of all which there has been Accounts rendered, and discharges
accordingly given, I do not know nor have heard of any other 4. s. per
Chaldron that has been Collected Newcastle. either before or since the year
1642. then what is above expressed. Dated Custom House Newcastle, September
30. 1654.

George Dawson, Collector.

Second Report.
By the Commissioners by Ordinance from his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Council, for Inspecting the Treasuries, October. 3. 1654.
IN pursuance of a Referrence from his Highness the Lord Protector dated August
3. 1654. upon the Petition of Sir Job Harby Knight.

We do humbly Certify, that we do find by Letters Pattents dated April 11.th
in the tenth year of the late King, there was an Imposition of 4. s. the
Chaldron of Sea-coales exported, which said Imposition was confirmed by Act of
Parliament in the book of Rates, and by the said Letter Pattents Job Harby
Esquire, was made Collector of the said Imposition, And by Letters Pattents,
dated July 2. in the tenth year of the late King, the said Imposition of 4. s.
the Chaldron on Sea-Coales exported, was granted to Henry Lucas, John White,
and Job Harby Esquire, for the Uses of the Earl of Holland, Earl of Dorset
and Sir Job Harby Knight upon consideration of Services done by the said
Earls, and of payment of Eight thousand six hundred and twelve pounds fifteen
shillings and threepence by Sir Job Harby, as by privy Seal dated last of
August the 10. year of the late King does appear, and according to the said
Letters Pattents the rent reserved therein was paid into the Exchequer by Sir
Job Harby and others, till the 23. of October, in the 20. year of the late
King, as by Affidavit of William Day of London Merchant does appear, we do
further find that the said Sir Job Harby has not received any part of the
profits arising on the said Imposition from the 29. July, 1642. they being
received by Order from the Earl of Newcastle, and after the delivery of the
Town of Newcastle, paid to the Scots, and ever since that time Mr. George
Dawson has received according to the book of Races established by Parliament
the sum of 11. Shil. 4. pence upon each Chaldron, in which the Imposition of
4. s. the Chaldron for Coals exported belonging to Sir Job Harby is included
the 11. s. 4. d. arising as follows, 8. d. Customs, received by the Farmers
of the Customs 6. s. 8. d. by the Deputy of Sir John Trevor, and 4. s. by the
Deputy of Sir Job Harby; all which appears by a Certificate under the hand of
George Dawson Collector of Newcastle, dated 30.th September, 1654. We do
further find there was an Imposition of 4. s. the Chaldron laid on by Sir
Arthur Haslerigge and the Committee of the Militia for the North, for the
maintenance of the Garrisons of Tinmouth and Newcastle, by Certificate under
the hand of Mr. George Dawson dated as aforesaid does appear, which said
Imposition was constituted by order of Parliament dated 9.th February, 1646.
but by an Order of Parliament dated September 11.th, 1649. repealed, as does
appear by a Certificate under the hand of Mr. Scobell. We further find an
Order made by the Committee of the Revenue, dated 10.th August, 1649. Requiring
Sir Job Harby to give an Account to Auditor Collins, what Moneys has been
received by him thereupon, which is all that was transacted by the said
Committee; relating to the said Imposition, as by Certificate under the hand of
Mr. Cousins does appear. Upon Examination of the whole matter, we humbly
offer as our Opinions, that it is just; That the said Sir Job Harby should be
satisfied for his Third part of -- 4. s. the Chaldron received on Sea-coales,
exported since the year, 1642. and the said Sir Job Harby to be admitted to
Collect the said -- 4. s. on the Chaldron for the future and to receive the
Third part thereof for his own use, during the term of years granted by the
said Letters Patterns yet unexpired.

George Bennet. William Roberts. Edw. Cresset. Exam. Tho: Smithsby, Secretary.

The last Reference.
HIs Highness upon Consideration of this Report, desires the Advice of his
Council thereupon, and to that end referres it to their Consideration.

JOHN THVRLOE.

Thursday 10.th February, 1656.
ORdered that the humble Petition of Sir Job Harby Knight, being directed to
his Highness and by his Highness referred to the Council, be committed to the
Lord Fleetwood, the Lord Lambert, the Earl of Mulgrave, and the Lord
Strickland, or any two of them, by them to be considered of, and the matter of
fact with their Opinion to be reported to the Council.

William Jessop, Cler. Council.

The Lord Lambert being absent Mr. Rouse was named in his place, who together
with the Lord Strickland did read the said Reports and approved them 13.
August, 1657

An Act of Parliament made 29. January, 1648. confirms all Letters Pattents.

Right Honorable.
YOu may please to remember that a Petition of mine was by your Honors hands
preferred to his Highness, humbly craving the confirmation of my Lease 4. s.
the Chaldron for Coals exported, which Petition was referred to the Committee
for Inspection the 23. February, 1653. who did examine all particulers therein
contained, and did Report to be just, That J should be restored to my
Collection, and also be admitted to receive a Third part, of the said duty for
my own use until the expiration of the Letters Pattents, as also that J
should be satisfied for my Arreares, since 1642. Which Report was by your
Honor offered to his Highness, whereupon his Highness for a further discovery
of the truth of the Allegations, did the second time Refer the same unto the
said Committee with further Directions to examine what had been agitated in
Parliament, and at the Committee of (...) also by whom the Money had been
received since 1642. By vettue of which second Referrence dated August, 1654.
the said Committee did seriously examine all the particulers, and after such
Examinations did 2. October make two Reports in hac verba, upon Examination; of
the whole matter, we most humbly offer as our Opinion, that it is just that
the said Sir Job Harby should be satisfied for his third. part of -- 4. s. the
Chaldron received on Coals exported since 1642. and the said Sir Job Harby to
be admitted to Collect the said -- 4. s. on the Chaldron for the future, and to
receive the Third part thereof to his own use; during the term of years
granted by the said Letters Pattents yet unexposed.

This Report his Highness referred to the Council, which together with my
Petition to their Lordships produced an Order 10.th Febr. 1656. whereby that
whole matter was Referred unto Four or any Two of their Lordships by them to
be considered, and the fact with their opinion to be reported to the Council,
In pursuance of which Order the Report from the Committee for Inspection was
received and considered at the Council 12. August last, and was by their
Lordships approved in every particular.

Hereby it does appear, that I have as just a Title to the premises as any
man has unto his Land of Inheritance, wherewith if his Highness were fully
acquainted, I am confident that such is his inclination to Piety and Justice
that he would not deny it unto an Aged man against whom there was never any
complaint, nor has ever been in Arms, nor opposition to the Parliament, but a
large and constant Contributor to the service of the State upon all occasions,
he having contributed above 3000. l. of which he never received back one
penny, and has in obedience to his Highness command lately satisfied 1400.
pound to the Executors of Captain Thomas Westro, whereas he might have been
cleared for Six and thirty pounds, had nor his Highness interposed.

The state of my Case in this particular, being thus stated, I do humbly and
earnestly crave, That I may be admitted to my Collection on according to the
Report so strongly confirmed, and that I may Have a Warrant to the Collectors
so to pay me, or be accomptable unto me for so much of the -- 4. Shillings the
Chaldron as has been Collected by them since 3. October, 1654. and for the
Arreares due to me from 1642. till 1654. I do humbly submit to take them out
of the future Collection of the said duty of -- 4. Shillings the Chaldron, and
shall pay the Rent reserved according to the Letters Patterns, which Act of
Justice mixed with Compassion will ever be thankfully acknowledged by --

October. 23. 1657. Right Hon:ble, Your most humble Servant, J. H.

To his Highness OLIVER Lo. Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. And to the Right Hon:ble, the Lords of his Highness
Council.
The humble Petition of Sir JOB HARBY Knight.
Most humbly Shows,

THat the Petitioner by your Highness just favor, has obtained two well
grounded Reports from the Committee for Inspection, certifying the just title
he has unto one third part: of a Lease for -- 4. shil. upon the Chaldron of
Sea-Coles exported; which said Reports have likewise by your Highness direction
been perused before the Council, and by some of their Lordships have been
confirmed in two particulers, viz. First, That it is just, the Petitioner
should have his Arreares since 1642. and 2.ly, That he should enjoy the
benefit of his Lease until the expiration of his Grant, as may appear by the
Papers in the hands of Mr. Jessop.

It may further please your Highness; The Petitioners Lease is under the, Great
Seal of England, and was more then XX. years past granted unto him, upon a
very valuable Consideration being near 9000. l. in Money with a Rent reserved
of -- 500. l. per annum until the end of the Lease; whereby (he humbly
conceives) he has as just a title thereunto as any man has to his Land of
inheritance; the want whereof, together with other his unparalleld sufferings
has reduced him and his Family into a perishing Condition, and this,
notwithstanding he did constantly abide with the Parliament and upon all
occasions has been a large Contributor to the Service of the Commonwealth.

The Premises considered, the Petitioner does most humbly pray, That he may
not (without any just cause) be deprived of his Propriety, but that he may
enjoy the benefits of his said Lease according to the Contents of the abovesaid
Reports;

And he shall Ever pray, etc. JOB HARBY.

Thursday 13.th May, 1658. At the Council at White Hall.
Upon reading a Report from the Committee to whom the Petition of Sir Job Harby
was Referred, Ordered, that the same together with the papers annexed, be
referred to the Lords Commissioners of his Highness Treasury to consider
thereof, and state the whole case as now it stands, as well in Referrence to the
Petitioners claim, as to the Imposition of 4. s. a Chaldron for Coals, and
report the same to the Council.

HEN. SCOBEL Clerk of the Council.

To the right Hon:ble, the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
ACcording to your Lordship Order of the 21.th of May 1658. Upon the Petition
of Sir Job Harby Knight, praying an allowance of a Demize and Grant by Letters
Pattents of the late king of 4. Shilling the Chaldron for Coals exported,
under the Rent in the said Demize reserved, and that a Committee may be
appointed to call those person to an Account for -- 20000. l. by them received;
and in particular Sir Arthur Haslerigge, for the great summers he has received
out of the said Collection. The said Petition with certain Papers, annexed
being referred to your Lordships by Order of his Highness, to state the whole
Case as it stands, as well in Reference to the Petitioners claim, as to the
Imposition of -- 4. s. the Chaldron for Coals, and report the same to the
Council, with all convenient speed. Upon information to us given, we find
that by Letters Pattents dated the 11.th April, 10.th Caroli the said late
King, did charge and command the Customers and Receivers, and all Officers and
Ministers attending the receipt of Customs, that they should cause to be
Levied and paid to the use of Him, his Heyrs and Successors, the sum of -- 4.
s. for every Chaldron of Sea-Cole, Pit, and Stone-Coale Newcastle measure, that
should be carried out of England, and Wales, or the Town of Barwick or Shipped
into any parts out of the said Realm in the name of Custom over and above all
the Customs, and Imposts on Coals and other Port duties before that time used
to be Collected and paid for such Coals; And that security should be given,
therefore according to the usual manner in cases of Customs.

That by Indenture under the Great Scale of England, dated 2. July in the 10.th
year of the said King, between the said King of the one part and Henry Lucas,
John White, and the Petitioner Job Harby Esquire of the other part, reciting the
said Letters Pattents, and that he was resolved so Continue the said
Imposition upon Coals to him his Heirs, and Successors for ever, in
Consideration of several yearly Rents reserved in the said Indenture, and
diverse other causes the said King thereunto moving; did Demize, Grant, and to
Farm let unto the said Henry Lucas, John White and Job Harby, their Excutors
and Assigns all and every the said new Customs of -- 4. s. due and payable or
by the said Letters Pattents appointed to be paid or answered unto the said
King, his Heirs and Successors, for or in respect of the said Coals for the
term and space of 31. Years from the date of the said recited Letters
Pattents, to Collect and receive the same by themselves or by their Deputies,
or every of their Deputies, or Substitutes from the Receiver or Collector
thereof, paying for the first 7. Years the sum of 100 l. per annum, at
Michaelmas and our Lady day, or within 40. days after, by equal portions into
the receipt of the Exchequer. And during the residue of the 31. years, the
sum of 500. l. yearly as aforesaid, with the several Covenants on the
behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, for the quite enjoying
thereof, under the said Rent in case of Interruption, as by the said several
Letters Pattents, and Indentures under the Great Seal of England, produced
unto Us did appear; And by an Act of the late Parliament 1648. entitled for
the Alteration of several Names and Forms heretofore in Courts, Writs,
Grants, Letters Pattents, etc. Amongst other things it is enacted as follows;
Provided that all Writs, etc. and all other Commissions Pattents and Graunts,
made and passed under the Great Scale of England, shall stand good and
effectual in Law, notwithstanding the death of the King, any thing in the said
act or any Article therein Contained, or any Law, Statute, or Custom to the
Country thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And in the Printed book of Rates
and Ordinances of Parliaments touching the same in the year 1647. Entitled An
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the establishing
of Subsedy of Tonnage and Poundage, together with the books of Rates, from the
26.th of March, 1648. until the 26.th March, 1651. It Is mentioned as foll etc.
--

Coals Vocat. Sea-coales Newcastle measure, -- 11. 6. 8. d.

Coals Vocat. Sea-coales the Chaldron London measure, 11. 13. 4. d.

Sea-coales of Wales or the West Country, which shall be transported into
Ireland, the Isle of Man, or Scotland, to pay the Chaldron Water measure, -- 00
1. s. 00.

And the Petitioner produced to Us Letters under the Privy Seal of the late
King dated the last day of August, in the said 10.th year of his Reign,
reciting the said Letters Pattents of a Lease of the said Imposition upon
Coals, and mentioning a claim of -- 3036. l. 7. s. 6. d. as due from the said
King unto the said Sir Job Harby for Goods of that value upon the late breach
between the said King and the French, seized to the French Kings use; And of
several sums due from the said King for freight of Ships, viz 840. l. 2. s.
and 736. 5. 9. both which sums a mount unto 1576. l. 7. s. 9. d. And that the
said Sir Job Harby, and Clement Harby, in Consideration of the said Demize and
Grant made as aforesaid, for the said new Customs. And as for the said Sir
Job Harby his Third part thereof, had by their Deed to 10. July then next
before, released unto the said King several Debts; And for a further
Consideration for the said demize of the said new Customs, as to him the said
Sir Job Harby had paid unto the Earl of Portland the Lord Treasurer, for the
Kings use the sum of 4000. l. It is thereby declared, that the said King did
accept of the said release in discharge of the said Debts, and did accept
thereof, and of the said 4000. l. in full satisfaction for the said Sir Job
Harby his 3. part of the said new Customs so by his Majesty demized; That
according to the said Demize the rent reserved therein was paid into the
Exchequer by the said Sir Job Harby and others the Leasees, until the 28. of
October. in the 20. year of the late King as appears by the Oath of Will Day
of London Merchant made before Baron Trevor 23. October, 20. Car. R. hereunto
annexed. That by late Kings Letters and Commands to the then Receiver of the
duties payable upon Coals dated the 29.th July in the said year 42. And soon
after by Letters and Commands from the Earl of Newcastle, then being in power
in those parts of the North, Command was given to the said Receivers, that they
should forthwith pay unto Sir Alexander Devidson of Newcastle for the Kings
use, all such Moneys as they had received or should receive upon that duty for
transportation of Coals into Foreign parts. As by the Original letter of
the late King, and under the privy Signet to Us produced appears, and the
Copies of other Letters of the said Earl of Newcastle, attested and sworn to
be true Copies before Mr. Baron Thomlins hereunto annexed may appear; And it
appears also by the Certificate of Tho. Palmer being Collector of the great
Customs at the Port of Newcastle, the then Farmers and Commissioners, did
receive several Acts of Parliament for Confirmation of the Subsedy of Tunage
and Poundage, and at that time did receive and pay the said new Impost of 4. s.
per Chaldron of Coals exported to the said Sir Job Harby or his Assigns, and
did so receive and pay the same until the 2. July, 1642. After which time
diverse sums of Moneys being in the hands of diverse Merchants and others for
Customs of Coals and Goods. The Earl of Newcastle possessing himself of the
said Town, of Newcastle, one John Lake (by power from the said Earl of
Newcastle) as was conceived, did receive the said sums of Money or pare
thereof, and after the Storming of Newcastle, which was about the 18. October
44. and ever since, one George Dawson did receive the general Customs, and
Subsedy of Tonage and Poundage, according to the new book of Rates, where all
the duties of Coals exported are placed together and received in One general
sum, the said new Impost of 4. s. being part thereof; The said Dawson faith,
that when the Scots and afterward Sir Arthur Haslerigge had the Command of the
said Town, he paid diverse sums of Money to them, for which he took their
Receipts, and did account to the Commissioners of the Customs for the same,
and still does account with them for all sums received by him since. And it
appears by a Copy of a Certificate of several Officers, and persons of the
Town of Newcastle, sworn also to be a true Copy as aforesaid hereunto
annexed, That before the new Impost of the 4. s. was imposed on Coals Shipped
for Over-seas, there was only 8. d. and 6. s. 8. d. paid by the English for a
Chaldron of Coals so Shipped. And afterward before the year, 1642. Mr. Thomas
Palmer, did at Newcastle first receive the said -- 4. s. per Chaldron for
Coals then imposed, and then the said several sums of -- 8. d. 6. s. 8. d.
and 4. s. were then received by several persons severally, it being in all 11.
s. 4. d. the Chaldron, and that of lare Mr. George Dawson the now Collector of
the Customs of Newcastle, does receive the said sums of 11. s. 4. d. the
Chaldron in one sum altogether, dated the 24. June 1658.

Peter Breerton, Tho: Manby.


