The Hunting of the Hare; With her last Will and Testament.
As 'twas performed on Bamstead Downs,
By Conny Catchers, and the^r Hounds.

To a pleasant ^ew Tune.
OF all delights that earth does yield
Give me a pack of Hounds in field
Whose echo shall throughout the sky,
Make J^ve admire our Harmony,
and wish that he a Mortal were,
to view the Pastime we have here.
I will tell you of a rare Scent,
Where many a gallant horse was spent
On Bamstead Downs a Hare we found,
Which lead us all a smoking round,
over Hedge and Ditch away she goes,
admiring her approaching Foes.
But when she found her strength to wast,
She parly'd with the Hounds at last:
Kind Hounds (quoth she) forbear to kill
A harmless Hare, that nere thought ill;
and if your Master sport do crave,
I Will lead a Scent as he would have.

Hunts-man. Away, away, thou art alone,
Make have I say, and get thee gone*
We Will give the Law for half a mile,
To see if thou can us beguile:
but then expect a thundering cry,
made by us, and our harmony.

Hare. Now since you set my life so slight,
I'^e make Black-sloven turn to white*
And Yorkshire Gray, that runs at all,
I Will make him wish he were in Stall:
and Sorrel, he that ^eems to fly,
I Will make him supple ere he dye.
Let Barnards Bay do what he may,
Or Barrons Bay, that now and than,
Did interrupt me on my Way,
I Will make him neither set nor play
or constant Robin, though he lie
at his advantage, what care I.
Will. Hatton he has done me wrong,
He struck me as I run along,
And with one pat made so sore,
That I ran reeling too and fro;
but if I dye his Master tell
that fool shall ring my passing bell.

Hounds. Alas, poor Hare! it is our nature
To kill thee, and no other creature,
For our Master wants a bit,
And thou will well become the spit;
h'l eat thy flesh, we will pick thy bone,
this is thy doom so get the gone.

Hare. Your Master may have better cheer,
For I am dry and butter's dear:
But if he please to make a friend,
He Is better give a P^ddings-end;
for I being killed, he sport will lack,
and I must hang on Hunts-man back.

Hounds. Alas Poor Hare! we pity thee,
If without nature 't would agree;
But all thy dubling shifts I fear,
Will not prevail, thy death's so near
then make thy will, it may be that
may save thee, or I know not what.

Hare. Then I bequeath my body free,
Unto your Masters courtesy:
And if he please my life to grant,
I Will be his game when sport is scant;
but if I dye, each greedy hound
divided my entrals on the ground.



IMprimis, I bequeath my head
To him that a fair fool does wed?
who has before her maiden head lost
I would not have the Proverb crossed,
which l' be hard among many qiblets*
set the Hares head against the Goose giblets.
Item, I do give and bequeath
To Men in debt (after my death)
My subtle-scent, that so they may
Beware of such and would betray
them to a miserable Fate,
by Blood-hoinds from the Compter-gate.
Item, I to a Tirn-coate give
(That he may more obscurely live)
My swift and sudden doublings, which
Will make him politic and rich
though at the last with many wound^
I wish him killed by his own hound^*
Item, I give into their hands,
That purchase Dean and Chapters lands,
My wretched jealousies and fears,
Mixed with the salt of Orphans tears,
that long vexations may presever,
to plague them and their Heirs for ever.
Before I dye (for life is scant)
I would supply Men's proper want,
And therefore I bequeath unto
The scriv'ner (give the devil his due)
that Forgeth, Swears, and then Forswears,
(to save his credit) both my ears.
I give to some Sequestered man,
My skin to make a Iacket on:
And I bequeath my feet to they
That shortly mean to run away:
when Truth is speake^, falshood's dumb,
Foxes must fly, when Lions come.
To Fiddlers (for all trads must live)
To serve for strings, my guts I give
For Gamsters that do play at tut,
And love the sport, I give my skut
but last of all (in this sad dump)
to Tower Hill I bequeath my Rump

Hounds. Was ever Hounds so basely crossed,
Our Masters call us off so fast,
That we the scent have almost lost,
And they then must rule the roast,
therefore kind Hare we will pardon you.

Hare. Thanks gentle Hounds, and so adieu.
And since your Master has pardoned me
I Will lead you all to Banbury,
Where John Turner has a larger room
To entertain all Guests that come,
to laugh and quaff in Wine and Beer,
a full Carouse to your Gallee^e.

FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Ve^e, and J. Wright.


