A Godly Sermon OF PETER'S Repentance, after he had denied his Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, as it is in his Repentance, he wept bitterly for his sins.

(...) fourth Edition, Corrected and enlarged, and set forth for the good of
all those that truly sear God: By a godly Pastor.

Matthew 26.75. and Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which he said, before
the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice: So he went out and wept bitterly.

Matthew 5.4. Blessed are ye that mourn, for ye shall rejoice.

London, Printed by B.W. and are to be sold by Eliz. Andrews in Little Saint.
Bartholomews Court in West-Smithfield. 1666.

Mark 14.68, 70. But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what
thou say; and he went out into the porch, and the cock crew. And he denied
it again. And a little after they that stood by, said again to Peter, surely
thou art one of them, for thou art a Galllean, and thy speech agrees thereto.


PEter is called Simon, an obdient hearer, he is also called Peter, confident,
and strong in faith, like a Rock unmovable; Thou art Peter, and upon his Rock
will I build my Church that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Matthew. 16.18. He was penitent, the words now read unto you do prove the sins:
for after he had sinned he went out: O that every Christian were qualified like
Peter, those that craves repentance and faith, and obedience, are better
welcome to God then the thr^e presents given by the Wise men unto Christ,
Matthew. 2.1. Precious about was not so much accepted a^ Peter's Repentance. Gold,
Frankincence, and Myrshe are not so precious as Peter's Repentance to Godward;
for he wept bitterly for denying his Lord and master Jesus Christ: Mark 14.71.
But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye
speak. So soon as he has learned to lie, he had learned to swear; they are
inseparable companions, and as I may say sworn brethren, that always meet
together the sinful society: We never read of Peter's sweating any where else,
yet hereupon a sudden, oaths, and curses she wed themselves. No sooner Ham
spied Noah's nakedness, Genesis 9.22. Cursed be Canaan a servant of servants shall
he be.

So he went out: This Text affords us three special Notes being very remarkable
in Peter's repentance, 1. Remembrance of sin. 2. Remorse of sin, 3. Sorrow for
sin. All of which ought to accompany a godly and sincere Convert in turning
from his evil ways.

Thus having found out the mine, let us now dig for the treasure: So he went
out: He was careless till the Cock warned him, thereby learning, that the first
step to repentance is the remembrance of sin, and therefore David says Psalm.
51.3. My sins are before me. Moses charged the people to remember their sins,
and there he put them in remembrance, how often they provoked the Lord, by that
means calling them to repentance, Deuteronomy. 9.7. He went out: another step of
Peter's Repentance, he first weighed his sin: mark Noah, and in the meditation
thereof now only naked and bare, but he was wakened from his former drowsiness
and slumber of sin. He went out; wherein observe the effectual operations of
Gods Spirit in the Children of God after we have sinned, spiritually the grace
of God calls us home again, and suffers us not to rest; like the Dove that
was sent out from Noah found no rest, Genesis 8.9. Nor can Peter now find any
rest, till he had found Christ by Repentance. whom he had loss by Denial:
Peter's sin was great, is was no small bait that Satan laid in his way, for
great is the danger; for what greater advantage could Satan else have wished
then this, had not the assisting hand of Gods mercies staid him up after his
fall for his own glory, and to the unspeakably comfort of the Godly, who though
they fall, can never fall away; for the promise of God stands sure, and has
this seal, God knows who are his. our Savior Christ says, Of those whom
thou have given me I have lost none of them, save the son of perdition. John
17.12. He went out as Isaac went out into the fled to pray. Genesis 24.63. so
Peter went out to meditate and consider what, he had done, Luke 22.62. Peter
went out and wept bitterly; the faithful soul when it is desirous to enter into
any holy consultation, or conference covets to be alone, like Christ in the
desert, Matthew. 4.1. Jacob being alone wrestled with the Angel, and prevailed
for a Blessing, Genesis 32.24. Jonah went out of the City Nineve to mourn over it,
as it is in Jonah 1.5. now Jonah preached in Nineve, that within forty days it
should be destroyed, and they repented. Moses was bid to pull of his shoes
when he passed over the flaming Bush, Exodus 3.5. so we must put off our shoes
of carnality, and go out from our selves, as the Adder takes his slough, if we
will tread upon holy ground, and press to come where God is. Peter so long as
he staid in the High Priests Hall among the Enemies of Christ; he became as one
of them, and had quite forgotten that Christ was his master; or he was
solitary, and so denied him whom a little before he promised to are for.

O what have I done miserable man that I am! how dangerously have I fallen in
denying him the Lord of life, and my Lord. I a rebellious sinner to deny him
that framed me, and by his truth redeemed me: and was I in wicked, if all the
world were offended, yet would not I be offended; yea, I was ready to lay down
my life for Christ my Lord: and yet before the Cock crew twice, I had denied
him three times, Matthew. 26.33 O perjured wretch that I am! how heavy have I
transgrest my faith, by denying him that died for me; I that thought my says
strong enought to encounter with the whole world, most shamefully instored a
woman, and the weaker vessel to discountenance me. Is not this to be offended?
And is this to give my life to my master? Nay is not this to forsake him quite,
and to join with the wicked? I denied him whom my soul loved best: for which
my name deserves to go with the brand upon it, as that of Jereboam goes with
his train, Peter confesses his train of sins, and Jeroboam by name cannot
only be mentioned, but his sins must be likewise here numbered. Jeroboam goes
with his train, Jeroboam that made Israel to sin: And Peter desir^ u^ to have
his train too, Peter that denied his master; from henceforth Peter repented him
of his hanious sins he committed in denying his Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

Let us all repent with Peter, that God may give us the earnest of his grace in
our hearts for ever: St. Paul says, Heb. 6.6. He that sins crucifieth the
Son of God again; so did Peter by denying his Lord and Master, Peter's faith was
wadering faith, had not God looked again upon him with the eyes of mercy and
tender compassion, heassured that Peter had fallen from light into utter
darkness and damnation, had not he truly repented with an unfeigned repentance;
Psalm 71.9. Cast me not away in the time of age, forsake me not when my strength
fails me: Here we may see how the Prophet cries to God for mercy, as Peter
did, cry and weep with a most exceeding weeping for denying his Lord and
Master. Genesis 27.34. And when Esau heard the words of his Father, he cried with
a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his Father, Bless me, even me
also, O my Father: These are the words of Esau the eldest Son of Isaac, but the
youngest in faith to Godward. Blessed be thou which art the triumphant
Conqueror of Hell, Hosea 13.14. the vanquisher of the Devil, Matthew 4.10. the
cenquerour and destroyer of death, 1 Cor. 15.55. and Redeemer of them that were
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke 1.79. All ye that be thirsty come
unto the water, and you that have neither Gold nor Silver come and receive all
these precious treasures free without paying any thing, Isa. 51.5. This is the
water of life which springs out of the everlasting Rock, the Rock of def^nce to
all that believes in Christ our Lord, who is the enduring Rock of our Salvation
in this world, and in the world to come. Amen.

But now Peter wept for his sins, and confessed his faults before God by
repenting of his sinful actions which he had committed against God; he was
taken for one of evil behavior, and as one that kept evil company, for they
said, he receives sinners, and eats with them, Matthew. 11.19. This of the
lowliness and meekness of our Lord and blessed Redeemer, who has redeemed us
from all evil, and looked upon Peter in mercy and love; for if Christ had not
called Peter by repentance, Peter had been a damned Creature for falling into
so great a sin, for he did utterly deny Christ by lying and sinearing, which
are great sins, and without Repentance cannot be forgiven. Christ has
commanded us to repent, Matthew. 3.2. And saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand: And again ver. 17. At that time Jesus began to preach, and
to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

My Brethren, here you may see how these places of Scriptures agree in one
point, so must our minds be agreeable to the will of God; that we may walk in
the light while we have light, and to walk in the Laws and Commandments of the
most high God: Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

And let us make a good end by Repentance; I heard a voice from Heaven, saying,
blessed are they that die in the Lord, henceforth, even so says they Spirit,
that they rest from their labor and sorrow, and their works shall follow them,
Rev. 14.13. Here we may see that God blesses those that fears him even unto
death, that he might give them eternal life: When Christ who is our life shall
appear then shall we also appear with him in glory: this is the hope of the
Saints, and all the Elect People of God; Matthew. 10 22. He that endures to the
end shall be saved. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life.

Peter was faithful unto death, by repenting him of his sins: And Peter went
out and wept bitterly: So Peter repented with a faithful repentance; Then Peter
said unto them, Repent And be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive of the Holy Ghost. This
Peter it was that denied Christ, but now does plainly declare him to all
people: here is the unworthiness of chose that look back by sin: And on the
other side, No man that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is
sir for the kingdom of God, Luke 9.62. But Peter looked back by denying his
Lord and Master Jesus Christ; it is a most certain truth that God has given
unto us eternal life; to this is as certain, that this life is in his Son; and
in the next verse. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son
has not life, 1 John 5.11, 12.

Now we may see how blessed a thing it is to have the Son of God in our hearts
by fasting, and prairs, and by faith and truth; he that has faith has life
eternal for evermore in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Prophet David's prayer, or
Arithmetic, is thus termed: Teach us, O Lord to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

Peter wept, because for the weight of grief and sorrow, in denying his Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, which made him for doing that heed say, Troubles have
compassed me round about, my heart is vexed and troubles, my sins are always
before mine eyes, which do grievously forment my conscience, and labor to beat
me down to Hell, there is no peace for the terror of the Lord; I refuse to be
comforted. I am troubled, and my spirit does afflict me, I see no place where
unto I may fly and seek a remedy for my sins.

But Peter denied his Master for frar, Peter then denied again, and immediately
the Cock crew: Then said the Damsel that kept the door unto peter, are not thou
also one of this man's Disciples? He says, I am not; but denied, saying, I know
not the man neither understand I what thou say: And he were our into the
porch, and the Cock crew, but he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know
not this man of whom ye speak. When Peter had gotten some feeling in his
Conscience, he went out and wept bitterly. 1 Cor. 15.34. Awoke to
righteousness, and sin not: for some have not the knowledge of God, I speak
this to your shame. Ezekiel. 16.63. That thou may remember and be ashamed, and
never open thy mouth more.

Thus Peter is rejected for his swearing and lying, as it to in Rev. 21.27. And
there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie. When Satan had tempted Peter to swear, he
tempted him to lie; if Peter had not speedily repented, he had been a lost man;
but we read that Christ had mercy upon him, and called him from the error of
his ways, and from that sinful deed.

Repentance is a turning to men, we must not be ashamed to acknowledge our
faults one to another, James 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray
one for another; and in so doing men may know that ye are my Disciples: So that
we ought to pray for one another, and on the contrary, we had rather curse one
another; but woe unto them that do so, for Hell fire is prepared for the
tormenting of their souls, being in that gulf of woe everlastingly (...) how
do thou expect to have Christ thy Redeemer and Advocate, when thy Conscience
tells thee, that thou have seldom remembered him but in thy Oaths to blaspheme
him; and oftener named him in thy Oaths and Curses, then in thy Prayers; surely
if I did swear faith and troth, this swearing made many sinful souls to fall
into Hell headlong; and if Peter had not speedily repented, he had fallen into
Hell torments, where there is nothing but howling gnashing of teeth, misery,
and lamenting for ever.

It is said in Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him: So Peter was
rebuked of his Conscience, it tells him that he had wickedly sinned by denying
his Lord and Master Jesus Christ: That is your gross ignorance of the
Scriptures, for the Scriptures teaches us to fear God; for God expressly
forbids swearing, and that upon pain of damnation: James. 5.12. My brethren
swear not neither by heaven, neither by earth, neither by any other Oath, but
let your yea be yea and your nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation. First,
our Savior Christ in his own person forbids it, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. I say
unto you swear not it all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by the
earth, for it is his footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great king: neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make
on hair white or black; but let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil: And then by his Apostle; Above
all things my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by, any
other oath, but let your yea, be yea, and nay, nay lest ye fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5.12. Where mark the Emphasis in the first words, Above all
things swear not: and the greater danger of it in the last words, left ye fall
into condemnation: for woe and sorrow will be in the end.

If the matter be light and vain we must not swear at all, if weighty, that we
may lawfully swear; as before a Magistrate being called to it, when we must
only use the glorious name of our God in a holy and riligious manner, as you
may see in Deuteronomy. 6.12. Isa. 45.23. and Isa. 65.16. Joshuah 23.7. Exodus 23.13.
Jer. 5.7. And the Reasons are weighty if we look into them; for in swearing by
any creature whatsoever we do invocate that Creature, and ascribe unto it
Divine Worship: yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate has our
Wittness, Surety, and Judge, Heb. 16. and by consequence deiste it by ascribing
and communicating unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, and his omnipresence,
and ominiscienty, of being every where present, and knowing the secret thoughts
and intentions of the heart; and likewise an omnipotency, and as being almighty
in patronizing, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for speaking the truth,
or punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so peculiar to God, as that
they can no way be communicated or ascribed to another; so that in swearing by
any of these things, thou committest Idolatry in an high degree, and thou
spoilest and robbest God of his glory, the most impious kind of theft; and in
a mamier dethronest him, and make an Idol in his room. And as to swear by the
Creature makes the sin more hanious; so the more mean and vile the thing is
which you swear by, as by my fey, by Cock, and by Hares foot, and by this
Cheese, and such like childish oaths, which are so much in use with the
ignorant and superstitious people the greater is your sin in swearing such an
oath, because you ascribe that unto these the basest of Creatures, which is
only propper to God, namely, to know the heart, and to be a discerner of
secret things; why else should you call that Creature as a wittness unto your
conscience, that you speak the truth, and lie not, which only belongs to
God: and therefore the Lord calls it a forsaking of him, as you may see what he
says, Jer. 5.7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children has forsaken
me, and sworn by them that are no gods: And to make it a small matter to
forsake God, and to make a god of the Creature, will you believe the Prophet
Amos? if you will, he says speaking of them that swore by the sins of Samaria,
that they should fall, and never rise again, Amos 8.14. a terrible place to
vain swearers. But Peter fell and rose again by faith.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our Oaths, for in so doing we
make Gods of the silly Creatures; for Peter wept sorrowfully for his sin and
offense which he had committed against Christ his Lord and Master; and because
he repented, God granted him mercy and forgiveness for all his offenses, which
he had committed against him by denying him with an oath, and cursing, and
lying: so that Peter's Conscience told him, that he was a great sinner in so
doing, but he repented with a tender Conscience, and he wept bitterly,
Repentance goes before salvation, and salvation works the souls everlasting
joys in the Kingdom of Heaven for evermore.

And a maid saw him again, and began to say unto them that stood by, this is
one of them; and he denied it again, and a little after they that stood by said
again to Peter, surely thou art one of them for thou art a Galilean, and thy
speech agrees thereto; but he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not
this man of whom ye speak; and the second time the Cock crew, and Peter called
to mind the words that Jesus said unto him before the Cock crow twice thou
shall deny me thrice: And he went out and wept biterly. Peter's heart misgave
him, he sinned in so doing, and he wept for it bitterly; we have a command from
God to shun all devices of evil works: Saint Paul says, Romans 6.23. For the
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if
we will obey Gods word, as you may see, Matthew. 5.34, 35. 36, 37. James 5.12.
And as it is in Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil And
St. Paul's everlasting Rule is, Romans 12.2. Fashion not your selves according to
this world, for this world passes away, and the glory thereof: For as St. John
says, Whosoever denies the Son, the same denies the Father; but he that
acknowledges the Son has the Father: But Peter denied God the Son, then he
must needs deny God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost; for as Christ says, He
that sins against the Son of man it shall be forgiven him; but he that
sins against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him; neither shall
there be any remission of sins for that poor soul: It Is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31. Stand in awe therefore, and sin
not, Psalm 4.4. 2 Timothy 2.22. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest
he fall. And therefore flee from youthful lusts, for it is a fearful thing to
fail into the hands of the living God: For the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
draws nigh, when he shall come with his mighty Angels in Glory, Honor, and
Power, and Majesty everlastingly to all. Consider what has been delivered, and
the Lord give you understanding hearts in all things. Amen.

FINIS.

