A MILITARY RUDIMENT, OR Observations of the form of Military exercise,
according to his Excellens Guard in Holland.

With the ranges and number of Officers in an Army, from the lowest to the
highest, and their duties, in short.

As also is added a little anent the composition of an Army.

And finally, Some few Principalls, in the Art of Fortification.

BY GEORGE INNES.



ABERDENE. IMPRINTED BY EDWARD RABAN, 1644.

BON ACCORD

Insignia Vrbis abredonie^



An Emblem of the Steps Of Military Preferment.
HONOR.

General.

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

This Counter-pyrameid ascended is by those,
Who fears not Death, who follows not repose:
For Sloth and Ease can never scale so hie,
And Cowardice makes Honor still to flic.
Who would so mount, to gayn the larger Banch;
Then he must do it, by Steps of lower Range:
The smaller Point, the greater body draws,
As of a Wedge, the Evidence who knows.
O, look above, The GARLAND is the Price,
Which does Brave Mynds to gayn the same entyce.


To the thryce Noble and Illustrious Lord, both in Virtue, and in Descent, My
LORD GORDON.
MY Lord, the exigencie of Time, with the request of some Friends and
acquaintances, did first urge to this attempt, for their private use; which by
accident you viewing, your will was, (which always is to me an absolute
Commandment) I should publish the same: My boldness now is in presenting it
you. And because it does (as it were) theoreticallie pervestigiate the tresses
of your Noble Practice abroad; where-by ye did tread the Path of Honor,
sealed with a part of your Blood: Therefore, supplicateth your acceptance, and
protection: for none more worthy to discern, none more able to defend, and to
none mine affection tends so much in the offer of this my Myte: Vouchsafe it
then my Lord, the Shield of your favor, where-by it shall be able to march
through an Army of Aspersions; and I fortunate it shall be useful to the
inexpert. And thus, my Lord, you shall obliedge all those to your beneficence,
for granting it both advancement, and a pasport; and also fortify my weakness,
in what I zealouslie can approve my self,

MY LORD Yours most affectionatelie devoted servant, GEORGE INNES.

To the Loving Reader.
NOthing is so well understood by Theorie, as by Practick: But of all studies
Military Exercise is hardest, to conceive without Practice: Wherefore I have
done this Rudiment. Where first ye shall find the precept of the Practice it
self: Secondly, the instruction how to perform the Exercise: Thirdly, the use
thereof: And fourthlie, the reason of the use, illustrated with diverse
Explanations, Notes, and Observations; not only for the sooner and better
conception of the inexpert obeying Soldier; but also for the use of the
inexperienced Commander: For tho when perfect in the Exercise it self; yet
inconsiderable what Practice to choose, according to the opportunity of time,
the advantage of the place, the strength and manner of the enemies assault, it
is not only in vayn, hut damnable: For the Physician, though never so
skillful, in the nature and virtue of simples, and of their composition; yet
ignorant in their application, it is not only to no effect; but that it
proves mortal. Thus I hope the inpractised (for whose use it only is) will
accept the same kyndlie, since I believe he will find no easier conception
hereof, in so short a Breviarie, for a Sum only I intend: I bid Farewell.

To the young Soldier.
YOung Soldiers, come; here make your address;
And you shall find your Practice put in Press.
Practice, indeed, does teach that is not our own.
But yet it is sooner, and better, known:
You to foreknow that which ye must practice,
For so the Act with Mind does simpathise.
Practice learns lay; their own and others speech:
But Grammar Rules, the Reason does us teach.
Come freely, come: For here is a Theature;
Where The'rie assumes a Practick Nature.
Young Soldiers, then, this Rudiment embrace;
Accept his payns, who does such help express.
A Contraversie betwixt Theorie and Practick, discerned by M. G. M. in praise
of the Author, for preventing MOMUS.
PRACTICK. HEnce hence, these Rudimentall notious,
I am praised, for brave practiced motious.

THEORIE. For all that, know, I do them paradise;
Teaching you how, when, and where, for to practice.

PRACTICK. Tush spayr, a pine for your Direction:
Let you profess, I live in Action.

THEORIE. Ay, but that which ye say, I do profess:
It does the line of acting well, express.

PRACTICK. Can subtle words, with gallant acts compare;
While Hunger, Cold, and Sword, I do out-dare.

THEORIE. Words but reveal's in me what is divyne;
While your gross acts, are servants to the Mind.

PRACTICK. What was Ulysses wit, when Ajax Arm,
Did quench the Greek Ships fyrie alarm?

THEORIE. Then but remember, Ulysses gayn'd the Pryse;
Ajax for's fault, his life did sacrifyce.

PRACTICK. Thus then the Trophies of the Nobles Nine,
Comes far too short, into these Rules of thine*

THEORIE. NO; But note! What is the life of Glory;
I am the Soull; thou but transitory?

PRACTICK. In fenzi'd words ye do as much exceed,
As I in Valor always you preceed.

THEORIE. If that the Instrument the Cause excel;
With like absurdity, ye press me well.

PRACTICK. Are you the Cause, when Provess of an Act;
Reduc's your Chimera, in my sole Fact.

THEORIE. If so, it holds your Sword to dignifie;
Above that arm, ye so do magnify.

M. T. L. HAlt both, I charge, and make a Reference,
Discerned in this sequel Inference.
This Author he has better Theoris'd,
That formerlie, he has the same practiced.
And doubtless better now he can practice,
That so well can his Practick Theorise.
Soull and Body makes a Man; here it is rare,
Act and Thesis, Exactness do declare.
A MILITARY RUDIMENT, Or Observations upon Military exercise.
BEfore I initiate the Exercise it self, or what is considerable there anent, I
give the young Soldier this Frontispice of Preparation; wherein there is two
general Principalls, he ought to be acquaynted with: First, in the certain
Belief, that the Coward is as soon killed, as the Valiant man; and that many
more die in flight^ as in fight; that Honor and Reward is to the one, but
Shame and Punishment to the other. Secondly, If this he would shun, and that
Gayn, it is in knowing how well he can obey his Superior, For upon Obedience
all depends; and without the same, nothing can be well ruled or done: for
from Obedience, comes Order; and from Order Military Exercise, (as ye may
perceive by the Definition thereof) and by Military Exercise all is
mayntayned.

DEFINITION.
MILITARY EXERCISE, is a Uniformitie of Order, in respect of difference of
persons; in respect of Distinction of Time; and in respect of distance of place.

And for the first of those, in respect of persons, what Commandment is to
one, must be practiced by all; except accidentally, and in trayning.

And in respect of Time, what is practiced be one, all must practice at the
self same instant, saving only in the former exception.

And in respect of Place: It is to be considered, there are three sorts of
Distances; to wit, Open Order: Secondly, Order: thirdly, Closs Order.

Open Order, or the first Distance is, when the Soldiers both in rank and
string, stand six foot romoved one from another.

The use hereof, is for exercising your motions: in which case, ye must
always keep your Open Order: and the reason is, the larger the Exercise, the
greater Distance is required.

The second distance, or order, is, when the Soldiers stand three foot
removed one from another.

The use thereof, is for the Musketeers, who must never be closser: and the
reason is, they must have a free use of their Arms.

The third distance, or Closs Order, is commanded by this word CLOSE: which is
when there is a foot and half from string to string, and three from rank to
rank.

The use hereof, is for the Pikes only, and never must be used, but when ye
stand firm to receive the Enemy: and the reason is, the closser they stand,
they are the more united: and so vneasier to be broken.

Having considered the foresayds: and before we come to the Exercise it self;
there is four things to be performed: the first is, to place the Company in
the first Distance of Open Order: and that for the reason in it own place
beforesayd.

The second is consisting in this word of COMMANDMENT: to wit, SILENCE.

The use thereof, is, that all may give audience, and observance, to that only
which is commanded.

And the third, is to make known to them all, what a Rank and a String is; and
the best Definition I can give you is.

To wit, of a Rank, when ye consider it from the right to the left hand, only
one man in deepness.

And of a String, when ye reckon and consider it from the Front to the Rear,
only one man in broadness.

The third thing is consisting in two Commandments: to wit,

Stand right in your Ranks.

Stand right in your Strings.

The Instruction how to perform both these Precepts is when their own just and
equal distance is betwixt man and man, both in Rank and String; but when they
are in their third order, their distance then must be equal, but respective.

And the reason is, if standing not right in rank and string, they should be
promiscuous; and there-vpon confusion, so contrary to order; for the very
essence and subsistence of Military Exercise, is Order.

The use of these Precepts, is in that they are the foundation of the whole
Exercise; For what Exercise can be performed without a rank and string, except
simples; which may be done by one only person, without a body.

And now of the Exercise it self, whose composition is of motion, and they are
of two sorts. The first are the Motions of the Exercise it self; which without
Arms may be done.

The second are the Motions of the Postures, in handling of the Arms; And for
the first of these, they are lykewayes of two sorts.

The first of these are Primitive, or more Simple Motions; The second are
Derivitiue, or Motions, of an ampler practice; and justly the particular
exercises, are called Motions.

And of these primitive, and more simple Motions; which are in number eight;
Four distinguished, and four indistinct; as ye may perceive by the words of
Command; to wit,

To the right hand.
As ye were.
To the left hand.
As ye were.
To the right hand about.
As ye were.
To the left hand about.
As ye were.
The Instruction how to perform the distinguished four is; When to what hand
ye turn, the foot of the self same hand or side, by mooving, indeed, turns;
but the contrary foot only remooveth. As for Exple; If ye turn to the right
hand, the foot of the right side must mooving turn; But the heell of the
foresaid foot, must keep the same place, and the contrary foot only remove.
And the reason is, to keep a perfect equal distance by all.

And the Lesson in performing the other four is to be specially noted, when
ye are commanded as ye were, ye are to return by the contrary hand. As for
example; If ye turn to the right hand, ye are to return as ye were to the
left hand, but the self same foot which did not remove in the turning, must not
remove in returning; and that for the reason, in the preceding instruction.

The use of these Motiones is, in that they are the fundamental Means, where
by ye may frame a Company consequently a greater body, to any fashion or
figure that is exigent.

But in the mean time, of placing your Company, this general observation,
must not be for gotten; that in the Front, Middle, and Rear; the most expert
and capable be placed; for they are Leaders; whom the rest must follow in
performing the subsequent Motiones; whereupon this general precept is to be
published; to wit,

Follow your leaders, and keep with your right hand man.

The use hereof is for facillitating their practice; for it is a precept to
each other rank, to each other string; as also to the followers of middle-men,
and fellowers of bringers up; and the reason is, That is to them only this
Rule, they are most inexpert; For rudeness, and inexperience, requires not
only precept, but example; and this for performing the following Motiones,
which are of the second sort, and of an ampler practice; and they are in number
many. The first of them are

Double your ranks to the right hand.
As ye were.
Double your ranks to the left hand.
As ye were.
Doubling of ranks is done, when each other rank from the Front, man by man
interponeth themselves severallie in the former rank, in the distance betwixt
string and string, to what hand they are commanded.

Double your strings to the right hand.
As ye were.
Double your strings to the left hand.
As ye were.
Doubling of strings is done, when each other string from what hand ye double,
man by man interponeth themselnes severallie betwixt man and man, in the
distance betwixt rank and rank, to what ye are commanded.

Middle-men, double your Front, to the right hand.
As ye were.
Middle-men, double your Front, to the left hand.
As ye were.
This is done, when the sixth rank equally marches up to the Front; and their
places themselves betwixt man and man, in the first rank, to what hand they
are commanded, and so the seventh, to the second; the eight, to the third; the
nynth, to the fourth; the tenth rank, to the fyft; and this is they being ten
in deepness.

Bringers up double your Front, to the right hand.
As ye were.
Bringers up double your Front, to the left hand.
As ye were.
This is done, when the last rank; to wit, the tenth, equally marches up to
the Front; and therein the first rank places themselves betwixt man and man;
and so the penult to the second. The ante-penult, to the third; the seventh,
to the fourth; the eight, to the fyft. So that both their doublings of
middlemen and bringers up, makes but half the deepnes; but in the self same
broadness, unites themselves in confederacy by double the former number.

The use of all these doublings in general, is. When upon a sudden surpryse
ye double your strength, in presenting; but this holds not always, in
doubling of strings; For then they are all open; and it is for evasion, either
of small or great shot: but if the assault be upon the wings, and the
commanded to the right or left hand; the first use then holds. They are often
practiced within a Wall, a Hedge, or Advantage, with other uses, which
brevitie will not permit.

Rank to the right hand countermarch.

Rank to the left hand countermarch.

This is a Countermarch in deepness; to wit, From the Front to the Rear. But
if ye would make a Countermarch in broadness: that is to say; From the right
hand to the left hand string, ye must command them first

Strings, to the right hand. Then Strings, to the right hand Countermarch.
Strings, to the left hand. Then Strings, to the left hand Countermarch.
The Instruction here-in is all one, when ye Countermarch. The first Ranks,
or Leaders, only must advance, and step forwards, with the right or left leg:
if to the right hand, the right leg: if to the left hand, the left leg: and
then turn, and so being fallen down, to the Rear, rank your self, accordingly
in the Rear. And all the other ranks must march up to the same place from
whence the first ranks did countermarch before they turned: And so they march
to the Rear, by the right or left hand, (as is commanded) of that part of their
own string that follows them. And these that have counter-marched, must still
follow them that as yet advances to the place of their Countermarch. So that
every man regayneth the same place, he first was in. And thus you see, it is
contrary to the ordinary March, as the word it self bears.

The use of a Countermarch commonly is, when you Skirmish; For you fight then
looss, and disbanded; and does not advance toward the Enemy.

Make your Conversion, to the right or left hand inwardly.
As you were.
This is done, when the two outmost strings; to wit, the right or left hand
string only turns, the right hand string, to the left hand; and the left
hand string, to the right hand; Which makes the two strings, to be face to
face. Then the strings in the body within these two outmost; The one half of
them falls to the right hand string; and the other half, to the left hand
string. And so they are all in two strings, face to face. And thus they are so
much void betwixt, as the strings within the outmost took up.

And the use hereof, is not only to give way, but to make Guard, to the
General, to an Ambassador to go in or out at a Passage; or to those that has
rendered a Fort, to go out.

Make your conversion to the right or left hand outwardly.

This is done, when the two middle strings turns; to wit, The right hand
string, to the right hand; the left hand string, to the left hand; and so back
to back, then the strings on the right hand of the middle strings, falls in
to the right hand string, and the strings on the left hand, falls into the
left hand; and so makes of all but two strings, and that back to back. There
is conversions also, when all the strings remayn inteir and compleet; but by
equal division, the one half turning to the left hand, and the other half to
the right hand; and so all faces to faces; or by turning outwardly, the one
and other half; and then back to back.

The former two Conversions can not be used, but when they are four or six at
most in broadness; to wit, in strings; but the latter Conversion may be used,
when they are a great many strings.

And the use of that outward Conversion amongst others, is, when they are
hardly assaulted on both wings.

The first rank string consequently the rest.

This is performed, when the right hand man in the Front advances while the
body halteth a little; and then his left hand man follows up after him; and
so all the rank man by man, is drawn up to the string; and after this manner all
the remaining strings. And thus as they have stringed, one after another
falls up to his first order.

The string on the right or left hand, consequently the rest.

This is done, when the right or left hand string advances from the body,
while the same halteth to the time the last man of the foresaid string be
clearlie advanced from his collateral string; Then immediately the remaining
strings in like manner advances one string after another; commonly as the
first string is clearlie advanced; it then halteth to the time the following
string, falls up to his first order; and so one after another.

The use of both Exercises (except in some little respects) are all one they
are done, when ye come to port, a strait, a Passage; When one only is able to
march in front.

Before ye make the Great Turn, or wheeling about ye must perform these
particulars following, five in number.

Right about. Close your ranks. Close your strings, to the right and left hand.
Close your ranks, to the sword point. Mount your Arms, Pickes and muskets.
The Great Turn, to the right hand.

The Great Turn, to the left hand.

There is so many distinct Particulars in this Exercise severallie performed,
that it admits no further Instruction, only note when ye will have them
close their strings, to the right or left hand, the outmost string on that hand
ye purpose to close, must be commanded to stand, and all the rest to close to
it.

And before you command them to their first Order, you must cause them
performing these four ensuing particulars: to wit;

Open your ranks, to the Rear. Ranks to your Order. Strings to your Order.
Front as you were.
In opening ranks or strings, you must make all, both ranks and strings,
(saving the outmost on that hand ye mean to open which must stand) to move
altogether, to the time the second rank, or string, from that which stands,
have gotten it distance and subsequent the rest.

The use hereof, is altogether defensine, to keep them selves unbroken by the
fury of horses.

And now this much of these Exercises, common to both Pike-men and Musketeers;
But there are others usual only be the Musketeers; and these are such as
follows. But before ye practice these particular Motions; your men must be
set in Batell, ten deep; or upon exigencie in Skirmishing; And when your Army
is not great, ye may place them six in deepness; And then ye must not fayll
to command them, to observe that in all their actiones, they turn to the right
hand; and that they carry the mouths of their pieces high, as well when they
are panning, as when they are pan-guarded; and come to give fire. And the
terms usual are.

Make ready the first two Ranks.
Turn to the right hand, and give fire.
And the Instruction of thus giving fire is that always two ranks make ready
together, and advance ten paces forwards before the body. At which instance, a
Sergeant, or when the body is greater some other Officer, must stand; to whom
the Musketeers are to come up before they present, and give fire. And the
second rank keep their Muskets closs, to their Rests: And the pan-guarded; and
as soon as the first are fallen away; the second immediately presents, and
give fire; two more are to make ready. And so one after another; making the
advancement of ten paces still; by which ye mayntayn at least your own ground;
if otherwise ye loss ground. And the reason is, they being ten in deepness.
The Rear men be consequence ten paces behynd. Which ten they advancing, they
stand in the self same place of these that were first in the Front.

The use hereof is in there is the ordinary form in Battle: and when they do
not Skirmish; but rather advances toward the Enemy.

Make ready the first two ranks, in the Rear.
Turn to the right hand, and give fire; and fall up to the Front; And so to the
last.
This is done, when you command the whole body right about. And thus your
Front, the Rear; and the Rear, your Front. And then makes that which is Rear,
now give fire by commanding them right about; and after fire, to fall away; and
place themselves in the Front. And so one after another.

The use is, When you are charged in the Rear; And while you thus give fire,
you march forwards to your intended place, whether it be for Relief of that
place; or for your own safety; or for advantage in preocupying the Enemy in a
Pass, or when you have charged the Enemy, and there-after intends to make a
safe Retreat; Because you have the worss, or other respective.

Left about. Note; That this a Commandment to all the Company.


The string on the right hand, make ready, and give fire, to the right hand;
and stand firm.
The other two strings, march up.
The second and third, turn to the right hand; and give fire.
All three thus being in on Front; the Sergeant brings up the first to the
second, upon the right hand; Then leads up the strings, to the Front of the
left string.

Here-in you may see and perceive so many distinct particulars, that the
instruction in performing this practice is clear.

And the use for the most is when with a few you would occupy the length of a
line, of a Wall, or of a Ditch, or any other suitable Advantage. And thus give
fire upon the Enemy, as he passes.

All the forsayds, which is usual only by the Musketeers, are most
observable in exercising; and that for teaching and trayning the unlearned. But
in practice, you must use only these Commandments.

Make ready by ranks; present, and give fire; and stand firm; and fall about
to the right hand, to the Rear; or rather, Make ready. Present. Give fire.


Note; As the Captayn exercises the Musketeers particularly; So the
Lieuetenant exercises the pike-men; making a Charge with Touck of Drum, in
presenting their Arms to the right and left hand; in the Vanguard, and in the
Rear, marching and retiring, answering to the Touck of Drum; which upon service
are a March and Trouping; a Charge; and a Retreat.

And thus much of the foresaid Motions, wherein a young Soldier may be
trained; and in some measure, before he have the occasion of Arms. But now of
the Motiones of your Postures, in handling your Arms. To wit, Of Pike and
Musket. And first of the Postures of the Pike, of whose number some are
performed standing; which you shall discern by this letter S. And some are
exercised both standing and marching; which you shall distinguish by these
letters S. and M. For in the position here I keep only the Method, according
to the Order of the Exercise it self in trayning.

Lift your pikes. S. Mount your pikes. S. Set down your pikes. S. Shoulder your
pikes. S. and M. Charge your pikes. S. and M. Set down your pikes. S. Palm to
the point your pikes. S. Cheek your pikes. S. Which is done, when by palming,
you hold your right hand upon your side, with your pike; and your left hand
upon the point thereof. is done, when you present your pike by palming. Recover
your pikes. S. Which is done, when you present your pike by palming. Charge
your pikes. S. and M. Shoulder your pikes. S. and M. To the right or left hand
charge. S. and M. Shoulder your pikes. S. and M. Charge to the Rear. S. and M.
Port your pikes. S. and M. Stand. Set down your pikes. S.
Observe in charging that half the ranks only must charge their pikes; And
that they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as may give no
offense, either in charging or retiring. And the reason is, In that this way,
pikes are not so subject to be broken by the shot of the Enemy.

Next; Of the Postures of the Musket; And the words of Command usual in the
handling thereof. And these first your Musket being charged,

March with your Musket in your hand. Sink your rest, and vnshoulder your
Musket. Hold up your Musket in the right hand; and let her sink in the rest.
In your left hand, hold your Musket; and carry your rest with it. In your
right hand, take your Lunt, (or Match) and hold it well. Blow your Lunt. Cock
your Lunt. Try your Lunt. Blow your Lunt, and try your pan. Hold your Musket,
and present. Give fire.
Now, Having discharged your Musket, you must charge again, after the manner
following.

Take down your Musket, and carry your Rest with it. Uncock your Lunt. Blow
your Lunt. Put it again betwixt your fingers. Blow your pan. Morss your pan.
Cloze your pan. Cast off your pan. Cast about your Musket. Trayll your Rest.
Open your Charges. Charge your Muskets. Draw out your Ramsticks. Shorten your
Ramsticks. Fetch your Musket forward, with the left hand; and hold it up in
the right hand; and recover the Rest. Shoulder your Musket.
And having thus way charged your Musket, you must again make ready, as
follows.

Lay your Musket in your Rest. Hold your Musket in your Rest, with the left
hand only in balance. Take your Lunt in your right hand. Blow your Lunt. Cock
your Lunt. Try your Lunt. Guard your pan; and be ready.
The Ranges of Officers, from the lowest, to the highest.
THE lowest Range, and meanest Officer, is Lanspresado; the Leader of half a
string; called a Middle-man, or Captayn over four, the Corporalls Deputy.

Next is the Corporal. He is the Leader of astring, and Commander of a
Squadre in their Watch and Centrie.

Next is the Sergeant; An Officer of great use, for rectifying of ranks and
strings, of necesirie he should be Skillful.

Next should the Drummer be at least the Drummer Major; whose Place is
Gentile; he should be of experience, and a good Linguist; for redeeming of
Prisoners; for intimation of Parties. His place of march is three ranks of
pikes or Muskets preceding.

Next is the Scriver, or the Clerk of the Band. He is no Soldier; yet he
ought to be learned in Martial laws; to instruct the soldiers. He
receaveth pay from the Tresaurers; and delyvereth it, proportionablie, to the
Company.

Next is the Surgeon like no ways, no soldier; And the reason is, if he
were wounded, who should cure those of the Company, he holds his place of
Courtesy.

Next is the Antsign, or Colors bearer, The Romans, as the Spaniards: now
holds him next the Captayn. He marches upon the right hand of the pikes,
commonly two ranks preceding him. In Garnison he ought to have the most
eminens place of Lodging, or in Quartering. And the reason is, It is the
conveaning place. For therein is the Credit, and principality of the Company.

Next is the Quartermaster of the Regiment, or Harbinger. He intimates their
way and passages; and where they set down; and to every Company their quarter
and place. He depends upon the Quartermaster General.

Next is the Provost Marshall. He has the Custody and Respect to Guilty
persons, and the Charge of the Execution. He depends upon the Judge Marshall.

Next is the Lieuetenant, a Captayns conjunct; in whose absence he occupies
his Vice, as the word it self bears; he brings up the Rear, while the
Captayn marches upon the Van; and the Rear has the second place. The reason
whereof, is, if commanded right or left about the Rear, becomes the Front.

Above all these, is the Captayn. His Charge is over a Company; commonly
consisting of one, two, or three hundredth. He ought to know the duty of the
forsayds Officers, that accordingly he may command.

Next is the Sergeant Major, a principal Captayn, the Deliverer and
Distributer of the Orders of the Regiment. He receaveth them from the
Commander of his Brigado: And he from the Major General, of his Brigado, (who
commonly is chosen out of the Majors of the Regiments;) And he from the Lord
Marshall of the Field.

Next is the Lieuetenant Collonell. He surragateth the Vice and place of the
Collonell, in his absence.

And above all these, is a Collonell. He is head, and has Commandment of a
Regiment; consisting of ten or fifteen Companies. And the eldest is Magister de
Campo.

Next is the Sergeant Major General. He is taken out of the Collonells,
commonly, at least once, he ought to have been on. He commands the
Collonells, and rangeth the infanterie into Battalia. He is one of the
Council of War.

Next is the Collonell General, if there be any. He has a general care of
the Government of all the infanterie: But in a Army, he has only
commandment of a Brigado. He is ever one of the Council of War.

Next is the Lieuetenant General of the Horss, or General thereof. For he
must have none above him, except the General of the Army; one of the Council
of War. He has his own Commissarie, and Quartermaster general.

Next is the high Tresaurer of the Army, under the General only. He is to
have reguard to the Auditor, Mustur-master, Commissarie, one of the Council of
War.

Next is the Master or General of the Ordinance. He is one of the Council of
War.

Next is the Lord Marshall. He distributeth the Generals Commands to all the
other Officers of the Army. He orders their Lodgings, and encampings. He
assigns in Battle, to every body his place. The Sergeant Major General,
afterward, accordingly rangeth. The Infanterie into Battalia. He marches in
the Vanguard.

Next is the Lieuetenant General of the Army, younger Brother to the
General. He ought to cause all the Generals Commands, be put in Execution,
as absolutely as himself: But specially in march. For thus he does ease
him. Some think unnecessary this Office, where there is a Lord Marshall.

Lastly; Having no parallel is the General; Whose properties ought to be
Valiantly to fight; of a resolute Mind, and judgment, in all Recounters; to
make a Surpryze, with good and foreseeing understanding; to choose well a place
of Advantage; to choose a proper place, for lodging, or fighting; to pass a
River, or escape an evil passage: and, when need is, to make great Expedition:
To make falss or true Allarums; or assaulteth to the Enemy, in place and time
convenient: To be Skillful in Engynes; and paynfull in all: To be liberal;
and to reward Valiant Acts of Arms; and merciful to Forfaitures. And in a
word; He ought to know every one his Duty; and should excel in Virtue,
Wisdom, Diligence, and Experience.

There is a second Range, and have another Dependence; And most of them wayt
upon the Horsemen; And take their Direction from the LORD MARSHALL.
THE First and Lowest, is Gun-Master, an inferior Officer; under the Master of
the Ordinance. And he is called a Constable.

Next, is the Trench-Master. He has respect to Fortifications.

Next, is the Wagon-master. He has charge of Bag and Baggage. He is called
Master Impedimentorum.

Next, is the Forrage-master. His charge is for Provision, to the Horss. He
depends more nearlie upon the Lord Marshall. He has his Inferior Officers.

Next, is the Proveant-master. His charge is for Victuals to the Army. And
he has his Quartermaster, and other Officers.

Next, is the Judge Marshall. He gives Sentence upon Offenders.

Next, is the Scout-master. He makes choose of places of Danger; where, and
how, to place them. He depends also more directly upon the Lord Marshall.

Next, is the Lieuetenant of the Ordinance. He depends upon the Master of
the Ordinance. They have their Quartermaster, and Inferior Officers.

The Last, and Greatest, is Mustur-master General: And is one of the Council
of War.

These are the Functions and Members, of the total and complete Body: Whose
head the General, communicates and diffundeth his Orders, and Commandments,
by the Lord Marshall to them all after this fourfold Division, or Distinstion.
Videlicet, Of the Cavalrie, of the Infanterie, of the Artillery, of the
Victual; Which is to say, The Commissarie General of the Horss, comes and
receaveth the General his Orders from the Marshall, and delyvereth them, to
the Lieuetenant General of the Horss; And then to the Quartermaster General
thereof; And from him to all the Quarter Masters, from every Quarter.

And so the Sergeant Major General of every Brigado comes to the Marshall;
and receaveth their Orders; which he delyvereth to the Commander of that
Brigado; and he to the Sergeant Major of each Regiment; and then to all the
Quarter Masters from every Quarter. And so the Quartermaster General of the
Artillery, from the Marshall, to the Master of the Ordinance; And from them,
to every Quartermaster. And in lyke-manner, the Quartermaster General, of
the Victual, comes to the Marshall, and receaveth their Orders; which he
delyvereth to the Proveant Master; And he to the other Quartermaster from
every Quarter. Thus you see with what Facility, and what Celeritie the
Diversity, of one man's Commandments, is distributed and diffunded to the
universal Army.

And of these Ranges, the Army is perfected. For it is a Body; And these are
the Members; and the more distinct, it is in their particular charges, the more
complete, the same is. This mayn body it self, is engrossed of man and man,
made up of many individual persons. Which is done, if upon march (which is a
space usually of three foot and half) being four, six, or ten, in Front; the
Muskets of every Company preceding the pikes of their own Band; they are
commanded to halt. Then considering the intended deepness, either of six, or
ten, or twelve men, you cause them, that immediately follows the foresaid
deepness, to march up in Front, upon the left hand of the first Division. And
after this manner, all the pikes. And in like manner, after these the Muskets,
still observing the left hand; making on Front; and on deepness of all the
Company. And thus way of Companies, Regiments, and of Regiments Brigadoes, or
Bodies; and of Brigadoes the universal Body; which in broadness has three
special Divisions; to wit, The right and left hand wings; Where the best men
ought to be placed; and comonlie begins the Fight. And the third Division,
is the Battle; or that which is the middle betwixt the two foresaid wings. The
Greeks and Swisses as yet, thus in on Front had their Battle; But compacted
very closs together, and made up of many ranks; commonly twentie-four in
deepness; They were so closs, that hardly they could be broken. But now
having the use of other Arms, we must keep the Distances already mentioned.
And there is a second Division; to wit, Of deepness, (specially used when the
Army is great and ponderous, the Field, strayt, and narrow, that it is not
able to contayn so large a Front, as the Army would extend to.) And thus it is
into three bodies; The first is the Front, or Vanguard; The second is the Mayn
Battle, or middle betwixt the Front, and the Rear: And the third, is the Rear,
or Stall. And thus the Army being placed, the first being beaten; the second
may renew the Fight. And if both, the last may recover all; As many examples
can instance. And it is thought the best way of fighting is by Reserues; Yea,
by Troops, as to hazard all at once. The Romans used this kind of threefold
Battle. But that they so placed them; that the first within, the second and
both within, the third might in order retire, if need was. And thus still to
mayntayn; or rather, to renew the Fight. But their form and manner of retreat,
now not in use. An Army may be drawn up after many diverse forms, and
figures, according to the exigencie of Time, Place, and new Inventions, and
Prudencie of a General, as into a Triangular. And the form of an Half moon; or
into both at one time, as the first point charge the Enemy; but composed of
the weakest men, that they may the more easily retire; while the two Angles
advances: and becomes two wings. And there-after the middle part shrinking,
and the wings advancing; is then after the form of an Half Moon. And that for
circumdating the Enemy, as the Battle of Cannas was. And some times into the
shape of a Diamond, for penetrating and pearcing within the Enemies Battle,
into the figure of an Orb, for defending at all quarters; into a Wind-miln, and
diverse others, for their several reasons. But heere-in I spare summing all up
in this, that an Army is a Body, made up of many singular persons; whose
head is the Captayn General, whose heart is good Order; whose life and welfare
is in good Commanders; Whose Defense is in Hors-men; for without the same an
Army, is naked. The Soull of which Body is Cannon; and Powder, and the
Sinews, and Nerves, that concatenateth altogether is Money.

Thus then I halt: Neither has it been my scope to undertake that which is
only firting for those of greatest Wisdom, and Experience in the perfect
Draught of a compleet Army. Only thus much I have given to the young
Soldier, as a general view of the reason, and the end of all the foresaid
Exercises; To the effect, That he who intends to be a Good Captain, he
may clearlie perceive, that of necessity he must first be expert in the
practice of this Military Rudiment. For by the same great matters, have been
performed; and without the same all goes to confusion; consequently, to ruin.

Most considerable observations, anent Fortification, both in Engines use of
Works, or Skill in Artiliarie; collected from the most expert; who has
verified them by their practice.
A Fort is made, that a little may resist a great force, or a few great number
of men.

And Works from Engyne, are either simple or componed. The Simples are a Wall,
a Rampate, a falss Bray within the Wall, a Counter-scarp, a Line, and Angle, a
Circle, etc.

The Compounds, are either of some of these; as is Redout, an Half Moon, an
Horn-work, a Sconss; or all of these, as is the Fortificationes of a Town.

That which proceeds from Assault, is either from Approaches, or from
Artiliarie. But the most furious, is by Artiliarie.

But first of Fortification, from Skill in Works; and then of Assault, by
Artiliarie.

Before you build a Fort, you must observe this Maxim, in four particulars.
First, to have a respect to the strength of the Enemy. Secondly, That the
Expense may bring Commodity. Thirdly, That the travaill may bring Rest.
Fourthlie, That the time may bring Assurance.

Next; You must observe the most Advantageous place of Situation: And there are
six. The first is that of a Mountayn, when the Fortification occupies the Tope
of the same. For it can not be commanded by any Art. And it discerns all
round about it, for to hinder Approaches. But it has that inco^moditie; often
wanting Water, and good earth, and facility of Transportation, The second is
upon a mountayn also. But the coming to it is by the continuation of another
mountayn. This has a incommoditie more as the first; Which makes Approaches
easy. for elevating a Mount upon the same; and to have an Command within the
place. The third also is upon a Mountayn, where there is many ways coming to
it, consequently, more incommodities. The fourth is upon a Marish watrie, or
sea place; where the Approaches can not be without drying the Marish. Thefyft
is upon a plain firm ground; which has the Commodities of good earth, and
Water in the Ditch. A Fortification easy to be made within and without. But
the incommodities great; For the Approaches are easy. The sixth and last, is,
That is commanded by some Mountayn, one or more. The Commodities few; The
incommodities great.

And the third Observation, is, Betwixt the Assailers, and the Assaulted in a
fortified place. And that is (excepting accidents) ten without, for one within,
with proportionable provision.

Lastly, You must observe that the Assailers has incommodities, that the
assaulted has not; First, Evil lodged in an Hut. Secondly, Discovered in
their Approaches. Thirdly, To cover them above at the foot of the Breach.
Fourtlie, To mount the Ruin of the Breach. Fiftlie, To guard them from that
which is casten from above upon them. Sixtlie, To fight harnished, and heavilie
armed.

And now, of Assaults by Artiliarie; which that you may the better know, you
must consider four things. First, The destruction of Cannon. Secondly, The
necessary proportions thereof. Thirdly, The most effectual shooting of
Cannon. Fourthlie, You must understand the proportion betwixt an Army, and
Artiliarie.

And for the first of these; The most common Artiliarie shoots 35, and 45
pound.

The most vulgar length of a Cannon, is ten or twelve foot.

And secondly anent the proportion. A Cannon of twelve foo^ in length, is
equal to 13, or 17.

The Charge is according to the value of the powder; commonly the third of the
weight of the Ball, at least.

The port of a Cannon in a right line is 600 commune space; a Culverine as
much, and others less.

Distance of Batteries is 200, 300 space, at the furthest, for to evite the
hazard of Muskets.

The ordinary force of a Cannon is (being 200 space distant) to pearce of
well disgested earth five foot: but of new builded ground, seven foot; and of
sand, ten foot.

A Cannon may shoot 80, or more shot a day.

The force of a Cannon, is greatest from a low place to a high.

A Cannon is more effectual, and makes greater ruin; being upon a Fort, with
Angles, and Corners, as a simple Battery, of on Front. For thus they shoot
athwart.

A thousand shot quickly done, makes greaterruin, with ten piece of Cannon,
as fifteen hundredth shot with five Cannon.

A good Engynier should chiefly foresee necessary reparations, according to
the ruin.

Lastly, anent the proportion betwixt Armies and Cannon; an Army for a Siege,
should have twelve Cannon, three Culverines, and some Bascards, for empeaching
of fortes.

You may judge the greatness of an Army by the number of pieces and munition;
they being the soul of an Army.

As there is proportion betwixt an Army, and that which sustayneth them, so
betwixt Artiliarie, powder, and ball.

A thousand men should have on Cannon, an hundredth balls, and proportionablie
powder, and for the carriage thereof an hundredth Horss: But this may change
according to the advantage of the place. For it is easier transporting by
Water, as by Land.

FINIS.

