A Looking-glass for a covetous Mister:
OR, Comfort to a Contented mind.
Being a serious discourse between a Rich Miser in the West Country, and a poor
Husbandman, as they accidentally, met upon the way: Their dispute being so
tedious, and of so great concernment, A neighbor of theirs hearing them, took
pains to write down the subject of their discourse, after he had heard what had
befallen to the Rich-man; He sent a Letter to a friend of his in London, and
desired that he would get it Printed for an example to all unthankful men.

to the tune of, the Fair Angel of England; or, the Tyrant


COme listen kind neighbors with heart and good will,
I promise you truly I think no man ill,
He only inform you whay news I do hear,
By Letteres at London out of Devonshire.
There was a rich miser that hoarded up grain.
Like wise a poor Husbandman honest and plain
The miser with sorrow ddid look pail and wan,
And thus to disputing this Couple began.
The Miser. Well met honess neighbor the Miser did say,
What is the best News at the Market to day;
How did they sell Barley, their Wheat, and their Rye?
Declare the truth to me without any lie:
For I was sore troubled last night in my sleep,
With dreaming of matters which made me to weep,
I thought my whole Barn full of Barley and Wheat
The Rats, Mice, and Vermin, did seem for to eat.

Husbandman. Seed Wheat gave three shillings a strike I protest,
But this I Will assure you it was of the best;
The best Rye in the market gave not half a crown,
Which made some rich Misers to fret and to frown,
For five groats and two pence good Barley was sold;
To speak the plain truth out a man may be bold,
Therefore be contented good neighbor with me,
Praise God and be thankful such plenty so see.

Miser. It grives me to thing what a Trade we shall drive.
Our Lands and our livings will not make us thrive,
The reason of this now I will tell you plan
Because of the cheapnesse of all kind of Grain.
Ere I will sell Barley two thillings a strike,
I now am resolved to throw plough in the dike;
If Grain hold so cheap as plainly appears,
I shall be undone within two or three years.

Husbandman Thou Covetous wiser did thou ever hear,
A Farmer undone in a plentiful year,
You know how I lived and paid a great Rent,
Sold Barley for fifteen and yet was concent,
In plentful ^easons Gods mercy is shown,
He sends the poor Ploughman two Bvshels for one,
And great store of Cattle with fodder and stuff
He that is contented has treasure enough.

M^ser. If troubles me sadly this Tale should be told,
I Have Corn lying by me that is full three years old.
They once bade six shillings a strike for it I think,
But now I Am persuaded that Barley does stink
Yet wee^l thrash no more then our family spends,
I hope that next year it will make us amends
If Grain holds so Cheap as it plainly appears,
I Will sell no more Corn yet this two or three eears.

Huband-man. The Rich-man in the Gospel spoke, like a child.
He Would pull down his Barnes that he larger might build
Whereby he might sollace himself with delight.
Though his Soul was required of him that same night
But I am contented I promise you true,
When corn will but last until God s^edeth new;
Though misers do murmur their grain they cannot raise
Let poor men be thankful and give God the praise.

miser. Example by Joseph in Egyp^, wh have
That in time of plenty men may their Corn save.
For fear least a Famine should be in the Land,
That we may have storehouses then at command
To furnish such people as then comes to buy,
You know that wise mon such things will deny,
If corn hold so cheap as it plainly appears,
I shall be undone within two or three years,

Husbandman You know that wise Solomon this does rehearse,
that man that keeps back his corn, people will curse,
But he that with cheerfulness sells his grain
A blessing upon him will surely remain:
But some men to covetousness are inclined.
Over they^d bate a farthing they^d see poor men pyn'd,
though misers do murmur their grain they cannot raise,
Let poor men be thankful and give God the praise.
But mark what befell to this covetous Moam,
His house it was robbed before he got home,
His chests were broke open, his servants were bound
He lost in one hour two hundred pound,
This sure was a Judgment his neighbors did guss
Because he these words did so often express
If Grain hold so cheap as it plainly aprears
He should be undone within two or three years.
Concluding my story mark well what I say,
The poor of this Nation are bound for to pray.
That God would be pleased to help them at need.
That they may have bread their poor Children to feed
For Charity's cold enough as it is well known.
Good house keeping like wise is now baad grown,
Take this admonition from me as a friend,
Praise God and be thankful that plenty does send.

T. J.

FINIS.
London, Printed, for W. Thackeray, T. Passinger and W. VVhitwood.


