The Judgment of God showed upon one John Faustus Doctor in Divinity.
Tune of, Fortune my Foe.




ALl Christian men give ear a while to me,
How I am plunged in pain but cannot die,
I lived a life the like did none before,
Forsaking Christ, and I am damned therefore.
At Wittenburge, a town in Germany,
There was I born and bred of good degree,
Of honest Stock which afterward I shamed,
Accursed therefore for Faustus was I named.
In learning Ioe my Uncle brought up me,
And made me Doctor in Divinity:
And when he died be left me all his wealth.
Whose cursed gold did hinder my souls health.
Then did I shun the Holy Bible book,
Nor on Gods word would ever after look,
But studied accursed Conjuration,
Which was the cause of my utter Damnation.
The Devil in Friars weeds appeared to me,
And straight to my Request he did come,
That I might have all things at my desire,
I gave him soul and body for his hire.
Twice did I make my tender flesh to bleed,
Twice with my blood I wrote the Devils deed,
twice wretchedly I soul and body sold,
to live in peace and do what things I would.
For four and twenty Years this bond was made,
And at the length my soul was truly paid,
time ran away, and yet I never thought
How dear my soul our Savior Christ had bought
Would I had first been made a Beast by kind,
then had not I so vainly set my mind;
Or would when reason first began to bloom,
Some darksome Den had been my deadly tomb.
Woe to the Day of my Nativity,
Woe to the time that once did foster me,
And woe unto the hand that sealed the Bill,
Woe to myself the cause of all my ill.


THe time I past away with much delight
Amongst princes, peers, and many a worl^y(...)
I wrought such wonders by my Magic Skill,
that all the world may talk of Faustus still.
the Devil he carried me up into the Sky,
Where I did see how all the world did lie;
I went about the world in eight Days space,
And then returned unto my Native place.
What pleasure I did wish to please my mind,
He did perform as bond and seal did bind,
the secrets of the Stars and Planets told,
Of earth and sea with wonders manifold.
When four and twenty years was almost run,
I thought of all things that was past and done;
How that the Devil would soon claim his right,
And carry me to Everlasting Night.
then all too late I cursed my wicked Deed,
the Deed whereof does make my heart to bleed,
All days and hours, I mourned wondrous sore,
Repenting me of all things done before.
I then did with both Sun and Moon to stay
All times and Seasons, never to decay;
then had my time nere come to ^ated end,
For soul and body down to Hell descend.
At last when I had but one hour to come,
I turned my glass for my last hour to run,
And called in learned men to comfort me.
But faith was gone and none could comfort me.
By twelve a Clock my glass was almost out,
My grieved Conscience then began to doubt;
I wished the Students stay in Chamber by,
But as they staid they heard a dreadful cry.
then presently they came into the Hall,
Whereas my brains was cast against the wall,
Both arms and legs in pieces torn they see,
My bowels gone, this was an end of me.
You Conjurors and damned Witches all,
Example take by my unhappy fall:
Give not your souls and bodies unto Hell,
See that the smallest hair you do not sell.
But hope that Christ his Kingdom you may gain,
Where you shall never fear such mortal pain:
Forsake the Devil and all his crafty ways,
Embrace true faith that never more decays.
Printed by and for A. M and sold by the Booksellers of London.


