A LETTER Written by KING JAMES To His HOLINESS The POPE, As it is Extracted out
of the Registers taken at DUBLIN
Most Holy Father.
WE did by the Earl of Melfort, our principal Secretary of State, signify to
your Holiness the joy we had in your promotion to the Sacred Chair. And those
Letters which your Holiness did with your own handwrite to us, were such
testimony of Fatherly love, and of your tender compassion for what we suffer,
that they have lessened the sense of our Calamity, and have proved of real
consolation to us. The only Source of all these Rebellions against us is, that
we embraced the Catholic Faith; and we do not disown, but that to spread the
same not only in our three Kingdoms, but over all the dispersed Colonies of our
Subjects in America, was our determination. To manifest this, there will need
no other proof, then to see how lately we have proceeded in this Kingdom; for
as we have frequently beaten the Rebels in small Parties, (which might have
been one complete Victory if they had not obstinately declined to give us
Battle) so we have still turned all to the advantage of Religion, and hope very
soon to see it here finally Established: Nor will it look hard, if but aided by
some Subsidies, to compass the same in our other Dominions, as soon as by Gods
favor we shall be restored, seeing our People do so ill bear the Usurpers Yoke,
and so universally long for our Return. It would promote this Work if a general
peace were settled among the Catholic Princes, or a Truce at least, in case
the time be too short for the other: For this would put an end to these
Calamities begun in Germany, and where the Heretics ly now gnawing in the very
bowels of the Church. But what need we speak on this Subject, where the things
themselves are so Loud, and implore your aid. The Apostolic Zeal of your
Holiness must find out Remedies fit for these Evils; and in full confidence
hereof, we beseech God to give your Holiness a long and Happy Reign. And we
being, with all love and filial observance prostrate at your Feet. Do beg your
Apostolic Benediction.

Given at our Castle of Dublin, this 26. of November MDCLXXXIX.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1691.


