The Joviall Crew: OR, Beggars-Bush, In which a mad Maunder does vapor and
swagger, With praiseing the Trade of a bonney bold Beggar.
To the tune of, From hunger, and cold, etc.


A Beggar, a Beggar,
A Beggar I Will be.
There Is none leads a Life so jocond as he;
A Beggar I was
And a Beggar I am,
a Beggar I Will be, from a Beggar I came:
If (as it begins) our Trading do fall,
I fear (at the last) we shall be Beggars all
Our Tradesmen miscarry in all their Affayrs,
And few men grow wealthy, but Courtiers and Players
A Craver my Father,
A Maunder my Mother,
A Filer my Sister, a Filcher my Brother,
A Cauter my Uncle
That cared not for Pelf;
a Lifter my Aunt, a Beggar my self;
in white wheaten-straw, when their bellies were full,
Then I was begot, between Tinker and Trul
And therefore a Beggar, a Beggar I Will be,
For none has a spirit so jocond as he.
When Boys do come to us,
And that their intent is
to follow out Calling, we nere bind them Prentice
Soon as they come to it,
We teach them to do it
and give them a staff, and a Wallet to boo't,
We teach them their Lingua, to crave and to Cant,
The devil is in them, if then they can want,
If any are here, that Beggars will be,
We without Indentures will make them free.
We beg for our bread,
But sometimes it happens,
we feast it with Pigg, Pullet, Couny and Capons,
For Churches Affairs,
We are no Men-slayers;
We have no Religion, yet live by our Prayers
But if when we beg, Men will not draw their purses,
We charge and give fire, with a valley of curses
The Devil confound your good worship we cry
And such a bold brazen-faced Beggar am I.
The second Part, To the same Tune,
We do Things in season,
And have so much Reason,
we raise no Rebellion, nor never talk Treason.
We Billet our mates
At very low Rates,
whilst some keep their Quarters as high as the Gates
With Shinkin ap Morgan, with Blew-cap, or Tege,
We enter into no Covenant, nor League:
And therefore a bonney bold Beggar I Will be;
For none lives a life so happy as he.
We never do prate,
In matters of State,
For fear we should come to Hugh Peter's his Fate
Whilst Scripture unfolders,
And Treason upholders,
Have lost their heads, we keep ours on our shoulders
Our Plots and our Projects, are never so tall
To reach to the Topmast of Westminster Hall
And therefore a merry brave Beggar I Will be,
For none wears his Nodle so safely as he.
For such petty Pledges,
As Shirts from the Hedges,
we are not in fear to be drawn upon Sledges
But sometimes the Whip,
Does make us to skip,
And then we from Tything to Tything do trip,
For when in a poor housing-ken we do bib it
We stand more in awe of the Stocks then the Gibbet:
And therefore a merry mad Beggar I Will be,
For when it is night, to the Barn goes he.
We throw down no Alter,
Nor ever do falter
So much, as to change a Gold-Chain, for a Halter:
Though some men do flout us;
And others do doubt us,
we nere go without forty pieces about us;
But many brave fellows are fine and look fiercer
That owe for their Cloths to the Tailor and Mercer:
And if from the Stocks I can keep out my feet,
I fear not the Compter, King's Bench nor the Fleet.
Sometimes I do frame,
My self to be lame;
and when a coach comes, I do hop to my game:
We seldom miscarry,
Yet never do Marry,
By the Gowns Common Prayer, nor the Cloak Directory,
But Harry and Mary (like birds of a feather)
do nothing but kiss, laugh, and lie down together
Like Piggs in the pease-straw, intangld they lie
Till there they beget such a bold Rogue as I.
To sum all in brief,
We live by relief,
And pray for King Charles, our Commander in chief:
God bless all the Peers,
The wise Overseers,
that they may consider the poor Cavaliers,
For if they let them but lower to fall,
The'l take our profession and beggar us all:
And then it will be but a folly for me,
A merry soul'd, bonny bold Beggar to be.
London, Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.


