The Joviall Crew, OR, Beggers-Bush.
In which a mad Maunder does vapor and swagger.
With praiseing the Trade of a Bonny bold Beggar.
To the Tune of, From hunger and cold.




A Beggar, a Beggar,
A B^gger I Will be,
There Is none leads a life so jocond as he;
A Beggar I was,
And a Beggar I am,
A Beggar I Will be, from a Beggar I came:
If (as it begins) our Trading do fall.
I fear (at the last) we shallbe Beggars all.
Our Tradesmen miscarry in all their affayrs,
And few men grow wealthy, but Courtiers and Players.
A Craver my Father,
A Maunder my Mother,
A Filer my Sister, a Filcher my Brother,
A Canter my Uncle
That cared not for pelf;
A Lister my Aunt* a Beggar my self;
In whit^ wheaten-stew, when their bellies were full,
Then I was begot, between Tinker and Trull;
And therefore a Beggar, a Beggar Jle be,
For none has a spirit so jocond as be.
When Boys do come to us,
And that their intent is.
To follow our Calling, we nere bind them prentice,
Soon as they come to it,
We teach them to do it,
And give them a Staff and a Wallet to boot,
We teach them their Lingua, to crave and to Cant,
The Devil is in them, if then they can want
If any are here that Beggars will be,
We without Indentures will make them free
We Beg for our Bread,
But sometimes it happens
We feast it with Pigg, Pullet, Conny and Capons
For Churches Affairs,
We are no M^^-slayers.
We have no Religion yet live by our prayers
But if when we beg men will not draw their purses
We charge and give fire, with a volly of curses
The Devil confound your good worship we cr^
And such a bold brazen-faced Beggar am I.




WE do things in season,
and have so much reason,
We raise no Rebellion, nor never talk treason
We billet our Mates,
At very low rates,
Whilst some keeps their Quarters as (...)as the Gates,
With Shinkin ap Morgan, with Blew-Cap, or Tege.
We enter into no Covenant nor League*
And therefore a bonny bold Beggar Jle be,
For none lives a life so happy as he.
We never do prate,
In matters of State,
For fear we should come to Hugh Peter's his Fate:
Whilst Scripture v^
And Treason vpholders,
Have lost their heads, we keep ours on our shoulders
Our Plots and our Projects, ere never so tall,
To reach to the Topmast of Westminster Hall
And therefore a merry brave Beg^er Jle be,
For none wears his Noddle so safely as he.
For such petty Pledges,
As Shi^ts from the Hedges,
We are not in fear to be drawn upon Sledges
But sometimes the Whip,
Does make us to scip,
And than we from Tything to Tything do trip:
For when in a poor Bousing-Ken we do bib it
We stend more in awe of the Stocks then the Gibbet
And therefore a merry mad Beggar Jle be,
For when it is night, to the Barn goes he.
We throw down no Alter,
Nor ever do falter
So much, as to change a Gold-Chain for a Halter:
Though some men do flout us,
And others do doubt us.
We nere go without forty pieces about us,
But many brav fellows are (...) and look fiercer
That owe for their cloths to the Tailor and M^rcer:
And if from the Stocks I can keep out my feet,
I fear not the Compter, King's Bench, nor the Fleet.
Sometimes I do frame,
My self to be lame.
And when a coach comes I do ^op to my game
We seldom miscarry,
Yet never do Marry
By the Gowns Commen-Prarer, nor the Cloak Directory;
But Harry and Mary (like Birds of a feather)
do nothing but kiss (...) and lie down together
Like piggs in the pease-straw, entangled they lie
Till there they beget such a bold Rogue as I.
To sum all in brief,
We live by relief,
And pray for King Charles, our Commander in chief;
God bless all the Peers,
The wise Overseers
That they may consider the poor Caveliers.
For if they do let them but lower to fall,
Ther'l take our profession, and b^gger us all:
And then it will be, but a folly for me,
A merry soul'd, bonny bold Beggar to be.
London, Printed for William Gilbertson dwelling at the Bible in Giltspurstreet.


