INSTRUCTIONS and RULES To be duly observed by each and every Master-Gunner
entertained upon any Ship, Friggot, or Vessel of War, which either now, or
hereafter shall be in the Service of His MAJESTY, by Order of His Royal
Highness, JAMES, Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Vlster, Lord High Admiral of
ENGLAND and IRELAND, etc.
For Regulating the Ceremony of Honor in Salutes.
I. THAT no Commander of a Ship of the Second Rank, (being neither Admiral,
Vice Admiral, nor Rear-Admiral,) at his first coming and saluting his Admiral,
give to his Admiral above Eleven Pieces, his Vice Admiral Nine, and
Rear-Admiral Seven; and the rest proportionably less by Two, according to their
Rank: And the Commander of any Ship is not to salute his Admiral after he has
done it once, except he has been absent from the Flag two Months.

II. That when any Admiral of a Foreign Nation is met withal, he be answered by
the like number by all the Ships that he salutes.

If a Vice Admiral, then the Admiral to answer him with Two less, but the
Vice Admiral, Rear-Admiral, and as many of the rest as he shall salute, are to
give him the like number.

If a Rear-Admiral, then the Admiral and Vice Admiral to answer him with Two
less; but if he salute the Rear-Admiral, or any other Ship, they to return the
like number.

III. That in case a Ship of the Second Rank carry any Ambassador, Duke, or
Nobleman, he shall fire the Ordnance following, viz. at his coming on Board
Eleven Guns, and at his Landing Fifteen.

When they shall carry a Knight, Lady, or Gentleman of quality, at their coming
on Board Seven Guns, and at their Landing Eleven.

And the other Ships by Two less, according to their Ranks and number of
Ordnance.

IIII. That when any Man of War, or Merchant-Man of another Nation, or of our
own, salute any of the King's Ships, he is to be answered by Two less.

V. That when any of His Majesty's Ships shall have occasion to salute any of
the King's Castles, they are to give Two Guns less then they are directed to
give when they salute their Admiral as aforesaid.

Rules for preventing the unnecessary waste and expense of Stores.
I. After the Ordnance in any Ships shall be Laden fit for Service, the Powder
and Shot not to be scaled oftener than once in six Months, unless upon
extraordinary occasion.

II. That for the first Month the Men be exercised Twice every Week, to the end
they may become good Fire-men, allowing six Shot to every Exercising.

That the second Month they be exercised once every Week, and after that only
once in two Months, allowing six Shot each time of Exercising.

III. That no Gunner be allowed by his Captain upon his Account for the waste
of any Iron-work, Beds, Coins, Copper-Ladles, Sheet-Lead, Tan'd-Hides, or other
natures of Stores not perishable; but that the Gunner be obliged to make them
good, unless it shall really appear to the Captain, and such other Officers of
the Ship as shall sign to his Account, that the same were lost or wasted in
Service.

IIII. That the Gunner and Armourer in each Ship be obliged diligently to look
to the keeping-oyled, clean and well-fixed all Muskets, Pistols, Pikes,
Blunderbusses, Swords, Halberts, Hatches, Brown-Bills, etc. And to return the
same in like condition as they were received (unless there be a sufficient
cause to the contrary:) And to that end, that no Armourer or Gun-Smith be taken
into any Ship, but such as shall be approved of by the Office of the Ordnance
for sufficient Workmen, and not to receive their Pay but upon Certificate from
that Office, that they have well discharged their Duty.

V. That after an Engagement, an exact Survey be taken by the Captain and
principal Officers of the Ship (if absent from the Flag, but if with the Flag,
by such as the Commander in Chief shall appoint) of all the Powder under the
Gunner, whether in Barrels, Cartridges, Guns laden, Collers of Bandeliers, or
otherwise, and that the said Survey be affirmed under his or their Hands, that
from thence the expense of Powder during the Fight may be ascertained.

VI. That every Commander and Gunner do certify unto the Master of His
Majesty's Ordnance from time to time what Ordnance, Powder, Shot, or other
Gunner-Stores shall come into his or their charge out of any Ship taken as
prize, and that the same be charged by the Gunner upon his Account, and
attested by the Commander and other principal Officers under their Hands.

VII. That if any Gunner shall receive any Additional supplies unto his Stores
from any Fort or Garrison belonging to His Majesty at Home or Abroad, or from
any Vessel or Ship, by order from the Admiral or Commander in Chief of a
Squadron or otherwise, he be obliged to give his Hand to the Person or Persons
from whence he shall receive the said Stores, and forthwith to advertize the
Master of His Majesty's Ordnance by Letter, expressly setting down therein the
Name of the Person, and place from whence, and the quantity and quality of the
Stores so received, and forthwith charge the same upon his Account.

VIII. That in case of the death of any Gunner at Sea, the Commander of the
Ship do immediately cause a Remain of all his Stores to be taken; attested
under his own, and other the principal Officers of the Ships Hands, and
transmit the same by the first opportunity unto the Master of His Majesty's
Ordnance to remain in the Office of the Ordnance, as a charge upon the
succeeding Gunner in passing his Accounts.

Rules for Keeping and Re^^ring the Gunners Accounts.
I. That the Captain or Commander do every Week, or at least every M^^^h, call
his Gunner to Account, and Weekly or Monthly sign to the same, which is
likewise to be attested by the other principal Officers of the Ship, and
nothing to b^^^eved of contrary to the foregoing Articles; And if the Captain
or Commander shall neglect to call for the Gunners Accounts as aforesaid, the
Gunner is then to give ^n his Accounts unto him Weekly or Monthly at the
farthest.

II. That every Captain upon his approach into Harbor do send up timely notic^
thereof, that so Warrant may be speedily directed to the Master of the
Ordnance, that the Remain may be taken as soon as the Ship shall come into
Harbor, and that before he leave his Ship he cause the Powder-Room to be made
fast and locked up, and other the Gunners Stores to be secured until the Remain
be taken, and that the Gunner before his Remain be taken, do deliver to the
Officer or Clerk appointed to take the said Remain, his Account signed as
aforesaid, for the better preventing any surreptio^s, additions, or alterations
for the after-levelling his Expense with the Remain.

III. That every Gunner be obliged to take care that the Guns and Carriages
left o^ Board his Ship be preserved without any Embezelment of Trucks, Beds,
Coins, Extrees, Cap-squares, Ring-bolts, or other Iron-work, under the penalty
of Repa^ring them at his own charge, and putting them into a good condition as
when they were first issued forth, reasonable wear only excepted.

Given under my Hand and Seal at White Hall, this Twentieth day of April, 1663
JAMES.

To Sir THOMAS CHICHELEY, Knight, Master General of His Majesty's Ordnance.
WHereas it has pleased his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral
of England, to make and ordain the several Rules and Constitutions
abovementioned for the better management of the Stor^^ of War relating to His
Majesty's Navy; These are therefore in pursuance of his Royal Highness said
Order to me directed, to will and require ^ou to take effectual care, that the
same be by you duly observed from time to time in each particular relating to
the service under your charge, to the int^^ a true Account may be rendered
thereof at the end of your Voyage; And hereof you are not to fail, as you will
answer the Contrary at your Peril.

To (...) Master Gunner of His Majesty's (...) the (...)

