A Strange Banquet, OR, The Devils Entertainment
by Cook Laurel at the Peak in Devonshire, with a true Relation of the several
dishes.
The tune is, Cook Laurel.


COok Laurel would have the Devil his guest
And bid him whom to Peak to dinner,
Where Fiend had never such a feast
Prepared at the charge of a sinner.
With a hey down down a down down.
His stomach was quesie he came thither coacht
The joggings had caused his cruets to rise,
To help which he called for a Puritan Poarcht
That used to turn up the white of his eyes,
With a hey, etc.
And so he recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down and began to eat:
A Promooter in Plumb-broth was the first dish,
His own privy Kitchen had no such meat.
With a hey, etc.
Yet though with this he much was taken
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher,
As Soon as he spied the Bawd and Bacon,
By which you may know the Devils a wensher.
With a hey, etc.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
With Semsters and tire-women fit for his pallet
With Feathermen and Perfumers put
Some twelve in a charger to make a grand sallet
With a hey, etc.
A rich fat Usurer stewed in his marrow,
With him a Lawyers head and green sauce,
All which his belly took like a barrel
As though till then he had never seen sauce.
With a hey, etc.
Then carbonado'd and cookt with pains
Was brought up a Cloven Sergeants face,
The sauce was made of a^^^mans brains
That had been beaten out with his Mace.
With a hey, etc.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board,
The feast had nothing been without them,
Both living and dead were foxed and fur'd
And their chains like sassages hung about them
With a hey, etc.




THe next dish was the Mayor of the town
With a pudding of maintenance put in his belly
Like a Goose in her feathers in his gown,
With a couple of Hinch-boyes boiled to a jelly.
With a hey, etc.
Next came the overworn Justice of Peace,
With Clerks like gizzards stuck under each arm
And warrants like Sippits lay in his own grease
^et over a Chaffing-dish to be kept warm.
With a hey, etc.
London Cuckold came hot from the spit
And when the Carver had broken him open,
The Devil chopped his head off at a bit
But the horns had almost like to choke him.
With a hey, etc.
A fair large Pasty of a Midwife hot,
And for cold baked meat in this story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought
Long Coffind in crust til now she is grown hoary
With a hey, etc.
The loins of a Letcher then was roasted
With a plumb Harlots head and Garlic
With a Panders Peti-toes that had boasted
himself for a Captain that never was warlick,
With a hey, etc.
Then boiled and stuck upon a prick
The Gizzard was brought of a holy sister,
That bit made the Devil almost so sick
That the Doctor did think he had need of a glister
With a hey, etc.
The Iowl of a Tailor served for a Fish,
A Constable sowced pissed Vinegar by
Two Aldermen Lobsters laid in a dish
A deputy Tart and a Churchwarden Pie.
With a hey, etc.
All which devoured, then for a close
He did for a draught of Derby call,
He heaved the vessel up to his nose
And never left till he had drank up all,
With a hey, etc.
Then from the table he gave a start
Where banquet and wine was not to seek
All which he blew away with a fart
From whence it is called ye Devils (...)
With a hey, etc.
Printed for W. Gil^ (...)


