A Loyal Subjects Admonition, or, a true Song of Britains Civil Wars.
Some with blind zeal, Religion did profess,
Murdered their lawful King, oh wickedness
Scripture nor Chronicle they could not bring,
To show what subjects ever judged their King.
King Charles beheaded was we understand,
Proud Rebels they did live upon his Land,
But now these Rebels are dispersed and gone,
Few honest men I think for them make moan.
If any man be angry at this Song,
What e're he thinks he would best to hold his tongue.
To the Tune of General Moncks right march, that was sounded before him from
Scotland to London, or the Highlanders march.
GReat controversy has been in England,
but of ye just cause there is few men do know,
Rebellion for certain, as I understand,
has beaen the forerunner of sorrow and woe,
For every Presbyter,
Struck at the Myter,
Till they had gotten the world in a sting,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King,
The Scots did adventure at first to Rebel
And Englishmen quickly this Lesson did learn,
But Lucifer tumbled from Heaven to Hell,
because his ambition he would not discern,
And therefore be wary,
lest he ensnare ye,
That count Rebellion a plausible thing,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
The City of London was zealous and hot,
to manage the cause of the Scots government
For ten thousand soldiers they raised I wot;
to go a King catching it was their intent;
rich they would make him,
if they could take him,
Such fair pretenses through Britain did ring,
But Monck has confounned,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
Much like a Partridge the King they did chase,
from mountain to mountain they did him pursue
They quickly dispersed all the Royal race,
with their Loyal subjects, these Verses are true,
then any Layman,
Brewer or Dray-man,
Could make a Throne or a Pulpit to ring,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.


WHen with their base power they would conquered his friends
they quickly surprised the Kings Majesty,
These zealots Religion, was for their own ends,
their Oath of Allegiance they then did defy
a Scaffold erected,
Murder effected;
Heathens never acted so horrid a thing,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
But while these Rebels did thus tyrannize,
a terrible Governor quickly arose,
Although Kingly government they did despise,
'twas treason to meddle with Olivers Nose,
for he like a Hector,
was their Protector,
Rebels had shelter under his wing:
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
This Tyrants government lasted too long,
for Rebels in England did daily increase,
Yet none but poor Cavaleers suffered wrong,
while every Ass was made Justice of Peace,
and Cabys must stand sir,
with Cap in hand sir,
At their command sir, in every thing:
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
Worshipful Walton got Sommersome Park,
without any labor or taking of pains,
And Wagstaffe that Major was counted a Spark;
although he did live upon other men's means,
and Rainsborough nimble,
slighted his Thimble,
When Higham Park such profit did bring,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be Loyal and true to our King.
These pitiful fellows are all put to flight,
which thought that their pleasures would never have end
For they in ambition did take such delight,
there is many supposes they will be hanged ere they will mend
for they in their bravery,
acted such knavery,
Curbing true subjects in every thing,
but Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be loyal and true to our King,
I wish with my heart all the Kings enemies
both Rebels and Traitors on Tyborn may swing
That every moment do mischeef devise,
and cannot be content with a Protestant King,
Esquire Dun take them,
never forsake them
Until thou make them peep through a string,
now Monck has confounded,
each prick-eard roundhead,
Now let us be loyal and true to our King.
Composed by loyal T. J.
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Grove on Snow-hill.


