JUDGE BARKELY HIS PENITENTIAL COMPLAINT: Wherein he laments the Condition of
his present Imprisonment, and the late Corruptions of violated and enforced
JUSTICE.
WHat wonder's this, to hear a Term should be
Gone off, and yet Vacation still with me?
That I should own the leisure to rehearse
My Cause to the Stones, and plead my Griefs in Verse:
That I who balanced Right, and in her Scale
Did raise or sink her to make Wrong prevail,
Should now lie lost to Justice, and infer
My self an Exile to her Hall and her;
Should fear her sentence, and should hide my face
(Where once I sat) from her Tribunal place.
Judgment proves then most happy, when the Law
Of Truth and Goodness does the Conscience awe.
Nor can he quickly into danger fall,
Who to himself lives a law rational.
But when the shows of Honor or of Gain
Grow on the heart, and do corrupt the brain,
Reason does startle, and the affections straight
Prove conquered Captives to that golden bair.
Why should those thick and glittering spangles, that
Do dance in glory on the robes of State,
Trouble the knowing mind to gaze upon
Their flattering splendors, or to put them on?
But that is not all; for when that fatal Vice
(That Turk amongst Christians) sordid Avarice,
Leads her black Army up, and does begin
To make the heart and Usurer to Sin;
Then Peace, Religion, Safety, Justice, all
Who own to Grace or Honor, humbled fall
Before that tyrant Fiend whose irefull doom
Breaches naught but ruin, rage, and martyrdom,
Who bribes the Law, and what was made so strong
To speak our Right, makes Law to speak it Wrong.
These were my faults, made happy did they guest
But in one Inn, or lodged but in my Breast:
But when that Justice on her knees shall fall
To beg the Judge to do her right, and call
Her spotless Ermines to his eye, and wronged,
Desire that grace to have her Cause prolonged
Until some happy Parliament should raise
New strength to her unnerved hand, and praise
Her faint and laboring pulses, make her know
Holds she the Balance in her hand, or no,
To lend her eyes, and from their gracious tongues
Infuse new breath to her despairing lungs,
When Life and Honor lay upon the stake,
And Justice dumb, while Falsehoods tongue did ache,
My sadded blood sickens to whay, and while
That Right now laughes, I gratulate her smile.
That Hand of Justice which I down did bear,
Strikes now repentance through me, which no ear
Can hear and spare no griefs, nor passing by
Can any see but with a bleeding eye.
Let all my Laws he broken, let the wheel
Of Fortune split, and her Atturneyes reele.
It is a glad and happy sin would prove
It self reformed to every good man's love:
Thus much my penitence can do, but this
Is good begotten from too much amiss.
Though cold my hopes, and my more sad affairs
Do pull more winter on my snow-touch'd hairs,
I now learn Justice, patient I learn more
Then ere her Agent I performed before:
And shall decree what ever way she is bent,
Just is my fate, as just the Parliament.
Printed in the year 1641.


