A COPY of the Late King James II. HIS LETTER TO THE Convention in Scotland.
March 23. 168^. Imprimatur. James Fraser. JAMES R.
To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Commissioners of Shires and Buroughs
of Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, met or to meet at Our good Town of
Edinburgh.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHereas We have been informed, that you the Peers and Representatives of
Shires and Buroughs of that Our ancient Kindom, were to meet together at Our
good Town of Edinburgh some time in this Instant March, by the Usurped
Authority of the Prince of Orange, We think fit to let you know, that as we
have at all times Relied upon the Faithfulness and Affection of you Our ancient
People, so much that in Our greatest Misfortunes heretofore We had Recourse to
your Assistance, and that with good success to Our Affairs; so now again We
require of you to support Our Royal Interest, and expecting from you what
becomes Loyal and Faithful Subjects, Generous and Honest men, that you will
neither suffer your selves to be cajoled nor frightened into any Action
misbecoming true-hearted Scotsmen: and that to support the Honor of the
Nation, you will contemn the base Example of disloyal men, and eternize your
Names by a Loyalty suitable to the many Professions you have made to Us. In
doing whereof, you will choose the safest part; since thereby you will evite the
Danger you must needs undergo, the Infamy and Disgrace you must bring upon your
selves in this World, and the Condemnation due to the Rebellious in the next;
and you will likewise have the opportunity to secure to your selves, and your
Posterity, the Gracious Promises We have so often made of securing your
Religions, Laws, Properties, Liberties, and Rights; which we are still resolved
to perform, as soon as it is possible for Us to meet you safely in a Parliament
in that Our ancient Kingdom.

In the mean time fear not to declare for Us the Lawful Sovereign, who will not
fail in Our part, to give you such speedy and powerful Assistance, as shall not
only enable you to defend your selves from any Foreign Attempt, but put you in
a Condition to assert your Right against Our Enemies, who have depressed the
same, by the blackest of Usurpations, the most Unjust, as well as most
Unnatural of Attempts; which Almighty God may for a time permit, and let the
Wicked prosper, yet the End must bring Confusion upon such Workers of Iniquity.
We further let you know, That we will Pardon all such as shall Return to their
Duty before the last Day of this Month inclusive^ And that we will punish with
the rigor of Our Laws, all such as shall stand out in Rebellion against Us, or
Our Authority. So not doubting that you will Declare for Us, and Suppress
whatever may oppose Our Interest: And that you will send some of your Number,
with an Account of your Diligence, and the Posture of Our Affairs there, We bid
you heartily Farewell.

Given on Board the St. Michael, the First of March, 1689; and of Our Reign the
Fifth Year. By His Majesty's Command. MELFORT.

London: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old-Bailey. 1689.


