The Careless Gallant* Or, A farewell to Sorrow.
Whether these Lines do please, or give offense,
Or shall be damned as neither wit nor sense,
The Poet is, for that, in no suspense,
For it is all one a hundred years hence.
To an Excellent, and delightful Tune.




LEt us sing and be merry, dance, joke, and rejoice,
With Claret and Sherry, Theorbo and voice,
The changeable world to our joy is unjust,
All treasures uncertain,
Then down with your dust:
In frolicks dispose your pounds, shillings, and pence,
For we shall be nothing a hundred years hence.
We Will sport, and be free, with Frank, Betty, and Dolly,
Have Lobsters and Oysters to cure melancholy,
Fish-dinners will make a man spring like a Flea,
Dame Venus, loves Lady,
Was born of the Sea:
With her and with Bacchus we will tickle the sense,
For we shall be past it a hundred years hence.
Your beautiful bit, who has all eyes upon her,
That her honesty sells for a hogo of honor,
Whose lightness and brightness does cast such a splender,
That none are thought fit,
But the Stars to attend her;
Though now she seems pleasant, and sweet to the sense
Will be damnable moldy a hundred years hence.
Your greatest Grand-Seignior who rants it in riot,
Not suffering his poor Christian neighbors live quiet,
Whose numberless army that to him belongs,
Consists of more Nations,
Than Babel has tongues:
Though numerous as dust, yet in spite of defense,
Shall all lie in ashes a hundred years hence.
Your Usurer that in the hundred takes twenty,
Who wants in his wealth, and pines in his plenty,
Lays up for a season which he shall never see,
The year of one thousand,
Eight hundred and three;
Shall have changed all his Baggs, his houses and Rents,
For a worm-eaten Coffin a hundred years hence
The Second Part,
to the same Tune.




YOur Chancery-Lawyer, who by conscience thrives,
In spinning a suit to the length of three lives,
A suit which the Clyent does wear out in slavery,
whilst pleader makes conscience
a cloak for his Knavery:
Can boast of his cunning but in the present-Tence,
For Non est inventus a hundred years hence.
Then why should we turmoyl in cares and fears?
And turn our tranquillity to sighs and tears,
Let Us eat, drink, and play, e're the worms do corrupt us,
For I say, that
Post mortem nulla voluptas:
Let Us deal with our Damsels, that we may from thence
Have broods to suceed us a hundred years hence.
I never could gain satisfaction upon,
Your dreams of a bliss when we are cold as as a stone,
The Sages, call us Drunkards, Gluttons, and wenchers,
But we find such Morsels,
upon their own Trenchers:
For Abigal, Hannah, and sister Prudence,
Will simper to nothing a hundred years hence.
The Plush-coated Quack that his fees to enlarge,
Kills people with License, and at their own charge
Who builds a vast structure of ill gotten wealth,
from the degrees of a Piss-pot,
and ruins of health:
Though treasures of life he pretends to despence
Shall be turned into mummy a hundred years hence.
The Butterflye Courtier that Peagant of state,
The Mouse-trap of honor, and May Game of fat(...)
With all his ambitions, intrigues, and his tricks
must dye like a Clown,
and then drop into Stix;
His plots against death, are too slender a fence,
For he will be out of fashion a hundred years hence.
Yea, the Poet himself that so loftily sings,
As he scorns any subjects, but Hero's or Kings,
Must to the Capricio's of fortune submit,
and often be counted
a fool for his 'wit,
Thus beauty, wit, wealth, law learning, and senc(...)
All come to nothing a hundred years hence.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke (...)


