Iennies Answer to Sawny.
Wherein Loves Cruelty is requited, Or, The Inconstant Lover justly Despised.
Being a Relation how Sawney being Disabled and and turned out of Doors by the
Miss of London town, is likewise scorned and rejected by his Country Lass, and
forced to wander where he may

Jenny at at last in a most woeful case,
Is forced to leave the Patched and Painted face;
For money there rules all, and when it is gone,
The Cully is no longer writed on:
Down to his Jenny he does hye with speed,
But, she remembers his Ungrateful deed;
Nor will forgive though on his knees he fall,
So Mortified he is despised by all.
To the Tune of, Sawney will never be my Love again.




When Sawny left me he had store of Gilt,
but he has spent it in London Town;
And now is returned to his Sun-burn'd face,
his own dear joy in a Russet Gown:
He Is come for another Sark and Band,
and coakes's me for more of my Coin:
But I'se guid-faith, shall hold thy hand
For Sawny shall never more be mine.
Sawny rid home on a Running Nagg,
and fain would he have me gang to the ^ade,
But never was Scot in such a case,
with riding upon a London Jade,
But now he repents s'th Painted face,
and bans the Lewd Queans of London fine:
He fain would have let his Nag run a race
But Sawny shall never more be mine.
He now would Angle in my Fish Pond,
to quench those flames that scorch him so;
And would put it in with his own hand,
But let him gang where the North-wi^ds blow,
I'se be content with my former dream,
nor at his absence will I repine;
No more will I'se taste of his Curds and Cream.
For Sawny never more shall be mine.
But yet methought that I'se was sad.
to see poor Sawny look so forlorn;
To think what glee I'se once from him had,
and that Ise should now his kindness scorn:
Guide faith he look both pale and wan,
repenting that he had been so unkind:
And begged of me for a Sark and band,
But Sawny shall never more be mine.


He told me he would be now my Slave
and never more see London Town
But ganging with me should think it brave,
take more delight in my Russet Gown
Then in that filthy Copper Lace,
that covers Harl^ts void of Grace,
Pox'd and Patched with an Impudent face;
But Sawny shall never more be mine.
Guide faith I'se keep close my two-leav'd Book,
I'se will not trust him to gang between;
Less my Fish Pond is spoild with his Hook,
because he has ligg'd with a London Queen:
She having gulled him of all his store,
Bid him to gang and seek for more,
And now he is returned both maimed and poor;
But Sawny shall never more be mine.
Though he showed me the gay green tree,
on which he often had carved my name
Whilst Primroses I'se plucked hard by,
and made him Nosegays of the same:
Guide faith I'se smile to see him weep,
Because his promise he did not keen,
But with a Miss o'th Town did sleep;
Yet Sawny shall never more be mine.
I'se bid him gang from whence he came.
and to the London ^ort declare,
He had wronged me, and could not, for s^^^
to me for House or Land repair*
He told me that she was muckle Fag,
For when he had emptied his bag,
She sent him home with a running Nagg,
Yet Sawny shall never more be mine.
And that he did entreat her still,
but she was cruel and would not hear
Swearing she would poor Sawny kill,
if that he stayed any longer there:
Thus any e'ne may plainly see,
What he got by leaving of me,
And what the Queans of London be,
Yet Sawny shall never more be mine.
Thus may the Lasses see how I paid
him for his base inconstancy
Who for to ride on a London jade,
cockt up his Bonnet and gang'd from me
For which I shall requite him now,
And no more of his kindness allow,
But let him gang home to his Fathers Plow
For Sawny shall never more be mine.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball, near the Hospital-Gate in West
Smithsfied


