JAMES Duke of York and Albany, EARL OF ULSTER, Lord High ADMIRAL OF England,
Scotland and Ireland, CONSTABLE of DOVER-CASTLE, LORD WARDEN of the CINQVE
PORTS, And GOVERNOR of PORTSMOUTH, etc.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR The better Ordering His MAJESTY'S FLEET IN SAILING.
INSTR. I.
The Signal for Weighing by Day. As soon as the Admiral shall loose his
fore-top-sail, and fire a gun, every ship in the fleet is to make ready and
weigh, and being come to sail, to follow the Chief of their Squadron.

INSTR. II.
The Signal for Weighing by Night. If the Admiral shall weigh in the night, he
will fire one gun, and hang a light on the main-top-mast-shrowds above the
constant light in the main-top, which is to be answered by the Chief of every
squadron, and the respective ships to answer by a light on their main-tops,
which they are to take in when the Admiral takes in his from the
main-top-mast-shrowds, and not before.

INSTR. III.
To know the Admiral and all the Flag-Ships by their Lights. For the better
knowing and distinguishing each Squadron, and keeping company in the night,
notice is to be taken, That

1. The Admiral has three lights on his poop, and one on his main-top.

2. The Vice Admiral (or he who commands in chief in the second place) two on
his poop, and one on his main-top.

3. The Rere-admiral (or he who commands in chief in the third place) one on
his main-top, and one on his poop.

4. The Vice Admiral of each squadron, two on his poop.

5. The Rere-admiral of each squadron, one on his poop; but when the whole
fleet carry their lights, then the Rere-admiral of each squadron is to carry
two lights, the one hoisted a yard above the other on the Ensign-staff.

6. In case of foul weather and a dark night, each ship is to carry a light.

INSTR. IIII.
The Signal for Cutting or Slipping by Day. In case the Admiral would have the
fleet to cut or slip in the day, he will fire two guns, and loose his
fore-top-sail.

The Signal for Cutting or Slipping by Night. And if he would have the fleet to
cut or slip in the night, he will fire two guns, and hang a light in the
main-top-mast-shrowds, above the constant light.

INSTR. V.
The Penalty, of not Sailing, and Anchoring, each Ship in his own Squadron.
That all ships endeavor to sail in their own Squadrons, and if they happen to
be a stern of their Chief, they are to make what sail they can, and come up by
them; and if any one shall take in any sail, and not do his utmost to come up
with the chief of his Squadron, as aforesaid; or shall not endeavor to sail
and anchor in his own Squadron; he shall be tried at a Council of war, as a
neglecter of his duty. And the Flag-officers of each Squadron are to take
notice of such neglect, and to give an account thereof at the next meeting.

Provided always, First Proviso. The Signal for Springing a Leak by Day. 1.
That in case of springing a leak by day, under sail, or any disaster, whereby
any ship is disabled for keeping company in the day; such a ship is to make a
sign thereof by firing two guns distinctly one after another, and to hale up
his low-sails. Second Proviso. The Signal for Springing a Leak by Night. 2.
That in case of springing a leak, or other disaster, by night; such a ship is
to hang out two lights of equal height in the shrowds, and to fire guns.


INSTR. VI.
There must be no striving for Wind, or Place, either in Sailing or Tacking. In
sailing or tacking, every ship is to keep good order, and not to strive for the
wind or place one of another, upon any pretext whatsoever, whereby the least
prejudice or damage may come to any ship, or ships of the fleet: That is to
say, every Captain, Lieutenant, Master, Masters-mate, or Pilot of a ship of
lesser rank, is to give place to one of a greater; and if they be of one rank,
then the younger Captain is to give place to the elder: However, no Captain,
Lieutenant, Master, Masters-mate, or Pilot, is to stand or endeavor to take
the place or wind of another ship, (though of a lesser rank) so as damage may
ensue to either ship, The Penalty of striving for Wind, or Place, though it be
the elder Captain, or greater Ship.
upon pain of cashiering and losing their pay; as well the elder Captain, or
Captain of a better ship; as the younger Captain, or Captain of a less ship.

But in case any Commander of a less ship, or younger Captain, shall offer to
go to windward of his senior, or better ship, when it comes to the necessity
that one must give way or place to the other, then the Captain or Commander of
a better ship complaining, the Captain, The Penalty for a younger Captain, or a
less Ship, to go to windward of an elder Captain, or a greater Ship.
Lieutenant, Master, Masters-mate, or Pilot, so offending, shall for every such
first offense, forfeit three months wages, to be paid unto such persons as the
Admiral or Council of war shall appoint, to be disposed of for the relief of
wounded men widows, and orphans of the slain: And for every such second
offense, shall forfeit four months pay: And for every such third offense, be
cashiered, and lose his or their whole wages.

INSTR. VII.
None are to go to Windward of the Chief of their Squadron, unless in Chase or
Fight. In sailing at any time, no ships are to presume to go to windward of the
Chief of their Squadron, unless in chase or in fight; but to give due respect,
to come and speak with him, as often as they can conveniently: The Signal when
any Ship is to bear under the Stern of the Chief of his Squadron, and speak
with him.
And if the Chief of their Squadron come by the lee, and make a weft with his
Jack, then every ship of his Squadron is to bear under his stern, and speak
with him.

INSTR. VIII.
The several and respective Signals, by which the Admiral calls any Captains,
or other Commanders, on Board. As soon as the Admiral shall put abroad the
Union-flag in the missen-shrowds, and fire one gun, all the Captains in the
fleet are to repair on board the Admiral.

If an Ensign be put abroad in the same place, all the Masters of ships are to
repair on board, as aforesaid.

If the Standard be put in the same place, then the Flag-Officers only are to
repair on board, as aforesaid.

If a red flag, then all the Captains of the Admirals squadron are to repair on
board, as aforesaid.

If a white flag, then the Vice Admiral, and all the Captains of his squadron,
are to go on board, as aforesaid.

If a blew flag, then the Rere-admiral, and all the Captains of his squadron,
are to go on board, as aforesaid.

If a Standard be put on the Ensign-staff, the Vice Admiral and Rere-admiral of
the fleet only are to go on board.

If a white flag be put on the Ensign-staff, all the Captains of the frigots,
that carry thirty guns and upwards, are to go on board.

If a blew flag be put there, all the Captains of the frigots, and good
sailors, that carry under thirty guns, are to go on board.

If a red flag be put there, all the Captains of frigots, both small and great,
are to go on board.

If the Jack, colored with colors, be put there, all the Captains of ships,
that are not frigots, shall go on board.

If they are not in a capacity to go on board themselves, they are to send
their Lieutenants, or next Officers, to give an account thereof; and none are
to fail upon forfeiture of one days pay, to be paid presently.

INSTR. IX.
The Signal when any Ship desires to Speak with the Admiral. Whoever has a
desire to speak with the Admiral, shall spread a flag from the head of his
topmast down the shrowds, lowering his top-sail, (that it may be the better
discovered) and fire one gun.

INSTR. X.
The Signal for Tacking by Day. When the Admiral would have the sternmost ships
to tack before him, in the day, he will fire one gun, and take in his Ensign,
and put out a pendent on the staff: And if he would have any particular ship to
tack, he will fire one gun, and take in his Ensign, and put up the signal for
speaking with that ship.

INSTR. XI.
The Signal for Tacking by Night. If the fleet chance to tack in the night, the
Admiral will fire one gun, and put out two lights more then he had before, at
equal distance, one over another, on the poop; and each ship is to answer with
one light more than ordinary; which light is to be kept out, till the Admirals
lights be taken in.

And in what Order. And when the signals are thus given for tacking in the
night, by the Admirals and Flag-ships, the sternmost and leeward-most ships
must tack first, and so keep on with an easy sail, till the Admiral comes a
head again; and every ship is to keep in order in their own squadron.

INSTR. XII.
The Signal when any Ships lose Company, and meet again in the Day. If any
shall chance to lose company in the day time, and meet again, those to windward
shall (...)

And those to leeward shall (...)

The Signal for the same thing by Night. And if the same thing shall happen by
night, that they may the better know one another, he who hales shall ask, What
ship is that? And he who is haled, shall answer (...) And the other who first
haled, shall reply (...)

INSTR. XIII.
The Signal when the Admiral shall shorten Sail in the Night. If in case of
sailing in the night, it overblows, so that the Admiral shall think fit to
shorten sail, he will put out one light over the other on the poop; and each
ship is to answer with another light, beside what they had before; it being
understood, that in foul weather, and a dark night, each ship is to carry a
light.

INSTR. XIV.
The Signal when the Admiral lies a Trey in foul weather. If by reason of foul
weather it be thought fit by the Admiral to hand the fore-sails, and lie a
trey, he will show four lights of equal height, and the rest are to answer with
the like.

Signal when he lies a Hull. And if the Admiral shall at any time, think fit to
lie short, or a hull, in regard of foul weather, then will he show three
lights, one over another, on the main-shrowds, or where they may be most
conveniently seen.

Signal when any other Ship lies a Trey or a Hull. And it is to be noted, That
if any of the fleet have occasion to trey or hull, when the rest of the fleet
bear away, he is to fire one gun, and show the same number of lights, after the
manner here before expressed.

Signal when the Admiral Sails (after blowing weather) in the Night. When the
Admiral shall see cause to make sail in the night, after blowing weather, he
will shoot off two guns; which are to be answered by the Vice and Rere-admirals
of his own Squadron, with one gun: The Vice and Rere-admirals of the fleet, are
each of them to shoot off two guns; and each of their Vice and Rere-admirals,
one gun: And the Admiral will put out three lights, one over the other, in the
main-shrowds, according to the signal for shortning sail; which being answered
from every ship, he will take in.

INSTR. XV.
Signal when the Admiral alters his Course in the Night. If the Admiral shall
alter his course in the night, he will fire one gun, without alteration of
lights; which is to be answered by the Chief of every Squadron.

INSTR. XVI.
The Signal whereby the Admiral makes himself known in the Night, when he sees
not the Fleet. If in the night the Admiral should not see the fleet, and yet
would know where each ship is, he will put out two lights of equal height,
besides what he had before: And each ship is to answer with the like, and to
get as near as conveniently they can, to the chief of their squadron's lights.

INSTR. XVII.
Directions for the Fireships and small Ships of the Admirals Division, when
he Anchors in the open Sea. If at any time after sailing (being in the open
sea) the Admiral shall anchor, the fireships and small ships of his division
are to anchor a fair birth to windward of him; and to observe, and shift their
roads, as the wind shifts, (during the time the Admiral rides there) in case
the weather shall permit them.

INSTR. XVIII.
The Signal when the Admiral Anchors in the Night. If the Admiral chance to
anchor in the night, he will fire two guns, a small distance of time one from
another; to which his Vice and Rere-admirals are to answer, each with one gun:
The Vice Admiral of the fleet, with two; his Vice and Rere-admirals, each of
them with one: Then the Rere-admiral of the fleet, with two; and his Vice and
Rere-admirals, each of them with one: Whereby the chief ships of each squadron
may have convenient time to birth themselves, and the whole fleet may have
timely notice to dispose of themselves near their respective flags; so that
they may receive no prejudice one by another: And each ship is to answer with
two lights.

INSTR. XIX.
The Signal when any discovers Land, or Danger in the Night. If in the night
any one sees land or any danger, he who first discovers it, is to fire one gun,
and then to show as many lights as he can, and to bear away or tack from it.

INSTR. XX.
The Signals in a Fog. If it grow thick and foggy weather, and there be
sea-room enough, the Admiral will hale up his low-sails, and shoot every hour a
gun; which the flag-officers of the Admirals own squadron, are first to answer;
afterward, the Vice Admiral, and his flag-officers; then the Rere-admiral, and
his flag-officers; and all the rest of the fleet are to answer, with firing of
muskets, beating of drums, and sounding of trumpets.

Signal for Sailing in a Fog. If the Admiral make sail in a fog, he will fire
three guns one after another, and one every glass; which is to be answered by
the chief ships of each squadron; and the rest are to beat drums, shoot off
muskets, and sound trumpets, as before.

Signal for Tacking in a Fog. If the Admiral shall tack in a fog, or thick
weather, so that the Admiral cannot discern the whole fleet, he will fire four
guns immediately one after another; and the chief flags of the other squadrons,
are to answer, each of them with three; and to keep firing, as aforesaid.

Signal for Anchoring in a Fog. If the Admiral shall anchor in a fog, he will
do the same thing, as when he anchors in the night; for which see Instr. 18.

INSTR. XXI.
When the Captains, etc. come into any Port, etc. they are to supply themselves
with all Necessaries. When the Captains, and other Officers of the fleet, shall
come into any port or harbor, they shall endeavor to supply themselves with
water and ballast, and whatever else shall be necessary for sailing and fitting
their ships, and enabling them for present service. And to make and to keep
their Ships clean and sweet, especially between Decks.
They are likewise to be very careful to wash and make clean their ships, as
often as they shall have opportunity, especially between decks and in the hold;
to which end they shall hoist up all beef, pork, and beer-casks, on the upper
deck, and shake them there, that so no stench may go down into the hold.

INSTR. XXII.
If a strange Ship come into the Fleet, the Ships that are nearest, are to know
what she is. In case any ship or vessel, not of His Majesty's fleet, shall at
any time come into the fleet, and make toward the Admiral, or lie driving in
the fleet, or at anchor; those ships of His Majesty's fleet, which are nearest
to such a ship or vessel, are to send on board the said ship, to know what she
is, and to give an account thereof unto the Admiral; not permitting such a ship
or vessel to come to the Admiral, unexamined.

INSTR. XXIII.
If the Admiral fire at a strange Ship, the next Ship (under the Third Rate) is
to fire at her, and bring her to the Admiral. When the Admiral being at anchor,
shall fire a gun at any ship or vessel, approaching, passing by, or standing
away from him, or at anchor; any ship of the fleet, which shall then happen to
be nearest to that ship or vessel, at which the Admiral shall so fire, shall
also fire at, and endeavor to speak with the said ship, and bring the
Commander thereof to the Admiral: But if such a ship shall decline to be so
spoken with, and the Admiral shall think fit to fire three times at her, those
ships of His Majesty's fleet that are nearest (under the third rate) shall
immediately slip or cut their Cables, and use their best endeavor to bring
such a ship or vessel to the Admiral.

INSTR. XXIV.
The Signal for the Admiral of the White Squadron to send out Ships to Chase.
When the Admiral shall put forth a flag striped with red and white on the
fore-top-mast-head, the Admiral of the white Squadron shall send out ships to
chase; when on the missen-top-mast-head, Signal for the Admiral of the Blew to
send out Ships to Chase.
the Admiral of the blew shall send out ships to chase.

The Signal for any Ship of the Admiral's Division to Chase, excepting his Vice
and Rere-Admirals. If the Admiral would have any particular ship of his own
division (excepting his Vice and Rere-admiral) to chase, he will put a flag,
striped red and white, on that place, where the ordinary signal for speaking
with that particular ship, uses to be a pendent.

The Signal for the Vice Admiral of the Red to send out Ships to Chase. If a
flag striped red and white be spread upon the main-top-mast, under the
standard, the Vice Admiral of the red is to send out ships to chase.

The Signal for the Rere-Admiral of the Red to send out Ships to Chase. If the
same flag be hoisted on the Ensign-staff, the Rere-admiral of the red is to
send out ships to chase.

INSTR. XXV.
The Signal for giving over Chase. Upon firing one gun, and lowering the
main-top-sail of the Admiral, or Chief of the Squadron, every ship in chase
shall give over his chase: And when the Admiral does it, the chief of the
Squadron next to him or them, ought to do the like, whereby the signal may be
the more apparent.

INSTR. XXVI.
The Signals in case of discovering another Fleet by Day. If any one in the day
time chance to see a ship or ships, more than His Majesty's fleet, he is to put
abroad his Ensign, and there to keep it till the Admiral's is out, and then to
strike it as many times as he sees ships, and to stand with them, that so the
Admiral may know which way they are, and how many; but in case they be at such
a distance, that the Ensign cannot be well discovered, then he is to lay up his
head toward the ships or fleet which he so descrys, and to brayl up his
low-sails, and to continue hoisting and lowering his topsails, and making a
weft with his top-gallant-sail (if he has any) until the Admiral answers by
lowering his topsails, and making a weft with his top-gallant-sails.

The Signal in case of discovering a Fleet by Night. If by night, the signal is
by firing of guns, and making of many false fires, and putting out a light in
the main-top, and three on the poop, steering after them, and shooting off
guns; unless the Admiral keep out his lights, and steer away another course,
and fire one gun, two, or three, to call them off; in which case, they are to
leave the ships and fleet so descryed, and follow the Admiral.


