TO THE MOST EXCELLENT PRINCESS THE DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE.
MY Muse beggs pardon of your Grace, that she
Meets not an Epithet in Poetry
Which is yet Virgin; It sullies but your worth
When common words presume to blaze it forth,
As those of Fair, and Good, with such as these
Your meaner Meritt's lulled in Ecstasies.
Could I uncase the Chaste Lucretia's Soul,
Compared with yours it would appear but foul:
Or could I turn a Chemist, and from thence
Distill all Venus into Quintessence;
Of that extract the most sublime, and pure
Only deserves to shade your Portraicture.
Nature in your rich frame has run out all
The Stock, and Credit of her Principal,
Be charitable and lend her a recruit,
For your Perfections made her Bankerout.
She cannot run so deep upon the score,
But you have merit yet can furnish more.
In you is summed up all which Nature can
Glory (of Worth) in it is Perfection.
What since sh' has molded, only Copyes were
Of those fair Graces which concentered are
In You, from whom she now must borrow all
She boasts of here, as from the Original,
The Graces arn't alone, the Sciences too
The Honor have to be refined by You.
What cunning Aristotle darkly writ,
As with intent to Vizard-mask his wit;
Your Grace had drawn the Curtain, and we see
Into each crevice of his subtlety:
I dare presume he would your Grace should know
Henceforth he will walk no more Incognito.
The Conclave of the Muses next do own,
To You, the Honor due to Helicon.
The Poets too, amongst whom Ben humbly lays
At your fair feet his late usurped Bays:
For such he needs must call them, when to You,
And to your matchless Muse they are only due.
Orpheus does press me hard, but to present
Unto your Grace his sullen Instrument:
For since Y' have graced that Science w'th your hand,
He vows he never could a Charm command.
The residue of the Sciences would
Wait on your Grace did you not think them bold:
For without leave it may be thought no less
Then an Intrusion on their Patroness;
Waiting that Honor with your Poet stand,
And humbly beg to kiss your Graces hand.
By H. J. of Grays-Inne, Gent.
With Allowance,

Apr. 27. R. L' Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by Sarah Griffin, 1667.


