A SPEECH Made to His EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK And the COUNCIL of
STATE, At Fishmongers-Hall in LONDON.
The Thirteeth of April, 1660. At which time they were. Entertained by that
Honorable COMPANY.
Written by Tho. Jordan.
After a SONG of difference betwixt the Lawyer, the Soldier, the Citizen and
the Countryman.

The CHORUS being ended. Enter the Ghost of MASSIANELLO Fisherman of NAPLES.
IS your Peace just? What rock stands it upon?
Conscience and Law make the best Union.
If you gain Birthrights here by Blood and Slaughter,
Though you sing now, you will howl for ever after:
Trust my Experience, one that can unfold
The strangest truest Tale er'e was told,
In my degree, few men shall overtake me,
I was as great as Wickedness could make me;
This heart, this habit, and this tongue to boot
Commanded Forty thousand Horse and Foot,
In three weeks time, My fortune grew so high
I could have matched my Fishers Family
With the best Blood in Naples: Right and Wrong,
And Life and Doath attended on my Tongue,
Till (by a quick verticitie of Fate)
I find too son what I repent too late;
And, though a Rebel in a righteous clothing,
My glowworm glories glimmer'd into nothing.
Thus fell that Fisherman that had no fellow,
I am the Wandering Shade of Massianello;
Who, since I was into Perdition hurled,
Am come to preach this Doctrine to the world.
Rebels though backs with Power, and seeming Reason,
Time and Success, shall fell the fate of Treason.
But stay! (...)e looks up to the Picture of Sir William Walworth (who stabbed
Jack Straw) that hangs over the head of my Lord General.
what Picture's this hangs in my sight?
It Is valiant Walworth, the King-saving Knight:
That stabbed Jack Straw: Had Walowrth lived within
These four Months, where had Jack the Cobbler been?
It was a bold brave deed, and act in Season,
Whilst he was on the Top-branch of his Treason.
But from that Shadow, To the Lord General.
dropping down My eye,
I see a Substance of like Loyalty.
IF long renowned Walworth had the fate
To save a King, You have to save a State; A Paralle(...)

And, who knows what by Consequence? The Knight
By that brave Deed, gained every man his Right:
And you, by this, may gain each Man his due,
Not only Trusty Hearts, but Traitors too:
He drew blood, you did not; it is all one sense,
There Is but a Straws breadth in the difference:
He saved the Town from being burnt, and You
Have rescued it from Fire and Plunder too:
He was this Companies good Benefactor,
And You have been their Liberties Protector;
For which, I heard them say, they would engage
Their States, and Bloods, and Lives against all rage
That shall oppose Your just Designs: And that
You are the welcomst Guest, ever came at
This Table; they say, All they can exhibit
Is not so much a Treatment as a Tribute:
They call you the First step to England's Peace,
The True forerunner of our Happiness:
And, joined with these great Councillors, To the (...)cil of St (...)
You are
Our best Preservatives in Peace and War.
You have a Loyal Heart, a Lucky Hand,
Elected for the Cure of this Sick Land,
Who by Protectors and unjust Trustees,
Has been Enslaved, and brought upon her Knees:
We humbly pray this may be thought upon
Before the Kingdoms Treasure be quite gone:
And hope you will (though Envy look a squint)
When all is fit, Put a Just Steward in it.
Spoken by WALTER YOUKCNY. CHORUS.
Then may your fame outlive all Story,
And prove a Monument of Glory;
Kings and Queens (as Tribute due)
On their knees shall pray for You,
Whilst all True hearts confess with Tongue and Pen,
A Loyal Subject is the best of Men.
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid over against the Anchor Inn in Little Britain.
1660.


