To the HONORABLE Societies of GRAY'S- Inn, and of the rest of the Innes of
Court, and to all the Professors of the LAW.
I Have now spent forty five years in the Study of the Laws of this Land
being my profession, under and by the conduct of which Laws this commonwealth
has flourished for some ages past in great splendour and happiness (jam seges
est ubi Troja fuit) The great and full body of this Kingdom has of late
years fallen into an extreme sickness, it is truly said that the cause of the
disease being known, the disease is easily cured. There is none of you I hope,
but does heartily wish the recovery of our common parent, our native country
(Moribus antiquis statres Brittannica) I call God to witness that this discourse
of mine has no other end then my wishes of the common good: How far I have
been from Ambition, my life past, and your own knowledge of me, can abundantly
inform you, and many of you well know, that I ever detested the Shippe-mony,
and Monopolies, and that in the beginning of this Parliament, for opposing the
excesses of one of the Bishops, I lay under three Excommunications and the
Examination of seeventy seven Articles in the high Commission Court. His sacred
Majesty: (God is my witness) made me a Judge in the parts of Wales against my
will, and all the means I was able to make; and a patent for my place was sent
me for the which I have not paid one farthing, and the place is of so
inconsiderable a benefit that it is worth but 80. l. per annum when paid, and
it cost me every year I served twice as much out of mine own estate in the way
of an ordinary and frugall expense. That which gave me comfort was that I knew
well that his Majesty was a just and a prudent Prince.

In the time of the Attournyshipps of Master Noye and the Lord Banks, they were
pleased to make often use of me, and many referrences concerning suits at Court
upon that occasion came to my knowledge, and as I shall answer to God upon my
last account this is a truth, that all or most of the references which I have
seen in that kind (and I have seen many) were to this effect, That his majesty
would be informed by his Counsel if the suits preferred were agreeable to the
Laws, and not inconvenient to his people, before he would pass them. (what
could a just and pious Prince do more?) Gentlemen: you shall find the Cause
and the Curse of the present great distemper in this discourse, and God prsoper
it in your hands, thoughts, and words, as the Case deserves.

Hold to the Laws, this great body recovers: forsake them, it will certainly
perish. I have resolved to tender my self a Sacrifice for them as Cheerfully,
and I hope (by Gods assistance) as constantly as old Eleazer did for the holy
Laws of his Nation.

Your well-wisher DAVID JENKINS. Now Prisoner in the Tower.

Lex Terrae.
THE Law of this Land has three grounds. First Custom. Secondly Judicial
Records. Thirdly Acts of Parliament. The two latter are but declarations of the
Common-Lawe and Custom of the Realm, touching Royall-Government. And this Law
of Royall-Government, is a Law-Fundamentall.

The Government of this Kingdom by a Royal Sovereign, has been as ancient
as History is, The kings prerogative is a principal part of the common Law.
Com. Littl. 344.
or the memorial of any time; what power this Sovereignty always had and used
in War and Peace in this Land, is the scope of this discourse; That Usage so
practiced makes therein a Fundamental Law, and the Common-Lawe of the Land is
common Usage, Plowdens Commentaries. 195.

For the first of our kings sithence the Norman Conquest, the first William,
second William, Henry the first, Stephen, Henry the second and Richard the
first, the Customs of the Realm, touching Royal Government, were never
questioned: The said Kings enjoyed them in a full measure. In king John's time
the Nobles and Commons of the Realm conceiving that the ancient Customs and
Rights were violated, and thereuppon pressing the said King to allow them in
the seventeenth of King John, the said Liberties were by King John allowed, and
by his son Henry the third, after in the ninth year of his Reign confirmed,
and are called Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, declared four hundred
twenty two years sithhence by the said Charters.

Now rests to be considered, after the Subjects had obtained their Rights and
Liberties, which were no other then their ancient Customs (and the
fundamental Rights of the King as Sovereign are no other.) How the Rights of
Sovereignty continued in practice from Henry the thirds time until this
present Parliament of the third of November 1640. for before Henry the thirds
time, the Sovereignty had a very full Power.

Rex habet Potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regno suo sunt,
Hen. 3.
ea quae suut jurisdictionis and Pacis ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Regiam
dignitatem, Bracton temps H-3. lib. 4. cap. 24. Sect. 1.
habet etiam coercionem, ut Delinquentes puniat and coerceat; This proves where
the supreme power is.

A Delinquent is he who adheres to the Kings Enemies Com. Sur. Littl. 261.
This shows who are Delinquents.

Omnis sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum Deo, non est inferior sibi
Subjectis, Sect. 5. Bract. ibid.
non parem habet in Regno suo. This shows where the supreme power is.

Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, satis habet ad poenam quod Deum expectat
ultorem. Brrcton lib. 5. tract. 3. de defaltis Cap. 3. Bracton. Lib. 3. Cap, 7.
This shows where the supreme power is.

Treasons, Fellonies, and other Pleas of the Crown, are propriae causae Regis.
This shows the same power.

By these passages it does appear what the Custom was for the power of
Sovereignty before that time; the power of the Militia, of coining of Money, of
making Leagues with foreign Princes, the power of Pardoning, of making of
Officers, etc. All Kings had them, the said Powers huveno beginning.

Sexto Ed. 1. Edw. 1.
Com. sur. Littl. 85. Liege Homage, every Subject owes to the King (viz) Faith
de Membro, de vita, de terreno Honor, the form of the Oath inter vetera
statuta is set down; We read of no such, or any Homage made to the two
Houses, but frequently of such made by them.

It is declared by the Prelates, Earls, Barrons and Commonalty of the Realm,
7. Ed. 1. statuts at large fol 42.
that it belongs to the King and his Royal Segniory, straightly to defend
force of Armor and all other force against the Kings peace, at all times when
it shall please him, and to punish them that shall do contrary, according to
the Law and Usage of the Realm, and hereunto they are bound to aid their
Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here the supreme power in
the time of Parliament, by both Houses, is declared to belong to the King.

At the beginning of every Parliament, all Arms are, or ought to be forbidden
to be borne in London, Westminster, 7 Ed. 2. 4 pars instit. 14.
or the Suburbs. This condemns the multitudes coming to Westminster, and the
Guards of armed men.

All who held by Knights* service, 1 Ed 2. de Militibus.
and had twenty pounds per annum, were distraynable ad Arma militaria
suscipienda, This agrees with the Records of ancient time, continued constantly
in all Kings times, but at this Parliament 3. November 1640. The King, out of
his Grace, discharged this duty, which proves that the power of war and
preparation thereto, belongs not to the two houses, but only to the King.

The two Spencers in Ed. 2. time, hatched (to cover their Treason) this
damnable and damned opinion (viz.) Ed. 3. Calvin's Case Cook l. 7. fol. 11
That Ligeance was more by reason of the Kings politic capacity then of his
person, upon which they inferred these execrable and detestable consequences.
First, if the King demeaned not himself by reason in the right of his Crown,
his Lieges are bound by Oath to remove him. Secondly, seeing the King could not
be removed by suite of Law, it was to be done by force. Thirdly, that his
Lieges be bound to govern in default of him.

All which tenets were condemned by two Parliaments, the one called exilium
Hugenis in Ed. 2. time; the other by 1. Ed. 3. cap. 2. All which Articles
against the Spencers are confirmed by this last Statute, the Articles are
extant in the book called vetera Statuta. The separation of the Kings person
from his power, is the principal Article condemned, and yet all these three
damnable, detestable, and execrable consequents, are the grounds whereupon this
present time relies, and the principles whereupon the two Houses found their
Cause.

The V^lleine of a Lord, in the presence of the King, cannot be seized, Plowdon
Com. 322. 27. ass. pl. 49.
for the presence of the King is a protection for that time to him: This shows
what reverence the Law gives to the person of a King.

Reges, 33 Ed. 3. aid de Roy. 103. Fitz.
sacro oleo uncti sunt capaces spiritualis jurisdictionis. But the two Houses
were never held capable of that power.

Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, 10 H. 7.16.
habet Ecclesiasticam and spititualem jurisdictionem. This shows the Kings
power in Ecclesiastical Causes.

The Lands of the King are called in Law, Com. Sur. Littl. Sect. 4.
patrimonium sacrum. The Houses should not have meddled with that sacred
Patrimony.

The King has no Peer in his Land, 3 Ed. 3.19.
and cannot be judged: ergo The two Houses are not above him.

The Parliament of 15. Ed. 3. was repealed, for that it was against the Kings
Laws and Prerogative. 4. pars. instit. fol. 52. This shows clearly the
Propositions sent to Newcastle, ought not to have been presented to his
Majesty, for that they are contrary to the Laws and his Prerogative.

The Lords and Commons cannot assent in Parliament to any thing that tends to
the disinherison of the King and his Crown, 4 pars Cooks instit. fol. 14.42 E
3. Parliament Roll: number: 7: Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti.
to which they are sworn. This condemns the said Propositions likewise.

To depose the King, to imprison him until he assent to certain demands, A
war to alter the Religion established by Law, or any other Law, or to
remove Counselors, 25 Ed: 3. cap. 2
to hold a Castle or Fort against the King; are offenses against that Law
declared to be Treason by the resolutions herein after mentioned, by that Law
men are bound to aid the King when war is levied against him in his Realm.
King, in this Statute must be intended in his natural body and person that
only can die; for to compass his death, and declare it by overt Act is
declared there by Treason, To encounter in fight such as come to aid the King
in his wars, is Treason.

Compassing of the Queens death, of the Kings eldest son, to coin his
money, to counterfeit his Great-Seale, to levy war against him, to adhere to
such as shall so do, are declared by that Act to be high Treason. This Statute
cannot refer to the King in his politic capacity, but to his natural,
which is inseparable from the politic, for a body politic can have neither
wise nor child, nor levy war, 21 Ed. 4 14.
nor do any act but by the operation of the natural body: A Corporation or
body politic has no soul or life, but is a fiction of the Law, and the
Statute meant not fictitious persons, but the body natural, conjoined with the
public, which are inseparable.

The clause in that Act, R. 2. 11 anno cap. 13 4 pars instit. fol. 42
that no man should sue for grace or pardon for any offense condemned, or
forfeiture given by that Act, was repealed by a subs^quent Act in 21. R. 2,
holden unreasonable, without example and against the Law and custom of the
Parliament. This condemns the proposition for disabling the King to Pardon. 4.
pars instit. fol. 42. The Act of 11. R. 2. so much urged by the other side, was
an Act to the which the King consented, and so a perfect Act: yet Note the Army
then about the Town: Note that that Law is against private persons, and by the
3. cap. thereof, the Treasons there declared, are declared to be new Treasons
made by that Act, and not to be drawn to example, it was abrogated 21. R. 2.
and revived by an usurper 1. H. 4. to please the people, and by the tenth chap.
thereof enacts that nothing shall be Treason but what is declared by 25. Ed.
3, 16 R: 2: cap: 5.


The Regality of the Crown of England is immediately subject to God and to none
other. Plain words, H. 4
showing where the supreme power is.

The Commission of Array is in force and no other Commission Rot. Parlm. 5. H.
4. numb. 24. an Act not printed, this Act was repealed by 4 and 5. P. and M.
cap. 2. this repealed by the Act of 1. Jacobi and so it is of force at this
day, for the repealing Statute is repealed, 4. pars institn. fol. 51. and 125.
published sit hence this Parliament, by the desire of the house of Commons,
their Order is printed in the last leaf of the Commentaries upon Magna Charta.

Sir Edward Cook, by their party is holden for the Oracle of the Law, A book
allowed by Sir Not Brent, called the reason of the war: fol 95
who wrote the said fourth part, in a calm and quiet time, and I may say, when
there was no need to defend the authority of the Commission of Array.

For that objection, That that Commission leaves power to the Commissioners to
tax men secundum facultates, and so make all men's estates Arbitrary: the
answer is That in levying of public aids upon men's goods and estates, which
are variable, and probably cannot be certainly known by any but the owners, it
is impossible to avoid discretion in the assess^ments, for so it ever was, and
ever will be. By this appears that the votes of the two houses against the
Commission of Array, were against the Law.

The death of the King dissolves the Parliament, H. 5:
if Kings should refer to the politic capacity it would continue after his
death, 4. pars Inst. 46. which proves that the King connot be said to be there
when he is absent, as now he is: there is no interregnum in the kingdom the
dissolution of the Parliament by his death shows that the beginning and end
thereof refers to the natural person of the King and therefore he may lawfully
refuse the Propositions 2 H. 5. 4 pars instit. 46


2. H. 5. Chap. 6. to the King only it belongs to make Leagues with foreign
Princes; This shows where the supreme power is.

8. H. 6.
H. 6. numb. 57. Rott. Parl. Cooks 4. pars instit. 25. No privilege of
Parliamenr. is grantable for Treason Felony or Breach of the peace; if not to
any one member, nnot to two, not to ten, not to the Major part, 19. H. 6.62.
The law is the inherritanc of the King and his people by which they are ruled,
King and people; And the people are by the law bound to aid the king, And the
King has an inheritance to hold Parliaments and in the ayds granted by the
Commonalty. If the major part of a Parliament commit Trason they must not be
Judges of it, for no man or body, ean be Judge in his own cause, and as well as
ten or any number may commit treason, the greater number may as well.

The King by his letters pattents may constitute a County palatine and grant
Regal rights, 32. H. 6.13. Plowd. 334.
this shows where the supreme power is.

17. Ed. 4. rot. parl. numb. 39. Ed. 4.
No privilege of Parliament is grantable for Treason, Felony or Breach of the
peace, if not for one, not for two or more, or a major part.

The same persons must not be Judge and party. A corporat body can commit no
treason, Calvin's Case 7 pars. fol. 11.12.
nor can treason be committed against a corporate body, 21. E. 4, 13. and 14.
but the persons of the men who make that body may commit treason, and commit it
against the natural person of him who to some purposes is a body corporate,
but quatenus corporate no treason can be committed by or against such a body;
that body has no soul, no life, and subsists only by the fiction of the Law,
and for that reason the Law does conclude as aforesaid; therefore the stature
of 25. E. 3, must be intended of the Kings natural person conjoined with the
politic which are inseparable and the Kings natural person being at Holmby,
Plow. com. 213.
his politic is there also, and not at Westminster; for the politic and
natural make one body indivisible

If all the people of England should break the league made with a foreign
Prince, 19 Ed- 4.6.
without the Kings consent, the league holds and is not broken; and therefore
the representative body is inferior to his Majesty's.

The King may erect a Court of Common pleas in what part of the kingdom he
pleases by his letters pattents; 22 Ed. 4. Fitz. jurisdiction last placite.
can the two howses do the like? 1. Ed. 5. fol. 8. Ed. 5. 4 Ed. 4.25. 5 Ed. 4
29.
It cannot be said that the King does wrong, declared by all the Judges and
Serj^ents at law then there.

The reason is, nothing can be done in this Commonwealth by the Kings grant or
any other act of his, as to the subjects persons, goods, lands or liberties,
but must be according to established laws, which the Judges are sworn to
observe and deliver between the King and his people impartially to rich and
poor, high and low; and therefore the Justices and the Ministers of Justice
are to be q^stioned and punished if the Laws be violated: And no reflection to
be made on the King. All Counselors and Judges for a year and three months
nntill the tumults began this Parliament were all left to the ordinary course
of Justice, what has been done sithence is notorious.

For great Causes and considerations an act of Parliament was made for the
surety of the said Kings person; R. 3. 1 R. 3 cap. 15.
if a Parliament were so tender of King Rich. the 3. the howses have greater
reason to care for the preservation of his Majesty.

The Subjects are bound by their allegiance to serve the King for the time
being against every Rebellion, H. 7; 11 H. 7. cap. 1.
power and might, reared against him within this land, that it is against all
laws, reason and good conscience, if the King should happen to be vanquished,
that for the said deed and true duty and alligeance they should suffer in any
thing, it is ordained they should not: and all acts of process of law
hereafter to be made to the contrary are to be void, This law is to be
understood of the natural person of the King, for his politic capasity
cannot be vanquished; nor war reared against it.

Relapsers are to have no benefit of this Act.

It is no statute, 12 H. 7.20. H. 8. 24 H. 8. cap. 12. 25 H. 8. cap. 21
if the King assent not to it, and he may disassent, this proves the negative
voice.

The King has full power in all causes to do justice to all men this is
affirmed of the King, and not of the two Houses.

The commons in Parliament acknowledge no superior to the King under God, the
house of Commons confess the king to be above the representative body of the
Realm.

Of good right and equity the whole and sole power of pardoning treasons,
fellonies etc. belong to the King, 27 H. 8. cap 24. Note.
as also to make all Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Judges, Justices of the
peace etc. This law condemns the practice of both houses at this time.

The Kings royal assent to any act of Parliament signed with his hand
expressed in his letters Patents under the great Seal, 33. H. 8 cap. 21
and declared to the Lords and Commons shall be as effectual as if he
assented in his own person; a vain act if the King be virtually in the houses.

The King is the head of the Parliament, Dier 38. H. 8. ^^ 59.60.
the Lords the principal members of the body, the Commons the inferior
members, and so the body is composed, therefore there is no more Parliament
without a King, then there is a body without a head.

There is a corporation by the Common law, 14 H. 8. fol. 3.
as the King, Lords, and Commons, are a corporation in Parliament, and
therefore they are no body with out the King.

The death of the King discharges all mainprise to appear in any Court or to
keep the peace. 24 Ed. 3^48. 1 Ed. 4.2. 2 H. 4.8. 1 H. 7.10. 1 Ed. 5.1.


The death of the King discontinues all pleas by the common law which agrees
not with the virtuall power insisted upon now.

Writs are discontinued by the death of the King; Ed. 6. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 7.
Patents of Judges, Commission for Justice of the peace. Sheriffs Escheators,
determined by his death; where is the virtuall power?

All authority and jurisdictions spiritual and temporal is derived from the
King; therefore none from the houses. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2.


His Majesty's subjects, 2.3 Ed. 6. cap. 2.11 H. 7. cap. 1. Calvin's Case. Sa.
pars Cook.
according to their bounden duties, ought to serve the King in his wars, of
this side or beyond the seas; beyond the seas is to be understood for wages;
This proves the power of wars and preparation for war to be in the King.

It is most necessary ^oth for common policy and duty of the Subjects, 5.6 Ed.
cap. 11.
to restrain all manner of shameful slanders against their King, which when
they be heard, cannot but be odible to his true and loving Subjects, upon whom
depends the whole unity and universal weal of the realm. This condemns
their continuing of the weekly pamphlets who have beeue so foul mouthed
against his Majesty.

The punishment of all offenders against the Laws, Q. Mary.
belongs to the King, and all jurisdictions do, and of right ought to belong
to the King. 1 Mar. Pl 2.6.2
This leaves all to his Majesty.

All Commissions to levy men for the war, 4.5 P. and M. c. 3 Q. Eliz. 10
Eliz. Pl. 315
are awarded by the King. The power of war only belongs to the King.

It belongs to the King to defend his people, and to provide Arms and force.
No speech of the two houses.

Roy ad sole government de ses subjects. Corpse natural le Roy and politic
sont un corpse, Plow. 234.242 213. Calvin's Case 7. pars fol. 12. Plow. com. 213.
that is, The King has the sole government of his Subjects, the body politic
and the natural body of the King make one body, and not diverse, and are
inseparable and indivisible.

The body natural and politic make one body, and are not to be severed:
Plow. 934. 243 213. Calvin's Case 7 pars fo. 12.
Ligeance is due to the natural body, and is due by nature; Gods Law, and man's
law, cannot be forfeited nor renounced by any means, it is inseparable from
the person.

Every Member of the House of Commons, 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Cawdries
Case 5 pars fol. 1.
at every Parliament, takes a corporal Oath, That the King is the supreme and
only Governor, in all Causes, in all his Dominions, otherwise he is no member
of that House; the words of the Law are, In all Causes, over all persons.

The said Act of 1. Eliz. is but declarative of the ancient Law, 43 Eliz. 3
pars inst it. fo. 12.
Cawdries Case ibid.

The Earl of Essex, and others, assembled multitudes of men to remove
Counselors, adjudged Treason by all the Judges of England.

To depose the King or take him by force, 39 Eliz. Hill. 1 Jacobi ibid.
to imprison him until he has yielded to certain demands, adjudged Treason,
and adjudged accordingly in the Lord Cobhams Case.

Arising to alter Religion established, or any Law, 39 Eli. Brads. Case fol. 9
and 10. By all the Judges of England, ibid. 10 Eliz. Plow: 316,
is Treason; so for taking of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ports or shipping.
Brook treason 24.3. and 4. Philip and Mary, Dyer, Staffords Case concerning
Scarborough.

The Law makes not the servant greater then the Master, nor the subject
greater then the King, for that were to subvert Order and Measure.

The Law is not known but by Usage, 10 Eliz. Plow. 319.
and Usage proves the Law, and how Usage has been is notoriously known

The King is our only Rightful and Lawful Liege Lord and Sovereign, K. James
1 Jaco. cap. 1. 9 Ed: 4. fol. 8.
We do upon the knees of our hearts agnize constant Faith, Loyalty and
Obedience to the King and his Royal progeny, in this high Court of Parliament,
where all the body of the Realm is either in person or by representation: We
do acknowledge that the true and sincere Religion of the Church, is continued
and established by the King, And do recognize, as we are bound by the Law of
God and Man, the Realm of England and Imperial Crown thereof does belong to
him by inhaerent byrthright, and lawful and undoubted succession, and submit
our selves and our posterities for ever, until the last drop of our blood be
spent, to his rule; and beseech the King to accept the same as the first fruits
of our Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his Posterity for ever, and for
that this Act is not complete nor perfect without his Majesty's assent, the
same is humbly desired. This proves that the Houses are not above the King;
that Kings have not their titles to the Crown by the two Houses, but by
inhaerent byrth-right, and that there can be no Statute without his express
assent, and destroys the chymera of the Kings virtuall being in the Houses.

To promise obedience to the Pope, 3 Jac. cap" 4: 23 Eliz cap: 1.
or any other State, Prince or Potentate, other then the King his Heirs and
Successors, is Treason; And therefore those persons who call the Houses the
Estates offend this Law.

Such Bills as his Majesty is bound in Conscience and Justice to pass, K.
Charles Collection of Ordinances fo. 727. 1 pgrs. ibid. fol. 728.
are no Law without his assent.

To design the ruin of the Kings person, or of Monarchy is a monstrous and
injurious charge.

Vbi Lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum, ibid. fol. 865.
all the aforesaid Acts and Laws do evidently prove the Militia to belong to
the King: that the King is not virtually in the two houses: that the King is
not considerable separately in relation to his politic capacity: that the
King is not a person trusted with a power, but that it is his inherent
byrth-right, from God, nature and law, and that he has not his power from the
people: These Laws have none of those distinctions of natural and politic,
abstractum and concretum, power and person, in Caesar's time this Island had
Kings, and ever since, which is almost 17 hundred years ago.

No King can be named, in any time, made in this kingdom by the people: A
Parliament never made King, for they were Kings before, the Parliaments are
summoned by the Kings Writts, which for Knights Citizens and Burgesses begins
thus, viz.

Rex vic. Wilts. Saltem. Quia Nos de avisamento and assensu Consilij nri. pro
quibusd. arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem Regni nri.
Angl. and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum nrum. apud
B. teneri ordinavimus and ibid. cum Praelatis magnatibus and proceribus dicti
Regni nri. Colloquium habere and tractatum, ipsi vicecomiti pre^ipimus firmiter
injungendo quod facta Pro clamatione in proximo Comitatu tuo post recepsionem
ejusd. brevis, duos Milites gladiis ^inctos, etc. eligi facias ad faciendum and
consentiendum hiis quae tun^ ibidem de Communi Concilio nro. Angliae faventi
Deo contigerit ordinari super negotiis antedictis ita quod pro defectu
potestatis hujusmodi sen propter improvidam electionem Milium, Civium, and
Burgensium pred. dicta negotia nra. infecta non remanerent.

The King is Principium, Caput and finis Parliamenti, 4 pars instit. fol. 3 and
4.
the body makes not the head, nor that which is posterior that which is prior:
Concilium non est Preceptum, Conciliarij non sunt Praeceptores, for Council to
compel a consent, has not been heard of to this time in any age, and the
house of Commons, by the Writ, are not called ad Concilium; the Writts to the
twelve Judges, Kings Council, twelve Masters of the Chancery are Concilium
impensuri, and so of the Peers. The Writts for the Cominalty, Ad faciendum and
consentiendum. Which shows what power the representative body has, they have
not power to give an oath, neither do they claim it.

The King at all times, when there is no Parliament, The Oath of the Justices
18 of Ed. 3. among Statutes of that year.
and in Parliament is assisted with the advice of the Judges of the Law,
twelve to uumber, for England at least has two Sergeants when fewest: an
Attorney and Solicitor, twelve Masters of the Chancery, his Council of State,
consisting of some great Prelates and other great Personages, versed in State
affairs, when they are fewest to the number of twelve. All these persons are
always of great substance, which is not preserved but by the keeping of the
Law, The Prelates versed in divine Law, the other Grandees in affairs of
State and managery of Government, The Judges, Kings Sergeants, Attorney,
Solicitor, and Masters of the Chancery versed in the Law and Customs of the
Realm: All sworn to serve the King and his people justly and truly, the King
is also sworn to observe the Laws, and the Judges have in their Oath a
clause, That they shall do common right to all the Kings people, according to
the established Laws, notwithstanding any command of the King to the contrary,
under the Great Seal or otherwise, The people are safe by the Laws in force
without any new: The Law finding the King of this Realm assisted with so many
great men of Conscience, Honor and skill in the rule of Commonwealth,
knowledge of the Laws, and bound by the high and holy bond of an Oath upon the
Evangelists, settles among other powers upon the King, a power to refuse any
Bill agreed upon by both Houses, and power to pardon all offenses, to pass any
Graunts in his Minority, (there are many great persons living hold many a
thousand pound a year by Patents from Edward the sixth, passed when he was
but ten years of age) not to be bound to any Law to his prejudice, whereby
he does not bind himself, power of war and peace, coining of Money, making
all Officers, etc. The Law, for the reasons aforesaid, has approved these
powers to be unquestionable in the King, and all kings have enjoyed them till
3. Nov. 1640.

It will be said notwithstanding all this sense about the Laws, the Laws
have been violated, and therefore the said powers must not hold, the two
Houses will remedy this.

The answer to this is evident: There is no time past, nor time present, nor
will there be time to come, so long as men manage the Law, but the Laws
will be broken more or less, as appears by the story of every age. All the
pretended violations of this time were remedied by Acts to which the King
consented before his departure 10. Jan. 1641* being then driven away by
Tumults. And the Houses for a year and almost three Months: From 3. Nov.
1640. to 10 Jan. 1641. as aforesaid, being a year and almost three months,
had time and liberty to question all those persons who were either causes or
instruments of the violation of any of the Laws.

Examine how both Houses remedied them in former times. First, touching
Religion, What has been done this way? Both Houses in Henry the eights time
tendered to him a Bill to be passed called commonly the Bill of the six
Articles, this was conceived by them to be a just and a necessary Bill: had
not Henry the eighth done well to have refused the passing of this bill? both
houses tendered a bill to him to take the reading of the Scriptures from most of
the laity: had not King Henry the eight deserved much praise to reject this
bill? In Queen Maryes time both houses exhibited a bill to her to introduce
the Popes power and the Roman religion; had not Queeene Mary don well to have
refused this bill? Many such instances may be given. The two Houses now at
Westminstar I am sure will not deny but the refusal of such bills had been
just, the King being assisted as aforesaid, and why not so in these times?

For the Civil Govrnment what a Bill did both houses present to Richard the
third to make good his title to the Crown; had it not been great honor to
him to have rejected it? what bills were exhibited to Henry the eighth by both
houses for bastardizing of his daughter Elizabeth, a Queen of renowned memory,
to settle the Crown of this Relme for default of issue of his body upon such
persons as he should declare by his letters Patents or his last will, and many
more of the like? had not this refusal of passing such bills magnified his
virtue and rendered him to posterity in a different Character form what he now
has?

And by the experience of all times and the consideration of human frailty this
conclusion is manifestly deduced, that it is not possible to keep men at all
times (be they the houses, or the King and his council) but there will be
sometimes some deviation from the laws, and therefore the constant and certain
powers fixed by the ancient law must not be made void, and the Kings
Ministers^ the Laws do punish where the Law is transgressed, and they only
ought to suffer for the same.

In this Parliament the houses exhibited a bill to take away the suffrages of
the Bishops in the upper house of Parliament, and have sithence agreed there
shall be no more Bishops at all, might not the King if he had so pleased have
answered this bill with Le Roy s'avisera, or ne veult: it was against Magna
Charta; Articuli Cleri and many other acts of Parliament. And might have
farther given these reasons if it had so pleased him for the same: first that
this Bill destroys the writ whereby they are made two houses of Parliament
the King in the writ to the Lords being Cum praelatis Colloquium habere;
secondly they have been in all Parliaments since we had any, and voted, but in
such wherein they themselves were concerned: And there have been Bishops here
sithence we were Christians, and the fundamental law of the kingdom approves
of them: if any of them were conceived offensive; they were left to justice,
and his Majesty would put in in-offensive men in their places: but sithence
his Majesty has passed the Bill for taking away their votes in Parliament, it
is a law that binds us so far.

Upon the whole matter the law has notably determined that Bills agreed by
both houses, pretended to be for the public good, are to be j^dged by the
King, for in all Kings reigns Bills have been preferred by both houses, which
always are pretended to be for the public good, and many times are not, and
were rejected with Roy s'avisera or Roy ne veult.

This Parliament begun the third of November 1640 before that time in all the
Kings reign no armed power did force any of the people to do any thing against
the law: what was done, was by his Judges, officers Referees and Ministers from
that time until the tenth of January 1641 (when the King went from London to
avoid the danger of frequent tumults, being a year and three months, Privy
Counselors and all his Justices and ministers were left to the Justice of the
law, there wanted no time to punish punishable men.

The Sphaere of the house of commons is to represent the grievances of the
Country, to grant aids for the King upon all fit occasions extraordinary, to
assent to the making or abrogating of laws: The Orb of the house of Lords to
Reform eronious judgments given in the kings Bench, to redress the delays of
Courts of Justice, to receive all petitions, to advise his Majesty with their
council, to have their votes in making or abrogating of Laws, and to propose
for the common good, what they conceive meet,

Lex non cogit ad imposibilia, subjects are not to expect from Kings impossible
things, so many Judges, Counselors, Sheriffs, Justices of the peace,
Commissioners, Ministers of State, that the King should over look them all
cannot be, it is imposible.

The King is virtually in his ordinary Courts of Justice; so long as they
continue his Courts: their charge is to administer the laws in being, and not
to delay, defer or sell justice for any commandment of the King. We have
Laws enough instrumenta boni saeculi sunt boni viri, good ministers, as judges
and officers are many times wanting, the houses propose new Laws, or
abrogation of the old; both induce novelty: the law for the reasons aforesaid,
makes the King the only judge, who is assisted therein by a great number of
grave, learned and prudent men, as aforesaid.

For the considerations aforesaid the Kings party adhered to him, the law of
the Land is their byrth-right, their guide, no offense is committed where that
it is not violated: they found the commission of Array warranted by the law;
they found the King in this Parliament to have quitted the Ship money,
Knighthood-money, seven Courts of Justice, consented to a trienniall
Parliament, se^led the Forest bounds, took a way the Clerk of the Market of
the household, trusted the house with the Navy, passed an act not to dissolve
this Parliament without the houses assent; no people in the world so free if
they could have been content with Laws oaths and reason, and nothing more
could or can be devised to secure us, neither has been in any time.

Notwithstanding all this we found the King driven from London by frequent
tumults, that two thirds and more of the Lords had disserted that house, for
the same cause, and the greater part of the house of Commons left that house
also for the same reason: new men chosen in their places, against law, by the
pretended warrant of a counterfeit Seal; and in the Kings name against his
consent, levying war against him, and seizing his Ports, Forts, Magazines and
Revenue, and converting them to his destruction and the subversion of the law
and land, laying taxes on the people never hard of before in this Land; devised
new oaths to oppose forces raised by the King, not to adhaere to him, but to
them in this war which they call the Negative Oath, and the Vow and Covenant.

By several ways never used in this kingdom they have raised moneys to
foment this warte, and especially to enrich some among them, namely first
Excise, secondly Contributions, thirdly Sequestrations, fourthly Fifth Parts,
fifthly Twentieth Parts, sixthly Meale-mony, seventhly Sale of Plundered goods,
eighthly Loanes, ninthly Benevolences, tenthly Collections upon their
Fast-dayes, eleventhly new Inpositions upon Marchandizes, twelvethly Guards
maintained upon the charge of private men, thirteenthly Fifty Subsidies at one
time, fourtenthly Compositions with such as they call delinquents, fiftenthly
Sale of Bishops lands etc-

From the Kings party means of susistance are taken; before any indictment
their Lands seized, 1 R. 3. cap. 3. Bract li. 3. c. 8. Stanford. 192. Sir Ger.
Fleetwoods Case. 8. pars Cook 7. H. 4. last leaf.
their goods taken, the law allows a Traitor or Fellon attainted, Necessaria
sibi and familiae snae in victu and vestitu where is the covenant? where is the
petition of right? where is the liberty of the subject?

Frst We have aided the King in this war contrary to the negative oath and
other votes, Our warrant is the twenty fifth of Edward the third, the second
Chapter, and the said resolutions of all the Judges.

Secondly We have maintained the Commission of Array by the Kings Command,
contrary to their votes: We are waranted by the statute of the fifth of Henry
the fourth and the judgment of Sir Edward Cook, the Oracle of the Law as they
call him.

Thirdly We maintained Archbishops and Bishops whom they would suppress. Our
warrant is Magna Charta and many statutes more.

Fourthly We have maintained the book of common prayer, they suppress it, Our
warrant is five Acts of Parliament in Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabets time
5. Peschae. 35. Elizabeth inter placita Coronae in Banco Regis; New book of
Entries fol. 252. Penry for publishing two scandalous Libels against the Church
government, was indicted arraigned attainted and executed at Tyburne.

Fifthly We maintained the Militia of the kingdom to belong to the King, they
the contrary, Our warrant is the statute of the seventh of Edward the first and
many statutes sithence, the practice of all times, and the custom of the Realm.

Sixthly We maintained the counterfeiting of the great Seal to be high
Treason, and so of the usurpation of the Kings Forts, Ports, Shipping, Castles
and his Revenue, and the Coining of money, against them; We have our warrant
by the said statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, Chapter the second
and diverse others since, and the practice of all times.

Sevenethly We mintayne that the King is the only supreme governer in all
caus^s. They that his Majesty is to be governed by them, Our warrant is the
statutes of the first of Q. Eliza. Chapter the first, and the fifth of Q.
Elizabeth Chapter the first.

Eighthly We maintain that the King is King by an inhaerent birthright, by
nature, by gods law, and by the law of the land, 9 Ed. 4. sol. 4.
They say his Kingly right is an office upon trust, Our warrant is the statute
of the first of king James, Chapter the first. And the resolution of all the
Judges of England in Calvin's case.

Nynthly We maintain that the politic capacity is not to be severed from the
natural. They hold the contrary: Our warrant is two statutes (viz.) Exilium
Hugonis in Edward the seconds time, and the first of Edward the third, Chapter
the second, and their Oracle who has published it to posterity, that it is
damnable, detestable and execrable treason, Calvin's Case pars 7. sol. 11.

Tenthly We maintain that who aids the King at home or abroad ought not to
be molested or questioned for the same, They hold and practice the contrary.
Our warrant is the statute of the eleventh of Henry the seventh, Chapter the
first.

Eleventhly We maintain that the King has power to disassent to any Bill
agreed by the two houses; which they deny. Our warrant is the statute of the
second of Henry the fifth, and the practice of all times, the first of King
Charles, Chapter the seventh, the first of King James Chapter the first.

Twefthly We maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in a grave and
peaceable manner, without tumults They allowed multitudes of the meaner sort of
people to come to Westminster to cry for Justice when they could not have their
will, Coll. of Ord. fol. 31.
and keep guards of armed men to wait upon them. Our warrant is the statute
of the seventh of Edward the second and their Oracle.

Thirteenthly We maintain that there is no state within this kingdom but the
Kings Majesty, and that to adhaere to any other state within this kingdom is
high Treason. Our warrant is the statute of the third of King James Chapter the
fourth, and the twenty third of Q. Eliza. Chapter the first.

Fourteenthly We maintain that to leavy a war to remove Councillors, to
alter Religion, or any Law established, is high treason, They hold the
contrary. Our warrant is, the resolutions of all the Judges of England in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and their Orracle agrees with the same.

Fiftteenthly We maintain that no men should be imprisoned, put out of his
lands, but by due course of Law, and that no man ought to be adjudged to death
but by the law established, the customs of the Realm, or by Act of Parliament;
They practice the contrary in London, Bristoll, Kent etc. Our warrant is Magna
Charta Chapter the twenty ninth, the Petition of right. the third of King
Charles, and diverse laws there mentioned.

We of the Kings party did and do detest Monopolies, and ship money, and all
the grievances of the people as much as any men living, we do well know that
our estates lives and fourtunes are preserved by the laws, and that the King
is bound by his laws, we love Parliaments If the Kings, Judges, counsel or
ministers have done a miss, they had from the third of November 1640 to the
tenth of January 1641, time to punish them, being all left to Justice; Where is
the Kings fault?

The Law says the King can do no wrong, that he is medicus regni, pater
patriae, spousus regni, 11 pars. Cooks Reports. Magdalen College Case
qui per anulum is espoused to his Realm at his Coronation; the King is Gods
Lieutenant, and is not able to do an unjust thing, These are the words of the
law.

One great matter is pretended that the people are not sure to enjoy the acts
passed this Parliament, A succeeding Parliament may repeal them; The objection
is very weak, a Parliament succeeding to that may repeal that repealing
Parliament. That fear is endless and remediless, for it is the essence of
Parliaments being complete and as they ought to be, of head and all the
members, to have power over Parliaments before; Parliaments are as the time
are; if a turbulent faction prevails; the Parliaments are wicked, as appears
by the examples recited before of extreme wicked Parliaments: if the times be
sober and modest, prudent and not biased, The Parliaments are right, good and
honorable, and they are good Medicines and salves, but in this Parliament
excessit medicina modum.

In this cause and war between the Kings Majesty and the two houses at
Westminster, what guide had the subjects of the land to direct them but the
Laws? What means could they use to discern what to follow, what to avoid
but the Laws? The King declares it Treason to adhere to the Houses in this
war: The Houses declare it Treason to adhere to the King in this War. The
Subjects for a great and considerable part of them (treason being such a crime
as forfets life and estate and also renders a man's posterity base beggarly and
infamons) look upon the Laws, and find the lettr of the law requires them to
assist the King, as before is manifested, was ever subject criminally punished
in any age or nation for his pursuit of what the letter of the Law commands?

The Subjects of the kingdom find the distinction and interpretation now put
upon the Laws of Abstractum and Concretum, Power and Person, body politic,
and natural, Personal presence and virtuall, to have been condemned by the
law: And so the Kings party has both the letter of the law and the
interpretation of the letter cleared to their judgments, whereby they might
evidently perceive what side to adbaere to, what satisfaction could modest
peaceable and loyal men more defire?

A verbo legis in criminibus and poenis non est recedendum, has been an
approved maxim of law in all ages and times. If the King be King and remain in
his Kingly office (as they call it) then all the said laws are against them
without color: Coll of Ordinances 777.
they say the said laws relate to him in his office, they cannot say
otherwise, Commissions and pardon in the Kings name, and the person of the King
and his body politic cannot, nor ought to be severed as has been before
declared: 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
And the members of both houses have sworn constantly in this Parliament that
the King is the only supreme Governor in all causes over all persons at this
present time.

For that of verbal or personal commands of the King which is objected, We
affirm few things to be subject thereto by the law: But his Majesty's Command
under his great Seal, which in this war has been used by the Kings command
for his Commission to leavy and array men, that is no personal command (which
the law in some cases disallowes) but that is such a command, so made, as all
men hold their lands by, who hold by Patents; All corporations have their
Chartera which hold by Charters, and all Judges and officers their places and
callings.

7 pars The Earl of Westmerlands Case. 1 Eliz. Dier 165. 7 pars Cook.


abuser or non user cease to be courts of Justice; when Judges are made and
proceedings in those courts holden by others then Judges made by the King, and
against his command under the great Seal, and his Majesty is not obeyed, The
case of discontinuance of Process.
but the votes of the houses, they cease to be the Kings Courts and are become
the Courts of the houses, and his Judges breaking that condition in law, of
trust and loyalty, implied in their Patents, are no longer his Judges; they
obey and exercise their places by virtue of writts and processes under a
counterfeit Seal. The King only can make Judges, the twenty seventh of Henry
the eighth, Chapter the twenty fourth, Justices of the Peace, etc. twenty
eighth of Henry the eighth Dier the eleventh, the Kings Patent makes Judges:
The chief Justice of the Kings Bench is made by the Kings writ only of all
the Judges.

The great Seal is the key of the kingdom, Avticuli super chartas cap. 5.
and meet it is that the King should have the key of his kingdom about him; 2
pars instit 552. which confutes their saying that the King got the Seal away
surreptitiously.

The King, and he only, may remove his Courrs from Westminster into some other
place, Britton sol. 23.
at York the Terms were kept for seven years, in Edward the sirst's time:
but for the Court of Common pleas, the place must be ceataine; for the Kings
Bench and Chancery, the King by the law may command them to attend his person
always if it seem so meet unto him: but the removing of the Common pleas
must be to a place certain, and so notified to the people.

All the books of law in all times agree, 34. Assis. pl. 24. 22 Ed. 4. Fitz:
jurisdiction last placit. 6 H. 7.9. 6 Eliz. Dier 226.
that the King may grant couusance of all Pleas at his pleasure within any
County or precinct to be holden there only, and remove the Courts from
Westminster to some other place (for the Common Pleas, the place must be
certain and so notified to the people) and adjourne the terms as he sees
cause. All which the two houses have violated. Plebs sine lege ruit.

Some seeming objections of Master Prinn's, seettered in diverse books, answered
and the truth thereby more fully cleared.

Henry the fourth reviveth the statute of the eleventh of Richard the second,
and repeales to the twelfth of Richard the second, whereby certain persons
were declared traitors to the King and kingdom, being of the Kings party.

Richard the second, A Parliament beset with 40000 men, and the King assents to
it, so an Act, and besides the first of Henry the fourth declares that that
treasons mentioned in the act of the eleventh of Richard the second, being but
against a few private men shall not be drawn into example, and that no Treason
should be but such as the twenty fist of Edward the third declares. 9 Ed. 4.
fol. 80.
All these are Acts passed by the King and the three estates, not to be drawn
into example in a tumultuous time, by a besieged Parliament, with an army, and
the confirmer (...) Henry the fourth being an usurper makes that act of the
first of Henry the fourth to secure himself. Also what is this to the votes of
the two houses only at this time.





By the same reason you may say that the Courts of Chancery, or any of the
Courts of law at westminster are above the King, for they make of no effect the
Kings Charters, which are passed against the law: and the King is Subject to
law, and sworn to maintain it. Again it is no Parliament without the King,
and the King is the head thereof, he is principium Caput and finis of a
Parliament as Medas tenendi Parliament. has it, and two houses only, want
principium Caput and finis of a Parliament and it is a sorry Parliament that
wants all these. And therefore to say that Parliaments are above the King, is
to say that the King is above himself.





Bracton says God, the Law, and the Kings Court (viz) his Earls and Barrons
are above the King. (viz) in Parliament, as Master Prinne expounds it,

Prinns discourse, who attributes so much to the house of Commons.



Cook their Oracle in his Chapter of Parliaments, Folio the first.



Besides the Corporations are so constituted by the Kings Charters, that the
greater number of votes shall make their Acts valid.





Sovereign power of Parliaments. 46.47.
rests not in the King, but in the kingdom and Parliament which represents it.

Prinne in the same lease affirms, and truly, that the Kings assent is
generally requisite to pass laws and ratify them, the King is the head of
the kingdom and Parliament, how then can a body act without a head?











de facto must be obeyed by them who submitted to him, and they are his
Subjects by their submission, and not Subjects defacto to the true King, 9 Ed.
4.12.
and such being Traitors and Rebels to the regent King (having renounced the
true King) when the lawful Kings is restored, may be punished by him for their
treason against the usurper. But here is a King still in both cases, and the
proceedings at law holds; The Judges having their patents from the being Kings,
in the reigns of Kings, de facto or dejure, for all Kings are bound and sworn
to observe the laws.

non Compos mentis etc. the two honses may establish Laws. go

Inter-regnum in England, as appears by all our books of law, and therefore the
dying without Heir is a Vain supposition, and by their principle he is
considerable in his politic capacity, which cannot die at all: The protector
assisted by the Council of the King at law, his twelve Judges, the council of
state, his Attorney, Solicitor and two Sergieants at law, his twelve Masters of
the Chancery, has in the Kings behalf and ever had, a negative Voice; but
what is this to the present question; We have a King of full age, of great
wisdom and judgment, The power of the two houses in such a case to be over
the King cannot be shown.





justas leges and consuetudines quas vulgas elegerit. go

James. Chapter the first and all our extant laws say, that the Kings office
is an heritage inhaerent in the blood of Our Kings and their byrth-right.

And usurpers that come in by the consent of the people, 1 Ed. 4. cap. 1.
are Kings de facto but not de jure as appears by the acts of Parliament
declaring them so. And by all our law books and the fundamental constitution
of the Land, Regal power is herditary and not elective.

For the words (vulgus elegerit) if vulgus be applied to the house of commons,
1 H. 7.
they if themselves can make no laws? The Peers were never yet termed vulgus,
but allowing they be so called, the laws to be made must be just and who is
fit to judge thereof is before made evident.



Princes have been deposed, and may be by the two houses. go

Cook Chapter: Treason in the second part of the Institutes. And never was
King deposed but in tumultuous and mad times, and by the power of Armies, and
they who were to be the succeeding Kings, in the head of them, as Edward the
third and Henry the fourth.



Parliament: the house of Commons have nothing to do therewith and in the
house of Peers, if a writ of error be brought to reverse any judgment. There
is first a Petition to the King for the allowance thereof, and the reason of
the Law in this Case is for that the Judges of the Land all of them, the Kings
Council, and twelve Masters of the Chancery assist there, by whose advice
erroneous judgments are redressed.

Henry the sixts time, and others, and Parliaments have bound the succession of
Kings, as appears by the statute of the thirteenth of Q. Eliza, Chapter the
first and the descent of the Crown is guided rather by a Parliamentary Title
then by common law. go

Richard the third, that Monster. All our books of law say they have the Crown
by descent, and the Statutes of the Land declare, that they have the same by
inherent byrth-right. And the Statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth, the first
Chapter, was made to secure Queen Elizabeth, against the Queen of Scots, then
in the Kingdom, clayming the Crown of England, and having many adherents. And
that Statute to that end affirms no such power in the two Houses (which is the
Question) but in Queen Esizabeth, and the two Houses, which makes against the
pretense of this time.

Master Prinne, fol. 104. of his book entitled the Parliaments supreme Power,
etc. Objecting the Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, and his own Oath,
That the King is the only supreme Governor of this Realm. Answers; The
Parliament is the supreme Power, and the King supreme Governor. And yet there
he allows him a Negative Voice, And fol. 107. confesses that Acts of
Parliament, translated the Crown from the right heirs at Common-lawe to
others who had no good Title; Then the Parliamentary Title makes not the King,
so powerful is Truth, that it escapes from a man unawares: To make a
distinction between Supreme Governor, and Supreme Power, is very strange,
For who can Govern without Power?

The King assembles the Parliament by his Writ, Vide Speed 645. 4 pars
Instit. 27. and 28.
Adjournes, Prorogues and Dissolves the Parliament, by the Law at his
pleasure, as is evident by constant practice, the House of Commons never sat
after an adjournment of the Parliament by the Kings command. Where is the
Supreme Power?





Master Prinne fol. 45. In his book of the Parliaments interest to nominate
Privy-Councellors, etc. calls the opinion of the Spencers to divide the
person of the King from his Crown, a strange opinion, Calvin's Case 7 pars fol.
11.
and cites Calvin's Case, but leaves out the conclusions therein mentioned, fol.
11. Master Prinne says there, But let this opinion be what it will: without
the Kings Grace and Pardon it will go very far, and two Acts of Parliament
there mentioned are beyond an opinion. And in his book of the opening of the
Great Seal fol. 17. The Parliament has no jurisdiction to use the Great-Seale
for Pardons General or Particular. Where is the Supreme power?

Prinnes (opening of the Seal) Page 19. says, The Noblemen and State, the day
after the funeral of King Henry the third (king Edward the first his son
being in the holy Land) made a new Great-Seale, and Keepers of the same: And in
Henry the sixts time, in the first year of his Reign, the like was done in
Parliament.

A facto, ad jus, is no good Argument, for that in Edward the firsts time, it
was no Parliament, for King Henry the third was dead, which dissolved the
Parliament, if called in his time, and it could be no Parliament of Edward the
first^ time, for no writ issued to summon a Parliament in his name, nor could
issues but under that new Seal, it was so suddenly done after Henry the thirds
death, King Edward the first being then in the Holy Land, it was the first
year of his Reign, and no Parliament was held that year, not the second
year of his Reign, The first Parliament that was in his Reign, was in the
third year of his Reign, as appears by the Printed Acts. Also the making of
that Seal was by some Lords then present, What hand had the Commons in it?
Concerning the Seal made in Henry the sixts time, the Protector was Viceroy
according to the course of Law, and so the making of that Seal was by the
Protector in the Kings name; and that Protector Humphry Duke of Gloucester, as
Protector, in the Kings name, summoned that Parliament, and was Protector made
by the Lords, and not in Parliament, as appears plainly, for that Parliament
was in the first of Henry the sixth, and the first holden in his time, and power
given by Commission to the said Dake, then Protector, to summon that
Parliament. Prinne ibid. fol. 19. But the new Counterfeit Seal was made when
the King was at Oxford, in his own kingdom and not in the Holy Land.

Prinue in his Book of the two Houses power to impose Taxes, restrain
Malignants against any Habeas Corpus, etc. says that the Parliament is above
Magna Charta, and folio 15 ibid. The Parliament has power over Magna Charta to
repeal the same when there is Cause.

Magna Charta contaynes many moral Laws, which by the Law of the Land a
Parliament cannot alter, 21. H. 7.2. Dr. and Student, 2. Dialogue. For example,
it says cap. 18. Justice shall not be sold, dlayed nor denied to any man, but
by this Argument the Parliament may make Law to delay, deny, and to sell
Justice, which surely is a very ill position to maintain.

What they would have does now by the Propositions sent to Newcastle to his
Majesty appear, whereby they would have him divest himself and settle in
them all his kingly power by Sea and Land, and of themselves to have power,
without him, to lay upon the people of this Land, what Taxes they think meet,
to abolish the Common Prayer book, to abolish Episcopacy, and to introduce a
Church government not yet agreed, but such as they shall agree on.

His Majesty finding a prevayling party in both Houses to steer this course,
and being chased away with Tumults from London, leaves the Houses for these
reasons.

(viz.)

FIRST, Because to alter the Government for Religion, is against the Kings Oath.

Secondly, Against their Oaths: For every of them has sworn in this
Parliament, That his Majesty is the only supreme Governor in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and over all Persons.

Thirdly, This course is against Magna Charta, the first Chapter and the last.
Salvae suis Episcopis omnes libertates suae, Confirmed by thirty two Acts of
Parliament, And in the two and fortieth of Edward the third, in the first
Chapter enacts, If any Statute be made to the contrary it shall be holden for
none, and so it is for Judgments at La we, in the twenty fifth of Edward the
first, chapter the first and the second, The great Charter is declared to be
the Common-lawe of the Land.

Fourthly, They endeavor to take away by their Propositions, the Government
of Bishops, which is as ancient as Christianity in this Land, and the book
of Common Prayer, settled by five Acts of Parliament, and compiled by the
Reformers and Martyrs, and practiced in the time of four Princes.

Fifthly, These Propositions taking away from his Majesty all his power by Land
and Sea, Rob him of that which all his Ancestors Kings of this Realm have
enjoyed. That Enjoyment and Usage makes the Law, and a Right, by the same to
his Majesty. They are against their own Protestation made this Parliament
(viz.) to maintain his royal Person, Honor and Estate; They are against
their Covenant, which does say that they will not diminish his just Power and
Greatness.

For these Reasons his Majesty has left them, and as is believed will refuse
to agree to the said Propositions, as by the Fundamental Law of the Land he
may (having a Negative Voice) to any Bills proposed.

The result of all is, upon the whole matter. That the king thus leaving of the
Houses, and his denial to pass the said Propositions, are so far from
making him a Tyrant, or not in a condition to Govern, at the present; That
thereby he is rendered a Just, Magnanimous and Pious Prince, so that by this it
appears clearly to whom the Miseries of these Times are to be imputed. The
remedy for all is, an Act of Oblivion and a General Pardon.

GOD save the KING.
28o. Aprilis 1647. David Jenkins. Now prisoner in the Tower.


