Directions for Prayer, for the Diocese of Bath and Wells.
To the poor Inhabitants within the Diocese of Bath and Wells, THOMAS their
Unworthy Bishop wishes the Knowledge and the Love of God.
Price 2 d.
Dearly beloved in our Lord,
THE Catechism truly teaches all Christians, That they are not able of
themselves to do those things they have vowed in their Baptism to do, namely,
To walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his special
grace, or favorable Assistance, and this they are to learn at all times to call
upon God for, by diligent Prayer.

How good and seasonable this advice is, you will all see, if you consider what
helpless and needy Creatures the very best of Men are. Alas! our weakness is
very great, our wants are very many, our dependence on God for all things, all
our lives long, is entire, and absolute, and necessary, and there is no way in
the World to gain help and supplies from God, but by Prayer; so that it is as
easy, and as possible to preserve a natural Life without daily Bread, as a
Christian Life without daily Prayer.

It was for this reason that our Savior himself took a particular care, to
teach his Disciples to pray, [Luke 11.1.] and it is for the same reason, and in
imitation of our Heavenly Master, that I have joined these Directions for
Prayer to the Catechism.

Sure I am, the Zeal I ought to have for your Salvation can suggest to me
nothing more conducing to the good of your Souls, than to exhort and beseech
you all of either Sex, to learn how to Pray.

This is the first general Request I shall make to you, and I am the more
earnest in it, because my own sad experience has taught me, how strangely
ignorant common People usually are of this Duty; insomuch, that some never Pray
at all, pretending they was never taught, or that their Memories are bad, or
that they are not Booklearn'd, or that they want Money to buy a Book; and by
this means they live, or die rather like Beasts than Men; nay, their Condition
is much worse than that of Beasts, for the Misery of a Beast does end at Death,
but the Misery of a Wicked Man does then begin, and will endure to all Eternity.

To prevent then as much as lies in me, the Damnation of those Souls which God
has committed to my care, and to cure that lamentable ignorance and
forgetfulness of God, which is the cause of the Damnation of so very many, I do
not only incessantly pray for you my self, but I beg of you all to pray for
your selves, and I beseech you to read the following Instructions: or if you
cannot read your selves, to get some honest charitable Neighbors to read them
often to you, that you may remember them, and God of his great Mercy reward the
Charity of such Neighbors.

If any of you, either by your own negligence, or by the negligence of your
Parents, or for want of Catechizing in your Parish, are wholly ignorant of your
Duty; though it be a most shameful and dangerous thing, for one who calls himself
a Christian, to know nothing of Christ or Christianity, yet if you are willing
to learn, and beg pardon of God for your wilful ignorance hitherto, and will
sincerely do your endeavor to get saving knowledge, and heartily pray to God
to assist you, you shall find, that the very entrance of God's Word gives
light, that it gives understanding unto the simple. [Psal. 119 130.]

I must warn you beforehand, that corrupt Nature will be very busy in
hindering the learning of your Duty, and thoughts will arise in your mind that
the Task will be too hard and too tedious for you to undertake; but I
faithfully promise you to impose no hard or tedious task on you, but such, as
you your selves shall confess, to be very complying with your Infirmities; for
our most compassionate Savior teaches me to say no more to you, than you can
bear (John 16. 12.)

All I shall exhort you to, is to learn your Catechism, which you may do by
degrees; if you learn but a line or two in a Day, you will, by God's Blessing,
in a very short time learn it all over, and you will rejoice, and thank God,
for the sudden and happy progress you have made.

God forbid you should ever think your selves too old to learn to serve God,
and to be saved, both which are taught in the Catechism, and therefore the
Catechism is of necessity to be learned; for how can you go to Heaven, if you
never learned the way thither? How can you be saved, if you do not know your
Savior?

It Is a great Error, to think that the Catechism was made for Children only,
for all Christians are equally concerned in those saving Truths which are there
taught; and the Doctrine delivered in the Catechism is as proper for the study,
and as necessary for the Salvation of a great Doctor, as of a weak Christian,
or a young Child.

But you will be the more encouraged to learn your Catechism, when you see how
excellent a help it will be to Prayer, for it will at the same time further
your Knowledge, and your Devotion both together; and the Prayers I intend to
commend to you, are chiefly the very Answers in the Catechism, which being
daily repeated, will be the better fixed in your Memory, and you cannot imagine
any advice for Prayer can be more easy and familiar, than that which directs
you to turn your very Catechism into Prayers.

You are by this time I hope satisfied, that the Duty to which I exhort you, is
no hard Task: and yet I will endeavor, by God's assistance, to make it more
easy, by putting you into an easy method to attain it.

If you are wholly ignorant of your Catechism, let it be your first care to
learn such Ejaculations, such short Prayers as these, and say them often and
heartily.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Christ have mercy upon me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Lord pardon all my wilful ignorance, and gross carelessness of my Duty, for
the sake of Jesus my Savior. Amen.

O my God assist me in the learning of my Duty.

Lord help me to know, and to love thee.

Lord pity me, Lord save me, Father forgive me.

Glory be to thee, O Lord who have hitherto spared me.

O that I might at last learn to glorify, and love, and serve thee!

Such short Prayers as these, you may easily get by heart, and the Method in
which I advise you to proceed, is, that in which Children are commonly taught,
in regard I am now to look on you as a Child: For there are two sorts of
Children; there are Children in age, and Children in understanding, (1 Cor. 14.
20.) and in this latter respect you are Children, and the same method for the
most part is proper for you, which is proper for those that are Children in Age.

I must therefore feed you with Milk, before you can be capable of strong Meat,
(Heb. 5. 13.) and I must look on you as Lambs of my Flock, which I am to use
tenderly, and these following Directions which I give to Parents, for the
training up their Children in Piety, I do equally design for the training up of
you. God of his Infinite Goodness, bless them to you both.

I exhort all you who are Parents, to instill good things into your Children as
soon as ever they begin to speak; let the first words they utter, if it be
possible, be these, Glory be to God,: Accustom them to repeat these words on
their knees, as soon as they rise, and when they go to Bed, and oftimes in the
Day, and let them not eat or drink, without saying, Glory be to God.

As their Speech grows more plain and easy to them, teach them who Made, and
Redeemed and sanctified them, and for what end, namely to glorify and to love
God; and withal, teach them some of the shortest Ejaculations you can, such as
these.

Lord help me. Lord save me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

All love, all glory be to God who first loved me.

Lord keep me in thy love.

Within a little time you may teach them the Lord's Prayer, and hear them say
it every Day, Morning and Evening on their Knees, with some one or more of the
foregoing Ejaculations; and by degrees as they grow up they will learn the
Creed, and the whole Catechism.

Be sure to teach your Children with all the sweetness and gentleness you can,
lest if you should be severe, or should over-task them, Religion should seem to
them rather a Burden than a Blessing.

As their Knowledge increases, so let their Prayers increase also, and teach
them as they go to turn their Catechism into Prayers, after the manner which I
shall show you, and to confirm and improve their knowledge, bring them duly to
the Church to be Catechized by the Parish Priest, that by his familiar and
devout Explications of the Catechism, they may learn to understand it, and may
be capable of reading the Exposition on it, and other Books of Piety.

Take conscientious care to season your Children as early as you can, with the
Love of God, which is the first and great Commandment, (Matthew. 22. 38.) and
with the fear of God, which is the beginning of Wisdom, (Psalm. 111. 10.) for
the awful love, and the filial fear of God, must always go together.

The same method you observe in teaching your Children, the same you may
observe in teaching your Servants, according as you see they want teaching, and
you your selves will reap the benefit of it as well as your Servants for the
more devout Servants they are of God, the more faithful Servants will they be
to you.

Remember, you must teach both your Children and Servants by your Example, as
well as by your Instruction, for they learn best by Example, and if they see
you give an example of fraud or lying, of revenge or calumny, of uncleanness or
drunkenness, of cursing and swearing, and irreligion; instead of teaching them
to obey God, you teach them to provoke him; instead of teaching them to honor
God, you teach them to blaspheme him; instead of leading them the way to
Heaven, you lead them the way to Hell; and you will increase your own
Damnation, by furthering theirs, which God forbid you should ever do.

Now that you may the better give a good Example to your Family, I will (by
God's help) give you a method of daily D^votion, taken for the most part out of
the Catechism, which will be suitable to all Christians, be they never so well
instructed, and which you may by little and little teach your Children; and
which those who have been bred up in ignorance, and are Children in
understanding, and yet willing to be taught, may learn to say also, as the
Capacities of either do increase; for a Christian must never stand at a stay,
but must be always growing in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; (2 Pet. 3. 18.)

A Method of daily Prayer.
As soon as ever you awake, offer up your first thoughts and words to God,
saying,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: Three Persons
and one God blessed for evermore: All love, all praise be to thee.

As you are rising say,

I laid me down and slept, and rose up a again, for the Lord sustained me: All
love, all glory be to God. (Psalm. 3. 5.)

As soon as you are dressed, kneel down, as our Savior himself kneeled, (Luke
22. 41.) at his Prayers, and remember you are in God's presence, and say your
Prayers with Reverence and Devotion.

Morning Prayer.
Glory be to thee, O Lord God, for my preservation and refreshment, and for all
the Blessings of the night past, for which, all Love, all praise be to thee.

Father, forgive me all the evil of the night past, for the Merits of Jesus my
Savior. Amen.

O merciful God, keep and protect, and bless me this day, and prosper me in my
Calling, and preserve me from sin and danger, for the merit of Jesus my
Savior, Amen.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Father, who have made me and all the
World.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Son, who have redeemed me and all
Mankind.

All love, all glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who do sanctify me,
and all the elect People of God.

All love, all glory be to thee, O Father of mercy, who in my Baptism did
make me a Member of Christ, thy own Child, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

O my God, I do this Day dedicate my self to thy Service, and do renew the
Promise and Vow of my Baptism.

I do from my heart renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity
of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; from all which,
good Lord deliver me.

I believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and I will keep thy Holy
Will and commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of my Life.

All this, O Lord, I am bound to believe and do, and by thy help so I will; and
I heartily thank thee, O Heavenly Father, who have called me to this state of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ my Savior; and I pray unto thee to give me thy
Grace, that I may continue in the same to my Lives end.

Lord, hear me, help me, pardon my failings, supply all my Wants, and the Wants
of all faithful People, which I sum up in the words of thy own beloved Son.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

After the like manner you may pray at Night.

Evening Prayer.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, for my preservation, and for all the Blessings of
the Day past; for which, all love, all praise be to thee.

Father, forgive me all the sins I have this Day committed, either in thought,
or word, or deed, either against thee, or against my Neighbor, for the sake of
Jesus my Savior. Amen, Amen.

It grieves me, O merciful God, that I should daily offend thee: But I repent,
O pity and pardon me, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved. Amen, Amen.

O my God, keep and protect, and bless me this Night, and preserve me from sin
and danger, for the sake of Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Lord refresh me this Night with seasonable Sleep, that I may rise the next
Morning more fit and able to serve thee in my Calling, for the sake of Jesus
thy Beloved. Amen, Amen.

I believe in God the Father, etc.

All love, all glory be to thee, our God the Father, who, etc. as in the
Morning.

I desire thee, O Lord God, O Heavenly Father, who art the giver of all
Goodness, to send thy Grace unto me, and to my Wife and Children, to my Husband
and Children, Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Kindred and Friends,
Master and Mistress, (you must name these Relations, according as you stand
related) and to all People, that we may worship thee, serve thee, and obey
thee, as we ought to do: And I pray unto thee, that thou would*st send us all
things that be needful, both for our Souls and Bodies, and that thou will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will please thee, to
save and defend us in all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and that thou will keep
us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly Enemy and from everlasting
Death: And this I trust thou will do of thy mercy and goodness, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Lord, so be it.

Lord, hear me, help me, pardon my Failings, supply all my Wants, and the Wants
of all for whom I pray, which I sum up in the words of thy own beloved Son,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

As you are going to Bed, say,

I will lay me down in peace and take my rest, for it is thou, Lord, only that
make me dwell in safty, (Psalm. 4. 9.)

As you began the Day, so end it with glorifying God, and when you are in Bed
say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, three Persons
and one God, blessed for evermore. All praise, all love be to thee.

I earnestly beg of God, to make you sensible your selves, and to give you
grace to make your Children and Servants sensible also, how Necessary, and
Happy, and Heavenly a Duty Prayer is, and how many exceeding great and precious
Promises God has made to them that devoutly pray to him; and if you are thus
sensible, you will not content your selves with Morning and Evening Prayer
only, but you will be desirous, if you have Opportunity, to retire about
Midday* for a few Minutes, that you may imitate the Devotion of holy David,
and of Daniel, and pray three times a Day, Dan. 6. 10. and that you may not
want a help for Noontide Prayer, the Catechism shall supply you.

Prayer at Noon.
At Evening, and at Morning, and at Noonday will I pray, and that instantly,
Lord, hear my voice, (Psalm. 55. 19.)

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, is now and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

All love all glory be to thee. O God, the Father, who have first loved us, and
have given thy beloved Son to die for our Sins, and to rise again for our
Justification.

Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great Goodness, according to the
multitude of thy Mercies do away mine Offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

Make me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me, for the sake
of Jesus thy Beloved Amen.

O Lord God, who see I am not able of my self to walk in thy commandments,
and to serve thee; be pleased to help and strengthen me by thy special Grace,
that I may daily and sincerely perform my Duty toward thee, and my Duty
toward my Neighbor, for the sake of Jesus my Savior. Amen.

O my God, give me grace to believe in thee, and to love thee with all my
Heart, with all my Mind, with all my Soul, and with all my Strength; to worship
thee, to give thee thanks, to put my whole trust in thee, to call upon thee, to
honor thy Holy Name and thy Word, and to serve thee truly all the Days of my
Life, for the sake of Jesus thy Beleved. Amen.

O my God, give me Grace to love my Neighbor as my self, to do to all Men, as
I would they should do to me; to love honor and succor my Father and Mother
(this clause must be left out, if your Father and Mother be dead) to honor and
obey the King, and all that are put in Authority under him; to submit my self
to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, and Masters; to order my self
lowly and reverently to all my Betters; to hurt no Body by Word or Deed; to be
true and just in all my Dealing; to bear no malice nor hatred in my Heart; to
keep my Hands from picking and stealing, and my Tongue from evil speaking,
lying and slandering; to keey my Body in temperance, soberness and chastity,
nor to covet or desire other Men's Goods, but to learn and labor truly to get
mine own Living and to do my Duty in that state of Life, unto which it has
pleased thee to call me, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved. Amen.

Lord hear me, help me, pardon my Failings, supply all my Wants, which I sum up
in the words of thy Beloved Son.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Instead of these two last Prayers, you may sometimes say the Ten Commandments,
which you may turn into a very good Prayer, by saying after every one.

Lord have Mercy upon me, and incline my Heart to keep this Law.

Where you not only beg pardon for the sins you have committed against each
Commandment, but you also beg Grace to keep it.

At the end of them you may say,

Lord have Mercy upon me, and write all these thy Laws in my Heart, I beseech
thee.

And so conclude with the Lord's Prayer.

Do not think that this Practice of Prayer will be too hard, or too long for
young Persons, or for laboring People; for if you cannot say them all, say as
much as you can; or if you are at Day Labor, or have not time or convenience
to say them, offer up to God two or three hearty Ejaculations in their place:
But if you can get time and convenience, say them all, and I dare assure you,
that all the three Forms of Prayer which I commend to you, will not in all take
up a quarter of an hour; and certainly that Person has very little sense of his
Duty, very little concern for his immortal Soul, very little Honor for God, or
value for Heaven, who will not spend one quarter of an hour in the space of
four and twenty hours, in the Service of God, and the Salvation of his own Soul.

I do by all means exhort you to give your Servants a few Minutes leisure at
Noon, to pray after your Example, and to use your Children to do the same, for
they will soon be able to say the Lord's Prayer and two or three Ejaculations,
and teach them to say these at Noon, as well as at Morning and at Night, and
it is incredible to think how much good this Practice will do them, and what
great comfort you your selves will reap from the early Devotion of your
Children.

To further this Devotion in your Children, instead of Idle Tales and Songs,
which Pollute their Souls, and when they come to be serious, will cost them
great pains to unlearn: You must teach them short Psalms by heart, which will
exercise their Memories and Piety both together; and as you teach the Psalms to
your Children, I exhort you to learn them your selves,

You cannot imagine the great benefit of learning Psalms by heart; for when you
are under any Temptation, or are in any Affliction, or when you lie Waking in
the Night, or when you are Sick, these Psalms will come into your Mind, and the
Devout repeating them will yield you most seasonable Consolations.

The very common People, in the first and purest Ages of the Church, were so
sensible of the Spiritual Advantages of learning Psalms, that they learned the
whole Psalter by heart, and sung or said the Psalms in their Shops, and at the
Plow, insomuch that St. James makes it the proper Expression of Christian
Mirth, (James 5. 13.) If any be merry let him sing Psalms.

This is the way to store your own and your Childrens Minds with Ejaculations,
or short Prayers for all Occasions, which I advise both Old and young to
accustom themselves to, because it is the true way of Praying without ceasing,
and it is a kind of Prayer most easy, and may be used at any time of the day,
or in any Place, and is one of the most efficacious means in the world to keep
us in God's Favor, which is of all things most desirable.

Ejaculations.
At going out, or coming in.

Lord bless my going out and my coming in from rhis time forth for evermore.
(Psalm, 121. 8.)

At Meals.

Lord grant, that whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I do, I may do all to
thy glory. (1 Cor. 19. 31.)

At Work.

Prosper thou the Work of my Hands, O Lord O prosper thou my Handiwork. (Psalm.
90. 17.)

In the Shop, or Market.

Lord, give me grace to use this World, so as not to abuse it. (1 Cor. 7. 31.)

Lord grant that I may never go beyond, or defraud my Brother in any matter,
for thou art the Avenger of all such. (1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.)

In temptation or danger.

O God, make speed to save me: O Lord, make haste to help me.

At any time of the Day.

Wherever I am, whatever I do, Thou Lord see me: O keep me in thy fear all
the Day long. (Prove. 23. 17.)

Lord, give me grace to keep always a Conscience void of offense toward thee
and toward Men, (Acts 24. 16.)

Lord teach me so to number my Days, that I may apply my heart to Wisdom.
(Psalm. 90. 12.)

O let my Mouth be filled with thy Praise, that I may sing of thy Glory and
Honor all the Day long (Psalm. 71.7.)

All love, all glory be to thee, O God, who did first love me.

Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. (Rev. 1. 5.)

O blessed Spirit, shed abroad the love of God in my Heart.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, Praise his Holy Name.
Psalm. (103. 1.)

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, Yea, as long
as I have any Being, I will sing Praises unto my God. (Psalm. 146. 1.)

You that have Families, I do farther exhort, that besides your private
Prayers, you would offer up to God, a Morning and Evening Sacrifice in your
Families, and that every one of you would take up the Holy Resolution of
Joshua, (as for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord, (Josh. 24. 15.) And
the Prayers I advise you to use, are taken out of the Common Prayer, as being
most familiar, and of greatest Authority withal.

If any of your Family are gone abroad to their Work before the rest can be
ready, call that little Congregation about you that is at home, and you that
are present pray for those that are absent, and by this means those that are
absent upon necessary Employments, will share in the Blessings for which you
pray.

Morning Prayer for a Family.
Let the Words of our Mouths, and the Meditations of our hearts, be always
acceptable in thy sight: O Lord, our Strength and our Redeemer.

O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable Sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us miserable Sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
us mirerable Sinners.

O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable Sinners.

O Lord we beseech thee mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their Sins unto thee, and they whose Consciences by Sin are accused, by
thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves, we give thee humble Thanks for thy preservation of us this Day past (or
this Night past) and for all the Blessings thou daily vouchsafest us; and we
beseech thee to keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our
Souls; that we may be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the
Body, and from all evil Thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the Heart of thy Servant, our King and
Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy
Honor and Glory, and that we and all his Subjects (duly considering whose
Authority he has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee,
and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who lives and reigns ever one God, World without end. Amen.

Unto thy gracious Mercy and Protection, O Lord, do we commit our selves this
Day, (or this Night) and all our Relations and Friends: Lord prosper us in our
Callings: Lord bless us and keep us: Lord make thy Face to shine upon us, and
be gracious unto us: Lord lift up thy Countenance upon us and give us Peace,
both now and evermore, for the sake of Jesus thy Beloved, in whose own blessed
Words, we sum up all our wants.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The same form, changing but one word, is proper for the Night as well as the
Morning, to make Family Prayer the more easy to you.

That Prayer which I have set down, wherein you pray for the King, and pray for
your selves also, that you may be good Subjects, I exhort you never to omit,
because you know that the Country wherein you live, was the only Seat of the
late Rebellion, and the Tares of Sedition have been industriously sown among
you, and you have the greater reason to pray, that you may continue firm in
your Allegiance; besides, St. Paul teaches you, that to pray for Kings, is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, (1 Timothy 2. 2, 3.)

To your Family Prayers, you may add, as you see occasion, one of these
following.

Almighty and everlasting God* give unto us the increase of Faith. Hope and
Charity, and that we may obtain war which thou do promise, make us to love
that which thou do command* through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord we beseech thee, Grant thy People grace to withstand the Temptations of
the World* the Flesh, and the Devil, and with pure Hearts and Minds to follow
thee the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our Works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally, by thy mercy obtain
everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

These and the like short Prayers, may be said alone in the Closet, as well as
in the Family, by changing only the Number, and for (we) saying all along (I)
and for (us) saying (me.) As for Example, when you read any part of the Holy
Scripture, either alone by your selves, or with your Families, both which you
should do daily, if you have leisure, but if you have not, see that you do both
on the Lord's-Days, and on Holy Days, and therefore Reading, say this Prayer.

Blessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
Learning, Grant that we (I) may in suchwise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy Holy Word, we (I) may
embrace, and ever hold fast, the blessed hope of everlasting Life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

God of his Infinite Mercy bless these Instructions to his Glory, and to the
furtherance of your Devotions, through Jesus the beloved. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

