The Kind MISTRESS:
Who being jealous that the Man she loved,
Constant unto another Woman proved,
She could not brook another should possess,
Him whom she loved more then she could express:
She bids him give her Wealth and Honor, all
But his ownself, him she her own must call.
To a pleasant new Tune, called, The German Princess's Farewell, etc.




LOng days of absence, Dear, I could endure,
If thy divided heart were mine secure,
But each minute I find myself without thee,
Methinks I and my Rival's arms about thee.
But she perhaps her interest can improve,
By all the studied arts of wealth and love;
Whilst I, alas! poor kind and harmless Creature,
Plunged in true patience, trust me it shows good nature.
In her fair hand lay silver and rich gold,
But what I must not name let my hand hold:
Give her rich robes, and jewels without measure,
Do but allow me every night the pleasure.
I dye to think that hapless I should lose,
Those sweet embraces no one can refuse,
Yet dare I not for shame my flames discover,
I dread the name of, Poor Forsaken Lover.
If she have wit and beauty, charms of love,
Some think I have the same, and those will move;
If she can smile, and kiss, and cling about you,
All these I Will do before I Will go without you.
O let not all my Rival's laugh and say,
I am become a silly Castaway;
Though all are bound to pay you wealth and honor,
It all comes short of what you lay upon her.
I Will force my soul, and summon all my charms,
Ever any she shall lie within your arms,
Except I found decays in every feature,
Or that old age had spoiled the works of Nature.
Oh! oh! my Dear where art, where art thou now*
Hear my sweet call, and hea^^^n to my vow,
What though you love her, yet you ought to leave her,
I vow my heart shall be thine own for ever.
I Will act such things, i will laugh, and dance, and sing,
I Will hug and kiss, and love like any thing;
Then change me not, till I can do no longer,
I Will use a means to make my spirits stronger.
But if she must have interest in your heart,
Dear Love, let it be but the weaker part;
Or if she once enjoy's a greater blessing,
You know my thoughts without the words expressing,
Should I be left by you, and quite forlorn,
All other objects my proud heart would scorn;
But if you still persist and will not mind me,
I Will mourn to death and leave her here behind me.
When Death has done its worst, and I am cold,
'Twill force a sigh when you such clay behold;
Alas! too late you will with your Friends lament me,
But when I was alive you would not content me.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.


