The Jolly Pinder of WAKEFIELD,




IN wakefield there lives a jolly Pinder,
in Wakefield all on a green,
in Wakefield all on a green,
There is neither knight mor Squire said ye Pinder
nor Barron that is so bold,
nor Barron that is so bold,
Dare make a trespass to the town of Wakefield
but his pledge goes to the Pinfold,
but his pledge goes to the Pinfold.
All this be heard three witty youngmen
it was Robin Hood Scarlet and John, etc.
With that they spyed the jolly Pinder
as he sat under a Thorn. etc.
Now turn again turn again said the Pinder
for a wrong way have you gone. etc.
For you have forsaken the King his high way
and made a path over the Corn, etc.
O that were great shame said jolly Robin
we being three and thou but one etc.
The Pinder leapt back then thirty good foot,
it was thirty good foot and one. etc.
He leaned his back fast unto a Thorn,
and his foot unto a stone, etc.
And there he fought a tongue Summers day,
a Summers day so long, c. etc.
Till that their Sword on their broad Bucklers
were broken fast unto their hands, etc.
Hold thy hand hold thy hand said Robin Hood
and my merry men every one, etc.
For this is one of the best Pinders,
that ever I tried with Sword, etc.
And will thou forsake thy Pinder his craft,
and live in green wood with me, etc.
At Michaelmas next my Covenant comes out,
when every man gathers his Fee, etc.
I Will take my blew Blade all in my hand,
and plod to the Green wood with thee, etc.
Have thou either meat or drink laid Robin Hood
for my merry men and me, etc.
I have both bread and beef said the Pinder,
And good Ale of the best etc.
And that is meat good enough sai^ Robin Hood
for such unbidden guest etc.
O will thou forsake thy Pinder his craft
And go to the green wood with me etc.
Thou shall have a Livery twice in the year,
the one green the other brown.
the one green the other brown,
If Michaelmas day were once come and gone,
And my Master had paid me my fee
And my Master had paid me my fee,
Then would I set as little by him
As my Master does set by my
As my master does set by me
Printed for F. Coals, T: Vere, and W. ^lberson.


