A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Buckinghamshire near Water-Stratford, TO His
Brother Mr. Thomas Pickfat, at the Three Kings in White-cross-street, in London.

GIVING An Account of the Doctrine and manner the Behavior of Mr. Mason,
Minister Water-Stratford, within Two Miles of Buckingham.

With the HYMNS they usually sing.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Star^ers Hall, 1694.

A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Buckinghamshire, near Water-Stratford, TO His
Brother, Mr. Thomas Pickfat, at the Three Kings in VVhite-cross-street, etc.
Brother,
I Have here, according to your Desire, sent an Account concerning Mr. Mason,
Minister of Water Stratford, Two Miles from Buckingham: I have sent Two Hymns
of Mr. Mason's own making, which He and his Hearers sing frequently, by which
you may gather what their Belief is. But more particularly, I have heard some
of his Hearers say, That they did believe they should see Christ appear, but in
what manner they would not be positive. Some of them would say, Visibly appear;
others say, His Appearance in the Clouds, and his Reign in the Clouds. Farther,
I have heard them say, That those that did believe this, and did see his
Appearance, should live One thousand Years, and all that while without Sin; and
likewise, That the fullness of the Gentiles was come in. They call
Water-Stratford, SION; and count Mr. Mason a Prophet, in the which the
Revelations of St. John is only to be Revealed. They do conclude this Reign
will begin about Ascension-Day next; and that all that believe this, must dwell
at Stratford, and there they will be preserved, and neither Magistrate can
meddle with them, nor any other Hurt can befall them; and that they shall stand
upon Mount Sion, and see all the Wicked round about them be burnt up. They have
had Music and Dancing, and singing of Hymns, and clapping of Hands about Six
Weeks, Night and Day: While some Sleep, others Sing and Dance.

The Week before Easter, several Families removed to Stratford to live,
carrying all they had thither. They fold Houses and Land for what they could
get. They did, last Winter, lay in at Stratford, Twenty Quarter of Wheat, Ten
Quarter of Malt, and Twenty or Thirty Hundred of Cheese. This Spring they have
laid in several Fat Bullocks, and Hogs.

On Easter-Monday Night Mr. Mason declares, he saw Christ; and on the next
Lord's Day following some of our Neighbors went to Stratford to hear and see
how the People went on; and being a great Multitude of People gathered together
round the Country, more than the Church could contain, they stood in the
Minister's Yard, and he, out of his Chamber Window, declared unto the
Multitude, That on the Monday Night before, he being in Bed and awake, lying on
his Left-side he turned himself to his Right, he saw Christ sitting in a Chair,
and a Candle lighted in a Candlestick standing on a Stool, and that Christ was
clothed in a purple Robe dipped in the Blood of his Enemies; and he confirmed
this with an Oath, saying, By the Eternal God what he said was true, and that
himself was neither in a Dream, nor Mad, nor Drunken, neither was he
Affrighted. But I cannot understand by any, that he says the Christ which he
saw did speak to him.

He has not given the Sacraments these last Two Years. And now they do not
Read nor Pray, only Four or Five of the last Words of the Lord's Prayer, which
is in Praise of the Glory of God. They say All is done, and there is nothing to
be done only to Praise God. They had for their Music a Violin, Tabor and Pipe.

Those who was of the same Faith, they being Poor and having nothing to put
into the Stock, they have turned them off about a Week since, from being
constant to Diet with them; and they have turned off since, the other Poor of
their Faith. There may be about Forty that are constant; but there is sometimes
Five Hundred, or One thousand, or more, to see their Fashions and Actions in
Dancing.

Your Brother Tom. and George, and some other Young Men of our Town, went last
Saturday Night to see them, and stayed all Night, and they saw them dance all
Night, but had no Music but only singing of Hymns: Their Dancing is in no
Order, but after an Antic manner, sometimes Three taking Hands and jumping
round, other while leaping from one end of the Room to the other, catching over
their Heads with their Hands, and clapping their Hands, saying sometimes,
Appear, Appear, Appear, other whiles, Glory, Glory, Glory. There is one Dancer
among them with a Wooden Leg, and he makes a great noise among them with his
Leg when he cuts Capers.

This Mr. Mason will not dispute with any Divine concerning his Opinion, but
will only say, All is done, they that are Righteous let them be Righteous
still; and they that are Filthy, let them be Filthy still. Diverse Ministers go
to see him; and in particular, our Minister, Mr. Crofts, went last Wednesday,
but could not be admitted to see Mr. Mason, he then being Ill with a Quinsie;
but with some of his Hearers, in particular, the Man with the Wooden Leg, Mr.
Crofts saying, That the Heavens must retain Christ until the Restitution of all
Things. The Man said, All Things were restored. Our Minister answered, They
were not all restored, because he had not his good Leg restored again.

We do hear, that within Two Days past, some of the Saints of New-named Sion,
have left it, and go about their Employments again.

I know no more at present, but when I am farther satisfied of their
Proceedings you shall know of it.

I have sent Two Hymns. I have a Copy which I borrowed which had Two more, made
by some of his Hearers, there being little in them, only taking the Lord's Name
often in vain; and time would not permit, I forbear.

Yours, etc.

HYMNS MADE By Mr. Mason, THE MINISTER.
This HYMN they had before Christmas: They Sung this, and the other, in the
Tune of a Ballad.
OUR Jesus this Day is Proclaimed in our Streets,
He Is visibly Crowned, and he is highly Renowned
From the East to the West, from the North to the South:
It Is the Language I hear in every one's Mouth,
That Jesus is King; let us Joyfully sing
Our Jesus is King, our Jesus is King.
All Glory, All Glory, all Glory alone,
To the Glory that sits on his Glorious Throne;
All Heavenly sweet Flowers be strewn in his way,
Hallelujahs, Hosanna's with Millions of Praise:
All Glory is due to the Holy and True,
Who sits on his Throne and makes us all New.
Come now to his Temple, ye Lookers for Jesus,
His Honor advance, and his Praise in the Dance:
Break forth into Singing ye Mountains and VVoods,
For Joy clap your Hands ye Fountains and Floods,
Taken out of Revelations 15.3, 4.
Let him be adored by Angels and Men,
And Sion adorned with her Tabrets again.
Another since.
It Is come, it is done, this is the Day.
My promised Savior's come away;
It Is come, it is done, this is the Hour
My Lord assumes his Royal Power.
It Is come, it is done, this is the Time,
Saints light your Lamps and run to him:
The Day is past, my Light is come,
My Christ he is the Risen Sun.
The Lord has Judged the Cursed Whore,
Her Smoke rose up for evermore,
And now all Scandal's at her cast,
The Beast and Dragon chained fast.
Proud Babylon in Ashes lies,
Her Sins have reached to the Skies,
And God to her Reward has given,
Because her Sins have reached to Heaven.
Let all the Saints and Angels sing
Loud Hallelujahs to our King.
Amen. All Honor, Glories due
Unto the Holy, Just and True.
Salvation to our God on high,
Amen, Amen, the Angels cry.
Great and mavelous are thy Works
Jehovah, working Wonders;
It lightneth when our Lord appears,
And when he speaks, it thunders.
Most Just and True are all thy ways,
Thy Saints shall bless thee all their Days:
Thou art our King they gladly sing,
Thy Subjects are before thee.
Had People known thy glorious Name,
They would have Glorified thee;
For Lord thou art that Holy One,
And there is none beside thee.
The Nations all shall flock and meet
With bowed Faces at his Feet;
Thy Judgments show thy Glory now,
Let all the World adore thee.
FINIS.

