Bp. LIGHTON'S Catechism FOR CHILDREN

Psalm. 119 9. Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to Thy Word.



EDINBURGH, Printed and Sold in Wariston 's Closs.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

A a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and. ct sh st ff ss fi
si fl sl ffi ssi ffl ae oe.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

A a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and. ct sh st ff ss fi
si fl sl ffi ssi ss ffl as is us ae oe.

a. e. i. o. u.,;:.?! ' - ()

ab. eb. ib ob ub Al el il ol ul

ac ec ic oc uc an en in on uu

ad ed id od ud ap ep ip op up

af of if of uf ar er ir or ur

g eg ig og ug as es is os us

Bp LIGHTON'S CATECHISM.
Quest. WHat is naturally every Man's chief Desire?
Answ. To be Happy.

Q. What is the way to true Happiness?
A. The true and lively Knowledge of the only True God, and of Him Whom He has
sent, Jesus Christ.

Q. What will that Knowledge effectually work in us?
A. It will cause us Believe in God, and Love Him above all things, even above
our selves, to Praise and Exalt and to Worship Him with all our Might, and to
yield up our selves to obey all His Commandments.

Q. Rehearse the Articles of our Be^^e^?
A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And in
Jesus Christ, His only Son our Lord, which was Conceived by the holy Ghost,
Born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and
Buried: He descended into Hell; the third Day He rose again i. e. Continued in
the state of the Dead, and under the power of Death till the third Day.
from the Dead, He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right Hand of God
the Father Almighty: from thence He shall come to judge both the Quick and the
Dead: I believe in the holy Ghost: the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins: the Resurrection of the Body: and the Life
everlasting. Amen.

Q. Rehearse the Ten Commandments, which are the Rule of our Obedience, and
Trial of our Love.
A. God spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other gods before Me.

II. Thou shall not make thee any graven Image or any likness of any thing that
is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water
under the Earth, thou shall not bow down thy self to them or serve them: for I
the Lord thy God am a jealous God: visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon
the Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate Me: and
showing Mercy unto thousands of them that love Me, and keep My Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy: Six days shall thou Labor and
do all thy work; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any Work: thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is
within thy Gates: For in Six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh Day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not Kill.

VII. Tbou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his
Ass, nor any thing that is tby Neighbors.

Q. What is the Summary our Savior has given us of this Law?
A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul,
with all thy Mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self.

Q. What is the great and effectual Means of obtaining increase of Faith, and
power to obey, and generally all Graces and all Blessings at the Hands of God?
A. Prayer.

Q. Rehearse that excellent and most perfect Prayer, that our Savior has
taught us?
A. Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Debts as we forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil. For Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory, for ever Amen.

Q. In what estate was Man Created?
A. After the Image of God in Holiness and Righteousness.

Q Did he continue in that estate?
A. No; but by breaking the Commandment which his Maker gave him, he made
himself and his whole Posterity subject to Sin and Death.

Q Did God leave Man in this Misery, without all Means and Hope of Recovery?
A. No; for He so loved the World, that he gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever Believes on Him should not Perish, but have everlasting Life.

Q What then is the great Doctrine and glad Tidings of the Gospel?
A. That same coming of the Son of God in the Flesh, and giving Himself to the
Death of the Cross, to take away the Sins of the World, His rising again, and
His ascending up unto Heaven.

Q. What does the Gospel mainly teach, and really persuade, the true Believers
of it to do?
A. It teaches them, That denying all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to live
Soberly, Holily and Righteously, in this present World.

Q. How has our Lord Jesus Christ expressed the great and necessary Duty of
all His Disciples?
A. That they deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow Him.

Q. Rehearse then some of the chief Points wherein we are to follow our Lord
Jesus Christ?
A. To surrender our selves wholly to our heavenly Father, and to His good
Pleasure, even in the sharpest Afflictions and Sufferings, and not at all to do
our own Will, nor design our own Praise or Advantage, but in all to do His Will
and seek His Glory. 2dly, To be spotless and chaste in our Affections and whole
Conversation. 3dly, To be meek and lowly in Heart, not slander or reproach,
mock or despise any, and if any do so to us, to bear it patiently; yea to
rejoice in it. 4ly. Unfainedly to love our Christian Brethren, to be
charitable and kindly affected toward all Men, even to our Enemies, Forgiving
them, yea and Praying for them, and returning them Good for Evil, and to
Comfort the Afflicted and Relieve the Poor, and to do Good to all Men as we are
able.

Q. What visible Seals has our Savior annexed to the Gospel to confirm our
Faith of it, and to convey the Grace of it to us?
A. The Two Sacraments of the New Testament Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. What does Baptism signify and seal?
A. Our washing from Sin, and our New Birth in Jesus Christ?

Q What does the Lord's Supper signify and seal?
A. Our nourishment and growth in Him, and transferring more and more to His
Likeness, by feeding on His Body and Blood, under the Figures of Bread and Wine.

Q. What is required to make fit and worthy Communicants of the Lord's Supper.
A. Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance toward God and Charity toward all Men

Q. What is the final Portion of Unbelievers and unrepenting Sinners.
A. The everlasting Torments of Devils.

Q. What is the final Portion of them that truly Believe, and really Obey the
Gospel?
A. The blessed Life of Angels in the vision of God for ever.

To young Persons before their first admission to the Lords Supper, this one
Question is particularly to be added.
Q Whereas you were in your Infancy baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, do
you now upon distinct Knowledge, and with firm Belief, and pious Affection, own
that Christian Faith of which you have given an account: and withal the
Baptismal Vow of renouncing the Service of Satan, the Lust of the Flesh and of
devouting your self to God in all Holiness of Life.
A. I do heartily and unfeignedly declare my Belief of that Faith, and my
Engagment to that holy Vow, and resolve by the assistance of God's Grace to
continue in the careful observance of it all my Days.

FINIS.

