THE Kings Majesty's Love TO LONDON.
MY dearest City, and my native place,
To see sad tears run down thy beauteous face,
Makes Me and mine, to mourn, lament, and weep,
Does cause me wake, when I should fall asleep;
As I am King, my Love to thee is more
Then Seas have Water, and the Earth has Shore:
My love shall never fail to thee or thine,
But for thy sake, as far as Sun does shine
My Navy and my Forces shall seek out
Thy foreign Foes, and seek the World about;
I Will scowre the Main, I Will make the Ocean dry,
And thy proud foes shall at thy Footstool ly:
In this distress, O London! thou shall see,
Great Britains King thy only Friend to be;
Trust to it London, for as I am King,
I will thy Foes unto subjection bring;
And cause them at thy Footstool for to ly,
Because they wrong thee in thy misery:
O London, London, if thou will obey
My just command, I never shall say nay
To any thing that is right, or thou wilt require,
Thou'st have thy will, thy grant, or thy desire;
My Cordial love is more then thou do know,
If thou wilt obey, if thou wilt subjection owe
To me thy King, I Will make the World to see,
Thou shall lose nothing by obeying me;
Though on my Foes I usually do frown,
And with my might I tumble them all down;
And will all those who commonly arise
In open Arms; and those who do despise
My Government: will not subjection yield,
But seeks to fight me in the open Field;
Or by false treachery do me annoy,
If they seek my life, I shall those destroy:
My chiefest City, I do much lament,
Thy grief, thy sorrow, and thy discontent,
Thy tears, thy mournings, and thy sad condition,
And for thy cause I daily do Petition
My Gracious God, to take his hand away,
And suffer not his Angel for to slay,
Or thee or thine, or suffer thee to stand,
Within the reach of his destroying hand;
But to remove his judgments, and to spare
My only City, for which I so care:
My Royal City, and my Native place,
My Metropolitan has spoiled her face;
Her eyes with weeping are sunk in her head,
And she lies now, much like to one that is dead:
What good thy King, O London! can thee do,
He will do it for thee, yea, and that soon too;
The daily prayers of great Britains King,
Will cause a Heavenly Dove, to London bring
An Olive leaf; whereby to signify,
That thou and thine shall live, ye shall not die.
LONDONS MODEST ANSWER.
Rejoice O London! in thy King,
Who to thy City does such comfort bring:
His Purse, his Prayers, and his Princely Deeds,
He does the send, to stanch thy Wound that bleeds.
MOST Sovereign Lord, my good and gracious Kings,
What Joy, what Comfort, does your sweet words
bring?
How they revive my soul, and do me cheer,
Expells my sorrows and drive back my fear;
But what am I, poor London, what am I?
That Britains King, the flour of Majesty,
Should look upon me with such care and pity,
A poor distressed and unworthy City?
It Is his free grace, and heavenly disposition,
That at Gods Throne he daily does Petition
For me and mine, that God would us restore,
To perfect health, and drive death from my door;
O gracious Prince, how am I bound to pray,
For your good Grace, and how bound to obey
Your sacred Person, and your just command,
Your Acts, your Statutes, and not to withstand
Your Will and Pleasure; but whilst I do live,
I will subjection to your Highness give?
If God be pleased to lengthen out my days,
I will not only Speak, but Write your praise;
And all the Nations this day under Sun,
Shall fully know what Englands King has done
To Londons City; when Gods hand did lie
Most heavy on her in her misery:
How Wine and Oil he poures in her wound,
How with his prayers he seeks to set her sound,
How he does comfort her amidst her grief,
How to the poor he sends great releif;
What comfortable words from him proceeds,
What Royal virtue, grace, and goodly deeds.
O happy London, in so good a King,
That in thy miseries such comfort bring,
In thy afflictions he should look upon
Thy wants, and woes when all thy friends are gone:
Whilst London stands, her King she will obey,
And for his Majesty will daily pray;
She never more will heave a single hand,
His sacred pleasure she will not withstand;
But will obedience and subjection give,
Unto Authority while she does live;
Live, live, O London, live, and do not dye,
Thy King's thy friend now in thy misery:
The King, the King, of Kings does daily pray,
That God would turn his heavy hand away
From me and mine, and in my great distress
Would comfort send, and with his graces bless:
What City in the World has such a Prince?
Not one example can be shown e're since
The Worlds creation; who did so provide
For his poor Subjects, who must needs have di'd:
Yea, thousands at this day had been in grave,
Who are alive in health whom he did save:
And under God by his rich means did cure,
In health amongst us Lord let him endure.
London, Printed by John Best, at the sign of the Three Crowns in
Giltspur-street. 1665.


