LILLY Lash't with his own ROD. OR, AN EPIGRAM On the Quaint Skill of that
Arch Temporizing ASTROLOGER MR. WILLIAM LILLY.
Collected out of his ALMANACKS, from ^647, to this present year, 1660.
SOund forth A Trumpet, that the world may hear,
The Great skill of this Famed Astrologer.
He that foresees all things in Church and State,
By help oth' Crystal, And his Book of Fate.
He that makes use of Direful Negromancie,
To terrify the timorous yielding Phancie,
He that does use whole Nations to Trepan,
With the bare Names of Angel-Guardian,
The Sybils Oracles, and Theurgie,
With His Little knowledge had of Ptolome!
All forts attend! whilst briefly I relate,
The Dirty juggling of this Son of Fate.
The Cunning used, by this Albumazer,
That of your common Cheats surpasses far.
They Contra-Legem, the Country quack about,
And deal their dirty-skill, at small rate out,
To Gull the Sillyer sort; this Artizan,
Proclaims himself a sixed conjuring man;
And Pride in him so monstrously prevails,
To be the States Belwether he Assails.
And then so furiously to work he goes,
He forfeits ail the honest Art he knows,
For the base Lucre of two hundred pound
A Year. Lilly had such a Sallary from White Hall by the means of one Frost a
Secritary to the Council of State, as I have heard him acknowledge.
(But changes still, as the wheel turns round)
And that all Persons to him may repair
Two Dyals Point us forth this Blazing Star:
That if the Lord of Gypsies men would see,
In the Strand there dwells, the May Pole, Stocks, and He!
Take some Specimina of his rare skill;
(And chide me for it, if I report him ill)
In forty seven, the Scots most Prudent were
(Or he a filthy liar did appear!)
Nay he Confided in their Nobles; And
Their Ministry Procla'm the worth oth' Land.
And in his forty eight years fine Epistle,
In their behalf, did confidently Bristle!
Pronouncing them most honest; And men Guided
By a Good Covenant. [From which they backslided.]
They did return, delivered our Towns,
[For which they Jugled from us, many pounds!]
Eut yet in forty nine, he Rails aloud
Calling them Pil-f^ing Scots; Peevish and Proud;
Traitors, and Enemies; A Graceless crew,
Of Villains; worse then any Turk or Jew.
And in his Merlin fifty one they are
Egyptian Scots; Pseud-Presbyters that dare
Do any thing, against this Power, for which
(Deservedly) they were Rid of their Itch.
And is there any Deliars Wizzard can,
In Temporising, match this cunning-man?
At this Rate with the Parliament he deals.
Telling the world, that they our Breaches heal;
That they are by God appointed for to scourge
The Norman Race: and all that else dare urge
But ought against them. Tells them their power shall stand,
Maugre the Acts of all by Sea and Land,
But when (in Fifty-two) he plainly saw,
Unto what side, the Army began to draw,
Oh! now (says he) Great Parliament your Power
Is but short-lived; And I expect (each hour)
Your timely Dissolution! In Fifty-three,
Basely abuses them; Threatening, that he
(With others) each Member thereof will call to
Account; And so, (in wrath) Devines their woe.
In Fifty-four he them unthankful styles:
Most terrible; [Forgetting's former Wyles.]
A Private ended crew; Intemperate;
Not fitting for to sway so great a State.
They Are Drowsy, Slothful, But yet are become,
As cunning Taylers! [His PROFESSION!] Lilly was a Tailor before pretended
Astrology and Apprentice to Pawlin in the Strand.

And thus you see, A Parliaments no more
With this Cretensis, then each Country Boar.
Further! Let Us note the Signal flattery
He Published in his senseless Monarchy;
Swearing no King in England, more shall Reign.
Yet when the Proaector began to Rule; Amain
He Pipes -- That Happy Monarchy's so good
A Government; (If truly understood)
None better was: Vowing't a Gallant thing
To England, if the Protector were a King.
I might here note this Quacks abusing Spain;
And's currying favor with that Prince again.
Of's Ambedextrous dealing with the State
Of Sweden, (Denmark,) at his flattering Rate.
How with the wheel of time, he turns about
And powers his spurious piosn'ous Oracles out,
Unto Astrologies, and Artists shame!
But Quaks are Quaks though pras'd in the mouth of Fame.
Hence, Baser Gypses! here is one that can
Out do ye all, in flattering any man,
Hence, with the dull stock of your footstool Cares;
Here Is one out-cheats-ye, by the height oth' Stars
Hence with your common small Beer single Fee,
Here Is one pulls Kingdoms for the Golden Fleece.
Be gone you Rosie-Crucians, that pretend,
All things to know; Here Is one your skill can Mend.
Fly, Fly, you Fairy Elves, that use to Prye
Into the Closets of Men's secrecy,
Your skill is stale; Here Is one that may compare
With Lucifer's great self, [both head and hair!]
Avaunt Great Faustus, Bacon, Lamb; and Let
The Imposters Bays on Lillyes head be set
That Laurel (surely) will befit him best,
Because he bears AMERLIN for his Crest.
Let all the Muses join, LILLY, to sing
Of Parasites the only lawful King.
For he is most fit to be a Prince of slaves,
That in himself contains ten thousand KNAVES.
Printed in the year, 1660.


