The Ladies Delight: OR, Narcissus his Love-Flower.
A pleasant and delightful new Ditty,
Made by a Lover, for Ladies so Witty;
When to Venus Sports they please to resort,
To pull sweet Flowers, that yields the best sport.
To the Tune of, Narcissus come kiss us, etc.


R I


As I was walking I cannot tell when,
nor I cannot tell whither,
I met with a crew of I cannot tell who,
nor cannot tell what they were:
But Virgins I think; for they cried
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
They sang a fine Song of I cannot tell what,
nor whether in Verse or in Prose:
Nor knew I their meaning although they all sat
even as it were under my Nose:
But ever and anon they all cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside:
There came in a Lad from I cannot tell whence,
with I cannot tell what in his hand;
It was a live thing that had little sense,
but yet it could lustily stand:
Then louder these Ladies they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
Some shak'd it, some stroak'd it, some kissed it, it is said
it looked so lovely indeed;
All hugged it as honey, and none were afraid,
because of their bodily need:
And louder these Ladies they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
The second Part,
to the same Tune






AT length he did put in this pretty fine top
in I cannot tell where below,
Into one of these Ladies; but I cannot tell why,
nor wherefore it should be so:
But in the mean time they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
But when that these Ladies had sported all night
and rifled Dame Natures store,
And raised themselves in Venus delight,
that they could hardly do more:
Yet louder these Ladies they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and us beside.
This Lad being tired, began to retreat,
and hang down his head like a flower;
The Ladies the more did desire the feat,
but alas 'twas out of his Power:
Then louder and louder they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside,
When full forty weeks were almost expired,
a pitiful story to tell,
These Ladies did hate what most they desired,
their Bellies began for to swell:
Then with a woeful Tune they all cried
Narcissus will not kiss us, nor love us beside.
Lucina in pity then lent them her aid,
to ease them of their sorrow;
But when that these Ladies were gently laid,
they had the same mind to morrow:
And dandling their Bantlings they cried,
Narcissus shall not kiss us, and lie by our side.
But as I was minding these pretty fine toys,
how Venus with Cupid did play;
What pleasure those Ladies did take in their boys,
did lead my fancy astray;
To hear how they lulled them, and cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
I then returned, I cannot tell how,
nor what was in my mind;
Nor what else I heard, I know not I vow,
nor saw, for Cupid is blind:
But that these Ladies still cried
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
But now to conclude, I connot tell what,
nor when, nor how nor where;
Nor found I the Sense of their Song or (...) That,
for Ladies are fickle as Air:
Therefore I am laugh till they cried,
Narcissus come kiss us, and love us beside.
London, Printed for W. Thackeray, Y. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.


