SPectators, make a Ring, that you may see
The fatal Battle which is like to be
Fought by two powerful Combatants: One's named
GALLU^ for Courage generally famed;
Yet not so Valiant as he would have men think,
But has (what makes men Valiant) store of Chinck.
TO other is CAPO called, who does supply
His want of Courage by his Policy:
By plotting and contriving he subsists,
And does with Brains what the other would with Fists;
Works underhand, and goes to undermine:
Both in their several ways in Battle join.
GALLUS does strut, and clap his wings and crow,
While CAPO laughs at that vain noise and show:
What the great Quarrel is, must not be known,
But is reserved till one be overthrown:
Both make great preparations for a Fight,
and he that Conquers, all believe has Right.
^APO has been well crammed, and lived in State,
and was become a mighty Potentate;
^wo Keys to open and to shut he bears,
and no his head a Triple Crown he wears;
and had a mind to Rule the World, as though
^ll men were governed by mere pomp and show.
GALLUS repines at this; Must I (says he)
^ear but one Crown, while he droops under three?
^is Keys may make a noise, and keep a stir
^ong easy souls, but he has never a Spur:
^^le spoil his Pageantry, and make him know,
that since he cannot Fight, he shall not Crow.
But now GERMANUS comes to interpose,
Thinking the Quarrel would prove dangerous;
And while those two do to Contention fall,
Their strife might prove the ruin of them all;
Both being so powerful, it is hardly known
Which side may prove most safe for him to own;
Mean time the MAHUMETAN Cook stands by
With sharpened Semiter, and watchful eye;
Let them fight on (says he) so both will be,
By their intestine War a Feast for me:
This is my time to feed and thrive, when they
Contend so fiercely which shall be my prey.
This makes good Gelly, to other's tender meat;
When both drop in one dish, who would not eat?
Their Quarrel is for Humor and Opinion,
But my design is Riches and Dominion;
While both to be Victorions do aspire,
I use their sparks to set the World on fire.
The CONCLUSION.
WHen Peace and Plenty make men proud, and they
Aspire to Rule, whose part is to Obey:
When each man has a Heresy of's own,
And most pretend Religion, but use none:
When Laws are boldly broke, and Love that binds
Men more then Laws, is fled from peoples minds:
Then must destruction on that Nation come,
And MAHUMET give Laws to CHRISTENDOM.
l' Autheur.
CHers spectateurs approchez
Et ce combat regardez:
Ou le cocq saute de fury
De quoi le chapon se rye;
C' est pourquoi il vaudra mieux,
De les accorder tous deux.
A Le Chapon Romain.
Le chapon Romain voyant,
Le cocq ainsi l'estancant.
Au combat pour resister
Hardise va preparer,
Et excite sa chaleur
Pour demonstrer sa valeur.
Mais ie crains que son effort
Ne le gradera de mort,
Car le cocq de grand rudesse,
^e pourchassera sans cesse,
De ses ailles le frappant
Et de son bec tres picquant.
B Le Cocq Francoys.
Le cocq fort anime d'ire,
Contre le chapon se vire,
Pour lui fair sentir a Pheur
Les effects de sa fureur:
Et ses ergots il aiguise
Pour finit son entreprise.
Car il fait tout son effort,
Pour bien tossed le metree a mort.
Deses ailles il debat,
Pour l'eschauffer au combat,
Et levant sa crest' il lance
Ses ergots dedans sa Panse.
C Le Mediateur.
Messieurs qui de vous Poura,
Die ce qu'il en adviendra
Veu qu'ils sont si eschauffez,
Entierement animez:
Ils se perdroyent bien tout deux,
C'est pourquoi il vaudra mieux
Que tossed y remediant,
On aille les accordant.
Ce coup nous seroit fatal;
Et nous touch en general,
Car leur perte accablera
Tout, and a rien nous rendra.
D Le cuisinier.
Mais voici le cuisinier,
Regardant ce combat fire,
Qui met la main aux cousteaux,
Pour leur fair sentier des maux,
Car si le cocq vehement,
Suit le chapon ardement,
Bien tossed il l'aterrera,
Ou en suite le mettra,
Puis ce cuisinier ruse,
Le voyant si bien graisle
De ses mains le ravira
Si le bon Dieu n'empeschera:
Les Poets ont beau de feindre
Des trois Furies, and les depeindre
Ayants les cheveux de vipere,
Et allumants le feu de guerre;
Voicy la Megere veritable,
Un boute feu plus effroyable,
Ce Turc vray Prince des Tenebres
Jettant sur nous flames funebres,
S'en va offrir a Mahomet
Son Dieu d' Enfer and faux Prophet
Un holocaust de Germany
Et puis de toute la Chrestiente.
O la chose digne de pity
Qu'il Pere d' Eglise and Fills aisnee,
En fin tous deux, le Pape and Roy,
A l'Infidel viendront en proy!
Gentle Readers and Spectators of this Combat,
MY design is not to amuse my self, or be so bold at to tax the Actions of
these two Great Personages, but only by this Emblem to let you see what that
Learned Carthusian Friar JOHN LICH TENBERG, in his Magical prediction, has
left in writing above two hundred years ago, wherein be speaks of a certain
Prince in the Field of the Flower de Luce, that be should be the Greatest
Monarch in EUROPE.

LONDON Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Henry Brom at the Gun in
Ivy-Lane, 1663.

Imprimatur,

Jan. 21. 1663. Roger L'estrange.


