LILLIES Invitation. (...)ose that have had no Coughs, nor Colds, this Winter,
to dine with him on Christmas day.
Admire ye Mortals! strange news does appear!
You Are welcome All to Lillies Christmas cheer.
Such cheer indeed, as is not to be found,
At any Wake or Fair, on English Ground.
The Good cheer.
ALl the varieties that can be got,
Plumb-pottage boiled in a Silver pot!
Roast-beef well stuffed with rosemary: that done,
Mince-pies by wholesale- for digestion.
And now the first course being well ended
Large bouls of wine are presently extended;
Your free Host then begins a health t'y' all,
And swears your welcome: with a conjuring call
Commands more wine that you may pledge him, Then
Sit down to the second course, and to it again
And after this the liquors run, and they
Strongly begin t'appear in Battle ray
The brisk ( anary, French both white and red
The brave Strongwaters Hartsease Anniseed;
Nay and to make each Genius run the quicker,
Nants Brandy will not be a failing liquor.
Music enough with various instrument
To give an increase to your merryment,
So taking approbation of the cheer,
Considering all things, I think it is not dear!
The Persons invited.
But now the persons that invited are
To this good cheer I kindly shall declare.
Least by mistake there should a difference be,
By taking all for every body,
All are not wisemen, yet all are not fools,
Some have sufficient, some insufficient tools
So some of all may be approved, as guests,
And welcome to partake of Lilles feast.
But such they needs must be, as must be sure
To have not one kind of distemperature
All those who have no Coughs, nor Colds nor Ptissick
That never had, nor still have need of Physic,
May not be called or appear to be
Partakers of the said variety.
So that, free Lilly. (as I dare express)
Though's good cheer, will have but little Guess.
The Authors advice.
Let those that take my Advice, stay behind
Least they wish after they would been of my mind.
For Lilly may perhaps to increase his praise,
With a Cramp Conjuring word the Devil raise,
And He Will so tumble and toss you all: That then
You may swear you will never Dine with Lilly again.
With Allowance.

London, Printed in the Year 1668.


