LAETITIAE CALEDONICAE, OR, SCOTLANDS Raptures, Upon the thrice happy Return of
Her Sacred Sovereign CHARLES the Second, Monarch of Great Britain, etc.
WHat Poetaster bold dare undertake,
An Emblem of my mirth in rhyme to make?
The tongues of Men and Angels, should but wrong
This Theme, so far transcending any Song:
My Loyalty likewise it would Eclipse,
If It were definable by humane lips.
Old Maro sure would blush, if he were here,
And galled with this disaster, shed a tear;
His soaring quill, which many Triumphs wrote,
Should in defining this, its Triumphs blot:
Parnassus Nymphs also, I dare be bound,
Would curse their native Soil, for barren ground,
That disproportion vast when they should see,
'Twixt their best notions, and this ecstasy.
How then shall Caledon, her sense express
Of this unuterable happiness?
This blessed Arrival of her Sovereign brings
That true Vicegerent of the King of Kings;
Shal't be with flying cups? O that is hot fit!
His Sacred MAJESTY prohibits it.
Shal't be with ranting swaggering bravado's,
We will do wonders against his foes Armado's?
This neither will suffice, himself can tell,
This is the Dialect 'bout Bacchus Well.
Shall we renewing Covenants, engage,
His Person to defend, and Royal badge?
No He Will never trust's thee more; (and who can blame him?)
Nor Tongue, nor Hand, that stopped e're to disclaim him:
What then shall our deportment be, and how,
Shall we do homage to that Sacred brow?
That brow! whose sweet appearance has undone
Those miseries, our follies had begun:
Even this; each Loyal Heart shall undertake,
With resolution, recompense to make,
By strong endeavors, never to back-slide
Into these principles, did us divide
From our Allegiance, shun equivocations
As Popish practices, to crush the Nations.
Each sparkle of rebellion let us smoother,
And to that purpose strengthen one another:
Each Overture that is made, before 't's appointed
Let Us ponder well, let not the Lord's Anointed
Get any prejudice from what we do,
Give him that right the Scripture does allow.
This will as in one Atome us unite,
And to commend us, foreign Pens invite:
This will the Moderns move aloud to praise us,
And our Posterities shall Trophies raise us,
With this Inscription, Blessed be our Sires,
Their Countries honor bounded their desires;
Whose souls expiring, Loyally did sing
With firm Devotion, long may our Sovereign Reign.
FINIS.

