To his Highness Oliver Cromwell, Lord High Protector of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
THou Lord of Hosts, that guidest Sea and Land,
Out of thy love direct my heart and hand,
His Theme to write, that Englands Helm does steer,
In thought, in word, and deed keep him sincere:
Such honor as thou giv'st him here in love;
His glory let it far exceed above,
In Paradise, where true joys ever dwell,
Give him that Crown, that earthly Crowns excel.
His place is very high, his thoughts keep low,
None but his Maker let him truly know;
Even all but Christ, let him count dross and dung,
So fix his mind, his faith may grow more strong;
Send Angels blessed, to fetch him to his friend,
Even when his days by natures course shall end.
O English hearts, advance your thoughts on high,
Land now express to him that rules the Sky,
In that he does all errors foul dispel,
Vile horrid devilish Tenants (broacht) from hell:
Each one extol and praise the living Lord,
Rightly ruling all Nations by his Word.
Call friend to mind the danger we were in,
Raised by some, who lately did begin
Out of Saul's zeal, the Clergy to expel,
Mingling the Gospels truth, with Doctrines fell.
Well may the Tribe of Levi now rejoice,
Even from the heart, that God has made a choice,
Lifting up one, a Nehemiah stout,
Lewd projects of Sanballats crew to rout.
Lord of thy self, (its not of our desert)
Out of me^r lover to take poor Englands part,
Raising a Cromwell, Gods cause to defend,
Dreadful to those who would Christ's Church still rend.
His happy entrance I do remember,
In the tenth month it was, cold December;
God gave him power in zeal our hearts to warm,
Himself with Council, us to save from harm.
Protect Lord, (protect) our Lord Protector,
Raise his thoughts, to affront the sly projector:
On Sions good, let him still set his joy,
Their downfall seek, who seek her to destroy:
Even as King David still had help from God,
Contrive so (Lord,) to settle his abode,
That Sacred truth may flourish, errors fly
Out of this Commonwealth perpetually.
Right so Amen, Amen from heart say I.
Of mercy Lord, bless Englands Commonwealth,
Fence it from Foreign and Domestic foes;
Even to all in it give soul-saving health,
Nor ever let them cast of endless woes:
Give Vrim and Thummim to the Clergy,
Like Trumpets shrill, to sound aloud thy praise:
Also us join in holy Unity,
Not only now, but 'during all our days.
Death will approach, there is none that knows how soon;
Shall we then trifle out our precious time?
Called many be (by death) e're it be noon,
O Jacobs ladder let us begin to clime;
That so our souls the Heavens may ascend,
Like Christ our Savior, who is gone before;
As soon as death our fleeting days shall end,
None may us stay from joys for evermore.
Deal gently (Lord God) with thy people all,
As suffer bondage under Turk or Pope;
None can them free but thou, from careful thrall
Deliver those, who on thee fix their hope.
I notice give to all of Levies Tribe,
Right to us now, stands our Lord Protector;
Else we might droop, for some both scoff and gibe.
Laugh at us too, ah! poor soul neglector;
And thankless shall we be unto our God:
No; who of all should praise him more then we?
Does he not mind to settle our abode?
Decree (though) some would all our misery.
Postscript. Ergo,
Cantemus Deo canticum,
Quod nos non sumus miseri,
Cantemus Deo canticum,
Quod omnes sumus liberi.
Quod omnes sumus liberi,
Cantemus Deo canticum,
Quod nos non sumus miseri,
Cantemus Deo canticum.
And that ye may this understand,
And with me all in joy accord,
The Lord has by his mighty hand,
Quite overthrown the threatening Sword.
Clean overthrown the furbusht Sword,
The Lord has by his mighty hand,
Then in a Psalm let us accord,
For saving us, and eke our Land.
Your Highness in all dutiful observancy, and Christian-like humility, John
Lineall, Minister and Preacher of Gods Word, yet now has neither place nor
maintenance, being aged 66. years.


