Litterae Consolatoriae; From the Author to the dejected place of his Nativity,
the Honorable City of LONDON: Emporium of Great Britain; In some Prophetic
Glances at it is future Glory and Prosperity; Indici^ of it is present Happiness,
from it is Upright and Judicious Lord Mayor, The Right Honorable Sir William
Turner Knight; To whom he wishes a long and happy Life here, and unexpressable
Glory hereafter.
ALL hail, Blessed City! which next age must see
Head (as Rome once) the worlds chief Monarchy
For tribute, Sunburned Afric, things of price,
And the two Indies send thee Gold and Spice;
Nilus, Seine, Tyber, Tagus; stoop to Them.
To his great honor, thy immortal fame,
Away with tears; let us have no more wet eyes;
Thy lofty Roofs already threat the Skies.
So Phoenix, grown old, does by flames expire,
To rise more vigorous from her funeral Fire.
Dear Mother, hail! behold a fair presage
Of times return, or a new Golden Age;
Banished Astraea again visits Earth,
Whose womb is pregnant with the expected birth;
Fear not miscarriage, for wise TVRNER, he
Lucina acts at the Delivery;
O happy place! which can at present show
Ancient Rome's Glory, Cato, The Lord Mayor for his Vigilance and Care to
advance and defend Justice, with the Right and honor of the City, as the Roman
Consul did against Catiline, etc.
Cicero;
Thy vanished honors, Rome, to boast forbear,
In one united, Censor, Consul are;
Worthy to sit in thy adored Chair,
If mortal man with Jove might Worship share;
Think not (Dear City) thou forsaken art;
Wonders my Muse shall suddenly impart;
And in smooth Numbers sing mysterious things,
Thy fall, thy rise, from whence these changes springs*
O much beloved of Jove! thy Fate's his care;
Put on a cheerful look; of grief beware;
No more complaints; vent not a sigh nor tear;
Those Emblemes are of an ignoble Fear:
Great Hearts such guests do never entertain,
Unless they flow from Anger or Disdain.
Consider past Events; and thou will find
That Gods and Fate have evermore been kind:
Favors, their Punishment; witness the Fire,
Which laid thee low, only to raise thee higher.
When to destroy Jove did an Angel send,
He likewise gave an Honorable Friend,
Illustrious Craven; whose great Charity
And virtuous Deeds unto Eternity
Recorded are in Volumes 'bove the sky.
Bright day appears; behold a glorious morn;
To splendid fortune thou again art born;
No longer be transmarine Nations scorn:
Boldly advance thy Head; look up, and see
Thy Discreet Mayors proceedings, Turner, He,
Restoring Justice, does Foundations lay
Whereon thou wilt rise to Heaven: That happy day
Thou gain'st thy height, pay Honor to his name
Who builds the Groundwork of thy future Fame.
London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, at the Sun and Bible in Postern-street
near Moregate, 1669.


