SERMONS On several SUBJECTS; SHOWING Gods Love to Mankind. Salvation is by
Grace. Wilderness-Provision. God a Strong Hold in Trouble. Light is to be
improved.


By J. Lougher Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near the
Marketplace. 1685.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To my esteemed Christian Friends in and about Southrepps and Alby in Norfolk.
Dear Friends,
THe kind Acceptance my former weak endeavors found with you, have induced me
to this second attempt of the same nature. I have contracted the Sum of several
Sermons into a narrow compass. They were once delivered to your Ears, they are
now in your Eye, the Lord writ them in all your hearts.

I expect to be variously censured; Some will reject them for their plainness,
as not being suited to the humor and style of this ingenious Age; Others will
dislike them as not agreeing in some things with their own sentiments. My
Apology is only this; As I have agreat value for the persons and labors of
every learned and good man, though of a different persuasion from me in things
e^trafundamental; so, I thank God for it, (...) man can have so mean an esteem
of me (...) my endeavors, but I have lower though^ both of my self and them.
For I do (...) ought to know my self better than other^ do or can. And by this
I have learned i^ some measure to esteem others better tha^ my self. Worthy
Friends, if God wi^^ please to make the following discourses by his Blessing,
instrumental to quike^ and excite any among you to make sure (...) an interest
in the special love of God, (...) seek Salvation by Grace, to trust God f^^
provision in your wilderness condition, (...) make God your strong hold in a
day (...) trouble, and to walk while you have Gospel Light, I have my chief end
in the publication. I desire the continuance o^ your Prayers to God for me, and
commend you all in the Perusal of these wea^ meditations to the care and
Blessed influences of Jesus Christ. For whose sake I am

Your Servant in the Gospel* JOHN LOVGHER.

SERMON I.
John 1.4.16. God is Love.


KNowledge is one great accomplishment of the rational creature: Of all
Knowledge, there is none so accomplishing as that which is Divine and
Spiritual: Of all Divine Knowledge, the Knowledge of God, and his perfections,
is the most excellent: Of all the perfections of God, there is none so sweet
and desirable to be known, as this of his Love: This was the Element in which
this Apostle and beloved Disciple St. John lived; and it made such impressions
upon his heart, that he breaths little but love throughout this Epistle, and
makes known something of what he had experience of in his own Soul; and not
only declares the love of God, but asserts God himself to be love, in the Text
now before us: Which words are a short description of God, and a Proposition in
themselves and so let us take them.

Doct. That God is Love. It Is more easy to declare what God is not than what
he is; hence some choose to speak of him via remotionis; they consider the
imperfections which are in the creatures, and remove them all from God as
inconsistent with a Deity: Thus they say he is impeccable, impassible, immortal
and the like; because to sin, to suffer, to die, are imperfections in the
creature This gives a negative discovery of him but falls far short of what he
is. The holy Scriptures give us the most positive account of him, yet not
according to his infinite perfections, no words can do that, but so as is most
suitable to his nature, and our apprehensions. John 4.24. 1 John 1.5.
Thus we read that God is a Spirit; God is Light; and God is Love: Thus he is
twice styled in this Chapter; viz. in the 8th verse of it, and in the Text.

Quest. 1. You will say, In what respects may this be spoken of God?

Ans. 1. He is Love essentially: Hence he is not only said to be loving, but
Love in the abstract: He is styled by St. Paul the God of Love; 2 Cor. 13.11.
but the Text says, God is Love, which shows it is essential to his Nature.
Creatures may be loving, God only is Love. In creatures it is but an accident
or quality, in God it is of a natural descent, of his substance and being. The
Apostle says, God is Love. Even as the Sun has but one glorious brightness,
and no colors, yet makes all other colors visible: So, though many things may
help our apprehensions of God, (we call him just when he punishes, true when
he performs his promises, merciful and loving when he shows pity to them in
misery,) yet God is but one entire perfection; Quicquid in Deo, Deus est;
whatsoever is in God, is God.

2. He is Love causally: He is the efficient cause of all that which deserves
the name of Love in the World: Jam. 1.17. Gal. 5.22. Romans 1 30. Romans 8.7.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of Lights.
If there be any love in our hearts to himself, it is the fruit of his Spirit;
for naturally we are haters of God; our carnal minds are enmity against God; so
St. Paul speaks. Love to God is not a Flower that grows in Natures Garden, but
is a drop issuing from God the Fountain of Love: 1 John 4.19.
We love him, because he loved us first. It is a beam darted from that Sun, a
reflection of his Love to us. The same may be said of true Love to Man;
naturally we are hateful, and hating one another, Titus 3.3.
as St. Paul says: If there be a cordial affection, though but natural, it is
from God, much more true Spiritual Love.

3. He is Love objectively: He is or ought to be the chief object of our Love:
As David calls God his joy, Psalm. 43.4. Psalm. 38.
his exceeding joy, that is, the object of his joy; and his hope, that is, the
object of his hope; so he is termed Love, because he is, and should be the
chief object of the Christians Love. Christ calls his Church his Love, Cant.
5.2.
in the Canticles, because it is the object of his Love. Thus God is deservedly
the object of the Love of Men and Angels, for he is altogether lovely. Whatever
outward good men set up as the object of their Love, it is in God in a more
high and transcendent way than can be in all creatures: Is it riches they
affect? we read much of God's riches: The Earth is full of thy riches, Psa.
104.24. Ephesians. 1.7. Romans 2.5. Phil. 4.19.
says the Psalmist: We read in the Scriptures of the riches of his grace; the
riches of his goodness; the riches of his glory; the riches of his mercy, and
the like: Is it beauty they are taken with? God is more glorious than Angels,
they cover their faces when they behold his brightness: Is it pleasure they set
their love upon? Psalm. 16. ult.
In his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
ever more. But to pass these.

4. God is Love declaratively: All his works are a declaratton of his Love:
Some take the Text only in the first sense, that he is Love essentially; but
others judge that the Apostle did not mean to puzzle us with abstruce and dark
notions of God, but to instruct and teach us, to descend to our capacities, and
to speak of that Love of God which is operative and communicative; and thus I
take it here.

Qu. 2. You will then say, How, and wherein has God declared himself to be
Love, that it may be clearly discerned?

Ans. Whether we consider what God has done for Man, 1. In his Constitution; Or
2. In his Degeneracy; Or 3. In his Recovery and effectual Restitution;
it will appear that God has made ample and large declarations of his Love.

1. Let us take a brief view of God's Love to Man in his natural Make and
Constitution; and that both in his Body and Soul: His Body is fearfully and
wonderfully made, and curiously wrought in the lowest part of the Earth, Psalm.
139.
says the Psalmist. It Is said of Galen, that famous Physician, and great
Atheist, that upon the serious consideration of the admirable composure of it;
he brake forth into the acknowledgment of a Deity, and sung an Hymn to his
Creator.

The Head and Eyes are the highest members, to guide and govern the rest that
are inferior, and the lowest to support the highest, and in the midst the
hands to defend and maintain them all: But most eminently is God's Love seen in
the faculties of man's Soul, in which he has set up his Image, and Engraven
his own likeness; How beautiful was man in the day of his Creation? There are 3
noble faculties, understanding, will, and conscience, yet but one Soul, which
some judge to be a shadow of God, where there is a Trinity of Persons in an
unity of essence: Others say the understanding represents God's Omniscience: He
knows all things; And ye have an unction from the Holy One, 1 John 2.20.
says St. John, and know all things. In the will there is a shadow of God's
Freedom and Sovereignty; God is a free Agent, so is man's will, it has a
natural freedom to choose and refuse. Conscience, say they, represents God as he
is the searcher of hearts, and no respecter of persons. Conscience also in a
man is the Candle of the Lord, Pro. 20.27.
and searches the inward parts of the belly: All, both high and low, rich and
poor must hold up their hands at Consciences Bar. If no more be said, these
things declare God's Love to Man in his original frame and constitution: Yet
the provisions God has made both for Body and Soul, speak this more fully; for
the Body he has provided food, raiment, and rest: The day for man to work in,
and the night to rest in: For the Soul, Arts and Sciences: He has given all
men the Book of the Creatures to read, and many good Lessons may be learned out
of them; Psalm 19.1.
For the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork. Man is Lord of all visible creatures, as David shows largely in the
8th Psalm. The Beasts are subject to man, yea, the very Angels themselves are
ministering Spirits; Heb. 1. ult.
and though by the sin of Adam, man's dominion over the creatures was abated,
yet God renewed this Charter again unto Noah, and to his posterity, as is to be
seen in the 9th of Genesis. And though wicked men have no right as Sons, yet as
Servants they have, and so have dominion over the creatures. Add to all this,
God's great Love in giving speech to man, and ability to use it; a favor
seldom taken notice of, because common, yet David call it his glory; Psalm. 57.8.
Awake O my glory, says he, meaning his Tongue; it is that which makes all our
glory to appear; Man does very little excel Beasts but in reason and in speech:
Beasts have voices, but not speech: Balaam's Ass speaking with man's voice, was
extraordinary and miraculous: Some creatures by industry may be taught to utter
words, but though they have the materiality, yet not the formality of speech,
wanting reason wherewith to utter their speech. A man is known by his speech,
as a vessel when we knock it is known to be full or empty. I have read of a
Philosopher, who at a Feast observing a young man not to utter a word, said to
him, If thou be a fool, thou do wisely, but if thou be a wise man, thou
do foolishly. By all these things God's Love is declared to Man in his
Primitive Constitution.

2. Let us consider Man in his Apostasy and Degeneration, and we shall yet see
greater declarations and manifestations of God's Love toward him. God is not
easily provoked, though sin is the only thing that is the object of his utter
detestation, and so the only provocation of his displeasure; yet he is slow to
anger, full of patience and forbearance; yea, Romans 2.5.
of great kindness to those who go on still in their trespasses: He does good
to them, who are always doing evil against him: He makes his Sun to shine, Mat.
5.45.
and his Rain to fall upon the bad and the unjust: He daily loadeth men with
his benefits: And if he be provoked, he is not willing to execute his wrath
upon men: He is loath to punish: Lam 3.23.
He does not willing afflict nor grieve the Children of men. Hence are those
conflicts in himself. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver
thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? Hos. 11.8.
How shall I set thee as Zeboim? my bowels are turned within me, my repentings
are kindled together. Here are strivings between mercy and justice, till at
last mercy gets the victory, and rejoices against Judgment: And if acts of
justice at any time appear, yet he allays and tempers them with mercy: Heaven
is all mercy, and Hell is all misery; but here in this world the most bitter
Cup of Affliction has some grains of mercy in it: Hence the Church says, Lam.
3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies we are not consumed; yet then terrible Judgments of
God were upon them: His acts of justice are not so extensive as those of his
mercy are, as is evident by what he declares in the second Commandment; where
he says, He will visit the iniquity of the Parents upon the Children, unto the
third and fourth Generation of them that hate him, but will show mercy to
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments. Nor are they so
pleasant to him; for he delights to show mercy, Mich. 7.18. Isa. 28.21.
but judgment is his strange work, with which he desires not to be so much
acquainted. Nor are they so permanent as the acts of his Love and Mercy are:
Isa. 27.8.
In measure he debateth, and stays his rough wind in the day of the Eastwind:
He will not contend for ever, Isa. 57.16.
nor be always wroth, lest the spirit fail before him, and the soul that he
has made: But his mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him. Yea, the end of God in afflicting, is to manifest his Love: He is angry,
that he may love; angry a little, that men repenting, he may love them for
ever: What excellent declarations of God's Love are these to the degenerate
Sons of Men? yet as if all this were but a small matter, there are yet greater
operations of it. Above all things, the Incarnation of his Son Jesus Christ,
does most eminently manifest the Love of God to the Sons of Men, and
demonstrates that he is Love it self: 1 John 4.9, 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his only
begotten Son into the world, to be a Propitiation for our sins, that we might
live through him. I speak of the common interest of all men in it: It was
brought to pass by God for to make his love to men appear: He so loved the
world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. And Christ came and died in our
nature for the world of Mankind, and not for the lapsed Angels: Which of the
Angels can say, To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given? He took not on him
the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but the seed of Abraham. The good Angels need no pardon, the bad Angels are
excluded from it, and Man only has a Savior provided for him, and offered to
him in the Gospel upon terms highly just, equal and reasonable. Look at the
Angels in themselves, and they are noble. Gold and Silver are the Monarchs of
the world, as one styles them; Brass and Copper the Gentry, but Lead and Iron
are the Refuse of the world: What has Iron in it? Of how mean a color is it?
yet the Loadstone refuses all other metals, and attracts the Iron to its self:
Thus the Angels are excellent and glorious creatures, Gold and Silver, as it
were, in comparison of Man; yet Christ took not the Angelical, but the Humane
Nature how full of Astonishment is this? An^ all flowed from the Love of God to
Man And what strange passages do concur i^ the work of Man's Redemption? All
were done by the death of the Lord of Life he was in poverty, that men might b^
made rich, and died, that they might liv^ who believe in him: He was wounde^
that they might be healed, and bare the curse, that they might have the
blessing and all this from the Fountain of Divine Love: 1 John 2.2.
God so loved the world, so admirally, so unspeakably, so inconceivably, non
but himself can tell how, that he gave h^^ Son to be a Propitiation for the
sins of the whole world: And Christ so loved Men that he gave himself to death
for them and what had he more to give? It is the nature of Love so to do; where
Divine Love is in any height or perfection, thoug^ it be but in a creature, it
brings an ecstasy, it makes that creature go out of i^ self, deny it self,
neglect its own profi^ and pleasure, and seek the Glory of God and to be taken
up wholly in the Servic^ of God: This Love was perfect in Christ and this made
him empty himself, an^ lay aside his Majesty and Glory for the good of them he
loved: Here Is Divine Love to the height, and in its perfection, and may bring
to an ecstasy; for the Love is such a Mine, as is too deep and rich for any
creature to fathom, or count the value of it; yet this the Love of God has
contrived and effected for Man: And, whereas some make an ill use of this Love,
to overthrow Christ's satisfaction; If God, say they, so loved Man, as to give
his Son for him, then he was not angry with him, and if not angry, then there
was no need at all of a satisfaction to be made for him: Though Love and Hatred
(that I may briefly answer it) are inconsistencies, yet Love and Anger may well
stand together: He gave his Son; there was great love; Isa. 53.
It pleased the Father to wound him, and bruise him for our iniquities; there
was great wrath. God's wrath was kindled against Job's Friends, yet in love he
directs them to atone him by a Sacrifice: Job 42.7, 8.
God could not but be angry at the sin of the World, and yet in love gave his
Son to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for sin. Oh the vast immense Love of God to
fallen Man in this particular! Unto all this, let me yet add one demonstration
of God's Love to fallen Man, which is manifest in giving his Word unto him,
both Law and Gospel, which is made known at one time or other, unto all Nation
most hearty desires and entreaties to a^cept the same: Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4.
He declares therein, th^^ he takes no pleasure in the death of s^ners, but
would have all men to be save and to come to the knowledge of t^^ Truth. He is
troubled and grieved wh^^ men slight and neglect the tenders (...) Peace made
to them.

Obj. Some will say, Why does God th^^ permit so many to perish, even the most
Mankind, and to lie for ever under his wrat^^ How can this stand with such Love
as G^^^ declares to the Sons of Men?

Ans. God's Love and Justice are n^^^ inconsistent, but can, and do stand w^^^
together: His Justice takes place upon those who despise the riches of his
Gra^^ and Love: He might have stood upon the first terms made with Adam: T^^
terms of that Old Covenant we just a^^ righteous: All his Posterity were
co^cerned therein, to stand or fall in hi^^ He sinned, and so brought sin and
dea^^ upon all the World of Mankind: By o^^ man sin entered into the world, Romans
5.12.
and death (...) sin, and so death passed upon all men, for the all have
sinned. Here God might have stood upon it, and have held all men to the terms
of the first Covenant, which was death upon the first transgression, and these
terms he might have prosecuted to the utter destruction of all men: He was not
bound to make new ones; yet this he has graciously done, and made a new
Covenant, his own Son a second Adam, the Head and Mediator of this Covenant: He
is freely offered and tendered in the Gospel to the Sons of Men, Jam. 3.16.
That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. If
men refuse and reject the tenders of Salvation, as the most do, their
destruction is of themselves; and the Love of God appears more in saying the
remnant that believe, than any severity in destroying the rest; especially
considering, he is not the cause of their sin, but is grieved that they will
not accept Life upon Gospel-terms. This is evident in his weeping over
Jerusalem, saying, Luke 19 42.
If thou at least in this thy day had known the things that belong unto thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes. So that every man's destruction is
of himself, Hos. 13.9. Joh. 5.40. Heb. 2.3.
because men will not come to Christ that they might have Life, but refuse him
that speaks from Heaven, and neglect great Salvation. This is written in
legible Characters, that he that runs may read the Love of God toward
degenerate, fallen Man. That Is the second declaration of it.

3. Let us look upon Man in his actual and effectual Recovery and Restitution;
and here we shall see yet further and more eminent manifestations of God's Love
unto those that are his own in the World: He has declared greatly his Love to
all Mankind, yet much higher Love is in him to all true Christians. It Is said,
Christ looked upon the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19.
and loved him. We also find it recorded, that he loved Martha, and Mary, and
Lazarus: Of this last, they went to Jesus and said, Behold, he whom thou love
is sick? and this was such, John 11.3, 5, 36.
as others observed it: For Jesus weeping at his grave, they said, Behold how
he loved him. And I doubt not but it was a far higher and more endeared Love,
than what he had for the young man; who, it is evident, loved the World more
than Christ, and esteemed earthly Treasure above heavenly. To make this Love of
God more apparent, let us consider the Properties thereof. This Love is great,
comprehensive, free, distinguishing, excellent, satisfying and everlasting.

1. It is a great and transcendent Love which God has declared unto his
People. God, who is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4.
says Saint Paul, for the great love wherewith he loved us. He is a great God,
and his Love is like himself, a great Love: It Is great above humane
expressions, yet some can speak great words. When St. Paul was in his Visions,
he was caught up into Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.
and heard things unutterable. We read of joy unspeakable; 1 Pet. 1.8.
such is the Love of God to his Servants, the best and greatest words are too
weak to declare it; yea, it is greater than the largest apprehensions of Men and
Angels can reach. This Love of God is like the Peace of God, Phil. 4.7.
which St. Paul says, passes all understanding. Hence we find that the four
dimensions, by which men take an estimate of corporeal greatness, are given to
this Love. We read of the breadth, and length, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
and height, and depth of this Love; the very same which are ascribed to God,
to declare the greatness of his perfection; which is said to be as high as
Heaven, Job 11.7, 8, 9.
deeper than Hell, longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea: But I would
speak of it comparatively, and so amplify the greatness of this Love. The Love
of one creature to another is very great: That between David and Jonathan was
great, 2 Samuel 1.26.
and wonderful, even passing the Love of Women; either of one Woman to another,
or of an affectionate Mother to her only Son, or of a loving Wife to her
dearest Husband: But what is David's Love, or the Love of all creatures to
God's Love? The one is but finite, the other infinite: Compare it with the Love
of good men unto God; some have had great affections this way; as David, I love
thee dearly, Psalm. 18.1.
says he, O Lord, my strength: But here is a vast disproportion: If all the
Love that ever have been, now is, and ever shall be in all the Saints, were in
one man's heart, it would be a great Love to God, yet far short of that in God
to them. Let us compare it with the Love of God to other objects; he loves all
his creatures, as such; yet Man above all inferior creatures: The Angels by
Creation had more Love than Man; and he loves Christ yet more than all. Now his
Love to his People is greater than all these, except the last; and though
Christ is the more adaequate object of God's Love, and so has higher measures
of it than Believers are capable of, yet he loves them with the same Love for
quality and kind, that he loves Christ with. This we learn from Christ himself
in his solemn Prayer, That the Love wherewith his Father has loved him, may be
in them. And again, Joh. 17.23, 26.
That the world may know that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.
Every Beam of Light is of the same kind with that in the Sun; every drop of
Water is the same for quality with that in the Ocean; and so every drop of that
Love which falls upon Believers, is the same for kind and nature with what the
Father bears to his Son: Oh the transcendent greatness of his Love! Who is not
amazed at it?

2. It is a comprehensive Love; it includes all the kinds or acts of Love
whatsoever: The Sun is so glorious a Light, because in the light thereof, all
other lights are contained in an eminent manner. Thus it is in this Love of God
to his People, there are all acts of Love in it; there is amor benevolentiae,
the Love of good will; there is amor miserecordiae, a Love of pity and
compassion: Isa. 63.9.
In his love and in his pity he redeemed them. This Love inclines him to
succor them in misery, and to help them in trouble: There is also amor
amicitiae, the Love of friendship, which he manifests to them as they come to
close with him in the Covenant. I entered into Covenant with thee, Ezekiel. 16.8.
says the Lord to Israel, and thou becamest mine, and this was the time of
Love. This is reconciling Love, which is nothing but a redintegration, or
renewing of broken friendship between God and us: Sin makes the breach, and
God's Love makes it up: Hence comes Abraham a Heathen and an Enemy, to be
called the Friend of God: James 2. Romans 5.8, 10.
Herein has God commended his Love, that his People, when Enemies, were
reconciled by the death of his Son. Into such friendship has this Love brought
them, as the secrets of God are revealed to them: Shall I hide from Abraham,
says God, Genesis 17.17.
the thing that I will do? Thus Christ called his Disciples Friends; For, Joh.
15.15.
says he, Whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you.
There is also amor beneficentiae, the Love of Beneficience; his heart opens his
hand to do them good, even beyond all the good of this World. He loves them,
therefore he gives his Son for them, 1 John 4.9.
and to them, and into them, that he may live in them, and they live through
him. It is this Love that gives them the remission of their sins: He has loved
them, Rev. 1.6.
and washed them from their sins in his own blood: It Is this Love that confers
Adopting grace: Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed 1 John 3.1.
upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. It is this Love that moves
him to comfort them: He has loved us, says St. Paul, and given us everlasting
consolation; 2 These. 2.16.
If not always the sense of comfort, yet firm and sure grounds of strong and
durable consolation: Once more, There is also amor complacentiae, a Love of
complacency and delight God has in his People, which is the highest act or
degree of Love: All his delight is in his Saints, Psalm. 16.3.
that are in the earth: His Truth, his Worship, and his People are all he has
any great delight in here in this World: To a contrite Christian, that trembles
at his word, Isa. 66.2.
he looks with an eye of greater complacency, than to Heaven and Earth. That Is
the second property.

3. It is free Love: Absolutely, perfectly free. I will Love them freely, Hos.
14.4.
says God by the Prophet Hosea. If he did not love freely, he could not love
at all, such vile Creatures as we are; There is no cause of his Love, but his
Love: The Lord did not set his Love upon Israel, because they were more in
number than any other People, Deuteronomy. 77.8.
but because he loved them. Free it is in every sense and respect; There was no
want of us, or of our services; For he is alsufficient, and what want can be to
him that is infinit^ to whom there can be nothing added The Sea, though a vast
Ocean, yet becau^^ finite, is capable of addition and di^^nution; but what can
be added to innity, which comprehends all things wi^^ in it self? Isa. 40.15,
17.
Behold, he takes up the Isles as very little thing, the Nations before him
(...) as a drop of a bucket, as the small dust of (...) balance: All Nations
are counted to his as nothing, less than nothing and vanit^ His Love therefore
is not a love of in^gence, but of redundance, flowing o^ freely: Also it was
without purchase (...) merit on his Peoples part, and in the sense free: They
have not enough to p^^chase the least outward mercy, much l^^^ special Love;
it is bestowed gratis, wi^^out money and without price: Even the merit and blood
of Christ did not p^^chase the Love of Benevolence; but the Love was the cause
of Christ's comi^^ and of all he did and suffered: Romans 5.8.
God commended his love to us, because when we w^^^ sinners, Christ died for
us, says St. P^^^ We have demerit enough to draw (...) the wrath and hatred of
God, but nothing to be an attractive of his Love: It is f^^^ also, because
given without grudgi^^ God loves his people with all his hea^^ and with all his
soul, Jer. 31.41.
and he upbraids not. Free also it is, because without constraint: None could
impose upon God in this matter; he could have withheld it, and denied it for
ever, and none could compel him to set his love upon them. In a word, It is
free Love, because it can receive no compensation from them who are the objects
of it. Can a man be profitable to the Almighty, Job 22.3.
as a man may be profitable unto himself? This the Lord foresaw, and yet loves
them.

4. It is a very peculiar, distinguishing Love: This is declared in those
saving mercies he bestows upon them, and denies to others, though they to whom
they are denied, fall under the same external circumstances, (if not greater
sometimes,) with those to whom they are given. A full instance of this we have
in Jacob and Esau: Was not Esau Jacob's Brother, Mal. 1.2.
says the Lord? yet I have loved Jacob, and I have hated Esau. Not that God
who is Love, did or could hate the person of Esau, abstractly considered; he
loves the person he made, and hates the sin he never made: He is said to hate
the workers of iniquity, but it is for their works sake: But here in the
Prophet, it is to be taken for a less degree of love, which is often called
hated in the Scriptures: Genesis 29.31.
It Is said, Ja^^ hated Leah; it is meant comparatively, (...) loved her with a
less degree of love the Rachel. Luke 14.26.
So it is said, He that hates not F^ther and Mother, etc. yea, and his own
li^^ also, cannot be Christ's Disciple. In oth^^ Scriptures we are commanded to
lov^ these relations, and to preserve our live and therefore it is to be
understood of lower degree of love: In comparison (...) our love to Christ, our
love to thing here below, should be rather a kind (...) hatred than love: Thus
God loved Jac^^ with such a transcendent, peculiar, d^^^ stinguishing Love, as
in compariso^^ he is said to hate Esau: His Lov^ to Jacob was manifested in
bestowing peculiar favors upon him, whe^^ Esau had only common mercies: H^
could say, I have enough, but Jacob said I have all. God passed a gracious
decre^^ and purpose upon Jacob, which he di^ not upon Esau, Romans 9.11, 12, 13.
as St. Paul testifies: The Children not being yet born, neither having done
good or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand he
said, The elder shall serve the younger, (...) it is written, Jacob have I
loved, but Esa^^ have I hated. Genesis 28.22, 13.
God appeared to Jacob, and established his Covenant with him; this he did not
to or with Esau: Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.4.
He made Jacob a Prince with himself, and gave him by prayers and tears to
overcome him: Of a wrestling Jacob, he became a prevailing Israel; this he gave
not to Esau: And though Esau had another name given him, yet it was a worse;
Edom, which signifies red, because of his red hairy complexion, as some think,
or because of the red Pottage he desired, and for it sold his birthright, as
others judge: But this signifies not so well as Esau, which imports protection:
But Jacob is yet much more excellent. In a word, Jacob had a very gracious and
savoury spirit: We read, when his Brother asked him who his Children were, he
answered, These are the Children whom the Lord has graciously given thy
Servant: We find no such favoury expressions fall from Esau: What
distinguishing love is there in all these passages? which will appear yet more
fully, if we consider that Esau was upon even ground with Jacob in outward
privileges, and in some above him. Romans 9.10.
They both descended from the same Parents; both under the Seal of the
Covenant, Circumcision; both had Education in the same Family; and herein Esau
excelled, that he was the firstborn, Genesis 25.
and the beloved Son of his good Father Isa^ yet, says the Lord, Jacob have I
loved, (...) Esau have I hated. O what wonderful ^^^culiar distinguishing love
is here! T^^ is the Love of God to all his People two that lie in the same
womb, broug^ up in the same family, the one taken, (...) other left; the one
beloved, the oth^^ not.

5. It is an excellent and precious Lo^^ even to admiration. How excellent
((...) precious, as it is in the Margin of y^^ Bibles) is thy loving kindness,
Psalm. 36.7.
O God! S^^^ the Psalmist. Some think he speaks (...) Gods general loving
kindness, and if (...) then the argument is the stronger; H^ much more
excellent is his love to (...) own people? When a man does well, (...) commend
him; if he does eminently, (...) extol him; but if his actions be sup^^^
eminent, then we admire him. Such the love of God, not only good, as Da^ says;
Thy loving kindness is good, (...) excellent, yea, even to wonderment. H^
excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! Compare it with other things that men
este^^ precious, and we shall see this true. W^^^ is one of the most excellent
creatures God, yet the experience the Spo^^ had of this love of God, caused her
to (...) Thy love is better than Wine. Cant. 1.
The love of Christ manifested in his Ordinances, is as a feast of fat things,
Isa. 25.6.
as Wine on the lees well refined. Let but their Souls enjoy communion with
him, and they have a more abundant sweetness, than in the choicest pleasures of
this World. Psalm. 104.15. Prove. 30.6, 7.
Wine makes glad the natural heart of man, therefore it is said, Give Wine to
them that are of a heavy heart. But the Love of God shed abroad into the heart,
makes glad even the very Soul of man. Wine may ^^^vive and restore the natural
Spirits, but this love restores the Soul, and makes believers forget terrors
of conscience, and ^gonies of Spirit, and remember their mise^^ no more. What
should I speak of Wine, which is but one help to nature? Life is ^^e most
excellent good in nature, and ^^e most desirable mercy. When God ^^lls Baruch
that he will give him his life or a prey, he implies, Jer. 45.
that it is the ^eatest outward good, and therefore made the matter of a
promise. He knew the worth of it, who said, Job. 2.4.
Skin for Skin, and all a man has will he give for his life. ^et the Psalmist
declares the loving kind^ess of God to be better than life. Psalm. 63.3.
These words are variously read. Some thus; Melior est quam virorum; Thy loving
kindness is better than the love of men Their favor many times is a snare, and
sometimes a mischief. Gods Love is always beneficial, yea, it is beatifical.
Su^^ vitas, say others; who understand it (...) the conditions of life men
choose t^^ themselves; As we commonly say, suc^ live a Husbandmans life, a
Scholars life or a Soldiers life; Take which of the^^ lives you please, or
take them together and all of the like nature that you can ad^^^ to them, and
the love of God is bette^ than all those lives, with all their accommodations.
Take it as most usually it is for man's natural life; which is the be^^^ and
most excellent natural good, and so w^^^ read. To him that is joined to all the
living there is hope, For a living Dog is be^ter than a dead Lion. We read also
tha^ the Philosopher preferred the least Fl^^ upon this account, Eccles. 9.4.
that it has life, to th^^ Sun, which though far more glorious, y^^ it is
inanimate, and without life; B^^ notwithstanding all this, the loving kindness
of God is a more excellent goo^ better than life it self; for it brings ne^rer
to God; In thy favor is life, sai^ David, even eternal life: It is this Lo^^
that makes life desirable and pleasant: Psalm. 30.5.
(...) is not worth the while to live in t^^ World, only to enjoy sensual
pleasures, and worldly profits, which are but for a season, and perish in the
using: Now, Quod efficit tale, magis est tale; that which makes life
delightful, must needs be more pleasant it self: This was it which made David
the more thankful to God for restoring his health, and sparing his life, even
because of the Love of God with which his life was crowned: Psalm. 103.2, 4.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, says he, and forget not all his benefits; who
redeemed my life from destruction, and crowned me with loving kindness and
tender mercies. In a word, natural life is not so far good, but it may be
apprehended sub ratione mali, as an evil, and this not only by Achitophel,
Judas, and all such who destroy their own lives, but even by very holy men, as
Elijah, Job, Jonah, and others, who have petitioned the Lord very earnestly,
either through slavish fear, or pressing afflictions, or sinful impatience,
that they might die, that God would take away their lives, and the like
expressions; I am weary of my life, Genesis 27.46.
says Rebeccah, because of the Daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a Wife of them,
what good will my life do me? But none ever was known to put up such prayers,
or make such complaints, touching the Love of God: None ever said thus, or to
the effect, Lord, take away thy Love from me; or, Lord, I am weary of thy lovi^
kindness, and if such and such crosses b^fal me, what good shall thy Love do m^
No, no; the Saints know that this is the life of their lives, the joy of their
heart their greatest comfort at all times, a^^ their only support in evil
times. Tha^ the fifth.

6. The Love of God is a satisfy^^ Love; it is satisfying both to God a^^ good
men: To God, who is said to r^^ in his Love; Zeph. 3.17.
he stays himself upon (...) Love, being every way self-sufficient: (...) is
said to be well pleased in his Son, Mat. 3.17.
(...) center, acquiesce, or rest in him. God (...) also said to rest in his
Sabbaths, and to re^^ in his Church and People: Of Sion (...) has said, Psalm.
132.13, 14.
This is my rest for ever; yet ^^timately, he does rest in his Love; this (...)
fully satisfying to his heart: There is n^ thing external that he can rest in;
eith^^ he must rest in his Love, or be left wit^out any hope of rest, which
cannot po^^sibly befall him: It is also that whi^^ gives all good men full
satisfaction, at a^^ times, and in all things; though the have all outward
things they can desir^^ yet if he withdraws but the sense of (...) Love, they
are troubled, disquieted, Cant. 3. Cant. 5.
and cannot rest, as you see in the Spouse: But when they enjoy this, they can
say, they have enough, they are satisfied: John 14.8.
Show us the Father, said they, and it suffices. It supplies all wants, it
fills up all conditions: Let them have the clear apprehensions, and sensible
fruitions of this Love, and this will give them better content and
satisfaction, than all the World can do in the want thereof. Isa. 55.2.
Here men are spending their money for what which is not bread, and their
labor for that which satisfies not; Verily, there is more solid satisfaction
in the enjoyment of this Love, than the quintescence of all earthly
contentments, if extracted, are able to afford: As to other things, that of
Solomon is true, Eccles. 1.8.
The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing; nor yet the
heart with enjoying; but they who share in this Love of God, may well sit down
and rest themselves, saying, Psalm. 16.6.
The lines are fallen to us in pleasant places, yea, we have a goodly heritage.
Eccl. 5.10.
The Scripture assures us, That he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied
with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase: But he that has a part
and lot in this Love, may say as the good old Patriarch did in another case, It
is enough, Genesis 45 48.
that my Son Joseph is yet alive so, it is enough that I enjoy the Love (...)
God, may a Christian say; I rest whe^^ God rests, I am satisfied where he
(...) ultimately satisfied even in his own Lov^ and I can desire no more; I
hunger a^^ thirst after no other thing. Better is (...) dinner of green herbs,
with God's Lov^ than a stalled Ox, Pro. 15.17.
and his hatred therewit^

7. The Love of God to his own, is a^^ everlasting love; it is a love that
reach (...) from one eternity unto another: T^^ Psalmist says thus, Psalm. 90.2.
From everlasting (...) everlasting thou art God: Let me say, From everlasting
to everlasting God is Love^ and that not in his Nature and Essen^^ only, but in
his works and manifestation to all true Believers. (1.) It is from eve^lasting;
it is no novel thing, of yeste^day, but an ancient love, as ancient as the
Ancient of days: The Lord appeared to (...) of old, Jer. 31.1.
says Jeremiah the Prophet, sayin^ I have loved thee with an everlasting lo^^
And when Christ prayed that the Fath^^ would grant his requests about the
unio^^ he desired between himself and Believer^ and between Believers each with
other his end was, that the World might kno^ that the Father had loved them,
Jo. 17.
as (...) loved him; How was that? even fr^^ everlasting. For, says he, thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world, that is, from everlasting: The
love of his Saints unto him is but of yesterday, if their life and love had
began together; but many are long in the World before they have any affections
toward him: Every one give him not the kindness of youth, but too many may
with grief of heart lament, as that excellent man Saint Austin is said to have
done, Nimis sero te amavi, Domine: Lord, it was too late when I loved thee. But
his love to them was as early as eternity it self. (2.) It is also unto
everlasting; it is of the same nature with himself, unchangable; Joh. 13.1.
Having loved his own, which were in the World, he loved them unto the end.
Psalm. 103.17.
His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him. It must
needs be so, for it is supported by everlasting Pillars, viz. the merit of
Christ, Dan. 9.24.
in whom is everlasting Righteousness; the New Covenant, which is durable, even
an everlasting Covenant: The Power of God, Isa. 55.3. Isa. 26.4. Isa. 9.6.
in whom is everlasting strength: The relation between God and them; he is
their everlasting Father: The way in which all good men de^^^e to walk, is of
the same nature; L^^^ me, says David, Psalm. 139.24.
in the way everlasting. The love of creature quickly fades and fails; at the
furthe^ their loves and their lives perish together it may be before death. 2 Samuel 13.15.
It Is said of A^non, that after he had defiled his Sister the hatred wherewith
he hated her, was more than the love wherewith he loved her; but (...) death,
Romans 8.35, 39. Isa. 54.
their love dies with them; b^^ death cannot separate from the Love o^ God, and
Christ. The Mountains shall (...) part, and the Hills be removed; not onl^
natural, but even those metaphoric^^ Mountains of desertion, temptation an^
corruption, shall be removed, which may and often do take away the sensible
man^ festations of this Love from Believers but the Love abides for ever; God's
kindness shall never depart, nor the Covenan^ of his Peace be dissolved: He may
sharply rebuke and chasten them, yet dearly and constantly love them: Rev. 3.19.
Whom the Lo^^ loves, he rebukes and chastens: He has said He will visit their
iniquity with a rod, Psalm. 98.32, 33.
an^ their transgression with stripes; yet he add^ my loving kindness will I
not take from the^ nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Among^^ men it is true,
Pro. 13.24.
He that spares the Rod, h^teth the Child, but he that loves him, ch^steneth
him betimes. The Rod of affliction is the fruit of God's affection, and th^^
affection will not suffer him to do any thing but what he knows is for their
good. It is good for me, says David, Psa. 119.
that I was afflicted: So Israel went into captivity for their good; You
thought evil, says Joseph, Genesis 50.20.
but God meant it unto good. Even our Lord Jesus Christ, who was the Son of his
Father's love, yet under the sense of his Fathers displeasure: Much more may
Believers expect this. Joh. 11.3.
He whom thou love is sick, said they to Christ, when Lazarus lay sick. So
when God suffered Enemies to carry Israel captive, says the Prophet, Thou have
given the dearly beloved of thy Soul into the hands of their Enemies. Jer. 12.7.
Great affections and great afflictions are not inconsistent: Men may be under
temporal dispensations of outward mercies, yet be in their sins, and so under
the hatred of God: Thus on the other hand, men may lie under great and many
troubles, and yet be the objects of God's eternal Love, as Job, and many others
have found by their experience: Eccles. 9.2.
He will not have us know love or hatred by what is before us, but rather by
what is within us; not by our outward condition, but by our inward disposition,
by his holy operations in us and upon us; If these be in us, we are the objects
of his Love, and if once so, it is ever so; he does not love, and the
afterward hate; but his Love is eve^lasting, like himself, yea, it is himself,
f^^ God is love. -- Now follows the practic^ Application of this Truth.

Use 1. If things be thus, That God h^^ declared such Love to the Sons of Me^^
and to his own, Then here we may tal^ up matter of Admiration, Job 7.17.
and say, Lo^^ What is man that thou should magn^^ him, and set thy heart
upon him? Ta^^ Man in his Constitution, and so he pr^ceeds from nothing; take
him in comp^tition with God, Isa. 40.15.
and so he is less th^^ nothing, and vanity; take him in his deg^neration, and
so he is worse than nothin^ consider him in his restoration, and so (...)
amounts to nothing; I am not behind (...) chiefest Apostles, says St. Paul,
though I (...) nothing. Now for God to publish h^^^ Love at the rate he has
done, to such (...) these, may it not amaze, and call out the utmost wonderment
both of Men an^ Angels? What may or can do it, if n^ this? It was the
expression of that h^^ man, Job 7.17, 18.
Lord, What is man that thou shoulde^^ visit him every morning, and try him
eve^ moment? He admired God should spen^ a Rod upon Man in order to his goo^^
How much more then may this raise (...) wonderment, that he should set his love
thus upon him? May we not say, Is this after the manner of men, O Lord God? As
David in another case said. Let our hearts be enlarged in a holy admiration of
this Love of God, and of this God who is love it self.

Use 2. How much does it concern us to see whether we have our part in the
peculiar love of God: all men share in his common goodness, few have interest
in his special, and distinguishing love: Now the stress of this discerning the
love of God, lies upon the Holy Ghost: He only can give the full assurance, and
sense of this love to a particular Soul: Hence we read of the Love of God shed
abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost. Romans 5.5.
This holy Spirit is acquainted with the heart and mind of God, and does
infallibly know those upon whom his love is set, and he only can display the
banner of love so, as to work up the heart of any to a secret persuasion of an
interest in it. Let us therefore above all things wait and pray for the
witnessings of the Spirit. Yet for our help in this matter, let me say, that
this love is discernable sometimes (especially when the Soul is free from
Clouds of passion, fears and darkness) even by the effects of it upon the heart
and life The least sincere love to him, is an evidence he has looked in upon
our Sou^ and loved us. 1 John 4.19.
We love him, says the Apostle, because he loved us first. Our love to him is
a beam of his love to us reflected back upon himself. Now our love (...)
discerned by our appretiations of God and by our affections to all that is
relat^ unto God; by our love to his Son, to hi^ house, to his commands, to his
Servants and unto all that bear his Image: In a word, if every dispensation of
God draw^ us more after God, it is as comfortable ^symptom of Gods love to us,
as I can fin^ in all the Scripture. Hos. 11.4.
I drew them, says the God of Israel, with cords of love. And again he says,
Jer. 31.3.
I have loved thee with a^ everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee. If God gives in of himself in any duty, the Soul is
thankful; if he witholds and answers not, the Sou^ is more humble before him,
and mournfu^ after him; 1 Samuel 28.
Not as Saul, who when God answered him not presently, went away to the Witch
of Endor; 2 Kings 6.33.
nor like him who said. Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? But as one
resolved to lie at his foot, hoping, and quietly waiting for the Salvation of
the Lord. If God gives outward comforts, and the Soul is not proud under them,
but is more vile in its own eyes, less than the least of all mercies; and if he
denies these things, that the Fig Tree blossom not, etc. yet it can rejoice in
the Lord alone: If he gives any sensible manifestation of himself, the the Soul
rejoices with trembling; if he hides his face, yet it follows him when it
cannot see him, it will serve him; if it cannot enjoy him, yet it will obey
him: Thus to be drawn nearer to God by every carriage of his to us, as the
Woman of Canaan was, Matthew. 15.
is a good sign he has loved us with an everlasting love.

Use 3. This Doctrine is a Spring of strong consolation, especially to you who
share in the peculiar love of God: If he loves, no matter who hates: The
Princes love will more than countervail the Courtiers envy: It Is said, that
when Joseph's Brethren saw that Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
they hated him, Genesis 37.3, 4
and could not speak peaceably to him. Thus it is often with Gods Children: The
World will hate them, even because God loves them; Yea, it may be, for this
they may lose the love of their natural Relations; but set this fountain
against the want of the streams, and Gods love will do you more good, than the
hatred of men and Devils can do you hurt. Further, if God loves, nothing can be
wanting that is good for us, for love is bountiful; He loves his people from
the Pit, he loves grace into them, and will love them into heaven at last: If
he loves he does all things in love, every bitter pil^ is rolled up in this
Sugar; if he loves, he makes all things work for good. When Balaam attempted to
curse Israel, 'ti^ said, Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5.
The Lord thy God would not hearke^ to him, but turned the curse into a
Blessing because the Lord thy God loved thee; out of the eater comes meat, and
out of the strong sweetness: How comfortable is the condition of all those who
are the objects of special divine love? What has been spoken about this love
should allay all objections about it. Say not, I can see no reason why God
should love me, and so cannot be comforted: For the reason of his love is in
and from himself. It is a piece of his Sovereignty to love freel^ Say not, I
have walked unworthy of this love, I have sinned against and after choice
manifestations of this love* For though this is ground of great humiliation,
yet not of discouragement; unworthiness did not hinder him from placing his
love upon you at first, nor can it hinder the continuance of it now, for he
knew and foresaw what thou would be and do. Isa. 18.8.
I know that thou would deal treacherously, says the Lord to Israel by
Esaias. Yet he has set his love upon thee; and therefore though he may inflict
fatherly chastisements upon thee, yet he will not take away his fatherly
affections from thee. For his love is an everlasting love. Neither let any say,
God hides his face from me, how can I think he loves me? For did he not desert
Christ, and yet loved him very dearly at that time? David frowned upon Absalom,
and banished him from his presence a great while, yet it is said, 2 Samuel 14.1.
Joab perceived that the heart of David was toward Absalom. God may alter the
show of his countenance, but his heart is not changed, his love is still
toward thee.

Use. 4. Let it be of Exhortation, in a few particulars.

1. This calls upon all to seek for a part and interest in the peculiar love of
God. His common love is not enough to make us happy. He gives it, that we might
be tempted to look after his special love. The time will come when there will
be an end of all the common love of Go^ that^s no everlasting love, it contin^^
at longest but while life lasts; if ^miss of this peculiar love, we have l^^^
all the common love, and for want (...) Covenant-love must lie down under (...)
infinite hatred and displeasure of God (...) and ever; Oh tremble and b^fraid
of neglecting to secure your part^^ the distinguishing love of God! Kno^ that
this love is not a sealed fountain, b^ is free to all that will believe in
Christ, (...) obey the Gospel, whatever their sins have been: Let none despair
of having the part herein; This cuts off all endeavou^ after it. Let this text
settle good though^ of God in every ones heart: He the judged God a hard
Master, Matthew. 25.
hid his tale^^ I know no better antidote against despo^dency than this text.
Come in and acce^^ of this love in the way of the Gospel, (...) will pardon all
thy sins, it is given (...) notwithstanding all the vileness of the creature;
This Great and excellent lo^^ may be had freely, O beg, cry mighti^^^ give the
Lord no rest till you have (...) interest in it. When one heard of the lov^
that was between two very intima^^ friends, he cried out, O utinam tertius
essen^^ O that I were a third, that I might sha^^ with them in their great
love! You have heard of the great love of God to believers. Be in a flame, and
burn with desires to share in this love of God. Every one is ambitious of the
love of great ones: Many seek the Rulers favor, Proc. 29.26.
though sometimes it proves a snare, if not a mischief. But behold, here is a
Ruler whose favor was never sought in vain, if sought in time; and which
always proves beneficial; yea, beatifical: What will the love of Friends and
Relations profit us? what will the love of all the World advantage us without
this excellent, satisfying, comprehensive, and eternal love of God? Luther is
reported to say, God should not put him off with these things. And if all the
honor the King put upon Haman, could not content him without Mordecai's bow,
much less should expressions of common love from God satisfy our Souls, but we
should daily put up David's request, Remember us O Lord with the favor thou
bear unto thy people. Psalm. 100.4.
That Is the first Exhortation.

2. Let none abuse this text and truth unto presumption; It is too common ^or
men to go on in a state of sin, and ways of wickedness, and yet rest on this,
that God is love, God is me^ciful, Christ died for sinners, and the like: But
such as walk after the imagin^tions of their own hearts, adding dru^kenness to
thirst, and yet say they sha^^ have peace, they doubt not but God lov^ them as
well as the best of them all; the is Spider-like, to suck poison from t^^
sweetest Flower in the Garden of (...) Scriptures, and the wrath of God w^^^
smoke against such, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21.
and the curses w^^ten in the Book of God will come upon them; he will blot out
their names from under heaven, and will separate the^^ unto evil. This is to
abuse the love (...) God, and to provoke even the God (...) love himself to
anger; and love abuse^ turns to fury. The sweetest Wine make^ the sharpest
Vinegar, and this sweet lov^ of God wronged and affronted, is th^^sting of
Hell, the emphasis and accent (...) the misery of such as live and dye un^^ the
guilt thereof. Romans 6.1, 2.
Shall we sin, says (...) Paul, that grace may abound? God forb^^ we cannot
with abhorrency enough entertain such notions. This is to have on eye evil,
because Gods is good, to tu^^ the love of God into lasciviousness, therefore
let us all beware thereof. Let a^^ that share in this love, make suitable
improvement thereof: This lies in imitation, and in contemplation: We should
abour to be like God in this, and imitate him, though we cannot equalize him:
He is Love to us, let us be love to him: Oh love the Lord all ye his Saints!
Psalm. 31.19.
All our services without this are worth nothing: Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, and of the Gospel too, without it our services are burdensome to our
selves, and unacceptable to God: Love makes hard things easy to us, and small
things grate^ul to him: This makes what we do so ^leasing, because it is so
suitable: God is (...) Spirit, therefore he is so well pleased with such as
worship him in Spirit, as being most agreeable to his nature: The ^ike may be
said here; God is love, and requires to be served in love, for it is the
perfection of all graces and duties; He that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him: Can we have a higher or more noble pattern than love it self?
What text in all the Bible can read us a more full lecture of love than this?
Let us study to write it out into our hearts, and pray for the fulfilling of
that promise; Deuteronomy. 30.6.
I will circumcise your heart to love the Lord your God, with all your heart,
and with all your Soul, etc. Were it once engraven on our hearts, it would be
legible in our lives and walkings. This Apostle John tell us, that love is both
the Old Commandment, and the New, urging love upon a new motive, even the love
of God and Christ to us. Joh. 13.34.
A New Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. Oh that this example might prevail upon us
not to live in the neglect of love to God or man, but to abound therein, as he
has given us precept and president for it. Let the impression of Gods love be
such upon our hearts, as to revive the decayed love amongst his People, that it
may once again be said, as anciently it was; See how the Christians love one
another. 1. Let our love run out to all men, for Gods love does so: Which had
such an influence upon Mr. Fox, that he never denied any one that begged of him
for Gods sake. And let us not forget to love our Enemies, for this is to
imitate God, who commended his love to his people, that when they were sinners,
enemies, ungodly, Christ died for them: Be ye therefore followers of God, as
dear Children, and walk in love, as he has loved you. 2. We should contemplate
this infinite love of God; solace our selves in the Meditation of this love. It
is the sweetest of the Divine Attributes; St. Paul says, Now abides faith,
hope, and charity; but the greatest of these is charity: Let me say; There are
many glorious attributes of God, his Power, Wisdom, Justice, and Love, but the
sweetest of these is love: Yea, it is the sweetner of all the other attributes:
The wisdom of God would amaze us, his power confound us, and his Justice
destroy us, were it not for his love. Who would not be much in the
contemplation of it, and say with the Church, Cant. 1.4.
We will remember thy love more than Wine? We may go too far in the
contemplation of the other attributes, as in examining the reason of his
actings toward his creatures; but we can never go too far in the meditation of
his love: And when we cannot reach the bottom of it, let us imitate the
Philosopher, who not being able to give the reason of the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea, threw himself into it, saying, Si ego non capiam te, tu capies me: If
I cannot comprehend thee, thou shall comprehend me. Oh how sweet is it to bathe
our Souls in the Ocean of divine love, to drown our selves in the contemplation
thereof! Especially considering, what power it has to bear up our Spirits in
all our troubles and adversities. When of old, great Calamities, were coming
upon the Earth, when death came up into the windows, God gave forth this
Attribute of his Lovingkindness to his People to rejoice in, and solace
themselves with: Let him that glories, glory in this, Jer. 9.22, 23, 24.
that he knows me to be* God exercising loving kindness in the Earth. Thus do
in perilous and evil days; by Faith and Meditation solace our selves i^ in the
apprehension of God's Love, the we may possess our Souls in patience, and enjoy
God in our troubles; Oh let us live and die cleaving by Faith to this Love till
we lanch into the infinite Ocean (...) it, and so come to a fuller
understanding of this Text, that, God is Love.


SERMON II.
Ephesians 2.8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.


THat these words have relation to the foregoing passages is evident, by the
particle (For) in the beginning of them. Some think the Apostle reassumes the
Argument he had hinted at in the 5th v. in a Parenthesis, By grace ye are
saved, and so gives a more full explication of them. Others refer them to what
is spoken in the 7th verse, where the Apostle shows the end God had in the
application of Salvation to these Ephesians, who were Gentiles, which was, that
in the Ages to come he might show forth the exceeding riches of his grace in
his kindness, etc. And then adds the words of the Text as a reason thereof; For
by grace are ye saved; as if he had said, God has therefore ordered it thus
toward you, that it may appear that the Original of Salvation, and of all the
means leading to it, is merely and purely of grace. In the words we have
Salvation laid down, with the Causes of it. (1.) The Principal Cause, Grace; By
grace are ye saved. (2.) The Instrumental Cause, is Faith; Through faith. (3.)
The Original of this Faith; this is set down, negatively; And that not of your
selves: And affirmatively; It is the gift of God. There are three things in the
words observable. (1.) That the Saints and People of God are saved here. (2.)
That their Salvation is by or of grace (3.) That the Faith through which they
are saved, is not of themselves, but is the gift of God. Of these in order.



Doct. 1. That the People of God are saved here. It Is twice set down in this
chapter, verse 5. and in the Text, and in the present tense, ye are saved. To
open this briefly.

Quest. 1. What is Salvation, and what kind of Salvation is here intended?

Answ. Salvation imports deliverance from evil and misery. I'ts threefold;
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. (1.) Temporal Salvation, relating to the
outward man ( Exodus 14.13.) Stand still, says Moses to the Israelites, and see
the Salvation of the Lord. This was an external bodily deliverance from the
Egyptians. (1 Samuel 19.5.) The Lord wrought great Salvation for all Israel;
which was deliverance from their Enemies the Philistines. (2.) Spiritual
Salvation. The Angels that stand were never under misery, therefore they are
never said to be saved, (for Salvation is from misery) as men are. ( Luke
1.71.) That we should be saved from our Enemies, etc. Our spiritual Enemies are
here intended, those that war against our Souls. (3.) Eternal Salvation. Now is
your Salvation nearer than when ye believed, ( Romans 13.11.) that is, your
perfect and complete Salvation. ( Heb. 9. ult.) Christ shall appear the second
time without sin unto Salvation.
Now when the Apostle says, Ye are saved, we may take it for spiritual, yea,
we may include eternal Salvation; for not only the Text, but also other
Scriptures speak the same Language. This day is Salvation come to this house,
says Christ, speaking of Zacheus, ( Luke 19.9.) and his own coming thither.
And the Apostle speaking of the preaching of the Cross, (1 Cor. 1.18.) namely,
of Christ crucified upon the Cross, says, to us which are saved, it is the
power of God. And Christ in his prayer, ( Joh. 17.3.) says, This is life
eternal to know thee, etc. Not i^ the future tense, it shall be, but in the
present, It is life eternal. He that has the Son, has life; (1 John 5.12.)
Christi^^ the Prince and Principle of life; he th^^ has union with him, and
interest in him has life. What life? not only the life (...) righteousness,
whereby he is justified, an^ the life of holiness, whereby he is sanctified,
but in a sense, the life of happine^ and glory. We read, ( John 3.18.) (...)
that believes not is condemned already, (...) cause he has not believed on
the name of the only begotten Son of God. That is, the sentence of condemnation
is past against him (which yet by his believing shall be reversed,) and there
wants nothing but execution. Should the thread of his frail life by which he
hangs over the Pit of destruction, be cut, while he is in this condition, he is
gone and lost for ever. No^ is an unbeliever condemned already, an^ are not
true Believers saved already Surely yes: Hence Christ says in the last verse
of that chapter; He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: H^ walks
upon the Battlements of Heaven and has one foot in the Porch of Paradise.
Those that shall be saved hereafter are saved here.

Quest. 2. Ye will say, In what respects are the People of God saved here?

Answ. 1. In pretio; in the price that was laid down for it: For not only are
Believers themselves bought with a price, (1 Cor. 6.20.) but Salvation it self.
Hence it is that the Apostle, ( Ephesians. 1.14.) calls Heaven a purchased
Possession. Though to us a free gift, yet to Christ a dear purchase. No man
ever made such a purchase of Lands, as Christ has made of Souls: He purchased
the Church with his own blood, ( Acts 20.28.) The Apostle speaking of, (1 Pet.
1.18, 19.) says, It was not with silver and gold, that Believers are redeemed,
but by the precious blood of Christ. This was also laid down for Heaven and
Salvation, and in the name of Believers, and to their use; they have a present
right and title to it upon that account. Salvation is not a reversion men come
to after so many years, there are no Leases nor Reversions there; but though
Christ holds possession for them, yet they have a right and title to it, and he
is entered there a forerunner for them.

2. In promisso; in the promise of it. This is the promise that he has
promised us, eternal life, (1 John 2.25.) Great is the difference between
Divine and Humane, promises. Men are either unable, and cannot, or else
unfaithful, and will not perform their promises; but with God t^ promise, and
to perform, is all one. W^ have God's promise for it, the great Cha^ter of
Heaven, and so have the thing ^^self, are as sure of it, as if we were in fu^^
possession. To him that orders his convers^tion aright, will I show the
Salvation of Go^ ( Psalm. 50.23.) He that believes shall be s^^ved, says
Christ, ( Mark 16.16.) Hen^^ have they a firm and sure foundation (...) hope
for the actual possession. ( Titus 1.2.) In hope of eternal life, which God
that cannon lie has promised. And his promise is on^ of those two immutable
things, in which it is impossible for him to lie. ( Heb. 6.18.) Hence the
Apostle tells the Romans, Th^^ we are saved by hope, ( Romans 8.24.) which is by
virtue of the promise, the groun^ of hope.

3. In primitiis; in the prelibations, foretasts, or first fruits of it. They
have (...) pawn, or pledge, or rather an earnest o^ Salvation. The Love of God,
Peace an^ Joy in the Holy Ghost; yea, the Holy Ghost himself is an earnest to
them of the full possession of glory. So he is styled; (2 Cor. 1.22.) And he is
called the earnest of that Inheritance. ( Ephesians. 1.14.) They are here saved from
the condemnation and dominion of sin, from the power of Satan, from the curse
of the Law, from the sting and bitterness of death, as the Scripture plainly
shows. Yea, they are infallibly preserved in a condition of safety, in grace,
in righteousness, once justified, and ever so; for Christ's righteousness is
everlasting. And unto perfect glory; They are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. (1 Pet. 1.5.) What are these but the bunches of Figs, and
clusters of Grapes given the Saints from the heavenly Canaan? Is not this a
good Country? Would you not be glad to be there? You have these first fruits of
the Spirit, to make you groan for the full Vintage, and complete Harvest? Those
first fruits under the Law, assured them of the whole crop. So Believers have
received these beginnings of Salvation, and on that account may be said to be
saved already. If a man walks out early, and see the morning Star, he will say,
the day is coming, the Sun will by and by appear: So if we have these Stars of
grace seen in our hearts, we may know the day of eternal glory is not far off.

Qu. 3. You will say, What are the reasons of this, and what the grounds of it?

Ans. 1. The first is drawn from the ^^der and predisposition of God. The
ete^nal love and good will of God is the fir^^ the highest link and cause of
Salvation* The Scripture resembles man's Salvation to a Chain, on which are
several Link^ as we may say; these Links are so fa^^ned together, that if you
draw one, all the rest will follow; such a concatenatio^ and folding up of
things together the^ is in the matters of Salvation, that gra^ one, and you
grant all. If there be a c^^tain number, whom God has out of (...) eternal
Love predestined unto Salvation, it may as truly be said in the sen^^ above
mentioned, that this number is a^ready saved, because nothing on Earth (...) in
Hell can hinder it: But the first is tru^^ as is evident from what is said, (
Romans ^^.29, 30.) Whom he foreknew, he did pedes^^nate to be conformed to the
Image of his Son^* Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them (...) also called;
whom he called, them he also j^stified; whom he justified, them he also
g^^rified. Here the Apostle uses words (...) the preterperfect tense for
things yet (...) come. Thus has God in his purpos^^ disposed things, to show,
that Predestination and Salvation are so linked together in regard of their
eternal coexisten^^ before him in his counsels and purposes, as this order of
his can never be dissolved. Therefore as they are said to be already foreknown,
already predestined, already called, and already justified; so they may as
truly be said (in the senses before expressed) to be already glorified. I
confess, if it were true some teach, that the purpose of God to save men, were
founded upon faith and good works foreseen to be in them, and done by them, and
that he saves them for these, and their continuance in them, I could not tell
how this should be true, that a man truly called, can be said to be truly
saved. But it is nothing so; but all is of grace, as the next Doctrine will
evidence, and the Text fully expresses. And if their wicked works could not
hinder God from calling and justifying them, though he foresaw them, how shall
he suffer their after-sins to null and make void these blessed acts, and so cut
them short of Salvation? Vocation, Justification, and Glorification, are here
made inseparable by the Apostle; break one, and you break all the Links of this
golden Chain of Salvation. Let none go about to pervert this blessed order of
God, for they shall not be able to destroy it, it is established by his eternal
immutable counsel, and (...) will not suffer it to fall or fail.

2. The second Reason is drawn from the power of the promises, and from the
nature and effect of Faith. (1.) From the power of the promises; they are n^^
weak things, but full of virtue and ef^^cacy to help us to cleanse our selves
(...) (2 Cor. 7.1.) Having these promises, let (...) cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of the fl^^^ and spirit. They do not only work for (...) but
they work in us also, not only as motives and incentives to holiness, but a
operative and influential upon us. Suc^ power do they bring with them, that it
is not in our power whether they shall be fulfilled or not: But though they
offe^ no violence to infringe the liberty of our wills, yet do they enable and
sweethl^ draw us by faith believing, and hope waiting upon God, to perform
those conditions which bring on the execution of them. We are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation, (1 Pet. 1.5.) There is a power of God, and
a power of Faith laying hold on the promises of God, which have a power to
enable us to lay hold of Salvation. (2.) From the nature and effect of Faith;
which is to make things future and absent to be present, to give them a real
existence to the apprehension of the Saints. Hence it is said to be the (...),
the substance, or rather subsistence of things hoped for, etc. Not a natural
being or subsistence in regard of the things themselves, as if Faith did make
that so to be which is not, but a being to the mind of a Believer, a mental
being; this is not a mere fancy or imagination, but such a being as a Christian
is confident of, as if they had a natural present subsistence.
This may be understood by Christ's words, ( John 6.54.) Whosoever eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has eternal life. Though eternal life be to come in
regard of the full fruition of it, yet it has a present existence to the eye
of Faith. These are the grounds of the Doctrine. The Use follows.

Use Of comfort and establishment to true Believers: Though the best is to
come, yet all is not to come, you have something here; the best Wine is kept to
the last, yet you are saved now, you have Christ now, and Heaven now in the
purchase, and promise, and first fruits of it: It Is true, If you have hope in
Christ in this life only, you are of all men most miserable, (1 Cor. 15.19.)
for none on this side Hell suffer so much as Christians often do; and
therefore, though men brin^ their best first, Christ reserves the be^^ to the
last; yet that which they here receive, is more worth than the World* union and
communion with Christ, the Holy Spirit dwelling in them, the grace and comforts
in Ordinances, yea, in afflictions and troubles, those sweet illapse and divine
flashes of light and life, tha^ blessed peace and serenity of Conscienc^ which
is a continual feast, these beginnings of a state of Happiness is better tha^
all the pleasures and treasures on Earth Set this Salvation against all the
cross of this life. This cup of Salvation is abl^ to sweeten the most bitter
cups of Affliction: You receive a Crown here, an^ these crosses serve to
brighten you Crown, to beautify your Profession an^ Religion. Why are we so
cast down a^^ afflictions, when they are but Gems an^ Jewels to adorn this
Crown of Salvation* We meet with many losses, but do w^ consider what our gains
are? Is not Salvation able to recompense our losses* Have we not God, and
Christ, and Salvation still? Why are we so anxious an^ solicitous about these
outward things when if we lose them, and gain Salvation we are great gainers,
but if we lose Salvation and our Souls, what can all the World profit us? Basil
cried out, Farewell life, let my Estate go, I have in Christ a better life, a
more enduring substance; the more I lose for him, the more I find in him. Set
this Salvation against all worldly cares and fears, against an affectation of
earthly vanities; Will Christ give thee a Crown, and deny thee a crumb? If he
has given thee Salvation, he will deny thee nothing good for thee. He would
not have you fear want of these things, when it has pleased him to give you a
Kingdom. O let nothing discourage thee, or slack thy pace toward Heaven, but
run with patience the Race set before thee; for he has given thee Salvation,
as a Garland to a Conqueror, in token of Victory. If any Soul say, O that I
knew that I were of them that have here received Salvation in the first fruits
of it! I answer briefly; Salvation is for the lost: The Son of Man is come to
save that which is lost. Have thou seen, and art under a sense of thy lost
condition and disability to recover thy self? Have thou fled to the City of
Refuge for safety? Art thou gotten really into Christ, united to him by the
Spirit and Faith? There is no Salvation in any other, ( Acts 4.12.) Salvation
is begun here in effectual vocation. (...) has saved us, and called us with an
holy ca^ling, (2 Timothy 1.9.) Salvation infers service, ( Luke 1.74.) Being
delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, we might serve him If thou find
these effects, there is Salvation come to thy house, to thy hear^ and soul; and
thou may rejoice (...) this Salvation: Thou art sav^^ in the Lord with a
spiritual and an eve^^^stin^ Salvation. If yet thou art short of it, the press
after it, work out thy own salvation with fear and trembling. Look to Christ by
Faith, and be ye saved, ( Isa. 45.22. O labor to close with the offers of it
i^ the Gospel. Behold, now is the day of Sa^vation, the day will not always
last; How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? ( Heb. 2.3.) And
if you are partaker of this Salvation, then where you^ happiness is, there let
your hearts be Where the carcass is, there will the Eagles b^ gathered. It Is
the part of a Beetle to creep upon the Earth, but the Eagle is never more like
her self, than when she get furthest off from it. If there be any thing of the
Eagle in you, you will then so^ aloft in Divine Ejaculations, and heavenl^
Meditations. O let your trading and tra^^^ sick be in Heaven! ( Cant. 7.4.) Thy
Nos^ is like the Tower of Lebanon; it is spoken of the Church. Look to the
phrase it self, it seems absurd and ridiculous, to have a Nose lide a Tower, is
monstrous. But the meaning is spiritual, it sets out to us the sharpness of
smell the Spouse had, savouring and resenting heavenly things: Oh let us get
strong affections to Christ, savouring the things above! The Earth moves
downward, but grace is like fire aspiring upwards. The Sun draws up the
vapors, and the Sun of Righteousness should draw all our hearts up to him.
These things well become those that have entered Heaven, as I may say, and are
saved here. O how good is it to have our way of Life above, and to meditate on
the undefiled Inheritance there! Often to take a turn upon Mount Tabor, and to
be transfigured there as Christ was; or upon Mount Olivet, from whence he
ascended up into Heaven: O that we could get upon such a Mountain, and ascend
to God by heavenly meditations and desires! I shall close this first
Propofition with those words, Heb. 12.28.) Wherefore having ^^ceived a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, ^^nce we are entered it already, let us not think we may
live as we list, but let us have ^race to serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear. O walk worthy of him the has called you into his Kingdom and
Glor^.

Doct. 2. That Salvation is of Grace. (...) (or of) Grace are ye saved, says
the Apos^^ here, both in the 5th verse, and in (...) Text. The grace of God
brings salvat^^^ ( Titus 2.11.) Grace is variously taken the Scripture, but
here for the free lo^^ and favor of God, saving them that a^^ unworthy, and
deserve the contran^ especially when God shows favor a^ mercy to some, and not
to others: For is gracious to whom he will be gracious, ( Ro^. 9.15, 16.) and
has compassion on whom (...) will have compassion. If any ask, wheth^^ God
should not have been gracious if (...) had saved all mankind? I answer, Ye^ but
his grace is now more full to tho^^ that he saves when others are lost; eve^^
as a Prince's grace is more full to one (...) two Rebels whom he saves out of
man^ they being obnoxious to the Justice of the Law as well as others. Two
things w^^^ clear the meaning of this Proposition (...) us, if we duly consider
them.

1. That the first and last stone of the building of salvation is of grace: Not
(...) grace infused into us, but of grace as it (...) seated in God, his free
favor to the creature. All the spiritual blessings which are bound up in the
bundle of salvation, flow from this fountain of the free and rich love and
grace of God. Election is of grace, ( Romans 11.6.) There is a remnant according
to the election of grace. Vocation is of grace; the Apostle Paul says, God
called him by his grace, ( Gal. 1.12.) Justification is of grace, ( Romans 3.24.)
Being justified freely by his grace. Regeneration and Adoption are of grace, (
Ephesians. 1.5.) Adoption is said to be according to the good pleasure of his will, (
James 1.18.) Of his own will begat he us. Redemption is said to be according to
the riches of his grace, ( Ephesians. 1.7.) Hope and Faith are of grace. We read of
some who believed through grace, and of good hope through grace, ( Acts 18.8. 2
These. 2.16.) Power against sin is from the same, ( Rom 6.14.) Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. The New
Covenant is a Covenant of grace. When Adam had spent all that stock of grace he
had at first, it was free whether God would set him up again. The giving of the
Gospel is called the dispensation of the grace of God, ( Ephesians. 3.2.) It Is true,
the meritorious cause of all this was the death of Christ, yet it was grace
which set thy design on foot. It was by the grace of God he tasted death, (
Heb. 2.9.) 2. That all this Salvation is only of gra^^ For in the Scripture
grace is opposed works, ( Romans 4.4.) To him that works, the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of d^^ And further, ( Romans 11.6.) he says, if it be
grace, (speaking of Election,) then is i^ more of works; otherwise grace is no
(...) grace: But if it be of works, then is it no m^^ grace; otherwise work is
no more work. Pla^ly setting grace and works in direct op^^sition in the
matters of Salvation. A^ having said here, By grace ye are saved, presently
adds in the next verse; Not works, ( Titus 3.5.) Not by works of ri^teousness
which we have done, but of (...) mercy has he saved us, (2 Timothy 1.9.) (...)
has saved us, and called us, not accord^^ to our works, but according to his
o^^ purpose and grace, which he purposed Christ Jesus, before the world beg^^^
These Scriptures give full witness to the point, and show, that it is only of
gra^^^ and not of works. Therefore those the die in their infancy, and such as
repent the last hour, as the Thief on the Cr^^^ did, are saved by grace only,
for the can do no good works. If it were (...) works, it must be either of
those done before conversion, or of those after it. N^^ of those before
conversion, for they (...) but splendida peccata, as some term them; all a man
does in this state is not only sinful, but sin it self; for they are not done
in faith, without which it is impossible to please God, ( Heb. 11.6.) The
Pharisees, and the young man in the Gospel, did very many good works, yet they
were not saved by their good works. God accounts of fruits according to the
nature of the root whence they spring. A bad Tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, says Christ, ( Matthew. 7.18.) Nor yet of works after conversion, for
when converted, they are in a great measure saved, as you heard in the former
Doctrine. Good works are rather the effect of salvation, for they are new
created unto good works, ( Ephesians. 2. v. 10.) Besides, that cannot be the ground
of salvation, which is it self imperfect, as all their best works are. And were
they free from imperfection, yet could they not merit salvation; because,
whatever merits, it must be proprium, our own; Indebitum, that which we are not
bound to do; and proportionatum, it must bear a proportion to the thing
merited. The best works of the best men are defective and wanting in all these;
for they are not their own, but wrought in God, and by the strength of Christ:
They are due to God, even the utmost of their ability (...) their bounden duty;
nor do finite work bear any proportion to an infinite rewar^ The doings and
sufferings of the be therefore, can be no causes of salvation for they can
never be accepted but by the Righteousness of Christ, and not for a^^ thing in
them or their works mereto^ously. He has made us accepted in the Beloved, (
Ephesians. 1.6.) and therefore salvation is to the praise of the glory of h^^ grace,
as it is in that verse. Some wi^^ say, salvation is promised as a rewar^ ( Heb.
11.26.) but not a reward of deb^ but of free bounty; The gift of God is eternal
life, ( Romans 6. ult.) You will say, Glo^^ is the Crown of Righteousness; but
tha^ is only in respect of God's promise, an^ Christ's purchase. You will say,
A^^ works wholly excluded from the state o^ salvation? Nothing so, only
exclude^ from being the causes of salvation. They are via regni, not causa
regnandi, as some speak. Some from what has been said may grow slighty in good
works, and neglect them. Luther is reported to complain in his time, that if he
commended good works to men, some would do them as if they would set up a
Ladder to climb to Heaven by them; if he extolled the free grace of God as the
grand cause of salvation, and acceptance with God, they would lay aside good
works, or be very negligent and formal in them. But let us remember, that
though salvation be not of good works, yet they ought to be done, because it is
the will of God we should be zealous of good works, ( Titus 2.14.) We are
created in Christ unto good works, which God ordained we should walk in them.
They that have believed in God, should be careful to maintain good works. (
Titus 3.8.) Faith without works is dead; Let our Light so shine before men,
that they may see our good works, etc. ( Mat. 5.16.) Good works, if neglected,
a man cannot be saved, yet are we not saved for them; they are good companions,
which make our journey more comfortable, yet our company do not carry us. And
though salvation be not for them, yet God rewards every man according to them,
and will not suffer any good work to be lost, but will abundantly reward it.
Here I might assign Reasons why salvation is of grace: I will name but one,
because that is hinted at here; namely, to exclude boasting, that no flesh may
glory in God's presence. Not of works, lest any man should boast, says the
Apostle; that all men may walk humbly with God, and glory in him alone; and
hence he says* ( Romans 3.27.) Boasting is excluded; By what Law? by the Law of
works: Nay, but by the Law of faith. The Use follows.

Use 1. Is Salvation of grace, and only of grace? Then here we see how evi^ and
dangerous it is to seek to be saved by or for our good works. No man can be
saved who neglects them, yet no man is saved for them; they are not the cause
of salvation, but grace alone. The Moralist will plead, he has been no
drunkard, no unclean person, no unjust dealer; the Hypocrite will attempt every
good work in show and appearance at least, and the profane person purposes to
be better, and to do better; thus me^ think to be saved by their works: Those
also that are troubled they can do n^ more good works, and not troubled for
want of the knowledge of the grace of God, and for want of his Spirit assisting
to every good work: Are you not those that may say, some of you, that you have
found sweetness from your good works and deeds, when you have been enlarged in
them, rather than from the sense of the rich and free grace of God? When you
have done them well, then you are comforted, but if dead and distracted in
them, then discouraged and cast down; what do these things show, but that we
seek salvation by works? Some cannot endure to hear of the sinfulness of their
good works, of the raggedness of their own best Righteousness: Thus did the
Pharisees, they could not endure Christ should pull up the Bridge upon which
they hoped to go to Heaven; these think to be saved by their good works;
whereas we should say, We serve God, because his free and rich grace invites;
and though imperfections cleave to our works, yet we expect not salvation by
them, but we appeal to the rich and free love and grace of God to save us. To
go about to claim salvation by works, is to take away the heart and life of the
Gospel. A man may as soon think to get over a deep River upon the shadow of a
Tree that grows by it, as get to Heaven by his good works: This very thought
mars and poisons all; if thou think to be saved by them, it is very doubtful
whether thou do not run the very hazard of thy salvation, be thy doings never
so good. The Gospel is a Doctrine of the utmost self-denial; it draws men to
good works in respect of performance and then draws them off from good works in
regard of dependence. O th^^ we could learn this great Mystery!

Use 2. Suffer the word of Exhortation in a few brief particulars. (1.) Le^ us
learn to study the rich and free grace of God more, and to grow in the
knowledge of it; for it is by grace we are saved. The right knowledge of it
strike down all presumption, and engages to duty and service. Men dare not sin
tha^ grace may abound, or turn this grace into wantonness, but will abhor it;
it is the presumptuous man that abuses and despises grace, and makes use of
it to neglect a holy life, and walking in good works. (2.) Let all be
encouraged to seek salvation by grace. Thou maye^^ not say or think, thou can
not be saved because thy sins are many and great; for we read of the manifold
grace of God, to take away thy manifold past and present sins, (1 Pet. 4.10.)
And, where sin abounded grace did much more abound, ( Romans 5.20.) Look for
salvation in this way, and here is hope for thee. It is a speech unbecoming any
to say, The God of grace never intended any thing of grace for me* Seek it
humbly, as Beggars that cannot compel an Alms: Seek it with hope, waiting
patiently on the Lord, and by no means say and think there is no hope for thee.
Grace can save whom it will; it justifies the ungodly, not in but from their
ungodliness, and what ground have thou to conclude against thy self? For a Soul
to say, If I were so holy, I could then cast my self upon grace; it destroys
the nature of grace. Remember that sweet promise, ( Job 22.29.) He will save
the humble person. Put thy self into the arms of grace, and thou will find the
sweetness of it. There is no Soul here this day, but for ought I know, may come
to be saved by this grace, if the fault be not his own, thinking he may live in
his sin, and walk after his ungodly lusts, and yet rest on grace to save him.
Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid, ( Romans 6.1.)
Better it were salvation had never been offered to us, than that either we be
found refusers or abusers of it, and so meet with the sorest destruction. (3.)
Let all God's People know and do their duty in answer to this grace. Mourn for
your sins against the Lord, because grace shall reign notwithstanding all your
sins, as the Apostle shows, ( Romans 5. ult.) Strongly desire the perfection of
salvation; attribute all to grace, as Paul did; he pressed forward toward the
mark, ( Phil. 3.14.) And though he labored more than others, ye^ he says, it
was not he, but the grace o^ God which was with him, (1 Cor. 15.10.) Set the
Crown upon the head of grace, a^ they, ( Zech. 4.7.) cried Grace, grace. Re^^
upon grace for the consummating salvation; and act in some resemblance to thi^
way of God: He saves you freely, do you serve him freely; and do you continue
to own, profess, and believe in this grace persevering in all those things that
accompany salvation, till you be fully possessed of it.


Doct. 3. That the Faith through which we are saved, is not of our selves, but
is the gift of God: Or thus; The work of Faith to Salvation, is not of humane
operation, but o^ divine donation. Here are three things to be cleared. (1.)
That those that are saved by grace, are yet saved through faith (2.) That this
work of faith to salvation is not of themselves. (3.) That it is the gift of
God.
Of these in order.

Branch 1. Those that are saved b^ grace, are yet saved through faith, or i^
the way of believing. The Text is express for it. So the Commission runs that
Christ gave his Apostles, ( Mar. 16.15, 16) He says to them, Go ye into all
the world, preach the Gospel to every creature; He that believes shall be
saved, he that believes not shall be damned. As many as were ordained to
eternal, life, believed. Whom God has appointed to salvation as the end, he
has ordained to faith as the means. We are of them that believe to the saving
of the Soul, says the Apostle, ( Heb. 10.39.) (...), but of faith. The
adversative conjunction shows, that Apostasy and Faith cannot stand together.
The backslider is no true Believer. The nature of this faith, which is saving,
is best understood by considering four things which relate to it, viz. The
Author, the Object, the Act, and the Ground of it. (1.) The Author of it is
God, whence it is styled the faith of the operation of God, ( Col. 2.12.) There
is a humane faith, framed by the strength of reason, but this is a blessed
fruit of the Spirit of God, ( Gal. 5.22.) it is there reckoned among them. It
is the effect of that almighty power which was put forth ^n the Resurrection of
Christ, ( Ephesians. 1.19, 20.) (2.) The Object of it, as saving, ^s Christ. So every
where in the Scripture; ( John 3.16.) Whosoever believes in him shall not
perish, etc. When the Jailer ( Acts 16.30, 31.) asked what he should do to be
saved; he was directed to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and had the
a^surance of being saved if he did so. H^ himself directs us to do thus, ( John
14.^) To believe in God, believe also in me. And (...) told the Jews, ( John
8.24.) If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sin Faith indeed
embraces the promises, be not for themselves, but for Christ, as (...) is
wrapped up in them (3.) The Acts (...) it, which are the assent of the mind, an^
the consent of the heart: The assent (...) the mind to those glorious Truths
th^^ concern Christ, and the salvation of m^^ through him: As, That he came
fort from God the Father, with commission to negotiate in this great work; Him
ha^^ God the Father sealed, ( John 6.27.) Tha^ he was incarnate: The Word was
mad^ flesh; ( John 1.14.) That he is the ver^ Son of God, as Peter says, (
Mat. 16.16.) Thou art Christ the Son of the living God That there is no other
name given under Heaven by which we can be saved, ( Act^ 14.12.) These and the
like Principles the mind assents to. This is not sufficient (...) make it
saving faith, unless the heart consents also. If thou believe with all thy
heart says Philip to the Eunuch, ( Acts 8.2.) With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, ( Romans 10.10.) It makes the heart esteem Christ most precious,
(1 Pet. 2.7.) To you that believe he is precious. It is that which helps us to
receive Christ into our very hearts. He dwells in the heart by faith, ( Ephesians.
3.17.) and causes the Soul to accept him in all his Offices and Natures, and
to rely on him alone for Justification, and Salvation, desiring to be found in
him, having the Righteousness which is by Christ, and of God by faith, as Paul
speaks, ( Phil. 3.9.) And for our preservation in the mean time, living (as the
Apostle says, ( Gal. 2.20.) by the faith of the Son of God. (4.) The ground of
it is the promise of God. For a man to believe for salvation without a promise
to build his faith upon, is presumption and self-delusion. We find Abraham had
this for the foundation of his faith, ( Heb. 6.13.) ( Romans 4.20, 21.) He rested
on the promises of God by faith, and staggered not at them through unbelief.
For a man to believe that God will save him, though he be out of Christ, and
though there be no principles of grace and holiness in him, is to build without
a foundation, for ^o such only is salvation promised. This ^or the nature of
saving faith. If any enquire, what the concurrence of faith to salvation is? I
answer briefly; Faith co^curreth to salvation as it unites to Christ All things
requisite to salvation meeti^^ Christ; but none have this salvation (...) him,
but such as are united to him. Ete^nal life is in the Son, and he that has t^^
Son, has life, he that has not the Son, ha^^ not life, (1 John 5.11, 12.)
Communion (...) grounded upon union, and this is the proper effect of faith; it
does interest the Soul in the merit of Christ, and gives it (...) share in his
Righteousness, which is un^^^ all, and upon all them that believe, ( Ro^ 3.22.)
and this by virtue of union. Henc^ proceeds peace; Being justified by faith,
(...) have peace with God, ( Romans 5 1.) Faith dot^ interest the Soul in the
Spirit of Christ (...) We know he abides in us, by his Spirit tha^ he has
given us.
Now it is evident, tha^ from the presence of the Spirit flows al^ things
necessary to salvation. Mortification of sin; If we through the spirit
mortifi^^ the deeds of the body, we shall live: The^^ life of grace; He that
believes on the Son out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. This
spoke Christ of the Spirit which Believers should receive, ( John. 7.38, 39.)
Thus faith is the Nurse of all graces drawing sap from Christ the root, and
deriving influence from the Spirit to keep them in life and activity. In a
word, it gives victory over temptations, outward from the world, alluring or
affrighting, (1 John 5.4.) This is the victory whereby we overcome the world,
even our faith: And inward from Satan: By this shield of faith we may be able
to quench all the fiery darts of that wicked one, ( Ephesians. 6.16.) Perseverance in
the ways of God; for by faith ye stand, (2 Cor. 1.24.) viz. by leaning upon the
power of God, which is the Spirit of God, a Spirit of power: And thus are
Believers kept by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation, (1 Pet.
1.5.) If any further enquire, How the way of faith is consistent with grace? I
answer; Very well, as appears by what is said, ( Romans 4.16.) Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by grace: For there is no grace so modest and humble,
that arrogates nothing to it self, but gives all to grace, as faith is and
does. Faith saves in a way of grace, a precarious way: It is empty and poor,
has nothing of it self, but receives all from grace, and gives all again unto
grace; so that no way could have been found out more advantageous to the glory
and honor of grace, than this of faith. Had it been through love, repentance,
or good works, there would have been some ascribing to the creature; b^ faith
sets the whole Crown upon the head of grace, and therefore we have reason to
admire this blessed contrivanc^ of God, who has ordered salvation t^ be
through faith, that it might more eminently appear to be of grace. Beside^
Faith it self is a fruit of grace; it is (...) grace that faith is given, (
Phil. 1.29.) (...) you it is given, freely given, to believe (...) Christ. It
is of grace that faith is accepted, not for its own worth or excellency So it
appears to be consistent with gra^^ that it be of faith, for faith does not
eclipse, but illustrate the glory of grace.

Branch 2. That the work of faith t^ salvation is not of humane operation;
(...) is not of our selves, says the Text. For the^^ is no power in man that
has any tendency to produce such an effect as this. For there was not a
principle of faith formally in Adam at first, and what might be (...) him
virtually by reason of that origina^ Righteousness in which he was created, i^^
destroyed by the fall; so that man is become weak, ( Romans 5.6.) and said to b^
without strength; his mind dark; he perceives not the things of God, (1 Cor.
(...) v. 14.) they are foolishness to him, nor can^^ know them, because they
are spiritually ^^^cerned. The preaching of faith in a crucified Christ as the
way of salvation, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, (1 Cor. 1.23.) The will and affections are dead, and Christ lays
the great guilt of unbelief upon man's will: Ye will not come to me, says he to
the Jews, that ye might have life, ( John 5. v. 40.) Men had rather perish
justly, than be saved freely: They will rather run the hazard of eternal ruin,
than be beholden to Christ to save them. Such is the security and desperate
pride in the hearts of men: They are full of the world, and of
self-righteousness, (as the Pharisees, who trusted in themselves that they were
righteous,) that they go about to establish their own righteousness, and will
not submit to the righteousness of God. This way crosses carnal reason, and
contradicts the carnal will, that men are filled with prejudice against the way
of salvation God has appointed. By all which it is evident, that the work of
faith is not of humane operation.

Branch 3. I shall show that faith is of divine donation, it is the gift of
God. To you it is given to believe on Christ, ( Phil. 1. v. 29.) which is
manifest, by its rise, springing from eternal Election; as many as were
ordained to eternal life believed, ( Acts 13.48.) and therefore called the
faith of God's Elect, as being peculiar to them: This also is evident to be
God's gift, by the power which is put forth i^ effecting it, which is the same
that wrought in Christ when he was raised from the dead, ( Ephesians. 1.19, 20.) It
is ye^ further manifest, by the way wherein i^ is wrought, and that is, by
God's own teaching and drawing, ( John 6.44, 45.) No man can come to me, except
the Father draw him. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father comes
unto me, says Christ. What can be more plain tha^ this, that it is by God's
teaching, opening men's Eyes, and revealing Christ to them, attracting and
changing their wills, that they are brought to close with him in a way of faith?

Obj. 1. Some will say, If there be (...) power in us this way, how can any man
believe?

Answ. There is yet left potentia obedientialis; I mean, man is subjected to
the power of God, that he cannot resist his working, ( Psalm. 110.3.) Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power; Volunteers in the day of thy Armies,
as Mr. Ainsworth reads it; Populus voluntatum, so the Original. And thus they
are in this work of believing: No violence is offered at all to the will, but
the averseness to this act taken away; and though Christ's power is upon it,
yet it acts freely, denying it self in any thing of its own, so as not to trust
in it, or depend upon it. It is willing to lay the stress of its salvation upon
Christ alone, though it has but a bare word to rest upon, and to take Christ
upon his own terms in the execution of all his Offices, though it be contrary
to the constitution of a natural condition. I will work, says God, and who
shall let it? ( Isa. 43.13.) If in a way of Judgment, it be thus, that none can
withstand God, much more is it so in a way of grace. Hence that ( Matthew. 3.9.)
God is able of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. This he does in
a spiritual sense, when he takes away the heart of stone, that principle of
hardness, and resistance, and opposition, that is in the will, and makes it
pliable and yielding to the impressions of his Grace and Spirit, and so of a
flinty makes a fleshy heart.

Obj. 2. If men have no power to believe, why does God command them to believe?

Answ. God's command is founded upon his own right, not upon our power. Man's
losing his ability to obey, does (...) more deprive God of his right to
command, than a Debtors wilful disablin^ himself to pay what he ows, deprives
h^^ Creditor of a right to demand his due Besides, the thing commanded is not
impossible in se, in it self; if we have ma^^ it so by sin unto our selves,
shall God be^ the blame? How unworthy and vile a^ such reflections upon his
holy Majesty Add to all this, That God has provide^ in the Covenant what he
commands. Do^^ he command us to make a new hear^ and a clean heart? he has
promised (...) give it. So here, if he commands us t^ believe, when he sees we
have no power to do it, yet he is just, yea, and mercifu^ too; for he has
promised to write hi^^ Law upon the hearts of his people, to tak^ away the
rebellious opposite heart, an^ to give a tender flexible heart to the writings
of his Spirit, to show us our ow^ weakness and wants, and his grace, power and
goodness to supply us, if we come t^ to him for it.

Obj. 3. How can men justly perish for unbelief, seeing faith is not of
themselves, an^ they cannot believe?

Answ. In some respects men cannon believe, but their cannot returns upon
themselves: There is indeed a Judicial cannot, ( John 12, 39, 40.) Therefore
they could not believe, because Esaias had said, He has blinded their Eyes,
etc. This is a spiritual Judgment in punishment of their former sin, ( Matthew.
13.14.) In them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Esaias, which says, In hearing ye
shall hear, and not understand, in seeing ye shall see, and not perceive, etc.
Men close their Eyes voluntarily, and then God does it judicially. But then
there is a cannot in sensu composito, as I may say; as thus; it is impossible
for a sitting man to walk, that is, while he sits, he cannot walk, ( John
5.44.) Christ says, How can ye believe? That is, whilst ye do those things
that keep you in unbelief: But lay those aside, and then there is a
possibility, yea, a probability you may believe, if not a certainty of your
believing. Further; in some respects men cannot, but it is not their cannot for
which they perish, a cannot of natural inability: The Scriptures upbraid not
men with disability, but with disobedience. To them that be disobedient, says
the Apostle, (1 Pet. 2.7.) The stone which the builders rejected, the same is
become the head of the corner. It is a positive act of the will rejecting
Christ, for which men perish, and justly too, ( Luke 19.14.) We will not have
t^^ man to reign over us, say they: Justly mig^^ he say, verse 27. Those mine
Enemies th^^ would not I should reign over them, bring ^^^ther, and slay them
before me. The Uses (...) this point follow.

Use 1. Of Information; This she^ men their dangerous mistakes. Some me^
apprehend a facility of believing; b^^ this is highly presumptuous; it is not
(...) your selves, says the Text: It is exceedin^ pernicious, for it makes men
slighty (...) examining this work, and careless in improving the means; and
like the fool S^lomon speaks of, ( Eccles. 4.5.) that folde^ his hands
together, and eats his ow^ flesh; careless, and negligent, and bring^
themselves to ruin. Others are ready (...) murmr against God, and think to
cha^^ their unbelief upon him, but he will b^ justified when he appears, and
clear when he judges. As Adam at first, so men (...) the last, will be ready
to lay blame o^ him, but he will surely return it upon themselves, and say, as
of old, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self! O ye Sons o^ Men, your guilt is
upon your own heads* Because unbelievers were preingage^ against the offers of
grace, men have beforehand made over themselves to Sin, Satan, and the World,
and are careless about the means of grace: Sinners do not what they may and
can, they improve not the rational faculties God gives them, ( Isa. 46.8.)
Remember this, and show your selves men. Why should men then think hardly of
God? Idolaters act beneath men. Surely his proceedings against them will be
just, and their condemnation righteous.

Use 2. Let us all examine and enquire into our hearts for a true work of
faith, through which we may be saved. It was unfeigned faith that was in
Timothy, (2 Timothy 1.5.) Is ours such? We all profess we believe, is it so
indeed? Thus it may be known. (1.) By strong desires to receive Christ on
Gospel-terms; as King, Priest and Prophet, not only to be saved by him, but to
yield subjection to him; not only to taste of his bounty, but to cleave to him
in duty. No unbeliever does desire Christ in this extent and latitude; he his
for happiness, not for holiness, for Christ to save him, and for his lusts to
rule him: In times of trouble, sickness and death, he has strong desires after
Christ, let these Clouds blow over, and his desires are vanished. David did not
only desire God would hide his face from his sins, but that he would create in
him a clean heart, and renew in him a rig^^ spirit. (2.) True faith is a
mourn^^ grace, it makes a penitent heart. They s^^^ look on him whom they have
pierced (...) mourn, ( Zech. 12.10.) Penitent tears fl^^^ from Faiths Eye; it
mourns for its o^^ weakness, and for strength of unbeli^^ ( Mark 9.24.) as he
said with tears, I ^^lieve, Lord, help my unbelief. (3.) It cann^^ rest in its
weakness, but desires the sin^^^ milk of the Word, by which it was fi^^
wrought, that it may grow there^^ (1 Pet. 2.2.) (4.) It will cleave to Ch^^^^
for ever, and not part with him, or fr^^ him, upon any terms.
The Gadarens ^^sily parted from Christ, for they belie^^ not in him. Some, yea
many of his D^^ciples went away from him, and walk^^ no more with him, ( John
6.66.) These h^^ no true work of faith in them. But wo^^ Peter, and the rest
that had received the gift of faith go away from him? No, (...) for the world,
verse 68. When Christ (...) the question to them, Peter answered (...) the name
of them all, Lord, to whom sho^^^ we go from thee? Thou have the words (...)
eternal life. What true faith wants in e^^dence, it will make up in adherence.
(...) us all try our selves in this matter by th^^ notes, and not deceive our
own So^^^

Use 3. Of Exhortation; (1.) Let all that want faith go out of themselves for
it, and seek this gift at the hand of God. He gives it by means: The Gospel is
the word of faith, ( Romans 10.8.) The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Faith, (2 Cor.
4.13.) and he is the Spirit of Promise. O wait in Gospel dispensations, in the
word of faith, for the work of faith, and oppose not the Spirit when he offers
his help to this work. And remember, whatever gift God gives, if you have not
this gift of faith, all is nothing. What is the gift of wealth? What is the
gift of restraining grace? What is the gift of humane wisdom? What is the gift
of ordinances, the gift of prayer, having not this grace of faith given with
and above them? Can they satisfy? Can they sanctify? Can they save us? Had
not the rich fool in the Gospel, the young man, and the Pharisees, and Herod
these gifts? yet all perished for want of faith to save them. We may covet the
best gifts, but this of faith is the more excellent way to life and salvation.
O pray much and earnestly for this grace, and know, if you that are evil can
give good things to ^our Children, how much more will God give faith to them
that so ask him. (2.) Believers are bound to glorify God for (...) gift: For
faith is precious, (2 Pet. 1.^^^ the trial of it, much more faith it (...) is
more precious than gold. Gold is p^^cious among men, and Solomon says, ^^ney
answers all things: So does faith m^^^ more.
Consider what manner of (...) faith is, and it will cause them that (...) it
to glorify God for it, (1.) It Is a ^^^ritual gift, for it is wrought by the
po^^^ of the Spirit, and that is the very rea^^ carnal men are so little
affected with (...) for they cannot understand it. (2.) (...) a free gift: Thou
have nothing to give (...) it. The Queen of Sheba gave great g^^^ to Solomon,
because of his wisdom, but th^^ have none to give to God. It Is free al^^
because thou have done nothing for it. D^vid slew many of the Philistines, to
ha^^ Readiness Daughter given him, but thou (...) slain no lust, done no service
for G^4^ that faith should be given thee. Free^^ is also, because without any
relation (...) engage him to thee. A Father gives (...) his Child, because he
is his Child; (...) thou art by nature a Child of wra^^^ (3.) It Is an excellent
and choice gift, ^^^led precious faith, as before was touch^^ God gives the men
of the world the hu^^ and stubble of the world, but to them (...) gives
precious faith; precious in respect of the worker, God; the object, Christ; the
end, Salvation; and in respect of the variety of blessings it lets thee into.
This is the golden Key that lets thee into all the Treasures of grace and mercy
laid up in Christ, into comfort here, and glory hereafter. (4.) It Is a lasting
gift. This gift of God is without repentance. God repented he gave Saul a
Kingdom, and ^o he may repent he gives men so much of the world; but where he
bestows this gift of saving faith, he never repents of it. The comfort and
assurance of faith, the ^vely actings and stirrings of faith may be ^^spended,
but the habit, root and principle of faith is not destroyed or removed. (5.) It
is a growing gift; a man ^^ves his Son Money or Land, and he ^ay increase it,
or he may diminish it; ^^at this gift shall increase, and grow from ^^ith to
faith, from strength to strength, ^^om one degree to another.
Oh what ^^use have Believers then to glorify God ^^r this unspeakable gift!
And show your thankfulness in two things. (1.) In living (...), and making use
of faith in all times ^^d conditions. Look to God for skill ^^use it, to fetch
power from Christ to ^^due lusts and the world. This is your Victory, even your
faith: O make use (...) it to fetch out of Christ's fullness gra^^^ for grace.
This is that grace which (...) go with us from place to place, from Country to
Country, from Earth (...) Heaven. Men may take away our Esta^^ our Relations,
but we may go up lean^^^ on this Jacobs staff, through all (...) troubles of
this Wilderness, till we co^^ to the heavenly Canaan. This will ma^^ us take
joyfully the spoiling of our goo^^ and make a Prison as good, yea bet^^^ than a
Palace; It makes that which (...) terrible to others, comfortable to you (...)
made some of the Primitive Christi^^ cry out to their Persecutors, to de^^ some
new afflictions, and to increase th^^ torments. By faith they gloried in
tri^^lations, and glorified God in the fires (...) learn, and labor to act
faith in all con^^tions. In your losses, act faith in Go^^ providence and
promises, that he will gi^^ you more of himself, and shed abr^^^ more of his
Love into your hearts, (...) manifest more of his image and grace (...) your
Souls. If your Enemies come (...) you, act faith in God's presence; and
^^lieve, that though Men and Devils (...) against you, yet God and his holy
A^^^ are with you, and for you; and gr^^^ are these, than those against you. If
you feel not the presence of God with you, yet act faith in his presence, and
say, For a moment he is gone, but with everlasting kindness will he return.
That you believe your Husband loves you, though he be absent from you, and that
he will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your Joy shall no man
take away from you. If you be brought low in the world, act faith in God's bond
and engagement; for though a man has no money by him, yet if he has good
bonds, he comforts himself: So may you, who have God's Covenant and Promises
for your security. So when death comes, act faith then, and remember you are
members of Christ, and shall not perish: Believe God is with you in death, as
he was with Daniel, the three Children, and David, who on that very account
would not fear to pass through the valley of the shadow of death, ( Psalm.
23.4.) Act faith in the Kingdom of God, and say to thy Soul, as Christ did to
the believing thief, To day shall thou be with Christ in Paradise. Though we
break our fast with Enemies, said some Martyrs, yet we shall sup with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. ^2.) Press after the perfection of your
faith; as the inchoation, so the confirmation of faith is the gift of God; He
(...) the Author and the Finisher of yo^^ Faith, ( Heb. 12.2.) It is of God to
cofirm faith; Christ prays your faith ^eword^ not, ( Luke 22.32.) Pray, as they
(...) ( Luke 17.5.) Lord, increase our faith; (...) will he fulfill the good
pleasure of (...) grace in you, and the work of faith (...) power, (2 These.
1.11.) And in due ti^^ you shall receive the end of your faith, (...) salvation
of your Souls. There is m^^^ lacking in your faith, but it shall be ^^^fected,
and you shall walk by sight, (...) not by faith.

SERMON III.
Deteronomy 8.16. Who fed thee in the Wilderness with Manna.


SOme of the Heathens, even by the Light of Nature, were carried to begin all
things with God. A Jove pricnipium, was a Maxim among them. How much more
commendable is it amongst them to whom are committed the Oracles of God, that
they should remember God, and acknowledge him upon all occasions? because it is
his assistance that is the principle of all performances, and his presence that
is the safety of all conditions. This is that therefore which Moses in this
chapter does put Israel upon, that in the midst of all their sufficiency, they
remember God, and thankfully acknowledge his bounty and goodness toward them.
This ^e inculcates and urges upon them once and again from the 10th verse of
this chapter unto the 15th. When thou have eaten and art full, then thou shall
bless the Lord thy God, etc. Beware that thou forget no^ the Lord thy God, etc.
v. 10, 11. So against v. 13, 14. Lest when thou have eaten and a^^^ full, then
thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc. Then Moses
proceeds to mention some particular favor God had bestowed on them in the
Wilderness; he enumerates his leading the^ verse 15. who led thee in the
Wilderness even till they were gotten through it. An^ here in the Text he
speaks of his feedin^ them there: Where we may observe (1.) The Agent; implied
in the wo^^ who; which has reference to the 14t^ verse, where God is
mentioned; he it wa^ that had the chief hand in this glorio^^ work. It Is said
indeed, he led them (...) the hand of Moses and Aaron; but the^^ were only his
Instruments, he was the principal Agent: So Moses struck the Ro^^ but God
caused water to flow out then^^^ (2.) The Act, Fed; that is, provided foo^ (3.)
The Persons that were fed by him Thee; not a particular person only, but the
people of Israel. (4.) The Place; whe^^ was it he thus provided for them? In
t^^ Wilderness. (5.) The food it self where with he fed them there; with Manna,
(...) which we read, ( Exodus 16.14, 15.) Wh^^^ the dew was gone up, behold,
upon the face of the Wilderness, there lay a small round thing, as small as the
hoar frost on the ground. And when the Children of Isreal saw it, they said one
to another, It is Manna; for they wist not what it was: And Moses said unto
them, This is the bread the Lord has given you to eat.
It was not like the Manna we use, which is Physical, but it was for food,
being prepared by the great God for that use. There are two Propositions in the
Text. (1.) That God orders a Wilderness-condition to be the lot of his Church
and People in this world. (2.) That he will provide for them in this
Wilderness-state.


Doct. 1. That God sometimes orders a Wilderness-condition to be the lot of his
Church and People in this world. Thus we see it was his dispensation to Israel,
to bring them into such a state, as well as into such a place. Here it is
styled, ( Asts 7.38.) the Church in the Wilderness. There were many
Wildernesses betwixt Egypt and Canaan: Sometimes they were in one, sometimes in
another: We read they were in the Wilderness of Shur, ( Exodus 15.22.) in the
Wilderness of Sin, ( Exodus 16.1.) in the Wilderness of Sinai, ( Exodus 19.1.) So
for particular persons. We read of David, how he was tossed from one Wilderness
to another: We find hi^ in the Wilderness of Ziph, (1 Samuel 2^^ 14, 15.) and
presently in the Wilderne^^ of Maon; v. 24. of the same chapter. (...) the
Wilderness of Engedi, (1 Samuel 24.^^ And all this after great appearances (...)
God for them: After he had so wonde^fully saved Israel out of Pharaohs han^^
and brought them out of Egyptian bondage, he brought them forthwith into the
Wilderness. After David was anoint^^ King, God ordered a Wilderness-con^tion
for him. Possibly some will say, A^^ this was in the time of the Old
Tes^^ment-dispensation, we hope better thing to be the lot of the
Gospel Church. B^^ if we look into the Scriptures of the Ne^^ Testament, we
shall find it is the ve^^ same, ( Rev. 12.6, 14.) The Woman is fo^ced to flee
into the Wilderness. By the Woman is meant the Church, so calle^ for her
weakness, and for her fruitfulness Even after the great deliverance she ha^^ of
the Man-child she traveled with, s^^^^ was ordered by God himself into this
condition: And no wonder, when Christ the Head of the Church had the same lo^^
For after that glorious manifestation (...) his Baptism, the Father speaking by
(...) audible voice, and the Holy Ghost appearing in the visible shape of a
Dove, and lighting upon him, he was led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness.

Qu. 1. You will say, In what respects is the Churches lot to be termed a
Wilderness-state?

Ans. 1. A Wilderness is a lonesome and solitary place. Hence it is said to be
a Land that no man passes through, where no man dwells, ( Jer. 2.6. Job
38.26.) And thence it is that the Wilderness and solitary place are made terms
synonymous, or of the same signification, ( Isa. 35.1.) And when the Prophet
desired to retire himself from his people, that he might the better lament
their sins and approaching calamities, he thus expresses himself, ( Jer. 9.2.)
O that I had in the Wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might
leave my people and go from them. It Is true, Some Wildernesses are habitable
and inhabited, as that in which John Baptist preached, ( Mat. 3.1.) he went and
preached in the Wilderness of Judea. He was the voice of one crying in the
Wilderness, ( Isa. 40.3.) But though here were Towns and Cities wherein men
dwelt, yet others mostly are without inhabitant. Thus is it with God's People
sometimes; they are brought into lonesome and solitary conditions, where they
can enjoy no comf^^table Christian-communion. David co^plains, That he was as a
Pelican, (or B^^tern, as some translate) in the Wilderne^^ and like an Owl of
the Desert: He wat^^^ed, and was alone as a Sparrow upon the house top, ( Psalm.
102.6, 7.) These are ^^litary and mournful Birds; and so mounful are Christians
when they lose the^ spiritual converse and communion, it being one great
comfort of their lives.

2. A Wilderness is a place of fear a^terrour: Solitariness breeds fear; but
(...) we add this to it, that there is not on^^ want of suitable society, but
many an^ great dangers by reason of wild Bea^^ inhabitants there, it may well
be style (...) the great and terrible Wilderness, as it (...) called, ( Deuteronomy.
1.19. and Deuteronomy. 8.15.) whe^^ were fiery Serpents and Scorpions. An^ it is said
of Christ when he was in the Wilderness, that he was with the wi^^ Beasts, (
Mark 1.13.) We read of the Dragons of the Wilderness, ( Mal. 1.3^ and how
mortal to the Israelites the ^^tings of the Serpents were, ( Numb. 21.6^ The
Lord sent fiery Serpents among the people, and they bit the people, and mu^^
people of Israel died. The world is like Wilderness to God's people in this
respect. Here is the great red Dragon, that old Serpent the Devil, as he is
called, ( Rev. 12.3, 9.) Here are his Agents and Bailiffs, wicked and ungodly
men, like wild Beasts seeking to make a prey of them that fear God, and to
devour them, and all they have; to spoil their outward comforts, to take away
their inward peace; to cast reproach upon their names, to deprive them of their
liberties, and to shed their blood, and how then can it be otherwise than a
place of fear and terror to them? Sometimes God says, Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. At another time he seems to summon all
the wild Beasts of the Forest to devour them, ( Psalm. 44.12.) Thou sellest thy
people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price. Like a
Captain that gives away his Soldiers by companies for naught. If God did
increase the revenue of his glory by this terrible dispensation, it would give
his people some satisfaction, but if otherwise, it must needs be grievous to
them. David says, Lead me in a plain path because of mine Enemies: Or
observers, as in the Original. Compare this with ( Hosea 5. v. 1.) where the
Rulers of Church and State are charged that they had been (...) a snare on
Mizpeh, and a Net spread up on Tabor. These were places not fa^^ from
Jerusalem, where Jeroboam se^^ Watches to observe who they we^^ that went away
to worship at Jerusal^^ after God's Institution, and could (...) with a good
Conscience comply with the new devised way he had set up a Dan and Bethel, to
bring them into (...) Net to punish them. Thus it has be^^ in after-ages,
snares have been laid (...) catch conscientious men in, and brin^ them under
severe penalties; whi^^ makes the World a terrible Wildern^^^ to them.

3. A Wilderness is a place of wa^dring. This was Isreal's condition d^^ring
their forty years abode in the Wi^^derness, as was threatened, ( Numb. 14.33.
Your Children shall wander in the Wilde^ness. We read that God causes ment^^
wander in the Wilderness, where the^^ is no way, ( Job 12.24.) Here it is use^
metaphorically: When a people are given over to mistakes and error, (...)
knowing how to order their course, (...) arrive at their end: Like men in a
wa^^ howling Wilderness, that know not whither they go; every step may be ba^^
ward as well as forward. Not that God is active in leading men into false ways,
but does permit them to be seduced, or as a punishment of his upon them for
neglecting his counsel and direction, may give them up to their own straying
hearts, and other seducing spirits. Even thus are God's people apt to wander,
whilst in the Wilderness of this world. I have gone astray, says David, like
a lost Sheep, ( Psalm. 119.176.) which of all creatures is most apt to wander,
and least able to return to the Fold again. So David found in himself the like
averseness: Hence he prays in the same verse; O seek thy Servant! He it is that
brings back wandering Souls at first conversion, and reduces them from their
after-straglings. Our wildrings are sent to prevent our wanderings; and this
effect they had on David, at least to prevent his being utterly lost, ( Psalm.
119. v. 67) Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now I have kept thy
word. Yet so great is our proneness to this evil, that David prays earnestly
for preventing grace as to this particular, ( Psalm. 119.10.) O let me not
wander from thy Commandments! The more experience any have ^f themselves, and
of the ways of God, the more sensible are they of (...) proneness to wander,
and so are ^^strustful of their own strength, and (...) more earnest with God
to be kept fr^^ it.

4. The Wilderness is a place of wa^^ Hence that where Israel was, is said to
(...) a place wherein was drought, wh^^ there was no water, as in the verse
^^fore the Text. And it is called a La^^ of drought, ( Jer. 2.6.) They could
(...) plow or sow, build or plant there, a^^ so no provision in an ordinary w^^
could be had: No Houses, but Te^^ only to lie in: No Raiment, but wh^^^ they
carried in with them was ^^raculously preserved from waxing ol^ They were also
without the standing settled way of Worship, and ordina^^ Sacraments, Thus it
is with the people of God oftentimes; they are reduced (...) great outward and
spiritual necessities Israel could speak often of dying a^^ starving, fearing
they should peri^^ through want; so do others still. Ho^^ many that are hoped
to have a princip^^ of good in them, yet fear they shall (...) and come to
poverty: So likewise (...) their Souls, they meet with a Fam^^^ hearing the
Word of the Lord. (...) some have ventured upon long and dan^erous Voyages by
Sea, and have gone even to the ends of the Earth to enjoy that way of Worship
God had convinced them of. While many wicked men a^ounded, we find Christ had
not a house of his own; (though Lord of the World,) to hide his head in, nor
money to discharge his occasions, but lived on the charity of others, and once
sent to a Fish for money to pay the Tribute. Well may the Servants be as their
Lord. We read of David once in such want, that he was forced to ask some relief
at the hands of the Priest. So it may fall out here to any of God's people. So
then in respect of solitariness, terror, wanderings, and wants, the condition
of God's people in this world may be a Wilderness-condition.

Qu. 2. But why does it please God thus to order his peoples lot and portion
here?

Ans. 1. To humble them. There was much Pride in Israel; their Pride testified
to their face, as the Prophet speaks, Hos. 7.10.) This sin God hates in all
men, and in his own especially. Therefore he labors by all means to hide Pride
from them, to lay and keep them ^ow in their own Eyes; and if he sees this sin
prevail in them, he will let (...) this swelling, and cure this dangers
Tympany, by pricking the bladder wi^^ the Briars and Thorns of the Wildern^
When he saw Paul but in danger to (...) exalted above measure, he sent him
Thorn in the flesh, and the Messenger Satan to buffer him preventionally. W^^^
smarting Providence did he visit He^kiah with, when he saw his heart li^^ up
with his prosperity, till he bro^^ him down to his foot, and caused him (...)
humble himself for the pride of (...) heart, (2 Chronicles. 32.) The Text sh^^ this
was one end of the Wilderness, (...) humble them. Pride is a weed that (...)
Lord will not suffer to grow in his G^^den; and though he does not root it q^^^
out here, yet he will use all means to (...) and curb it, and keep it from
spre^ing. Hence it is he not only o^^ troubles and afflictions, but leaves s^^
self still remaining in his people: By (...) they have conviction and
experience of vileness of their Natures, and are br^^^ into such a Wilderness
in their spiri^^ so bewildred in their spiritual con^^^^ that they are brought
to loath them^^^^ for sin. As he of old dealt with (...) gyptian Idols, who
destroyed them all one, which he kept entire, not as a Monument of Idolatry,
but as a spectacle of their sin and misery: So does God leave a stump of sin in
his people, to keep them low in their own Eyes: This is his end also in all the
terrors, and wants in the Wilderness of this world, which they are at any time
exposed to, and exercised with.

2. To prove them and others; to discover and reveal the secrets of many
hearts; so the Text intimates; to humble and to prove them: The sincerity of
some, their faith and other graces: The hypocrisy, unsoundness and falsness of
others. I say, partly to try the faith of them that are sincere; that the trial
of their faith, which is more precious than of Gold that perishes, may be
found to honor, praise and glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ, (1 Pet.
1.7.) A Believer ^n a day of prosperity is like a valiant Soldier in a day of
Peace, who seems not to differ from a Coward or timorous man, but in a day of
War his valor and wise conduct will appear: Then it is seen what manner of man
he was. When true Believers are in a Land of Peace and Plen^y, they seem not to
differ from others; but when Wilderness-Tryals are upon them, then their faith
in God's promises, their love to his name and ways, th^^ holding fast the
profession of his tru^^ their walking in some measure answera^^ to his holy
Commands, will show the^^ selves. Earthly minds are set upon ea^^ly objects,
nothing affects them like temporal good; they care not for (...) great concerns
of Religion; offer the some worldly advantage, and it will qui^ly be seen what
their profession is; the will do any thing for gain. But God (...) have it
known, that there is a Generat^^ that will serve him, though it be (...)
naught, whose hearts are above these (...) things. As a great man said, He to
more glory in the honor he denied, the in that he kept. A true Christian (...)
take as much comfort in the losses meets with for Christ's sake, as in a^ thing
he enjoys for himself. Thus is (...) faith and other graces proved by the try
he meets with in the Wilderness. A^^ partly, that the rottonness, hypocrisy a^
unsoundness of others may be made m^^fest, is this condition ordered. Then
(...) the hearts of such be turned back (...) things of sense and time; even
(...) mixed multitude, who came out of (...) with the Israelites lusted after
the (...) and Garlic of Egypt, and caused the (...) ^ren of Israel to murmr
and be troubled. ( Numb. 11.4.) When tribulation and persecution arises, they
are offended, ( Mat. 13.21.) and so discover their unsoundness. It Is ^rue
indeed, some of God's sincere people may have their faintings, their
stagger^ngs and declinings for a time, as Peter ^ad, yet these recover and
return by weep^ng-cross, as Peter did. But there are too ^any carried away with
the stream of ^he times, and turn their backs upon the ^ays of God they have
sometimes owned, ^onoured and admired. The love of out^ard comforts take away
the hearts of ^any, and therefore the great Argument ^ome use to draw
Christians off from the ^uth, is outward preferments, dignities and promotions,
Civil or Ecclesiastical; and these take with those who know no ^igher and
better things. That which I ^m at is this; That God has always a disovering work
upon his hand by Wilderess-dispensations; he discovers the Sheep ^om the Goats
even here: The Goats ^ow appear to take their portion, and to ^y hold upon
their objects, whilst the ^heep hear Christ's voice, and follow him, and cleave
to him, a suffering Christ, a ^aked persecuted Christ. And this is a ^econd
reason why God orders this condition for them.

3. To do them good in the latter (...) For hereby God brings them nearer (...)
himself, as it is said he did Israel of (...) when they were in the Wildem^^ (
Exodus 19.4.) He brought them to himself that is, into nearer familiarity and
fello^ship with himself; into greater acqu^^tance with the secrets and
mysteries (...) his grace and love, into a greater ma^^festation and discovery
of the sweetness (...) his communion, into larger experience (...) his
comfortable visitations. Hence (...) says, ( Hos. 2.14.) concerning his Chur^^
Behold, I bring her into the Wilderness, (...) will speak comfortably unto her;
or, spe^^ to her heart, as it is in the Origin^^ Whilst Christians are in the
clutter (...) the world, in the noise and clamor th^^ variety of objects and
occasions here (...) make, their ears are apt to be dull a^^ heavy, and they
not so fit to hear wh^^ God speaks; and therefore God de^^ with them as he did
with the blind m^^ ( Mark 8.23.) He took him by the ha^^ and led him out of the
Town, and th^^ cured him. So God brings his people (...) to the Wilderness, and
there heals ma^^ distempers, and reveals many truths, giv^^ them experiences of
himself, that they ^^ver knew or had before. These wor^^ things stop the ears
of men, and make them they cannot hear the voice of God's Word and Spirit, nor
understand the voice of his Providence; therefore says God, I will bring them
into the Wilderness, and I will speak to their hearts: I will apply the things
of my Word, and what I speak by my Providence so to their very hearts, that
they shall fill and possess their hearts with joy, peace and comfort: So that
what the Apostle speaks of the event and issue of God's severe dealings with
Job, ( James 5.11.) Ye have seen the end of the Lord, that he is pitiful, and
of tender mercy: That may I say concerning this Wilderness-condition God orders
for his people in this world: His designs are holy and wise, and if we stay to
see the issue, it will be found to be very gracious, even what we have heard
from the Text, to humble and prove them, and do them good in the latter end.

Use 1. Are these things so? Then let as not be offended if we meet with such a
Wilderness-condition in our way to the heavenly Canaan: It is no more than what
Israel met with in their passage to the typical Canaan, and what the Primitive
Gospel Church went through also, and what we must expect to be our lot and
portion. Some are soon offended at the frowns and rage of violent men, but
remember that it is God's way and metho^ to lead his people into the
Wilderness* Think not that therefore you are out. God's way, but know, that
this will (...) more profitable to you, I mean, this p^^sent Wilderness, than
your past Cana^^ ever was. The Romanists indeed ma^^ outward prosperity to be a
note of a (...) Church: Like them of old, who said, ( J^^^ 43.17, 18.) We will
burn Incense to (...) Queen of Heaven, and pour out drink-offer^^^ to her, as
we have done, we and our Father our Kings and our Princes; for then we (...)
plenty of victuals, and were well, and sa^^^ evil: But since we left off thus
to do, we ha^^ wanted all things, etc. Great is the offe^^ of the Cross, the
Thorns of the Wilderness are piercing, but blessed is he that (...) not
offended at these. Christ has told (...) of this beforehand, that we might not
(...) stumbled, ( Joh. 16.1.) Let us not be (...) those that think it strange,
but be pre^^red for it.

Use 2. This should cause us to (...) weaned from, and dead unto this pres^^^
evil world. Who would be fond of a Wilderness, or set his heart upon it? O le^^
labor to get our affections crucified to as Paul says, he was, ( Galat.
6.14.) let our Souls be as a weaned child, as David says his was, ( Psalm.
131.2.) who would not be weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts?
Who-would embrace and hug a wilderness, the briars and thorns, the lusts and
cares of which will pierce us through with many sorrows? It Is observable, that
it was the Devil who represented the world to Christ as a glorious object, (
Mat. 4.8.) He showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
God shows us the world as a vain, deceitful, defiling, and perishing thing; If
we look into the glass of the Scripture, we shall find it thus set ^orth to us:
Let us therefore leave vio^ent contentions for earthly things to them whose
names are written in the ^orth, and have their portion in this life. Not that
God requires us absolutely to ^elinquish our outward estates, and be ^etired
from the world, as the Papists ^^ach, and some among them seem to ^ractise, but
to have our affections dead (...) them, to desire neither poverty nor ^iches,
but if God please to give us food ^onvenient for us, to be therewith con^^nt,
remembering what the world is, ^^d our state in it a wilderness-state.

Use 3. Here is yet some comfort to the Church and People of God; which (...)
in three things; (1.) They are not (...) be always thus; They shall at length
com^^ out of their wilderness-condition into the paradise above. The Church is
set for^ ( Cant. 8.5.) to be coming up from the Wilderness. It Is true, as
Israel pass^^ over Jordan before they could come in Canaan, so must Gods People
pass throug^^ the valley of the shadow of death, (...) they can arrive in the
heavenly Canaan Yet as they of old passed over safely, (...) shall the Saints
here, they shall not drow^ in this Jordan, because God is with the^^ (2.) They
may send out and search the good land, and get some first fruits of the
heavenly Country even here. As Isra^^ sent Spies to search out the land of
Canaan of old, who brought some of the fruits of the land for a taste; so may
Go^ People send faith and hope as Spies ^^view the Land above, and bring the^^
some bunches of Grapes, some cluste^ of comfort from thence for a foretas^^
Indeed some of the Spies of old brou^^ an evil report upon the land of Canaan
and spoke of the walled Cities, and the tall Giants the mighty Sons of Anak the
saw there, and did so weaken the hearts the People; But the Spiritual Spies I
named can bring no such reports of the heavenly Canaan; for there are no Sons
of Anak there, no Enemies to combat with, as there was in that of old; The
Enemies are here in the Wilderness of this world, and if once you pass the
brink of death, the last enemy to be destroyed, you are at rest in that
glorious and pleasant Country for ever, (3.) There is this Comfort also, That
God cares and provides for his Church in their present condition, until they
arrive there, which is the second Doctrine.


Doct. 2. That God does and will certainty provide for his Church and People in
their Wilderness-Condition. Thus the Lord ca^ed for Israel of old, which he
would ^ave them not forget: Who fed thee in ^^e Wilderness with Manna, says
the ^^xt. So he did for the Gospel Church, ( Rev. 12.6, 14.) He prepared a
place (...) the woman in the Wilderness that ^^ey should feed her there. He
pro^^des all things needful for his People ^ere. I will name two or three
Particu^^s.

1. He provides a place for them there. (...) he did for Isreal of old: Tents
they ^^d, though no settled abode, no houses, because they were moving up and
do^^ from place to place. So in the pla^^ named before, the woman had a pla^^
in the Wilderness prepared of Go^^ Though but Tents, yet suitable to (...)
place, for here they have no continu^^ City. In my fathers house, says Christ,
(...) many Mansions, ( John 14.2.) a (...) not made with hands, eternal in the
heaven (2 Cor. 5.1.) Here therefore Te^^ should content them. So were they
(...) old, Heb. 11.38.) though they wan^^red in deserts, and mountains, and
de^^ and caves of the earth. So long as G^^ has work for them, doing or
suffer^^ work, he will have a Room, a place (...) them. When Luthers enemies
ask^^ him, where he would be when such (...) great person came into Germany to
se^^ for him? He answered, Aut sub (...) Aut in coelo: Either under Heaven, or
Heaven; So may all Gods People say. 2. He provides leading and ^^rection for
his People in and through (...) Wilderness of this world. Thus he (...) for
Israel of old, ( Exodus 13.21, 2^^) The Lord went before them by a pill^^ cloud,
to lead them the way, and by night i^^ pillar of fire to give them light to go
by (...) and by night: He took not away the ^^dar of cloud by day, nor the
pillar of fire by night, from before his People. Thus he is said to have led
them in the Wilderness, in the verse before the text. Though he led them about,
this way and that way, yet the right way that they might go to a City of
habitation, ( Psalm. 107.4, 7.) They had many turns and returns, backward and
forward, yet arrived at a happy end, and were conducted to their desired rest:
So it is still: The Word and the Spirit, and the Providence of God, are the
pillars, as it were, by which God provides and gives counsel, guidance and
direction to his People as they travel through the Wilderness of this world. As
many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, ( Romans 8.14.) So it
is as true reciprocally: As many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit
of God. And indeed so it guided Israel of old, ( Isa. 63.11, 12, 13, 14.) Where
is he that put his Spirit within him? That led them by the right hand of Moses
with his glorious arm? That led them through the deep as an horse in the
Wilderness that they should not stumble? As a beast goes down into the valley,
so the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest. God made Moses a guide to Israel,
but it was the Spirit of God that led. Moses, and instructed him to lead the
People; So no^ in Gospel-days, and therefore Christ tells his sorrowing
Disciples, ( Joh^ 16.13.) that when he is come he w^^^ lead them into all
truth. So likewis^ by his word he leads them: He has o^dained it to be a light
to their feet, and (...) Lamp to their Path, ( Psalm. 119.105.) The Spirit is a
voice behind them, an^ the Word is a rule before them. A^^ by his providence
also he does dire^^ them. Hence it is termed the eye (...) God, because by it
God guides his People in all the revolutions and turning of this world. I will
instruct thee, sai^^ God to his servant, ( Psalm. 32. verse. 8.) in the way in
which thou should go. I wi^^ guide thee with mine eye: His provide^tial eye.
If any say, How is it then th^^ they wander and miscarry, as sad e^^ perince
shows? I answer, Not from any defect in Gods provision, but either because they
will not follow the condu^^ of heaven, wilfulness sometimes occasio^^
wanderings; Or because God for th^^ their sin does withdraw or suspend hi^
leading and guiding influences from the^^ and then they go astray. It is said,
(2 Chro^^ 32.31.) That in the business of th^^ Ambassadors of the Princes of
Babyl^^ God left Hezekiah, etc. And how soon did he stumble and fall? When
pride and self-confidence prevail in them, as it did in him and in Peter, then
God is provoked to remove his direction from them. Yet this is never totally
and absolutely taken from them, but God will reduce them and recover them, and
never cease leading them in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the Paths
of Judgment, till he has caused all those that love him to inherit substance,
as it is said ( Prove. 8.20.21.) 3. He provides food and raiment for them: I
say, food both for their Bodies and Souls. So he did for Israel of old, as the
text shows. He fed them in the Wilderness with Manna. What the Manna was we
read, ( Exodus 16. and 1 Cor. 10. and John 6. largely.) It was the bread that
the Lord gave Israel from the Clouds to eat. There was no plowing and sowing in
the Wilderness, and so no ordinary provision; God therefore gave them Manna
miraculously and extraordinarily; They did eat Angels food, says the Psalmist;
Excellent food it was, if Angles needed, they could desire no better. Thus
wonderfully did he seed Israel forty years together in the Wilderness. And this
was not food only for their Bodies, but for their Souls also. Hence it is said
to be Spiritual meat, in that place beforenamed, (1 Cor. 10.) They did all eat
the same Spiritual meat: Because the Manna was an eminent Type of Christ, as is
largely set forth by Christ himself, ( John 6.) It was one of the Jews
extraordinary Sacraments, which sealed up to Believers their Spiritual
nourishment in grace by the free Covenant of God in the Messiah. He also
secured their Cloths from waxing old by a miracle. And he is not worse to his
Gospel Church than to Isreal. There is a general care God has of all his
Creatures; He feeds the Ravens when they cry unto him: He gives all his
Creatures their meat in due season; He opens his hands, and satisfies the
desire of every living thing: ( Psalm. 145.15, 16.) There is a more particular
care he takes of man, but yet exercises a more special and peculiar providence
over his Church and People. So he provided for David in his straits: He sent a
Raven with bread and flesh morning and evening to feed Elijah, (1. Kings 17.4,
6.) And in the same Chapter we read how wonderfully he provided for the widow
of Zarephath; when she had but a handful of meal in the barrel, and a little
oil in the cruise; he by a miracle increased it, so that it failed not till God
sent rain on the earth. So Christ miraculously multipled the loaves that he
might feed the People in the Wilderness, ( Matthew. 15.) And as for the bodies,
so for the Souls of his servants, he still feeds them in all their straits. If
the ordinary means of grace fail he can provide extraordinarily. Hence it is
said, God had prepared that they, (namely, the two Prophets spoken of, ( Rev.
11.) should feed the Woman in the Wilderness, ( Rev. 12.6, 14.) They should
feed those hidden ones with the hidden Manna. So he promises to feed his
people Israel with the heritage of Jacob their Father, ( Isa. 58.14.) that is,
with spiritual communications of the Covenant of Grace. And again, ( Zech.
11.7.) I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you O poor of the flock. An
afflicted and poor people, designed to slaughter and ruin; who have lost your
visible pastures, the Ordinances: I will be your Shepherd; and will feed you
invisibly by my Word and Spirit, ye shall go in and out and find pastures. So
in several verses of the 34th of Ezekiel, we have promises to the same purpose.
And David having the Lord for his Shepherd, concludes he shall want (...) good
thing; he shall be fed in green p^^stures, and led beside the still waters (
Psalm. 23.12.) That is, God would giv^ him enough, food sufficient; so is (...)
and water to the Sheep; yea the (...) condition and daintiest provision; so a^^
green pastures, and still waters: Or as the Original has it, pastures of
tender gra^^ and waters of quietness, such as are em^nently restorative; for it
follows, He restores my Soul. This is the care God taken to provide for his in
their Wilderness state.
Quest. You will say, Why will God th^^ provide for his Church and People?

Ans. 1. Because they are the people of his Covenant, and so he stands in al^
Covenant-relations to them, ( Psalm. 111.5.) It Is said, He gives them their
meat i^ due season that fear him; he will ever b^ mindful of his Covenant. He
is relate^ to them as a Father, and if a Father be aske^ Bread by a Son, will
he give him a Ston^^ says Christ, Your heavenly Father know^ ye have need of
these things, ( Matthew. 6.^^) Will an affectionate Father see his (...) want,
when he is able to supply hi^^ The Apostle says, (1 Timothy 5.8.) If a^^ man
provide not for his own, especially for those of his house, (or kindred, as it
is in the Margin,) he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. And
will not God much more provide for his Vovenant People, who thus lays it upon
men as their duty to look to their own, and so severely sensures them that
neglect it? Surely he will. This Israel found, ( Psalm. 105.40, 41, 42.) The
people asked, and he brought Quails; and satisfied them with the Bread of
Heaven, etc. For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his Servant.

2. Because God is sufficiently qualified to provide for them: He has an
all-see^ng eye, a compassionate heart, and an almighty hand: These three render
him ^ble, and fit, and willing to do it. I say, ^1.) An all-seeing eye; For the
eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good, ( Prove.
15.3.) And these eyes ^f the Lord do therefore run to and fro ^he whole heart,
that he may observe how (...) is with his Church, and take care for them, (2 Chronicles. 16.9.) When Hagar sat ^own, and lifted up her voice and wept, because
the water in the bottle was spent, ^ Genesis 21.15, 16.) and they were now in ^e
Wilderness, a dry and thirsty Land, where little expectation of supply (...) be
had; God saw the affliction of H^^ and her Son, and opened her eyes, and (...)
saw a Well of Water, v. 19. With this p^^vidence she was much affected, as you
(...) see, ( Genesis 16.13.) She called the nam^ (...) the Lord that spoke unto
her, Tho^ (...) see me; for she said, Have I also (...) looked after him that
sees me? Wher^^^ the Well was called Beer-lakairoi; that (...) the Well of him
that lives and sees (...) because God had so seen her in her ^^^ction, as to
provide graciously for (...) (2.) A pitiful and compassionate he^^^ Some see
the wants and necessities (...) others, yet have no bowels of compassio^^ and
so make no provision, give no relie^^ Such were the Priest and Levite we read
(...) ( Luke 10.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.) When they sa^^ the man stripped of his
raiment, and wounde^^ the Priest passed by on the other side, the Levite looked
on him, and passed away likewise when the Samaritan saw him, he had comp^^sion
on him, bound up his wounds, pouring (...) Oil and Wine, etc. Christ is the
goods Samaritan, who has compassion on the so^^ and bodies of them that are in
want, a^^ provides suitably and graciously for the^^ He had compassion on the
peoples so^^ ( Mat. 9.36, 37, 38.) when he saw m^^tudes fainted, and were
scattered abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd, and said, The harvest truly is
great, but the laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest,
that he will send forth laborers into his harvest. So was he moved with pity
and compassion to the bodies of the people that were fasting in the Wilderness,
( Matthew. 15.32.) with him three days, I will not send them away fasting, says
he, lest they faint by the way, (3.) An almighty hand. Some have knowledge of
their Childrens wants, and hearts to pity them, and yet it is not in the power
of their hand to supply their needs. As we read Hagar saw her Child's danger,
and showed the compassions of a tender Mother, yet could not help and relieve
him, or her self; but God has an omnipotent hand, and can do what he will in
Heaven and in Earth; he can rain Manna from Heaven, and give Water out of the
Rock, as he did to Israel in the Wilderness. And thus he represents himself to
Abraham, ( Genesis 17.1.) I am God almighty. And being thus qualified, he will
surely provide for all his people.

3. Because he knows that by so doing, he provides for his own glory. Hence it
is that when Abraham had that question put to him by his Son, Where is the Lamb
for a burnt-offering? He answered, M^ Son, God will provide himself a Lamb,
etc. ( Genesis 22.7, 8.) There is an emphasis i^ that word, Himself. For the
answer (...) the question had been full, if it had be^^ omitted, and he only
had said, God (...) provide a Lamb. But when he puts (...) that phrase,
Himself, it is very significa^^^ it is as much as if he had said, My S^^ that
God who commands me to go a^^ offer a Sacrifice, will not fail to prov^^^ the a
Lamb, for otherwise he should (...) provide for his own glory, which he w^^^
not lose. It is not for the honor of al^ ^ther to bring his children into
straits, (...) leave them there without suitable (...) necessary provision, God
should not co^sult his own glory if he should do the and therefore I doubt not,
nor wo^^ have thee question, but he will provi^^ himself a Lamb for a
burnt-offering. M^ses told the People in the Wilderne^^ that they should see
the glory of the Lo^^ ( Exodus 16.7.) Though the place (...) primarily respect
the glory of his Just^^^ for their murmurings, yet it is true li^^ wise that
they did see the glory of (...) goodness and mercy, in providing bre^^^ and
water when they were in a starv^^^ condition; These are the reasons of (...)
Doctrine.

Object. Some will say, We see not this made good, sometimes Gods people are in
great wants and straits, and none more than they.

Answ. God's provisions of the things of this life, are so ordered, as to
further, and not hinder the spiritual and eternal salvation of his people, and
there are ^imes of Trial, as here he tried Israel in ^he Wilderness, as the
Text shows. God will have it manifest whether we serve ^im for Loaves or for
Love; whether we will cleave to him and his ways in ^traits and necessities.
Sometimes the ^niquities of God's people hinders good things from them, ( Jer.
5.25.) For God ^romises these things as the fruits of that faith and Obedience
he requires of his ^ervants. On these and such like ac^ounts, God sees it good
to cut them ^ort of these things.

Use 2. Are these things so? Then ^is shows us the great evil of doubting, and
distrust found among God's people (...) any straits they come into. This is
(...) common infirmity among them. They ^^e ready to cry out, What shall we do?
^ow shall we be provided for? When ^^ey are in straits as to temporals, this
(...) their Language; What shall we eat? What shall we drink? Wherewithal shall
we be clothed? As Isaac sai^^ Where is the Lamb? so they, Where (...) food? and
where is raiment? We a^^ friendless and helpless, and we shall star^^ and
perish. Such is their Language as (...) Spirituals, when they see Ministers a^^
Ordinances fail; What shall become (...) our Souls? How shall our spiritual
(...) be preserved? We shall die and per^^^ by the hand of Saul, as David said,
(1 S^^^ 27.1.) We shall fall and miscarry (...) the hand of our temptations;
our c^^ruptions, (like the Sons of Zerviah (...) David,) are too hard, too
strong for (...) But I may say to such, as Christ did (...) Peter, O thou of
little faith! wheref^^^ did thou doubt? ( Matthew. 14.31.) Or (...) his
Disciples, who in a Storm at Sea fea^ed drowning, Why are ye fearful O ye^
little faith? This was Isreal's sin of o^ ( Psalm. 78.19, 20.) Can God furnish
Table for us in the Wilderness? Can give bread? Can be provide flesh for (...)
people? What a provoking evil is th^^ of unbelief, and yet how common a th^^ is
it even in those that profess the Lo^^ Name? We read of Isreal's Infidelity many
places, ( Exodus 14.11.) They (...) to Moses, because there were no G^^^ in
Egypt, Have thou taken us away (...) in the Wilderness? For it had been better
for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the Wilderness. Thus
full of unbelief were they, and yet God does ^ppeal to their Consciences in
this mat^er, ( Jer. 2.31.) Have I been a Wilderness unto you, or a Land of
Darkness? I have rather been a Paradise to you; you have been a Wilderness to
me, and not I un^o you: I have been wanting in no good thing to you. This
unbelief is such a ^ontempt of God, and provocation to ^im, (the day of
temptation in the Wilderness was a day of provocation, Heb. ^.8.) that he
swears in his wrath they shall not enter into his rest, in verse 11. He made
their carcasses to fall in the Wilderness, and they could not enter in because
of unbelief, in verse. 17, 19. O ^he evil and danger of this sin! It de^rived
Israel of the Land of Canaan; ^ea, Moses because of his fretting, never ^ould
set his foot in that Country. And ^ow smart a dispensation was that upon ^^at
great person we read of, (2 Kings ^.2.) The Lord by his Prophet had ^retold a
sudden great plenty to come, ^or the Famine was now sad and grievous (...)
Samaria,) this great man instead of ^^tertaining this comfortable news with
faith and thankfulness, rejected it wi^^ scorn and disdain, and a bold
presum^tuous question full of unbelief: If (...) Lord would make windows in
Heaven, (...) this thing be? As if he had said; If (...) thus do, yet this
plenty could not be. (...) plainly contradicts the Prophets wo^^ He questions
both the Power and (...) Truth of God; he denies both his A^^lity and his
Veracity, and it is a spee^^ that has too much blasphemy in it: (...) not only
speaks as if the thing it self (...) unlikely, but plainly that the Lord
h^^self could not do it: Therefore his ^^^stion meets with a terrible answer;
(...) hold, thou shall see it with thine Eyes, (...) shall not eat thereof.
Thus Infidelity (...) prives men of the comfort of what (...) has promised.
All things are possible (...) him that believes, but nothing is poss^^^ to him
that believes not. And this (...) gravated this great man's misery, (...) though
he should see this plenty, yet (...) should not eat of it: To come so (...) the
mercy, and yet not to partake of (...) is the greater misery. The sum of (...)
comes to this, to fright us all from ^^^ving to do with this provoking s^^
(...) unbelief. As the Apostle exhorts (...) cautions us, to take heed lest our
se^^^ fall after the same example of unbelief, ( Heb. 4.11.) So let us be the
more heedful, because we are least suspicious of our selves in this particular.
Every one is ready to think he believes the power and truth of God, till it
comes to the trial, and then there is too much questioning these things. This
is evident in that we can believe God in little matters, but not in greater and
more difficult; whereas his power can effect the hardest as well as the
easiest. Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Is not he faithful that has
promised? Shall we be like Thomas, who would believe no further than he saw?
The Lord heal our unbelief.

Use 2. Suffer the word of Exhortation. If God provides for his people in all
their Wilderness-conditions, Then let them be found faithful in Wilderness-work
and duty. Particularly, (1.) Be thankful to God for his care of you, and
provisions for you in all your straits. Say as David, Bless the Lord O my Soul,
and forget not all his benefits, who remembered thee in thy low estate, when no
man cared for thy Soul. (2.) Go not back from him, turn not aside from
following him in thy duty, though it be through difficulty. This God commends
in Israel of old, ( Jer. 2.2.) I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love
of their Espousals, ho^ thou wentest after me in the Wilderness. O Repent not
of your engagements for God; Say not as some of these murmurers did, Let us go
back again to Egypt, to our Onions and Garlic, to our sins and lusts, to our
Superstitions and Idolatries again. But rather let us say as Jepthah, ( Judges
11.35.) I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. When we
fall into days of great backsliding, we should think we hear Christ speaking to
us, as he did to his Apostles; ( Joh. 6.66, 67, 68.) When many of the Disciples
of Christ went back from him, and walked no more with him; he said to the
Apostles, Will ye also go away? Peter answered, Lord, To whom should we go? O
let a Caleb- like spirit be in us, that we may follow the Lord fully! O that we
could by this approve our selves to be the Sheep of Christ indeed, by hearing
his voice, and following him, and not following strangers, nor knowing the
voice of strangers, ( John 10.4, 5.) Strange Doctrines, strange Worship, that
is, such Doctrines and Worship as are strange to the holy Scriptures, let us
not receive them, nor those that bring them. Never is there more need Sheep
should listen to the voice of their Shepherd, and follow him, than when they
are in a waste howling Wilderness, apt of themselves to go astray, and so ready
to be devoured by the Beasts of prey: We should therefore pray with the Spouse,
( Cant. 1.7.) Tell me O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where
thou make thy Flock to rest at noon? for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the Flocks of thy Companions? (3.) To conclude all; Trust in the Lord
for ever; This is Wilderness-work; In the greatest straits, and most amazing
distresses, when we are stripped of all humane helps, and ordinary means fail,
yet believe that God will provide for our Bodies, for our Souls, for our
Families, for his Church and People; Casting all our care on him; for he cares
for us, (1 Pet. 5.7.) In all our exigencies, let us roll our selves on God, and
go up from this Wilderness leaning on our Beloved, ( Cant. 8.5.) This is God's
Command, ( Psalm. 37.3.) Trust in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in
the Land, and verily thou shall be ^ed. Hereby we give God his greatest honor,
( Romans 4.20.) Abraham was strong in faith, giving glory to God. This ^s the way
to be delivered out of straits, ( Exodus 14.13.) Stand still (namely, in way of
faith and dependence) and ye shall see the salvation of the Lord. Faith will
(...) our best Anchor, staying our Souls upon God and his Promise, ( Isa.
26.3.) The wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose min^ stayed on thee, because
he trusts in the We know not how great the wants (...) straits are we may be
reduced unto. Remember this Example in the Text no^ before us. Ordinary means
failed, (...) God provided extraordinarily. He ha^ wonderful ways to provide
for his Ch^^dren: He can make a little go a gre^^ way, as when he multiplied
the Loa^^ by a Miracle: He can cause the course^ food to be as good nourishment
as the best dainties, witness Daniel's pulse: H^ can by unexpected ways bring
relie^ When Musculus that famous Divine wanted bread for his Family, and ma^^
those Verses in his straits, which are (...) follows:

Est Deus in coelis, qui providus omnia cur^^
Nunquan credentes deseruisse potest.
In English thus; There is a God in H^^ven who has a provident care for all
(...) creatures, and cannot forsake those that ^^lieve in him. As he was thus
exercising himself in a way of Faith, one sent him a Loaf of Bread, which
relieved him and his Family. And in the Massacre at Paris, was one Merlin
nourished fourteen days together by an Egg a day laid by an Hen that came
constantly to that Hawmow, where he lay hid from danger. Only, let us labor to
be Israelites indeed, for such shall want no good thing. Let us come into the
Wilderness, as Israel did, by following God's Word and Spirit, and not by
neglecting God's Rule, not by prodigal expensive courses, or idleness and
neglect of our Callings. Let us use all good and lawful means to provide for
our selves. Israel took pains to gather the Manna daily, and to bake it in
Pans, and fit it for their eating. We must also pray for provision, as Christ
teaches us in the Pattern he gave his Disciples, to say, Give us this day our
daily bread; and then let us trust in the Lord, and by Faith leave the event
with him, he will take care for us. As Mr. Hern a worthy Minister of the Gospel
said to his Wife when he was nigh death, and she with diverse Children like to
be left in a low condition, weeping by him; he sought to quiet her with these
words; Peace Sweetheart, That God that feed the Ravens will not starve the
Herns: So would I say here; That God who fed Israel with Manna in the
Wilderness, will not fail to feed those that trust in him, with food convenient
for them in their greatest straits and necessities.

Comfort your selves and one another with these things.

SERMON IV.
Nahum 1.7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows the^^ that trust in him.


SOme say this Prophet was born at Elkosh, a small Town in Galilee, and there
named Nahum, which signifies a Comforter; And so he was to Gods people: He
speaks indeed terrible things against Gods enemies in the 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6,
verses: He shows how dreadfu^ the wrath of God would be against the Ninevites,
and the Assyrians for their great wickedness; Yet so as he also declares how
comfortably God would manifest himself to his people in all their troubles, in
the words of the text, The Lord is good, etc. Wherein he gives us, (1.) A
description of Gods nature in general; The Lord is good. (2.) An account
wherein he his ready to express this goodness to Israel in particular; Which is
set down in two things. (1.) He is a strong hold; (2.) He knows them that trust
in him, in a day of trouble.

The notes observable are these. (1.) That the Lord is good. (2.) That the
Church and people of God have (or may expect to meet with) a day of trouble.
(3.) That God is a strong hold for them in that troublous time. (4.) That God
knows them that trust in him in the day of trouble.
Of these in order.

Doct. 1. That the Lord is Good. This is expressly in the Text. To open this
briefly in two things.

1. He is good in himself, and so there is a threefold goodness in him as
learned men observe. (1.) Bonitas naturalis, The goodness of his nature, which
is the perfection of it, a perfect being. Thus its taken, ( Exodus 33.19.) When
Moses prays, I beseech thee show me thy glory; says God, I will make all my
goodness (...) before thee, and I will proclaim the name (...) the Lord before
thee, etc. Compare this with ( Chap. 34.5, 6.) The Lord descended in the cloud,
and proclaimed the name of the Lord, The Lord, The Lo^^ God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth. Th^^ is that
goodness which is the beauty a^^ perfection of his nature. (2.) Bonitas
^^^^ralis, This is the rectitude of his will Persons and things are said to be
good (...) they are conformable to Gods will, ( Ac^^ 11.24.) It Is said in this
sense of Barnaba he was a good Man: And ( Romans 7.19.) (...) the Law, that it is
holy, just, and good (3.) Bonitas benignitatis, ( Jer. 31.12.) They shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord; (...) goodness of bounty and beneficence,
which is a natural propension to communica^^^^ to his creatures according to
their several capacities. I call it a natural propension (...) inclination,
because it is in him essentially, ( Luke. 18.19.) None is good save one that is
God. It inclines him to commu^^cate. Thou art good, and thou do good ( Psalm.
119.68.) This he does to all (...) creatures; The Lord is good to all, ( Ps^^
145.9.) Yet especially to his own people Therefore.
2. He is good to us, as he is our good; with reference to our enjoyment of
him. He is the ultimate good of his people, which constituteth their happiness.
And happiness is the rest the Soul takes in an object so full of real good, as
is able to satisfy all its desires. And God is this object, considered in his
perfections, and that in relation to our concernments. Consider our happiness
as spiritual, it lies ^n supplies of grace and peace, or as temporal, so it
lies in preservation and provision; Now God is such a good as suits all our
necessities, and so satisfies all our desires, and consequently constitutes our
happiness. This is evident in that he is (...) God alsufficient; ( Genesis 17.1.)
I am God, (El Shaddai) Alsufficient; Show us the Father, says Philip, ( John
14.8.) and it suffices us. And God calls upon his people, ( Psalm. 81.10.) Open
thy mouth wide, and promises that he will fill it. Omne ^onum in summo bono,
All good is in the chief good: By way of eminency; all good is in him
vertually. As having nothing, yet possessing all things, (2 Cor. 6.10.) The
scattered excellencies of creatures meet in him. All is in him Originally, ^he
creatures add nothing to him. Hence ^f we delight our selves in the Lord, he
will give us the desires of our ha^^ He is the chief good by way of effici^^ as
he can create all that which he se^^ be good for us. He is the Father mercies,
(2 Cor. 1.3.) As a Father he (...) a procreating power, he gives a b^ to what
he pleases. He calls th^^ that are not as though they were, ( (...) 4.17.)
He is the God of all gr^^^ (1 Pet. 5.10.) to implant it; He ca^ the stones
raise up children unto Abra^^ ( Matthew. 3.9.) To increase it, (2 Cor. ^.8.) God
is able to make all grace abo^^ toward you. To preserve it; He su^^ not Faith
or any grace to fail. So (...) comfort; He is the God of all cons^^tion, and
can fill our hearts with all (...) and peace in believing, ( Romans 15.1^.) So
for temporal good; He can prese^^ from trouble and in trouble. He (...) provide
for us in all our straits and wa^^ My son, God will provide, said Abra^^^ to
Isaac. And this alsufficiency of (...) is of himself, and he has power to
^^^municate as he pleases. And by ^^^munication his fullness cannot be
ex^^sted. I might yet enlarge this by she^^^ how Good he is in his outgoings in
(...) in whom he has suited himself (...) happiness of our Souls. He has help
for us upon that mighty one, ( Psalm. 89.19.) In him there is perfection of
righteousness for peace and reconciliation. ( Heb. 7.2.) He is first King of
righteousness, and then also King of peace. A righteousness which answers the
obligation of the Law; In him also there is fullness of Spirit to quicken and
renew; and indeed it has pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, ( Col. 1.19.) I might show how good he is in his Word; called the good
Word of God, ( Heb. 5.6.) And in his Ordinances, by conveying great and good
things. And in his providence of mercy and correction ordering them and
^ringing good out of them. But briefly ^o apply this truth.
Use 1. Let us all try whether we have (...) propriety in this good. Now saving
^nterest is only by Covenant. Without Christ and without God are all that are
^rangers to the Covenant of promise, ( Ephesians. 2.12.) If any say, How shall we now
we are in covenant? I only say; When we are subdued to the terms of it, ^aith
and holy obedience, when the pro^ises of it are in any measure of truth
^lfilled in us: Has God given us his spirit? Is his law in truth written upon
^^r hearts? Are our Souls sprinkled with his clean water promised to (...) viz.
the blood and grace of Ch^^^ justifying, and sanctifying grace? (...) our Souls
flee to the Covenant for c^^^ fort in all our troubles, as David (...) (2 Samuel
23.5.) He has made with (...) an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all the
(...) and sure: These are good signs.

Use 2. Of Exhortation. (1.) Let (...) get an experimental knowledge of (...)
Lord as Good. O taste and see that (...) Lord is good, ( Psalm. 34.8.) Every one
(...) fires good, Who will show us any good? (...) the voice of all men, (
Psalm. 4.6.) O (...) us press after a clear, affecting, exp^^mential knowledge
of God our ch^^^ good. This will bring our Souls to (...) mire him, and set him
up in his excellen^ and to choose God for our portion, (...) love him, to cleave
to him, to fol^^^ after him, and to long for him. T^^^ will bring our Souls to
rest and sat^^^ction, and make us bless our selves (...) God, and make our
boast of God: He (...) by he will be all in all unto us, and th^^ both in the
presence and enjoyment (...) all things, and in the absence and w^^^ of all
things; patient in tribulation, c^^tented in losses and wants, chearfi^^
straits. So it was with David in the various straits he was in; (1 Samuel 30.6.)
He encouraged himself in the Lord his God. (2.) Let us carry it well and
suitably toward so good a God in all duty and service: To fear the Lord and
his goodness, ( Hos. 3.5.) Fear to sin against so good a God, and lest we
should not suitably improve, and walk worthy of his goodness; Let us not
despise or any way ^buse the riches of his goodness. Let not our eye be evil,
or our ways evil, because ^e is good, but let us rather imitate ^is goodness,
he does good even to his ^ery enemies, ( Matthew. 5.45.) So let us, ^f our enemy
hunger, feed him, if he ^hirst, give him drink. Let our work ^e to go up and
down doing good, as Christ did. And let not the common goodness of God content
us; greatly ^hankful we should be for it, but not ^est in it. Let us say as
David, ( Psalm. ^06.4.) Remember us with the favor thou ^earest to thy people,
etc. (3.) Let this ^omfort Gods people, for so good is God, that no good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, ( Psalm. 84.^1.) They that fear
the Lord shall want no ^ood thing, ( Psalm. 34.10.) Some may say, we see many
such in great want, and un^er many evils and troubles.
Let such know and consider; (1.) It is becau^^ they are wanting to themselves;
The^ are not in the exercise of Faith, nor (...) close walking with God. These
with hold good things from them. Acqu^^^ thy self with God, so shall good come
(...) thee, ( Job 22.21.) (2.) The state of G^^ people is not to be judged by
outwa^^ appearance. They have a better go^^ than this worlds good. They enj^^^
spiritual good things; God says, (...) will satiate the weary Soul with
goo^ness; with the goodness of his hou^^ even of his holy Temple. This
Str^^gers meddle not with: It is better th^^ all the good things of their own
hou^^ (3.) The time of their full enjoyme^^ of God is not yet come.
Then they w^^^ say, as it is, ( Psalm 31.19.) O how grea^^ thy goodness which
thou have laid up for th^^ that fear thee, for them that trust in th^^ before
the Sons of men! So much for th^^ first note.

Doct. 2. That the Church and People (...) God have a day of Trouble. This is
here i^^plied, in that God is said to be their str^^^ hold in the day of
trouble, it supposes th^^ had such a day. The Prophet its tho^^ has a
particular respect to Hezekiah; (...) had a day of trouble, of rebuke and
bl^phemy, when Senacherib the King of Assyria came up against him, as is
evident in the Prophet Isaiah, ( chap. 37.3.) And thus it has been, is, or may
be with God's people; they have their days of trouble, a cloudy and dark day,
as Ezekiel calls it, a showry, a rainy day. As they have their days of
Sunshine, of Joy and Mercy; so a day of Affliction, a stormy and tempestuous
day. All kind of trouble is here understood; outward and inward trouble, little
and great troubles. As they have a day of prosperity, so likewise of adversity.
The Church of Christ is his body; in every natural body there are many members;
sometime the head aches, or the eye smarts, the arm is sore, the foot is
wounded, the heart is heavy, then great must needs be the trouble of the body:
So here, one member of Christ's body lies in the prison, others are oppressed
and ruined in their Estates, others banished, others put to death; great must
needs be the trouble of the body of Christ when it is thus. Elijah lamented his
trouble, being persecuted by Jezabel, (1 Kings 19.) Job, an upright member, had
many troubles, like the waves of the Sea, one upon another; his Estate gone,
his Children slain, his Wife and Friends prove his Enemies and Troubles, S^^^^
shooting his Arrows at him, and (...) seeming to be against him; great was
(...) trouble. Jacob, David, Paul, and oth^^ confirm this truth to us. Here I
(...) briefly show, (1.) The Times wh^^^ (2.) The Reasons why it is thus.


Qu. 1. Ye will say, When, or at (...) special Times has the Church a day
(...) trouble?

Ans. 1. When their hearts g^^^ high and proud under mercies, then (...) ally
follows a day of trouble. God gi^^ great favors to his people, exalts th^^ in
privileges, and they are lifted up (...) pride, wax wanton under them, then
co^^^^ great trouble. Thus it was with Hez^kiah, who, (as I hinted before) is
h^^^ particularly spoken of, he was under g^^^^ mercies, raised from a low and
w^^^ condition by sickness, his heart was lif^^^ up in pride, then comes a day
of troub^^^ upon him: He showed the Embassad^^ of the King of Babylon all his
Treasu^^ in a vainglorious boasting way, therefo^^ all was carried away from
him. D^^^^ was advanced, his Mountain was stro^^ he upon this grew secure and
proud, (...) said he should not be moved, and t^^ drew upon him a day of great
trouble (...) adversity. To have our hearts lifted up in the ways of God, as
Jehosaphat's was, under many and extraordinary mercies, is excellent indeed;
but to be lifted up above measure, as Paul found a proneness in himself to be
under his revelations, is very sinful; God will prick this bladder swollen with
pride by some thorn in the flesh, to take us down again, for his Soul so
liftted up is not upright in him as the Prophet speaks.

2. When the people of God are in some measure fitted and prepared for trouble,
then they may expect a day of trouble. Its a great misery and judgment to have
mercies or troubles when we are unprepared for either. But God is very good to
his people in this, that he gives them both when they are fitted for them, to
be better by them, to improve mercies and troubles. He knows their frame, and
will not put new wine into old bottles, nor lay heavy burdens on weak
shoulders, but proportions the burden to the back, his strokes unto their
strength, that they may be able to bear it, (1 Cor. 10.13.) The woman is not
put to flee into the Wilderness, ( Rev. 12.6, 14.) till she has wings given
her to fit her for the flight, and a place prepared of God that they should
fee^ her there. When God has given mu^^ grace, then comes a day of trouble to
(...) Christians to the use of that grace. As Go^ will not over-burden them, so
he wi^^ not undervalue them. If they have great grace to bear great troubles,
they man expect them.

3. When his people lean to their ow^ understandings, and follow their ow^
devices, not consulting God, nor taking his counsel, then let them expect a da^
of trouble: When they will be wise (...) their own conceit, and betake
themselv^^ to their own inventions, neglecting (...) frequent his counsel, they
always mee^ with trouble. Did you ever read God people thus doing, and escape
it? Go^ would have Jonah go and preach to Ni^^veh what he bad him, but he runs
to hi^ own ways, and goes to Tharshish; D^^ he escape trouble? O the great
affliction he was involved in! Thrown, as (...) were, into the belly of hell,
for his disobedience to the God of heaven, and following his own contrivances
to avoid trouble, he brought himself into far greater troubles. Never did any
good man lie easy upon that pillow which was (...) their own laying, or sleep
well on th^^ bed which was of their own making. Though Jacob was designed to
have the blessing, yet when he yielded to his Mother to endeavor the attaining
it by lying and dissembling, what abundance of trouble did he bring upon
himself by it? Therefore trust in the Lord for ever, and lean not to thine own
understanding.

4. When God intends to raise and advance his people, he will bring a day of
trouble upon them to fit and prepare them for it. A man that purposes to build
a house high, will lay the foundation low. So God inflicts much trouble upon
his servants, and brings them low by afflictions, because he intends to advance
and advantage them thereby. By the oppressions of Egypt, and by the perils and
troubles of the Wilderness, he prepared Israel for the Land of Canaan. Before
Joseph had a golden Chain put about his neck, and was raised to honor by
Pharaoh, he must have his feet in the stocks, and undergo various troubles. As
David grew nearer the Kingdom, so did his troubles increase, and so he grew
fitter for a Crown by his crosses: His Soul was as a weaned child, ( Psa. ^
31.2.) By troubles he was so humbled, as to be in less danger of being proud
(...) made worse by his honors. He mi^^^ more safely enjoy the pleasures of
(...) Court without danger of surfeiting (...) his ruin. When God intended to
d^^ble Jobs estate, he stripped him of all (...) had, so that he who in the
morning (...) the richest man in the East, was at nig^^ poor to a proverb. As
many ti^^ after great manifestations of his lo^^ the Lord humbles his people by
g^^^ desertions and sore temptations in the Spirits, so in his providence.
L^^^ observed, that before God honor him to do any great piece of services^
his name, he would exercise him w^^ some sore affliction or humbling
dispe^^tion. There is a time wherein (...) will make the place of his feet
glori^^^ or glorify the house of his glory, (...) in this World; ( Isa. 60.7,
13.) But (...) fore this comes to pass, there may (...) such a time of trouble
as never was, (...) the nearer the glory comes, the gre^^^ may be the trouble;
as the nearer a (...) man in travel is to deliverance, (...) stronger and more
painful her th^^ may be, and it is darkest a little bef^^^ the day breaks. When
God inte^^ his people a Joyful harvest, they (...) first expect a wet
seed-time. They that sow in tears, shall reap in Joy; They that go forth
weeping, bearing precious seed, shall return again rejoicing, bringing their
sheaves with them, ( Psalm. 126.5.6.)

5. When God intends to make a complete and full destruction of his and his
Churches Enemies. Hence it was that Israel was in such great trouble, because
God intended to get himself glory upon Pharaoh and upon the Egyptians in their
utter overthrow. This may inhanse and raise the troubles of Gospel-churches in
these last days of the world, because God has a great design to execute the
vengeance written against Antichrist, and to save his people from his Iron
yoke. There shall be such a time of trouble as never was, says Daniel, ( Chap.
12.1.) and then shall Gods people be delivered, and consequently their enemies
ruined, for these mostly go together: As when Mordecai and the Jews had a great
deliverance from troubles, Haman and his Accomplices had a dreadful overthrow.
These like the buckets in a Well, the one coming up, the other goes down. If
the wicked rise, the righteous mourn, but when those perish, these rejoice.
These are the seasons of the Churches troubles.

Qu 2. But you will say, What are (...) reasons of their troubles? To this I
answer.

An 1. To take away their dross a^^ and purge away there sin. By this s^^^ the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, namely, b^^ troubles and afflictions, ( Esa. 17.9.
(...) this is all the fruit to take away his sin. T^^ fining Pot is for Silver,
and the Furnace f^^ Gold, ( Prove. 17.3.) God put his Gold in^^^ the Furnace of
affliction to take away i^^ dross, and make it more pure and (...) fined. Flesh
and blood will shrink at thi^ but grace will close with it, for it is (...)
blessed design of love God has in thi^ to bring them forth vessels of hono^^
meet for his use, and ready for ever^ good work.

2. To prevent their sinning, and (...) their ruin. As God is pleased to
p^^vent the infection of the air by thund^^ and lightning, which do much
clarify i^ and to keep the Sea from putrefying (...) the winds, and the
constant motion of the Waves, so he preserves his people from much hurt and
danger by their troubles* He sees how apt prosperity is to infe^ them, and they
to surfeit upon creatu^^ fullness; he sees an empty cup is bet^^ for them than a
full; better to go aw^^ from a table hungry, than a glutton, and ^hirsty, than
drunk. When God gave ^srael what of outward things they desired, ^t was their
ruin, by reason of their sin, ( Psalm 106.15.)

3. To discover what is in them, both of sin and grace. They neither know the
one nor the other, till tried by troubles, and then they often find more sin,
and less grace than they made account of. When the Waters are roiled, the Mud
rises which was at the bottom, not seen before. O says a Christian, when
stirred by troubles, and passions rise, I did not imagine there had been so
much impatience and discontent, so much pride, unbelief and ^rowardness, and
worldliness, as now I find ^n my heart; I thought faith, and patience, and
other graces, had been more strong ^han they are; alas, how weak are they ^f
any at all? I thought I could have wrested with any trouble, and not have had
^n impatient rising against God's providence, but now I see I am mistaken in my
^elf. Thus Peter thought he should have died, rather than denied his Master;
but when trial came, he found how much he was deceived in himself. It is easy
for ^o talk of War in a time of Peace, but (...) Soldiers valor is known in a
Battle. Troubles discover whether men wi^^ adhere to God, his truth, and ways,
^^swim down with the stream, and turn wi^^ every wind. For men then to stand
th^^^ ground is something, but how often is the timorous weakness of many great
Profe^sors then discovered? We say commonly we cannot know a man thoroughly,
till w^ have summer'd and wintered him; so it (...) here; God brings a Summer
of prosperi^^ that discovers the weakness of many; b^^ then comes a Winter of
adversity, and the discovers others: He that well bears bo^^ is a strong
Christian indeed. When the^^ is a great deal of Rain, we see what wee^ were in
the ground that were not dif^^vered before. Little do good men thi^^ or believe
the corruptions that are (...) them, till by a day of trouble they sh^^^
themselves. When Absalom was tak^^ away by death, then was David's pass^^ and
inordinate affection to him ma^^ known, beyond what one would ha^^ thought to
be in him. You may obser^^ in some Professors a very loving cour^^ous carriage
while they are pleased, but (...) you cross and vex them a little, how (...)
lent and outrageous are they in their ^^gry passions? Like the troubled Sea,
^^^ing out mire and dirt, raging waves of ^^ea, foaming out their own shame. O
^he unbecoming words and actions that ^ill come from them! Hence when God ^ould
discover men, he brings upon them (...) day of trouble.

4. To make them useful to others. ^ereby he furnishes them with experien^es of
his power, love and goodness, that ^hey may be able experimentally to en^ourage
and comfort others with what ^hey themselves have found in a day of ^^ouble.
Hereby they are taught to sym^^thyize with others that lie under inward
^^oubles, sense of guilt, apprehensions of ^rath, the fiery Darts of Satan's
temptati^ns, long and sore desertions, combats ^ith strong corruptions: They
that never ^^lt these troubles, cannot pity and com^^ssionate others that are
under them. He ^^at has endured the misery of those ^^ute diseases, the Stone
or Gout, he can ^^est tell how to pity those that are under ^^em. Christ
himself submitted to suffer (...) temptations, that he might be able ^^om his
own experience to succor them ^^at are tempted, ( Heb. 2. ult.) So expe^^enced
Christians are the best and most ^^le comforters of others in a day of ^^ouble;
none so able to advise and help ^^em in trouble as these are; they can give
experimental counsel and comfo^^ and this is one great end why they ha^^ been
exercised with such troubles, t^^^ they may impart and communicate the
experiences to others. And blessed a^^ they who are thus found to improve th^^
troubles.

Use 1. Of Information; in a word; (...) God brings a day of trouble upon his
o^^ people, Then let others know that (...) has worse things in reserve for
the^ This is expressed in the verses before (...) Text, and after it;
especially the 2d a^^ 8th verses. The Lord revengeth, and (...) furious, the
Lord will take vengeance (...) on his Enemies, and he reserveth wra^^ for his
Adversaries. Those that seek (...) thrust him beside his Throne, that opp^^^
his Worship, contemn his Word, pe^^cute his People, and say, we will not ha^^
this man to reign over us; bring hit^^^ these mine Enemies, will he say one d^^
and slay them before me, ( Luke 19.27* Such as return by true and lively
rep^^tance, shall not find him thus furious, (...) gracious. As for others, he
has wrath (...) store, treasures of wrath against the (...) of wrath laid up
for them: Their pre^^^vation for a time, is but a reservation (...) that wrath
to come. If God uses (...) Pruning-knife for his own Trees if they grow out of
order, what shall be done to a Bramble, to a Thistle? O where shall the sinner
and the ungodly appear? What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel,
as the Apostle speaks, (1 Pet. 4.17, 18.)

Use 2. Of exhortation, in two or three things. (1.) Let not Gods people
censure themselves, nor others judge unrighteously of them, because of the
troubles and adversities they meet with. To say they are none of Gods people,
but wicked, and hypocrites. This is to write (...) false Commentary upon Gods
people and ^is dealings with them; for in all ages ^hey have been great
sufferers. When ^ome supposed the Galileans, whose blood ^ilate mingled with
their Sacrifices, and those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell and slew them, to
be sinners above all those in Galilee and in Jerusalem, because ^hey suffered
such things, Christ tells them, No, it was nothing so, ( Luke 13. ^he five
first verses.) but except they re^ented, they should all likewise perish. When
Jobs three friends had branded him ^r a wicked Hypocrite, because of his ^^eat
and grievous troubles, Job would ^old fast his righteousness, and not let his
integrity go, ( Job 27.4, 5.) He co^^ appeal to God himself and say, Job 10.^^
Thou know that I am not wic^^ And God determines the business on J^^^ side
against his Friends, and was (...) angry with them for their ungroun^ and rash
Censures of him. Therefore none Judge hardly of themselves o^thers, but wait
the issue. (2.) (...) Gods people expect and prepare for day of trouble. Let
not a careless se^ frame of Spirit possess them, for it is only because man is
born to troub^^ the sparks fly upward, that they are ^^ject to it, but also
because God has (...) special manner designed them to a su^^ing lot. Provide
therefore for a R^^^ day. Deny your selves and be read^ take up the Cross and
that daily, ((...) 9.23.) Who knows, whether a C^^^ may not gather upon us that
shall diss^^^^ in a shower of Blood? Now then (...) good laying up in store a
good found^^^^ against the time to come. A stock of gra^^ a stock of
experiences, a stock of prom^^^ will do well in such a day. (3.) Let (...)
people carry it well in and under any of trouble that befalls them in the W^^^
That is, Humbly.
Humble your s^^^der the mighty hand of God, (1 Pet. (...) Thankfully; for when
it goes ill, it (...) have been much worse. It is of the Lords mencies we are
not consumed, said the Church in a day of great trouble then upon her, ( Lam.
3.22, Why should a living man complain? Alive and complain, out of Hell and
complain, this ought not so to be; but in the greatest trouble here, to be
thankful we are cast into the bottomless Pit of Ruin, as our sins deserve.
Patiently; let patience have its perfect work in us; when we can possess
nothing here, if by faith we can possess God and in patience possess our own
Souls, then when we are as having nothing, we shall still possess all things.
Happy are we if troubles shall thus discover graces. Then will God be glorified
thereby, and these are his great ends in exercising us with trouble. Spices
smell not much till they are beaten, but then are very fragrant. If when God
puts us into the Mor^ar, and beats us with the Pestel of afflictions, our
Spikenard send out its savor, it is a blessed fruit and effect of trouble. And
to say no more, let us carry it prayerfully in the time of our adversity. This
has been the practice of good men; Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left, was the Message of Hezekiah to Isaiah, ( Chap. 37.4.) And this was his
own practice, he went up to the house of the Lord, Spread Rabshakehs reviling
Blasphemous Letter before him and pra^^ed. I called upon the Lord in my
trouble, sai^^ David, Psalm. 116.3, 4. This is it God ha^^ commanded and has
also promised (...) liverance to his people upon it, ( Ps^^^ 50.15.) Call upon
me in the day of troub^^ I will deliver thee. As David said of G^ahs Sword, so
let me say of prayer, the^^ is no means like it. Some in their tro^bles murmr
against God, quarrel wi^^ second causes, laying the cause here a^^ there, and
in stead of praying fall a curs^^ and swearing. It is common and easy do thus,
but who falls down before G^^ and says, Lord, it is for my pride, (...)
worldliness, my unprofitableness, th^^ troubles come; O pardon and heal (...)
for thy names sake. O then let us be m^^^ with God in Prayer in all our own a^^
the Churches troubles; Only let the^^ be fervent prayers. The effectual ferv^^
prayer of a righteous man avails much ( James. 5.16.) Much more the unanim^^^
prayers of his Churches will preva^^ especially, if mixed with faith and (...)
join Reformation of heart and life to o^ supplication. If my people pray (...)
seek my face, and turn from their evil w^^ then will I hear in heaven and
forgive (...) iniquity, and heal the land, (2 Chronicles. 7.14.) But if I regard
iniquity in my heart, says David, the Lord will not hear my prayer. How shall
we think our requests can prevail, when our practices contradict our prayers?
We pray against pride, divisisions, worldlyness, unfruitfulness, and yet
continue in these sins. We lament our neglect of duty, in our families and
closets, our breach of Gods holy day, our deadness and loss of our first love
and ^ife, and yet go on in these things, our supplications without reformation
are but a provocation, as the howling of Dogs in Gods ears, as he says of
Israel of Old. They howled upon their Beds, ( Hos. 7.14.) and were no more
regarded by God, than (...) Dog that howleth is by men. Had there been
reforming answerable to our praying, we might have had the mercies prayed for
before this. Let us then pray and turn from our evil ways, and God will turn
his promises into performances, and our prayers into praises, our Hosanna's
unto Hallelujahs. And O that we could yet stir up our selves to take hold on
God by faith and prayers. Preces and lacrymae, Prayers and Tears are the
Churches best weapons in a day of trouble. The Spirit of ^rayer fails, O that
he who has the residue of the Spirit, would once again p^^^ out the Spirit of
grace and supplication upon his people; So in every day of Jac^^ trouble, when
he is brought low, and (...) say, By whom shall Jacob arise? We sh^^^ find such
wrestling with God by pra^^ will engage Jacobs God to command (...) liverances
for Jacob in due time. And nothing, that arises in our hearts to k^^^^ us from
this duty, or deaden us in it, h^^der us. Let none say, our troubles are
extreme that we are overwhelmed (...) them. So it was with the Psalm ( Psalm.
142.3.) His Spirit was o^^^ whelmed in him, yet he prayed. Tho^^^ God lamed
Jacob as if he had been Enemy, yet he wept and made suppl^^^tion. Out of the
Belly of Hell cried I, sa^^^ Jonah. Let none say, our sins are so gr^^^ and we
upon that account so vile and worthy, that we dare not pray, for G^^ hears
not sinners, ( John 19.31.) (...) let such consider David, ( Psalm. 40.13.) My
sins are more than the hairs my head, Yet he prays, Be pleased, O (...) to
deliver me, O Lord, make have to help Let there be a real mourning for sin,
turning from sin, and thy sins shall hinder thy prayers. That unbelief w^^^
hinders thee from praying is worse^ all thy other sins, as appears, ( John
16.^9.) He shall reprove the World of sin, because they believe not on me,
says Christ. Let none say, I would but I am unable, I want the Spirit of
prayer; but know, there may be effectual and acceptable prayer when yet thou
feel nothing but a great indisposedness to prayer. When the Psalmist
complains he was so troubled that he could not speak, yet then he prayed, (
Psalm. 77.1.3.4. verse) I cried unto God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.
When Hezekiah could but chatter like a Crane, and mourn like a Dove, as he
complains, Isa. 38.14.5. Yet even then the Spirit of prayer wrought effectually
in him, as is clear by what God speaks. I have heard thy prayer, I have seen
thy Tears. Neither let any say, it is to no purpose for them to pray, for many
do well enough that never pray. But this is not true. For all such have, is but
temporal good things, and they cannot have them as blessings with the love and
favor of God, but in anger, as a curse, and to their hurt. The prosperity of
fools shall destroy them, ( Prove. 1.32.) But to them that pray, be it much or
little they have, it is in love and sanctified by the word and prayer. Let none
say, it is in vain for them to pray, because God knows perfectly what our wants
and troubles a^ before we pray, and has determin^^ what to do for us, and he
is of one mi^^ and who can turn him, prayer it self ca^ not alter his purpose.
And he is of so g^^cious a nature that he is ready to give^ what he sees good
for us, though we pr^^ not for it. Now though all this be tru^^ yet to neglect
prayer on these accoun^ is most weak and unsound. For, thou^^ God knows our
wants, yet he has commanded us in every thing by prayer a^^ supplication, that
we make known our ^^quests to him, ( Philip. 4.6.) And wha^ ever birth his
decree and counsel Trave^ with in a way of mercy to us, he ha^ appointed prayer
to be the midwife (...) hand it to us, ( Ezekiel. 36, 37.) The^^ are many gracious
promises of go^^ to Gods Church and people, I will yet (...) enquired of, says
God, by the house of Isra^^ to do it for them. Yea, it is a manifest toke^ of
his goodness, that he will be soug^^ unto for the good he purposes (...)
promises to bestow upon us. For it (...) because he loves to hear the work of
(...) own Spirit in us, Let me here thy voice ( Cant. 2.14.) For sweet is thy
voice; The praying voice, even as you that are Pa^ents love to here your little
ones speak though but lisping, much more does God ^o hear his Children. And let
none say, ^ur prayers have been fruitless time after ^ime, for it is no
argument God neglects them, because they obtain not presently; ^or what if he
sees it is better for us to be without a mercy than to have it? Is it ^ot our
interest to subscribe to his wis^om, and submit to his will therein? What if it
be not for his glory we have (...) as yet, cannot we wait his time? Mar^ha and
Mary sent to Christ, ( John 11.) to ^ome quickly, for Lazarus whom he loved was
sick. Yet Christ deferred coming till he ^ad been dead some days, and no hope
in an ordinary way for his living again, till the Resurrection; This was done
that God night be glorified in his being raised to ^^fe by a miracle. And what
if God will ^nswer our prayers in some better way ^han in giving us the thing
prayed for? ^ught we not to rest satisfied in his wise ^ispose for us? Are we
fitter to carve for ^ur selves than he is? Surely it is best for us ^o
acquiesce in his gracious choice of our ^nheritance for us. Abraham prayed for
^hmaels conversion. O that Ishmael may ^^ve before thee; God answered him in
Isaac which was better. David prayed for the life of his sick Child, God denie^
him in that, but answered him in Solomon a better mercy. Paul prayed for the
removal of that sorely afflictive temptation which he knew not how to bear God
answered him with a promise o^ supporting grace which was better. S^ that if we
could observe the ways o^ God toward us in answering prayer we should have no
cause to restra^^ prayers upon a temptation that they ar^ fruitless, but should
see our labor is no^ in vain in the Lord. These things considered, nothing
should take us off from or deaden our hearts in, prayer to Go^ in the day of
trouble, but we should be encouraged to continue instant in this duty, always
to pray and not to faint ( Luke 18.1.) But some will say, wha^ shall we do to
bear up till deliverance from trouble come? The 3. Doctri^^ tells us that,
which may comfortab^^ support us in praying and waiting (...) it, viz.

Doct 3. That the Lord is a strong ho^^ in the day of trouble. So in the Text
e^pressly. And thus God is set forth (...) other Scriptures. ( Isa. 26.4.) He
(...) called the Rock of ages; a refuge to (...) that trust in him through all
Generations. Hence it is said, ( Prove. 18.10.) The name ^f the Lord is a strong
Tower. It is a Me^aphorical speech; look what a strong Tower is in case of
danger, such is the ^ame of God in a day of trouble; the one^y sanctuary to run
into for security. The Lord is my Rock and my fortress, my ^trength, and my
high Tower, says David, ( Psalm. 18.2.) A strong fort or fortification.
Hezekiah, who in his days of trouble had this very word in the text given him
for his relief, found him so, notwithstanding Rabshakeh blasphemed in telling
him, the God in whom he trusted would deceive him.

Qu. 1. And if you ask, Wherein it appears, that God is a strong hold in the
day of trouble;

Ans. I answer; In that he is, and has all that belongs to a strong hold: viz.
Strength, provision, ammunition, advantage against Enemies, and the like. God
has strength, A paper-house will not make a good strong hold, or houses made
of reed or rotten Timber; But God is my strength and power, says David, (2 Samuel 22.32) In him his everlasting strength. God has provision: If this be
wanting to them in strong holds, their enemies may starve them. But (...) know
what God is to his people, a Father, a Shepherd; These will provid^^ for their
children, for their flocks, Go^ much more for his. So Abraham believed, My Son,
God will provide, an^ so he found it, ( Genesis 22.7.8.) God ha^ also ammunition;
In a strong hold the^ are great pieces of Ordnance, which are for offense and
defense. So in Go^ there are glorious Attributes, he ha^ made also gracious
promises to his people, and terrible threatenings against (...) enemies; Faith
and prayer give fire (...) these to discharge them, and then dreadful execution
is done upon Gods and (...) peoples Enemies. He makes his A^rows sharp in the
hearts of his Enemies his right hand does terrible thing whereby they fall
under him, ( Psalm. 45 4.5.) I might also show, what great adva^tage he has
against Enemies to rep^^ and do them hurt; But I only add that as a strong
hold is not known b^^ only to them that are in it; So no^^ know what strength,
provision, etc* are in God, but those that are in hi^ But some will say.

Qu. 2. Why or whence is it, that the L^^^ is a strong hold in the day of
trouble?

Ans. This he is, and has undertaken ^o be for them, and to them, partly that
^e might make them every way happy. Happy are the people, whose God is the Lord
that have the God of Jacob for their help, whose hope is in the Lord their God.
( Psalm. ^44.15. and Psalm. 146.5.) Partly that his ^ervice might not seem
unreasonable. ^ometimes God calls his to very hard and difficult services. Now
it is thought ^nreasonable, that a Master should set his ^ervants about a work
he will not defend them and bear them out in. God never ^oth so, he always
secures and protects those he imploys in doing or in suffering-^ork. His grace
is sufficent to bear their charges, and his Kingdom is enough ^o reward their
faithfulness in his ser^ice. Partly, because else in their fears and
temptations they would be ready ^o run to other refuges and strong holds ^or
their security. And partly to vex their Enemies. It is a great vexation ^o
them, to see and observe God to be his ^eoples strong hold. How was Saul
^roubled and vexed to see that God was David's strong hold? David is said to
dwell (...) strong holds, (1 Samuel 23.29.) Some^^mes he fled to one and sometimes
to ^^other, yet David acknowledges God to be his rock, refuge and high Tower
and Saul was convinced in his own conscience, that God was with David a^ David
with God, hid and secured in (...) secrets of his present, and this was matt^^
of vexation to him, as it is to many other of his Spirit.

Use 1. This shows the great mista^^ of the Sons of men, and their sin al^^
They mistake in thinking Gods peo^^ shelterless, and destitute of relief a^
safety, whereas they have a strong ho^^ even God himself; They sin in
perse^ting them, for they persecute God a^ Christ, their strong hold; Saul,
Sa^^ Why persecutest thou me; ( Act. 9.^^ They, that let fly their Arrows
agai^^ those in a strong hold, shoot at (...) strong hold in which they are. So
it here, when the King of Assyria let his blasphemies against Hezekiah, by
servant Rabshakeh, God says, Whom (...) thou reproached and blasphemed? (Isa.
^ 23.24.) and against whom have thou exa^^ thy voice, etc. even against the
holy o^^ Israel: By thy servant have thou proached the Lord. They sin and
greatly also, in betaking themselves other strong holds, ( Nahum. 3.14.) ^^tify
thy strong holds. The Prophet se^^ to deride their care and cost in their
fortifications. Some make strong Castles, others make riches their strong hold.
The rich man's wealth is a strong City and a high wall in his own conceit:
whereas in a time of common calamity, riches are more dangerous than poverty.
The rich were carried away to Babylon into Captivity, when the poor were ^eft
to till the Land. ( Jer. 29.10.) Its spoken of that desolation by
Nebuchad^ezzar. It Is said, that in the Massacre at Paris diverse rich Papists
were murdered for their estates as well as Protestants. Others make their
Church Priviledges a strong hold, crying as of old, The Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord, ( Jer. 7.4.) But these were lying words. There is no
Sanctuary, no not in the Sanctuary, whilst men are in their sins. O that we
could be affected and afflicted with and for the mistakes of men in this matter
of so great concernment; and the rather, because of the danger there is in men's
resting in them, they make lies their refuge, and the storm will sweep away the
refuge of lies, and the waters of Gods wrath overflow these hiding places.

Use 2. Of Exhortation. Let us all be persuaded in this day of trouble (...)
take the right course to secure (...) selves. Turn to your strong hold, (...)
the Prophet, ( Zechar. 9.12.) That is (...) God. Satis praesidii in uno deo.
Ther^^^ security enough in one God, thought (...) want other strong holds. O
the g^^^ trouble and perplexity they will be (...) when grievous calamities and
death c^^^ that are not gotten into this strong ho^^ All hearts will melt, all
hands and kn^^ will be weak and feeble, and all sa^^ gather paleness because of
the fierce a^ger of God against them that are fo^^^ not to have secured
themselves in th^^ Sanctuary of safety. Therefore let us (...) run and flee
from the avenger (...) blood, that will pursue us, into this C^^^ of refuge,
where we shall be hid (...) day of the Lords anger. This is do^^ by faith and
prayer, upon these two (...) we may run into this strong hold, a^^ be set aloft
from the fear of danger. (...) faith, we get into the hold of Gods Na^^ and run
into the several rooms there^^ his power, wisdom, providence, the are the
chambers of preservation for (...) Souls in an evil time. And prayer the other
foot. By this, Hezekiah, (...) that day of trouble now upon him, (...) get into
this strong hold, ( Jsa. 37.) When God gives men the Spirit of prayer, he gives
them the Key of this strong hold by which they may open the Gates and Doors
thereof, enter in and be safe. Only let it be fervent and faithful prayer. By
this strength we may have power with God as Jacob had and secure our Souls in
the worst days that can pass over us in this world. So believe, and so pray
that we may prevail, so run that we may obtain.

USE. 3. Let Gods people, who are by faith gotten into this strong hold, know
both their dignity and their duty. (1.) Their dignity and comfort. They are
very precious in the Lords esteem. Men do not use to secure their Lumber, but
their Jewels and Treasure in a time of trouble and danger. Such a value has
God for his peculiar people, who are his Jewels, his peculiar Treasure, ( Mal.
3.17. Psalm. 135.4.) He did Noah in the Ark and Lot in Zoar before those
dreadful desolations upon the old world by a deluge of waters, and upon Sodom
and Gomorrah by a shower of fire. But to show how strong consolation to
believer; this affords, let us consider what manner of strong hold the Lord is,
He is an invincible strong hold, he cannot be overcome by enemies. If a strong
hold b^ taken by the enemy, it must be either by surprise, or by treachery, or
by undermining, or by violent assault, or by starving. But none of these can
be^^ God. He cannot be surprised, for he foresees all things, those most
continge^^ and to us accidental. He cannot b^ overcome by treachery, for he
kno^ the secrets of men's hearts, and make their counsels and devices of no
effect He cannot be undermined, for he is infinitely above all. He cannot be
overcome by violent assault, for strong is hi^ hand and mighty is his right
hand Nor by starving, for he is self-sufficient O the honor and comfort of
those wh^^ have a dwelling in this strong hold. B^^ farther; This excels all
other strong holds, in that it can deliver believer from all their fears, as
David found ( Psalm. 34.4.) it never fails in a day (...) trouble, as others
may, and do. God f^^eth me never, says David. Yea, it de^^vers when fallen
into the Enemies han^ as Joseph out of prison, Jeremy out of the dungeon, Peter
from the expectation^ the Jews. It is near to us at all times ( Psalm. 46.1.)
God is our refuge, a very present help in the time of trouble. Other strong
holds may be safe, but are a far off it may be, when danger is nigh. Other
strong holds last not, but God is the Saints dwelling place to all generations,
( Psalm. 90.1.) (2.) Their duty.
To keep themselves within this their strong hold. A man gotten into a City of
refuge was safe if he kept close in it, ( Numb. 35.26.27.28.) otherwise in
danger to be destroyed by them that pursued him. O wander not from your strong
hold, go not out from God, but know it is your best interest in a day of
trouble to keep close to him. It was a very evil day when the Psalmist wrote
the 73. Psalm. The righteous were afflicted, and the ungodly prospered in the
world; He began to conclude, it was in vain to be godly, and was dangerously
tempted to forsake God and his ways; But at length he recollected himself, saw
and lamented his own folly and Ignorance, renews the lively actings of his
Faith, and concludes, it was best for his to draw nigh to God. O let all Gods
people conclude and act thus for themselves; Keep your selves within your
strong hold in all the perils and dangers you see or foresee, so you may be
free from inordinate fear in evil days, and be able to encourage your selves in
the Lord your God, as David did, and to have your hearts fixed in the most
shaking times, trusting in him, and consider for your comfort, what is added in
the Text, That he knows them that trust in him.

Doct. 4. That the Lord knows then that trust in him in a day of trouble, So
the text speaks. What is said of another grace, (1 Cor. 8.3.) is true of this
here. If any love God, the same is known of him. So if any man trust in God,
the same is known of him. God knows all men, but if any love and trust in him,
them he knows in a special manner. Here I shall very briefly show (1.) What it
is to trust in God. (2) In what he sense he knows such. (3.) Why he will do it?


Qu. 1. What is it to trust in God in a day of trouble?

Ans. The word signifies to betake ones self to God. So in the Prophet Isaiah,
( Chap 14 ult.) the poor of hi^ people shall trust in it. Chasah, Co^fugit,
That flees to him. It is accommodated to a double Metaphor, or similitude. (1.)
As chickens betake themselves to the wings of the Hen. God is the spoken of, (
Deuteronomy. 32.11. Matthew. 23.37.) As an Eagle spreads abroad her Wings, takes her
young, bears them on her Wings, so the Lord alone did lead him, speaking of
Jacob. How often would I have gathered you, says Christ to the Jews, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings? And Boaz, speaking to Ruth, ( chap.
2.12.) says, a full reward be gigin thee of the Lord God of Israel, under
whose Wings thou art come to trust. (2.) As men betake themselves to a Rock God
is thereunto resembled, ( Deuteronomy. 32.4 He is a Rock, says Moses, speaking of God.
Now to follow these resemblances, when we betake our selves to God for shelter
and for refreshment in the sense of miseries and necessities, then we are said
to trust in him. Wings do both shelter and refresh in a Scorching time or time
of danger. Thus does a Rock also. Thus God has Wings and is a Rock in these
cases, to give shelter and to cherish in all troubles outward and spiritual.
And thus has the Scripture set him forth, and good men found him in all their
straits and needs. See David's experience of him and carriage toward him, (
Psalm. 17.7.8. Psalm. 18.2.) O thou that savest them that trust in thee, hide me
under the Shadow of thy Wings. In the Shadow of thy Wings will I make my
refuge, until these Calamities be overpast, ( Psalm. 57.1.) The Lord is my
Rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I will
trust, ( Psalm. 36.7.8. The Children of men shall put their trust under the
Shadow of thy Wings they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house, etc. The Rock gave supply to Israel in the thirsty Wilderness, ( Deuteronomy.
8.15.) And that Rock was Christ says Paul, (1 Cor. 10.4.) So then, when in the
sense of Soul miseries, as of guilt or temptations, we betake our selves to God
in Christ, flee for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, and to that
grace that is sufficient for us; When in outward dangers we run into the name
of the Lord as our strong hold, then we are said to trust in him. That Is the
first.

Qu. In what sense is it here said, he knows them that trust in him?

Ans. His knowing them is his care of them, his love to them, and his appearing
to act sutably for them in a day of trouble. Men will neglect and pass by their
Old acquaintance and not know them so as to take care of them, delight in them,
or to act good for them. So will not God, he will not pass them by, as if he
had no respect from them, but he cares for them, (1 Pet. 5.7.) When others are
careless of them, ( John 10.27.) My sheep, says Christ, hear my voice, and I
know them; That is, I am careful of them that they wander not, or if they do go
astray, to seek them and bring them back that they do not perish, ( Psalm. 1.6.)
The Lord knows the way of the righteous. So he does he way of the wicked. But
it is meant of a knowledge with affection and approbation. So he knows them
that trust in him, therefore he has in the Scripture pronounced them blessed,
( Psalm. 34.8.) Blessed is the man that trusts in thee. Yea this implies, that
he will own and acknowledge them, he will declare and manifest unto others that
they are his people, ( Amos 3.2.) You only have I known of all the families of
the Earth, etc. Not as his creatures only, as he knows all the beasts of the
field, ( Psalm. 50.11.) but as his Children. So he owned Joseph, Job, and
Jeremiah in all their troubles. Now know I that thou fear me, says God of
Abraham; ( Genesis 22.12.) That is, I have by trying thee in thy Isaac, made it
known to all the World that shall hear of thee, what manner of man Abraham is,
God glories in his Servants that trust in him in days of Trial and Trouble,
yea, he knows them so as to keep them and deliver them, (2 Pet. 2.9.) The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation. When they know not what to
do, nor how deliverance should come, yet God knows how to save and deliver.

Qu. 3. Ye will say. Why will God thus know believers in a day of trouble?

Ans. Partly, because faith is his own gift and work in them. To you it is gi^^
to believe, ( Phil. 1.29.) Faith is the gift of God, ( Ephesians. 2.8.) And he will
know and own his own work and Crown it too: Partly, because they do what God
requires ( Psalm. 62.8.) Turst ye in the Lord at all times, ye people. And
partly, because they know and own God in such a day. A man that knows not God,
cannot rightly believe in him, but they that know thy name will put their trust
in thee, says David, ( Psalm, 9.10.) And by trusting in him in their troubles,
they own him to be one worthy to be relied on in the greatest straits. Hence
that resolution of Job, ( Chap. 13.15.) Though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him. As he loves those that love him, so he knows those that show and manifest
to the world, that they know him and can own him in the face of Death it self.
Now the use.

Use. 1. Let us then try our selves, are we those that trust in God in a
trouble? Such will use no unlawful means to get out of trouble, as others will.
Such dare not live in any known sin under the means of grace, as others do.
Such bring forth the fruits of faith looking after Christ's righteousness for
Justification, true holiness of heart and life; others content themselves with
outward duties and privileges, outward profession and a form of godliness.
Well, let us remember, God knows them that trust not in him as well as those
that do. He can distinguish between the true and counterfeit believer. And as
he knows them that believe truly in their troubles, so he knows the unbelievers
in the time of their fears and straits when they come upon them. He will laugh
at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes, ( Prove. 7.26, 27, 28.) Nor
will he so know them in Death and Judgment as to own and save them, but so as
to discard and cast them off, with a Depart from me, I know you not. I know you
to be workers of iniquity, to be unbelievers, but I love you not, I own you
not, I reject you as unbelievers, depart from me, I never knew you. Men can
bear these word^ from the Mouth of a Minister of the Gospel, but O how will
they be confounded for ever when Christ himself shall utter them, as he will
certainly do as you read from himself, ( Mat. 7.23. Matthew. 25.12.) O who would
rest in a^ unbelieving state? Who would be satisfied without the grace of
saving faith?

Use 2. Let all Gods poor and afflicted people continue to trust in the name of
the Lord. Let this encourage you t^ it, he knows them that trust in him i^ a
day of trouble, ( Psalm. 31.7.) He knows my Soul in adversity. He knows you^
names and persons, (2 Timothy 2.19.) The Lord knows them that are his. He knows
their graces and good works. ( Rev. 2.2.) I know thy works, says Christ to the
Church of Ephesus, and thy labor and thy patience. He knows their thoughts and
desires. Lord, says David, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is
not hi^ from thee. He knows their frame, ( Psalm. 103.13, 14.) What trouble they
are able to bear, and will remember it so as not to over-burden them. He knows
their corruptions, and temptations, and their enemies. He sees what sin they
grap^^e with, and will not suffer it to have ^ominion over them, ( Romans 6.14.)
Christ prays that their Faith fail not in ^he time of temptation, ( Luke
22.32.) He ^nows the power and policy of all their nemies, so as to break their
arm, and ^rush their head. He knows the walk and ^onversation of his people.
Thou know, ^^ith Job, the way that I take, ( Job. 23.^0.) What great and
excellent comforts ^re these for all believers! O therefore ^rust in the Lord
for ever, though days ^f trouble be many and great, for if the ^^mes be evil,
and men be evil, yet the Lord is good, is a strong hold in the ^ay of Trouble,
and he knows them ^^at trust in him.

SERMON V.
John 12.35. Walk while ye have the Light.


THese words are part of Christ's answer to a Question some of the Jews made
touching himself. Thou^^ they had enjoyed the benefit of his M^nistry and
Miracles to convince the^^ that he was the Messiah, and spoke to the^ of his
death and sufferings, yet they we^^ so wilfully blind, as to shut their eye^
against the light: Hence he makes (...) direct answer to their Question, namely
Who is this Son of Man? In the vers^ before the Text, but secretly taxes the^^
ignorance and obstinancy against the mea^ of salvation; intimating, that he,
who as a light shined among them, should shortly be taken from them, and if
they did not improve this light whilst they had it, they should be left to
their blindness and ignorance, to their own just ruin^ and destruction.

There is no difficulty upon the terms of the Text, but to find what is meant
by light? Which cannot be taken properly, for that noble and excellent quality
which enlightens the earth, called the light of this World; ( John 11.9.) But
Metaphorically, and so it is used variously in the Scripture; Sometimes for the
word of God; Thy word is a light ^o my feet, says David, ( Psalm. 119.105.)
Sometimes for Gospel Ministers, Ye are the light of the World, ( Matthew. 5.14.)
But here it is to be taken for Christ himself. For it is that light which they
are called to believe in, in the next verse to the Text. While ye have light,
believe in the light, that is, believe in me; as is evident, in that they are
taxed for not believing on him, 37. verse. And ( John 14.^1.) He requires men
to believe in him; So that in the words two things are considerable.

1. Suppositio beneficij; A benefit supposed: Ye have the light. 2. Positio
obsequij. A duty imposed: Walk while ye have the light.
Accordingly there are two Propositions offer themselves to us from the words;
1. That Christ is the light to the Soul. 2. That it is the duty of men to walk
while they have the light.
Of these in ord^^

Doct. 1. That Christ is the light to (...) Soul. So he preaches himself to be
in the Text and other places. I am come a Li^^^ into the World, ( John 12.46.)
( while I am in the World, I am the light of the World ( John 9.5.) Sometimes
there is an article the Greek which bears an Emphasis; in ( John 1.9.) and in
the Text before us: (...), Ye have that Light: The is that Light; Showing
Christ to (...) the light. But to come to partic^lars?

1. He is light essentialiter, essentially That lux increata; that divine and
(...) created light: God is light, says the Apostle ( John 1.5.) He is said to
(...) clothed with light as with a Garme^^ ( Psalm. 104.2.) To dwell in that
lig^^ which no man can approach unto, (1 T^^ 6.16.) (...), light inaccessi^^^
Light in others is created and so is a qu^lity, and therefore separable; The
A^gels by creation were full of light, call^^ the morning Stars, ( Job. 38.7.)
Thou^^ many of them by the fall are Angels darkness. Magistrates when just and
go^^ ruling in the fear of God, are said to (...) as the light of the morning
when the S^ariseth, as a morning without Clouds, David says, (2 Samuel 23.3.4.)
Ministers are said to be Stars in the hand of Christ, ( Rev. 2.1.) And
Christians are said to ^hine as lights in the World, ( Phil. 2.15.) Yet none of
these are light essentially, as Christ is.

2. He is light primitive, originally: Hence he is called a Sun, ( Psalm.
84.11.) Many understand it of Christ. To besure, that of the Prophet Malachi is
so taken, ( Mal. 4.2.) Where he is called the Sun of Righteousness. The natural
Sun is fons ^^is, the fountain of light: The Moon and ^tars derive all from it,
much more may Christ be thus esteemed to be the Ori^inal light: With thee,
says the Psalmist, (...) the fountain of life, yea and of light ^^so: For he
is styled the Father of lights, ( James 1.17.) Angels, Magistrates, Mi^isters,
Christians, yea every man that ^omes into the World have their light ^om him, (
John 1.9.) Of his fullness all ^eceive, some a Natural, others a Spiri^^al
light, thus true believers only; All have but a borrowed light: All have their
light from the Lord, but believers ^^e light in the Lord, ( Ephesians. 5.8.) Tan^am
in causa producente, as some interpret; (...) Lord giving them a sanctifying
and ^^ving light: To all the light of reason, To many, the light of Scripture;
T^ some, the light of convicton; To his ow^ the light of grace and sound
conversi^^ Not the same measure of any kin^ of light to all, but various
degrees (...) he pleases; But still the original an^ primitive cause of all,
that is Christ alone.

3. He is light ratione veritatis; In re^pect of Truth, ( John 1.9.) That was
the true Light, says the Text: (...) a double Article to make it more
signi^^cant: That light, That true light. T^^ said of John Baptist, ( John.
5.35.) (...) was a burning and a shining light; (...) he was not that light,
that true Lig^^ Christ, as he is the true vine, ( John. 1^1.) the true bread
that came down from Heaven, ( John 6.32.) So he only is t^^ true light, in
opposition to false and ^^^ceitful lights. There are ignes fa^^^ false and
imaginary lights which men (...) up, that yet do but delude them. (...) such
the Prophet speaks; ( Isaiah 50. (...) Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, and
(...) pass your selves about with sparks; wal^ the light of your fire, and in
the sparks t^^^ ye have kindled; This ye shall have of (...) hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow. By (...) light and fire here, some understand the own natural
righteousness, and by the sparks, the acts and works of righteousness, which
may be struck out by natures flint and steel, especially when joined with the
word good education, and an enlighted conscience; These men content themselves
with, and rest in all their days, without union with Christ the Spring of all,
and so perish. Others rather will have it meant of outward comforts, which
while men enjoy abundance of, they bless themselves as if therefore they were
beloved of God, and in his special favor, living still in the neglect of
Christ and his righteousness. Some will have both these taken in, yet all this
is but ignis culinaris, kitchen fire, the Sons of the coal a light and fire of
our own setting up and kindling, not the true light. And what will be the fruit
and ^ssue of all, but that instead of the comfort and security we expect by
them, instead of lying down upon our Beds of rest and ease, we meet with
nothing but trouble, sorrow and vexation? Many pre^end to be new lights, but
true lights they are not. In the Apostles days some seemed Angels of light,
would bring in a new way of life and salvation, (2 Cor. 11.13.) The Mosaical
Rites, and Justification in part at least by the works of the Law, but these
hindered the progress of the Gospel then, and we have but too sad effects of
such pretending to new light, and new truths* but are contrary to Christ in his
Doctrine, which is the only truth that is according to godliness.

4. He is the light, ratione intensionis; In regard of eminency, and
perfection. Hence he is said to be light, and in him is no darkness at all, (1
John 1.5.) In the Angels that fell, there is darkness, and no good at all. And
in them that yet stand, its evident that the light that is in them is not
absolutely perfect; His Angels he charge with folly, ( Job 4.18.) With
possible folly; but those that sinned are held in Chains of darkness In the
best men that are there is imperfection. There is smoke in our best elementary
fire, but none in the Sun. The light of the saints has much darkness in it,
and therefore the Church is resembled to the Moon, ( Cant. 6.10.) Fair as the
Moon. Now the Moon at the full has dark Spots. But as Christ is a Lamb, so is
he a light without the least spo^^ or deficiency.

5. He is the light, ratione durationis: In regard of continuance. Even wh^^
creature light shall be swallowed up, as the light of the Stars is by the Sun,
then shall he be light. Hence that promise, ( Isa. 60.19.) The Sun shall be no
more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give light to
thee; But the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
glory, (Rev. 21.23.) Its said, The City had no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon
to Shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten, it and the Lamb is the light
thereof. We cannot think the meaning to be as if the people of God should at
any time here have no need of these celestial Bodies to give them light, but
that they shall have such a clear shining of the light of his truth, favor and
gracious fellowship, that shall render these common and ordinary lights of
little account: Yet some refer that in Isaiah wholly to the heavenly state,
when these outward lights ceasing, God shall be all in all: And that in the
Revelation many understand to be meant of the Church on Earth. That they shall
have so much comfortable converse with Christ here, that they shall make light
account of all worldly enjoyments: But will more fully be completed in heaven,
when these ordinary lights shall be useless, and God in Christ shall be an
everlasting light, a light that has no shadow of change as these bodily lights
often have, a light that Shines by night as well as by day; a constant
perpetual light that never sets or is eclipsed, but shines to all eternity.
Hence he is said, ( Heb. 13.8.) To be the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.
Yesterday, viz. To them under the Law, To day, viz. To us under the Gospel, and
for ever, viz. To them in heaven, and there without variation, or shadow of
change. To open this yet further.

Qu. Ye will say, in what sense or respect is Christ the light?

Ans. As he is opposed to a threefold darkness, so he is a light in three
respects.

1. There is a darkness of misery, ( Isa. 8.22.) They shall look to the Earth,
and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish, and they shall be driven
to darkness. It is spoken of the Idolatrous Israelites, who finding no help
from heaven, turn their eyes downward, looking hither and thither for comfort,
but in stead thereof, meet with nothing but darkness, are driven to darkness;
that is, to variety, extremity, and continuance of misery. Hell is called outer
darkness, because of the sorrow, misery, and discomfort to them there. In
opposition to this is the light of joy and gladness. The Jews had light and
gladness, joy and honor, ( Esth. 8.16.) Light is sown for the Righteous, and
Gladness for the upright in heart, ( Psalm. 97.11.) Light and gladness here are
the same; the reason why light is put for gladness, is because light is
pleasant, and disposes a man to joy, whereas darkness inclines a man to
sadness: Light is sweet, says Solomon, ( Eccle. 11.7.) And a pleasant thing it
is to the eyes to behold the Sun. Thus Christ is light, for he gives the truest
ground of Joy, ( Isa. 9.2.) The people that walked in darkness, have seen a
great light; they that dwell in the Land of the Shadow of death, upon them has
the light shined. This prophecy is applied to the coming of Christ, ( Mat.
4.16.) and then said to be in part fulfilled. The meaning is plain. The people
of God, Israel and Judah walking in the darkness of misery and calamity, shall
see that light at the coming of the Messiah, which will glad and rejoice their
hearts. Therefore we read that the news of his Incarnation is said to be
tidings of great Joy, ( Luke 2.10.) And when Christ was preached by Philip in
Samaria there was great Joy in that City, ( Acts 8.5, 8.) Hence it is called
the preaching of the acceptable year of the Lord, ( Luke 4.19.) Not as if
Christ preached but one year, as some think, (for he preached more than one or
two years,) but it is an allusion to the year of Jubilee, which was a general
release proclaimed by sound of Trumpet to them that would go free, which could
not but be matter of Joy to many: So this is the happy time of Gods grace,
wherein the welcome news of the Gospel is proclaimed, wherein men may be
acceptable to Christ, if they come in unto him; They shall be set free by the
Son, and then they are free indeed, free from the guilt of sin, the curse of
the Law, and so from the fear of condemnation. This is the good will of God in
Christ to sinners, and tidings of great Joy to all that truly receive Christ as
he is offered in the Gospel; Thus Christ is light in opposition to the darkness
of trouble and misery.

2. There is the darkness of sin and wickedness: What communion has light with
darkness? (2 Cor. 6.14.) Gracious persons with wicked Idolaters in Marriage, or
other intimate fellowship: If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in
darkness, that is, in sin and ungodliness, we lie, and the truth is not in us,
(1 John 1.6.) And we are exhorted to put off the deeds of darkness, ( Romans
13.12.) And to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, ( Ephesians.
5.11.) Which works are set down in the third and fourth verses of the Chapter.
But fornication, and uncleaness, and covetousness, let it not be once named
among you as becomes Saints. In opposition to this is the light of holiness,
and true conversion. Hence when men are said to be turned from Satan to God, it
is set out by their being turned from darkness to light, ( Acts 16.18.) And by
their being translated from the power of darkness, ( Col. 1.13, 14.) And the
Church is said to be clothed with the Sun, ( Rev. 12.1.) Thus is Christ the
light, (1.) For his whiteness, and this relates to the Righteousness of
Justification. Light is white, ( Mat. 17.2.) When Christ was transfigured, his
raiment was white as the light. Christ is light, he is clothed, and clothes his
Saints with white Garments, ( Rev. 3. v. 4.) They are said to walk with Christ
in White, and to have washed their Robs, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb, ( Rev. 7.14.) In this sense are believers all fair and no spot in
them, ( Cant. 4.7.) Light is of so undefileable a nature, that nothing can
pollute it; It shines into the most nasty and filthy places, and contracts no
defilement. And such are these garments of Justifying righteousness with which
he investeth his Church and people. (2.) For direction. Light directs us how to
walk and keep our way, and keeps from stumbling and falling into danger: If any
man walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this World,
(John 11.9.) But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no
light in him. This relates to the righteousness of sanctification, ( Psalm. 43.
v. 3.) O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me. Light guides the
traveller in his way. Men in the dark lose their way, and go they know not
whither, as the Text we are upon speaks: Think they are going to heaven, when
indeed it is to Hell that they are going; The way of the wicked is as darkness,
says Solomon, ( Prove. 4.19.) They know not at what they stumble. Those men
stricken with blindness, (2 Kings 6.) thought they had been going to Dotham,
but when their eyes were opened, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria,
their enemies Country. Thus men think of going to paradise, because they are in
the dark, and if the Lord be not gracious to open their eyes in time, they go
into outer darkness. Now Christ is the light to lead the blind in the way they
know not, and has promised to do it, ( Isa. 42.16.) I will bring the blind by
away they know not, and lead them in paths that they have not known; I will
make darkness light before them, etc. This is he that leads Souls in the way of
righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment, ( Prove. 8.20.) And the
Psalmist speaks the same; ( Psalm. 23.3.) He leads in the paths of
Righteousness for his names sake. When Israel followed the Pillar in the
Wilderness, they took no harm. When Peter kept near the light, followed Christ
close, he stumbled not, but leaving Christ, he dashed himself against a stone,
and sadly bruised himself. Good Josiah walked in the night in that rash
expedition against Pharaoh-Necho; He went up to the Battle not so much as
asking counsel of God, and lost his life. Christ is the only light to guide our
feet into the way of peace, as he leads in the way of holiness in which
wayfaring men, though fools, err not.

3. There is the darkness of Ignorance. The light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not, ( John 1.5.) It is spoken of man in the State of
nature. A^ first man was made full of light and knowledge, but by the fall is
full of darkness a^^ ignorance, (Ephesians. 4.18.) Alienated fr^^ the life of God
through their understanding being darkened, and the ignorance that is in them.
Natural men may have a deep reach into the matters of this world, but there is
dreadful darkness upon the face of their Souls in the things of God, and of his
Spirit: Though the light of the works and word of God shines upon them, yet the
darkness comprehends it not. The natural man perceives not the things of
God, they are foolishness unto him, neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, (1 Cor. 2.14.) The natural light scatters the darkness
where it comes, if the light comes, darkness gives place to it, and flees away;
but this spiritual darkness will resist and rebel against the light as some are
charged, ( Job 24.13.) And men are said to love darkness more tha^ light, (
Joh. 3.19.) And that Apostle says, (1 John 2.8, 11.) The darkness is past, and
the true light now shines; but he that hates his Brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because darkness has
blinded his eyes. What profession of light so eve^ such a one may make, and
whatever shines upon him outwardly, yet he is in darkness, and knows not his
estate Godward; be knows not whither he goes to heaven or to Hell, nor what
his end will be, whither Joy or misery. This was the vail drawn over the face
of the Gentiles before the coming of Christ: Hence the Prophet ( Isa. 60.1.)
Upon a Prospect of Christ's appearance, cries out, Arise ^^ine, for thy light is
come, the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Christ the true light, the
glory of the Father, will ere long come and show himself glorious in his
Doctrine, miracles, and the work of Redemption for the salvation of his Church
and people. Hence when he comes, he is said to give the knowledge of salvation
unto his people, by the remission of their sins, ( Luke 1.77.) And the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God is seen only in the face of Christ, (2 Cor.
4.6.) More particularly; He shows two properties of light. (1.) As he makes
things manifest. The Apostle says, ( Ephesians. 5.13. All things that are reproved
are made manifest by the light, for whatsoever does make manifest is light.
Thus does Christ discover the glorious things of God; His blessed attributes,
the freeness of his grace, the riches of his mercy, his infinite truth, power,
wisdom, Justice, and goodness. He discovers the depth of Satan, the mysteries
of iniquity by which he works, the windings and turnings of this old crooked
Serpent, the wiles, devices, and methods of this subtle and deceitful
adversary. We are not ignorant of his devices, says Paul, (2 Cor. 2. v. 11.)
Thanks be to Christ, the true light, for the knowledge of them. He also makes
manifest the hidden Counsels of men's hearts. He shows what our natures are and
what our conditions are, whether good or bad, pleasing to God or no. (2.) He
enlightens the Soul to apprehend these things, for it is blind, ( Isa. 42.18.)
Look ye blind, that ye may see. For though we have eyes, yet we are blind, and
cannot see; Who is blind but my Servant? As the next words are. He it is only
that takes away the covering and the vail that is spread over Nations and
people. There is a vail upon the hearts of men Jews and Gentiles, which is done
away by Christ alone, (2 Cor. 3.14, 15.) He only opens the eyes of them that
are born blind ( John 9.) As we all are in a Spiritual sense, and in his light
gives us to see light.

Use 1. Here we may see that a Christless estate is a dark estate. Ye were
sometimes darkness, ( Ephesians. 5.8.) Not dark only, but darkness in the abstract.
At what time was this? The Apostle tells ^s, if we compare this with Ephesians
2.12. At that time ye were without Christ, in your Gentile-state, in your
natural and ^nregenerate condition; O who can express how dreadfully unhappy
and miserable the estates of all such people are! Such are unfit for work, for
their callings and employments. We read when the Egyptians were under that
plague of darkness, ^ Exodus 10.23.) No man stirred from his place for three
days together. We never stir a step heavenward while we abide without Christ;
we do not a stroke of work, as I may say, for God or our Souls, nor do we know
how to order our words, thoughts, or actions, by reason of darkness. Besides, a
Christless state renders as full of fears, as darkness is that which makes many
fearful and afraid; Some are afraid to be alone in the dark. Christless Souls,
if sensible of their condition, cannot be fearless Souls. But few are truly
sensible of this, and therefore are people so generally carless, and fearless,
and secure as they be. The Egyptian darkness was felt, but so is not spiritual
darkness, and thence no more fears and complaints of it. But when any are
awakened to purpose, and have any spiritual sense, then how full of fears are
the hearts of such? Fears lest death surprise them, lest their hearts ruin
them, lest Satan devour them, lest the Justice of God overtake them. They rise
up in fear, and lie down in fear, they go out and come in under many fears;
they work out their Salvation with fear and trembling. Besides; In the dark men
wander, and are apt to be misled into dangerous ways; So when no light of
knowledge to direct, no light of holiness to guide the Soul, how sadly must it
wander? And without Christ no beam of light can be obtained, for he is the
light. O that the Lord would affects our hearts with the danger of resting in a
natural eestate, a Christless condition! The blind man was sensible of his
bodily blindness and darkness, but the Pharisees would no^ be convinced of
their Spiritual blindness, ( John 9. ult.) Are we blind also? said they to
Christ. He answers them; Ye say we see, therefore your sin remain^* Hence he
says a verse before; For Judgment am I come into the World, that th^^ that see
not might see, and they that see mig^^ be made blind. That is, that they that
ar^ sensible of their blindness might see; an^ they that are only conceited
they see, might be Judicially blinded. How full of pride was their question.
Are we blind also? Yet how often does Christ come over with it in one chapter,
viz. ( Matthew. ^.33.) To awaken them, (14, 24, 26, v.) Thou blind Pharisee. Ye
blind guides. Thou fool and blind. Here was their dangerous mistake, to say
they saw, though without Christ, who only could give them sight and light. Let
us all awake out of our Spiritual sleep, and Christ shall give us light. Awake
profane Man or Woman; Awake ye civil Moral people; Awake ye foolish Virgins,
ye hypocrites, and unsound professors of the Gospel, stand up from the dead,
and Christ shall give you light.

Use 2. Of comfort to those who have Christ, a real well-grounded interest in
him, a Spiritual and sound union with him. You cannot want light having him who
is the essential, primitive, true eminent and durable light. Ye are light in
the Lord, and the Lord in you is a light ^^to you. It Is true, you have the
re^ains of darkness in you still, sin, and er^or, and ignorance, for ye are
sanctified (...) part, only, and know but in part, yet Christ will scatter all
those black mists that trouble you. You are sometimes in the darkness of
desertion, and see no light of comfort, like them, ( Acts 27.20.) Who were upon
the stormy Sea, and without any appearance of sun or stars for many days, so
that hope of being saved was taken away; Yet, to the upright there arises
light in the darkness, ( Psalm. 112.4.) Your darkness shall in due time be
turned into light: But Christ's goings forth are prepared as the morning, ( Hos.
6.3.) Now the morning goes forth gradually; small at the first, but grows up to
perfection. So Christ gives first some crevis of light, the day of small
things, but the promise is, ( Prove. 4.18.) The path of the just shall be as the
Shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. And so, though
it may be in regard of Gods providence a cloudy and a dark day, as the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks, yet Christ will lighten us by his word and promises. When there
is darkness in his works of providence, Christ will afford light enoug^ to see
our way and work, he will giv^ the light of knowledge in the darkne^^ of
ignorance, the light of hope in the darkness of desertion, the light of his
grace in the darkness of corruption; the light of Joy in the darkness of
affliction; and the light of deliverance in the darkness of extreme
persecution. We rejoice when we see the natural light; How much more ought we
to rejoice and be thankful for Christ this excellent light?

Object. Some will say, This would cause as much to rejoice, if we could find
that Christ ^ere alight to us in a saving way; does not Christ himself caution
us, ( Luke 11.35.) to take heed, lest the light that is in us be darkness? How
then shall we know Christ is a saving light to us, that we may apply these
comforts?

Ans. 1. The true light is that which comes from heaven. Christ is such a
light, he comes from heaven, from thence he shines upon and into the very
hearts and Souls of men. We read, ( Acts 9.3.) That as Saul journied and came
near Da^ascus, suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven. This
was some beams of glory from the glorified body of the Lord Jesus, for it is
said to be above the brightness of the Sun, ( Acts 26.13.) If still you say,
may not a false light pretend to be from heaven? Are not such pretenses
frequently made by those who hold forth new lights? How shall we then certainly
know the light which is indeed from heaven, from pretenders to it? There are
three Characters of it, or three effects of this light which shined from heaven
upon Saul, set down in the 4th, 5th, and 6th verses of this 9th Chap. of the
Acts; which will be found upon others also in some measure upon whom Christ
this true Light shines savingly. (1.) It is a humbling light. This was the
first effect it had upon Saul, verse 4. He fell to the earth; not only
prostrate in his body, but doubtless his heart was low, laid in the dust even
at the foot of Christ. Has the light we received had this blessed effect upon
us, to humble us for the pride of our heart? Does it puff us up, and make us
proud, conceited of our selves, despisers of others: This light is the work of
the Prince of darkness, transforming himself into an Angel of light. The light
from heaven brought Saul into a posture of humility, who before thought scorn
to be controuled; and will have the same effect upon our hearts. (2.) It made
Saul inquisitive after Christ, verse 5. He said, Who art thou Lord? By which
question, he acknowledges his own ignorance, and mistake, and begs information
and instruction in the knowledge of Christ. Such operation will the light that
comes indeed from Heaven have upon us. It will make us full of enquiries after
Christ. Such as these; Who art thou Lord? How shall I know thee? Where shall I
find thee? How shall I come to be acquainted with thee, O thou blessed Lord
Jesus? How may I get some experimental knowledge of thee in the virtues of thy
death, in the power of thy resurrection, in the influences of thy grace and
Spirit, in the comforts of thy love and covenant? (3.) It caused Saul to submit
himself to Christ, his will to Christ's commands, verse 6. He said, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? As if he had said, I have gone formerly to men to know
what service they would command me, but now I bow my self to thy most holy
pleasure, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Speak Lord, and give me what
commands thou please, and I am ready through thy grace to comply with them;
Make and propound thy own terms, I will submit to them. A man may have great
natural light, and acquired knowledge in Arts and Sciences, in Tongues and
Languages, and these are so far from causing his heart to submit to Christ's
will, that he will be ready to stand upon his own Terms. But if it be from
heaven, it will cause a man to strike sail to Christ absolutely and presently,
as we see here in Saul. Are we able to say, Speak Lord for thy Servants hear.
Write thy own terms, declare thy pleasure what thou will have us to do or
suffer, our wills and interests are swallowed up in thine. We will no longer be
our own, to do the wills of the flesh and of the mind, or to be captives to
Satan at his will, but we would be melted into thy holy will, and improve our
utmost strength and designs for thy service; This is a light darted into thy
Soul from heaven, this is a sure evidence it is Christ that is thy saving
light, when it thus makes thee humble before him, inquisitive after him, and
submitting thy self unto him.


2. Christ the true saving light is warming and enlivening; Such is the Sun to
the earth; It heats and quickens the creatures. Such is the Lord Christ to the
Church, to the hearts of those that are his indeed. The Lord God is a Sun, (
Psalm. 84.11.) which several expound of Christ. It is he alone that heats our
Chill Spirits. He quickens those dead in trespasses and sins, ( Ephesians. 2.1.) But
now because there are false heats, some will yet enquire how we may know the
heat and quickening we have to be from Christ? For answer briefly. (1.) If it
be a heat from the Lord, it will warm us throughout, inwardly as well as
outwardly. Artificial heat is only external; but this heats within and without,
it warms every part as well as any one. The fire within me burst out, says
David, ( Psalm. 39.3.) It made Paul truly zealous for God. It made the
disciplies hearts to burn within them, ( Luke 24.32.) The Ark was pitched
within and without. This heat Christ gives will make us not only abstain from
sin our of respect to men and our credit with them, but to abhor and hate every
false way out of a deep respect to God. The Sun warms every part of the body;
God and Christ can pierce deeper than the Sun. (2.) This true light warms
intensely as well as thoroughly. I mean, it heats more and more unto perfection:
It makes us fervent, boiling hot in Spirit, not like Jehu, zealous only in
pretense, and growing colder as his own ends were attained, but still pressing
more and more after the mark; still more of God, more of Christ. The heart was
never so much for sin and self, but now it is as intense upon God. (3.) If the
light we have, and the heat and quickening from it be from Christ, then it is
communicative. The Sun communicates his light and heat, his beams and luster to
others; so it will be here. A man will not be all for himself. There is no
Minister truly enlivened by the Lord, but he will say, O that all my people
were savingly enlightened and quickened by Jesus Christ; Come, let us go up to
the house of the Lord, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. There is no
Christian thus wrought upon but will be ready to say as the Woman of Samaria
did, ( John 4.29) Come see a man that told me all that ever I did. Or as David,
Come, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul. Thus as the Sun
brings the creatures it produces to their perfection, so does Christ much more
finish his good work he has begun to its perfect growth and maturity. This is
the light and heat of the Lord. (4.) If it be attractive and drawing, lifting
up the affections, and drawing away the corruptions of the heart, it is from
Christ.
The light and heat of the Sun does attract and elevate the vapors and fogs
from the earth. So Christ the Sun of righteousness does, (1.) Draw up the
affections of Souls to himself. When I am lifted up, says Christ, I will draw
all men unto me, (John 12.32.) No man can come to me, except the father draw
him, says Christ, ( John 6.44.) Draw us, says the Spouse, we will run after
thee, ( Cant. 1.4.) He will draw up our love, our joy and our desires unto him,
our sorrow, our hatred and all our affections. We shall love as he loves, and
grieve where he grieves, and hate what he hates, and joy in what he rejoiceth
in. He carries away our hearts from whatever was the unlawful object of our
love, and makes us willing in the day of his power, ( Psalm. 110.3.) (2.) He
draws away our corruptions by the forcible heats of his holy Spirit.
There will soon be some showers of sorrow and grief, that we should so much
and so long sin against the Lord, so loving and so good a Father. It will make
our souls die to sin daily, and to be careful and jealous lest any affection
should prove inordinate and prejudicial to Christ's honor, and its own comfort.
By these things we may know whether Christ be indeed a saving light unto our
Souls, and so finding him to be, may drink in all the comfort that flows from
so sweet a truth as this is.

Object. We fear, may some say, Christ is not such a light to us, because we
find our corruptions so strong in us, and our affections so dead to Christ?

Ans. There may be something of Christ as such a light in thee, and yet this
not clearly perceived nor felt by thee. There may be notwithstanding thy
complaints some dawning of the day, some breakings forth of the morning light
upon thy Soul. For Christ's goings forth in enlightening, and quickening, and
comforting grace, are prepared as the morning, ( Hos. 6.3.) Now the morning
goes forth gradually; small at the beginning, but growing to perfection. Do
not despise the day of small things. Though the morning be Cloudy, and Rainy,
yet Christ ^uth prepared a wind to blow them ^ver; He deals with Souls in this
case as in the care of the blind man, ( Mark. 8.^3, 24.) He caused him at first
to see ^ut imperfectly, he saw men walking ^s Trees; afterward clearly. So he
will ^eal with thee. Though thou go forth ^s the morning, yet ere long, thou will ^e fair as the Moon, yea, clear as the Sun, ( Cant. 6.10.)

Use 3. Suffer the word of Exhortation (1.) Let all be persuaded to receive
Christ this true light. We see ^ur need of natural light, and who re^ects it?
Who loves not the light more than darkness? Who opens not their windows and
doors to receive the light of the Sun? How much more should we ^pen our eyes
and hearts to entertain Christ the Spiritual and saving light? O let us all
pray with David, Lord, lift ^^ou up the light of thy countenance upon us, (
Psalm. 4.6.) None but the blind do un^ervalue the benefit of light, none but
weak Eyes are offended at it; none but ^culterers and thieves fly from it. None
but ignorant, or wicked, or hypocrite^ undervalue Christ, and when he is
willing to be a light to them, love darkness rather than light. Owls and Bats
love the night. Darkness is a suitable element to a dark heart. Melancholy
Spirits love dark places. So did he we read of, ( Luke 8.27.) But after Christ
had commanded the evil Spirit out of him, then he sat at Christ's feet clothed,
and in his right mind. O let us all go to Christ that he would be pleased, who
commanded the light at first to shine out of darkness, to shine into all our
hearts, to give us the light of saving knowledge, sound holiness, and divine
comforts, that we may no more call light darkness, and darkness light, but in
this our day see the things that belong unto our peace before they be hidden
from our eyes. (2.) Let us receive every discovery of Christ as a beam of
light, and let us receive nothing as light but what comes from him: And above
all things, let us walk while we have the light: Which leads us to the second
Doctrine.


Doct. 2. That it is the duty of all men to walk while they have the light.

Hence is that Exhortation of the Apostle Paul, ( Romans 13.12, 13.) The night is
far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the deeds of darkness,
and put on the Armor of light; Let us walk honestly as in the day, etc. As if
he had said, The night of your unregeneracy is past, and the day of grace has
dawned upon your Souls; Therefore as men when they see the glimmering of the
day cast off their night-clothes, so we seeing a glimmering of the Gospel,
ought to cast off the works of darkness, as night-attire, and have no more to
do with them; sins are called works of darkness, because many times they are
done in the dark, and because they proceed from darkness, and if not cast off
truly and timely, tend to bring men to utter darkness: And we should now put on
the Armor of light, as those that rise out of their sleep put on their working
apparel that they may be fit for the business of the day: So now, seeing the
night of ignorance is past, adorn your selves with the works of light; They
that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are drunk, are drunk in the
night: But let them that are of the day put on the graces of the Spirit of
Christ, that bright and glistering armor, wherewith their Souls shall not only
be armed, but adorned, such as shines to the glory of God and becomes those
that desire to walk honestly as in the day. Christ himself did walk and work
while he had his day, ( John 9.4.) I must work the works of God, says he,
while it is day. Let us follow his steps herein.

Qu. 1. Ye will say, How may men be said to have the light?

Ans. By enjoying the Gospel of Christ. For though his personal presence and
ministry are withdrawn, yet the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
shines amongst us: And every word of Christ is light, ( Isa. 51.4.) A Law shall
proceed from me for a light of the people, says Christ. His word is the rule
and standard of light, ( Isa. 8.20.) To the Law and to the Testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light, (or, no
morning) in them. This is that more sure word of prophecy which we shall do
well we take heed unto, as un to a light that shines in a dark place, (2 Pet.
1.19.) Where the Apostle shows, that a written Revelation from the Word, is
more sure than an immediate Revelation from heaven. Here I might show some of
those Truths the Gospel gives a more full and clear discovery of, than ever was
before this glorious light came into the World. As the great Doctrine of the
Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ; the great and dangerous evil of unbelief,
that Christ came and put himself in the place of sinners, and died an accursed
death to save men from unbelief; so that by his mediatory sacrifice there is a
possibility for condemned unbelievers to be saved from that sentence that is
gone out against them; He ordered Repentance and Remission of sins to be
preached in his name; And that he that believes in him shall be saved. And he
stayed not till men sent to him, but he calls to them, ( Ezekiel. c. 18.) Why will
ye dye, O house of Israel? -- Yea, The Gospel holds forth life to the greatest
sinners, to the worst or men, if thy will indeed believe and turn in to God by
Christ: God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotton Son, (John
3.16.) That whosoever believes on him, (None excepted where Christ is offered,
but those that except themselves) should not perish, but have eternal life.
Yea, the Gospel shows the way whereby men may be justified from those things
from which they cannot be Justified by the Law of Moses; namely, by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed by God to those that apprehend and apply
the same by true faith, ( Phil. 3.9.) Paul desires to he found, not in his own
righteousness, but in that righteousness which is through Christ, the
righteousness, which is of God, by faith. So likewise, ( Romans 3.22.) He speaks
of the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
upon all them that believe. Yea, life and immortality is brought to light by
the Gospel, (2 Timothy 1.10.) Obscurely under the Law, more clearly under the
Gospel are these things revealed.

Qu. 2. Ye will say, What is that walking in the light the Text enjoins upon us?

Ans. 1. It is a walking, or coming forth unto the light; as if Christ had
said, Come forth that ye may see the light, ( Isa. 49.9.) Christ is there
promised to be given for a covenant of the people, that he may say to the
Prisoners, Go forth and to them that are in darkness, Show your selves. God the
Father speaks to Christ, in the verse before. Thus says the Lord, I will give
thee for a Covenant to the people, that he may say to the Gentiles, go forth:
That he might with power and efficacy say thus to them, as he did at the first
beginning of all things say, Let there be light, and there was light: To the
Prisoners, that is, to the Gentiles who are held fast by the cords, and in the
fetters of sin in Satan's Prison. Come forth to the light; Receive Divine
illumination: Come forth that ye may see your selves, your lost, dangerous,
undone condition by nature, before it be too late to get help and recovery.
It Is said, ( John 3.20.) Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds be reproved. Ahab hates Michaiah and
Elijah, and took them for his enemies, because they discoverd his sins. Men
love darkness rather than light, not only because they are unwilling others
should see their sins, but because they are not willing to see them themselves;
But if we will listen to Christ, we must come forth to the light, and he that
does and would ever do truth, comes to the light, that it may be made manifest
that his works are wrought in God, as it is, verse 21.

2. It is a walking into the light. This is that Christ speaks of in the verse
after the Text; Believe in the light, that ye may be children of light: And so
the sense is, Believe in me who am the light. And in v. 46. Christ adds further
to clear this; I am come a light into the World, that whosoever believes in
me, should not abide in darkness. So then when the Spirit of Christ works faith
in our Souls, we are united to Christ, ingrafted into him by these blessed
bonds of union: His Spirit dwells in us, and he himself dwells in our
hearts by faith; when we thus receive Christ Jesus the Lord by believing in his
name, we walk into the light indeed, ( John 1.12. Col. 2.6.) When we accept him
upon the terms of the Gospel, in all his Offices, Natures, Ordinances, and
Commands, and continue in them, we obey that which is required in the Text.

3. Walk up to the Light: Obey the light. I am the light of the World, says
Christ, ( John 8.12.) He that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but
have the light of life. Some speak much of following the light within them, and
it is indeed the duty of all to walk up to the light they have received. They
that have only the light of Reason, that Candle of the Lord, should walk up to
to that light; And to what of God they that are Heathens have, or may know by
the works of Creation: And so they that have the light of the Scriptures, ought
to obey the same, and follow the Rules thereof. And so where the light of grace
is, there is expected an answerable living up to the same. If we thus walkin
the light, as God is in the light, we have fellowship with him, and the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, (1 John 1.6.) This goes
under various notions in the word; Walk in wisdom, ( Col. 4.5.) That is, with
care and caution in regard of the manifold dangers and extremities we are
liable to. Walk uprightly. Peter did not thus walk in that particular
mentioned, ( Gal. 2.14.) He did not (...), foot it aright, as he ought to have
done, but went against his light, for which the Apostle Paul reproved him. Walk
circumspectly, ( Ephesians. 5.15.) (...), Walk exactly, or precisely and accurately
-- Walk in the Spirit, ( Gal. 5.16.) In and after the Counsels and motions of
Gods holy Spirit? To obey his voice, when we hear him saying, This is the way,
walk ye in it. Thus we should walk in all holy duties, and even in our ordinary
Callings. A man may walk in the flesh, even in the ^orst of Religions, and a
man may and ^^ght to walk in the Spirit, when he is about the works of his
ordinary and ^^rticular Calling. This is also termed a walking according to
Rule, * Gal. 6.16.) As many as walk according (...) this Rule, peace be on them
and mercy. Religion lies not in dead and unactive ^abits and principles, but
there must be activtiy and operation; there must be walking not in this or that
single or particular duty, but in a holy tract, ^ourse and conversation; so
walking ^mports: And yet we may not walk (...) random, but regularly and
according ^o rule. (...); To walk in ^^der, in a comely and decent manner, ^o
the word signifies. A Christian is ^ot left to Rove up and down at large where
he list, but to keep within ^ounds and to observe his measures (...) walking.
Yea, it must be according to this Rule, (...); That is, the Rule of the new
creature, spoken of in the very verse before. The Gospel in the word of it, and
and the Gospel in the work of it, each of them is a Rule to a Christian. The
latter is here intended. To act and walk according to the principles and
Inclinations of grace, and a sanctified heart and nature. This is also set
forth under the notion of walking in love, ( Ephesians. 5.2.) in love to God and
Christ, in love to his House and Ordinances, and Servants, in love to our
Friends, yea even to our Enemies. So it is styled a walking in the Truth, (
verse 4.) of the second Epistle of St. John.) In the truth of Doctrine, in
truth of heart, in truth of words and expressions to all men. It is called a
walking in newness of life, which is to act according to the height of those
principles which are in them. Also a walking as Christ walked, (1 John 2.6.) A
showing forth the virtues of him who is the light, and has called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light, (1 Pet. 2.9.) And once again: It is called
walking as Children of light, ( Ephesians. 5.8.) (...) are all the Children of the
light, says (...) Apostle in another place, (1 These. 5.6.) Therefore let us
not sleep as do others, (...) let us watch and be sober. O let us ^our thus to
carry it! Then we walk (...) and up to the light indeed, when (...) have
nothing to do with the ^^^ks of darkness, which become (...) Children of light
but Children (...) darkness rather. It is now broad (...) light, the light of
the Gospel ^^^es full in our faces; every one ^^ll now condemn those that
pra^se deeds of darkness. To speak more ^^^ticularly, yet very briefly. To walk
up (...) Gospel Light, it lies in these fol^^wing things.

1. It is to walk openly, with all ^^gleness of heart, as we read the ^^mitive
Christians did, ( Acts 2.46.) ^^me walk so intricately, with such ^^^ings and
Windings, are so full (...) darkness, as we know not what to ^^ke of them. But
to be of plain ^^arts, as Jacob was, that the honesty (...) our hearts and
designs may be seen (...) all our words and dealings, this is becoming such as
are Children (...) the light and of the day. 2. It is to walk exemplarily;
(...) shine as lights in a dark World, (...) Beacons set upon a hill, which
give lig^^ round about, ( Phil. 2.15.) To ha^^ our light so shine before men,
as the^^ seeing our good works, may glori^^^ God, ( Mat. 5.16.) God hung (...)
those lights at the first Creation ( Genesis 1.) That they should give lig^^ upon
the earth. Thus we should poi^^ out to others the way to Heaven (...) the light
of our examples, and ca^^ a Torch before them that will e^^^ go into the
kennel, and walk in (...) mire and dirt of wicked ways. T^^ evil deeds of men
are made manife^^ and reproved also by such a carriag^ and if by this we turn
others from (...) ways of sin to righteous paths, (...) will brighten our own
Crown, (...) we shall shine as Stars for ever a^^ ever. Light propagates it
self, (...) so should all enlightened Christians (...) deavour to communicate
their light (...) the good of others. 3. It is to walk purely, in holiness of
life. A spot is easily seen in a Sun beam; we should walk without rebuke,
blamless, harmless, without spots, as much as may be; spot not our consciences,
nor our conversations, but be undefiled in the way, and keep our selves
unspotted from the World: To abstain from not only apparent evil, but the very
appearance of evil. Quicquid male coloratum est; All that has the show and
color of evil, As ^e that has called us is holy, so let us be holy in all
manner of conversation. 4. It is to walk knowingly, in the light of Spiritual
Judgment and understanding. The Apostle requires Husbands to dwell with their
Wives as men of knowledge, (1 Pet. 3.7.) So ought all Christians to walk as
those that know the evil of sin, to hate and avoid it: As those that know
Satan's wiles and devices, to shun and flee from them: As those that know the
vanity of the World, to be dead and crucified to it by the death of Christ, as
Paul was, ( Gal. 6.14.) As those that have seen the beauty of Christ, and
tasted of his love, to be enamoured with him, and to cleave in love to him who
loved them first. In a word, if they know any thing of his will, to be found
doing it, that they may be blessed in their deed. 5. It is to walk cheerfully,
in the light of Joy. Those Christians that spend their days in sadness, bring
an evil report upon Gods good ways, and dishearten and discourage many, who
who will look upon Gods ways as things that tend to destroy the comfort of
their lives. God loves a cheerful giver, and a holy cheerful liver. Avoid
sinful frothy mirth; the Joy of the Lord is your strength. Sometimes indeed sin
is as a Thief in the Candle that does wast a Christians Joy, and dim his
comfort, which yet if truly repented of, may be recovered, and made to shine
more bright. But let a believer keep off from avoidable sins, and live in the
exercise of faith, and he may rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of glory,
and strangers intermeddle not with this Joy. This is to walk in the light, when
we walk unto the light, into the light, and up to the light.
Use. Let me urge this exhortion of Christ upon you all, and upon my self. Let
us walk while we have the light. Some sit still idle all the day of the Gospel;
Others walk in contrary ways, but whatever others do, let us be found in
obedience to this command of Christ. Consider to help us herein;

1. It is the end why we have the light. We give our servants light to work by,
not to play by. No more does God give the glorious light of the Gospel to men
to dally and trifle with, but to work out their own salvation by.

2. If we thus walk as has been shown, we shall have cause to rejoice that
ever we had this blessed light. The Psalmist praises God for the great lights
set up in the visible Heavens, ( Psalm. 136.7, 8, 9.) The Sun to Rule by day,
and the Moon and Stars by night. But what praise shall we be bound to give unto
God for Christ and the Gospel of Christ, if while it shines among us, we do as
men do when the Sun arises? What is that? The Psalmist tells us, ( Psalm.
104.22, 23.) Man goes forth to his work and to his labor until the evening.
This Sun of Gospel light is given us, not that we should play away our Souls
into destruction by carnal security, but to get evidences of our Salvation with
fear and trembling.

3. The light will not always shine, but darkness will come upon us. Hence the
Lord in the Text uses this Argument; Yet a little while the light is with you,
walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you.

1. The darkness of Gospel-removal. The longest day has a night following it;
We have enjoyed the Gospel Light many years, and the brighter the day has
been, and yet abused, it may end in dreadful darkness. Christ threatened Ephesus
for the loss of her first love and works, to come to her quickly, and remove
her Candlestick (and the Candle consequently) except she repented, ( Rev. 2.4,
5.) And does not he seem to speak the same to England, and to his Churches here
at this day O let us yet in this our day know the things that belong unto our
peace, before they be hidden from our eyes.

2. The darkness of death, ( Eccel. 12.2.) While the Sun, or the light, or the
Moon, or the Stars be not darkened, etc. Then shall the dust return to the Earth
as it was, etc. that is, Before the outward parts of the body, or the inward
parts of the mind decay by old age, the forerunners of death, and death it self
overtake us. We are exhorted to do our work while it is day, and that with our
might, ( Eccle. 9.10.) For there is no work in the grave whither we go. And
Christ says, ( John 9.4. verse.) The night comes when no man can work. Now if
we are going, and the night coming, how greatly does it concern us all, to day,
even while it is called to day, to work for God, and for our Souls with all our
might, whatever he has put into our hand to do.

3. The darkness of Hell, that blackness of darkness which is for ever, ( Jude
12. verse) The Children of the Kingdom are above others cast into utter
darkness, ( Matthew. 8.12.) Let me end all with that of the Prophet Jeremiah (
Chap. 13. verse 16.) And O that the Lord would cause it to take some good
effect upon us. Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness,
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light,
he turn it into the Shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Giles
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence.

A Word in Season.

Defensive Armor against four of Satan's most Fiery Darts.

Sermons upon the whole first and second Chapters of the Canticles.

Thirteen Sermons upon several useful Subjects; all published by John Collings,
D. D.

The Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glory of Christ set forth; with the necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons, both by Mr. Thomas Allein, late Pastor of a Church at Norwich.

Enochs walk with God, and Christ a Christians gain; by Mr. Timothy Armitage
late Minister in Norwich.

A Discourse of the Preciousness of Faith, and of the Preciousness of Christ.

Precious Promises the Portion of Overcomers; both by Mr. John Lougher,
Minister in Norfolk.

The Saints Ebenezar; by Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich.

Directions to spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation as it was begun by Luther.

The Dead Saint speaking, being a Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcome.

The English Presbyterian.

The Ordinary Matter of Prayer drawn into Questions and Answers.

Two Treatises; The first of Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all cases and
conditions; The second of a Christians Hope in Heaven, and Freedom from
Condemnation by Christ; both by Mr. Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ
in Norwich.

Obedience to Magistrates recommended in a Sermon preached on the ninth of
September 1683. being the Thanksgiving day, for His Majesty's Deliverance; by
Mr. Jonathan Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk.

A Present for Youth, and Example for the Aged.

Two Discourses; one of Spiritual Blessings, the other, That God has a high
account of the least Grace in the Saints; by Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of
a Church of Christ in the City of Norwich.

FINIS.
ERRATA*
IN the Epistle, r. persuasion; in the Book p. 2. l. 8. r. remove, p. 9. l. 10.
r. willingly, p. 14. l. 24. r. were, p. 53. l. 14. add the word it, p. 63. l.
4. r. like, p. 65. l. 29. r. this, p. 95. l. 3. (...). principium, p. 97. l.
23. r. Church, p. 108. l. 23. r. rottenness, p. 126. l. 12. let a be left out,
p. 127. l. 21. r. Use 1. p. 137. l. 8. r. is, p. 159. l. 8. add the word not,
p. 170. l. 5. r. presence, p. 179. l. 10. r. the, p. 181. l. 5. add day of, p.
184. l. 14. r. obstinacy, p. 218. r. of, p. 223. l. 7. r. works.


