A Looking-Glass for a Christian Family; OR, A Warning for all People to Serve
God.
Good people, in this Glass you may behold the joy and Comfort the Godly are
in, the wicked being accursed for evermore: Likewise the great cause the Lord
sends such sore Judgments among us for our Sins and Wickedness, and worser he
will send if we repent not in time.

The Tune is, Aim not too High.


My Gold is my God.




ALL you that fear the Lord that rules the sky
and fear his holy Name that sits on high:
Do but observe these Lines which I have penned;
I hope 'twill be a means your Lives to amend.
You see that Charity is fled and gone,
And Love and Unity is left alone:
Where as plain-dealing used to bear the sway,
Deceit and Cozening it has got the day.
Oh is it not a grievous sight to see,
The Son against the Father for to be:
The Daughter curse and ban her Mother dear,
To bring her up she always took great care.
This is the cause this Land is punished sore,
And still I doubt it will be more and more:
The Lord his Judgments he does on us send,
Because we don't our wicked lives amend.
Do you not see in Town and City too,
Now men and women's hearts are full of woe,
Sore sick dear Friends, O this is all their cry,
Praying to God to ease their misery.
The burning Fevor, and pain in the head is chief,
And griping in the Belly's all their grief:
No easment can be had for it, nor cure,
But still poor souls the same they must endure.
Therefore good people all both night and day,
Unto the Lord on our knees let us pray:
That he would be pleased to ease their pain,
And grant them to their former health again.
O England, England, whither will thou hie,
Thy Sins to God for vengeance they do cry
Thy Pride and Whoredom thou seek'st to maintain
And the true Word of God do still refrain.
Oh ally Soul, where will thy Pride become?
When as grim Death appears to strike thee home?
Then thy Rich Jewels and thy brave attire.
Will be but Fuel for Eternal Fire.
then thou will curse the Pride that did thee wrong
And wish thou'st dyed when thou had been young:
But all is too late, and vain be sure 'twill be,
To call for help to ease thy misery.




WHen thou do on thy bed of languish lie,
Against thee then thy conscience it will cry:
And witness all the Sins thou have commit,
Make thee apear for Heaven much unfit.
Then from thy Gold and Silver thou must part,
Though thou do leave it with a heavy heart:
But when death comes thou must not put him by,
Nothing so sure that one day thou must dye.
Children see you your Parents do obey,
So Heaven will protect you night and day:
Servants be just to those your Masters be,
Then God will surely bless you ye shall see.
It grieves my very heart and soul to see,
How young Children to cursing given be:
Those that can scarcely yet speak one word plain,
Yet they can take the Name of God in vain.
But all you that are Mothers meek and Mild,
Do not you spare the Rod to spill the Child:
Apply the Twigs before they stubborn stand,
Lest at last you cannot bend them with your hand.
Uphold not Children Neighbors for to wrong,
But look unto their ways in hand and tongue:
Let him be first a Liar, he will turn Theif,
Then thou wilt repent, when there is no relief.
Then silly Soul why wilt not thou amend,
Knowing that all things once will have an end:
All wordly pleasures are but vanity,
None knows but that to morrow we must dye.
The Glutton shall with hunger pine away,
Drunkards the more they thirst the more they may:
Swearers, and those that do delight therein,
Be sure in Heaven shall never favor win.
The Usurer and those that grind the poor
Are like to have a judgment very sore:
He that does seek the ^iddows overthrow,
Will one day repent that ever he did so.
But he that relieves the Widow and Fatherless,
At the years end will never have the less:
What thou do give unto the Blind or Lame,
The Lord he will restore to thee again.
Suppose that thou had thousands lying by,
And thou wast sick and full of misery:
Would thou not give it all some ease to have?
But mind, O man, 'tan't Gold thy life can save.
And some so proud and lofty they are grown,
That a poor man in heart they scorn to own:
Because their Riches that will save away,
And both their Beds musts be a clod of Clay.
These things my Friends see that you do observe,
And from the word of God he sure don't swerve:
For fear you should repent when it is too late,
When you shall ask God mercy at his gate.
Thus Christian friends you hear in every thing,
The difference between a wicked and good thing:
He that fears the Lord a blessed man is he,
But for the Wicked Damned shall he be,
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, I. Wright, I. Clarke, VV. Thackeray, and T.
Passenger.


