The London lasses Hue-and-Cry After Her Dearly Beloved Robin, Whom she
unluckily lost last Saturday Night.
To the Tune of the Rant.
Licensed according to Order.





GOod People pray give your Attention,
Unto this my new Hue-and-cry,
It Is after my Love, and I Will mention
his Form, and Apparel, for why,
Without him I cannot be contented,
he is the Sole-joy of my life,
For him I have went, and lamented,
I fear I shall never be a Wife.
O he is my joy, love and honey,
I lost ^im last Saturday night,
I Would give twenty Shillings in Money
to those that bring him to light.
He has I must tell ye, two Faces,
his head it stands quite all awry,
He Amb'^s and h^th all his Paces,
likewise he is seven hands high.




You Will say that there is not a sweeter
young man in the Kingdom than he,
I now will d^^ribe every Feature,
if that you will listen to me.
His Skin is as fair as tanned Leather,
likewise his sweet Face to adorn,
His Nose and his Hat meets together
turned up like a Sow-gelders-Ho^n.
His Teeth they are black, green and yellow,
those changeable Colors are fine,
And like to the fair Crimson ^allow,
his Cheeks too with Beauty does thine.
His pretty sweet Mouth I admire,
which froaths like a Tankard of Purt,
The hair of his Head like soft Wire,
you will find than of ^aggot-stick Curl,
His pretty sweet Eyes like two Saweers,
his wounded my heart now I see,
His Ears they stand out like two ^aw^ers,
a pretty sweet Creature is he.
Now having described his Beauty,
his Body must no ways escape,
For here I account it my Duty,
is tell ye his delicate shape.
I think in the waste he is smaller
than the largest ^ of a Drum,
Besides I am sure he is taller
by the head, than honest Tom Thumb.
O he ^s a most delicate Og^re,
his Hips they do stand out behind
As broad as a Bushel and bigger,
would I this sweet Creature could find.
Some Uillains his death has contrected,
(...) he would not have left me I Am sure,
I shall go quite mad and distracted,
this loss I can never endure.
Look after my love Friends and mind him.
his Age is about twenty five,
A Guinay I Will gi^e those that find him,
and bring him now dead or alive.
Perhaps they have pressed my sweet Jewel,
to give him as ^^^rers place,
But sure they would never be so cruel,
to take such a pretty sweet f^ce.
Goods People with pity be filled ^o,
and seek (...) all with one accord,
Then come to the sign of the Dildoe,
and there you shall have your Reward.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and ^. Yack.


