A Looking-glass for all true Christians, Very useful and necessary for all
people of what degree soever to look upon in these troublesome times of sorrow.
The tune is, Aim not to high.


O Hark, O hark, methinks I hear a voice,
Which said the Lord made man for his own choice
And yet he will not reconciled be,
To leave his sins and to live righteously,
Awake awake thou mortal man from sleep,
Repent thy sin cry to the Lord and weep,
For it is only he that must thee save,
Do thou repent and mercy thou shall have.
Remember man that thou art made of clay,
And in this land thou art not long to stay,
Then lead thy life while here thou do remain,
That being dead thy soul may heaven gain.
If thou the Lord do fear that rules the Sky,
And puts thy trust in him that sits on high,
Thou need'st not doubt but God will thee defend,
And bring thee to a true and faithful end.
But we to much delight in wicked ways,
And do not yield unto the Lord due praise,
If we do think his mercies for to gain,
Then we must seek his mercy to obtain.
What wicked vice has been in former time,
That in our Land does not begin to climb,
Therefore with Ninivie let us repent,
The Lord to us his Messenger has sent.
But all these warnings will not serve our turn,
To make us leave our sins with speed and mourn,
But we do still offend the Lord of might,
And st(...)ll do follow pleasure and delight.
Here every man takes care to please his mind,
And seeks not for the living God to find;
The which they will repent when it is too late,
When they shall ask God mercy at his gate.
We all do seek for worldly wealth and pleasure,
And seek not to have store laid up in treasure,
Some do not think upon the world to come,
And therefore still a wicked course to run.
The Lawyer he does think upon his fee,
The Usurer likewise on his Money,
The Glutton he thinks on his dainty cheer,
The Drunkard on his Tobacco and beer,
And many grievous sinners more there are,
And for to speak of all I do not dare,
But God alone who knows the hearts of all,
Will bring them all together great and small.
And when that day to many does appear,
And see the Lord in judgment, then I fear,
Too late twill be for them then to repent,
With sorrow then their grief will still augment.
Good Lord that man would but conceive aright,
And fear the living Lord the God of might,
Then would they not so much be bent to sin,
But now would see a new life to begin.
O Lord my God to thee I make my moan,
Destring that thy favor might be shown,
And as we have offended thee full sore,
Give me thy grace I may do so no more.




MY thoughts tell me that I have done amiss,
And now I seek for favor and redress,
Of thee sweet Lord I hare do pardon ask,
That I may please thee well in this my task.
Methinks I see our land is full of pride,
And also bent to covetousness beside,
Which is a thing which does offend the Lord;
I Scripture we do find it is abhorred.
Then now let us prepare our hearts to live,
And to the Lord let us our prayers give,
And then no doubt but he will have respect.
To pardon us our great and halnous fact.
The Lord does say if a sinner does repent,
And turn to him with heart that's penitent.
He will forgive him his offenses past,
And will receive his soul to him at last.
But we in sin do flourish and remain,
And do not seek Gods favor to obtain,
We think not no the judgment day at last
Nor take no care until the time be past.
And then too late twill be for us to pray,
When as the soul from body is away,
Therefore in time let us our lives amend
That we may make a true and faithful end.
Methinks I sere thee poor in great distress,
The rich to them do yield but small redress,
They do complain in woeful misery,
And few there be that do regard their cry.
Look what men give to the poor and needy soul,
The Lord will pay again to them ten sold,
Do thou regard thy brother in distress,
No question thou shall ever the less,
But it is no wonder now at all to see,
A many like to Judas for to be.
They Will sell our Savior Christ for gold and pr^^,
Like unto Judas which did him betray.
If that a man would think upon his death,
While he does live upon the earth beneath,
He could not choose but fear the Lord on high.
That made the Earth the Sea and eke the Sky
We late have had ill fortune us befall,
The which is like to be a grief to all,
True Loyal subjects of our Royal King,
Did turn our joys in sorrow for to sing.
Which is a token of our great offense,
And just reward for our find recompense,
Because the Lord has justly took occasion,
To make us yield by this his kind persuasion.
Remember how Jerusalem did fall,
And how their enemies did them tuthrall,
Which were but righteous judgments from the Lord
Because his holy word was still abhorred.
The Ninivites we read did soon repent,
When God the prophet Jonas to them sent,
Then why should we who have the Gospel pure
Still seek our own eestraction to pro^^re.
Remember man what woeful Torments be,
Prepared in hell as warnings you may see,
The poins ase woeful to be thought upon,
Besides all this they never will be done.
And otherwise all those that fear the Lord,
And follow after his most holy word,
Shall live with Christ in perfect joy and peace,
Where heavenly Angels sing and never cease.
Now to conclude O Lord give us thy grace,
That we may lead our life in such a case,
That when we are departed hence away,
We may then live in perfect peace and ^oy
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, W. Gilbertson.


