Cum Bono DEO.

A REMONSTRANCE TO THE GODLY PARTY.

Two maine Quaeries, Which stand much useful for these our times.

The One is anent that, which made this woeful Diaphragma or Dissepimentum,
this Division twixt KING, State and Church; And this is Episcopacy.

The Other is anent that, which has so pitifully rent our Church in her self,
and so stands maceries, paries intergerinus, or intergerivus, The
Partition Wall twixt our PROTESTERS, the GODLY PARTY, (as they are pleased out
of a more then a Pharisaicall pride superciliously to arrogate this title to
themselves) and the Assembly-men; So that it is turned questionable with not a
few with us to day, which of these two contrary Factions we should acknowledge
for our true Representative Church, both these acclaiming in jure, this Title
to themselves.

AND this is, If our Commission of Church did rightly determine anent the
receiving in, into the bosom of their Army of Nuncupative Malignants, in such
a nick of time and exigence of Affairs, or pronounced therein clave errante.
Numero, If that Engagement stood lawful with the One, or unlawful with the
Other:

AND A VINDICATION of Both, By ANDREW LOGIE sometime Arch-Deane of Aberdene;

Penned by the Author, Ann. 1654, And printed 1661.

OF Episcopacy.
THe First Quaere shall be this, If Episcopacy, The ORDER it self may be justly
outted, because that the Name or Title whereby the men in the order entitled or
designed, viz. Episcopus, which is rendered in our ordinary language Bishop,
does seem to our Disciplinarians, forsooth, sapere fastum, to savor of pride
and arrogance.

Answer. GOod LORD! What presumptuous and bold, as unwarrantable ignorance is
this, from off of the Name, from whence men in a CALLING receive their
denomination, to raise grounds or reasons to infirm and weaken a CALLING? Is
not this Ludere in vocibus, rather then serio agere, nay, impie ludere in re
tam seria? But to the Point. This their Alleadgeance is false: for this is a
TITLE oneris potius, quam Honoris, of a burden rather, then of honor. Does not
this very NAME Episcopus or Overseer, import and design Curam et
solicitudinem, which requires no little vigilance and carfulness? And so as
Honos, or Honor is conferred to them, so an onus, or burden is imposed on
them, and thus it is incumbent on them, as praesse, so prodesse, since dignity
and duty go together. This very Name of GODS own imposition, is like a Memento,
or as the voice of a Crier, to sound out wholesome admonitions and instructions
on both sides: for to them, Aurem vellit et admonet, it pulls them by the
ear and admonishes them of the heavy burden imposed on them, and weyghty
charge entrusted them; That they so oversee, as men who must one day reddere
rationem villicationis suae, give, render and make an account of their
inspection and oversight; And on the other hand, IT bears on them, who are
committed to their inspection and oversight, the return of a reciprocal duty
of acknowledgement, subjection and submission. But I cannot sufficiently
wonder, That men of Learning should, yea or could have stumbled at this, though
the Name whereby they are designed should import no slender Honor or
Prerogative, seeing that, as if the Earth could not sufficiently furnish us
titles of Honor to dignifie that Office or Calling, accordingly, we find the
Heavens sought unto, to afford according Titles, to set forth the high and
surpassing great dignity of that so eminent and honorable an Ministration, and
so ennobled by the blessed TRINITY. IT is to be wished, as Gregory says well
on that they are called Angeli Domini exercituu^. Mal. 2.7. ut dignitatem
servarent in nomine, quam explent in operatione; yea, et e converso, ut quam
dignitatem obtinent in nomine, explerent in operatione, Numero, ut nomina rebus
responderent suis, et res nominibus. If we should be pleased to prove idle, and
seek out any lurking Pride in vocables, we might arcesse their Presbyters or
Elders, Seniores, of no less arrogance, and so call their divine and so much
cried up office of Eldership in question, which were a piacular sin: for does
not the French word Seigneurs, as if ye should say, Senieurs, flow from that of
Seniores nay, and Senatores too? but this is but an idle Logomachy or vain
contest about words. But this shows forth to the full, as their hate and
aversation of the matter or Office, so their best poor willingness, to bear
out their point, and root out the Order. If this were safe and sure
argumenting, Why might we not no less justly cry out against the dignity of
Christians under Christ's Kingdom, where we are said in common to be made in
Him (...), into a Royal Priesthood, where every word serves to advance the
surpassing great dignity of our Condition under the Gospel, above that under
the Law. IT wonders me not a little, How that these men, who bowed the knee to
Independency, and proved active and isntrumental to bring in a Paritie in
State, as in Church, grudged not, and excepted against the usurped name of a
Lord Protector, since that the Prophet Isai. fore-prophecying of Christ's
Kingdom, Is. 32. from the beginning, may justly seem to vindicate this Title
to that Man Christ, Who is both GOD and Man, and so can only prove an hiding
place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest. How is it that they so
deeply forgot themselves, as shuning Charybdis, they should so willingly, as
wilfully cast themselves into Scylla, and esclave themselves to a far higher
and harder dependency: where their least finger proved bigger, then were their
Fathers loins? Certes me thinks it no wonder, That men, who made it no scruple
or conscience, to cast off their RVLER, whom GOD had set over them, Their just
Titular KING, though GOD Himself to dignify the Office of Kings, is pleased to
impart to them, and communicate with them His Name and Office, by an Ego dixi
dij estis, I have said, ye are gods, Ps. 82.6. That they bearing His Image and
Superscription, as it were, might labor to be answerable to their Prototypon,
and so strive to be (...) lively Images of GOD, in ipso judicandi munere, in
their due administration of Justice; I say, I can think it no wonder, That
these who scrupled not, or made the least conscience to make such an alteration
in State, should not stand on this, to banish all order in Church: and so bring
in confusion in both. Truly these so grave and learned Divines and pious
Reformers, arcessing from the bare and naked Name, grounds and reasons to
infirm the Office, may not without just cause seem to resemble that
Rhetorician, who could Mirifice res exiguas verbis amplificare, wonderfully
amplify small matters with hye words, whom Agesilaus thought no more
commendable for it, then the Shoemaker, who should make great shoes for little
feet. Thus you see, That this is no verdict or true saying, but a false-dict or
false-saying, that the name or appellation of Bishop savours of Pride and
arrogance. I pray you number (...) quae Bezae perplacet appellatio, caret omni
supercilio, stands this Compellation void and free of all pride? yea and
whereas the Pope of Rome calls himself servum servorum; does this impair his
pride, and not rather augment and increase his deep hypocrisy? Is not this
sacred and venerable Title ascribed to Christ Himself in scripture? Is not He
called, The shep-herd and Bishop of our souls? Nay, may we not upon the same
ground, unica litura, expunge Apostleship: as that which is stylled by the Holy
Ghost Episcope or Bishopric, thus Act. 1.20. whereas Matthias is suffected in
Judas his room, It is said, Et Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter, And his
Bishopric let another take. Where, by the way, observe; That the word in the
original (...) is evil rendered in our Translation, Communibus suffragiis
allectus est: for the Apostles were not by Election, but by Christ's immediate
designation; And so it is better rendered in our vulgar language, Annumeratus
est, from (...) calculus, And he was numbered with the eleven Apostles, Act.
1.26. If any should except here, That this Charge sortito ei obtigit, befell
him by Lot, IT is easily replied, That the disposition of the Lot is of GOD,
and so this proves nothing prejudicial to his immediate and extraordinary CALL.
Thus Non est fastus in nomenclatura, there may well be in stomach^ vestro
fastidium; Nay, and though this Name be usurped with our Adversaries, this
bereaves not us of our just right: for we cannot loss our just title or
claim to things, from hence, That they are abused to superstition, for I pray
you, What is so holy, which may not be abused to superstition? Now the abuse of
a thing, as it taks not away, so can it not defraud us of the lawful use of
it; for else Exscindenda essent nobis vites, and we should take out of the
Firmament duo illa Luminaria magna. CHRIST made use in His very first Miracle,
of turning water into wine, of the vessels used in the jewish Purificatian;
Paul sailled in a Shipe carrying the badge of Castor and Pollux; Nay, and our
strickest Reformers preach in Temples bearing the names of forged and doxastick
saints in the popish Legendory. I believe, There is no little distance twixt
these two, to mutuate, emprunt or borrow a thing from superstition; and to
vindicate it from superstition. Magnum hic (...), labes, lacuna, dissidium. Now
Popedom gave not the source or original to Episcopacy, but owes it cadence
or descent to it. For Closure, I would gladly learn; If the name of
Superintendent, which is a name of man's imposition, did savor of less Pride,
yea and wherein stood his power or prostasy less. Now this sort of government
obtained and found place, at our first Reformation.

Now to come more pressly to the Point; The second Quaere shall be this; If
Episcopacy be Institutionis dominicae, or barely dispositionis ecclesiasticae,
of Divine institution, or of mere Ecclesiastical disposition.

The Apostle S. Paul having called the Elders of Ephesus together to MILETUS,
He exhorts them to take heed unto themselves, and to all the flock, over the
which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, (where the word in the original
is, Episcopos) to feed the Church of God, which He had purchased with His own
Blood: Now I believe, That Praefectura Spiritus Sancti, cannot be denied to
stand Ordinatio, or Institutio Divina, a Divine Ordinance and Institution. If
any should except here, That this Name stands common to these our gregary
Laik-Elders brought on our stage to day; There be two maine arguments
militating here to the contrary: For first, The Charge given to them or
entrusted them, sciz. Pascere gregem, to feed the flock, evinceth the
contrary, for Hi tondent et diglubunt. 2. This Charge is said, to have been
entrusted or committed to them, by the Holy Ghost, which both are here wanting
with our temporary, yea well often extemporary Elders. Again, The same Apostle
Phil. 1.1. Having directed his salutation to all the Saints in Christ Jesus in
common, subjoines, with the Bishops and Deacons; Whereupon S. Chrysostom having
posed the question, wherefore he had left no place intermedio Tagmati
Preshyterorum? Replies straight, (...), because there is no distance or
difference here: For, says he, (...), the same things are competent to the
one, which to the other: for the Order stands but one and the same, admitting
only a disparitie of degree in the Order. Who sees not, except a Borne blind,
That if we shall deny Episcopacy, to stand of divine Right and Institution, we
shall unica litura expunge Presbyteratum cum Episcopaetu, ELDERSHIP with
EPISCOPACY out of this Class, and so to deny it to stand of divine
Institution, which with our zealous modern Reformers to day were grande nefas,
et plus quam morte piandum. Nay Ex promiscuo usu vocabulorum, non statim recte
infertur paritas Ministrorum: for the promiscuous use of a word, does not
always straight subinferre with it, the indistinctio^ of a thing. We would
heed well in this Argument, to remember that Episcopacy may be considered two
ways, either in the Abstract, as an Order, or in the Concret, as exerced by
men in the Order. Now thought it should not have been rightly here exerced and
administered by these, but that they should have singularly appropriated to
themselves somthings which stood common to Presbytries with them, This could
not nor cannot infirm the Office: for personal infirmities bear no aspersion
upon the Calling; What Calling stands so holy, which may not suffer abuse? I
believe, That our holy and zealous Disciplinarians cannot, yea dare not take
upon them to justify all their transcendent actings whether in State or
Church: for do we not hear daily of their Retractations and Retro-gradations
in both. In multis labimur omnes, no place here for perfection; we must not
confound viam cum patria, or e converso. Again, 1. Cor. 12.28.29. Liquido
cernere est imparitatem Ministrorum. Again the same Apostle 1. Tim. 3. from
the beginning; calls this a verdict or true saying, That If a man desire the
Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. yea and lays down his required
qualification; as semblably Tit. 1. which could not hold true, if Episcopacy
stood an unlawful and unwarrantable Office in Church. But lest any should or
could from hence infer an Isotomy or Homotomy, an equality of Honor from off
of the communion of Names; you are to take heed well in this argument, that
from aque ad aquale, the consequence, stands inconsequent: for under the LAW,
Sacerdotiu^, the Priesthood was but one and the same, they were all aque
Sacerdotes, and yet there ceased not from hence to be a disparitie of degree in
one and the same Order: for the High Priest prae caeteris eminebat, he emine
above the rest, and so from that legal economy this Order may be arcessed and
instructed. Again lest there should be any place left here for exception; That
from the Law, to the Gospel it should prove inconsequentiall; This is no less
consencaneous and agreeable with the Evangelicall economy or dispensation under
the Gospel: forwheras CHRIST ascended up on high, He gave some to be
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers. Ephesians. 4.11. where there cannot be denied to have been a disparity of
degree. but lest there should be any place here left for exceprio^, that this
only serves to militate here, and to instruct a distance and disparitie of
degree twixt the several Classes, but can make nothing to instruct a
disparitie of degree amongst those of one and the same Class. I would pose him
here, How is it, that amongst the very Apostles some are called (...),
Insignes, seeming pillars, as James, Cephas and John, Gal. 2.9. May not this
seem to import some disparitie, if not in officio, saltem in regimine: for why
may there not be impares gradus in regimine, yea, and that in aequali officio,
to avoid disorder and confusion? What would S. Paul imply, whereas be says,
That he was nothing inferior to the very chiefest Apostles; for albeit this
passage will not straight subinferre, that, besides the Twelve Apostles, there
were others of a secondary rank, yet it maks the Argument stronger, in that
there were amongst the very Twelve, some more, some less chief; Now Magis and
minus, though they alter not the spece, they alter the degree. I am not
ignorant how some except here, That there is a fallacy here from the communion
of Names. But I pray you, does communion of Names, import and infer always
with it, a communion of Office and communion of equality of degree in the
Office, yea and in the external regiment too? Does it straight follow from
hence, That Peter calls himself (...), a Fellow-Presbyter, 1. Pet. 5.1. that he
emined not, or had no prerogative above these whom he thus enstiled? I would
gladly learn (where I promise to yield my self docil and teachable) wherefore
there may not be an inequality of Power in government, as there is a disparitie
acknowledged to be in other gifts? May there not fall our abuses in these, as
in that of Power? Wherefore is Timothy enstiled The first Bishop of the
Ephesians; yea and Titus the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians? I know
some to except here, That the argument cannot be thought pressing, which is
only taken from the subscription. Answ. There be in Epistles these three;
Inscriptura, Scriptura and Subscriptura. Now with what parresy or freedom they
may challenge Subscripturam, may they not with the same Inscripturam? Yea I
have heard some of the strictest Presbyterians or Disciplinariaens challenge
Scripturam, call the whole body of an Epistle in question, a thing of a well
dangerous consequence, and giving the enemy no small advantage; But I reason
not simply from the subscription, but make Scripturam, the body of the Epistle
my Ground. How is it, That these Charges are borne on these two, on Timothy
That he lay not on hands suddenly on no man, 1. Tim. 5.22. Yea and that he
lays down Rules to be observed of him in reproving, verse. 1.2. and on Titus,
That he should set in order the things which were wanting, and ordain Elders
in every City, Tit. 1.5.? what belonged this to Timothy, if he had no further
power then any ordinary or gregary Presbyter, to admit or receive orderly of
accusations against Presbyters? But I know some to except here, That Timothy
was an Evangelist, and that so Bishops cannot from hence acclaime to any
interest in that his right. IT wonders me to see men so blindly wedded to their
own Notions; That they cannot but cherish them, how unsound soever: like to a
woman kissing and embracing her own abortion: for if he shall turn an
Evangelist from hence, that he is bidden Do the work of an Evangelist, II. Tim.
4.5. Why may we not from a congener warrant transhape him into an Apostle; In
that S. Paul wills the Corinthians to receive him so, as that he may be
without fear, and the reason is subjoined, Because that he wrought the work of
the Lord, as he did, 1. Cor. 16.10. Thus Nihil hic nisi scopae dissolutae. I
pray you, was imposition of hands a part Extraordinarii muneris, of an
extraordinary Chaerge? Certes, thus it should cease to have any place or use
with us to day, and expire with the persons of an extraordinary Call. Again,
How do these Seers so deeply forget themselves here? whereas they straight
abase and degrade him, redact him into the class and rank of ordinary and
gregary Presbyters, from off of that passage 1. Tim. 4.14. where he is exhorted
by PAUL, Not to neglect the gift that was in him, which was given him by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytrie. Which cannot be
averred of an Evangelist, or of one extraordinarly called: Now Mendax oportet
sit sui se^per memor, A liar would have a good memory. Nay, and how do they
again forget themselves so deeply, as to argue from off of this passage, since
Paul restraines this, to the laying on of his own hands, II. Tim. 1.6.? Nay and
some of the learned take Presbyterium, pro presbyteratu, for the Order or
Office it self, and not for a College or Society of mere Presbyters. Now as I
have said, Episcopatus and Presbyteratus, stand but unum et idem Tagma,
admitting only a disparity of degree in the Order; Alwise I would learn of
these Seraphick and enlightened Doctors, Wherefore it is, That seeing in the
Church of the Cretians there were more Presbyters; This is singularly
recommended to Titus, to ordain Elders in every City, to set in order the
things that were left undone, to reject an Heretic after the first and second
admonition? Why is this privilege singularly indulted and permitted to
Timothy and Titus, Presbyteros constituere vel exauctorare, if any gregary
presbyter had a like power with them? For as I believe, par in parem non habet
potestatem.

Shall we defer no respect to the Antiquity of this custom in the Church of
God, in, and throughout the whole 4 Patriarchicall seas or seats,
Hierosolymitana, Antiochena, Ro^ana et Alexandrina. as Eusebius deduceth well
the series or line of the perpetuated succession of Bishops to his times, which
evidenceth that this sort of government obtained well timeously in the Church,
from the very days of the Apostles; Shall we defer nothing to the testimony
of that famous Council of Nice (Whereunto, I believe all our purer Modern
Councels in these our days of so blessed and glorious, so much cried up work
of Reformation, cannot be parelleled or stand worthy to come in competition)
which affirms this Government not to be Nova Institutionis, sed antiqui
moris, of new Institution, but of ancient custom; Nay, and the same Council
decreed, That there should not be two Bishops in one City, but this change with
us to day, is nothing to be admired, to see men to contemn, yea condemn all
Antiquity, who love only Novations, and dote upon Novelties.

Nobilitat Novitas, quod damnat saepe vetustas

I could think, that some respect were to be deferred to the testimony of
piously learned Calvin, a witness of old with the best of this stamp of
Presbyterians or Disciplinarians, omni exceptione major. Now he in the fourth
book of his Institutions. sect. 1. sets down these express words; It shall be
profitable in these things to consider the form of the old Church, which shall
represent to our eyes, a certain Image of Gods Institution: for although the
Bishops of these tims did set forth many Canons, wherein they seemed to express
more, then was expressed in holy Scripture, yet they with such heedfulnesse
framed all their order, after the only rule of Gods Word; that a man may
easisly see, in this behalf; that they had nothing dissagreeing from Gods
Word. And straight after subjoines; Thaet out of a sincere zeal they
endeavored to preserve Gods Institution, and that they swarved not much from
it. Nay, and straight again in the 2. sect. he subjoines, That in every City
they elected or choosed out of their own number one Man, to whom they gave
specially the title of Bishop, lest from an equality, as it usually falls out,
dissentions should grow and arise; I believe, That we have found and felt the
smart of this truth, by sad and doleful experience of late amongst our
selves. Let our fyerie Zelots, these sons of Thunder see to it, qua facie,
quo front, qua (...), qua audacia, with what face or conscience, they could
not only have themselves: but violently enforced others, to abjure simply,
this so ancient, so sacred, yea and divine Institution, as merely
Antichristian: and so out of an implicit faith, called for, yea and exacted a
blind obedience. Now I believe, That ultima fidei analysis, the last resolution
of faith is, in Deus dixit: for Credere promiscue quicquid affirmatur a
Praelatis, non opus est virilis intelligentiae sed puerilis inscitiae. It fears
me not a little, from the fyrie heat, which our Modern Reformers have showed
and kithed in the prosecution of this their so much cried up work of
Reformation, that if those holy fathera, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Cyprian,
nay and all the rest of that stamp, who were of old holden Ecclesiae Lumina,
Christianae Reipub. Columina; yea, and those Learned and godly Bishops in our
Neighbor Nation, who suffered Martyr-dome for bearing testimony to Christ, and
to His Truth, had lived in these our days amongst us; They should have found
no more mercy, with, or from them, then did our Modern Prelates, yea and many
honest suffering Brethren: but all should have gone through their firery
trial. But to return, unde nescio quo digressus luxuriante calamo; Wherefore
is it I pray you, That S. John directs all his Epistles which he writs to the
seven Churches in ASIA, Angelo cujusque Ecclesiae, to the Angel of each Church
singularly? I know that our Reformers will not have that to be denied of the
rest, quod de uno praedicatur, and that so the word Angel should be rendered
per Ministrum simply, or lose all the Ministry in common to be comprehended and
designed here, and so to be taken Collectively, and not one particular Person
to be pointed at. But with their leave, Since there were in each of these
Churches more Presbyters or Ministers then one, as may be instanced from that
of Ephesus; This interpretation must needs fall of will, which renders the word
per Ministrum in the singular number only, for thus it should follow; That
there should have been but one Presbyter or Minister in each Church, again on
the other hand, If all the Prebyters or Ministers in common should, or were
here to be understood under this name of Angel, why do we offer violence to S.
John's words, by the change of the Number? Wherefore is it, that he still directs
his speech to One, nay and if the speech stand directed to the Ministry in
common, how could it be cognosced to whom it were singularly thus directed?
Again, If this One stood not instructed with some power over the rest, but all
in common partooke of alike Power with him, how is he thus singularly entitled
above the rest? And which is more, How is the faultiness of all in common,
imputed singularly to him? Marlorat on the 2 of the Revel. jumps here in
judgment, whiles he says, most pertinently to this purpose, Non populum
aggreditur leannes, sed Principem Cleriutique, Episcopum. Nay, and hitherto
Beza in his Annotations on the 3 of the Rev. renders the word Angelo, by (...)
quem oportuit de his rebus imprimis admoneri, from hence it follows, That this
Angel had a Prostasie, preseance, presidence and pre-eminence above his
Fellow-Ministers; But I hear some replying here, That if this Prostasie was of
this kind, it was only over the Common flock, and not of power and authority
over his Fellow-Ministers. Answ. Dato, non concesso, giving, but not granting;
That this Prostasie or preseance were only over the Flock, yet it remains, That
it was a prostasie of Power, else how could he have excerced any Authority over
them; Nay but he is commanded to exerce it, even against Fellow-Ministers or
preaching Elders, yea, and is commended from hence, that he took order with
them, Who called themselves Apostles, but were not, and found them liars.
Revel. 2.2. I hear again some excepting against this Truth, though so
clearly and fully vindicated and asserted, from off of these passages, Math.
20.25.26.27. and I. Pet. 5.2.3. Where Christ prohibits his Apostles to exerce
such Dominion as did Reges terrae or Magnates, and where Peter warnes the
Elders so to feed the flock of God, as not domineiring over the Lords
inheritance: but proving ensamples to the flock. Now in both these there is a
plain fallacy, a mo do rei ad rem, from the manner, to the matter; Now I
believe, that the different manner of a thing, is so far from the overthrowing
or the removing of the thing it self, that on the contrary, Ponit et subinfert,
it puts and subinferres it, and so both, Christ and S. Peter take not away
simply all power from them, but such a modalized one, viz. a despoticall,
herill or civil power, but not Paternall and Pastoral. Does not the Apostle
S. Paul I. Cor. 14. last verse. command, That all things be done in the Church
decently, and in order. Now I believe, that Order which is (...), as Nazianzen
calls it, secluds a parity, for what else is ORDER, Quam parium impariumque,
sua cuique tribuens loca, dispositio? and so where all stands alike in dignity
and power, ibi ordints, decori ne umbra quidem, there can be no shadow of
Order or Comeliness: from whence it is consequentiall, That if we take away
imparity, una et eadem opera omnem ordinem inter sacros Evangelii Ministros
turbatum et eversu^ ibimus; we shall overturne all order, and banish it the
Church. I hear some replying here, That it cannot be denied, that Presbyters
for a time did govern some Churches, pariauthoritate et communi Consilio. Ans.
This derogats nothing from Episcopal dignity, nor proves prejudicial to it,
but rather confirms the necessity of Episcopal Charge, in that this sort of
Regiment even in the very Apostles days and times, perpetuiis dissidiis
Ecelesias dilaceravit, did rent the Church by perpetual dissentions. I deny
not with S. Hierome, Episcopos presbyteris majores, consuetudine magis, quam
Dominica Institutionis veritate: but this is rightly to be understood, sciz. as
to the appropriation of the Tule to one above another: for it was Consuetudo
Ecclesiae, the custom of the Church that made the title of a Bishop greater,
then that of a Presbyter; and not any Dominicall or Apostolical disposition or
constitution, and so his words ar to be understood by accommodation and
restraint to his own times, and so of that Authority, which Bishops so called
obtained then over Presbyters. Alwise for the least, it is clear and evident
from hence, That S. Hierome did not averse an imparitie in Church, yea, and
giving, though not granting, That this imparity or diversity of degrees
amongst the Ministers of the Gospel, is not founded or grounded upon any
express warrant of Christ in the Scriptures, yet this so ancient a practice
taking its source and beginning from the very Apostles, and having continued so
constantly since in the Christian Church, may stand for a Precept to us, and
may serve us for a Directory for the regulation of our comportment and
approbation of so ancient a custom and practice, and not of new Institution.
IT is not unknown how Aerius was condemned of Heresy, for condemning of
Episcopacy; There be many Aerians with us to day, both for Name and matter, if
it were lawful ab eventu facta putare, to construe of things from their
events, I might make bold here, to refer the matter, not only to indifferent
Arbiters, but to the decision of the most strict Disciplinarians, whether the
Church or truth of Religion prospered or flowrished more, under that
Prelaticall Government, as some are pleased thus odiously to traduce it. then
under this late Presbyteriall, and under which of these two, the Church in her
just liberties stood more or less eclipsed; I may boldly aver, That as
Aarons rod budded, blossomed and bore ripe Almonds, whereas all the rest of the
rods of the twelve Princes of Israel were blasted: so under Episcopal
government the Truth was maintained in greater purity; the Church enjoyed
far greater Liberties freedom and Privileges, then under this new coined
and forged Presbyteriall: for under that facta multa accessio credentium
Ecclesiae, There was made a great accession of Believers to the Church: But
alas under this no less decession, as was well timously fore-prophecyed by a
Reverend Prelate, at the first rearing up of this so great, so glorious cried
up work of Reformation. And if any accession be made, it is credendorum, and
not Credentium, for these men scruple not fidei articulos condere et solvere,
as they durst make bold to turn Christi documentum, into Nocumentum: and
blasphemously to call the Lords Prayer, a Nocent Ceremony; yea, and to account
the recital of it at service, a Note of Malignancy; I may no less boldly
aver now, that many with us to day both in State and Church, Qua ibatur
cuntes, but qua eundem non inquirentes, from off of this so sad and doleful
experience of the bitter fruits of this lamentable Change and alteration in
State, as Church, their Government would be glad to run back (...), et (...),
and submit their necks with all cheerfulness to those yokes of wood, under
the which they were well gently pressed under that Government in both, that
they might shake themselves loose and free of these of Iron: lying so heavily
on them, under these new introduced ones. Veritas est filia temporis; for a
parity in Church, has brought on and in, a parity in State; and so a
lamentable and deplorable confusion and disorder in both. Thus no wonder That
KING JAMES of blessed Memory, used this ordinary expression, No Bishop, no
KING: for Quam been convenium, mutuas sibi praestant operas, et conspirant
amice. If I durst make bold here, I would interpone my poor and mean, but well
meaning advice in this bussines, which shortly take it thus; That the Use may
remain and be kept on foot, the Abuse only being removed and taken away,
which might happily have at first, composed the Contest; viz. That whereas
there shall happen or fall out any vacancy in an Episcopal sea or seat; That
the Brethren of the Diocy may fully conveene themselves, and condescend upon
some selected Ones out of their Number, of best abilities for a due acquitall
in so eminent a Ministration, and give in these to the Supreme Magistrate in a
Lite or List, granting him Conge de lire, or Liberty of Election: as Penes quem
solu^ sit prae esse externo Regimini. Whose solely it is to manage the
external Regiment of the Church, standing with Constantin the Great, Episcopus
ad extra; and that such a One be thus praefected over the rest, for the
preservation of good Order, and keeping all in a right frame, and shuning of
Confusion, upon an confused parity; Ad Culpam only, And not ad vitam, even in
case of abuse of his Power to Tyranny: for Forma Apostolica haec est, dominatio
interdicitur, indicitur Ministratio; The spirits of the Prophets stand subject
to the Prophets, and so their Power standing but a delegated one, upon abuse
may suffer and admit a warrantable repetition. If this Course had been taken,
or presented by our violent Reformers to our sacred and dread SOVEREIGN, I am
assured that such woeful disorders had not fallen out in State and Church. Who
may not see, except a Born-blind, the doleful sequels? yea I may boldly now
say, upon sad and lamentable experience (which Asseveration at the first
setting on foot of this great and glorious work of Reformation, stood grande
uefas, et plus quam morte piandum) effects of an arbitrary government in State
or Church: For Let there be no King in Israel, and then every man shall do what
seems good in his own eyes, as you may see in the latter chap. of the Judges
passim. Nay, and let Moses the Civil Judge subduce himself to the Mount for the
least space, and then the whole people, etiam Aarone duce, shall fall away in
common to Idolatry. I believe we may learn a better After-wit in both, having
bought it by doleful experience at the highest rate.

By your leave, That I may speak somewhat (...), or en passant of this new
modalized Presbyteriall Government; I would gladly understand, on what Mount
they have seen the Pattern, after the which they have effigiated, exasciated,
edolated and reared up this structure of this Presbyteriall Government,
consisting or made up of such ingredients or constitutives, viz. of two sorts
of Presbyters or Elders: RULING and LABORING, nay, and wherefore ordinary, as
their bussinesse in hand called for, the number of the RULING was doubled, Quo
certaretur numero, praevalerent confuso boatu, for Suffragia numerabantur, non
ponderabantur (majori part vincente saniorem, It fears me, it was not mount
Tabor, for I cannot think that Christ frequented but the least this Mount,
far less that He was here transfigured, He may well perhaps have been
disfigured. Sure I am it is the Archtype it self: for seeing that the Divines
agree in common that there be Two Classes only of standing Officers in the
Church under the Gospel, Bishops or Presbyters, which stand but one and the
same order, and Deacons. I would learn upon what warrantable grounds, they
have brought upon our stage to day, this third Class or Rank of RULING or
LAIK Elders, as they are pleased to baptize them, a spece of Presbyters
unwarranted by Gods Word, yea unknown to all Antiquity. IT is not unknown what
Tertullian disproved in his time, Hodie Presbyter, cras Laicus, I believe with
the Apostle, That it is not lawful Manum huic aratro admotam dimovere, to take
back the hand from this Plough. Thus Anniculi nostri or Biennales Presbyteri
were unknown and unheard of in these times, far more these extemporary Elders,
whereof use was well often made, as the necessity of their Affairs required.
Whereas they were pretended to have been brought in, for the better ordering of
Gods House, The event has proven the contrary, that they wrought no small
Disorder both in State and Church; And whereas they were pretended to have been
brought in use on our stage with Aaron and Hur, to have sustented and stayed up
Moses his hands, whiles going about a praying, and so for the good and help of
the laboring Presbyters to strengthen their hands, the sequel has proven,
that there was no use made of them, but to weaken the hands of the ablest
Ministry, yea to work their degradation, if they did not prove active and
isntrumental to promove the glory of their Work, and should happen to show
the least dissaffection to the Work in hand. Who is so blind, that he may not
clearly see from bought experience, That they are so far from being worthy to
carry an Ephod before the Lord, that they are not worthy with the Gaboanites,
to hew wood, and draw water for the use of the Lords Altar? Since Antiquity
disclaimes them, and will not own them, let us come to the Word of GOD the
safest and surest Directory for the finding out of Ministerial Offices or
Charges: Now we find neque volam neque vestigium, no trace of them here at
all, for if we shall be pleased to look to the first institution of Deacons,
Act. 6. or to the Canons whereunto this spece of Ministry ought to be appended
and exacted, I. Tim. 3. We shall find them not to have so much as any
colorable Warrant from hence, whether for manner of Qualification, or
Institution and Ordination. As to the first, They behoved to be men of good and
honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and of wisdom, men having the Mystery
of faith in a good Conscience; who might have been received to that Charge,
admitted to that Ministry; Now with us (...) in hoc Collegium cooptantur, hoc
munere vestiuntur, hoc titulo gaudent, ornantur, some promiscuously of the very
dreggs of the People, nay, and some stigmatized ones, Carbone notati most
dissolute, and licentious Livers have proven readiest received into this
wholesome Incorporation: as who durst not but approve their best subservencie
to their Lustfulnesse. As to the 2. They were invested in this Charge, by
prayer and imposition of hands. Quae omnia hic desiderantur, which are all here
wanting with our modern Elders; Nay, and this was not a vicissitudinary or
temporary Charge as this is with us, but they that had ministered well, and
acquitted themselves in an inferior Ministry, acquired and purchased to
themselves (...), praeclarum gradum, a fair and further degree, which S.
Nazianzen calls (...), ceu (...). I am not ignorant that some, yea, and these
not unlearned too, will have them to stand of a divine generation, and hitherto
arcesse their Pedigree, Cadence or Descent from off of that passage of
scripture I. Tim. 5.17. where, The Elders that rule well, are commanded to be
had in double honor, but especially (say they) these who labor in Word and
Doctrine; But it fears me, if we will be pleased to eye this Text more nearly
and narrowly, we shall find this to be but a gloss of Orleans destroying the
Text, as may evidently appear from these a few ensuing Reasons. First, The
Apostle is not classing or distinguishing Elders, in Ruling and Laboring
Elders in word and doctrine, for thus both should stand worthy of double
honor, though mainely that the Laboring do merit or challenge this respect.
But he defines well Ruling Elders to stand and be such, who painfully labor
ad sudorem pulvereum (which the word (...) from (...) or pulvis, imports) and
thus the Apostle sets not down two several Classes or ranks of them. 2. Does
not the annexed or subjoined Reason, wherefore this honor is averred to stand
due, clearly evict this to the full, viz. That we should not muzle the ox that
treads out the Corn; and that the Labourer is worthy of his hyre or wages?
Now are these your Ruling-Elders brought on your stage, of the number of these
Oxen, that tread out the Corn? You confess them not to be of the Cense of
these Laborers, else why do ye contra-distinguish them. 3. If ye will needs
have a distinction or classing here of Presbyters or Elders, Lo it must needs
be here, Inter Magis et Minus laborantes. The more, or less painful
Laborers; Now Magis et Minus, More or Less, as they speak in Schools, non
mutant speciem sed gradum, they change not nor alter not the spece, but the
degree only. 4. IT is not unknown that some, yea, and not unlearned too, by
(...) understand stipendium. wages or reward. I pray you then as ye divide the
Province or Task, why will ye not suffer and admit a division or partage in
the Wages or Reward. IT fears me, and that well justly too, That in this case,
the strictest of you would not prove deficient to themselves, but would
endeavor themselves to find out a new gloss on the words, and make up a new
Commentary; as I am no less assured on the other hand, That these our well
Ruling-Elders with us to day, would be no less ready to acclaime to their
right and interest in this Reward, if they should find any sure or firm basis
whereupon to ground their Challenge and Claim. 5. Some no slenderly expert in
the original language aver, That after (...) there would be required the
adversative particle (...) to import a necessary distinction. 6. Some no less
expert in this original language, arcesse some ground of reason from off of the
accents and grammatical spirits, to infirm and weaken this distinction or
classing.
But I love not to strain apiculations in gra^matications. Thus this very
passage, wherein tantum ponunt praesidij, they place the full force and strength
of their CAUSE, petit jugulum causae, it cuts the throat of their Cause; and so
unde illi vitam, nos mortem. This poor wandering Levite must harbor and rest
with the Godly Party forsooth; finding no where else in Heaven or upon Earth an
harboring or sheltering place. No wonder that such a Heterogenious body,
compacted of such dissimilary parts should suffer such a sudden dissolution.
Thus it is evident, that we must needs go elswher to seek out their generation,
then from Gods Word or yet sound Antiquity. In a word they were (...) foetus
necessitatis, the birth and brood of Necessity; for we find no use for them to
day, except in such a case, where a bussines or work in hand, cannot be
effectuated and brought to pass, but by the subsidiary help of their suffrage,
Majori part vincente saniorem, which else in reason or by force of Argument
would fall short. May it not justly seem according to Gamaliel his decision in
a congener case, That this Counsel or this work has not been of God, but of
men, Act. 5.38.39. seeing it is so soon come to naught, for there is no use of
them now, their work being accomplished which they intended, or in case of any
new emergent bussines, calling for their subsidiary help to hold up that
ruinous and decaying Fabric and structure, so that for the best they are but
Nocturni Fungi ex nocturna pluvia nati, or an untimous birth and abortion, no
sooner brought to light, then expired.

THE SECOND QVAERE.
THe Second Quaere is, If our Commission of Church did rightly determine anent
the receiving in of Nuncupative Malignants into the bosom of their Army, to
fight pro Patria, pro aris et focis, for KING, Country, Religion, Lives,
Liberties, Fortunes in such a nick of time and exigence of affairs, against
Foreign invasion of so dangerous an Enemy infesting the whole Kingdom, and
seeking to overturne and raze all from the very foundation; or pronounced
therein Clave errante. Numero, If that stood an Unlawful Engagement with the
Godly Party, or men of godly understanding?

IT marvels me not a little, how the Question can be thus stated and modelled,
whereas adhuc sub Judice lis est, which of these two contesting Parties,
Herodians or Pharisees so to speak, should be thus branded with the Note of
Malignancy. I believe, That Veritas which is Filia temporis, TRUTH which
stands the daughter of time, has given us some farther light and clearer
insight in this bussinesse; For how have they I pray you acquitted themselves
here, who were so much cried up for sole men of known integrity? Have they not
detected to the world their deep masked hypocrisy, and so bred more nor just
matter of jealousy in the hearts of all these who are of truly godly
understanding? Coelum et terram hic in testes advocare possem. 2. Is it not
strange, That our new start up Protestators should so malign men under this
name and notion of Malignancy, whereas they roundly profess their ignorance
here, of the true Notes and marks from whence they may be discerned and
dignosced, as the Desire or Petition put up by them, The sole Nuncupative Godly
Party, or men of Godly understanding, to that Venerable Assembly at Edinburgh
anno 52. for their information hereanent in their 3. Proposition bears, and
instructs to the full; Now is it not more nor strange, That they should have so
maligned men under this name and notion, whereas it is not yet conveened upon
and condescended, what stand these Notes and marks? Vbi nulla lex, ibi nulla
tra^sgressio, where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression. May it not
justly seem That Malignancy receives subinde, new Notes and Characters or
Marks according to the various revolution of Cases, and exigence of times, or
rather men their brainsick apprehended fancies? Nonne haec Ecclesia in Maligno
posita est? Et quae non anima^ just odit coetum hujusmodi Malignantium? 3. I
would gladly understand the Reason or discrepance here, (where I promise to
yield my self docil and teachable) Why the Non-conformists at first, These who
found not themselves fully satisfied with the public Resolutions of our
Church, whiles this work was but in it Infancy, as it were, and so when, as I
believe, it stood more venial and pardonable to have scrupled theranent, were
branded with this Note of Infamy and Reproach; yea, and most cruelly
persecuted, as it were, with fire and sword; And the Non-conformists now, so
avowedly protesting against all their public Resolutions, and opposing
themselves with an high hand, when this work is come to a perfection, to the
stature of a Perfect man, shall not only go unbranded, but go under the name
of the Godly Party, or men of godly understanding, and shall go over these
dangerous rocks, without the least Jacture or Naufrage, yea, turgidis velis,
vento secnudo, nay, and should be sealed in their foreheads with a Noli me
tangere. What! Is your so glorious a Sun come to so sudden a declining? How is
the faithful City become a harlote, how is your silver become dross, and your
wine mixed with water? how is the strong staff broken, and the beautiful Rod?
I dare be bold to aver, That the Approbation at first of the public
Resolutions of Church stood to many Ciphers both in State and Church, who in
effect stood more expletive then significative, Their best qualification and
endowment, yea stood the sole means of their advancement to the highest rooms
in both. A blind Obedience out of an implicit faith stood for all
qualifications else, and an approven and evidenced activity to promove the
great and glorious work in hand; This was Panchrestu^, panacaea, a sovereign
salve against all sores; Omnibus malis averrumcandis pollens Alexipharmacum;
yea, vestis talaris a fair and goodly rob to cover all nakedness, blemishes or
defects whatsomever. It was the balm of Gilead, and The tree of the twelve
manner of fruits.

The grave, learned and judicious Commisioners of our Church have sufficiently
and fully vindicated and asserted this Tenet, and confirmed the lawfulness
thereof in the Case set down, from the universal uncontroverted practice of
all Christian Kingdoms, and approbation hereof by the unanimous consent and
judgment of all the soundest protestant Divines, in the Case of just and
necessary defense against foreign invasion; From the very law of Nature,
which no positive law of man can infirm or infringe, calling us hereunto,
binding and obliedging every Member of the politic body of a Kingdom, to
endeavor to the uttermost, the good and preservation of the whole, and
allowing the Body, yea, laying an obligation upon such as are in Eminency or in
Power, to call for this help and assistance at the hands of every Member; yea,
and bearing no small guilt upon such as shall prove deficient, and shall
withdraw their aid and assistance in such an exigence, as betrayers of their
Trust. AND last from Gods Word, holding out unto us innumberable clear and
sufficient warrants for approving of this Practice. For re-collection; Is this
practice justifiable from and by the very law of Nature, who can prove so far
denatured here, as to malign the same? Stands it justifiable by Gods Word?
Then what man can prove so impudent, and dare make so bold, as to seclude and
disclude whom God admits? I believe, That where God has not a mouth to speak,
man should not have an ear to hear. Optimus sobrietatis terminus est Deo
loquendi finem faciente, sapere velle desinere, It is not safe, to co-argue
Gods Wisdom of folly. Verum vero semper consonat, vos vobis constate.

But because I find as yet not a few pestred and infected with this leaven of
the Pharisees, I find me necessitated to speak a little more fully of this
Matter, and to contribute my poor mite, out of a willing and free mind for
the use of this Tabernacle: for why may it not justly seem lawful to these,
vel Tauru^ e* farina fingere, qui praetenui peculio vitulum vivum divis
elustrare nequeunt? Is it not notourly known, That some works of Necessity,
which not unfitly is indigitated, Lex temporis, The Law of time, become
justifiable, which extra hunc casum, without this case would cease to be such,
as the Disciples their plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath day. David's
eating of Show bread, which was only lawful for the Priests. Now who dare
prove so impudent, as to deny an urgent and pressing necessity here, so that it
can not be in reason challenged of any unlawfulness? Is it rather wisely or
safely done by us, out of uncertain praeconceived dangers, yea, and but fears
of such, and these evitable too, from fellow subjects, to cast our selves into
seen and certain dangers of a foreign Enemy? Let me pose you here, If a King
can be in reason denied the common benefit of the law of the Subject? Now
shall subjects without challenge make use promiscuously of fellow subjects,
yea, and against their Native KING, and shall we condemn this fact in His
Sacred Person; to make promiscuous use of His subjects both in His own just and
necessary defense and theirs too? O for an impartial Judge to decide this
controversy aright! are we not bound and tied both by League and Covenant, to
mantaine the KINGS just Greatness, the liberty of the Subject; and shall we
comply with Enemies to both, to the subversion of both? Shall we make so great
Conscience foresooth of the meanest heads and articles of our sworn unto
Covenant, and none of this maine one? If these fiery Zelots had lived in
Christ's and his Apostles their days, doubtless they would have envyed and
maligned the accession of so many thousand souls to the Church in one day; who
maligned so the receiving in of bare Nuncupative Malignants into the bosom of
their Army. Certes, These differ much in practice from that of Christ's, in
receiving in of Publicans and sinners May not these Hote-spirited seem most
justly to be altogether ignorant of the nature and properties of love set down
I. Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.8. verses? Shall Christ weeping over Jerusalem profess his
great carfulness and earnestness, to gather her Children, notwithstanding of
their great waywardnes, untowardnes and frowardnes, as an Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, Matthew. 23.37. and shall we be more propense and
bently set for dispersion and scattering, then gathering? Shall Christ profess
this to be the End of His coming into the World, to seek the lost sheep, to
bring again what had gone astray: and shall these who would singularly
acclaime this Prerogative to themselves, as that they stand solly his Ministers
amidst a common defection, vouchsafe no pains here? It fears me, The Scribs and
Pharisees compassing sea and dry land, to gain in a Proselyte, shall rise up
in judgment against our strictest, rigide and violent Reformers, and condemn
their careless and sinful neglect here, and fiery and violent procedure. God
is said to be (...), A God of long Nostrills, and so is slow to anger, gentle
and easy to be appeased; but these quite contrary to Gods Natural, partake
only in the evil both of the Cholerian and the Melancholian, they are short
spirited, soon set on fire and edge, but their wrath is not easily quenched
and abated, they prove implacable Edomits against their brother Jacob, yea,
Novatians, veniam omnem denegant lapsis; for I heard this expression from some
of their mouths, That they could sooner and readier comply with a Turk, then
with a Malignant, (...), hic (...), no less irreconcilable enmity, then twixt
the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, but I spare you, studens
Correctioni, parcens pudori. I could wish these holy Zelots to show me warrants
from Scripture, the safest Rule and surest Directory, Where a KING, Judge or
Ruler is reproved for making promiscuous use of his subjects, for the defense
of the People of God, and making war upon their Enemies; Nay, and on the
contrary, we see them sadly reproved for their neglect and omission here;
Hitherto Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye
bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord,
to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Did not Gideon a Judge of Gods own
designation, choosing and sending out in his might, Make an Ephod, and put in
Ophrah his City, after which all Israel went a-whoring: and which thing became
a snare unto him, and to his house, and tended to their destruction, Judge.
8.27. Now did the people from hence, with our fiery Zelots, refuse to go under
his conduct, or yet receive from his hands or by his means many notable
deliverances? Nay, was not the Country in safety and quietness forty years
in his days? Let me pose these so tender-conscienced men, if in the 20 of
Deuteronomy. 5.6.7.8. verses; where, the Martial Law is set down, they do find this
exception of Malignancy, so much as in the parallel of it? Certes, Too vehement
a Purgation of the Body proves for common well dangerous: for thus the Vital
spirits become exhausted and quite spent. I pray you, will ye find a Church
or Army only Electorum? This were to seek Patriam in via, and to confound
viatores and compraehensores voyagers and co^prehensors. In the field of the
Militant-Church upon earth, we will not faill to find still tares, cockle and
darnell amidst the best Corn or Wheat, till the day of the great separation.
When the Lords People went fourth to Battle, were they not promiscuously
without any instituted Purgation (a new and unheard of, in Gods Word, piece of
policy brought on our stage) gathered as one man from Dan to Beersheba, with
the land of Gilead, unto the Lord in Mizpeh, Judge. 20.1. Nay, and is not this
called, A Calling of all generally without our new modelled Limitations, II.
Sam. 17.11. Was not the numbering of the People for War, instituted and taken
from their ability to carry Arms and skill in handling them, and not from any
new found out qualifications? Read we not Saul's practice, admitting all the
men of Israel and Judah. without difference, to go forth with him, in the case
of Jabesh-gilead commended of God, and seconded with a blessing, I. Sam. 11.?
In the time of the Judges, when the people fell away from the Lord, to or by
Idolatry, did not these very Idolaeters fight the Lords Battles and carry the
victory? Nay, and the very Judges themselves, who fought the Lords battles
stood not free, under whose conduct the people of God obtained many notable
deliverances, as was presently instanced in the person of Gideon. Who was more
bloody and wicked then Joab, and yet fought the Lords battles? Nay, and did not
David oversee him in a seeming prudentiall way for his time, though he gave a
special command to his son Solomon against him, I. Kings, 2.? Did not Abner
make a bloody war against David, and yet he did not cease from hence to make
use of him? Were not these men, who were with David when he fled from SAUL,
Outlaws and Malcontents, Now forbore he to make his best use of these
Malignants, to speak in the language of Babel? Nay, Did he not welcome Simei,
who had formerly cursed him, and stood his most cruel Enemy in the time of his
adversity: and that notwithstanding of Abisha's instancie to the contrary? I
wish we should propose before our eyes David's practice and example (who was
called a man according to Gods own heart) for our safer direction, and better
regulation of our Comportment here. Spectemus hanc Cynosuram; Now David sent to
Zadok and Abiathar the priests, to rebuke the negligence of the Eleders of
Judah, to bring again the King to his house, whereas the people contested and
strove here in forewardnes, and that from an argument taken from his interest
in them, and their attingency to him, sciz. That they were his Brethren, his
flesh and his bones; Nay, and he sent the^ to Amasa, who had been a Ringleader
in a present rebellion with Absalom against him, willing them to make use of
this same argument with him; Nay, and promising fairly to make him Captain in
Ioabs stead, which he accordingly performed, did not God second this with a
succesfull blessing? Did he not bow all the hearts of the men of Judah as of
one man, II. Sam. 19.11.12.13.14. verse. To apply here home, Why might not, or
may not our KING use the same policy even to reclaim, and win in the hearts
of these, who had been Ringleaders in a known and open Rebellion against him,
far more to make use of His loyal subjects? May I not from hence thus safely
argue and reason? Do not all in whom he has a-like common interest stand
justly liable in, and to the same common duty? What wisdom or prudence were it
in a common Combustion and Conflagration, to debar and seclude any from
contributing their aid and assistance, for quenching and extinguishing the
same? Let me pose them here, if these whom they so odiously traduce under the
name of Malignants, had or have no part or right in their KING, that they might
be so far neglected, as that neither their advice nor assistance should be
sought or called for, for his safety and preservation, 2. Sam. 19.43? I would
gladly understand the reason of difference here, why these whom they are
pleased to traduce under such odious nomenclatures as Malignants and Engagers,
whereas adhuc sub judice lis sit, whether the Engagers for their KING, or these
for the Common Enemy, may, yea and justly should be holden and accounted true
and real Malignants? Why I say these were admitted, ad omnia interiora sacra,
ad (...) to the participation of the sacred Symbols in the Sacrament, and yet
denied admission into the bosom of an Army, alleged raised for the good of
the wholl kingdom in common, wherein they have their just interest? Is there
greater Religion to be showed here in This, then in that Other? May it not
justly fear me, That as Ieroboa^ made religion subservient to his by-ends,
whereas he made the two golden Calves, and set the one in Dan, and the other
in Bethel, yea, and made a Temple; where Altars were built for Idolatry, or an
house of high places, and made Priests of the lowest of the People (with our
pious and zealous Reformers to day) Which were not of the sons of Levi,
pretending one thing, The Ease of the people: but intending another, To keep
the hearts of the People, that they should not turn back again unto their
Lord, even to Rehaboam King of Judah, I. King. 12. That it did so go and fare
with the^ here, that they made Relegion but tributary and subservient to their
own by-ends: for may it not now clearly be seen; That their Pretenses or
pretexts, and their Real intentions have never reciprocated and
retro-commeated? That returned Answer of Vriah to David, bidding him go down
to his house, II. Sam. 11. Whereas the Ark, and Israel and Judah were
sojourning in tents: and his Lord Ioab, and the servants of his Lord were
encamped in open fields, that it was not time to him to go down to his house,
may prove much useful and subservient to the Purpose in hand: for was it time,
I pray you, for any Subjects promiscuously, when KING and Kingdom, PRINCE and
Subject, all stood in danger, a common Enemy infesting the Land, to sit the
Charge, not answer the Call, or for any to withdraw or withold their aid
and assistance in so pressing an exigence, or yet for the Ministry to open
their mouths so wide against a present, so necessary and just expedition? I
could be easily and no less justly adduced and induced to believe here, That
salus populi, should have stood suprema lex. But Quod dolendum, juxta ac
pudendum, our violent Reformers have overturned all; They have brought on our
stage all new Rules for ordering of things, Novam regulam Credendi, novam
faciendi, novam precaudi, whereas the Lord forbids us, To take His Name in
vain. How many have they adacted to conceive many blind Oaths, which is a
flate Taking of His Name in vain? Nay and how many have they enforced to swear
against the very light of their Conscience, not only doubtingly, yea and to
conceive a quite Contrary-Oath to that whereunto they had sworn formerly? Now
I believe, That two Contrary-Oaths cannot be averred to have their due
qualifications, to be in Truth, in Righteousness and in Judgment; Have they
not professed Perjury in the person of their Characterized ones, to stand but a
Personal infirmity, for extenuation of that heinous sin in men of their
stamp? Have they not pleaded for Muther and for the Murderers vindication and
absolution, in the person of some rightly affected to their Work in hand? Have
they not taught disobedience to Civil Powers, yea, and severly punished others
for teaching Obedience, as their Doctrine by them formerly condemned of
unsoundnesse, upon after recognition declared sound and orthodox, can make
faith? How many have they enforced to bear false witness against themselves,
by the acknowledging parforce of the equity of their most unjust sentences,
which is no less sinful then to bear the same against their Neighbor? How
have they not only overseene, but besides a Toleration, patronized
uncleanness in the person of their sealed ones? Numero, throughout all,
contrary to Tertullians prescript, That Fides non aestimanda ex personis, sed
personae ex fide, They passed their constructions upon men their actings of
whatsomever kind, as they did favor or disfavour the Actours. Non Abel e
donis, ob Abelem donae placebant; As to the RULE of Faith, Their Covenant. is
made the sole Authentike RULE. As to the RULE of Prayer, they not only
cashiered that pattern of Prayer prescribed by Christ, but blasphemously
traduced it under the name of a Nocent Ceremony, and constructed of the bare
conceiving of it, at any public service, a Note of Malignancy, Quae hos
dementia caepit.

EXCEPTIONS or OBJECTIONS.
I meet here with three maine Exceptions taken against this Truth, though so
clearly evidenced and fully vindicated and asserted, or Objections builded
upon weak and infirm Topics, whereby they go about to infirm and weaken this
Truth.

The First is, from that Fact and Example of Amaziah, separating from his Army,
The houndreth thousand valiant men of Israel, who came to him out of Ephraim,
II. Chron. 25. The Second is, from Gideons purging of his Army Judge. 7. The
Third is, That thus All former Principles so fairlie and firmly laid, are
hereby quite inverted, changed and overturned.
To overrune these Calaemo currente, By a running pen.

1. To the First. Nihil hic Praesidii, There is no help from this Mountain:
for did not Amaziah make a promiscuous Choice and use of all those, that were
able to bear Arms, handle spear and shield, to go forth to war, without
making any difference? Now who dare prove so impudent as to averr, That in such
a numerous Army, there was no mixture of good and bad, or to speak by
accommodation, of Covenanter and Anti-Covenanter, as we learn now to speak?

2. Amaziah stood here instructed with an express Warrant from the Man of GOD,
for his instituted Purgation and separation, straightly inhibiting and
discharging him, to let the Army of Israel go with him, because the Lord was
not with them, II. Chron. 25.7. Now instruct the like Warrant for this your
instituted Purgation, and so ye shall justify and warrant your Practice. I
believe, That this sort of economy is now ceased, God does not so speak to
us now in these last days. Heb. 1.2.

3. The hundredth thousand men of Israel, who were separated, were men hired out
of the ten Tribes, who had made a former revolt both from GOD and their King:
But these men whom they would have purged out of their Army, were men fearing
God and their King, or as Peter speaks, Fearing God and honoring their King,
and so hic magnum (...), labes, lacuna, dissidium, There is a great distance
here. IT were to be wished, that some Armies with them had not almost
altogether consisted of open or masked Rebels.

4. IT is not safe argumenting from an Idolatrous King, to a Christian: for
this Amaziah (whereas he should have given Praise to God for his victory) he
fell foullie away to Idolatry, for he brought the gods of the Children of
Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and worshipped them, and burned incense to
them, ibid. verse. 14. Nay, and a great many of his own subjects, who^ he had
promiscuously admitted, sacrificed and burned incense in the high places, II.
King. 14.4.

5. From a Contre-mand, to associat with Idolaters and Forraigners, to a
Positive Commaend, to seclude and exclude Fellowsubjects and Professors. The
Consequence stands inconsequent, Thus this strong Hold being disma^tled, Ad
quod se recipient diverticulum, To what starting hole can they betake them now?

To the Second. GIDEONS Purgation.
1. Certes, Me thinks, This is no less impertinently alleged for the
justification of a called for Purgation of our Army: for he had an immediate and
express Warrant from God, to qualify and justify that his Purgation.

2. This his Purgation was instituted and made upon a far different respect,
Lest Israel should have vaunted themselves against the Lord, and said, That
their own hand had saved them, as the TEXT bears.

3. GOD commanded this Purgation for a special End, to prove Himself To be the
Lord of Hosts, Who saves not by sword or bow, spear or shield: but can save
by few, as by many; Now Deus non sibi, sed nobis ponit, fert legem.

4. The Lord gave GIDEON a sign, whereby he might know and discern these whom
the Lord would have to go with him, sciz. The lapping of the water, And this
for the confirmation of his faith.

5. The Lord assured them by a Dream, and the interpretation thereof, of the
Victory by a few: Now I believe, That the Lord dealt not so with the Army of
our Water-lappers; Omnia haec hic desiderabantur, all these were here wanting:
and so the Event comproved That God was not with them, and that their
instituted purgation of Armies, stood unwarrantable and unjustifiable.

To the Third. The Change and Alteration of Principles.
Here the West-land and North-land Donatists in common make bold to arcesse our
Representive Church of Defection and Apostasy.

1. I would learn of these Seraphick and enlightened Doctors, What sort of
Principle this can be called and accounted, To deny Fellow Subjects this
liberty in common, to fight pro Patria. pro aris et focis, for KING, Country,
Religion, Lives, Liberties, Fortunes in such an Exigency of so neessarie and
pressing a Defense against a Common Enemy, infesting the whole Kingdom, and
seeking the overthrow, and subversion or supplantation of all? If this be a
Principle of divine irrefragable and immutable verity and Authority, or of
humane Policy, Institution and Invention, set only on foot by man, for his own
sinister and By-ends, as a mean most powerful to keep the sword and all Power
else in their own hands, as they scrupled not openly to profess their fear
here of the same danger from others; In a word, Lest they should be cried
down, and others up to speak homlie. Certes, This was a deep Policy from the
very forge of hell, to divest the KING of His just Power, which they call the
chief place of Trust, to stir up the one part of His subjects, and that not a
little considerable, to a just jealousy, if not open Rebellion, and so denude
Him of their just and due aid and assistance: and so to expose Him to the
mercy, rather Cruelty of a most dangerous Enemy infesting Him and the whole
Kingdom in common. Numero, to redact His Monarchy, into an Aristocracy or
Oligarchy, nay, into a Democracy and popular Confusion: for Virtus quo unitior,
eo fortior; and ubi fingli pugnant, singuli vincuntur; Factions make fractions,
and these are the certain forrunners of an unavoidable after Confusion. I
believe, That I have found out Labans gods for all Rachel her Cunning, and
close sitting on them, and laboring to hide the^ from our fight.

2. Ye do well to call this a Principle: for Principia praesumenda, non
probanda, as they speak in Schools: Thus it is safest to presume this for a
Principle: for sure I am, That ye shall never prove able, to prove and instruct
it by any, demenstiative Proof, Note or Mark, as is clear and evident out of
the Premises; And so the Philosophy which they kithe and bewray here, is only
depraedatrix, a spoiling or robbing Philosophy, for through the deceit thereof,
with the little, but pernicious skill they have, they have done what in them
lay, to have carried away a fair spoil and goodly booty, By their vain
traditions and elements of the World, and not of Christ, Coll. 2.8. Nay, and
overturned both State and Church, and brought all under desolation.

3. If we shall be pleased to construe of things and measure them ab eventu,
What better success had that Westland Army, which consisted to their judgment
of mere Water-lappers? Was God found to have been with that Army?

4. What need you to stand upon this, to change and alter such a Principle,
since you dared to make bold to invert Principles of a far higher nature? For
of old Ecclesiastical Constitutions stood not obligatory in foro externo, till
the Magistrate should have interponed (...), or his Sanction, and so these were
confirmed in Parliaments: but now the Chase is turned, the case quite altered;
By your Ecclesiastical Constitutions, you made bold to confirm or infirm
Parliaments, warlike Engagements, and what not? Did ye not thus transcend your
sphaere, and out-repasse your Line, Non sic fuit ab initio.

5. Did not your Westland Donatists protesting against their KING His bare
sitting with them in Council, let be presiding. Whose proper right it is
praeesse externo Regimini, to moderate the external government of the Church,
invert a Principle of a higher nature? Distant hac duo, Potestas Ecclesiastica
proprie sic dicta, et potestas circa res ecclesiasticas versans; The Civil
Maegistrat stands Episcopus ad extra, as CONSTANTINE the great termed Himself,
as the Ministry stand Episcopi ad intra.

6. Let me pose you, If similarie parts be not of the same tenure and nature,
and so what case has behapned or befallen the Church, in changing and altering
these her first Principles, might not have befallen her at the first
substerning them for Principles? What I pray you could have privileged your
Church from Errability or fallability at the first more then now? I wish from
mine heart, she had never made farther nor fouler defection.

7. Is it not agreed upon amongst all sound Divines, That even the sentences or
decrees of oecumenicall Councels stood not obligatorie, propter authoritatem
pronuntiantis, sed propter veritatem aequitatem (...), pondus sententiae,
because of the Authority of the Pronouncer, but for the Truth, Equity and
Weight of the sentence? Hitherto maks that dispute twixt S. Augustine and
Maximinus an Arrian; where both roundly acknowledged, That the Authority of
Councels is not binding. Is it not a received Maxim amongst the Iurists,
Sententia legibus contraria, ipso jure est nulla?

8. I believe, That the Change and alteration of all Principles formerly
holden, cannot in safe construction be accounted Apostasy; Turned Paul an
Apostate, whereas of a strict Pharisee, he turned an Apostle? or S. Augustine,
whereas he left off to be a Manichaean, or when he had his Retractations? Moses
was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. now did he always
hold fast all their Principles?

9. Does not the Apostle even command a certain Apostasy by an (...), Let
every one depart or apostate from iniquity. Would to God there were more of such
Apoctates. Now such is this, if it may be called Apostasy.

10. Quod transcendit omne mirum, How have these rigide and so strict Observers
of Principles, so deeply forgotten themselves, that almost they have
retro-graded and trodden under foot the greatest part of all their prior
principles? Fear here stands the Law of time.

11. I pray you, did you not invert and quite overturne a Principle of a far
higher nature and deeper Concernment, whereas in your so much cried up Covenant,
as of a divine frame, you limited your obedience due to your KING, in the
preservation of Religion, whereas in the Confession of Faith homologated by
both the Nations, you stick not roundly to confess and acknowledge, that
neither Infidelity nor difference in Religion maks void the Magistrates just
and legal Authority, nor does free the people from their due obedience?
Mendax oportet sit sui semper memor. O! What an Acatastasie and Confusion would
this bring in Kingdoms, where Subjects and Prince stand of contrary
professions? I was taught that every one should live peaceably, under the laws
of the Lord of the Territory, wherein he lives.

12. Do ye not substerne and lay this as a firm principle, and of undoubted
divine Authority, the abjuration of the Articles of PERTH? Now I would pose
you, If Christ prescribed any certain gesture to be observed at the perception
of the Eucharist; Nay, or if he used the gesture of sitting Himself, wherein
they place so great Religion? If this particular gesture stand instituti or
praecepti divini, how should they not condemn the French-Church who administer
it in transitu, or en passant, and so arcesse her of Apostasy: for what is
preceptory, is to all obligatory? I pray you, Is the different estimation of
days, a principle of divine, irrefragable and immutable verity? I believe,
besides that both in the Jewish and Christian-Church some Days have been had
in greater veneration, That the Apostle wills every one anent his different
estimation of them Romans 14. to labor for a pleroforie or fullness of assurance
for his acting hereanent, Let each of these, him who esteems one day above
another, and him who puts no difference here, but esteems every day a-like,
do it to the Lord, and all shall go right. The kingdom of God stands not in
meat and drink, (where omnia congenerae are to be understood) but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; alace whereas they have
so busily and painfully gone about to bring in a Reformation, in
Circumstantials or matters of a middle nature or indifferency, they have
inverted and overturned many substantials, nay, Luxarunt et laxarunt Compagem
utriusque Tabulae.

13. What needed you to scruple much here, anent the change and alteration of
this Principle, Anent the qualification of men to be received into the bosom
of an Army, whereas you made no conscience to invert and overturne a Principle
of far higher Nature and greater Concernment, viz. That having sworn in
Covenant to maintain the KINGS just Greatness, (where under this word, just,
experience has proven many hid pieces of dishonesty to have lain lurking) and
Authority, you surrendered Him into the hands of His Enemies? IT cannot but
wonder me, you should strain a Gnate, having swallowed a Camel; Was this to
make conscience of that sacred oath tendered by you to maintain His Sacred
Person and just Greatness? In an Oath we ought no less heedily to look, Cui,
then quid juraverimus as the schoolmen teach us, whose Name is interponed, the
sacred Name of God, Whom-unto rather, then where-unto. As David reported well
to Abner, I. Sam. 26.15. with no less just matter may I here to you. Were not
ye only men of known integrity, the Charactarized Ones, and none like you in
all the kingdom, for Loyalty, valor, and gallantry, wherefore did not you keep
better your LORD, the KING, whereas a common Enemy was seeking His overthrow and
of this whole kingdom? Alace, whereas formerly we were accounted men of
unstained and untainted Loyalty, yea and of no small valor and provesse,
throughout all Nations, as that we were admitted and received by foreign
Kings, to stand their Guardians or guard du Corpse, as they speak; Now with
Reuben we have fallen from our dignity, and lossed our excellency, and most
justly incurred the stain and note of Infamy at home (in that we tendered not
more the preservation and safety of our KING) to our everlasting diffamation
and never dying reproach; loquetur posteritas. whereas you fondly pretexe for
your justification, that they kept not Covenant here with you or
Capitulation; This will not cover your nakedness, but your heels shall be found
bare: for Non faciendum malum, ut eveniat bonum, we must not do evil, that
good may come of it; far less, for an uncertain after-good, commit a certain
present evil. Is not our whole duty we owe our KING, borne upon us by
Negatives? Now as the Schoolmen teach us here, Negative precepts or Commands
bind and obliege as ad semper, so pro semper, as to all times, so for all
times, Nay, and does not the Scripure bind up the whole man and the whole of
man here, totum hominem, et totum hominis, tongue, hand and thought, so that
albeit cogitationis poenam nemo patiatur in foro soli, in foro popoli it goes
not unpunished, so that it is not safe for us to curse the King, no not in our
thought Eccl. 10.20. and it is worthy our best and narrowest remark, who shall
stand the discovers or revealers hereof, for a bird of the air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. May not this strick us
with fear and terror, to prove deficient in our bonden duty to out Sacred and
dread SOVEREIGN? As we reply to Papists going about to justify their Idolatry,
averring that they set up Images, non ad culium, sed ad usum historicum; That
it is better and safer lapidem offendiculi e via consulari tollere, quam
ponere, with whatsomever Cautions or Caveats over the head of it: so may I
here; IT had proven better and safer, to have kept our LORD the KING and
capitulated with them, then upon the surrendering of Him into their hands, to
trust to their after-Capitulation. Do not your Ministry discover both your and
their own Skirts, whereas from Chair they make bold to attest God, how evil
ye stand acquitted for your Loyalty and good service done them, which has
proven disloyalty and bad service to your Supreme LORD of Heaven, and His
Deputy upon earth.

IT is a received MAXIM; Quod quis per alium facit, hoe per se merit facere
videtur, yea, and there is another to the same purpose, Quod quis non vetat,
cu^ potest, quod vetare tenetur, is jubet. Thus I see not how you can stand
free of the crying bloud-guilt of your Sacred SOVEREIGN. Do not, I pray you, S.
Ambrose yea, and Gregory too, aver; Non carere scrupulo societatis occulto,
ubi quis manifesto sceleri desinit obviare. I dare be bold to aver, That
unsoundnes of Doctrine has done no less harm, then the Sword of Persecution
throughout the whole bussines. As is recorded of ARRIUS Heresy, That it did
more hurt to the Church of God, then the ten bloody Persecutions. IT fears me,
That it may be truly said of our Church, for all the cried up glory of this
great and glorious work of Reformation, That her works are not to be found
perfect before God, as is said of the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3.2. Nay, And
that Christ has not a few things against her, as is said of the Church of
Pergamus. Revel. 2.12.

14. I cannot understand upon what warrantable ground this can be goodly called
a Principle, To deny fellow subjects liberty, to fight pro patria, pro aris et
focis, for KING, and Kingdom, whereas Wise Solomon determines quite to the
contrary: for he shows that In the multitude of people stands or consists the
Kings honor, as on the other hand, In this defect or want His destruction,
Prove. 14.28. The truth and smart whereof, we have found by sad and doleful
experience. For Closure, Let me recommend both to State and Church, throughout
this kingdom, Mordicai his healthful advice to queen Esther; For if thou
altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there Enlargement and
deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers
house shall be destroyed, Esther 4.14. So accomodate ad subjectum, by
accommodation to the subject or purpose in hand; If you shall prove deficient
and wanting to repress, yea and redress all formerly Disorders both in State
and Church, and carefully repair by gone slipps and misgivings, these shall
prove but the bare and naked beginnings of greater After-sorrows and
Calamities, and God shall not fail or prove wanting, to foresee and provide,
for the good and well of His own Zion. As on the other hand, Queen Esther her
practice in undertaking the suit, by taking her life, as it were, in her hand;
If I perish, I perish, to your imitation; That so disrespecting, as it were,
the quality of whatsoever opposers, and laying aside all Panik-fears, you would
endeavor to break through all contrary Letts and thwarting obstacles: and make
the peace of State and Church your chiefest joy and aim, and that so according
to Christ's prescription, you would at last, Render to Caesar, the things that
be Caesar's, as to God, the things that are Gods. Nay, and I would wish from
mine heart, That as you have committed, by following Achitophelian counsel, a
transcendent, exorbitant and unparelleled Transgression, by surrendering up of
your KING into the hands of His cruel and bloody Enemies, yea, and whereas
He came of His own accord under your wings to trust, whereby you have done
what in you lay, to precide and cut off all just hopes of all after
Reconciliation. So now following the example of the Aramits, you would in all
submission and out of a deep resentment of guilt and sorrow, stay and present
your selves to His Son, your Sacred and dread now SOVEREIGN, with rops about
your necks, relying on His Merciefulnes; and you might yet expect some
favorable aspects and respects: for, NOBILIS EST IRA LEONIS, parcere subjectis
et debellare superbos; And sure I am, That He will account it His no less
glory, to succeed His Royal FATHER of Blessed and never dying Memory, Who
lived a SAINT, and dyed a MARTYR, in, and to His most rare and commendable
Christian Virtues, then in, and to His Crowns.

Printed by James Brown, APRIL, 1661.


