THE FRENCH KING'S EDICT Upon the DECLARATION Made by the Clergy of FRANCE, Of
their Opinion concerning the Ecclesiastical Power: Wherein is set forth, That
the King is Independent in Things Temporal. That General Councils are above the
Pope. That the Popes Power is to be limited by the Ancient Canons. That the
Popes Decisions are not Infallible without the Consent of the Church.


Together with the said, Declaration of the CLERGY, As they were Registered in
the PARLIAMENT of PARIS, the 23 of March 1682.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, 1682.

The KING's Edict, upon the Declaration made by the Clergy of France, of their
opinion concerning the Ecclesiastical Power.
LOVIS By the Grace of GOD, King of France and Navarre, To all present and to
come, Greeting. Although it be a certain and uncontested Truth, Established
upon the Words of Christ Himself, That Our Crown is Independent of any Power
but that of GOD alone; We have however received with Satisfaction the
Declaration which the Deputies of the Clergy of France, Assembled by Our
Permission in our good City of Paris, have presented to Us containing their
Opinion touching the Ecclesiastical Power: And We have so much the more
willingly hearkened to the Request which the said Deputies have made to Us, to
cause the said Declaration to be published, for that, it being made by an
Assembly composed of so many persons equally recommendable for their Virtue and
Learning, and who have with so much Zeal employed themselves in whatever may be
of advantage to the Church, and Our Service, the Wisdom and Moderation with
which they have expressed the Opinion that ought to be had on this Subject, may
very much contribute to the confirming Our Subjects in the Respect, which they,
as well as We, ought to have for the Authority which God has given to the
Church, and to the taking away, at the same time from the Ministers of the
pretended Reformed Religion the pretext they take, from the Books of some
Authors, to render the power of the Visible head of the Church, and the Center
of Ecclesiastical Unity, Odious. For these Causes, and other good and weighty
Considerations, Us thereunto moving, after having caused the said Declaration
to be examined in Our Council. We have by this Our present, perpetual, and
irrevocable Edict, Said, Established and Ordained, do Say, Establish, and
Ordain, We Will, and it pleases Us, That the said Declaration of the Opinion
of the Clergy concerning the Ecclesiastical power, hereunto affixed, under the
Seal of Our Chancery, be Registered in all Our Courts of Parliament,
Bailliwicks, Senechalsies, Universities and Faculties of Divinity, and the
Canon Law, in our Kingdom, Countries, Lands, and Siegneuries under our
Obedience.

I.

WE forbid all our Subjects, and all Strangers being in our Kingdom, as well
Seculars as Regulars, of what order, Congregation, or Society they are, to
teach in their Houses, Colleges, or Seminaries, or to write any thing contrary
to the Doctrine contained in the same.

II.

We Command that those which shall for the future be chosen to teach Divinity
in the Colleges of every University, whether they be Seculars or Regulars,
shall before they perform that Function in the Colleges or Houses Secular or
Regular, subscribe the said Declaration in the Registries of the Faculties of
Divinity, and promise to teach the Doctrine therein contained; and that the
Syndics of the Faculties of Divinity shall present to the Ordinaries of the
Places, and to the Atturnies General, Copies of the said Subscriptions, Signed
by the Registers of the said Faculties.

III.

That in all the Colleges and Houses of the said Universities, where there
shall be many Professors, whether Seculars or Regulars, One of them shall be
obliged every year to teach the Doctrine contained in the said Declaration;
and in the Colleges where there shall be only one Professor, he shall be
obliged to teach the same every third year.

IV.

We Command the Syndics of the Faculty of Divinity to present every year,
before the Opening of the Lectures, to the Archbishops or Bishops of the places
where they are established, and to send to Our Atturnies General the Names of
the Professors who shall have the charge of Teaching the said Doctrine; and We
Command the said Professors to present to the said Prelates, and to Our
Atturnies General the Writings which they shall dictate to their Scholars,
when they shall be by them thereto required.

V.

We will, That no Bachelor, whether Secular or Regular, shall for the future
be Licensed in Divinity, or the Canon Law, nor received a Doctor, till he has
maintained the said Doctrine in one of his Theses, which he shall make appear
to those that have right of conferring the said Degrees in the Universities.

VI.

We Exhort, and also Enjoin all Archbishops and Bishops of Our Kingdom,
Countries, Lands and Segneuries under Our Obedience, to employ their Authority
in causing the Doctrine contained in the said Declaration of the said Deputies
of the Clergy to be taught in their Diocesses.

VII.

We Command the Deans, and Syndics of the Faculties of Divinity, to take care
of the Execution of these Presents, on pain of answering the contrary in their
own and private Capacities.

So We give Charge to Our Well-beloved and Trusty holding Our Courts of
Parliament, that they cause these Our present Letters, in form of an Edict, to
be Read, Published, and Registered, together with the said Declaration of the
Clergy, in the Registries of Our said Courts, Bailliwicks, Senechalsies, and
Universities within their Jurisdiction, and that they see the same observed,
without suffering any contravention therein directly or indirectly; and that
they proceed against the Offenders in such manner as they shall think fit,
according to the Exigency of the case; for such is Our pleasure. And that the
same may remain firm and established for ever, We have caused Our Seal to be
put to these Presents.

Given at St. Germains in Lay, in the Month of March, in the year of Grace
1682. and of Our Reign the 39th. Signed LOVIS;

And lower, By the King, Colbert; Visa, le Tellier, and Sealed with the great
Seal on Green-Wax.

Registered, The Atturney-General being heard, and requiring it, that they may
be put in Execution, according to their Form and Tenor, pursuant to the Order
of this Day.

At Paris in Parliament, the 23 of March 1682. Signed. DONGOIS.



The Declaration of the Clergy of France, concerning the Ecclesiastical Power.
MAny there are who endeavor to invade the Decrees and Liberties of the
Gallican Church (with so much Zeal contended for by our Ancestors) and even to
undermine the Foundation of them, which is Built upon the Holy Canons, and the
Tradition of the Fathers; nor are those wanting, who under pretense of those
Liberties, are not afraid to lessen the Supremacy of St. Peter, and his
Successors, the Popes of Rome, Instituted by Christ, the obedience due to them
from all Christians, and the Majesty of the Apostolic See (revered by all
people) wherein the Faith is Preached, and the Unity of the Church preserved.
Neither do the Heretics omit any thing, whereby they may render the power, by
which the peace of the Church is preserved, grievous and odious to Princes and
their Subjects, and by these Frauds they withdraw the Simple from the Communion
of their Mother the Church, and of Christ: To prevent which Evils, we the
Archbishops, and Bishops, met at Paris, by the Kings Command, representing the
Gallican Church, with other Ecclesiastical Persons, deputed together with us,
have after Mature deliberation, thought fit that the following Articles should
be established and declared.

I.

That the power of things Spiritual, and such as belong to our eternal
Salvation, was given by God to St. Peter, and his Successors Christ's Vicars,
and to his Church, but not that of things Civil and Temporal: our Lord saying,
My Kingdom is not of this World. And again, Render therefore unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. And this is
meant by the Words of the Apostle, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers; For all power is from God, and all powers are ordained by God: He
therefore that resists, resists the Ordinance of God. That therefore Kings
and Princes are not, by the Command of God, subject in things Temporal, to any
Ecclesiastical Power, neither can they directly, or indirectly, be Deposed by
the power of the Keys of the Church, nor their Subjects be freed from their
Duty and Obedience, and Oath of Allegiance. And that this Opinion necessary for
the public Peace, and no less useful to the Church than the State, is to be
Maintained as altogether agreeable to the Word of God, the Tradition of the
Fathers, and the Examples of the Saints.

II.

But that this full Power of things Spiritual, is so in the Apostolical See,
and St. Peter's Successors, the Vicars of Christ, as that withal the Decreets of
the Holy Oeconomical Council of Constans, made in the 4th and 5th Sessions,
concerning th Authority of General Councils, which have been approved by the
Apostolic See, and Confirmed by the practice of the Popes of Rome, and of the
whole Church, and always Religiously observed by the Gallican Church, are in
full Force, and continue unalterable. And that the Gallican Church condems
those that would take from the force of those Decrees, as if their Authority
was doubted, or less approved, or would apply them only to the times of Schisms.

III.

That therefore the use of this Apostolic power, is to be Moderated by the
Canons, made by the Spirit of God, and Consecrated by the Reverence of the
whole World. That likewise the Orders, Customs, and Statutes, received by the
Crown and the Gallican Church, are of Force; and that the Bounds fixed by the
Fathers, ought to remain unremoved; and that it concerns the Greatness of the
Apostostolick See, that the Statutes and Customs, confirmed by the consent of
so great a See, and of the whole Church, should be Established upon a firm
Foundation.

IV.

That in Questions concerning Faith, the Pope has the chief part, and that all
and singular Churches are concerned in his Decrees; But that however his
Decisions are not unreformable without the consent of the Church.

V.

Which Doctrines we have received from the Fathers, do Decree to be sent to all
the Gallican Churches, and to the Bishops by the Holy Spirit presiding over
them, that we may all say the same thing, and be all of the same Mind.

Signed by The Archbishop of Paris, President. The Archbishop of Rheims. Six
other Archbishops. By 26 Bishops, and the rest of the Deputies of the Clergy.

Registered in the Parliament of Paris, the 23. of March, 1682.
FINIS.

