LONDONS PLAGUE FROM HOLLAND, OR Inquiries after the Natural Causes of Her
Present Calamity.
What Is Englands Metropolis become folorne?
Europes late Glory, now a Pesants scorn?
The Mistress of the Seas, She that outvi'd?
Her ranting Sister Cities, the Gallick Pride?
Room resrrect, in her great Ela State?
Must s(...)ckle to the Dooms of Fate
W(...)e? 's no bold Champion sent
To wre^^^er from the rudest Ravishment
O'th Rawhon'd Rascal, must he triumph thus?
And timpanize himself with blood of us
Poor Morals? (...)
Then Bell and Dragon in an age could steal?
Where Is all the Quixots of our age? has none
The Elixir, the long-look'd-for Stone?
No Cure for her, whose Tenants made their boasts
Till now, they would rout the most victorious hosts
Of all Diseases? Here Is a Goliath stands
And bids defiance against the united bands
Of Art: Then muster up your Forces, say,
Who shall command? or who begin the Fray?
If Seniority takes place, the Galenist's
Obliged in honor first to enter the Lists.
What weapons must he use? a Weavers Beams
Too great for him to wield, His Apozemes,
Electuaries, Julips, Bolus, and the rest
Are all too gross to touch this Spirituallist.
More refined weapons (though desensive all)
Some say may shield us from this Canniball.
Enter Van Helmont then, who like another
Jacob, endeavors to supplant his Brother,
And with more right perhaps; take but this story,
What seats he will do with his Elabratory;
How he^'l unravel Nature, the causes find
By Chimick art what it is compounds the wind*
Yet h^s Aquafortis, Regis, and Coelestis,
(With choicest spirit, which esteemed the best is)
Though elevated higher then the gross
And saeculent composure of a Dos,
Are too terrene t'encounter or contest
With this invincible Antagonist.
Quartans no more shall Galenists defame,
Nor the Altahest the Paracelsian blame.
Here Is a Disease so subtle (though impure)
Baffles them both to find the Cause or Cure.
Let Us force Art to her Zenith then, and try
The Virtuosoes Etimology.
How they define, or gravely descant on
This grand invisible Contagion.
Malignant vagrant Atoms are the quaint
(say they) Compounders of this mortal taint*
Their (...) and motion's yet obscure,
Till the Dioptricks can discern th'impure,
Though subtle exhalations that proceeds
From the first matter, which infection breeds,
A Quere may be urged, whether they be
Not vivid Atoms, since we daily see
All sulphurous Fumes, these wanderers expels,
With other Insects to remoter Cells.
What ere they be, extrinsique first they are,
And Vagrant too, why suffered then so far
TO entrench on humane nature? cannot Art
Contrive a Statue Law, and whip this tart
Unruly Vagabond from mortal bounds,
Or (as the Countryman the Stragler pounds)
Confine him? No, This Hoegan Mogan Lord,
(Though wafted higher on a Shipwrackt board)
Takes so much state upon him, (like his Sire,
The Sink of Christendom, Europes Quagmire)
That Civil Laws this Gaderen defies,
With Arts and Sciences as Enemies.
Is Art then stinted? a non ultra here
To her proceedings? The Question is not clear;
The Fountain's muddy whence this taint first came
Why then should the English Artist soul his name
In pudling into the Cause, thus much I Will say,
If sympathetick Atoms bear the sway,
Our Calvenist with his motled Brotherhood,
Draws Dutch Opinions, and his Countries blood.

