armsTHE ORDER OF My LORD MAYOR, The ALDERMEN, and the SHERIFFS, For their
Meetings and wearing of their Apparel throughout the whole year.

Printed by J. Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1667.

THE TABLE.
UPon Midsummer-day, for the Election of the Sheriffs of London, etc. 1 On
Bartholomew Even for the Fair in Smithfield 4 On Bartholomew-day, for Wrestling
5 For our Lady Day in Southwark 6 For the Swearing of the Sheriffs upon
Michaelmas Even 7 Upon Michaelmas-day, for the Election of my Lord Mayor 8 For
the Presenting of my Lord Elect to the Lord Chancellor, (or Lord Keeper) 12 The
morrrow after Michaelmas-day, for the Sheriffs going to Westminster ibid. The
order for Simon and Judes day. 15 On the morrow after Simon and Judes day, for
my Lord's going to take his Oath at Westminster 17 For going to S. Paul's on
All Saints day, Christmas Day, Twelfth day, and Candlemas-day 20 Upon S.
Thomas-day 21 Eor the Christmas Holidaies ibid. Upon Innocents day ibid. For
Monday after Twelfth-day 22 For Good Friday ibid. For Monday and Tuesday in
Easter-week. 23 For Wednesday in Easter-week ibid. For Low-Sunday 24 For
Whitsunday ibid. For Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun-week ibid. For the Lord
Mayors Knighthood 25 For going to S. Paul's the first Sunday of every Term ibid.
For Election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament 26 For the Lords of the
Council coming down for Subsidies 27 For the Election of Master Chamberlein and
Bridg-Masters, if any of them depart within the year ibid. For the Coronation
of a King 28 The Use of my Lord's Cloak ibid. For the first day of every
Quarter Sessions, 29 For the Burial of Aldermen 30 For the Nomination of an
Alderman ibid. For the Orphans Court 31 At the Election of Governors for
Christ's Hospital ibid. Courts of Aldermen 32
Upon Midsummer-day, for the Election of the Sheriffs of LONDON, etc.
MY Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, with the Sheriffs, meet at the Guildhall at
eight of the clock in the morning, apparelled in their Violet Gowns lined, and
their Cloaks of Scarlet lined, without their Horses.

And when they have been together in the Council Chamger a certain time,
concerning the Nomination of certain persons to be Elected, my Lord and the
Aldermen come out, and put on their Cloaks in the Orphans Court, and then go
down in order to the Hustings Court, and there being set, master Recorder
stands up, and makes his obeisance, first to my Lord, and then unto the
Commons, and declares unto them wherefore they are assembled together, showing
unto them that it is for the election of one of the Sheriffs of London, and the
Sheriff of Middlesex, for the year next ensuing, and the confirmation of the
other Sheriff nominated by my Lord Mayor, according to his Prerogative; and
also for master Chamberlein, and other Officers.

But my Lord and the Aldermen go up to my Lords Court, and there remain until
the Sheriff be named and chosen, the door shut to them.

Then M. Sheriffs, M. Chamberlein, master common Sergeant, master Town Clerk,
and the Counselors of the City, and other Officers, remain still in the
Hustings Court, to take and receive the Name of him that shall seem by their
judgments, freely and with one consent, to be nominated and elected, and justly
tried out, not only by voice, but also by hands, to be Sheriff for the year
following.

Then the Commons go to the Election of master Chamberlein, the two
Bridge-masters, the Auditors of the City and Bridge-house acounts, and the
Surveyors of Beer and Ale, according to the accustomed manner.

That done, the Sheriffs, master Chamberlein, M. common Sergeant, M.
Town Clerk, the Counselors of the City, the two Secondaries, and the Wardens
of the head Companies, master Common Crier going before them with his Mace,
carry up the Report to my Lord and the Aldermen of their said Election.

Which Report received, my Lord and the Aldermen come down again to the
Hustings Court, and there being set in order and placed, master Recorder
stands up as he did before, and makes rehearsal of the names of those whom
they have nominated and chosen, asking them whether it be their free Election,
yea or no. And they grant, Yea, yea. Then master Recorder gives them thanks,
and so they arise and depart home.

On Bartholomew Even for the Fair in Smithfield.
THe Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at the Guildhall Chapel, at two of
the clock after Dinner, in their Violet Gowns lined, and their Horses, without
Cloaks, and there hear Evening Prayer: which being done, they take their Horses
and ride to Newgate, and so forth of the Gate, entering into the Cloth-Fair, and
there make a Proclamation: the Proclamation being made, they ride through the
Cloth-Fair, and so return back again through the Churchyard of great S.
Bartholomews to Aldersgate, and so ride home again to the Lord Mayors house.

On S. Bartholomew-day, for Wrestling.
SO many Aldermen as do dine with my L. Mayor and the Sheriffs be apparelled in
their Scarlet Gowns lined, and after Dinner their Horses be brought to them
where they dine: and those Aldermen which dine with the Sheriffs ride with them
to my Lords house to accompany him to the Wrestling. Then when the Wrestling is
done, they take their Horses and ride back again through the Fair, and so in at
Aldersgate and so home again to the said Lord Mayors house.

The next day, if it be not Sunday, for the Shooting, as upon Bartholomew-day:
but if it be Sunday, the Monday following.

Embroydered cap, pearl Sword, collar of Esses without Hood.
For our Lady Day in Southwark.
MY L. Mayor and the Sheriffs ride to S. Magnus Church in their Scarlet Gowns
lined, without their Cloaks, after Dinner, at two of the clock, and there the
Aldermen meet my Lord, and after the Evening Prayer they ride through the Fair,
till they come unto S. Georges Church, and farther to Newington Bridge, or to
S. Thomas of Waterings, to the stones that point out the liberties of the City,
(if it be so their pleasures) and they return back again unto the Bridge-house,
and have a Banquet there, and then over the Bridge, and there the Aldermen take
their leave of my Lord, and depart the next way, every one to his house. And
after all is done, and my Lord brought home, my Lord Mayors Officers have a
Supper made them by the Bridg-masters.

For the Swearing of the Sheriffs upon Michaelmas Even.
WHat day soever it falls, so many of the Aldemen as be bidden to Dinner to
either of the Sheriffs come thither to breakfast* or else to drink, at 8 of the
clock in the morning, in their Violet Gowns furred, with their Viole^ Cloaks
furred, brought with them, without Horses. And if the Sheriff be an Alderman,
then they must put on their Cloaks, and the Sheriff likewise his Cloak, and so
go to the Guild Hall between two of the gray Cloaks: And if the Sheriff be no
alderman, then to come between two of the Aldermen without Cloaks, and the
Sheriff in his Livery-gown and his Hood. And after when he is sworn, then to
put on his Violet Gown and Cloak, and his chain thereon. And the Aldermen must
bring him home to his place, with their Cloaks, to Dinner, and so after Dinner
take their pleasure.

Upon Michaelmas-day, for the Election of my Lord Mayor.
ALL the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at eight of the clock in the
Morning at Guildhall, in their Scarlet Gowns and their Cloaks furred, and their
Horses: and after they have been a certain time together in the
Council Chamger, they come forth into the Orphans Court, and put on their
Cloaks, and so go in order to the Chapel, there hearing Service and Sermon,
and my Lord with certain Aldermen receive the Communion.

And then after the Communion ended, and they have offered, return again into
the Council Chamger, and, pausing a while, return to the place where the
Hustings is kept: and being set in order, Master Recorder arises up, and
makes his obeisance first to my Lord, and after to the Commons, and declares
unto them, that they of old Custom know that the cause of their Assembly and
meeting together is for the election of the Lord Mayor for the year ensuing;
declaring unto them diverse Grants from the Kings Progenitors for this their
Election from time to time. That done, my Lord and the Aldermen go up into my
Lords Court; and there tarry (the door being shut to them) till the Election be
brought to them. Then stands up master Common Sergeant, (the Sheriffs
standing on either side of him) and by the Sheriffs M. Chamberlein, M.
Town Clerk, the two Secondaries, and the Counselors of the City, in the said
Hustings Court before the Commons. And he the said Common Sergeant makes a
short rehearsal of that M. Recorder had spoken to them before saying, There
rests no more for him to say, but to put them in remembrance in what order
and sort they should use themselves in their Election; that is, how they must
nominate and choose two, of the which two my Lord and the Aldermen must confirm
one: which two being nominated, elected and chosen, M. Common Sergeant, the
Sheriffs, with the rest before named, and certain of the head Wardens of the
chief Companies, go up to my Lord and the Aldermen, and there present the names
of those two which the Commons have nominated in their Election.

Then the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen proceed by scrutiny to elect one of those
two persons, which the said Commons had before nominated. Then comes down my
Lord again to the Hustings Court, and he (whom they have chosen) on his left
hand, and so my Lord and the Aldermen sit down again in order: but he who is
chosen sits next unto my Lord on his left hand. Then stands master
Recorder up, and reads unto them the names of such persons whom they have
nominated and chosen: of which my Lord and the Aldermen have admitted one,
whose name is N. asking them whether it be their free Election, yea or no: and
the Commons answer, Yea, yea. Then the Sword Bearer takes off his Tippet, and
has it for his labor, and puts, on his Chain, and the Mayor new elected
stands upon the Hustings Court, and gives thanks, etc. That being done, the
old Mayor does likewise give them thanks, etc. Then they arise up, and put off
their Cloaks, and my Lord Mayor has the Lord elect riding with him to the
eldest Sheriffs to Dinner.

For presenting of my Lord Elect to the Lord Chancellor (or Lord Keeper.)
THen after Dinner my Lord Elect goes to my Lord Chancellor, (or Lord Keeper)
if he be at home at his place, or near unto it, with five or six of the
Aldermen, and master Recorder with him, in their Violet Gowns, either by foot
or by water, as the dewlling place of the Chancellor (or Lord Keeper)
requires. The common Hunt, with the extraordinary Officers, and those that be
at liberty, attend on him.

The morrow after Michaelmas-day, for the Sheriffs going to Westminster.
ALL the Aldermen must be at the two Sheriffs houses in the morning at eight of
the clock, in their Violet Gowns furred, and their Horses, without Cloaks: but
my Lord, master Recorder and the two Sheriffs must be in their Scarlet Gowns
furred, and their Cloaks born to Westminster with them, and so ride to the
Guildhall, and from thence to the Vinetree, and there taking Barge land at
Westminster-bridge, and in the Hall put on their Cloaks, and so go up to the
Exchequer: and there the two new Sheriffs be presented, and the old sworn to
their account.

Then they put off their Cloaks, and take Barge, landing again at the Vinetree,
and there take horse: and my Lord Mayor rides to the eldest Sheriffs to
Dinner, master Recorder and the Sheriffs riding next my Lord, the two Sheriffs
carrying two white rods in their hands, and their Hench-men going after them.

The order for Simon and Judes day
THe old Mayor shall have so many of the Aldermen as dine with him come to his
place at eight of the clock in the morning, in their Violet Gowns furred, with
their Violet Cloaks furred, and Horses, and the Sheriffs to fetch him to the
Hall, and there tarry in the Council Chamger until the new Mayor comes, and
the rest of the Aldermen come, with the Company of either of the Lords before
them: and after they have been together a certain space come forth into the
Orphans Court, and put on their furred Cloaks, and go to the Hustings Court:
and there being set in order, the Common Crier makes Proclamation, commanding
every man to keep silence.

Then Master Town Clerk gives him his Oath: and when He has taken, his Oath,
the old Lord arises, and gives the new Lord his place, the old Lord taking
the new Lords place: and then master Chamberlein delivers first to him the
Scepter, next the Keys of the common Seal, lastly, the Seal, of Office of the
Mayoralty, after master Sword Bearer gives him the Sword. Then they arise and
put off their Cloaks, and the old Lord rides home with the new Lord to his
place, and there leaves him, and as many of the Aldermen as dine with him. And
the old Lord, with the rest of the Aldermen, ride to his place, the Sword born
before him: and so after Dinner the Aldermen depart home at their pleasure.

On the morrow after Simon and Jude's day, for my Lord going to take his Oath
at Westminster.
ALL the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my new Lord at eight of the clock in
their Scarlet Gowns furred, A Velvet Hood, Cap of Maintenance.
and their Cloaks born with them, and their Horses, and so ride to the
Guild Hall, and the Bachellors and the Livery of my Lords Company before him.

But the old Lord rides from his own place to the Hall alone, having no
Officers to wait upon him, but the common Hunt, as a Gentleman Usher, going,
and those Officers that be at Liberty, A Velvet Hood for both Mayors.
and the common Hunt his man, (with his own men following him) and so tarrieth
at the Hall.

And after they be come all togethere, they take their Horses, and ride to the
Vinetree, and there take Barge to Westminster-bridge.

And after they be landed, the Lord mayor and the Aldermen put on their Cloaks
within the Palace, and go round about the Hall, making curtisie in the Hall,
and so go up to the Exchequer to be sworn. Then after the Oath taken in the
Exchequer, they come down again, and go first to the Kings Bench, then to the
Common Place, and so put off their Cloaks, and go about the Kings Tombs in
Westminster Abbey, and then take Barge again. And being landed, he rides to
the Guildhall to Dinner, and all the Companies of this City with him: and at
their coming into the Hall, the new Lord Mayor, with two of the ancient
Aldermen, master Recorder and the Sheriffs go up to my Lords Table to bid them
welcome, and likewise all the other guests there, and from thence to the Lady
Mayoress Table, and so come out to the Gentlewomens Table, and to the Judges:
and so from thence my said new L. Mayor goes into the Chamberleins Office,
where he dineth; and the old Lord Mayor, at their first coming into the Hall,
goes up to the high Table in the Hustings, and there keeps the State for
that Feast. And after the Hall is almost served of the second, then the new
Lord Mayor goes, with master Recorder and those Aldermen that dine with him,
to bid the old Lord and all the guests in the Hall welcome. Then after Dinner
goes to S. Paul's, with all the Companies waiting before my Lord.

For going to S. Paul's on All Saints day, Christmas Day, Twelfth-day, and
Candlemas-day. A Velvet Hood for ^oth.

ALL the Aldermen and the Sheriffs come to my Lords place in their Scarlet
Gowns furred, All Saints day is the last day that the old Lord rides with the
new.
and their Cloaks and Horses, and from thence ride to the Guildhall, my Lords
Company and the Bachelors before him, and there hear Evening Prayer: and when
Prayer is done, they ride to S. Paul's, Cap of Maintenance.
and there both the new Lord Mayor and the old put on their Cloaks, and go up
to the quire, and there hear the Sermon: which done, they go about the Church,
and there put off their Cloaks where they were put on. Then they take their
Horses again, and the Aldermen bring my Lord home, and then they have
Spice-bread and Hippocras, and so take their leave of my Lord.

Upon S. Thomas day.
THe Lord Mayor and every Alderman is to sit in his Ward in his Violet Gown and
Cloak furred. If it be not Sunday.


For the Christmas-Holydaies.
FOr Christmas-Holydaies, No Cloak.
until Twelfth-day, if me Lord and the Aldermen go abroad to any public
meeting, they are to wear Scarlet: but on the working-daies within the twelve
days, if my Lord go to the Guildhall, Markets or Strees, they wear Black,

Upon Innocents day.
UPon Innocents day the Aldermen dine at my Lords, No State.
and the Sheriffs, in Scarlet: but the Ladies wear Black.

For Monday after Twelfth-day.
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at the Guildhall at eight of the clock in the
morning, in their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloaks furred without Horses,
to receive of their Wards their Indentures of the Wardmote Inquest, and for the
swearing of the Constables and Scavengers.

For Good Friday.
Black Sword.
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at S. Paul's Cross at one of the clock, to hear
the Sermon, in their pewke Gowns and without their Chains and Tippets.

For Monday and Tuesday in Easter-week.
ALL the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto my Lords place before eight of the
clock to Breakfast, A Hood for my Lord. Cap of Maintenance.
in their Scarlet Gowns furred, and their Cloaks and Horses: and after
Breakfast, take their Horses, and ride to the Spittle, and there put on their
Cloaks, and so sit down in order to hear the Sermon; which done, they ride
homeward in order, till they come to the Pump within Bishopsgate, and there so
many of the Aldermen as do dine with the Sheriffs take their leave of my Lord,
and the rest go home with him.

For Wednesday in Easter-week.
LIke as before in the other two days save that my Lord and the Aldermen must
be in their Violet Gowns, and suitable Cloaks, but the Ladies in Black.

For Low-Sunday.
ALL the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at S. Paul's School in their
Scarlet Gowns, furred, without their Cloaks or Horses, to hear the Sermon.

For Whitsunday.
FOr Whitsunday all the Aldermen meet my Lord and the Sheriffs at the new
Churchyard, in their Scarlet Gowns lined, without Cloaks, to hear the Sermon:
which being ended they depart.

For Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun-week.
If his pleasure be to go.
ALL the Aldermen must meet my L. Mayor and the Sheriffs at S. Paul's in their
Scarlet Gowns, without Cloaks, to hear the Sermon.

For the Lord Mayor's Knighthood.
ALL the Aldermen meet my Lo. either at the three Cranes, (if the King be at
Westminster) or at S. Mary hill, (if the King be at Greenwich) by seven of the
clock in the morning in their Scarlet Gowns, and Cloaks born with them: and
after Morning Prayer they take Barge to the Kings place, where they attend till
that Ceremony be ended, and so go home with my Lord Mayor to Dinner.

For going to S. Paul's the first Sunday of every Term.
ALL the Aldermen meet my Lo. and the Sheriffs at S. Paul's, in their Scarlet
Gowns furred or lined, without Cloaks or Horse, as the time of the year
requires, when the Term begins.

For Election of Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo. and the Sheriffs at Guild Hall at nine of the
clock, in their Violet Gowns and their Cloaks furred or lined, as the time of
the year when they shall be chosen requires, and sit in the Hustings Court
while the Commons choose them. The order is, that they must choose master
Recorder for one of their Knights, and one gray Cloak for the other, and two
Commoners for the Burgesses: which done, they depart.

For the Lords of the Council coming down for Subsidies,
FOr the Lords and Commissioners coming down to assess the Subsidies, my Lord
Mayor and the Aldermen wear their black Gowns as at other times, and the
Comissioners are to be warned by master Sheriffs Officers.

For the Election of Master Chamberlin and Bridg-masters, if any of them depart
within the year.
MY Lord and the Aldermen sit in the Hustings Court while they be chosen, in
their Violet Gowns without their Cloaks, and do not remove until the Election
be done.

For the Coronation of a King.
My Lord in a crimson velvet Gown, Collar of Esses and Scepter. No Cloak.
ALl the Aldermen meet my Lo. and the Sheriffs at the three Cranes in the
Vintry, at the hour of their summons, in their Scarlet Gowns, and Cloaks born
with them, lined or furred, according to the time of the year, where taking
Barge, they land at Westminster, and there they attend in the Checquer-Chamber
(being served with Wine and Cakes) until they are called by the Heralds: then
they put on their Cloaks.

The Use of my Lords Cloak.
Beginning upon Michaelmas Even
FRom Michaelmas to Whitsuntide, Violet furred: and from Whitsuntide to
Michaelmas Scarlet lined.

The Lord Mayor and those Knights that have born the Office of Mayoralty ought
to have their Cloaks furred with gray Amiss, and those Aldermen that have not
been Mayors are to have their Cloaks furred with Chalabre.

And likewise such as have been Mayors are to have their Cloaks lined with
changeable Taffata, and the rest are to have them lined with green Taffata.

For the first day of every Quarter Sessions.
THe first day of every Quarter Sessions, in the forenoon only, my Lord and
the Sheriffs wear their Violet Gowns and Cloaks furred; but at Midsummer
Quarter Sessions the first day they wear Violet Gowns and Scarlet Cloaks, and
on the other days Black.

For the Burial of Aldermen.
THe Aldermen must be in their Violet Gowns, except such as have of their
friends black Gowns. When any Alderman dies, master Sword Bearer is to have a
black Gown, or xxxiii. s. iiii. d. in money: and if he gives my Lord a black
Gown, master Sword Bearer is to have another, or xl. s. in money, the price
thereof, and so carry the Sword in black before my Lord.

Master Chamberlein is not to wear his Tippet but when my Lord Mayor or the
Aldermen wear their Scarlet or Violet.

At the Nomination of an Alderman.
FOr the Nomination of an Alderman, my Lord wears his black Gown and Violet
Cloak, and both the Sheriffs black Gowns.

For the Orphans Court
MY Lord and the Aldermen meet at the Guild Hall in their Violet Gowns without
Cloaks, but my Lord Mayor must have his Cloak. This Court the Common Crier
warns.

At the Election of Governors at Christ's Hospital.
FOr the Election of the Governors of the several Hospitals, the Lord Mayor
and the Aldermen wear black Gowns.

The four Pleaders, the Chamberlein, Town Clerk, Common Sergeant, two Judges of
the Sheriffs Court, the Secondaries, Vnder-Chamberlein and Bridgmasters, are to
attend my Lord at his house, before his going abroad upon all Festival times,
and general days.

Courts of Aldermen.
COurts of Aldermen in ordinary are kept at the Guild Hall every Tuesday and
Thursday through the whole year, except Holy Days, the month of August, until
Bartholomew-day be past, the week before Christmas, Shrove-tuesday, and the
week before Easter.

FINIS.
The names of the several Companies in their Order.
Mercers. Grocers. Drapers, Fishmongers. Goldsmiths. Skinners.
Merchant-Taylors. Haberdashers. Salters. Ironmongers. Vintners. Cloathworkers.
Dyers. Brewers. Leathersellers. Pewterers. Cutlers. White-Bakers.
Wax-Chandlers. Tallow-Chandlers. Armourers, Girdlers. Butchers. Sadlers,
Carpenters. Cordwayners. Barbersurgeons, Painter-stainers, Curriers. Masons.
Plummers. Inholders. Founders. Poulterers. Cooks. Coopers. Tylers and
Bricklayers, Bowyers. Fletchers. Black-Smiths. Joyners. Weavers. Woolmen.
Woodmongers. Scriveners. Fruiterers. Plaisterers. Brown-Bakers. Stationers.
Imbroyderers. Upholders. Musicians. Turners. Basketmakers. Glasiers.

