A Letter for a Christian Family.
Directed to all true Christians to read.
Which being sealed up in heart and mind,
Nothing but truth in it you will find,
Both Old and Young, both Rich and Poor,
Bear it in mind, keep it in store:
And think upon the time to come,
For time does pass, the Glass does run,
Therefore whilst thou have time and space,
Call to the Lord above for Grace.
Then he will surely thee defend,
And thou shall make a happy end.
To the Tune of, The Godly Man's Instruction.




BOth young and old, both rich and poor give ear,
Unto thise verses which I shall declare,
And give good heed to that which here is penned,
And strive in time your wicked lives to mend.
But yet there is many that does not regard,
Till for their sins they have a just reward:
But still goes on, their wicked courses run,
Until both Soul and Body be undone.
Therefore good people let us have a care,
And unto Christ with speed let us repair;
Leave off your sins which now do so abound,
For 'twas for sin that once the world was drowned.
How many sins within this Land we see?
In high and low of every degree;
Both rich and poor they now do live at strife
And great debate is betwixt man and wife.
Brother and Sister they do disagree,
As by experience now we daily see:
And children that have hardly use of Tongue,
Will Swear and Curse as they do pass along.
And some will Curse their Parents to their far,
Methinks to them it is a foul disgrace,
But it is forbidden in the Laws of God,
Therefore let us serve him all with one accord.
The sin of pride we see does so excel,
In Men and Women now the truth to tell:
And for that sin we read that Satan fell,
From an high Angel to a Devil in hell.
Also we read of Dives pomp and state,
And of poor Lazarus that lay at his gate,
In Abraham's bosom he was nourished,
And with sweet comforts he was daily fed.
Whilst Dives for one drop did call and cry,
To cool his Tongue, he did in torments lie,
But any comfort could he not receive,
Because poor Lazarus he would not relieve.


fashions strange and many a fond delight,
We please our fancies now both Day and Night,
And neverthink upon this time to come.
Although our Glass has but one hour to run.
There Is many now that to the Church do go,
Their pomp and pride, and bravery to show,
More than to hear the sacred word of God,
(...) all such beware his heavy Rod.
Be not too covetous in heart and mind,
Nor to that sin he not too much inclined:
Remember Judas how he was too bold,
For (...)sness his Lord and Master sold.
Be not too prudent in this thy worldly wealth,
Do not trust to it, for it is but pel^,
'Twill fade away and leave thee in the dust,
From thence thou came, and thither return thou must
Lord give us grace to understand aright,
Thy holy laws and therein take delight;
And comfort those the which are comfortless,
And help the Widow in her great distress.
Likewise the Fatherless O Lord defend,
And thy true grace unto all Christian send:
And grant that we thy holy name may fear,
And serve thee still with heart most pure and clear.
How many Messengers the Lord has sent,
To give us warning that we should repent,
But yet our hearts so stubborn are I say,
That ^e God's holy word will not obey.
Sermons on Sermons we do daily hear,
By Minister swell learned as does appear,
To give us warning to repeat our sin,
Which we so long time now have lived in.
All you that read these lines which hear are pen^^
Observe them well and strive your lives to mend
For time does slide, and swiftly pass away.
One hour or minute for no man will stay.
Our time which in this world we have to spend,
In prayers and tears unto the Lord let us send,
For to defend us from all Satan's powers,
That seeks our Souls and Bodies to devour.
Now to conclude, the God of peace and love,
Grant that our Souls may dwell in Heaven above
And grant our King and Queen a prosperous reign
The Gospel pure amongst us to maintain.
By me J. V.
Printed for W. Th^^^ary, I. M. and A. M.


