The Long-Nos'd LASS: OR, The Tailors, Millers, Tinkers, Tanners, and Glovers;
with a great number of other Tradesmen, dash't out of Countenance by a
Sow-ships Beauty, to their great Discontent, and her perpetual trouble.
Tune of, The Country Farmer.
This may be Printed,

R. P.









(...) you not hear of a Rumor of late,
^oncerning a person whose Fortune was great,
^^tion was Seventeen thousand good pound,
(...) a good Husband was not to be found:
(...) of this I will tell to you now,
(...) was perfectly just like a Sow,
(...) to Court her came flocking each day,
(...) her, straight they run frighted away.
(...) all the rest a fine Tailor also,
(...) to this person a Suitor to go;
(...) at the present alas I am poor,
(...) and Gold I shall then have good store:
It Is Cowcomber-time, and I now have no Trade,
But if do get her, I then shall be made,
Therefore I will put on the best of my Clothes,
My Hat, with my Band, and my Holy-day-Hose.
The hopes of this Fortune his fancy did feed,
And therefore to her he did hasten with speed
When coming he straight for this person did ask,
She came her own self in a fine Visor-Mask;
And said, I am she Sir, pay what would you have?
I Am come, quoth the Tailor, your Love for to crave,
She opened the door, and bid him welcome in,
And then to his Courting he straight did begin.
The Tailor went on with a noble good grace,
Like one of much Courage his Love to Embrace;
Thought he, with a Fortune I now shall be blessed,
But listen I pray to the Cream of the Jest:
She pulled off her Vizor, and turned her about,
And straightway the Tailor beheld her long Snout;
Ah! how he was frighted and run out of door.
And vowed he would never come near her no more.
The next was a Miler, who to her did Ride,
Resolved he was for to make her his Bride;
Quoth he, as I now am a right honest Man,
I Will Wed her and Love her as well as I can:
For Beauty, O let it be now as it will,
As long as the brings me good Grift to the Mill;
Both Silver and Gold I shall have at command;
With which I will Purchase me Houses and Land.
I now in conceit am as great as a Lord
What pleasures soever the World can afford,
I Will have it, and likewise in Silver will shine,
Then Gillian will wonder to see me so fine:
To Robin my Servant i will give my great Bowl,
With which I was formerly used to take Toll,
And likewise the Mill, if I Marry this Maid,
For never no more will I follow the Trade.
As he was a riding to her on his Mare,
He thus was a building Castles in the ^ir;
But when he beheld her most amiable Face,
Alas! he was soon in a sorrowful case:
His hopes were confounded, away he did run,
Saying, should I have her, a thousand to one
But I shall be frighted, when her I behold,
Therefore I Will not have her for Silver or Gold.
Both Tinkers and Tanners, and Glovers also
Came to her, the Money encouraged them so;
Nay, thousands came to her then every day,
Each striving to carry this Beauty away:
But when they beheld this most ordinary Stuff,
The sight of her Visage did give them enuff;
Yet if she be Married while here she does live,
A perfect account of the Wedding I Will give.

