A Looking Glass for Maids. OR, The Downfall of two desperate Lovers.
Hinry Hartlove and William Martin, both lately living in the Isle of Wight,
who for the love of Anne Scabborow, a beatifull Virgin, she having first made
her self sure to one of them, and afterward sell offto the other, chaleng'd the
field, where after a cruel fight they were both mortally wounded, and were
found dead upon the place by the before mentioned Maiden, who bestowed many
tears upon their bodies, buried them both in one Grave.

And now she lies in grief and sad distress,
Wishing all Lovers true, more happiness.
The tune is, Aim not too high,




Unhappy I, who in this prime of youth,
Unkind to him with whom I broak my truth;
Mark well my words you that are Maids and Wives,
I was the cause that two Men lost their lives.
In The Isle of Wight, Anne Scarborow was my name
There did I live in credit wealth and fame,
My Parents rich, I nothing then did lack,
But grace and truth, the which did go to wrack.
A gentle man a Suter to me came,
With whom I might have lived a gallant Dame,
But wantonness and pride did seize my heart,
Was sure to him, and yet from him did part.
He broak a piece of Gold, and gave it me,
Then did I seemingly to him agree:
But Oh my heart was never rightly placed,
Another Man I afterward embraced.
Which when he knew he fell into dispare,
He beat his breast and toro his curled hair:
O who would trust a woman, then said he,
That seldom are what they do seem to be.
Now do I and, that all a man can do,
His best endeavors make not women true,
Yet he that now has intrest in your heart,
Shall buy you dearly, sore that we do part.
Then came the other, whom I loved so well,
But now behold a heavy chance befell;
When my first Love his Rival had beheld,
He cast his Glove and challenged him the Field.
To answer him the other thought it fit,
He said he nere was known a Coward yet;
He for my favor then so much did strive,
He said he would fight with any man alive.
Next morning then these Gentlemen did meet,
And manfully each other they did greet,
Each other wounded in most piteous sort,
Ere any man unto them did resort.
At last they made a strong and desperate close,
Both fell to ground and never after rose:
Cursed be ye place where these brave men did fall,
And cursed be I, that was the cause of all.
The second part,
To the same tune,




When word was brought to them I quickly went
But ever I came their lives alas was spent,
Then did I tare the hair from off my head,
And wished a thousand times that I were dead.
When I came there these Gallants then I found,
Both of them livelesse bleeding on the ground,
My Conscience told me I was cause of this,
Sweet Jesus now forgive me my amiss.
I buried them and laid them in one grave,
God grant their souls a resting place may have,
More rest then I whose restless conscience now,
Accuses me for breaking of my Vow.
If I walk near the place where now they lie,
It troubles my mind exceedingly.
If to the place where then did fight I go,
It fills my guilty conscience full of woe.
If I to bed do go I cannot sleep,
And if I do my dreams do make me weep,
Me thinks I see them bleeding in my sight,
By thoughts by day and eke by dreams by night.
My rich Apparel I have laid aside.
My Cloth of gold and other things of pride
In savie will I mourn while I have breath,
And every day expect and look for death,
A dead man's Scull my silver cup shall be,
I'n which I Will drink too good a cup for me,
Instead of meat on Roots and herbs I Will seed,
To put me full in mind of soul deed.
You woo^y Nimphs that welcome in the Spring,
Come hear a discontented Virgin sing
O that I might my time now with you spend,
In silent Groves until my life does end.
You Maids likewise in Country and in City,
That now have heard my discontented Day,
Be constant ever True to one alone.
For if that you prove false it will be known
If you will know where sorrow does abide,
Repair to me no other place beside,
Grief and Despair does daily now attend me,
And there is naught but death that can befriend me
This discontented Damsel now she keeps
Her chamber where she daily sits and weeps
And suffers none to come to her it is said
But only one and that is her Fathers Maid.
The meat and drink her Father to her sends,
She sends the poor the which she calls her friends,
She feeds on Roots and herbs and such like things
Sometimes on bread which she counts food for Kings
See here the fruits of wantonness pride,
O let us pray yt God may be our guide:
There Is few of us that have our times ill spent.
So well brought up, that does so well repent.
You Damsels all now have a special care,
Forget not her that did these things declare:
Be to your Sweet-hearts ever just and true,
And so fair Maids she bids you all adieu.
Finis.
Printed for Tho, Vere at the sign of the Angel without Newgate,


