The Languishing Young Man. Or, The Lovesick Sail-man's sorrowful Lamentation
for the Loss of his Beautiful Maria, who left him languishing at the Point of
Despair. To which is added. Maria's Kind Answer at the last time of Distress.
To the Tune of, If Love's a Sweet Passion, etc.
Licensed according to Order.





OH! Why does my true Love so sadly disdain
All the Gifts I afford her? Yet sure it is in vain
For to offer her any; she is grown so unkind,
That I Am least in her Fancy, and less in her Mind,
Who before was her Darling, yet now she does turn
Her Affections to Hatred which daily does burn.
Look down, Oh, fair Venus, thou Goddess of Love,
And send Cupid, that he may these Arrows remove,
With which I this present am wounded so sore,
For the fear I shall see dear Maria no more:
I Am sinking, I Am swooning, I Am fainting away,
For the loss of Maria: Oh! what shall I say?
Why was I so foolish to settle my Love,
Or Affections on any, since falsely they prove?
Above all, dear Maria, she has proved so untrue,
That the Hour of Birth I am forced to rue.
I Am wounded, I Am bleeding, I Am struck to the Heart?
Come, my dearest Maria, ease me of this smart.
Oh! Where are ye Gods that are wonted to be
Great help unto Mortals? Why help ye not me,
Against this fierce. fiery, powerful Dart,
Which is shot by fierce Cupid into my poor Heart,
Oh! help me! Oh! help me this moment! I cry,
Or else, for the loss of Maria I dye.
Come here, Oh! thou Charon, and make no delay,
And bring here thy Ferry; I am longer can stay:
Make haste with me over unto the dark Grove
Of Elysium, that there I may mourn for my Love?
Come quickly, come quickly, why do thou delay?
Every Moment's a Year that I here have to stay.
Adieu to my Kinsfolks, and Parents most dear;
Adieu to my Brother, and Sister most near;
Farewell young Uncle, above all the rest,
For of Parents and Kinsfolks, you have been the best.
Adieu to you all that my Moans now do hear.
I am ready to dye for the Loss of my Dear.
Maria's Kind Answer.
NO sonner had Willy thus uttered his Grief,
But Maria she came with a speedy Relief;
Who declared that her Dearest should never complain
For the Loss of his Love, who would Loyal remain:
I adore thee, said she, the true Joy of my Heart,
And as long as we live, Love, we never will part.
It Is true, my Relations would have me deny
All the Vows which I made thee, sweet Willy; for why?
There Is a wealthy young 'Squire provided for me,
Who has promised to make me a Lady, said she;
But my Love, and dear Willy, thou, thou have my Heart,
And as long as we live, Love, we never will part.
My Parents, I tell thee, has been so unkind,
That a Month in my Chamber I have been confined;
But so soon as I ever did my Freedom obtain,
I came running to thee my sweet Willy again:
Thou art lodged in my Breast, and art Lord of my Heart,
And as long as we live, Love, we never will part.
I value not Riches, true Love I adore,
And I therefore am come all thy Joys to restore;
Let my Friends and Relations all grieve and repine,
Thou shall be my sweet Jewel, and I will be thine:
Thou art lodged in my Breast, and art Lord of my Heart,
And as long as we live, Love, we never will part.

