THE Loyal Livery-Mens HUE and CRY AFTER Sir John Presbyter.
WIth Hair in Characters, and Luggs in Text;
With a splay Mouth and a Nose Circumflext,
With a set Ruff of Musket bore, that wears
Like Cartrages or linen Bandileers,
Exhausted of their Sulphurous Contents,
In Pulpitt Fireworks, which that Bomball vents;
The Negative and Covenanting Oath,
Like two Mustachoes issuing from his Mouth:
The Bush upon his Chin (like a carved story,
In a Box Knot) cut by the Directory;
Madam's Confession hanging at his Ear,
Wire-Drawn through all the Questions, How and Where:
Each Circumstance, so in the hearing felt,
That when his Ears are Cropped he will count 'em Gelt:
The weeping Cassock scared into a Jump,
A sign the Presbyter's worn to the stump:
The Presbyter, though charmed against mischance,
With the Divine Right of an Ordinance:
If you meet any that do thus attire 'em,
Stop them, they are the Tribe of Adoniram.
What Zealous frenzy did the Senate seize,
That tare the Rotchet to such Rags as these?
Episcopacy minc't, reforming Tweed
Has sent us Runts, even of her Churches breed;
Lay-Interlining Clergy, a device
That Is Nickname to the Stuff called Lopps and Lice.
The Beast at wrong End Branded, you may trace
The Devils footsteps in his Cloven face.
A face of several Parishes and Sorts,
Like to a Sergeant shaved at Inns of Court.
What mean the Elders else, those Kirk-Dragoons,
Made up of Ears and Bands like Duccatoons?
That Hierarchy of Handicrafts begun?
Those new Exchange-men of Religion?
Sure they are the Antick-Heads, which placed without
The Church, do gape and disembogue a spout:
Like them above the Commons-House have bin
So long without, now both are Gotten in.
Then, what Imperious in the Bishop Sounds,
The same the Scotch Executor rebounds.
This Stating Prelacy, the Classick rout,
That spoke it often, e're it spoke it out.
So by an abbeys Scheleton of late,
I heard an Echo Supererogate,
Through Imperfection, and the voice restore,
As if she had the Hicp over and over.
Since they our mixed Diocesans Combine,
Thus to ride double in their Discipline;
That Paul's shall to the Consistory call,
A Dean and Chapter out of Weavers-Hall;
Each at the Ordinance for to assist,
With the Five Thumbs of his Great-changing Fist.
Down Dagon Synod with thy motley ware,
Whilst we do swagger for the Common Prayer,
That Dove-like Embassy, that wings our sense
To Heavens Gate in shape of Innocence.
Pray for the Miter'd Authors, and defy
These Demicasters of Divinity.
For where Sir John with Jack of-all-trades Joins,
His Finger's thicker, than the Prelat's Loins.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Miller at the Blew Bible in Bedford Street
Covent Garden, 1683.


