THE LAST OFFERS OF THE NOBLEMEN and GENTLEMEN NOW IN ARMS FOR THE COVENANT,
To the Earls of Craford Glencairn and Lanerk, George Munro and others joined
with them in the late unlawful engagement against the Kingdom of England.
We have seriously considered the sad and deplorable condition, to which this
Kingdom is now brought, by your proceedings and actions in pursuance of the
late engagement, against our neighbor Nation of England, with whom We are
joined in Covenant, and the fearful desolation that is like lie further to
come upon it, by the return of a part of that Army which invaded England; And
after several debates and conferences with your Lordships, these several
days by past, both by word and writing, We do find the state of the the
difference betwixt your Lordships and us to be this. That which hinders
agreement upon our part, is the point of conscience, forbidding us to do any
thing, which may infer an accession to the late engagement, the desire we
have to keep the Covenant and Treaties, and not break the Union betwixt the
Kingdoms, and to avoid a quarrel with England, which may destroy this
Kingdom and entayle a war upon us and our posterity, and to prevent the
exposing of the cause and Kingdom to the same dangers under which they now
lie, from which grounds We cannot part; Whereas the Arti^les on your part,
which hinder agreement, are such, from which your Lordships may easily recede.
We have very much endeavored in our last paper to give your Lordships all
just and reasonable satisfaction; Yet that it may further appear how desirous
We are to prevent an Intestine War, and to have the peace of the Kingdom
settled, We offer unto your Lordships these Articles following to be agreed on.

I. That for easing the Burdens of the Kingdom, and to prevent famine and
desolation, all forces on both sides whither in the field or in the Garrisons of
Berwick and Carlisle, or the Garrisons within the Kingdom be disbanded betwixt
the 25th day of this instant month of September.

II. That the secureing and settling of Religion at home, and the promoteing the
work of Reformation abroad in England and Ireland, be referred to the
determination of the General Assembly or their Commissioners, and that all
Civil questions and differences whatsoever be referred to the determination of
a Parliament to be speedily called.

III. To prevent the imminent dangers to Religion and a quarrel with our
neighbor Nation in the mean time, un till the meeting of a Parliament (which
cannot be done without a Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms) That all of your number
who have been employed in public place or trust, shall forbear the exercise
thereof, and not come to the Committee of Estates, to the end there may be a
Committee of Estates consisting of such members as are free of the late
engagement, and against whom England may not have this exception, That such
have the manageing of the affairs of this Kingdom as they esteem their
Enemies, and with whom they cannot treat. And if your Lordships shall out of
love to this almost ruined Kingdom yield to those our just desires, We are
very confident that the peace this Kingdom shall be settled, the union betwixt
the Kingdoms continued, and all quarrels prevented.

Signed by command of the Commissioners for the Treaty. M. Tho. Henderson.
Woodside 16. September. 1648.
Printed by Evan Tyler Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1648.


