The Loyal Forrister, Or, Royal PASTIME;
Being a Pleasant Discourse between the KING and a Loyal KEEPER, who not
knowing His Majesty, would not suffer him to Hunt in the Forest for any Reward
whatsoever, which Faithfulness the King highly commended as you shall find by
this following Ditty.

To an Excellent New Tune. It was a bold keeper^
A^M



YOu Subjects of England come listen a while,
Here is a new ditty may make you to smile;
It is of the King and a keeper also,
Who met in a Forest some winters ago.
O Early O Early, all in a morning,
King William rose early all in a morning,
And a gown of gray russet King William put on,
As tho he had been (...) some silly poor man.
The houn^ was made ready prepared for the game,
No Nobles (...)en of honor and Fame;
But like a mean Subject in hamely Array,
He to his own Forest was taking his way.
O then bespake Mary our Most Royal Queen,
My Gracious King William where are you going
He answered, I count him to be no wise Man,
That will tell his council to a Woman.
All that I have offered I prithee now take,
And do thy endeavor my peace for to make;
Besides forty shillings I Will give thee a King,
If thou wilt not betray me to William our King.
Your three hounds I tell you I never will take,
Nor yet your three hawks your peace for to make,
Nor will I be bribed by your forty shilling,
But I will betray you to William our King.
As I am a Keeper I Will not be unjust,
Nor for a Gold Ring will I forfeit my trust;
I Will bring you before him as sure as a Gun.
And there you shall answer for what you have done.
Thou art a bold fellow King William replied,
What do thou not see here the star at my side,
This Forest is mine I would have you to know.
Then what is the reason you threaten me so.
With that the bold keeper he fell on his knees,
a trembling fear his spirits did seize,
The picture of death too appeared in his face,
He knew nor at first that the King was in place.
O pardon, O pardon my sovereign Liege,
For your Royal pardon I beg and beseech,
Alas my poor heart in my breast it is cold!
O let me not suffer for being so bold.
The Queen with a modest behavior replied,
I wish that kind providence may be thy guide,
To keep thee from danger my Sovereign Lord,
The which will the greatest of comfort afford.
He went to the Forest some pleasure to spy,
The Greyhounds run swift, I the keeper drew nigh,
Who cried you bold fellow how dare you come here,
Without the King's leave to chase his fair Deer.
I am one of his subjects I am one of his force,
And I am come hither for to run a course,
Get you gone bold fellow you run no course here,
Without the leave of King William forbear.
Here is my three hounds I will give then to you,
And likewise my hawks they are as good as e're flew,
Besides I will give thee full forty shilling,
If thou wilt not betray me to William our King.
Get up honest keeper and shake off thy fears,
In thee there is nothing of folly appears
If every one was as faithful as thee,
O what a blessed Prince King William would be
Because I Would encourage such persons as you,
I Will make thee my Ranger, if that will not do
Thou shall be a Captain by Sea or by Land,
And high in my favor thou ever shall stand.
The keeper replied my great Sovereign Lord.
Sure I am not worthy of such a reward,
Yet nevertheless your true keeper I Will be
Because I am fearful to venture by sea.
At which the K, laughed till his sides he did hold,
Then threw him down 20 bright Guinies of gold
And bid him make have to Kingsington Court;
where of this true jest he would make pleasant sport
And when you came thither pray ask for long Jack,
Who wears a Pumgranet of gole at his back,
Likewise a green Pheasant upon his right sleeve,
I Will warrant he is a true man you may him believe.
He Is one of my Porters that stands at my Gate
To let in my nobles both ear^y and late;
And therefore good fellow came up without fear,
I Will make thee my Ranger of Parks far and near.
Printed for C. Bates in Pye-corner.


