Love in a MAZE; or, The Young Man put to his Dumps.
Here in this Song you may behold and see
A gallant Girl obtained by Wit and Honesty;
All you that hear my Song, and mark it but aright,
Will say true Love's vvorth Gold, and breeds delight.
To a pleasant New tune, called, the true Lovers delight; or, the Cambridge
Horn.




LAte in the morning, as I abroad was walking,
All in a Meadow green, I heard two Lovers talking;
With kisses sweet the young man her Saluted,
Then I drew near to hear what they disputed:
Then I drew near to hear what they disputed.
Young Man. Fair Maid, qouth he, this merry morning,
Present one smile to me, and be no longer scorning:
Him who has vowed to be thine own for ever,
O say but to me, Our loves shall never sever:
O say, etc.

Maid. Indeed Sir, quoth she, it is a nusty morning,
But I would have you to know I always hated scorning,
And as for love, as yet I mean to smother,
I know not one as yet I love better than another:
I know, etc.

Young Man. True love, sweetheart, quoth. he, if ever you change to know it,
It cannot smothered be, but at last you will show it;
The first time I beheld thy sweet and comely carriage,
I ever since desired that we were joined in marriage:
I ever, etc.

Maid. I Love Sir, quoth she, is like a Fishers Angel,
Which often has golden baits fifty Maidens to entangle,
Are cunningly cast out by Young-mens false inventions,
Then marriage they will pretend where it is not their intentions.
Then marriage, etc.

Young Man. O it is so, my dear, true love is like a fountain
That cast out water clear out of a Rocky mountain,
Whose stream for to stop you will say it is a wonder,
Likewise it is as strange to cleave the Rocks in sunder:
Likewise it is as, etc.

Such is my love to thee, and shall be ever,
No unconstant thoughts or fickle mind can sever
My heart from thee, which always shall be bringing
Fountains clear and fresh, that from true love is springing,
Fountains clear and fresh, etc.
Maid. Your comparision, said she, I must confess is witty,
To stay the stream of love it were a pity;
But your heart you compare indeed to rocky mountains,
For stony often they are, and cast our several fountains.
For stony, etc.

As from some fountain several streams are running,
So many seigned loves you often have by your cunning;
It Is hard to pierce your slinty heart asunder,
and stop your fickle streams, it is a wonder:
And stop, etc.
Young Man. Fie, fie, sweetheart, your wit does over-match me,
No words I can impart but presently you catch me:
You maidens now each day do grow so coy and witty,
Let Young Men beg and pray, you will take of them no pity.
let Young Men, etc.

Maid. Fie, away for shame, you Young Men can dessemble,
Your wits are ripe, your tongues are quick and nimble,
Indeed you will beg and pray sometimes to get your pleasure,
Then leave us in the lurth, and we may repent at leisure:
Then leave, etc.

Young Man. Confessed it is, there is many are so minded,
But it thou would prove my Constancy, thou wilt find it,
Do thou but command, through danger I will enter,
and for to gain thy love, through an army I would ventre:
And for to gain, etc.




Sweetheart i would you know I never could dissemble,
and my complements are slow, my tongue was never nimble;
It Is none but loyal love makes me come unto thee,
It is not for thy wealth but virtue that I love thee.
it is not for, etc.

With that a bush of May this lovely maid espied,
Near to a bank of Time, where to she quickly hyed,
Down she plucked the May that was so green and tender,
and up she plucked the time with her pretty arms so slender:
and up she, etc.
She stuck the bush of may in time, and did present it
Unto this Young Man, which was soon discontented;
Here, Sir, quoth she, if that you will be eased,
Read but this Riddle, Sir, perhaps you may be pleased.
Read but, etc.
Young Man. He took it from her hand and received it as a token,
Then in a dump did stand, and never a word was spoken;
blushing, then at last he modestly replied,
Your Riddle I can read, love, and shall not be denied,
Your Riddle, etc.

This may stuck in time, which is to me presenting,
Shows that I may in time gain your love and not contenting
Which if I may, i will stay your time and leisure,
No time i will think too long, so at last I gain the treasure.
No time, etc.
He took her by the hand and lovingly they walked,
but tied in Cupids hands most amorously they talked,
Then on each other smiled with inerchanging kisses,
O it is pity time beguiled such lovers of their blisses.
O it is pity, etc.
Perhaps, sweet Sir, you by this Riddle reading,
May think you gained me by little or no persuading,
Which if you did, it is yet at my pleasure,
I am not bound to you yet, but you must stay my leisure.
I am not, etc.

Then let this heart within this breast lie panting,
No happiness e're see, but let joys be ever wanting;
If e're I think an evil thought upon thee,
let mirth be banished quite, and sorrow wall upon me.
Let mirth, etc.

If it be so, quoth she, thou bear such true affection,
Hereafter i will agree to be ruled by thy direction;
No friend shall sever or break our loves asunder,
For loyal loving hearts will be the worlds wonder.
for loyal, etc.
The time that late was mine to thee shall be presented,
all that I have is thine, then rest thy self contented;
Thy gallant wit, thy modesty and carriage,
Has won my heart, we will be joined in marriage,
Has won, etc.

Young Man. He took her at her word, and modestly replied,
Short time I will afford, long time shall be densded:
This being the first of May, our hearts being joined and wedded.
before the fifth day in wedlock we'll be ^edded.
before the, etc.

Nine hundred pound with this maiden he obtained,
On marriage day was paid, which by his wit he gained;
although no means he had, she never a whit repented,
He was a gallant lad, and she was will contented.
He was, etc.
Now all you pretty maids that live in town or city,
The author you persuades to learn from this his dity,
If a Young Man you love, look not then for his treasure,
For if he honest prove in him is wealth and pleasure:
for if, etc.
You Young men i will persuade to hear my motion,
For if you affect a maid, regard not then her portion;
Hang ten pounds, give me the lass that loves me,
If a good wife thou would found, no joy on Earths above thee.
if a good, etc.
Young Men and maids that lately went a Maying,
Mark the Nightingale, one tune he is always playing,
Iug, jug, jug, sweet, is all the note she sings,
as when loyal lovers meet, no double tongues they brings.
as when, etc.
all you pretty maids that are civil in Your carriage,
This Song in sent to you to be wary in Your marriage:
Try before you trust, be careful in consenting,
That when the knot is tied, there may be no repenting.
that when Knot is, etc.
FINIS.
Printed by and for A. M. and sold by the Booksellers of London.


