A Description of Plain-dealing, Time, and Death, Which all Men ought to mind
whilst they do live on earth. Abuse not Plain-dealing, but keep your Conscience
clear, Spend well your Time also, then Death you need not fear.
Plain-dealing is grown out of Date
Because he is poor, many him hate:
Conscience likewise is laid aside,
'Cause he base Actions cannot abide.
Written by Thomas Lanfire.

To the Tune of, A Letter for a Christian Family.
Plain-dealing loves Honesty,
Conscience hates Knavery.






Plain-Dealing. I Am Plain-dealing which all men ought to use,
But many now a days does me abuse:
Dissemulation is esteemed best,
Poor Plain-dealing is grown out of request.
In City, Town, and likewise in Country,
They say Plain-dealing will a Beggar Dye:
Gallants they at me do both mock and flout,
Because that I go in a Threadbare Coat.
The reason that so many does me slight,
Is because I am Honest and Downright:
I use no Deceit, Fraud, nor Flattery,
But does to all men as I Would be done by.
I am not Covetaus nor Worldly wise,
I crave no more then what will me suffice:
I hate vain Pride which now too much does reign,
Therefore plain-dealing they will not entertain.
In Days of Old I was a welcome Guest,
And had good entertainment with the best:
I was esteemed amongst Rich and Poor,
But now plain-dealing is turned out of Door.
For now Dissemulation has got the Day,
And in this Nation bears a mighty sway:
plain-dealing is held in scorn and disgrace,
Alack, when shall I find a resting place.

Conscience. My Name is Conscience, poor plain-dealing's mate
Although like him, i am Old and out of date:
Many with their whole hearts does me defy,
'Cause Conscience cannot agree with Knavery.
But if I within their Bosoms once do creep,
With their base a^ions I prick their hearts deep:
I mind them of their Covetousness and Pride,
Therefore poor Conscience they cannot abide.
The Lawyer and Usurer has forgot me,
They Gripe poor Men Unconscionably:
I hey study only how to keep up Gold,
Conscience and plain-dealing they quite have sold.
And many others in these times there are,
That of their Conscience do not take no care:
They pawn their Conscience for Lucre of gain,
Which Conscience will to them at last make plain.
So many are inclined to Cruelty,
And does Conscience and plain-dealing defy:
Tell them of Conscience they will count you their foe,
Quoth they Conscience was Hanged long time ago.
But I wish such men they folly would refuse,
Lest Conscience at the last should them accuse:
In a good Conscience a man may put trust,
Then see you keep your Conscience right and just.

Time it does pass away full fast,
Yet many does spend Time in waste:
When Time is gone then comes Death,
And puts a stop to Mortal Breath.
Time does stay for none. Death Cuts down every one.







TIME. I Am the ancient standard of great fame,
Which all men ought to prize, Time is my name:
But this vain world does now so many blind,
So that I am almost grown out of mind.
For why, I am slighted by many a one,
Who never thinks on me till i am past and gone:
And then too late they do mourn and complain,
Wishing they could recall back Time again.
Some spends their whole Time most wickedly,
In Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Blasphemy:
And some again sets their delight in Pride,
Not thinking how their precious Time does slide.
Time is a stately jewel of great gain,
If it be well prized and not spent in vain:
Those that their time bestows in doing well,
In happiness no doubt but they shall dwell.
And those that spends their time in Idleness,
Shall one day want it in their great distress:
The whole world cannot lost time restore,
Yesterday's gone and will never return more.

Time's last Speech to the World.

Like to an Arrow shot out of a Bow,
Like to the Tide he which does Ebb and Flow:
Like is a Bird full swift I fly away,
For Rich nor Poor i will not make any stay.
DEATH. I am the chief Commander Captain Death,
I Fight against all Mortals upon Earth:
When I amongst them chance to have a care,
I Conquer all, none dare with me hold War.
I fear not the bravest Champions that be,
Though they are stout, yet they cannot Conquer me:
It Is not Manhood nor Valor can them save,
I make them stoop and yield unto the Grave.
The chiefest Prince that in the world does Live,
When I him strike, he up the Ghost must give:
His whole Kingdom cannot him from me retain,
From Dust he came, and shall to Dust again,
Of Rich men's Power I do not stand in fear,
Nor for their loftiness I do not care:
Their Pride and Honor in the Earth I lay,
When their Glass is out, with me they must away.
Thus Rich and Poor, with Old and Young also,
Both Wise and Simple to the Grave must go:
There Is no respect of Persons, worst or best,
All must at last by me lie Mortu us est.
When I on Mortals lay my fatal stroke,
They cannot in no wise slip out my Yoke:
I came suddenly and unawares to all,
Then see you are prepared when Death does call.

FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


