The Lusty MILLER's Recreation: OR, The Buxome Females chief Delight.
Being most pleasant Design between a certain Miller, the Good-Wife, and her
Three Daughters. A most Delectable New Song, etc.
Fair Peggy first to the Mill with Grist was sent,
Who pleased returned, but would not tell the event;
Which Betty once perceiving, needs would go,
Who sped in the same Tune, returned too;
At which the Mother knew not what to guess,
But did her self in admiration bless,
Till Jenny, of the Three the Youngest Lass,
Would needs go see how all this came to pass,
Return the same; then forth the Mother set,
Who finds the Plot, but never Discovered it.
To a pleasant New Tune.




THe Good-Wife her Daughter did send to the Miller,
to grind her Grist neatly, and for to came back;
But you little imagine how full he had filled her,
to fill up her Belly as full as her Sack:
And when she came home her Wits were bebritch'd,
her Mother did think she had been bewitched;
She asked her where she had been loytring all day,
But this was all that the Daughter would say,
Ay! marry Sir, there is a brave Miller indeed.
Quoth Betty to Peggy your Back is all whited,
what has the Miller done? pray tell me truth;
If you have been wronged, then you shall be righted,
for I have heard say he is a mad merry youth:
Said Peggy to Betty your suit is in vain,
For Peggy o'th Miller would never complain;
For what they could do by Night or by Day,
Still this is all that the Daughter would say,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Next morning sweet Betty, fair Peggy's own Sister,
would venture her Body whatever befell;
But how finely the Miller he hugged her and kissed her,
that in a while after her Belly did swell:
And for to come back again home she did come,
And stood like an Image both senseless and dumb;
For she being loath for to lose her sweet Play,
This to the Mother the Daughter would say,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Alas! quoth the Women, my other poor Daughter,
for she is bewitched as I greatly fear;
But I will take care how I send them hereafter,
if Millers prove Witches, as it with appear:
Then Bessy and Peggy come speak your minds freely,
And let not your selves be thus simple and silly,
Yet for what she could do by Night or by Day,
This it was all that the Daughters would say.
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Woe's me, cries the Mother, what mean you by this,
my Daughters pray tell me for fain I would know?
In Faith if you will not I Will find what it is,
for unto the Miller I mean for to go:
At which up starts Jenny, the younger o'th three,
And said, Nay pray Mother for this time send me,
I Will warrant you that I will find out the knack,
And bring you the meaning of (when I come back)
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Then cries the old Woman once more I will venture,
I know thou art witty, and wilt find no doubt
The meaning of all, so on Horseback she sent her,
but when Jenny came there, she long held not out;
But under the Stones with much pleasure she fell,
While the Miller so marrily worked in her Wheel;
Where she held him tack till her Grist it was ground,
Then home she came jogging, and uttered this found,
Ay! marry Sir, there is a fine Miller indeed.
It Is sure, cries the Mother, my Daughters are mad,
I Will find out the cause on it whatever betide;
At home you shall stay and abroad no more gad,
for I to the Miller intend for to Ride:
Go Panel me Dun now, and make no reply,
At which Peggy starting, Oh Mother did cry,
(As loath the Old Woman should know of the Game)
Pray go not for fear you bewitched sing the same,
Ah! marry, etc.
Alas my dear Mother, the Miller is wild,
and if you should go he may do you much harm;
Nay worse, quoth sweet Betty, you chance may he spoiled,
for he is Distracted when once he is warm:
A Spirit does haunt him I know it full well,
Which nothing can lay but a Two-legged Spell?
Then should it get power on you I Am afraid,
you will be bewitched so to say we have said,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Nay Mother, quoth Jenny, they are in the right,
for he is a mad Miller I needs must declare;
So furious he works that the Stones often smite,
though the Hopper be filled, yet he will not forbear:
But heaps it and thrusts it till all the Cogs move,
Vds-bobs, quoth the Mother, such Millers I love;
Then tell me the cause, or no longer I Will stay,
how he has bewitched you thus only to say,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Quoth Jenny I Will go and I Will ask him the cause,
nay soft, quoth sweet Betty, I Am older then you;
It Is my turn I Will warrant by Birthright and Laws,
come, come, hold your prating, quoth. Peg, it is my due,
For I Will not be robbed I Am resolved of my right,
But the Grist to the Mill I will carry this night;
In vain you design it, unless we go all,
Quoth Jenny, for I Will declare what did befall,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
The Mother observing the strife grow so hot,
never stayed for her Panel, but mounting astride,
By kicking and whipping of Dun the soon got
to the Millers, who seeing her, took her aside,
And spreading his Sacks, on her back he then laid her,
Where in the same Coin on purpose he paid her;
While the Stones they run round, and merrily played,
Till her Grist was well ground, then returning she said,
Ay! marry Sir, etc.
Then long it was not e're their Bellies did swell,
Pegg's, Betty's, and Jenny's, the Mothers likewise,
But none of them could be persuaded to tell
what Champion of Venus 'twas made them to rise;
But still the bold Miller they praised for his worth,
Who Tole-free would never (...) Females come forth,
But labored to serve than by night and by day,
While all the brisk Lasses this of him did say,
Ay! marry Sir, there is a fine Miller indeed.
Finis.
Printed for P. Brooksby, in VVest-smith-field.


