THE Loyal Protestants NEW LITANY.
FRom the Romish Whore with her Tripple Crown,
From the Plots she has hatched, and her Babes now disown,
Though they died with a Lie in their mouth is well known.
Libera nos Domine.
From such as presume to speak ill of Queen Bess,
From a Popish Midwife in a Sanctified Dress,
Adorned with a wooden Ruff for a Crest
Libera nos, etc.
From Judas the Pursebearers Protestant face,
From any more of his Machiavel race
That henceforth may ever succeed in his place
Libera nos, etc.
From a Doctor that durst prepare such a Dose
That would take a Protestant-Prince by the Nose,
(Although it be spoken under the Rose.)
Libera nos, etc.
From a Papist that Curses the Catholic Whore,
Although in his heart he the same do adore,
And still is contriving more Plots than before,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Jesuit dressed up in Masquerade,
That understands his Blood-thirsty Trade,
That can neither by Justice or Mercy be laid.
Libera nos, etc.
From Bumpkin and Citt that at random, do range,
And for a Sham-Plot do true honesty change,
Though come often by the LEE, methinks it is STRANGE.
Libera nos, etc.
From such a hard Fortune as barely to write
But only for Bread from Morning till Night;
That would more than a Crack-farts Courage affright.
Libera nos, etc.
From those that Sedition do daily invent
To render a breach and gross discontent
Betwixt our Great King and Loyal Parliament,
Libera nos, etc.
From such as do daily possess us with fears,
And yet at the same do prick up their ears,
Which care not which Course our Council now Steers.
Libera nos, etc.
That the Romish Whore may be stripped of her dress,
And cast in the Pit that is called bottomless;
That her Plots, Loyal Subjects no more may distress.
Quesimus te Dom. ne.
That Queen Besses Enemies run the same Fate
As lately they did in the last Eighty eight,
May never one want to peep through a Grate.
Quesimus, etc.
That the Purse-bearer Judas his Protestant face
May never resume his former high place,
Except for to fall in Eternal Disgrace.
Quesimus, etc.
That the Doctor beyond Sea in spite of his skill,
May never return, but keep close there still;
Or else may he Die by his own Poisonous Pill.
Quesimus, etc.
That Popish Curr in honest disguise
That Curses us all before he do rise,
May his Plots be confounded though never so wise.
Quesimus, etc.
That such whose hands are still dipped in Blood,
And intend to make second Noah's Flood,
That all such may perish, and all of their Brood,
Quesimus, etc.
That such as do render the Plot for a Fable,
And make it the talk of each Coffee-House Table;
To enter Heaven Gates may they never be able.
Quesimus, etc.
That such as are forced to write but for Bread
May be by the daily Providence fed,
Much rather than those who will Plot till they are dead,
Quesimus, etc.
That Seditious Spirits may now be suppressed,
And that in true earnest, not only in Jest,
That such may never more feather their Nest.
Quesimus, etc.
That those who do daily possess us with fears,
May fall themselves together by the Ears;
And quit us all from that Cloud which appears.
Quesimus te Domine.
London, P^inted for T. Davis, 1680.


