The Loving Shepherd:
Or, Phaon's humble Petition to Beautiful Phillis, who readily answered his
Request.
To an Excellent New Tune much in Request.
Licensed according to Order.



WHen first on my Phillis I cast my eye,
I wished to enjoy her or else to dye,
When first on my Phillis I cast my eye,
I wished to enjoy her or else to dye,
But she was so cruel she would not give
One token of love, that I might live,
Phillis, said I, remove your disdain,
And yield some relief to your restless Swain.
O what Torments I endure both day and night,
I never can enjoy her, nor take delight;
O what Torments I endure both day and night,
I never can enjoy her, nor take delight;
But then she cried out, O ye Gods be kind,
The pleasures of love has possessed my mind;
Thus all the night long our pastime was sweet,
Till at length our joys called us fast a sleep.




WHen from those soft slumbers we did awake,
She bid me my sorrowful sighs forsake;
When from those soft slumbers we did awake,
She bid me my sorrowful sighs fo^sake,
Since she in a Vision of love beheld,
Those innocent joys which her heart had filled,
So that she could no ways my suit deny,
Fair Phillis was wounded as well as I.
So soon as I found her to love incline,
No joy in the world was so great as mine,
So soon as I found her to love incline,
No joy in the world was so great as mine,
Instead of the frowns which had wounded me,
I taken was then with an Ecstasy,
Said I loving Phillis whom I adore,
Grant me but thy favor I ask no more.
For thou art my Jewel and only joy,
Which can all my trouble and g^ief destroy,
For thou art my Jewel and only joy,
Which can all my trouble and grief destroy,
And since thou art willing to grant me love,
I tell thee by all the Powers above,
There Is none in the World I adore but thee,
Fair Phillis my Amorous love, said he.
Kind Phaon such passionate pains I feel,
That I can no longer my love conceal,
Kind Phaon such passionate flames I feel,
That I can no longer my love conceal,
The Conquering power of Cupid's dart,
Will make me surrender my yielding heart,
And thou shall enjoy it my dear said she,
For why I can give it to none but thee.
But if after all you ungrateful prove,
To Phillis, your faithful and entire love,
But if after all you ungrateful prove,
To Phillis, your faithful and entire love,
In slighting the Favors which I bestow,
My eyes will like Rivers and Fountains flow,
For true love it is a tormenting pain,
Whenever requited with sad disdain.
Fair Phillis by all the Powers Divine,
For ever, for ever I will be th^ne,
Fair Phillis by all the Powers Divine,
For ever, for ever I will be thine;
In Bowers of Pleasure our days we'll spend,
Fair Phillis my true and entire Friend,
Young Cupids with garlands shall crown my dear
Who does like the Goddes^ of Love appear.

