Love without Measure. OR, The Young-mans Delight, and the Maidens Joy.
This young man wooed a Damosel fair,
And called her his joy and dear,
But she was coy, as Maids will be,
And said he came with flattery.
But he did protest it was not so,
And at last brought her unto his bow:
Now they live in love, in peace, and joy,
And she very fain would have a boy.
To a rare new tune, called, Du-vals Delight.




LAte in the Country as I was walking
Viewing the Meadows so fresh and green
There I was a ware of two Lovers a talking
Under a bush, but could hardly be seen,
I laid me down and I listened a while,
To hear if the man could the maiden beguile:
But the maid she was crafty, witty and loyal
Although many times he put her to the trial,
And in the conclusion thus he did her woo:
My dear love, my joy, and my honey,
No tongue can express how dear I love thee
Thou shall never want for love nor money
If thou will but set thy affection on me,
For all the fair beauties that ever I saw
I still must submit and yield to thy Law;
Then unto thy dearest friend be not so cruel,
For thou art my comfort, my joy, and my jewel,
And so I shall count thee until I dye.
Maid. The Damosel unto him straight way replied,
Is it for this you hither me brought?
Your suit at this time is must be denied,
I am not a bird that is so easily caught:
For marriage I see is a costly name;
Besides (quoth she) I Am too young to marry,
This seven years I may very well carry,
For sorrow and troubles come fast enough on.
A maiden (quoth she) knows but little sorrow,
Before that in wedlock band she is tied;
She has very little to buy or to borrow,
and many times meets with a cross man beside:
Which is the worst grief a woman can have,
She Would better to be set quick in her grave
Than to have a man that pevish and fraward,
For men now a days do prove so untoward,
It Is hard for a maiden in them to put trust.

Man. THese words my dearest that you have spoken
Pierces the tender sick heart of mine,
Oh let true love by you known,
Though I am the bark, and you are the vine,
Although I am poor and thou art rich,
Slight me not I thee beseech:
No woman yet that ever was gained
Shall be more brave and better maintained:
What I speak to thee I will perform.

You say that marriage is a hard matter,
And those that are single live best at ease;
But with you I do scorn to cog or yet flatter,
I will speak my mind then say what you please:
She that is single I know she would be wed,
For it is an honor to obtain marriage bed
Therefore my dearest do not abhor me,
Thy mother did yield to a man before thee,
Then why will thou not do as she has done?
Maid. What though my mother did make an adventure
It was a great hazard the which she did run,
She had her fortune which God he had sent her,
And he unto her proved a right honest man:
But such now a days are hard for to find,
Men can so dissemble and turn with the wind,
They Will speak a maid fair and vow they love her:
So I Am resolved a maiden to dye.

Some men now a days have sweethearts a dozen
And in the conclusion they will marry with none,
They make it their trade poor Girls to cozen,
For ought I know you may be such a one:
Your tongue is so tipped and your words are so fair
Your countenance plainly shows what you are;
That you have been trading with girls t'th City
And wronged many maids, the more is the pity,
If you be a Batchellor I am mista'en.
Man. Oh! you are mistaken much in this matter,
The words you speak I know you cannot prove,
But with you I do scorn to cog or yet flatter,
Nor never did try if any could love,
But any but thee I vow and do swear,
Then prithee be merry and cast a way care:
Be not so fickle, but look on me blishly,
For I am a Lad that is lusty and lively.
I Will hug thee and kiss thee ten times of a night
I Will promise no riches nor yet no great treasure,
But all that I have thou shall it command,
Although I Have but little my love's beyond measure,
Then prithee dear grant me thy heart and hand:
Then why should we make any longer delay,
But unto the Church now let us away;
The Bridemen and maids they for us do carry,
Therefore my dear tell me when thou it marry,
if I go without thee I surely shall die.

Maid. If that I thought you did not dissemble
I quickly should yield to what you request,
But men's tongues I see can run so nimble,
It Is hard to trust any I do protest:
They can so cologue bath flatter and lie,
With fair pretenses a maiden to try,
They Will kiss them and hug them until they have won um
And then they will forsake um when they have undone um
So it is good to be careful who they do trust

Man. My fairest and dearest, if e're I forsake thee,
I wish that nothing may ever thrive with me,
Come wealth or woe, no sorrow shall make me,
Or cause me once to prove disloyal to thee:
Then prithee look cheerful and take a sweet kiss
In token of love, no harm is in this:
Let not fickle fortune no longer you hinder,
From a good motion to keep us asunder,
But let our hearts be joined in one.
The maiden she hearing what he had spoken,
She had no power to say him nay,
But gave him a kiss in love as a token,
As he unto Church should take her away.
Where they was married I after did hear;
Now she calls him honey, he calls her dear,
Though long, at last this Youngman did gain her,
Now in civil habit he bravely maintains her,
Let this be a pattern for Lovers so true.

Printed for VV Thackery, and T Passinger.


