Loves better then Gold: OR, MONEY's an Ass.
Come hear my Song, it does you all concern,
From it you may your own Misfortunes learn:
And yet' it is vain, as hereby I shall prove,
For want of Money to neglect your Love.
To a New Delightful Tune, much in request at Court.




WHy should friends and kindred gravely make thee,
Wrong thy self, and cruelly forsake me,
Be still my dearest Mistress, hang relations,
Loves above their dull considerations;
Let them live and want to heap up treasure,
Whilst that thee and I enjoy our pleasure.
He that seeks a Mistress in a portion.
Puts himself to use with damned extortion:
If he must be bribed to copulation,
Pox upon his love, it is out of fashion:
Where we like, no matter where the estate is.
It Is not love except he shows it gratis.
How to see the Miser have I wondered,
Weighing out his passion by the hundred,
Never consulting birth or education,
Virtue without wealth's but profanation:
Be she old or ugly it is no matter,
So she is is but rich he will venture at her.
Ioynture is a sordid lay invention,
Quite beside our nature and intention:
When we would agree it makes resistance,
Finding tricks to keep us at a distance:
Then who poorly makes a new election,
Suffers wealth to Cuckold his affection.




SOuls are free and should not be confined to,
Objects which the fancy has no mind to,
When a pretty female I importune?
Shall I lose her for her want of fortune?
It Is a folly, sordid, and inhumane,
Thus to sell the pleasures of a woman.
More to me the pleasing of my mind is,
Than the far-fetcht wealth of both the Indies,
I Have a soul above those drossy treasures,
Love does yield more sweet and lasting pleasures,
Such a joy as nothing can destroy it,
None desribe it but they do enjoy it.
Yet the low-soul'd wretch may have his fancy,
I can value nothing but my Nancy:
She that has an eye so black and sprightful,
And a place I name not more delightful?
Such a mine as greater wealth affords,
That the wretched worldling ever hoardeth.
Rows of brightest and of shining pearls are,
Not so oriental as my girls are,
Rubies touch her lips, and gain more luster,
Looking redder when that they have bust her,
Her red cheeks so fair she need not patch it,
There Is none but the other cheek can match it:
Then for humor, wit and conversation,
Nothing can be like her in the Nation,
Always lively, airy, brisk and jolly,
Free from studied pride, and Melancholy?
Such she is, and her I love more dearly,
than the dame that has her thousands yearly.
There you cringe and make your best addresses,
But alas she likes not your caresses;
Speak and Bow as well as e're you can Sir,
Ten to one if e're you get an answer:
When you are gone she cries a saucy fellow,
Come to me without his white and yellow,
He that can and will this hag may marry,
But for me the jade is like to tarry;
Let her live till lust and age do grieve her,
Till she call her Money to relieve her;
May she covet Husbands without measure.
Always wish, but know not of her pleasure.
Still my girl and I will love each other,
Want of wealth shall never my passon smother
Were she rich I could not love her better,
Were she poor I would never defeat her:
Whatsoever I have I must confess it,
She deserves, and therefore shall possess it.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Hospital-gate, in West-smithfield.


