The LAST SPEECH OF THOMAS THWING Priest; Executed at YORK for High-Trenson; On
Saturday the 23. of October 1680.
Published verbatim as he spoke it; For preventing all (Popish or other)
Misrepresentations.
Matthew. xxvii. v. xxiv. Vos Videritis.
THis sudden news of my Execution [after my Reprieve,] coming so unexpectedly,
made me fear I should have more severity showed Me than has been to others; and
consequently, that I should not have my full liberty to declare my mind in the
place of my Execution, Therefore I have briefly expressed my self in Writing as
follows.

First, As I hope for Salvation, and Benefit by the Blood and Passion of my
Blessed Savior, I most sincerely Protest, that what R. Balron and L. Mowbray
swore against me, was absolutely false; For here in the presence of the Eternal
God, I declare I never knew of any Consult at Barnbow, least prejudicial to the
KING or Kingdom; Nor Was I ever at any such Consult or meeting With Sir Thomas
Gascoin, Mr. Gascoin his Son, Sir Miles Stapleton, the Lady Tempest, Mr.
Ingleby, or any other, where any thing was ever treated, spoken, or Written,
about killing the KING, or alteration of the Government; Nor did I ever see, or
know of any List of Names of Persons mentioned, and sworn by them against me.

Secondly, Upon my Salvation I declare, that I never have been in my whole life
time Guilty, even so much as in Thought of any Treason against his Majesty, or
the Kingdom, being directly contrary to the Principles of our Faith.

Thirdly, That although I have, and do declare against the Oath of Allegiance
as it is worded, Yet it is only by reason of some Clauses therein contained,
not pertaining to Allegiance; And therefore, if an Oath, containing nothing but
Allegiance, had been legally tendered me, I should have thought it a sin to
refuse it.

Lastly, I acknowledge my self a PRIEST, and to have about 15 years performed
the Priestly Function; which I am so far from denying, that I thought it the
greatest Honor imaginable.

Now Dear Countrymen, having made this Protestation in the most plain and
serious terms I could, without all Equivocation, or mental Reservation
whatsoever; I appeal to the Eternal Judge, whether all good Christians ought
not rather to believe what is here in this manner sworn by me in my present
Circumstance, than what was sworn by my Accusers* whom notwithstanding, I beg
of God Almighty to Forgive; As also the Jury, and all others, who have in any
kind concurred to my Death.

Having full time allowed him, he spoke much more (with a clear Voice, and (as
they say) a remarkably Cheerful Countenance,) to the same Effect, declaring his
Innocence as to any Plot, his Loyalty to the King, his Charity to his
Neighbor, his Love and Piety to God, which he expressed in Fervent Prayers and
Ejaculations: But these Particulars not being by him committed to Writing, we
must expect a more verbal account of each from those Who were actually present
at his Execution.

Just as he went off the Ladder, he was distinctly heard to say these words,
Sweet Jesus Receive my Soul.

GOD SAVE THE KING.

