The GOOD-FELLOWS Resolution: OR, The Bad Husbands Return from his Folly, Being
a Caveat for all Spend-Thrifts to beware of the Main Chance.
Here in this Ballad you may see,
The vain ness bad Husbandry:
Good Advice here is to be found.
The which may save you many a Pound.
By T. Lanfiere.

To the Tune of, The Plow-Mans Honor made known.
Drink the other Bowl, I Will follow thee.





I Have been a bad Husband this full fifteen year,
And have spent many pounds in good Ale, and strong beer
I have Ranted in Alehouses day after day,
And wasted my time and my Money away:
But now i will beware, and have a great care,
Left at the last Poverty falls to my share:
For now I will lay up my Money in store,
And I never will play the bad Husband no more.
Too long I have lived in this idle course,
In spending my money, which has made me the worse;
When as I had got Silver plentifully,
I did not regard how fast I let it fly:
For sometimes I Have spend, and sometimes I Have Lend,
But the longest day now I see must have an end:
For now, etc.
Sometimes in the Alehouse a week I would sit,
If I with Good-fellows did chance for to meet;
Until all my Money was wasted and gone,
Then it was high time to turn out and go home:
My proud Hostis she, would look scornful on me,
And tell me she did not love such Company:
But now, etc.
Doll Cleanly that lives in the middle of the Town,
Has first and last of me had many a Crown;
If then I did come to her and bring store of Money,
And call apace for Drink, on me she would look bonny:
Both Early and Late a Boozing I have sat,
But my Hostis and I now is in great Debate:
For now, etc.
Too much unto Gameing my self I would use,
There was no kind of Exercise I did Refuse;
A Crown or an Angle I have lost on a day,
Which would have been better kept then thrown away:
Then Beer it was plenty, no Flaggons stood empty,
Sometimes on the Board stood full eighteen or twenty:
But now, etc.
Such idle courses I used always to take,
For little account of my Money I Have make;
I would call for strong tipple and make my heart merry,
But now of such actions truly I am weary:
Though threadbare I went, with my clothes torn and rent
Yet I to the Alehouse would always frequent:
But now, etc.
My Landladys they would seem loving to be,
If that they saw Money was plenty with me;
But if that I had none at all for to show,
They would look coy on me, as if they did not me know
And if so be that I was never so dry,
To trust me a Flaggon some Whores would deny:
But now I will lay up my Money in store,
And I will never play the bad Husband no more.
I Went to an Hostis where I used to resort,
And I made her believe that money was short;
I ask her to trust me, but she answered nay,
Enough of such Guests I can have every day:
Then quoth she, pray forbear there is no staying here,
Except you have money you shall have no Beer.
But now, etc.
I pulled out a handful of Money straightway,
And showed it unto her, to hear what she would say;
Quoth she, you shall have Beer and ale of the best,
You are kindly welcome, I did speak but in jest:
O no, no, said I, your words I defy.
I Will see you hanged e're with you i will spend a penny:
But now, etc.
Thus here you may see and observe it full plain.
The Ale-wives and innkeepers all are for gain;
If a man on them spends all that e're he has got,
He shall have no thanks, but be counted a Sot:
To you they will seem kind, whilst you can them Cash find,
But when you have spent all they will change their mind
But now, etc.
If I had but saved half the money I have spent,
How it would rejoice my heart with much content;
But since it is all gone, farewell unto it,
Henceforth I Am resolved for to learn more wit:
My folly I see, in spending so free,
The Ale-wives no more my Purse-bearers shall be:
For now, etc.
Then bad Husbands of the main chance have a care,
Left Poverty comes on you e're you are aware:
Take heed how idly your Money you spend,
Make much of that little which God does you lend.
Endeavor always your stock for to raise,
Then of honest people you will have the praise:
Strive for, etc.
To conclude, take my counsel do not it restrain,
You Will find it will be for your profit and gain,
Whilst you are young and lusty strive to get and save,
Then things necessary in old age you will have:
Be sure do not waste, left you want at last,
Those that plays in Summer in Winter must fast:
Then learn for to lay up your money in store,
Resolve for to play the bad Husband no more.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vero, J. Wright, J. Clarke. W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger.


