LUNATICUS INAMORATUS OR, The Mad Lover.
HArk how the Welkin Thunders; Hark! stand, stand.
Dire Flames Belch forth, the Fury's are at hand.
Pluto by Stix! Foul Tysiphon avaunt:
Ho Proserpine! beaut'ous Proserpine, grant
Me a Boon; Command that Cerberus lie still:
Tell the lowed Curr, it is Amarantha's Will:
My Amarantha; She, who is now at Play
With Ariadne, in the Milky-way.
The Studded-Crown is stak't; O unkind part,
Against a Crown to wage thy Lovers-Hart:
Why Covets Amarantha such a Gemm?
Jove shall present thee with his Diadem.
But, that these cursed- Manacles forbid;
I Would mount the Globe, and place it on thy Head.
Aurora speak; What! has my Angel Won?
It Is so, it is so; now give it, to the Sun,
The days proud-Post; He Will drink thy Health at Night,
In Sweets extracted from his Thetis sight.
What Plagues are these Cold-Chains? Why, Ixion!
Sysiphus, Sysiphus! lay by that Stone;
Pledge Me, and Tantalus: This Glass to Her
Who Tinds the Stars, keeps Me a Prisoner.
Come, ye smoky Cyclops, come, Drink apace:
That, to your Mistress; next, to Juno's Grace:
To Neptune now, quaf't off ye frolic Slaves;
For Neptune Tipples the Impostum'd Waves.
Sirrah Boy, Ganimede, fill up their Boules:
It Is well; the Horned-God keeps thirsty-Souls.
More Nectar still, A Tun to him that sits
Collecting Notions from a Bedlams Wits,
Arm, arm Alcides! Sooty Feinds Invades
The Flowry-borders of the Elizian-Shades.
Charon, Scull, Ferriman, Steer toward Shore;
Stem that proud Wave; Bear-up, now waft me over.
Whence blows that Gust? be calm, be calm; rude Wind
Obey; Love, and my thoughts are unconfined.
Bold slave forbear to touch it; know that Rose,
Only to deck my Amarantha Grows.
The Ruddy-Morne has strung of Dewy-Pearl;
A double Carkanet for thee, my Girl.
Look, where She comes; Hyperion stay,
And strew thy Golden-Attoms in Her way.
Venus, thy Chariot; quick, How dare thou see
Her walk on foot, that is more fair than Thee?
Attendance there; the Graces I Will prefer;
'Twould Grace the Sacred-Nine to wait on Her,
Jove, Tune the Whirling-Sphears; Arion come,
And Sing my Sweet a Lovers Requium.
Ha Squalled Villain! Scourge me; hold,
I Am still, I Am still; Dear Heart, I was too bold:
Forbear, I Am quiet now: the God's can tell,
My Amarantha does not take this well.
These Ginn's oppress. It Is Gold, pure Gold; the Stone,
Dropped from the Ringlet of an Amazone.
Hyppolita, perhaps, a Pilgrim might
Do Adorations to it, it looks so bright.
Who Hollows there, Rogue, Captive, Lunatique;
If Molops hear, he will lash thee to the quick.
SINGS Her Hair upon Her Shoulders spread;
Each curle, a Fringe for Beauties Bed:
Jun's-Roses in Her Checks are born:
From either Eye,
A Serene Sky,
Ope's like the Windows of the Morn.
Where is my Angel? Ah! to sleep shrunk in;
To The fragrant Bud of some choice Jessamin:
Or rests in Flora's Lap.
Hark, silence there, does not yon, doleful Bell,
Sound hollow as it were a mourning knell;
What sad departing Soul with lingering breath,
Disturbs the drowsy Bed-maker of Death.
For Amarantha, ha, and would she go,
Not once farwell; unkind, not let me know.
Dead, Amarantha dead, draw over the Light,
The fullen Curtains of the gloomy Night:
Aurora's blushes, darkest Clouds Eclipse,
Grow pale, as now my Amarantha's lips.
My Glory dead? Her Tenement resign,
Why would she not, an Inmate, dwell in mine.
See where she hovers, like a Cherubim,
Have, have, bright Soul, to thy Caelestial Inn.
Stay not to Banquet, these insatiate Eyes,
That must do service at thine Obsequies:
Ye purer Spirits of the Air attend,
My wandering Angel to her journeys end:
With Sable cloth, the spangled Canopie,
That every Star may mourn as well as I:
And as ye pass, her Legacies proclaim,
To me her heart, to the World her Virtuous, name.
Come swift winged Mercury, it is thou must be
The Messenger, betwixt my Love and me.
Where have you hid her Relics? Let me clime,
And fix them 'bove the reach of wrinckled Time.
Go, tell her Hermes, how my thoughts are bent,
On Parian Clifts, to raise her Monument.
Plutus, base Miser, it is thou detaines
My Jewels Cabinet; thy hollow Veins,
I Will rend in sunder; search the Infenced Deeps,
Break-up the Cells, where all thy Treasures sleeps.
Discover what thy Avaritious mind,
Since the Proleptick Age, has close confined;
Black-warders, of your fordid Masters over
By Dis, and Hell, I conjure you to restore
His Theft; How dare you keep what must be set,
With Columns double Archt on Arraret?
Ho, Light-heel'd Boy, What have thou brought me there?
A Letter, ha, a Letter from my Dear
Sealed with a Kiss.
Who would not over Rapid Torrents wade,
To kiss the Lips, that this Impression made.
A curled Lock and Diamond too, by Stix,
The wanton Archers strange Hyrogliphicks.
My Amarantha deems me still as wife,
As when I guest her meaning by her Eyes;
To read these Characters, writ by her looks,
The gravest Cato, would have left his Books.
From the Region of the Moon.
Inhabits Amarantha there? A place,
Beseeming such a Beauty, such a Grace.
Tarquin withdraw thy lustful Fancy from her,
She Is now Diana's chiefest Maid of Honor.
The sportful Goddess often takes delight,
To let her wear the Cressent of the Night;
And with her smiling Nymphs attending, stray
Over Latmos, Ephesus, and Cayria.
Ovid, thy Courtship She Will no more approve,
She must be courted with, Platonique Love,
Such as the holy Virgin Nun may pant,
When ended prayers to her Indulgent Saint.
Chaste Votress, I will offer at thy Shrine,
Flames, for their purity, shall equal thine.
Permit me though, when under Morpheus charms,
To dream I kiss, and keep Thee in mine Arms.
Soft Rest approach, polluted thoughts be gone,
Thou shall be Cynthia, I, Endyminon.
With ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin. 1667.


