The Lovesick LADY: Being her sorrowful sighs for her Loyal Soldier; whom at
length she enjoyed, to her unspeakable satisfaction.
Tune of, What shall I do to show how much I love her.
Licensed according to Order.





NEar a fair Fountain a Damsel sat weeping,
and to her Lover she often replied,
Thou have my heart and affections in keeping,
yet of thy favors I Am clearly denied:
How can thou ever he so desperate cruel,
to slight a Lover with scorn and disdain?
Every slighting adds Flame to my Fuel,
that I a Languishing Lover lie slain.
Why is my Blooming fair Beauty and T^easure,
so unregarded? Ah! how can you slight
Those Snow Mountains and Ri^e^s of Pleasure,
where Lovers Angle for Charming Delight?
All that mine thou should soon be Possessing,
could I but once be assured of thy love,
But you're unworthy of so great a Blessing
since so ungrateful my Strephon can proved.
I that have often been Courted by many,
is now most scornfully slighted by thee,
Others had reason, but thou never had any,
for thou wast ever right welcome to me,
Slave to affection, and thy sweet complexion
too much I have been, but now will no more,
In your false love I have made an inspection,
whom I of lace did so dearly adore.
Ah, fair young Beautiful Lady excuse me,
think not that e're I could slight such a Saint,
But being fearful that thou would refuse me,
I never venture'd to make my complaint,
Tho my poor heart has been fatally wounded
by the sweet Charms from thy fair killing eyes,
Sad sighs and sorrows my senses surrounded,
thinking my proffered love you would despise.
When I considered from whence thou descended,
by Birth and Beauty a Lady of Fame.
Strait I concluded thou would be offended,
if the least motion of love I should name;
Love for this reason I was not for Courting,
so fair a Creature, and Beautiful Star,
Being no more than a Soldier of Fortune,
who is exposed to the hazzards of War.
Tell me no more of Rich Friends nor Relations,
my State and Grandeur freely forsake,
That with my love I may range Foreign Nations,
in weal or woe there my fortune I Will take:
Long by my smiles thou might freely discover,
that I did prize and adore thee my dear,
Therefore when this you did truly discover,
tell me how could you have reason to fear.
Have not I Courted you, though against nature,
what greater simptoms of love would you find,
Then he no more an insensible Creature,
since your fair Lady to love is inclined:
Then in his Arms he did freely receive her,
saying, sweet love thou art welcome to me,
With solemn vows that he never would grieve her,
but be as Loyal as Lover could be.

