A POEM ROYAL TO THE Sacred Majesty of CHARLES the II. King of Great Britain.
AND THE Illustrious Donna CATHARINA His Incomparable CONSORT.
By J. L. Esquire
COnfusion, with gray Winter's snow's dissolved,
Rebellion's ice (that so long time involved
Our Loyal hearts, chilling the noble Blood
That once so vig'rously that Frost withstood)
Thawed by the * Genesis Monk
Northern Star; the glor'ous Spring
To the Worlds great wonder did produce a King;
Great CHARLES that had so long concealed his rays
Behind the angry Clouds, he now displays
His splendid luster, and the Flowery May
Must ever sacred be for that glad Day;
The god's confirmed it; and (in spite of Fear)
The Sun and Stars more fulgently appear
The ensuing May; you would have thought our joys
Top and top gallant now; what novel toys
Shall the next year bring forth? Fortune 'twas deemed
Had played the Prod'gal; and Britain seemed
With triumphs forfeited: But Heaven's Decree,
Bliss much above our hopes, we 'gain must see
A happy May; great Neptune now must bring
A glorious tribute to the Oceans King:
Proud of the bliss, his countenance he cheers,
And learns to smile, his Charr'ot swift he bears
To the Indian shore, searching that Golden Mair,
In hopes some precious Carcanet to gain
Some Massy Orient Pearl, or Odor taken
Out of the Phoenix Nest; but all the store
The D^dy's yields too small, he must have more:
Then tacks about, fair Lisbon Port's his aim;
His Sea-Nympths and loud Fame in's ears proclaim
The Infania's rare Accomplishments; it is she
The war'ry God will court for's Majesty.
He offers up his Trident-Fork, his Chair,
He charms the Seas to calmness, takes the care
Of Pilot, and commands his liquid train
Of Nymphs and Dolphins to corrant the Main:
Whilst Tryton shrilly founds, Sirens are seen
Warbling melod'ously to please our Queen.
So once the Cyprian Goddess 'bout her Isle
Did sail in state; her triumph did beguile
The winged hours, and she her self did please
With hopes of being Goddess of the Seas.
But lead she seen how far our Queen excels
Her famed Beauty, how the Ocean swells
To bear a Gem more worth then all that e're
Trusted themselves unto the Sea-god's care,
She Would pull her Altars down, for anger die,
Or blush her self into deformity.
Mild Zepherus softly fill the expanded sails,
The ships glide nimbly, favored with fresh gales,
The unwilling Waves divide, amazed to see
Upon their backs such beaut'ous Majesty,
Whilst the proud billows strive over deck to glide,
In hopes unto her Royal foot to slide
And steal a kiss; but curbed by Neptunes frown,
They burst with grief, and in tears trickle down.
The sporting Fishes leap along the way,
Offering themselves for sacrifice in joy.
But England envies that the seas so long
Should her so much desired bliss prolong.
She grows impatient til the Cornish Hills
Salute her Royal Fleet; the news soon fills
The neighboring shires, they 'larm all the I Will,
With joy the Rocks at her approach do smile.
But Neptune would by no means leave his Charge
Till Europe's * D. York.
Mars from's care did him enlarges;
Commands him to retreat, and vows himself,
To set her safely on the happy Earth.
No sooner landed, but the Guns roar joy,
The Bonfires and the Bells make Holy Day.
Each Loyal heart exalts, the Muses sing
A joyful Meeting to our Queen and King.
The well-loyn'd Citizens will drink a health
To Royal Cath'rines Nupti^ls; may their wealth
E're ready be for to support her state;
And may Great CHARLES protect her from all hate.
May all auspicious stars conjoin to grace
Their interviews, and at that blessed place
(At the first sight) let showers of Arrows fly,
And pierce their hearts, sent from each others eye.
And may their lovesick souls (to seek a rest
At first salute) steal in each others breast:
That sacred Hymen may unite those hands,
Whose hearts were joined before in Cupids bands.
Then let our Isles with IO sound, the Night
Is sacred to our Sovereigns choice delight;
May it prove full, e'relasting, may desire
Hourly add Fuel to their Nuptial Fire.
May both live long, both love, and happy be
In Health, Wealth, Peace, and in Prosperity.
And may this Month, great Sir, a Britains Heir
From your Imperial Loins next year prepare
A Princely Pledge of your chaste Consorts love,
Another CHARLES to reign when you're above
Enthroned; but may that change never draw near
Till Nestor's Age upon your head you bear:
Your Royal Babe grown Man, that we may be
Ruled still by one of your blessed Progeny.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle near the West End
of Paul's, 1662.


