A MEMORIAL on the Death of that faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, NATHANAEL
STRANGE,
Pro. 10.7. Mat. 26.13
Es. 57.2 Rev. 17.14
Who for his Loyalty to his Lord the King, ran through many Jeopardies and
Dangers; Isa. 26.13. Est. 3.8. 1 Chronicles. 11, 19 Neb. 6.2, 11. Number 23.21, 23
Numb. 24.7. Luke 1.32. Heb. 10.37.
Cheerfully and constantly Witnessing to his Princely Authority over All
Nations; Romans 6.16. Psa. 119.32 Psa. 134.1. 2 Cor. 6.5. Act. 5.31, 32. and 26.
16, 22. Pro. 14.32. Genesis 50.24. Psalm. 72. Zech. 9.10. Psa 110 5,6.
and in full confidence of Christ's Coming, and his Glorious Reign on Earth,
Jer. 23.5. Isa. 32.1. and 24.23. Rev. 11.7.
rested from all his Labors, Rev. 14.13. the fourth day of the eighth Month,
1665.

An Acrostick.
NEw Griefs, new Sorrows now are come, now Strange from hence is flown
Away from us, who here do dwell within this Frigid Zone.
This World too low, for thee so High, so Heavenly divine;
Heaven is thy home, where thou do dwell, and in great Glory shine.
Alas! Strange, thou art gone, to whom the World was very strange;
Now unto us great Loss, to thee great Gain: most happy Change!
All Earthly Joys contemn did thou, because thou were Sublime;
Eternity was in thine Eye, beyond the bounds of Time.
Labour'ous was thy Work and Care, in the Vineyard night and day;
Sions great Friend, and Watchman true, who never ceased to pray
That Babylon'an-Powers might be unto nothing brought;
Regent over Nations and Affections CHRIST alone was sought.
Admirable Graces and Gifts did richly thee adorn;
Now scarce thine Equal left, for which we all lament and mourn.
God's Glory was thine only Aim, endeav'ring Souls to save;
Evangelist wast thou, whose Message Joy to many gave.
Anagram. NATHANAEL STRANGE. Satan then all Anger.
Enraged was Satan; ( Satan then all in his Anger) Why?
God by such Evangelick means, will make his Power dye.
No glad-tidings sent unto man of Liberty, of Peace
A bide can he: for when man's free, Then does his Kingdom cease.
Raging Satan, in's Anger then, his Agents did employ
To catch that Soul, whom God preserved, and now possessed in Joy.
Satan then all in Anger. When? Even then, when Strange did preach.
Learning truly Divine did he, all those that heard him teach.
Enraged therefore was Satan, yet could not at all prevail
Against him, who his Kingdom did with so great force assail.
No Power ever can prevail against JESUS CHRIST our King:
All Nations he will under him into subjection bring:
His Scepter, and his Laws, must bear the Rule and Sway alone.
This Doctrine strange unto the World, Strange to the World made known.
A Single-state he did prefer, It being his intent
Nothing should let him in his Work, for which the Lord him sent.
Scatutum est hominibus at semel moriantur.
STRANGE, he was an Example which did teach
(Being in Conversation just, upright)
The same which in his Doctrine he did preach;
Which evidenced he was a shining Light:
Mirror of Virtue, in which we might see
His Splendor, and our own Deficiencie.
Some years ago in the Army he was made
An Officer; and for the Good Old Cause
No time in Idleness by him delayed;
His Aim was to advance God's Righteous Laws.
A Valiant Soldier, to maintain God's Right,
Who with his Sword and Doctrine both did fight.
But we have sinned; and therefore for our sin
Frustrate was made that Glorious Design;
And we are brought where first we did begin,
As if Heaven and Earth did both combine,
To make us see it is vain for us to trust
In Arm of Flesh, that must return to dust.
Therefore with our whole heart we should implore
The God of Grace, that we might be more wise;
And Him alone, in all things to adore;
His Servants love, but not them idolize;
Lest we the Glory from our God should take,
And of more Sorrow for the same partake.
Moses a Righteous man, yet he did fail;
And for his Sin most justly he did die:
Which does declare, the best of us are frail,
And subject unto great Infirmity.
By Pestilence, or Sword, the Just may die,
And the Just God, no honor lose thereby.
Our GOD, (not Man) let us glorify in all:
So may we stand, or otherwise we fall.
London, Printed in the Year, 1666.


