The May-poles Motto.
AS concerning the first Institution of May-poles, many are very ignorant, that
most greedily have taken pleasure in reviving an old popish Custom (was well
nigh consumed in this Nation) as by their folly is made manifest, in erecting
it again, and Idolizing and sporting themselves in the day time, with drumming,
drinking, and dancing about them, by cursing, swearing, and blaspheming Gods
Name, and his Tabernacle with them that cannot run amongst the baser sort to
this excess of Riot, to the vexing of the righteous souls of such as behold
their unlawful deeds, and cursed practices, which plainly does demonstrate,
that the root and ground of this Tree (so idolized) is not good, by the fruit
which is brought forth to the Planters thereof: Moreover it is credibly
reported, that an old whore called Flora, sometimes inhabiting at Rome, who had
at her door a long Pole with a Motto on it, for a sign to invite her lovers,
and that she having by the filthiness of her fornication gained much money in
her lifetime, did at her death, as a Legacy, give vast sums of money unto
Maids or Virgins (so called) yearly upon May day, to solemnize her Feast or
Funeral by this signal testimony of a May Pole, which Priests and people adore
in remembrance of the old whore, or Monument, to preserve her memorial, which
has been practiced in an ignorant zeal and lewdness, by them who are the
offspring of that Mother of Harlots, mentioned Rev. 17. and that be under the
Prince of the Ayr's dominion. Now if any of the abettors or promoters of this
memorial of this Strumpet and old whore, or any others, that ignorantly have
run to this excess of riot, desire to be satisfied farther herein, concerning
this old abominable branch and whore, which this year (as in a night) has
suddenly sprung up to a very tall stature, in many Cities, Towns, and Villages
in this Nation, where they do it in remembrance of her their old Love: Let them
search the Histories, or enquire of such as have recourse thereunto, that they
might understand, and be able to give a reason of such their practices in this
particular; for it concerns them chiefly to know the ground, and make proof
thereof to such as are unsatisfied, and not us: Nevertheless we cannot but bear
our testimony against it, and we have also here transcribed something formerly
composed concerning its Birth, Pedigree, State, Power, and Authority; whether
by a friend unto, or a witness against, we leave the Reader to judge here as
follows.

The May-poles Speech to a Traveller.
O Passenger know thou not me?
Where Is thy Cap? and where is thy Knee?
Thy betters do me honor give,
And swear they will do it whilst they live;
Both High and low they me respect,
I can command them at my beck:
I think thou art some Puritan,
Or censuring Precisian,
That love not May-poles, Mirth, and Plays;
But cries, Alas! these wretched days;
That stop your ears, and shut your eyes,
Lest ye behold our vanities.
But goodman Gooscap, do thou know
I do disdain your holy show,
Your peevish humor I do scorn,
And hold you wretches all forlorn;
Your censurings all I do shake off,
And at your zeal I freely scoff:
I will stand here in spite of such,
And glad to hear that they do grutch.
But prithee fellow learn of me
My Birth, my Worth, my Pedigree,
My Name, my Fame, my Power, my Praise,
My State, my Acts, my honored Days.
I am Sir May Pole, that is my name,
Mer, May, and Mirth gave me the same:
Dame Flora, once Romes famous Whore,
Did give to Rome in days of yore
(By her last Will) great Legacies
My yearly Feast to solemnize
With jovial sports and pleasantness,
In lust-procuring wantonness;
And surely I am near of kin
Unto that Romish Man of sin;
And scarce under the heavens scope
There Is none (as I) so like the Pope.
Has holy Father much ado
When he is chose? So have I too;
There is such joy at my plantation
As is at his Coronation:
Men, women, children on a heap
Do sing, and dance, yea skip, and leap;
Yea Drum, and Drunkards on a Rout,
Before me make a hideous shout;
Whose loud Alarms, and bellowing cries
Do fright the earth, and pierce the skies.
Does he upon men's shoulders ride?
That honor does to me betide.
Has holy Pope his noble Guard?
So have I too, that watch and ward:
For where it is noised I am come,
My followers summoned are by Drum;
I have a mighty retinue,
The scum of all the Rascal crew
Of Fiddlers, Pedlers, Jayl-scape slaves,
Of Tinkers, Turncoats, Tosspot knaves,
With Thieves, and Scapethrifts many a one,
With bouncing Bess, and jolly Joan;
The Hobbyhorse does hither prance,
Maid Mariam, and the Morris dance.
The Pope does keep his Jubilee,
A time of mirth and jollity;
And on such as to Rome will go,
Great benefits he will bestow.
I also keep my Jubilee,
A time of yearly jollity;
And unto such as it frequent,
I mirth procure, and much content:
First Music does their passions charm,
Then Liquor strong their lust does warm;
Their dancing gesture, looks, and words,
More fuel to the fire affords:
The old, that have scarce tooth, or eye,
But crooked back, and lamed thigh,
Must have a frisk, and shake the heel,
As if not stitch, nor ache they feel;
And since their works do hate the Light,
They take the vantage of the night.
But lest you think my stately port
Maintained is by baser sort,
I have some else of better note,
That jet it in a silken coat:
I cannot boast much of their grace,
But this I say, they are men of place;
Whose Country Worships have great praise
In Maypolizing now adays:
Though cold they are in better things,
In this they Reign as Parish kings:
They are as light as feather in cap,
They nothing fear the fatal hap;
Besides, there are some learned men,
Perhaps Divines, how say you then,
Disputed have of me in Schools,
I hope these are no simple fools;
They stiffly do maintain my cause
To be according to God's Laws;
They make it good, were it not for me
All love would perish speedily.
The Pope does challenge power divine,
I (next to him) do say its mine;
I can enlarge men's Conscience,
And qualify each vile offense:
I take away all fear of evil,
Of sin, of death, of hell and devil;
I tell them its a time to laugh,
To give themselves free leave to quaffe,
To drink their health upon their knee,
And mix therewith much Ribaldry,
To reel, to spew, to brawl, to fight,
To scoff and rail with all their might;
I teach the servant disobey,
The child to say his Parent nay;
The poorer sort that have no coin,
I can command them to purloyn;
All this, and more, I warrant good,
For this maintains Neighborhood:
Yea, when my Rogues do Vict'als want,
When money, cloth, and all grows scant,
Then forth a forraging they go,
And fall upon their common foe;
No pillage seems half so good,
As what is stolen from the Brotherhood.
O Trav'ler, learn more grace to show,
And see that thou thy Betters know;
And since thou must part me fro,
Then let my lesson with thee go:
There Is never a Drunkard in all the Town,
Nor swearing Courtier, nor base Clown,
Nor swaggering Lobcock, mincing Queen,
Nor Popish Clerk, nor Priest, nor Dean,
Nor Knight deboist, nor Gentleman
That follows Drabs, or Cup, or Kan,
That will give thee a friendly look,
If thou can not a May Pole brook.
The Priests and their hearers may say, that they set it up in honor of their
old Love, if we gather money to do the same, for the old Whore had one at her
door, who gave a great Legacy that they might set it up again in honor of the
old Strumpet.

Now these things are written chiefly to the May Pole Planters, and the rest of
their rude ranting foolish followers, for them to read and consider; and if the
Verses were at first composed by one of their own Poets, or Prophets, his
testimony may be very true; though he spoke lightly in many things, as if he
did but make a mock at sin, yet his rude speech renders him not altogether so
much a fool, as their practices do bespeak them, who are of this sinful
society, and who take pleasure in such folly and vanity; for these practices
are an ill savor amongst all sober minded men, and this old sin new revived,
and so frequently committed in our Cities and Towns, is a very great reproach
to a Christian Nation, and by the Lord's Prophets and Saints it is verily
believed, that the Lord will visit for these things, and that he will avenge
himself of such great abominations as are committed in the Land, both in this,
and in several other things of the like nature, which is a vexation to the
spirits of just men, and hereby testified against by such as truly fear the
Lord, and tremble at the word of his Holiness, although in those days by that
generation, are reproached by the name of Phanatiques.


