May Day Country Mirth: OR, The Young Lads and Lasses Innocent Recreation.
Which is to be prized before Courtly Pomp and Pastime.
To an excellent New Tune.
Licensed according to Order.





JOan to the Maypole away let us run,
The time is swift and will be gone,
There go the Lasses away to the Green,
Where their Beauties may be seen:
Nan, Noll, Kate and Moll.
Brave Lasses have Lads to attend 'um,
Hodge, Nick, Tom, Dick,
Brave Dancers, who can amend 'um?
Did you not see the Lord of the May,
Walk along in his rich array;
There goes the Lass that is only his,
See how they meet and how they kiss.
Come Will, run Gill,
Or do thou list to lose thy labor?
Kit Crowd, scrape aloud,
Tickle her Tom, with a Pipe and Tabor.
Lately I went to a Mask at Court,
Where I see Dances of every sort;
There they did dance with time and measure,
But none like Country Dance for pleasure:
There they did Dance just as in France,
Not like the English lofty manner,
And every she, must furnished be
With a feathered knack when she sweats ^^^^te fan her,








But we when we Dance, and do happen to sweat,
Have a Napkin in Hand for to wipe off the wet,
And we with our Dories do Iig it about,
Not like the Court which often are out;
If the Tabor do play, we thumps it away,
And turn and meet our Lasses to Kiss 'em;
Nay they will be as ready as we,
That hardly at any time can miss 'em.
Yonder comes Dolly over the Down,
And Roger he gives her fair green Gown,
See how he hands her up again,
And how they trip along a main;
They pass, over the Grass,
And at every Style they are Billing,
He gives, she receives,
Bring youthful, ready and willing.
There is not any that shall out-bye,
My little pretty Joan and I;
For I Am sure I can dance as well,
As Robin, Jenny, Tom, or Nell:
Last Year, we were here,
When rust Ralph he played us a Bore,
And we, merrily
Thumpt it about and goin'd the Glory.
Come sweet Joan let us call a new Dance,
That we before them may advance,
Let it be what you desire and crave,
And sure the same sweet Joan shall have:
She cried and replied,
If to please me thou will endeavor,
Sweet Pig, the Wedding Iigg,
Then, my Dear, I Will love thee for ever.
Sure I will grant thee thy request,
And learn thee that among the rest;
For ever it be long we'll Married be,
And then my pretty Joan shall see
Fine Toys, sweet Ioys,
And soft Kisses too out of measure,
Sweet Charms, in my Arms,
This will be a Fountain of Pleasure.
And if we hold on as we begin,
Joan thee and I the Garland shall win:
Nay, if thou live till another day,
I Will make thee Lady of the May;
Dance about, in and out,
Turn and kiss, and then for-greeting;
Now Joan we have done,
Fare thee well till the next merry meeting.

