Unto his Grace His Majesty's high Commissioner, ane Honorable Estates of
Parliament, The PETITION of George Mackenzie Sub-tacksman of the Additional and
Annexed-Excise of the Northern Shires.
Humbly shows,
THat where your Petioner having unhappily engaged himself in July 1695, in a
Tack of the Additional and Annexed Excise for the several Shires benorth Tay,
for which he was bound by his Tack to pay 19423 lib. ster.

After subscribing of his Tack, he immediately went North to appoint Collectors
in the several Towns and Shires, and to regulat the Brewers; But shortly after
there happning a great Scarcity in the Northern Countries, Brewing was for the
most part given up, so that is was not possible to make up the Tack-duty.

Your Petitioner foreseeing the sad and calamitus Condition, and the apparent
Famine in these places, and finding that there was not the least possibility
for him to make good his Tack; He made Application first to the principal
Tacksmen, and then to the Lords of Thesaury, who after consideration of what he
had represented, gave him a Sift of Execution, as to one half of his Tack-duty.

Thereafter the sad and deplorable Condition of these Countries increasing, the
Country Brewers were so far from continuing to Brew, that there was not Bear to
be had to make Meal of to keep in their Lives, so notwithstanding of all the
Trouble, Fatigue and Expense your Petitioner was brought to, it was not
possible for him to make one half of his Tack-duty, and yet to save himself and
his Cautioners so far as he was able, he has paid in what he has collected,
and near one thousand pound sterling more of his own proper Stock, which goes
very near to ruin him, but he yet lying under the Obligation of his Tack to
pay 9000 lib, sterling, which he never received, he is necessitat humbly to
Address the Honorable and High Court of Parliament in this matter.

By his Tack it is declared, that if the Accidents of Plague, Famine or War,
should fall out, his Tack should fall, and from thence-furth be mull: That
there was Famine in these places is but too noture, but that the Truth might
the more fully appear, there were Declarations signed by several Noblemen and
Gentlemen in the respective Shires, which were presented to the Lords of
Thesaury, and which are hereto subjoyned, as a farther evidence of the condition
of that Country.

What was formerly represented to the Lords of Thesaury, was found by them to
be true and after the Petitioner had made Application to his Majesty by his
Officers of State. His Majesty was graciously pleased to recommend the Lords of
Thesaury, to make Inquiry anent the true State and Condition of the Country,
and to make a Report thereof to his Majesty, which accordingly they did, and
found that what your Petitioner had formerly represented, was true in every
Circumstance.

The Petitioner was so far from pretending benefit by his Tack, that he has
paid near one thousand pound sterling more than ever he made of it, and the
principal Tacksman do very well know, that albeit his Collection was in the
time of the greatest Scarsity and Dearth, yet he has paid 1500 lib. ster. more
for the Five Pennies than they can now make effectual in all these Shires for
the six pennies, when there is less Scarsity and cheaper Victual.

By all which it may evidently appear to his Grace, and honorable Estates of
Parliament, that the great Loss and Damnage the petioner has sustained, arose
from the Dearth and Famine which immediately followed his Tack, and which was
Casus fortuitus, and vis divina, and could not be foreseen, so that he could
not resist divine Providence in this matter. And it w^r a Hardship above
whatever His Majesty or his Ministers did, to take the small Stock of the
sub-tacksman, who in Zeal to His Majesty's Service, has advanced on his own
Credit considerably more as he has gotten in, and is content to lose it; And it
is humbly hoped, that your Grace and honorable Estates of parliament, in
Justice and Mercy will consider his Circumstances, and since none, far less a
gracious Prince should reap profit by a poor his Circumstances, and since
none, far less a gracious Prince should reap profit by a poor man's Stock who
keeps not one Farthing of the Kings, but willingly and faithfully serves him
for nothing.

May it therefore please your Grace and honorable Estates of Parliament, to
consider the premises, and seeing your petitioner relied much upon the Quality
of his Tack and that his taking Instruments against the principal Tacksman, and
proving the Condition of the Country by so pregnant Evidences, was sufficient
to exoner him; That therefore your Grace and Lordships would be pleased to
declare his Tack a Collection, with this Qualty, that albeit his Collection be
less than the Sum of 10423 lib. sterling, which he has already paid, yet the
petitioner is to repeat no part thereof, but the declaring of his Tack a
Collection, is only to this effect, that Inquiry may be made if his Collection
(his necessar Charges being deduced; exceeds the Sum already pased; Or
otherwise, if your Grace and Honorable Estates of parliament think it not
convenient to o^p^^ the Tack that you would be pleased to exoner him of the
9000 lib. ster. for which he has got so frequent Sists, and which is the just
proportion, conform to the late Report from the Exchequer to His Majesty. And
your Petitioner shall ever pray.

DECLARATION In Favors of the BREWERS and TACKSMEN of the EXCISE, with the
Tenor of the Representation given in by the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Magistrates
of the North Shires, concerning the Dearth and Famine in their Shires and
Towns, with the Reasons why the Brewers have given up, and the Excise cannot be
made Effectual; Viz.
WE the Noblemen, Barons and Heretors of the Shires of Angus, Merns, Aberdeen,
Bamff, and Be North; Considering that George Mackenzie Subtacksman of the
Annexed and Additional Excise, has several Processes depending before the
Commissioners of Supply and Excise, against several of our Tennents who have
been in use of brewing upon our Ground, for their giving over that Trade of
Brewing at this time: Do therefore Testify and Declare, That there was an
absolute necessity for their giving over, by reason of the want of Malt and
Bear, and the Dearth thereof this year; the price of the Malt and Bear giving
with us 12 of 13 lib. Scots to Martinmas next, which is more than triple value
of former years, being occasioned by the last years bad Cropped, and the
unnatural Storms of Rain which fell out in Harvest last, and our Tennents being
in Arrear to us the full half part of their Rent in several places, so that by
these Calamities the Brewers have given over, and generally quite broke, and
the few that does Brew are not able to pay the foresaid price for the said Malt
and Bear, with the double Excise; so that for this Season there is no hope of
Brewing, and the scarcity and badness of the last years Cropped, has occasioned
not only Dearth, but Famine to all the Poor, who are dying in several parts for
Want, and a great part of the Land is not sown for want of Seed, so that we
are necessitat to discharge Brewing in several places: And to Order the making
the Meal of Bear, and to keep up the famine for the use of the Poor, that are
in a starving Condition. The like Scarcity and Want not being seen for many
Ages. This We in all Humility, Represent to the Right Honorable the Lords of
His Majesty's Theasaury and Exchequer, praying them to consider the Condition
of the Brewers and Tacksmen, and to forbid their Farmers to molest the said
Brewers on their desisting from Brewing, by reason of the foresaids sad
Calamities, and to Discharge any Trouble to be given them on that account, that
the Poor may have Bread, and not Starve, which even this will hardly prevent.

The Names and Designations of the Subscribers, as follows, viz.
For Aberdeen-shire.
EArl of Errol, Earl of Kintore, Lord Pitsligo, Sir Thomas Burnet of Lies, Sir
John Forbes of Craigievar, Samuel Forbes of Foyeran, Andrew Frazer of Kinmundie
Sheriff-Deput, James Gordon of Seatoun, Robert Ross of Auchlossen, John Vdney
of that Ilk, Roderick Forbes of Brux, George Keith of Creichy, James Moor of
Stonywood, John Vdney of Newtyle.
For the Town of Aberdeen.
Robert Cruckshank of Banchry, provost.
Bamff-Shire.
EArl of Finlator, the Lord Boyne, James Abernethy of Birkenbog, Alexander
Ogilvie of Foirgland, William Bumbar of Durn, Alexander Gairden of Troup,
George L^slie of Burdsbank, Alexander Hay of Arnbath.
Angus and Kincardine-shires.
DAvid Grahame of Fintrey, Hercules Scot of Brothertoun, Mr. Robert Burnet of
Glenbervie, James Scot of Logie, William Barclay of Balmagequand.
Town and Shire of Inverness.
GEorge Cuthbert of Castlehill, William Robertson of Inches, James Mackintosh
of Termitt, Angus Mackintosh of Kelachie, William Duff of Diple, Hugh Frazer of
Belladrum, William Baillie of Dr^nzeain, William Baillie Commissar of
Inverness, John Grant of Corimonie.
Machpherson of Clunie,
Mr. Daniel Polson of Kinmyle, Sheriff-deput of Inverness, William Frazer of
Erchert, Alexander Frazer of (...) James Baillie of (...)
Cumming of Dalshanie
Hugh Robertson, Provost, James Macklain Baillie, Alexander Duff of Drummor
Baillie.
Cullen Town
JOhn Baird Baillie, Patrick Sanders Baillie Thomas Murray Clerk John Lorimer
Counselor William Strachan Counselor William Wall^ce Councellor.
Bamff Town
ALexander Lesly of Kinninvie Provost, Walter Stuart late Provost. Robert
Sanders Baillie Alexander Wallace Baillie James Ogilvie Baillie, George Leith
late Baillie William Scot Dean of Guild, James perik Thesaurer
The Declaration of North Inverness, Ross and Cromarty, has this Addition, etc.
LIkewise, We declare, that by reason of the badness of the last years Cropped,
there is such Scarsity of Beer and Malt here, that there is a great Dearth and
Famine amongst our Commons, and in several places, the Land is not Sown for
want of Seed, and all this Summer they could hardly get Beer to buy to make
Meal thereof, and we are necessitate to buy up Beer wherever we can get it, and
furnish them, to make Meal thereof, for the use of the poor that are in a
Starving Condition. This we in all humility represent to the Right Honorable
the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Thesaury and Exchequer, to consider
the Condition of the Tacksmen and Brewers, and to allow the Brewers their
desisting that the Poor and Commons may have Bread and not Starve, which we are
afraid of, if GOD in his Infinite Mercy prevent it not.

SIR John Monro of Foulis Sir Alexander Mackenzie of Coul Hugh Monro Younger of
Foulis David Monro of Kiltearn, David Monro of Teaninich William Monro of
Teanerd, George Mouro of Culrain, John Beaton of Calwaskea, Sir Donald Bayne of
Tulloch, Alexander Forrester of Culnald, Colin Mabkenzie Elder of Redcastle.
Rod. Mackenzie Younger of Redcastle Rod. Mackenzie of Culcovie. Alexander
Maskenzie younger of Dachmaluag: David Monro of Dalmoir, John Ross of
Achnaloch, William Ross of Aldy, Alexander Ross of Pitherry,
Cromarty Shire
Kenneth Mackenzie of Cromarty Alexander Clunies of Neilstoun Alexander
Vrquhart of Newhall John Vrquhart of Craighouse
The Burgh of Tayne
Walter Ross Provost of Tayne John Ross late Provost of Tayne Alexander Hay
Baillie of Tayne,
The Burgh of Fortross
Thomas Forbes Balilie of Fortross.
The Declaration by the Shire of Cathness has this Addition, viz.
WE the Commissioners of Supply, and other Heritors of the Shire of Caithnese,
undersubscribing, Do hereby Testify and Declare, that the Scarcity of Victual,
and especially of Bear in the said Shire, for the Crops 1695. and 1696. is, and
has been such, that none living among us have seen or felt a greater Famine,
and that many have starved for want of Bread; So that the Excise cannot make
near the half of what formerly it did, by reason of the foresaid Famine.

Sir George Sinclair of Clyth David Sinclair of Freswick, Alexander Sinclair of
Blebster James Sinclair of Forse William Suther and of Gees William Cunninghame
of Reasbo John Sinclair of Stirkock, James Murray of Claden. Patrick Murrray of
Scots-Cadel. Alexander Williamson of Borseskirk.
The Burgh of THORSO
Alexander Rorieson Baillie of Thorso John Swanson Baillie of Thorso
The Burgh of WEEK,
James Doul Baille of Week

