The MILKMAIDS Resolution.
Let Young men prate of what they please
Cause young men have been kind,
Theyl find no more such Fools as these
To please each Apish mind.
Tune, Cupids Trappan.




OF late I did hear a young man domineer,
Plow and vapor of what he could do
But I think he knew how for so manage the
far better then maidens to woe brave boys
far better etc.
And he surely does think that we maidens are mad
for to mind every Clown we do see
Should his Love be expressed, with a vow and protest
i would believe no such boobies as he brave
i would etc.
Though his bottles of Ale and other fine things
he bestows on me every day
It is my intent when his money is spent
to bid him begone and away brave boys
to bid, etc.
I Will give him good words while his money does last
and tell him I dearly do love him
When his cash is all gone, i will tell him my man John
there is others I fancy above him brave
And that which is worse, when once they do find
a maidens poor heart it is won
They Will laugh and they will jeer, they will giggle and sneer
that they this poor maid has undone brave
that etc.
Some men they love for what they can get
and it is certain there is many a Lubbard
Will sigh and will pant, seeming ready to faint
and all for the love of the Cubbard, brave boys
and all etc.
And others so long as they think a poor maid
has been careful and saved some money
This maiden will find he will prove very kind
and call her his joy and his honey brave boys
and etc.
Yea if this poor soul will be such a fooll
to hearken to this fellows tale
She Will to poverty fall, he will beguile her of all
she has got by the merry milk pail brave boys
And she that does carry the merry milk pall
and delights for to milk the brown Cow
May sure be as good, be it well understood
as the Looby that follows the Plow brave
as the etc.
Yet each pitiful clown will boast up and down
of the maidens that he has betrayed
If all were like me, such things should not be
nor ever hereafter be said, brave boys
nor etc.
Keep but at a distance, and then they will be
like men quite bereaved of sense
Then the best of them all into passion will fall
and be ready to dye for a wench brave boys
and etc.
Tho some of them now, do say they know how
to make any maiden to yield
But I would defy any man that should try
in the midst of the merry Broom field brave
in etc.
For my modesty shall defend me from all
that say it is so easy to win
The poor virgins sort, of which they make sport
and delight in this treacherous sin brave boys
and etc.
Then maidens beware, of such villains take care
whose delight is your absolute ruin
If they conquer with ease and gain what they please
theyl soon be^ weary of wooing brave boys
But if you stand off and at them do scoff
you will find they will burn like a fire
When you make them to bow, let your reason know how
to grant then the thing they desire brave
to grant etc.
Then take my advice you maids that are free
i will assure you I speak not in jest,
Never play with the dart till you yoyson your heart
for a single life it is the best brave
for etc.
There Is some that are married before they had wit
that with sorrows are sorely apprest
Then think it not strange, I am not for a change
for a single life it is the best brave boys
for etc.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball


