The Leichestershire Tragedy: OR, THE Fatal Overthrow of two Unfortunate
Lovers, CAUSED By SVSANNA's Breach of Promise.
To the Tune of, The Jealous Lover: or, The Languishing Swain.
YOung Lovers most discreet and wise,
With bleee^ing hear^ and melting eyes,
A sad Rela^ion h^re I ^r^^e,
Of one whose beauty shined bright:
Susana Lynard, was her name,
To whom for Love young Gallants came,
Amongst the rest, a Yeoman's Son,
Who at the length her favor won.
To her he brought a Ring of Gold,
And said, My dearest Love behold,
Receive this Token now from me,
And let our hearts united be.
If I am false to thee, my Dear,
I wish that I may never here
One day of Joy or Comfort find;
Then Dearest never change thy mind.
The youthf^l Damsel then replied,
If I refuse to be thy Bride,
Or fa^sifie the Vows of Love,
Let me a just Example Prove.
Yet, notwithstanding what had past,
When a young Squire came at last,
Who did to her new Courtship make,
Her former Love she did forsake.
Now when her loyal Lover knew,
That she her Vows had bid adieu,
He went to her in woeful case,
But she would not let him see her face.
Then like a dart, it pierced his heart,
He sighing said, And must we part?
Oh, most unconstano Wretch, he cried,
Sure Justice will be satisfied.
He waited till the Wedding Day,
Whe^n meeting her, he thus did say,
Though y^u shall with another wed,
You are my own alive or dead.
Your Love you shall not long enjoy,
For since my Life you do destroy,
When I have yielded up my breath,
My Ghost shall haunt you after Death.
This said, he left the Perjured Bride,
And wandered to a Riverside,
Where the next Morning he was found,
Bathed in his Blood upon the ground.
This Tidings to the Bride was brought,
Whose false heart his destruction wrought,
Her eyes did then like fountains run,
A loud she cried, What have I done!
My Vows comes fresh into my mind,
No Peace of Conscience can I find;
Alas, there is nothing left for me,
But the Reward of Perjury.
As she lamented night and day,
His bleeding Ghost was heard to say,
You shall not have an hour's rest,
For I will still your Joys molest.
The dreadful Visions of the Night,
Did fair Susanna so afright,
That she into a Fever fell,
And dying, said, False World farewell.
Young Men and Maids both far and near,
That shall this sad Relation hear,
See that you are not false in Love
For there is a Righteous God above,
Who will no doubt just Vengeance take
Of those that does no Conscience make,
When solemnly they Vow and Swear.
Henceforth false Lovers then bewear.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, in Pye-corner.


