THE Merry Hay-Makers; OR, Pleasant PASTIME, BETWEEN THE Young Men and Maids,
in the Pleasant Meadows.
To an Excellent New Tune.
Licensed according to Order.







IN our Country, in our Country,
where Kuff^lers they was a Backing;
And the rarest pastime that ever you see,
was when Hay-cocks they were a making. to be.
There Is Timmy, and Tommy, with Bottle and Bag,
as soon as the Lasses beheld them,
Because they did not give them what they d^d lack,
adzuggers they swore they would geld them. to be.
And did you not know one Volking the Smith,
and Mary that went to the D^iry;
Oh give me quoth she a thing that is soft,
for to make me look Buxem and Airy. to be.
And down in a dale there was tumble down Dick,
with Mary, and Sarah, and Susan.
They being in have for to play the old trick,
they leapt into bed with their shoos on. to be.
And some they will Fo^k, and some they will ^^ke,
when merrily they were a ^uassing.
And if you had but soon how Jones buttocks did wag,
^ would a broke a many sides out of laughing. to be.


young Bridget came next and plaguely Next,
with fury she fell upon Robin,
His Clatter de-vengance adzuggers she clawed,
'cause he with young Kate had been bobbing. to be.
With that he mote bold with speed to take hold,
of Bridgets young Chitter-de-widgeon,
He threw her along, but did it no wrong,
because it was just upon fledging. to be.
Her mother came by, and as she drew nigh,
the sight put her into a laughter;
His buttocks the hanged, and bid him be hanged,
for playing the fool with her daughter. to be.
The men and the maids they love their comrades,
above any paultry riches;
Quoth Nancy to Dick adzuggers I Am sick,
for something thou have in thy Breeches. to be.
What say thou me so then to it we'll go,
thou shall have thy earnest desire;
For thou art the Lass, I swear by the Mass,
which I above all do admire. to be.
At making of Hay they frolic and play,
as you may observe by this ^^tty,
And when they are cracked, away they are packt,
for Virgins away to the City.
Printed for C. B. in Pye-Corner.


