A mock-Song: Or, Love and no love.
The young man with this Maid would fain be doing,
And very earnest was with her in wooing;
But the Maiden she was very cunningly witted,
I think no young man never was better fitted.
To the Tune of, Mars and Venus.
With Allowance, To. L'Estrange.



ALL in the Evening as I walked
in the fields to take the ay^,
I spyed two Lovers there a talking,
under a pleasant shady Bower;
The young man said sweetheart do love me,
For I vow now I am come to prove thee,
if thou will be true and constant,
And grant me love for love again,
For I swear my heart with love is slain.
Maid. Indeed good Sir you do but flatter,
your complements cost you no money;
I Would have you rest your self contented,
for all you call me love and honey:
For a Maiden she had need be careful,
And of young men's promises to be fearful;
they are given so much to dissemble;
And tell a Maiden a hundred lies,
as many as there is stars in the skies.

Man. Alas fair Maiden your mistaken,
i will be as true as I do say:
And take these Gloves now in a love token,
and let us dally a while to day.
The time is pleasant, let us be doing,
As a remembrance of our amorous wooing;
and be so civil to my question;
If thou and I can but agree,
I take much delight in thy company.

Maid. O Sir I see what your intent is,
your a pretty man I understand;
To bring a Maiden to destruction,
if she could be by you trappan'd:
but hold you, for though your tongue runs nimble
Some men they can lie and dessemble;
so cunningly that he can woo:
To bring a Maiden to their Bow,
But I am not one that will do so.





Besides your nose Sir is so messel,
you spend what should maintain a Wife,
That is a sign that you will baffle,
you make her weary of her life:
Besides your countenance looks sour,
That you can both lout, pout and lour,
out of a Crab-tree you was bred;
Your Vinegar face makes me afraid,
I Would better in my grave he laid.

Man. O prithee Maiden be contented,
I have gold to make amends for all;
For want of beauty i will show more fancy,
thou have thy servants at thy call:
Besides i will be so loving to thee,
Because I can small beauty show thee,
what in my heart shall not be wanting:
If thou will yield thy love to me,
That we in love may both agree.

Maid. Indeed Sir you I cannot fancy,
that is not the thing I stand upon;
If I have a man he be neat and handsome,
take your answer now Sir, and be gone:
For a Drying Pan face shall not me entangle,
I Will keep out of false Cupids angle,
nor no golden baits shall fetter me:
I live well enough if I can see,
For a single life to a Maid is free.

Man. Why then fair Maiden I must leave thee,
God send thee a husband to thy delight,
I am sorry my Crab-tree face does grieve thee,
a fairer may chance to have more deceit.
All is not gold that now does glister.
Nor all not lead that does look rusty:
the Trial of a man is all,
If thou can not love me another shall,
You may chance to leap and get a fall.

Maid. I wish you Sir once more to hear me,
I have a word more for to say;
If I should yield and you deceive me,
I might repent it another day;
Therefore i will not be tied in Marriage,
But live a Maid in a civil carriage,
a single life I hold it pleasant;
For a woman to go whether she please,
She Is free to work, or take her ease.

And so i would wish you to be jogging,
and take your fortune where you can;
Many Maids has believed young-mens coging
and by that means has been undone.
For as long as a Maid she can live single,
And keep out of Cupids tangle,
she is free from sorrow, care, and strife;
Before many a man that has a Wife,
And lives a pleasant happy life.

Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospital-gate, in
Westsmith field.


