AN ELEGY
In Memory, and at the Interring of the Body of the most famous and truly
Noble Knight, Sir HENRY MERVYN.

Pattern of all true Valor; Worth, and Arts, who departed this life the 30. of
May, and lies Interred at Westminster, Anno Do: 1646.

With wondering raptures, darting at the air
Much grief and anguish, sadness and despair,
With mournings, ^usings, madness, and a mind
Cast down so low, disconsolate, combined,
With cruel thoughts, to tear the Stars, and strive
To pluck the Planets; who by power deprive
Those admired Spirits, so inspired with worth.
And rob those rare Excellencies of earth;
What fatal planet; placed in the Sky
Durst thus triumph? What cruel destiny
Durst dare to meddle, or molest thy Spirit,
Which did all Virtues to the full inherit?
The rarest Model of admired Parts,
Pure quintesence, of exquisite deserts,
So Singular, no Second could admit,
The very essence of all acute wit.
The Emphasis of every praise we read,
And Source from whence all knowledge did proceed,
The life of learning and a light to all
That lived, or had their being on this Ball.
Nature is nothing, if it has not Art;
But it in thee, perfection did impart
In such abundance, that I do believe
Art, here, by nature, was superlative,
Thy thoughts were such: they soared on sacred wing^
Unlimited, to Sublunary things,
Were all subleame, or at the least too high,
for usual Spirits, Men's Capacity;
Throughout all Nations, Notable for Fame,
Whose worth, all after ages shall procleame,
Who scorned the honors of this present age,
Nor found it fit, thy virtues to, engage
With such as strove, in State to be extolled,
Or wrapped by favor, in a new framed Mould,
Let all the Muses, mourn in sable Coats,
Heavens Quiristers, sing Melancholyk notes;
Let all the Arts, both Moral, and Divine,
All Curious Poets, add one mournful line
To show their love, our loss, and let them pen
The highest praise, appropriate to men,
And yield them all; as attributes most due,
To do him honor, and again renew
Their Verse once more; and write upon his Chest.
The quickest Wit, the rarest mind, the best.
Dame Natur's darling, singular in skill,
Of all the arts, and sciences, no quill
Can Comprehend, Contrive, or Calculate,
His true de-merits; nor can Elevate.
His Worth; nor yet Apelles Colored art,
Nor Zeuxes pencill, if alive, impart
His prudence, and his pregn^nt Eloquence,
His practice, rare performance, Eminence,
Nor yet his outward, objects of our Eye,
None could at all, draw to the life; but lie
And let them be, but as they are the aim,
To figure forth, things signity'd by them;
Nor has he left, behind, one so expert,
Upon the Stage; equal to play his part,
Yet all these could not, add one hours increase
Unto his time, you see all flesh is graffe.
No usual quill could draw so rare a shape,
The best Experience, could not well escape,
But it must err, nor none can draw his mind
No more then they, Can fathom up wind.
Wherefore in silence, I must cease, and wonder,
So thou may stay, swift passenger, and ponder:
What Piece of Earth, lies here Intemb'd, and then
Go tell that Mervin, was the praise of Men.
SIR HENRY MERVIN; Anagram. My hit's ever in he'ven, Anagram. Here in my Urne:
My hit's ever in he'ven, then do not mourn.
There rests my soul; my earth; Here in my Vrne. Anagram.
Here in my Vrne, in secret where J lie,
Confined by fate, or humane destiny.
Fame passing hence; struck in a Maze, stood dombe,
And writ these words, upon my painted Tomb
With sighs, and tears, and Sacrifized Groans,
And left them all, as witnesses at once
For to be viewed who having tribute paid,
Straight vanished quite; these were the words were said,
Epitaph.
Mervyn the Model moral and divine,
Of all that Natur's knowledge could combine,
Lies here, but yet for all of this Conceive
His boundless worth, Could not come to the Grave
But lives; and still, so long as time does last,
His fame (shall far, exceed the Worthyest.
Who in a word, proves truly such a Theme
That you may read Minerva in his Name.
To the Island of England, and the Universal Ocean.
O English Island, hence forbear to boast:
You boundless Oceans, which surround its Coast,
Disclose your secrets: neither swell with pride,
Since Mervyn now, the Marinors best guide,
Is gone; for if, thy stormy Waves arise,
No Art, nor Skill, can Christendom devise
To compass safely; he, was only he,
Who could triumph, and in thy deep did see
Those hidden dangers, which devoured a world,
For want of knowledge, and were headlong hurld,
Beyond their bounds; but O! What Trophies can
Be then Created: for so rare a Man?
No; none at all; but such as may seem Odd,
And must be made: by Neptun who is a God.
And that is this; the sky's shall change their kind
Into a Curtain; and constrain the Wind
To stay; and henceforth never more shall blow,
But be a substance, and no ayrie show
Shall thence proceed; but shall as Emblem's fly
Gaiz'd on, and wondered at, with mortals eye:
As signs of honor; and shall so remain,
Till Mervyn be, raised from the dust again.
HENRY MERVYN. Anag. Renew my hire.
HENRY MERVYN. Anag. Merry in he'ven.
Dystichon Renew my hire; and make me one of them
That Is Merry in he'ven, it is all whereat I aim.
Eccrostick.
Here, learnings Compend, Miracolous in Arts
Estranged does lie; ( Endowed with divyne Parts)
No more to more, Removed from our Sphere,
Remains above, Unstained, in spotless Air,
Just and ingenuous Yet he must Submit,
Even unto death, Nothing can Conquer it
But his perfection, who made him perfect,
Where Mervyn liv's, with Angels, in Delight.
By W: MERCER.
London, Printed by Jane Coe, 1646.


