The Maidens Counselor OR, A fair Warning before Marriage.
You Damsels fair, take special Care,
And not too hasty be
A Marriage Life brings Care and Strife,
When single Maids live free.
Tune of the Spinning-Wheel.
This may be Printed, R. P.





YOung Damsels all, both far and near,
observe the Counsel which I give;
And then I Am sure you need not fear,
but that you all may happy live;
Let not young Men your hearts ensnare,
A single life is free from care.
Full one and twenty years and more,
I am of Age full well it is known,
And though I have got sweet hearts store
yet I delight to lie alone;
Resolved I am to shun the snare;
A Single Life is free from Care.
Some Damsels does great Portions bring,
Of Gold and Silver many a Pound,
To those that make the Taverns Ring,
until the same they quite confound;
For their poor Wives they nothing spare;
A single Life is free from Care.
Have I not heard of those well bred,
who never knew no want at all,
Yet after being sometime Wed,
they have been brought to deadly thrall;
For want alas! full heard they fare;
A single Life is free from Care.




What pleasing stories some will tell,
poor harmless Damsels to betray,
Swearing they Love them passing well,
but it is their Money more then they;
But he advised and shun the snare;
A single life is free from Care.
Beware of every hussing balde,
for they are subject to deceive,
As being of the Lying-trade,
and therefore do not them believe,
Although they Solemnly do swear;
A single life is free from Care.
For while you lead a single Life,
your Suitor he will kindness show,
But when you once are made his Wife,
alas! you will find it nothing so;
Instead of Love perhaps he will swear,
A single life is free from Care.
Bad Husbands they abroad will Roam,
and take those pleasure where they please,
While their poor Wives must stay at home,
there is too many such as these;
With this they patiently must bear,
A single life is free from Care.
For when they do return at Night,
from their sweet Mirth and pleasant Ioys,
In which they place their chief Delight:
I mean their Kanting Roaring Boys;
The Wife with this, and more must bear,
A single life is free from Care.
Though she Entreats him to refrain,
while Tears does trickle from her Face,
Yet alas it is all in vain,
for he Resolves to run his Race,
And will not in the least forbear,
A single life is free from Care.
I pray take heed now all that is here,
before the Marriage Rites are past;
It is not for a Month or Year,
but full as Long as Life shall Last;
Therefore be wife, and shun the snare;
A single life is free from Care.
Young Dam'sels now of each degree,
be careful of your Marriage State,
And take this kind advice of me,
for fear Repentance comes too Late;
Do not your selves too soon ensnare;
A single life is free from Care.

