The Merchants Daughter of Bristow.
The tune is, the Maidens Joy.
BEhold the Touch stone of true Love,
Maudlin the Merchants daughter of Bristow Town,
Whose firm affection nothing could move,
This favor bears the lovely brown.
A gallant youth was dwelling by,
Which many years had born this maiden great good will
She loved him so faithfully,
But all her friends withstood it still,
The young man now perceiving well,
He could not get nor win the favor of her friends,
The force of sorrows to expel,
To view strange Countries he intends,
And now to take his last farewell,
Of his true love his fair and constant Maudlin,
With Music sweet that did excel,
He played under her window then,
Farewell quoth he my own true Love,
Farewell my dear and chiefest Treasure of my heart,
Through fortunes spite that false did prove,
I am enforced from thee to part,
Into the Land of Italy,
There will I wail and weary out my life in woe,
Seeing my true Love is kept from me.
I hold my life a mortal foe.
Fair Bristow Town therefore adieu,
For Padua shall be my habitation now,
Although my Love does rest in thee,
To whom alone my heart I vow,
With trickling tears thus did he sing,
With sighs and sobs discending from his heart full sore,
He said when he his hands did wring,
Farewell sweet Love for evermore,
Fair Maudlin from a window high,
Beholding her true Love with Music where he stood.
But not a word she d^rst reply.
Fearing her Parents angry mood.
In tears she spent that woeful night,
Wishing her self though naked with her faithful Friend
She blames her friends and fortunes spite,
That wrought her love such luckless end.
And in her heart she made a vow,
Clean to forsake her country and her kindred all,
And for to follow her true love*
To abide all chance that might befall*
The night is gone and the day is come.
And in the morning very early did she rise,
She gets her down into a lower Room,
Where sundry Seamen she ^spyes.
A gallant Master among them all
The Master of a great and goodly ship was he,
Who there was waiting in the Hall,
To speak with her Father if it might be,
She kindly takes him by the hand,
Good sir said she and would you speak with any here,
Quoth he fair Maid therefore I do stand,
Then gentle sir I pray draw near.
Into a pleasant parlor by,
With hand in hand she brings the Seamen all alone,
Sighing to him most piteously,
S^e thus to him did make her moan,
She falls upon her tender knee,
Good sir said she now pity you a woman's woe.
And prove a faithful friend to m^*
That I to you my grief may show,
Since you repose your trust he said,
In me who an unknown and eke a stranger here.
Be you assured most proper maid,
Most faithful still I will appear,
I have a brother then quoth she,
Whom as my life I love and favor tenderly
In Padua alas is he,
Full sick God wot and like to dye,
Full fain I would my brother see.
But that my Father will not yield to let me go,
Therefore good sir be good to me,
And unto me this favor show;
Some ship boys Garment bring to me,
That I disguised may go unknown,
And unto Sea I Will go with thee,
If thus much favor might be shown,
Fair maid quoth he take here my hand
I will fulfill each thing that you desire,
And set you safe in that same Land.
And in that place that you require.
She gave him then a tender kiss,
And says to him your servant Master will I be,
And prove your faithful fr^end for this,
Sweet master then forget not me,
This done as they had both agreed,
Soon after that before the break of day.
He brings her garments then with speed,
Therein her self she did array,
And ere her Father did arise,
She meets her Master as he walked in the hall,
She did attend on him likewise,
Until her Father did him call,
But ere the Merchant made an end,
Of all his weighty matters he had then to say,
His wife came weeping in with speed,
Saying our Daughters gone away,
The Merchant then am^z;'d in mind,
Yonder vile wretch enticed away my child quoth she
But I well wot I shall him find
At padua in I^aly
With that he spoke their master brave
W^, shipfull merchant thither goes this pretty youth
And any thing that you would crave,
he will perform and write the truth.
Sweet youth quoth he if it be so,
Bear me a leter to the English merchant th^r
and gold on thee I will bestow,
My daughters welfare I do fear,
Her mother took her by the hand,
Fair youth quoth she if ere thou ^ost my daughter see,
Let me therefore soon understand,
and there is twenty crowns for thee,
Thus through the daughters strange disguise,
The mother knew not w^^n she spoke unto her child,
and after her master stright she hyes,
Taking her leave with countenance mild,
Thus to the Sea fair Maudlins gone,
With her gentle maste^ God ^end them a merry wind,
Where we a while must let them alone,
Till you the second part do find,
WElcome sweet Maudlin from the Seas,
Where bitter storms and tempests do arise
The pleasant banks of Italy
You may behold with mortal eyes
Thanks gentle master then said she,
A faithful friend in sorrow thou have been
If fortune once do smile on me.
My gentle heart shall soon be seen.
blessed be the land that feeds my love
blessed be the place whereas his person does abide
No trial will I stick to prove
Whereby my true-love may b^ tri^d.
Now will I walk with joy full heart
To view the town whereas my darling does remain
And seek him out in every ^art,
Until his sight I do obtain
And I quoth he will not forsake.
Sweet Maudlin in her sorrows up and down
In wealth or woe thy part i will take,
And bring thee safe to padua town
And after many weary steps
In Padua they safe arrived at the last
For very joy her heart it leaps
She thinks not on her sorrows past
Condemned to die he was alas
Except he would from his Religion turn,
but rather then he would to mass
In fiery flames he vowed to burn.
Now does sweet Maudlin weep and wail,
Her joy is turned to weeping sorrow grief and care,
For nothing could her plaints prevail,
For death alone must be his share.
She walks under the prison walls
Where her true love did lie and languish in distress
When woefully for food he calls
When hunger did his heart oppress.
he sighs an^ sobs and makes great moan,
Farewell sweet love forevermore.
And all my friends that have me known,
In bristow town with wealth and store,
but most of all farewell quoth he
My own sweet Maudlin whom I left behind
For never more thou shall me see.
Woe to thy father most unkind,
how well were I if ^hou were here
With thy fair hands to close these my wretched eyes
My torments easse would appear
My soul with joy should scale the Skies.
When Maudlin heard her Lovers moan
her eyes with tears her heart with sorrow filled was
To speak with him no men was known
Such grievous doom on him did pass.
Then she put off her lads attire
her maidens weed upon her back she seemly set
To the judges house she did inquire.
And there she did a service get
She did her duty there so well
And eke so prudently she did herself behave
With her in love her master fell,
his servants favor he does crave,
Maudlin quoth he my hearts delight,
To whom my heart in affection is tied
breed not my death through thy despite
A faithful friend thou shall me find
O grant me thy love fair maid quoth he
And at my hands desire what thou can devise
And I will grant it unto thee
Where by thy credit may arise.
I have a brot^e^ sir said she
For his Religion is now condemned to dye*
I^ loathsome prison he is cast
Oppressed wi^h grief and misery
Grant me my brothers l^^e she said
And now to you my love and liking will I give
that may not be quoth he fair maid
Except he turn he cannot live
an ^nglish friar there is she said
Of ^^^rning great and assing pure of life
Let ^im to my brother be sent
and he will finish soon the strife
Her master granted her request
The Mariner in Friars need she did array
And to her love that lay distressed
She did a letter soon convey
When he had read these gentle lines
his heart was ravished with present joy
Where now she is full well he kn^w
The Friar likewise was not coy
but did declare to him at large
The enterprise his love for him had taken in hand
The youngman did the Friar charge
His love should straight depart the land
here to no place for her he said
But woeful death and danger of her life
Profess^ng truth I was betrayed,
And fearful flames must end the strife.
For ere I will my faith deny
and swear my self to follow damned antichrist
I Will yield my body for to die.
To live in heaven with the highest
O sir the gentle Friar said
A woeful match quoth he is amnde
Where Christ is left to win a wife.
When she had used all means she might
To save his life yet all would not be,
then of the judge she claim^d her right
to die the death as well as he.
When no persuasion could prevail
Nor change her mind in any thing that she had said
She was with him condemned to dye
and for them both one fire was made.
Yea arm in arm most joyfully
these lovers twain unto the fire did go
The Mariner most faithfully
Was likewise partner of this woe.
but when the judges understood
The faithful friendship did in them remain
they saved their lives and afterward
to England sent them back again
Now was their sorrow turned to joy
and faithful lovers have their hearts desire
their pain so well they did employ
God granted that they did desire.
and when they did to England come
and in merry bristow arrived at the last
Great joy there was to all and some
That heard the dangers they had past
Her father he was dead Got wot
and eke her mother was joyful at her sight
Their wishes she denied not.
but wedded them to hearts delight.
Her gentle master she desired.
to be her father and at church to give her then
It was fulfilled as she required
Unto the joys of all good men.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson.


