MEMORIAL To his Grace, His MAJESTY'S High Commissioner, and the Honorable
Estates of Parliament, concerning a Fond for a yearly Sallary to the Judge of
the High Court of Admirality.
THE High Court of Admirality, being by Act of Parliament declared a Sovereign
Court, it is suitable to the Dignity thereof, that the Judge have a settled
Sallary for his Pains and Encouragement, as other Judges of Sovereign Courts
have, and that he be not left to the meanness and uncertainty of Sentence-money.

The most natural Fond that occurs, is some small Tunnage on Shipping, which
may be made to easy, that it will be very insensible to those liable in
payment.

In the last Session of Parliament there was Imposed Sixteen Pence on the Tun
of every Foraign Ship which came into any Harbor or Road within this Kingdom,
each Voyage, and Four Shilling Scots on every Tun of Scots Ships above Twelve
Tuns Burden, once ilk Year, which was to be applied by the Lords of Privy
Council for Re-imbursing Captain Slazer and Mr. Adair, for certain Mapps,
Prospects, and Descriptions of Scotland, with power to stop the said Imposition
in whole or in part, when the said Maps and Prospects were perfected.

How far Mr. Slazer and Mr. Adair are paid or might have been paid out of the
said Fond, may be enquired into if the Estates of Parliament think fit.

It is certain this Imposition was complained of as a very heavy Burden by
those concerned with Shipping, for easing them thereof in a great Measure.

It is humbly proposed, that the one half of the said Imposition be continued
to be a Fond for a Sallary to the Judge of the High Court of Admirality, and
for making it the more effectual, that a Collector be appointed touplift the
whole Termly, and that he have a suitable Allowance, as also that the Judge and
Collectors Sallary be appointed to be paid out of the first and readiest of
the said Imposition, and if the Parliament think fit to continue any part of
the said Tunnage for Mr. Slazer or Adairs Behooves, that the same be paid out
of the superplus: But Captain Slazers performances being altogether extrinsick
from Shipping, the Parliament may possibly fall on some other more proper Fond
for his Reimbursement.

The Royal Burrows who are most concerned in this Matter, will willingly agree
to this Proposal, and what shall be the Quota of the Sallary, is submitted to
the Commissioner his Grace and the Honorable Estates of Parliament.


