THE Spiritual GUIDE, WHICH Disintangles the Soul, AND Brings it by the Inward
Way, TO THE Getting of Perfect Contemplation, AND THE Rich Treasure of Internal
Peace.

Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos, Priest.

With a short Treatise Concerning Daily Communion By the same AUTHOR.

Translated from the ITALIAN Copy Printed at Venice, 1685.

The Second Edition.

This may be Reprinted, C. N. May 2. 1688.

London: Printed for Tho. Fabian, at the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, a
Corner shop next Cheapside. 1688.

AN ACCOUNT Of the following BOOK To all sorts of Readers.
THE Book that is here presented yea, is a Translation from the Italian Copy,
Printed at Venice in 1685. The first Man that got it, with difficulty, out of
the Author's hands, and then had it Printed at Rome in 1675, with all the
solemnity of approbations, was Friar John of St. Mary, who styles himself
Provincial; and he speaks very fine things of it, and he had so heartily read
it over, that the impression which it made in his Mind, gave him the exact cue
and knack of that sort of Language which the Author uses, when he throws
himself headlong into darkness and obscurity: And when this Man had recommended
the Book to the sincere Reader, after his way; the next that appears to give a
Grace to it, is no less a Man, than the most Illustrious and most Reverend
Lord, the Archbishop of Rhegium, who tells us how many great Offices in the
Church he had passed through; he says in his Approbation of the Book, that it is
a hard matter to make a judgment of it, without some experience of the things
contained in it: And that how high soever the secret of it be above all humane
Discourse, yet they are not only not contrary to the right dictates of Reason,
but altogether conformable to it: Which is as fitting a Preface to some things
in the Book, as any man in the World could have made with the Study of Seven
Years: First, to say that these sovereign Secrets, which the Book treats of,
are above all humane Discourse; and then in the very next words, to say they
are conformable altogether to the dictates of Reason: as if the dictates of
Reason and human Discourse had entered into a Combination never to come to a
right understanding of one another. He that would be further satisfied of the
fitness of this Archbishop's Character to the Book, will be gratified, by
reading patiently some things of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Chapters of the
Third Book: But it is enough, that this great Man speaks well of his Countryman
Molinos's Doctrine, that it is according to the judgment of the holy Fathers,
and the usual way of Mystical Divines: he says again, that the Author of this
Book, does not speak his own Capricios, but follows the footsteps of the
Ancients, and builds upon their Principles, and spiritual Foundations, that he
reduces 'em to a right and clear Method, bringing forth (says he) out of his
Treasures, things new and old: And for the Style of the Book, he allows it to
be clear, easy, plain, and full in such crabbed hard and lofty Subject; adding
withal, that the Man does not decline Proofs of Scripture, Doctrines of the
Fathers, Decrees of Councils, nor the Principles of Morality, and therefore he
judges it to be a useful Piece, and very worthy to be Printed: and what can be
said more to set any Book off.

Next to the Archbishop's Approbation, in comes that of Friar Francis Mary,
Minister General of the whole Franciscian Order, given from his Convent of Ara
Coeli, who speaks mighty kindly and favorably of the Book, and recommends it
to the Press.

Then appears the Approbation of Friar Dominic of the most holy Trinity,
Qualifier and Counselor of the holy Office of Malta, and of the Inquisition
of Rome, Rector of the College of Missionaries, at St. Pancrace, and he
blesses himself as he sits in judgment upon it, and gives his sense and liking,
as formally as the rest.

After this comes a famous Jesuit, another Qualifier of the Roman Inquisition,
and he takes it to be a Book of singular esteem and use, and recommends it to
others with as much cordial kindness, as he fancied he had received good by it.

And next to him a great Capucine, that could not forbear (either for the
credit of the Book, or himself) to tell the World, that he had been no less
than four several times, Provincial of Andaluzia, and was at present Definitor
General of all his Order; and expresses himself much taken with the Book, and
as a good proof of so being, discourses upon it in that Mystical Way, and would
by no means have it kept from being Published.

All this is Roman Approbation; which signifies but little to a Book that must
be Printed in Venice; and therefore the Reformers of the University of Padua,
who License Books, receiving a Certificate from their Secretary, that the Book
had nothing in it against Princes, or good Manners, give leave to a Stationer
of Venice to Print it again there, in 1676, upon the Authority of which License
it came out once more, in 1685; which was the Copy, that this Translation goes
by. So that this Book, it seems, has been sufficiently dispersed in the World,
by all these Impressions: And who can say any thing more for it, than such men
as these, that have Read and Censured it so Heartily, and Kindly? If what has
since happened to the Author and his Reputation, do make his Vouchers wish
that they had not been so free of their Courtesy, let them look to that: But
whilst the poor Man is so harrassed in Rome, it would become the Mercy of this
religious Nation, to hear him speak his Mind by an Interpreter: What has stung
the Court of Rome may be partly guessed at by this Book: Till we know further
of the Author, there is no more to be said of him than that sometimes he
lights upon shrewd Truths, and very excellent Thoughts, as well as mere Trash
and Foppery. Do but pardon him his rich Vein of Enthusiasm and Gibberish, and
give him leave now and then to speak further than you can see or apprehend, and
you will find things enough to make you think and attend to what he says: But
withal let me tell you, that it is a Blessing to you to live in a Country, where
the Ministers of Religion do not use to put Tricks upon your Understanding nor
lead you blindly you know not whither. And so I rest,

In Molinos 's Style, NOBODY.

THE Spiritual Guide, Which disentangles the Soul, and by the inward way, leads
it to the fruition of Perfect Contemplation, and of the rich treasure of
Internal Peace.
THE AUTHOR to the READER.
THere is nothing more difficult, than to please all People, nor more easy and
common than to censure Books that come abroad in the World. All Books, without
exception, that see the light, run the common risk of both these
in^onveniences, though they may be sheltered under the most sublime Protection,
what will become of this little Book then, which has no Patronage? the Subject
whereof being mystical and not well-seasoned, carries along with it the common
censure, and will seem insipid? Kind Reader, if you understand it not, be not
therefore apt to censure the same.

The Natural Man may hear and read these Spiritual Matters, but he can never
comprehend them, 1 Cor. chapter 2.
as St. Paul says, The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God. If you condemn it, you condemn your self to the number of the wise men of
this World, of whom St. Denis says, that God imparts not this Wisdom to them,
as he does to the simple and humble, though in the opinion of men they be
ignorant.

Mystical knowledge proceeds not from Wit, but from Experience; it is not
invented, but proved; not read, but received; and is therefore most secure, and
efficacious, of great help and plentiful in fruit; Matthew. 11.
it enters not into the Soul by the Ears, nor by the continual Reading of
Books, but by the free Infusion of the Holy Ghost, whose Grace with most
delightful intimacy, is communicated to the simple and lowly.

There are some Learned Men who have never read these Matters, and some
Spiritual Men that hitherto have hardly relished them, and therefore both
condemn them, the one out of Ignorance, and the other for want of Experience.

Besides, it is certain, that he who has not the experience of this sweetness,
cannot pass a Judgment upon these Mysterious Secrets; nay, rather he will be
scandalized (as many are) when he hears of the Wonders which the Divine Love is
wont to work in Souls, because he finds no such rarities in his own. Who shall
limit the goodness of God, whose Arm is not shortened, but that he can do now
what he has wrought at other times? God calls neither the strongest nor the
richest for their merit; but calls rather the weakest and most wretched, that
his infinite mercy may shine forth the more.

This Science is not Theoretical, but Practical, wherein Experience surpasses
the most refined and ingenious Speculation. Hence it was that St. Teresia
admonished her ghostly Father, that he should not confer about Spiritual
Matters, but with Spiritual Men; Because, said she, if they know but one way,
or if they have stopped midway, there is no success to be expected.

It will soon appear that he has no expeperience of this practical and
mystical Science, who shall condemn the Doctrine of this Book, and who has not
read St. Dennis, St. Austin, St. Gregory, St. Bernard, St. Thomas, St.
Bonaventure, and many other Saints and Doctors approved by the Church, who like
expert men, approve, commend and teach the Practice of this Doctrine.

It is to be taken notice of, that the Doctrine of this Book instructs not all
sorts of Persons, but those only who have the Senses and Passions well
mortified, who have already advanced and made progress in Prayer, and are
called by God to the inward way, who encourages and guides them, freeing them
from the obstacles which hinder the course to perfect Contemplation.

I have taken care to have the Style of this Book devote, chaste, and useful,
without the ornament of polite Sentences, ostentation of Eloquence, or
Theological niceties, my only scope was to teach the Naked Truth, with
humility, sincerity, and perspicuity.

It is not to be wondered at that new Spiritual Books are every day published
in the World, because God has always new Lights to communicate, and Souls
stand always in need of these Instructions. All things have not been said, nor
every thing written, hence it is that there will be Writing to the end of the
World. Wonderful were the Lights that God Almighty communicated to his Church,
by means of the Angelical Doctor St. Thomas, and at the hour of his death, he
himself said, that the Divine Majesty had at that instant communicated to him
so much light, that all he had before written came short of it. God has, then,
and always will have new Lights to communicate, without any diminution to his
own Infinite Wisdom.

The many and grievous pains and difficulties of the inward way ought not to
make a Soul despond, because it is but reasonable that a thing of great value
should cost dear. Be of good comfort, and believe, that not only those which
are here represented, but many others also will be overcome with the Grace of
God and Internal Fortitude.

It was never my design to treat of Contemplation, nor in defense of it, as
many have done who have learnedly and speculatively published whole Books, full
of efficacious Reasons, Doctrines and Authorities of Saints and of the Holy
Scripture, for confuting the Opinion of those who without any ground have
condemned, and do condemn it.

The Experience of many Years (by reason of the many Souls who have trusted to
my insufficiency, for their conduct in the inward way, to which they have been
called) has convinced me of the great necessity they are in of having the
obstacles taken out of their way, the inclinations, affections and allurements
removed, which wholly hinder the course and obstruct the way to perfect
Contemplation.

This whole practical Book tends chiefly to this end, because it is not enough
to ascertain the inward way of Contemplation, if the obstacles be not taken out
of the way of those Souls that are called and assured, which hinder their
progress and spiritual flight; For which end I have made use rather of what God
out of his infinite mercy has inspired into me and taught me, than of any
thing that the speculative reading of Books has suggested unto me, or furnished
me with.

Sometimes (though very seldom) I quote the Authority of some practical and
experienced Author, to show that the Doctrine which is here taught is not
singular and rare. It has been my first scope then, not to ascertain the
inward way, but to disentangle and unpester it; My next has been to instruct
the Spiritual Divertors, that they may not stop those Souls in their course
which are called by these secret Paths to internal Peace and supreme Felicity.
God of his infinite mercy grant, that an end so much desired may be obtained.

I hope in God, that some of those Souls, whom his Divine Majesty calls to this
knowledge, will find profit from what I have writ; for whose sake I shall
reckon my pains very well employed. This has been the only but of my desire,
and if God (as certainly he will) accept and approve those pure desires, I
shall be content and have my reward.

Farewell.
THE PREFACE.
First Advertisement. By two ways one may go to God; the first by Meditation
and Discourse or Reasoning; the second by pure Faith and Contemplation.
1. THere are two ways of going to God, the one by Consideration and Mental
Discourse, and the other by the Purity of Faith, an indistinct, general and
confused knowledge. The first is called Meditation, the second Internal
Recollection, or Acquired Contemplation. The first is of beginners, the second
of Proficients. The first is sensible, and material, the second more naked,
pure, and internal.

2. When the Soul is already accustomed to discourse of Mysteries, by the help
of imagition, and the use of corporal Images; being carried from Creature to
Cteature, and from Knowledge to Knowledge (though with very little of that
which it wants) and from these to the Creator; Then God is wont to take that
Soul by the hand, (if rather he calls it not in the very beginnings, and leads
it without ratiocination by the way of pure Faith) making the intellect pass by
all considerations and reasonings, draws it forward, and raises it out of this
material and sensible state, making it under a simple and obscure knowledge of
Faith, wholly aspire to its Bridegroom upon the wings of Love, without any
farther necessity of the persuasions and informations of the Intellect, to make
it love him, because in that manner the Soul's love would be very scanty, much
dependent on Creatures, stinted to drops, and these too but falling with pauses
and intervals.

3. By how much less it depends on Creatures, and the more it relies on God
alone, and his secret documents, by the mediation of pure Faith, the more
durable, firm, and strong will that Love be. After the Soul has already
acquired the knowledge which all the meditations and corporal images of
Creatures can give her; if, now, the Lord raise her out of that state, by
stripping her of ratiocination, and leaving her in divine darkness, to the end
she may march in the straight Way, and by pure Faith, ^et her be guided, and
not love with the scantiness and tenuity that these direct; but let her suppose
that the whole World, and all that the most refined conceptions of the wisest
understandings can tell her, are nothing, and that the goodness and beauty of
her beloved, infinitely surpasses all their knowledge, being persuaded that all
Creatures are too rude to inform her, and to conduct her to the true knowledge
of God.

4. She ought then to advance forward with her love, leaving all her
understanding behind. Let her love God as he is in himself, and not as her
imagination says he is, and frames him to her; And if she cannot know him as he
is in himself, let her love him without knowing him under the obscure veils of
Faith; in the same manner as a Son who has never seen his Father, but fully
believing those who have given him information of him, loves him, as if he had
already seen him.

5. The Soul, from which Mental Discourse is taken, ought not to strain her
self, nor sollicitously seek for more clear and particular knowledge, but even
without the supports of sensible consolations or notices, with poverty of
spirit, and deprived of all that the natural appetite requires; continue quiet,
firm and constant, letting the Lord work his work, though she may seem to be
alone, exhausted and full of darkness: and though this appear to her to be
idleness, it is only of her own sensible and material activity, not of God's,
who is working true knowledge in her.

6. Finally, the more the Spirit ascends, the more it is taken off of sensible
objects. Many are the souls, who have arrived and do arrive at this gate, but
few have passed or do pass it for want of the experimental guide, and those who
have had, and actually have it, for want of a true subjection and entire
submission.

7. They Will say, that the Will will not love, but be unactive, if the Intellect
understand not clearly and distinctly, it being a received Maxim, that that
which is not known, cannot be loved. To this it is answered, that though the
Intellect understand not distinctly by ratiocination, Images and
Considerations, yet it understands and knows by an obscure; general, and
confused Faith; which knowledge, though so obscure, indistinct, and general, as
being supernatural, has nevertheless a more clear and perfect cognition of
God, than any sensible and particular notice, that can be formed in this life,
because all corporal and sensible representation is infinitely distant from God.

8. We know God more perfectly (says St. Denis) by Negatives, Mist ^^ Theol. c.
1. ^. 2.
than by Affirmatives. We think more highly of God, by knowing, that he is
incomprehensible, and above all our capacity, than by conceiving him under any
image, or created beauty, according to our rude understanding. A greater esteem
and love then, will flow from this confused, obscure and negative, than from
any other sensible and distinct way; because that is more proper to God and
abstracted from creatures; and this, on the contrary, the more it depends on
creatures, the less it has of God.

Second Advertisement. Declaring what Meditation and Contemplation are, and the
difference that is betwixt them.
9. Lib. 3. de fide c. 24.
ST. John Damascene and other Saints say, that Prayer is a sallying out or
elevation of the mind to God. God is above all Creatures, and the Soul cannot
see him, nor converse with him, if it raise not it self above them all. This
friendly conversation, which the Soul has with God, that is to say, in Prayer,
is divided into Meditation and Contemplation.

10. When the Mind considers the Mysteries of our holy Faith with attention, to
know the truth of them, reasoning upon the particulars, and weighing the
circumstances of the same, for exciting the affections in the will: This mental
Discourse and pious Act is properly called Meditation.

11. When the Soul already knows the truth (either by a habit acquired through
reasoning, or because the Lord has given it particular light) and fixes the
eyes of the mind on the demonstrated truth, beholding it sincerely with
quietness and silence, without any necessity of considerations, ratiocinations,
or other proofs of conviction, and the will loves it, admiring and delighting
it self therein: This properly is called the Prayer of Faith, the Prayer of
Rest, Internal Recognition or Contemplation.

Which St. Thomas with all the mystical Masters says, is a sincere, 2. 2. q.
180. Art. 3. p. 4.
sweet, and still view of the eternal truth without ratiocination, or
reflection. But if the Soul rejoices in, or eyes the effects of God in the
creatures, and amongst them, in the humanity of our Lord Christ, as the most
perfect of all, this is not perfect Contemplation, as St. Thomas affirms,
ibidem^
since all these are means for knowing of God as he is in himself: And although
the humanity of Christ be the most holy and perfect means for going to God, the
chief instrument of our salvation, and the channel, through which we receive
all the good we hope for, nevertheless the humanity is not the chief good,
which consists in seeing God; but as Jesus Christ is more by his divinity than
his humanity, so he that thinks and fixes his contemplation always on God
(because the divinity is united to the humanity) always thinks on, and heholds
Jesus Christ, especially the contemplative man, in whom Faith is more sincere,
pure, and exercised.

13. As often as the end is obtained, the means cease, and when the Ship
arrives in the Harbor the Voyage is over. So if the Soul after it has been
toyled and wearied by means of meditation, arrives at the stilness,
tranquillity, and rest of Contemplation, it ought then to cut off all
reasonings, and rest quiet with an amorous attention, and simple Vision of God;
seeing and loving him, sweetly rejecting all the imaginations that present
themselves, calming the Mind in that Divine Presence, recollecting the Memory,
and fixing it wholly on God, being contented with a general and confused
Knowledge, which is had by the Mediation of Faith, applying the whole Will to
love him, wherein consists all their fruit of enjoyment.

14. St. Denis says, As for you, most dear Timothy, Mist. Theol.
in applying your self to Mystical Speculations, abstract from the Senses, and
Operations of the Intellect; from all sensible and intellegible Objects, and
Universally from all things that are, and are not; and in an unknown and
inexpressible Way, as much as lies in the power of Man, raise your self to the
Union of him, who is above all Nature, and Knowledge. Thus far the Saint.

15. It concerns us then, to forsake all created, sensible, intelligible, and
affected Beings; and in short, every thing that is, and is not, that we may
cast our selves into the loving Bosom of God, who will restore to us as much as
we have left, increasing in us strength and power to Love him more Ardently,
whose Love will maintain it self within this Holy and Blessed Silence, which is
of more worth, than all Acts joined together.

16. 1. 2. Quest. 27. 2. ad secundum. ar.
St. Thomas says, It is the least thing, that the Understanding can know of God
in this Life, but much what the Will can have of Love.

17. When the Soul attains to this state, it ought wholly to retreat within it
self, in its own pure and profound Center; where the Image of God is, there is
amorous attention, silence, the forgetfulness of all things, the application of
the Will, with perfect resignation, hearing and talking with God hand to hand,
and in such manner, as if there was no other but them two in the World.

18. Good reason have the Saints to say, that Meditation operates with toil,
and with fruit; Contemplation without toil, with quiet, rest, peace, delight,
and far greater fruit. Meditation sows, and Contemplation reaps: Meditation
seeks, and Contemplation finds: Meditation chews the Food, Contemplation tastes
and feeds on it.

19. All this was said by Mystical Bernard, upon these Words of our Savior:
Quaerite and inve nietis; pulsates and aperietur vobis. Lectio opponit ori
solidum cibum, meditatio frangit, Oration saporem conciliat, contemplatio est
ipsa dulcedo quae jucundat and reficit. Thus ye have an account what Meditation
and Contemplation are, and the difference that occurs betwixt them.

Third Advertisement. What is the Difference, betwixt the Acquired and Active
Contemplation, and the Infused and Passive: With the Signs whereby it is known,
when God will have the Soul to pass from Meditation, to Contemplation.
20. THere are moreover two ways of Contemplation: The one is Imperfect, Active
and Acquired: The other Infused and Passive. The Active (whereof we have
Treated hitherto) is that, which may be attained to by our Diligence, assisted
with Divine Grace; we gathering together the Faculties and Senses, and
preparing our selves by every way that God would have. So says, Boias and
Arnaia.

21. St. Bernard recommends this Active Contemplation, discoursing upon these
Words, Audiam quid Loquatur in me Deus. Psalm 85.
And he says, Optimam partem elegit Maria, licet non minoris (fortasse) meriti
sit apud deum humilis conversatio Marthae, sed de electione Maria laudatur:
quoniam illa omnio (quo ad nos spectat) eligenda, haec vero si injungitur
patienter est toleranda.

22. Secunda q. 182 art 2. and 3.
In like manner St. Thomas inculcates this acquired Conternplation in the
following Words; Quanto homo animam suam, vel alterius propinquius deo
conjungit, tanto sacrificium est deo magis acceptum, unde magis acceptum est
deo quod aliquis animam suam, and aliorum applicet contemplationi quam actioni.
Very clear Words to stop the Mouth of those who condemn acquired Contemplation.

23. How much the nearer a man approaches his own Soul, or the Soul of another
to God, so much the more acceptable is the Sacrifice to God; from whence it is
inferred, (concludes the same Saint) that the application of a man's own Soul,
or the procuring that of another to Contemplation, is more acceptable to God,
than the applying of the same to Action. It cannot be said, that the Saint
speaks here of infused Contemplation, because it is not in the power of man, to
apply himself to the infused, but to the acquired.

24. Though it be said, that we may with the Lord's help, set our selves to
acquired Contemplation; nevertheless, no man ought of his own Head to be so
bold, as to pass from the state of Meditation to this, without the counsel of
an expert Director, who shall clearly know whether his Soul be called by God to
this inward way; or for want of a Director, the Soul it self is to know it by
some Book, that Treats of these Matters, sent to him by Divine Providence, for
discovering that, which without knowing what it was, he experimentally felt
within his own Heart. But though by means of the light which that Book gives
him he may obtain assurance enough, to leave Meditation for the quiet of
Contemplation, yet his Soul will still retain an ardent desire of being more
perfectly instructed.

25. And to the end it may receive good Instruction in order to that point,
I Will here give it the Signs, whereby it shall know that Call to Contemplation.
The first and chief is, an inability to Meditate, and if the Soul meditate, it
will perform it with much disquiet and irksomness, provided that proceed not
from the indisposition of Nature, or a melancholy Humor, or a Dryness,
springing from the want of Preparation.

26. It will be known not to be any of these defects, but rather a true Call,
when that Soul passes a Day, a Month; any, and many Months, without being able
to discourse in Prayer. The Lord guides the Soul by Contemplation, (says the
holy Mother Teresa) and the Mind finds it self much disabled from Meditating
the Passion of Christ, since Meditation is nothing else but a seeking of God;
the Soul once finding him, and retaining the Custom of seeking him of new, by
the operation of the Will, it will not be baffled with the Intellect. Thus far
the Saint.

27. The second Sign is, that though it is wanting in sensible Devotion, yet it
covets Solitude, and avoids Conversation.

The third, that the reading of godly Books is usually tedious to it, because
they speak not of the Internal Sweetness, that is in its Heart, though it know
it not.

The fourth, that though it find it self destitute of ratiocination, yet it
has a firm purpose of persevering in Prayer. The fifth is, that it will
experience a sense (with great confusion) of it self, abhorring guilt, and
entertaining a higher esteem of God.

28. The other Contemplation is perfect and infused, Wherein (as St. Teresa
says) God speaks to a man, sequestrating his intellect, questioning his
thought, and seizing (as they say) the word in his mouth; so that if he would,
he cannot speak, but with great pain. He understands, that without the noise of
words, the Divine Master is instructing him, suspending all his powers and
facult^e^, because if at that time they should operate, they would do more hurt
than good. These rejoice, but know not how they rejoice; the Soul is inflamed
(...) love, and conceives not how it loves; it knows that it enjoys what it
loves, and knows not the manner of that enjoyment: well it knows, that that is
not enjoyment which the intellect longs for. The Will embraces it, without
understanding how; but being unable to understand any thing, perceives it is
not that good, which can be merited by all the labors put together which are
suffered upon earth for gaining of it. It is a gift of the Lord of the Soul,
and of Heaven, who in the end gives as he is, and to whom he pleases as he
pleases: such is his Majesty in this, that it does every thing, and his
operation is above our nature. All this we have from the Holy Mother, in her
Way to Perfection, chap. 25. From whence it follows, that this Contemplation is
infused, and freely given by the Lord to whom he pleases.

Fourth Advertisement. The Burden of this Book consisting in rooting out the
Rebellion of our own Will, that we may attain to Internal Peace.
29. THe way of Inward Peace, is in all things to be conform to the pleasure
and disposition of the Divine Will. Hugo Cardinalis in Psalm. 13.
In omnibus debemus subjicere voluntatem nostram voluntati divinae haec est
enim pax voluntatis nostrae, ut sit per omnia conformis voluntati divinae. Such
as would have all things succeed and come to pass according to their own fancy,
are not come to know this way, Psalm. 13.
Viam pacis non cognoverunt, and therefore lead a harsh and bitter life, always
restless and out of humor, without treading in the way of Peace, which
consists in a total conformity to the will of God.

30. This conformity is the sweet yoke that introduces us into the regions of
internal peace and serenity. Hence we may know, that the rebellion of our Will,
is the chief occasion of our disquiet; and that because we will not submit to
the sweet yoke of the Divine Will, we suffer so many streights and
perturbations. O Soul! if we submitted our own to the Divine Will, and to all
his Disposition, what tranquillity should we feel! what sweet peace! what
inward serenity! what supreme felicity and earnest of bliss! This then is to be
the burden of this Book: May it please God to give me his Divine Light, for
discovering the Secret Paths of this Inward Way, and Chief Felicity of Perfect
Peace.

THE Spiritual Guide, Which leads the Soul to the fruition of Inward Peace.
The First Book. Of the Darkness, Dryness, and Temptations, wherewith God
purges Souls, and of Internal Recollection.
CHAP. I. To the end God may rest in the Soul, the Heart is always to be kept
peaceable in whatsoever Disquiet, Temptation, and Tribulation.
1. THou art to know, that thy Soul is the Center, Habitation, and Kingdom of
God. That therefore, to the end the Sovereign King may rest on that Throne of
thy Soul, thou ought to take pains to keep it clean, quiet, void, and
peaceable; clean from guilt and defects; quiet from fears; void of affections,
desires, and thoughts; and peaceable in temptations and tribulations.

2. Thou ought always then to keep thine Heart in peace, that thou may
keep pure that Temple of God, and with a right and pure intention, thou art to
work, pray, obey, and suffer, without being in the least moved, whatever it
pleases the Lord to send unto thee. Because it is certain, that for the good of
thy Soul, and for thy spiritual profit, he will suffer the envious enemy, to
trouble that City of Rest, and Throne of Peace, with temptations, suggestions,
and tribulations, and by the means of creatures, with painful troubles, and
grievous persecutions.

3. Be constant, and cheer up thine heart in whatsoever disquiet, these
tribulations may cause to thee. Enter within it, that thou may overcome it,
for therein is the Divine Fortress which defends, protects, and fights for
thee. If a man has a safe Fortress, he is not disquieted, though his enemies
pursue him, because by retreating within it, these are disappointed and
overcome. The strong Castle, that will make thee triumph over all thine
enemies, visible and invisible, and over all their snares and tribulations, is
within thine own Soul, because in it resides the Divine Aid and Sovereign
Succor. Retreat within it, and all will be quiet, secure, peaceable, and calm.

4. It ought to be thy chief and continual exercise, to pacify that Throne of
thy Heart, that the Supreme King may rest therein. The way to pacify it, will
be to enter into thy self by means of internal recollection; all thy protection
is to be Prayer, and a loving recollection in the Divine Presence. When thou
see thy self more sharply assaulted, retreat into that region of Peace, where
thou wilt find the Fortress. When thou art more faint-hearted, betake thy self to
this refuge of Prayer, the only Armor for overcoming the enemy, and mitigating
tribulation: thou ought not to be at a distance from it in a storm, to the
end thou may, as another Noah, experience tranquillity, security, and
serenity, and to the end thy will may be resigned, devote, peaceful, and
courageous.

5. Finally, be not afflicted nor discouraged to see thy self faint-hearted, he
returns to quiet thee, that still he may stir thee, because this Divine Lord
will be alone with thee, to rest in thy Soul, and form therein a rich Throne of
Peace; that within thine own heart, by means of internal recollection, and with
his heavenly grace, thou may look for silence in tumult; solitude in
company; light in darkness; forgetfulness in pressures, vigor in despondency;
courage in fear; resistance in temptation; peace in war; and quiet in
tribulation.

CHAP. II. Though the Soul perceive it self deprived of Discourse, or
Ratiocination, yet it ought to persevere in Prayer, and not be afflicted,
because that is its greater Felicity.
6. Thou Wilt find thy self, as all other Souls that are called by the Lord, to
the inward way, full of Confusion and Doubts, because in Prayer thou have
failed in Discourse: It will seem to thee that God does no more assist thee as
formerly, that the exercise of Prayer is not in thy power; that thou losest
time, whilst hardly and with great trouble thou can make one single
Ejaculation as thou was wont to do.

7. How much confusion, and what perplexities will that want of enlarging thy
self in mental Discourse raise in thee? And if in such a juncture thou have not
a ghostly Father, expert in the Mystical Way, thou wilt certainly conclude that
thy Soul is out of order, and that for the security of thy Conscience, thou
stand in need of a general Confession; and all that will be got by that
care, will be the shame and confusion of both. O how many Souls are called to
the inward way, and the Spiritual Fathers for want of Understanding their case,
instead of guiding and helping them forwards, stop them in their Course, and
ruin them.

8. Thou ought then to be persuaded, that thou may not draw back, when
thou want expansion and discourse in Prayer; that it is thy greatest
happiness, because it is a clear sign, that the Lord will have thee to walk by
Faith and Silence in his Divine Presence, which is the most profitable and
easiest Path; in respect, that with a simple view, or amorous attention to God,
the Soul appears like a humble Supplicant before its Lord, or as an innocent
Child, that casts it self into the sweet and safe Bosom of its dear Mother.
Thus did Gerson express it, Though I have spent Forty Years in Reading and
Prayer, yet I could never find any thing more efficacious, nor compendious, for
attaining to Mystical Theology, than that our Spirit should become like a young
Child and Beggar in the presence of God.

9. That kind of Prayer is not only the easiest, but the most secure; because
it is abstracted from the operations of the Imagination, that is always exposed
to the Tricks of the Devil, and the extravagancies of Melancholy, and
Ratiocination, wherein the Soul is easily Distracted, and being wrapped up in
Speculation, reflects on it self.

10. When God had a mind to instruct his own Captain Moses, Exodus 24.
and give him the two Tables of the Law, written in Stone, he called him up to
the Mountain, at what time God being there with him, the Mount was Darkened and
environed with thick Clouds Moses standing idle, not knowing what to think or
say. Seven days after God commanded Moses, to come up to the Top of the
Mountain, where he showed him his Glory, and filled him with great Consolation.

11. So in the Beginning, when God intends, after an extraordinary manner, to
guide the Soul inter the School of the divine and loving Notices of the
internal Law, he makes it go with Darkness, and Dryness, that he may bring it
near to himself, because the Divine Majesty knows very well, that it is not by
the means of ones one Ratiocination, or Industry, that a Soul draws near to
him, and understands the Divine Documents; but rather by silent and humble
Resignation.

12. The Patriarch Noah gave a great instance of this; who after he had been by
all men reckoned a Fool, floating in the middle of a rageing Sea, wherewith the
whole World was overflowed, without Sails and Oars, and environed with wild
Beasts, that were shut up in the Ark walked by Faith alone, not knowing nor
understanding what God had a mind to do with him.

13. What most concerns thee, O redeemed Soul, is Patience, not to desist from
the Prayer thou art about, though thou can not enlarge is Discourse. Walk
with firm Faith, and a holy Silence, dying in thy self, with all thy natural
Industry, trusting that God who is he who is and changes not, neither can err,
intends nothing but thy good. It is clear that he who is a dying, must needs
feel it, but how well is time employed, when the Soul is dead, dumb, and
resigned in the presence of God, there without any clutter or distraction, to
receive the Divine Influences.

14. The Senses are not capable of divine Blessings; hence if thou would be
Happy and Wise; be Silent and Believe; Suffer and have Patience; be Confident
and Walk on; it concerns thee far more to hold thy Peace, and to let thy self
be guided by the hand of God, than to enjoy all the Goods of this World. And
though it seem to thee, that thou do nothing at all, and art idle being so
Dumb and Resigned; yet it is of infinite fruit.

15. Consider the blinded Beast that turns the Wheel of the Mill, which though
it see not, neither know what it does, yet does a great Work in grinding the
Corn, and although it taste not of it, yet its Master receives the fruit, and
tastes of the same. Who would not think, during so long a time that the Seed
lies in the Earth, but that it were lost? Yet afterward it is seen to spring
up, grow and multiply. God does the same with the Soul, when he deprives it of
Consideration and Ratiocination: Whilst it thinks it does nothing, and is, in
a manner undone, in time it comes to it self again, improved, disengaged, and
perfect, having never hoped for so much favor.

16. Take care then that thou afflict not thy self, nor draw back, though thou
can not enlarge thy self, and discourse in Prayer; suffer, hold thy peace,
and appear in the presence of God; persevere constantly, and trust to his
infinite Bounty, who can give unto thee constant Faith, true light, and divine
Grace. Walk as if thou were blindfolded, without thinking or reasoning; put thy
self into his kind and paternal hands, resolving to do nothing but what his
divine Will and Pleasure is.

CHAP. III. A Sequel of the same Matter.
17. IT is the common opinion of all the holy Men, who have treated of the
Spirit, and of all the Mistical Matters: That the Soul cannot attain to
perfection and an union with God, by means of Meditation, and Ratiocination:
Because that is only good for beginning the spiritual Way, to the end one may
acquire a habit of Knowledge, of the beauty of Virtue, and ugliness of Vice:
Which habit, in the opinion of Saint Teresa, may be attained to in six Months
time, and according to S. Bonaventure in two.

18. In prolog. de Mist. Theol. page 655.
O how are, in a manner infinite numbers of Souls to be pitied who from the
beginning of their Life to the end, employ themselves in mere Meditation,
constraining themselves to Reason,, although God Almighty deprive them of
Ratiocination, that he may promote them to another State, and carry them on to
a more perfect kind of Prayer, and so form any years they continue imperfect,
and in the beginning, without any progress, or having as yet made one step in
the way of the Spirit; beating their Brains about the frame of the Place, the
choice of the Minutes, Imaginations, and strained Reasonings, seeking God
without, when in the mean time, they have him within themselves.

19. St. Austin complained of that, in the time when God led him to the
Mystical Way, saying to his Divine Majesty, I, Lord, Solioq. C. 31.
went wandering like a strayed Sheep, seeking thee with anxious Reasoning
without, whilst thou wast within me, I wearied my self much in looking for
thee without, and yet thou have thy habitation within me; if I long and breath
after thee, I went round the Streets and Places of the City of this World,
seeking thee, and found thee not; because, in vain I sought without for him,
who was within my self.

20. The Angelical Doctor St. Thomas, for all he was so circumspect in his
Writings, may seem yet to jeer those, who go always in search of God without by
means of Ratiocination, when they have him present within themselves. Opusc.
63. C. 3. in fin.
There is great Blindness, and excessive Folly in some, (says the Saint) who
always seek God, continually sigh after God, often long for God, invocate and
call upon God daily in Prayer; they themselves (according to the Apostle) being
the living Temple of God, and his true Habitation, since there Soul is the Seat
and Throne of God, where he continually rests. Who then, but a Fool, will look
for an Instrument abroad, when he knows he has fast shut up within Doors? Or
who can refresh himself with the Food he desires, and yet not taste it? Such
exactly is the Life of some just men, always seeking, and never enjoying, and
therefore all their Works are imperfect.

21. It is certain, that Our Lord Christ taught Perfection to all, and ever
will have all to be Perfect, particularly the Ignorant and Simple. He clearly
manifested this Truth, when for his Apostles, he chose the Smallest and most
Ignorant, Matthew. 11.
saying to his Eternal Father, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, because thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes. And it is certain, that these cannot acquire
Perfection, by acute Meditations, and subtle Reasonings, though they be as
capable as the most Learned, to attain to Perfection, by the affections of the
Will, wherein principally it consists.

22. St. Bonaventure, teaches us not to form Conceptions of any thing, no not
of God, because it is Imperfection to make Representations, Images, and Ideas,
how subtle or ingenious soever, either of the Will, or of the Goodness,
Trinity, and Unity; nay, of the Divine Essence it self: In respect that, though
all these Representations appear Deiform, yet are they not God, who admits of
no Image, nor Form. Non ibi (says the Saint) oportet cogitare res de creatur is
nec de, Mist. Theol. p. 2. q Un. p. 685.
Angelis, nec de Trinitate, quia haec sapientia per affectus desideriorum, non
per meditationem, praeviam debet consurgere. We must not here think any thing
of Creatures, of Angels, nor of God himself, because that Wisdom and
Perfection, is not acquired by nice and quaint Meditation, but by the desire
and affection of the Will.

23. The holy man cannot speak more clearly; and thou would disquiet thy
self, and leave off Prayer, because thou know not, or can not tell how to
enlarge therein, though thou may have a good Will, good Desire, and pure
Intention? If the young Ravens forsaken of the old, because seeing them without
Black Feathers, they think them Spurious, are by the Dew of Heaven fed that
they may not perish; what will he do to redeemed Souls, though they cannot
speak nor reason, if they believe, trust, and open their Mouths to Heaven,
declaring their wants: Is it not more certain that the Divine Bounty will
provide for them, and give them their necessary Food?

24. Manifest it is, that it is a great Martyrdom, and no small Gift of God,
for the Soul finding it self deprived of the sensible Pleasures it had, to walk
by holy Faith only, through the dark, and desert Paths of Perfection, to which,
notwithstanding, it can never attain but by this painful, though secure means.
Wherefore endeavor to be constant, and not draw back, though Discourse be
wanting to thee in Prayer, believe at that time firmly, be quietly silent, and
patiently persevere if then would be happy, and attain to the Divine Union,
eminent rest, and to the Supreme Internal Peace.

CHAP. IV. The Soul is not to afflict it self, nor intermit Prayer, because it
sees it self encompassed with dryness.
25. THou shall know that there are two form of Prayer, the one tender,
delightful, amiable, and full of sentiments; the other obscure, dry, desolate,
tempted, and darksome. The first is of Beginners, the second of Proficients,
who are in the progress to Perfection. God gives the first to gain Souls, the
second to purify them. With the first he uses them like Children; with the
second he begins to deal with them as with strong men.

26. This first Way may be called the Animal Life, and belongs to them who go
in the tract of the sensible Devotion, which God uses to give to Beginners, to
the end that being endowed with that small relish, as the natural man is with
the sensible Object, they may addict themselves to the spiritual Life. The
second is called the Life of men, and belongs to those who not minding sensible
Pleasures, fight and war against their own Passions, that they may conquer and
obtain Perfection, the proper employment of men.

27. Assure thy self, that dryness or ardity is the Instrument of thy good,
because it is nothing else but a want of sensibility, that Remora, which puts a
stop to the flight of almost all Spiritual Men, and makes them even draw back,
and leave off Prayer: as may be seen in many Souls, which only persevere
whilst they taste sensible Consolation.

28. Know that the Lord makes use of the Veil of Dryness, to the end we may not
know what he is working in us and so be humble; because if we felt and knew
what he is working in our Souls, satisfaction and presumption would get in,
imagining that we were doing some good thing, and reckoning our selves very
near to God; which would be our undoing.

29. Lay this down as a firm ground in thine Heart, that for walking in the
inward Way, all sensibilitie should first be removed; and that the means God
uses for that is dryness. By that also he takes away reflection, or that view,
whereby the Soul eyes what it is doing, the only impediment that obstructs the
advancing forward, and God's communicating himself, and operating in it.

30. Thou ought not then to afflict thy self, nor think that thou reapest no
fruit, because in coming from a Communion or Prayer, thou have not the
experience of many sentiments, since that is a manifest Cheat. The Husbandman
Sows in one time and Reaps in another: So God, upon occasions, and in his own
due time, will help them to resist Temptations, and when least thou think,
will give thee holy purposes, and more effectual desires of serving him. And to
the end, thou may not suffer thy self to be transported, by the violent
suggestion of the Enemy, who will enviously persuade thee, that thou do
nothing, and that thou losest time, that so thou may neglect Prayer: I Will
declare to thee some of the infinite fruits, that thy Soul reaps from that
great dryness.

31. The first is to persevere in Prayer, from which fruit spring many other
advantages.

II. Thou Wilt find a loathing of the things of the World, which by little and
little tends to the stifling of the bad desires of thy past Life, and the
producing of other new ones of serving God.

III. Thou Wilt reflect upon many failings, on which formerly thou did not
reflect.

IV. Thou Wilt find, when thou art about to commit any evil, an advertency in thy
Heart, which restrains thee from the execution of it, and at other times from
Speaking, Lamenting, or Revenging thy self; that'll take thee off from some
little earthly Pleasure, or from this or the other Occasion, or Conversation,
into which formerly thou was running in great Peace and Security, without the
least Check or Remorse of Conscience.

V. After that through frailty, thou have fallen in to some light fault,
thou wilt feel a Reproof for it in thy Soul, which will exceedingly afflict thee.

VI. Thou Wilt feel within thy self, desires of suffering, and of doing the will
of God.

VII. An inclination to Virtue, and greater ease in overcoming thy self, and
conquering the difficulties of the Passions, and Enemies that hinder thee in
the way.

VIII. Thou Wilt know thy self better, and be confounded also in thy self, feel
in thee a high esteem of God above all created Beings, a contempt of Creatures,
and a firm Resolution not to abandon Prayer, though thou know that it will
prove to thee a most cruel Martyrdom.

IX. Thou Wilt be sensible of greater Peace in thy Soul, love to Humility,
confidence in God, submission, and abstraction from all Creatures; and finally
the Sins thou have omitted since the time that thou exercised thy self in
Prayer, are so many signs, that the Lord is working in thy Soul, (though thou
know it not) by means of dry Prayer; and although thou feel it not whilst
thou art in Prayer, thou wilt feel it in his due time, when he shall think it fit.

32. All these and many other fruits are like new Buds that spring from the
Prayer, which thou would give over, because it seems to thee to be dry, that
thou see no Fruit of it, nor reapest no advantage therefrom. Be constant and
persevere with Patience, for though thou know it not, thy Soul is profited
thereby.

CHAP. V. Treating of the same thing, declaring how many ways of Devotion there
are, and how the sensible Devotion is to be disposed; and that the Soul is not
idle, though it reason not.
33. THere are to be found two sorts of Devotion; the one essential and true;
the other accidental and sensible. The essential, is a promptitude of mind to
do well, S. Thom. 2. 2. q 82. art. 1.
fulfill the commands of God, and to perform all things belonging to his
service, though, through humane frailty, all be not actually done as is
desired. Suar. t. 2. de Pel. l. 2. c. 6. n. 16. and 18.
This is true Devotion, though it be not accompanied with pleasure, sweetness,
delight, nor tears, but rather it is usually attended with temptation, dryness,
and darkness.

34. Accidental and sensible Devotion is, St. Bern. Ser. I. de Not. Dom.
Suarez, ib. Molin. de Oration, c. 6.
when good desires are attended with a pleasant softness of heart, tenderness
of tears, or other sensible affections. This is not to be sought after, nay, it
is rather more secure to wean the will from it, and to set light by it; because
besides that it is usually dangerous, it is a great obstacle to progress, and
the advancement in the internal way. And therefore we ought only to embrace the
true and essential Devotion, which is always in our power to come by, seeing
every one doing his duty may with the assistance of the Divine Grace acquire
it. And this may be had with God, with Christ, with the Mysteries, with the
Virgin, and with the Saints.

35. Some think that when Devotion and sensible Pleasure are given them, they
are Favors of God, that thence forward they have him, and that the whole life
is to be spent in breathing after that delight; but it is a cheat, because it
is no more, but a consolation of nature, and a pure reflection, wherewith the
Soul beholds what it does, and hinders the doing, or possibility of doing any
thing, the acquisition of the true light, and the making of one step in the way
of perfection. The Soul is a pure Spirit and is not felt; and so the internal
acts, and of the will, as being the acts of the Soul and spiritual, are not
sensible: Hence the Soul knows not if it lives, nor, for most part, is
sensible if it acts.

36. From this thou may infer, that that Devotion and sensible Pleasure, is
not God, nor Spirit, but the product of Nature; that therefore thou ought to
set light by, and despise it, but firmly to persevere in Prayer, leaving thy
self to the conduct of God, who will be to thee light in aridity and darkness.

37. Think not that when thou art dry and darksom in the presence of God, with
faith and silence, that thou do nothing, that thou losest time, and that
thou art idle, because not to wait on God, according to the saying of St.
Barnard, Tom. 5. in Tract. de vit. solit. c. 8. p. 90.
is the greatest idleness: Otiosum non est vacare Deo; inimo negotiorum omnium
hoc est; And elsewhere he says, that that idleness of the Soul is the
business of the businesses of God. Hoc negotium magnum est negotium.

38. It is not to be said, that the Soul is idle; because though it operate not
Actively, yet the Holy Ghost operates in it. Besides, that it is not without
all activity, because it operates, though spiritually, simply, and intimately.
For to be attentive to God, draw near to him, to follow his internal
inspirations, receive his divine influences, adore him in his own intimate
center, reverence him with the pious affections of the will, to cast away so
many and so fantastical imaginations, and with softness and contempt to
overcome so many temptations: all these, I say, are true acts though simple,
wholly spiritual, and in a manner imperceptible, through the great
tranquillity, wherewith the Soul exerts them.

CHAP. VI. The Soul is not to be disquieted, that it sees it self encompassed
with darkness, because that is an instrument of its greater felicity.
39. THere are two sorts of darkness: some unhappy, and others happy: the first
are such as arise from sin, and are unhappy, because they lead the Christian to
an eternal precipice. The second are those which the Lord suffers to be in the
Soul, to ground and settle it in virtue; and these are happy, because they
enlighten it, fortify it, and cause greater light therein, so that thou
ought not to grieve and disturb thy self, nor be disconsolate in seeing thy
self obscure and darksom, judging that God has failed thee, and the light also
that thou formerly had the experience of; thou ought rather at that time
persevere constantly in Prayer, it being a manifest sign, that God of his
infinite mercy intends to bring thee into the inward path, and happy way of
Paradise. O how happy will thou be, if thou embrace it with peace and
resignation, as the instrument of perfect quiet, true light, and of all thy
spiritual good.

40. Know then that the streightest, most perfect and secure way of
proficients, is the way of darkness: beause in them the Lord placed his own
Throne; And he made darkness his secret place. Psalm 18.
By them the supernatural light, which God infuses into the Soul, grows and
increases. Amidst them wisdom and strong love are begotten, by darkness the
soul is annihilated, and the species, which hinder the right view of the divine
truth, are consumed. By this means God introduces the Soul by the inward way
into the Prayer of rest, and of perfect contemplation, which so few have the
experience of. Finally, by darkness the Lord purges the senses and sensibility,
which hinder the mystical progress.

41. See now if darkness be not to be esteemed and embraced. What thou ought
to do amidst them, is to believe, that thou art before the Lord, and in his
presence; but thou ought to do so, with a sweet and quiet attention not
desire to know any thing, nor search after delicacies, tendernesses, or
sensible devotions, nor do any thing but what is the good will and pleasure of
God; Because otherwise thou will only make circles, all thy life time, and not
advance one step toward perfection.

CHAP. VII. To the end the Soul may attain to the supreme internal peace, it is
necessary, that God purge it after his way, because the exercises and
mortifications that of it self it sets about, are not sufficient.
42. SO soon as thou shall firmly resolve to mortify thy external senses, that
thou may advance toward the high mountain of perfection, and union with
God; His divine Majesty will set his hand to the purging of thy evil
inclinations, inordinate desires, vain complacency, self-love and pride, and
other hidden vices, which thou know not, and yet reign in the inner parts of
thy Soul, and hinder the divine union.

43. Thou Wilt never attain to this happy state, though thou tire thy self out
with the external acts of mortification and resignation, until this Lord purge
thee inwardly, and discipline thee after his own way, because he alone knows
how secret faults are to be purged out. If thou persevere constantly, he will not
only purge thee from affections and engagements to natural and temporal goods,
but in his own time also he will purify thee with the supernatural and
sublime, such as are internal communications, inward raptures and extafies, and
other infused graces, on which the Soul rests and enjoys it self.

44. God will do all this in thy Soul by means of the cross, and dryness, if
thou freely give thy consent to it by resignation, and walking through those
darksom and desert ways. All thou have to do, is to do nothing by thy own
choice alone. The subjection of thy liberty, is that which thou ought to do,
quietly resigning thy self up in every thing whereby the Lord shall think fit
internally and externally to mortify thee: because that is the only means, by
which thy Soul can become capable of the divine influences, whilst thou
suffer internal and external tribulation, with humility, patience and quiet;
not the penances, disciplines and mortifications, which thou could impose
upon thy self.

45. The husbandman sets a greater esteem upon the plants which he sows in the
ground, than those that spring up of themselves, because these never come to
seasonable maturity. In the same manner God esteems and is better pleased with
the virtue, which he sows and infuses into the Soul (as being sunk into its own
nothingness, calm and quiet, retreated within its own center, and without any
election) than all the other virtues which the Soul pretends to acquire by its
own election and endeavors.

46. It concerns thee only then, to prepare thine heart, like clean paper,
wherein the divine wisdom may imprint characters to his own liking. O how great
a work will it be for thy Soul to be whole hours together in Prayer, dumb,
resigned, and humble, without acting, knowing, or desiring to understand any
thing.

CHAP. VIII. A Sequel of the same.
47. WIth new efforts thou wilt exercise thy self, but in another manner than
hitherto, giving thy consent to receive the secret and divine operations, and
to be polished, and purified by this Lord, which is the only means whereby thou will become clean and purged from thine ignorance and dissolutions. Know,
however, that thou art to be plunged in a bitter sea of sorrows, and of
internal and external pains, which torment will pierce into the most inward
part of thy Soul and Body.

48. Thou Wilt experience, that the creatures will forsake thee, nay, those too
from which thou hoped'st for most favor and compassion in thy streights; the
brooks of thy faculties will be so dried up, that thou shalt'st not be able to
form any ratiocination, nay, nor so much as to conceive a good thought of God.
Heaven will seem to thee to be of brass, and thou shall receive no light from
it. Nor will the thought comfort thee, that in times past so much light and
devote consolation have rained into thy Soul.

49. The invisible enemies will pursue thee with scruples, lascivious
suggestions, and unclean thoughts, with incentives to impatience, pride, rage,
cursing and blaspheming the Name of God, his Sacraments, and Holy Mysteries.
Thou Wilt find a great lukewarmness, loathing, and wearisomness for the things of
God; an obscurity and darkness in thy understanding; a faintness, confusion and
narrowness of heart; such a coldness and feebleness of the will to resist, that
a straw will appear to thee a beam. Thy desertion will be so great, that
thou wilt think there is no more a God for thee, and that thou art rendered
incapable of entertaining a good desire; so that thou wilt continue shut up
betwixt two walls, in constant streights and anguish, without any hopes of ever
getting out of so dreadful an oppression.

50. But fear not: all this is necessary for purging thy Soul, and making it
know its own misery, and sensibly perceive the annihilation of all the
passions, and disordinate appetites, wherewith it rejoiced it self. Finally, to
the end the Lord may refine and purify thee after his own manner with those
inward torments, will thou not cast the Jonas of sense into the sea, that
thereby thou may procure it? With all thy outward disciplines and
mortifications, thou'll never have true light, nor make one step toward
perfection: so that thou will stop in the beginning, and thy Soul will not
attain to the amiable rest, and supreme internal peace.

CHAP. IX. The Soul ought not to be disquieted, nor draw back in the spiritual
way, because it finds it self assaulted by temptations.
51. OUr own nature is so base, proud and ambitious, and so full of its own
appetites, its own judgment and opinions, that if temptations restrained it
not, it would be undone without remedy. The Lord then seeing our misery and
perverse inclination, and thereby moved to compassion, suffers us to be
assaulted by diverse thoughts against the faith, horrible temptations, and by
violent and painful suggestions of impatience, pride, gluttony, luxury, rage,
blasphemy, cursing, despair, and an infinite number of others, to the end we
may know our selves and be humble. With these horrible temptations, that
infinite goodness humbles our pride, giving us in them the most wholesome
medicine.

52. All our righteousness (as Isaiah says) are as filthy rags, Chap. 64.6.
through the stains of vanity, conceitedness, and self-love. It is necessary
they be purified with the fire of tribulation and temptation, that so they may
be clean, pure, perfect and agreeable to the eyes of God.

53. Therefore the Lord purifies the Soul, which he calls, and will have for
himself, with the rough file of temptation, with which he polishes it from the
rust of pride, avarice, vanity, ambition, presumption, and self-conceitedness.
With the same, he humbles, pacifies and exercises it, making it to know its own
misery. By means thereof he purifies and strips the heart, to the end all its
operations may be pure, and of inestimable value.

54. Many Souls when they suffer these painful torments, are troubled,
afflicted, and disquieted, it seeming to them, that they begin already in this
life to suffer eternal punishments; and if by misfortune they go to an
unexperienced Confessor, instead of comforting them, he leaves them in greater
confusion and perplexities.

55. That thou may not lose internal peace, it is necessary thou believe,
that it is the goodness of divine mercy, when thus it humbles, afflicts and
trys thee; since by that means thy Soul comes to have a deep knowledge of it
self, reckoning it self the worst, most impious and abominable of all Souls
living, and hence with humility and lowliness it abhors it self. O how happy
would Souls be, if they would be quiet and believe, that all these temptations
are caused by the Devil, and received from the hand of God, for their gain and
spiritual profit.

56. But thou'll say, that it is not the work of the Devil, when he molests
thee by means of creatures, but the effect of thy neighbors fault and malice,
in having wronged and injured thee. Know that that is another cunning and
hidden temptation, because though God wills not the sin of another, yet he
wills his own effect in thee, and the trouble which accrues to thee from
another's fault, that he may see thee emproved by the benefit of patience.

57. Do thou receive an injury from any man: there are two things in it, the
sin of him that does it, and the punishment that thou suffer; the sin is
against the will of God, and displeases him, though he permit it; the
punishment is conform to his will, and he wills it for thy good, wherefore thou
ought to receive it, as from his hand. The Passion and Death of our Lord
Christ, were the effects of the wickedness and sins of Pilate, and yet it is
certain, that God willed the death of his own Son for our redemption.

58. Consider how the Lord makes use of another's fault for the good of thy
Soul. O the greatness of the Divine Wisdom, who can pry into the depth of the
secret and extraordinary means, and the hidden paths whereby he guides the
Soul, which he would have purged, transformed and deified.

CHAP. X. Wherein the same Point is handled.
59. THat the Soul may be the habitation of the celestial King, it is
necessary, that it should be pure, and without any blemish; wherefore the Lord
purifies it as gold in the furnace of terrible and grievous temptations.
Certain it is, that the Soul never loves, nor believes more, than when it is
afflicted and baited with such temptations; because those doubtings and fears
that beset it, whether it believe or not; whether it consent or not, are
nothing else but the quaintnesses of love.

60. The effects that remain in the Soul make this very clear; and commonly
these are a loathing of it self with a most profound acknowledgment of the
greatness and omnipotence of God, a great confidence in the Lord, that he will
deliver it from all risk and danger; believing and confessing with far greater
vigor of faith, that it is God who gives it strength to bear the torments of
these temptations, because it would naturally be impossible, considering the
force and violence wherewith sometimes they attack, to resist one quarter of an
hour.

61. Thou art to know then, that temptation is thy great happiness; so that the
more it besets thee, the more thou ought to rejoice in Peace, instead of
being sad, and thank God for the favor he does thee. In all these temptations,
and odious thoughts, the remedy that is to work, is to despise them with a
stayed neglect, because nothing more afflicts the proud devil, than to see that
he is slighted and despised, as are all things else that he suggests to us. And
therefore thou art to tarry with him, as one that perceives him not, and to
possess thy self in thy peace without repining, and without multiplying Reasons
and Answers; seeing nothing is more dangerous, than to vie in reasons with him
who is ready to deceive thee.

62. The Saints in arriving at holiness, passed through this doleful valley of
temptations, and the greater Saints they were, the greater temptations they
grapled with. Nay after the Saints have attained to holiness and perfection;
the Lord suffers them to be tempted with brisk temptations, that their Crown
may be the greater, and that the spirit of vainglory may be checked, or else
hindered from entering in them, keeping them in that manner secure, humble, and
sollicitous of their condition.

63. Finally thou art to know, that the greatest Temptation is to be without
Temptation; wherefore thou ought to be glad when it assaults thee, and with
Resignation, Peace and Constancy resist it: Because if thou will serve God, and
arrive at the sublime Region of Internal Peace; thou must pass through that
rugged Path of Temptation; put on that heavy Armor; fight in that fierce and
cruel War, and in that burning Furnace, polish, purge, renew, and purify thy
self.

CHAP. XI. Declaring the Nature of internal Recollection, and instructing the
Soul how it ought to behave it self therein, and in the Spiritual Warfare,
whereby the Devil endeavors to disturb it at that time.
64. INternal Recollection is Faith, and Silence in the Presence of God. Hence
thou ought to be accustomed to recollect thy self in his Presence, with an
affectionate attention, as one that is given up to God, and united unto him,
with Reverence, Humility and Submission, beholding him in the most inward
recess of thine own Soul, without Form, Likeness, Manner, or Figure; in the
view and general nature of a loving and obscure Faith, without any distinction
of Perfection or Attribute.

65. There thou art to be with attention, and a sincere regard, with a sedate
heedfulness, and full of Love toward the same Lord, resigning and delivering
thy self up into his hands, to the end he may dispose of thee, according to his
good Will and Pleasure; without reflecting on thy self; nay, nor on Perfection
it self. Here thou art to shut up the Senses, trusting God with all the care of
thy Welfare, and minding nothing of the affairs of this Life. Finally, thy
Faith ought to be pure, without Representations or Likeness: Simple without
Reasonings, and Universal without Distinctions.

66. The Prayer of Internal Recollection may be well typified by that
Wrestling, which the holy Scripture says, the Patriarch Jacob had all Night
with God, until Day broke, and he Blessed him. Wherefore the Soul is to
persevere, and wrestle with the difficulties that it will find in internal
Recollection, without desisting, until the Son of internal Light begin to
appear, and the Lord give it his Blessing.

67. No sooner will thou have given thy self up to thy Lord in this inward Way,
but all Hell will conspire against thee, seeing one single Soul inwardly
retired to its own Presence, makes greater War against the Enemy, than a
thousand others that walk externally; because the Devil makes an infinite
advantage of an internal Soul.

68. In the time of the recollection, Peace and Resignation of thy Soul, God
will more esteem the various impertinent, troublesome and ugly thoughts that
thou have; than the good purposes, and high sentiments. Know that the effort,
which thou thy self may make to resist Thoughts, is an impediment, and will
leave thy Soul in greater anxitie. The best thing that is to be done, is
sweetly to despise them, to know thine own wretchedness, and peacefully make an
Offering to God of the Trouble.

69. Though thou can not get rid off the anguish of Thoughts, have no Light,
Comfort, nor spiritual Sentiment: Yet be not afflicted, neither leave off
recollection, because they are the Snares of the Enemy: Resign thy self at that
time with Vigor endure with Patience, and persevere in his Presence; for
whilst thou perseverest after that manner, thy Soul will be internally
emproved.

70. Do thou believe that when thou come away from Prayer dry, in the same
manner as thou began it; that that was because of want of Preparation, and that
has done thee no good: That is a Fallacy: Because the fruit of true Prayer,
consists not in enjoying the Light, nor in having Knowledge of spiritual
things, since these may be found in a speculative Intellect, without true
Virtue and Perfection; it only consists in enduring with Patience, and
persevering in Faith and Silence, believing that thou art in the Lord's
Presence, turning to him thy Heart with tranquillity, and purity of Mind. So
whilst thou perseverest in this manner, thou wilt have the only Preparation and
Disposition which at that time is necessary, and shall reap infinite fruit.

71. War is very usual in this internal Recollection, which on the one hand
will deprive thee of sensibility, to try, humble, and purge thee. On the other,
invisible Enemies will assault thee with continual Suggestions, to trouble and
disquiet thee. Nature her self, apparently, will torment thee, she being always
an Enemy to the Spirit, which in depriving her of sensible Pleasures, remains
Weak, Melancholy, and full of Irksomness, so that it feels a Hell in all
Spiritual Exercises, particularly in that of Prayer, hence it grows extremely
impatient to be at an end of it, through the uneasiness of Thoughts, the
lassitude of Body, importunate Sleep, and the not being able to curb the
Senses, every one of which would for its own share, follow its own Pleasure.
Happy art thou if thou can persevere amidst this Martyrdom!

74. That great Doctoress, and Mystical Mistress, Santa Teresa, confirms all
this by her heavenly Doctrine, in the Letter she wrote to the Bishop of Osmia,
to instruct him, how he was to behave himself in Prayer, and in the variety of
troublesome Thoughts, which attack us at that time, where she says: 8. of her
Epistolary.
There is a necessity of suffering the trouble of a Troop of Thoughts,
importune Imaginations, and the impetuosities of natural Notions, not only, of
the Soul through the dryness and disunion it has, but of the Body also,
occasioned by the want of submission to the Spirit, which it ought to have.

73. These are called drynesses in Spirituals, but are very profitable, if they
be embraced and suffered with Patience. Who so shall accustom himself to suffer
them without repining, will from that Labor draw vast advantage, It is
certain, that in recollection the Devil frequently charges the Soul more
fiercely with a Battalion of Thoughts, to discomfit the quiet of the Soul, and
alienate it from that most sweet and secure internal Conversation, raising
horrors, to the end it may leave it off, reducing it most commonly to such a
state, as if it were led forth to a most rigorous Torment.

74. The Birds, which are the Devils, knowing this (said the Saint in the
above cited Letter) pricks and molest the Soul with Imaginations, troublesome
Thoughts, and the Interruptions which the Devil at that time brings in,
transporting the Thought, distracting it from one thing to another, and after
he has done with them attacking the Heart, and it is no small fruit of Prayer,
patiently to suffer these Troubles and Importunities. That is an offering up of
ones self, in a whole burnt Sacrifice, that is to say, to be wholly consumed in
the Fire of Temptation, and no part spared. See, how this heavenly Mistress
encourages to suffer and endure Thoughts and Temptations; because, provided
they be not consented to, they double the profit.

75. As many times as thou exercisest thy self, calmly to reject these vain
Thoughts, so many Crowns will the Lord set upon thy Head, and and though it may
seem to thee that thou do nothing, be undeceived, for a good desire with
firmness and stedfastness in Prayer, is very pleasing to the Lord.

76. Wherefore to be there (concludes the Saint) without sensible profit, is
not lost time; but of great gain, whilst one toyls without Interest, and
merely for the Glory of God; and though it may seem to be toyling in vain, yet
it is not so, but it is as with Children, who toil and labor under the power
of their Father: though in the evening they receive not the wages for their
day's work, yet at the year's end they enjoy all. In fine, you see how the
Saint confirms our document with her precious Doctrine.

CHAP. XII. A Sequel of the same Matter.
77. GOD loves not him who does most, who hears most, nor who shows greatest
affection, but who suffers most, if he pray with faith and reverence, believing
that he is in the divine presence. The truth is to take from the Soul the
prayer of the senses, and of nature, is a rigorous martyrdom to it, but the
Lord rejoices, and is glad in its peace, if it be thus quiet and resigned. Use
not at that time vocal prayer, because however it be good and holy in it self,
yet to use it then is a manifest temptation, whereby the enemy pretends, that
God speaks not to thy heart, under pretext that thou have not sentiments, and
that thou losest time.

78. God has no regard to the multitude of words, but to the purity of the
intent. His greatest content and glory at that time, is to see the Soul in
silence desirous, humble, quiet, and resigned. Proceed, persevere, pray, and
hold thy peace; for where thou find not a sentiment thou wilt find a door
whereby thou may en^e^ into thine own nothingness; knowing thy se^^ to be
nothing, that thou can do nothing, nay^ and that thou have not so much as a
good thought.

79. How many have begun this happy practice of Prayer, and Internal
Recollection, and have left it off, pretending that they feel no^ pleasure,
that they lose time, that their thought trouble them, and that that Prayer is
not for them, whilst they find not any sentiment of God, nor any ability to
reason or discourse; whereas they might have believed, been silent and had
patience. All this is no more, but with ingratitude to hunt after sensible
pleasures, suffering themselves to be transported with selflove, seeking
themselves, and not God, because they cannot suffer a little pain and dryness,
without reflecting on the infinite loss they sustain, whereas by the least act
of reverence toward God, amidst dryness and sterility, they receive an eternal
reward.

80. The Lord told the venerable Mother Francesca Lopez of Valenza, and a
religious of the third Order of St. Francis, three things of great light and
consequence in order to internal recollection. In the first place, that a
quarter of an hour of Prayer, with recollection of the senses and faculties,
and with resignation and humility, does more good to the Soul than five days of
penitential exercises, hair clothes, disciplines, fastings, and sleeping on
bare boards, because these are only mortifications of the body, and with
recollection the Soul is purified.

81. Secondly, that it is more pleasing to the Divine Majesty, to have the Soul
in quiet and devote Prayer for the space of an hour, than to go in great
Pilgrimages; because that in Prayer it does good to it self, and to those for
whom it prays, gives delight to God, and merits a high degree of glory, but in
pilgrimage, commonly, the Soul is distracted, and the Senses diverted, with a
debilitation of virtue, besides many other dangers.

82. Thirdly, that constant Prayer was to keep the heart always right toward
God, and that a Soul to be internal, ought rather to act with the affection of
the will, than the toil of the intellect, All this is to be read in her Life.

83. The more the Soul rejoices in sensible love, the less delight God has in
it; on the contrary, the less the Soul rejoices in this sensible love, the more
God delights in it. And know that to fix the will on God, restraining thoughts
and temptations, with the greatest tranquillity possible, is the highest pitch
of praying.

84. I Will conclude this Chapter by undeceiving thee of the vulgar error of
those who say, that in this internal recollection, or prayer of rest, the
faculties operate not, and that the Soul is idle and wholly unactive. This is a
manifest fallaey of those who have little experience, because although it
operate not by means of the memory, nor by the second operation of the
intellect, which is the judgment, nor by the third, which is discourse or
ratiocination, yet it operates b^ the first and chief operation of the
intellect which is simple apprehension, enlightened b^ holy faith, and aided by
the divine gifts of the holy spirit. And the will is more apt to continue one
act, than to multiply many; so that a^ well the act of the intellect, as that
of the wi^^ are so simple, imperceptible, and spiritual, tha^ hardly the Soul
knows them, and far less reflect upon them.

CHAP. XIII. What the Soul ought to do in Internal Recollection.
85. THou ought to go to Prayer, that th^^ may deliver thy self wholly up
into the hands of God, with perfect resignation, exerting an act of faith,
believing that thou a^ in the divine presence, afterward settling i^ that holy
repose, with quietness, silence and tranquillity; and endeavoring for a whole
day^ a whole year, and thy whole life to continue that first act of
contemplation, by faith and love.

86. It is not your businesses to multiply the^^ acts, nor to repeat sensible
affections, because they hinder the purity of the spiritual and perfect act of
the will, whilst besides that these sweet sentiments are imperfect,
(considering the reflection wherewith they are made, the self-content, and
external consolation wherewith they are sought after, the Soul being drawn
outward to the external faculties) there is no necessity of renewing them, as
the mystical Falcon has excellently expressed it by the following similitude.

87. If a Jewel given to a friend were once put into his hands, it is not
necessary to repeat such a donation already made, by daily telling him, (Sir, I
give you that Jewel, Sir, I give you that Jewel) but to let him keep it, and
not take it from him, because provided he take it not, or design not to take it
from him, he has surely given it him.

88. In the same manner, having once dedicated, and lovingly resigned thy self
to the will of God, there is nothing else for thee to do, but to continue the
same, without repeating new and sensible acts, provided thou take not back
the Jewel thou have once given, by committing some notable fault aganist his
divine will, though thou ought still to exercise thy self outwardly in the
external works of thy calling and state, for in so doing thou do the will of
God, and walk in continual and virtual oration: He always prays (said
Theophylact) who does good works, nor does he neglect Prayer, but when he
leaves off to be just.

89. Thou ought then to slight all those sensibilities, to the end thy Soul
may be established and acquire a habit of internal recollection which is so
effectual, that the resolution only of going to Prayer, awakens a lively
presence of God, which is the preparation to the Prayer that is about to be
made; or to say better, is no other than a more efficacious continuation of
continual Prayer, wherein the contemplative person ought to be settled.

90. O how well did the venerable Mother of Cantal, the spiritual daughter of
St. Francis of Sales, practice this Lesson, in whose Life are the following
words, written to her Master: Most dear Father, I cannot do any act, it seems
to me always that this is the most firm and secure disposition: my spirit in
the upper part, is in a most simple unity; it is not united, because when it
would perform acts of union (which it often sets about) it finds difficulty,
and clearly perceives that it cannot unite, but be united. The Soul would make
use of this union, for the service of Mattins, the holy Mass, preparation for
the Communion, and Thanksgiving, and in a word, it would for all things be
always in that most simple unity of spirit, without reflecting on any thing
else. To all this the holy Father answered with approbation, persuading her to
persist, and putting her in mind, that the repose of God is in peace.

91. Another time she wrote to the same Saint these words: Endeavoring to do
some more special acts of my simple intuition, total resignation and
annihilation in God, his divine goodness rebuked me, and gave me to understand,
that that proceeded only from the love of my self, and that thereby I offended
my Soul.

92. By this thou will be undeceived, and know what is the perfect and
spiritual way of Praying, and be advised what is to be done in Internal
recollection: Thou Wilt know that to the end Love may be perfect and pure, it is
expedient to retrench the multiplication of sensible and fervent Acts, the Soul
continuing quiet and resting in that inward Silence. Because, tenderness,
delight, and sweet sentiments, which the Soul experiences in the Will, are not
pure Spirits, but Acts blended with the sensibilitie of Nature. Nor is it
perfect Love, but sensible Pleasure, which distracts and hurts the Soul, as the
Lord told the venerable Mother of Cantal.

93. How happy and how well applied will thy Soul be, if retreating within it
self, it there shrink into its own nothing, both in its Center and superior
Part, without minding what it does; whether it recollect or not; whether it
walk well or ill; if it operate or not, without heeding, thinking, or minding
any sensible thing? At that time the Intellect believes with a pure Act, and
the Will loves with perfect Love, without any kind of impediment, imitating
that pure and continued Act of Intuition and Love, which the Saints say the
Blessed in Heaven have, with no other difference, than that they see one
another there Face to Face, and the Soul here, through the Veil of an obscure
Faith.

94. O how few are the Souls, that attain to this perfect Way of Praying,
because they penetrate not enough into this internal recollection and Mystical
Silence, and because they strip not themselves of imperfect reflection, and
sensible pleasure! O that thy Soul, without thoughtful advertency, even of it
self, might give it self in Prey to that holy and spiritual Tranquillity, In bis
Confess. lib. 9. cap. 10.
and say with St. Austin, Sileat anima mea, and transeat se, non se cogitando!
Let it be silent and do nothing, forget it self, and plung into that obscure
Faith: How secure and safe would it be, though it might seem to it that thus
unactive and doing nothing it were undone.

95. I Will sum up this Doctrine with a Letter that the illuminated Mother of
Cantal wrote to a Sister, and great Servant of God: Divi^^ Bounty (said she)
granted me this way of Prayer that with a single View of God, I felt my self
wholly dedicated to him, absorpt and reposed in him he still continued to me
that Grace, though I oppos^^ it by my Infidelity, giving way to fear, and
thinking my self unprofitable in that state; for which cause, being willing to
do something on my part, (...) quite spoil all; and to this present I find my
se^^ sometimes assaulted by the same Fear, though (...) in Prayer, but in other
Exercises wherein I am always willing to employ my self a little, though I know
very well, that in doing such acts, I come o^^ of my Center, and see
particularly that that simp^^ View of God, is my only remedy and help still,
(...) all troubles, temptations, and the events of th^^ Life.

96. And certainly, would I have followed my internal Impulse, I should have
made use of no other means in any thing whatsoever, without exception; because
when I think to fortify my Soul with Arts, Reasonings and Resignations, then
do I expose my self to new temptations and straights: Besides that, I cannot do
it without great violence; which leaves me exhausted and dry, so that it
behooves me speedily to return to this simple Resignation, knowing that God, in
this manner, lets me see, that it is his Will and Pleasure, that a total stop
should be put to the operations of my Soul, because he would have all things
done by his own divine Activity; and happily he expects no more of me, but this
only View in all spiritual Exercises, and in all the pains, temptations and
afflictions that may befall me in this life. And the truth is, the quieter I
keep my Spirit by this means, the better all things succeed with me; and my
crosses and afflictions suddenly vanish. Many times has my blessed Father St
Francis of Sales, assured me of this.

97. Our late Mother Superior, encouraged me firmly to persist in that way,
and not to fear any thing in this simple View of God: She told me, That that
was enough, and that the greater the nakedness, and quietness in God are, the
greater sweetness and strength receives the Soul, which ought to endeavor to
become so pure and simple, that it should have no other support, but in God
alone.

98. To this purpose I remember, that a few days since, God communicated to me
an Illumination, which made such an impression upon me, as if I had clearly
seen him; and this it is, That I should never look upon my self, but walk with
eyes shut, leaning on my Beloved, without striving to see nor know the Way, by
which he guides me, neither fix my thoughts on any thing, nor yet beg Favors
of him, but as undone in my self, rest wholly and sincerely on him. Hitherto
that Illuminated and Mistical Mistress, whose Words do Credit and Authorize our
Doctrine.

CHAP. XIV. Declaring, how the Soul putting it self in the Presence of God,
with perfect Resignation, by the pure Act of Faith, walks always in virtual and
acquired Contemplation.
99. Thou will tell me (as many Souls have told me) that though by a perfect
Resignation thou have put thy self in the Presence of God, by means of pure
Faith, as has been already hinted, yet thou do not merit nor improve,
because thy thoughts are so distracted, that thou can not be fixed upon God.

100. Be not disconsolate, for thou do not lose time, nor merit, neither
desist thou from Prayer; because it is not necessary, that during that whole
time of recollection, thou should actually think on God; it is enough that
thou have been attentive in the beginning; provided thou discontinue not thy
purpose, nor revoke the actual attention which thou had. As he, who hears
Mass, and says the Divine Office, performs his Duty very well, by virtue of
that primary actual attention, though afterward he persevere not, in keeping
his thoughts actually fixed on God.

101. This the Angelical Doctor St. Thomas confirms, in the following Words:
2.2. quaest. 82. art. 13. ad 1.
That first intention only and thinking on God when one Prays, has force and
valve enough to make the Prayer, during all the rest of the time it continues,
to be true, impetratory and meritorious, though all that while there be no
actual Contemplation on God. See now if the Saint could speak more clearly to
our purpose!

102. So that (in the Judgment of that Saint) the Prayer still continues,
though the Imagination may ramble upon infinite numbers of thoughts, provided
one consent not to it, shift not Place, intermit not the Prayer, nor change the
first Intention of being with God. And it is certain, that he changes it not,
whilst he does not leave his Place. Hence it follows in sound Doctrine, that
one may persevere in Prayer, though the Imagination be carried about with
various and unvoluntary thoughts. He prays in Spirit and Truth (says the Saint
in the forecited place) whoever goes to Prayer with the Spirit and Intention
of Praying, though afterward through Misery and Frailty his Thoughts may
straggle. Evagatio vero mentis quae fit praeter propositum, orationis fructum
non tollit.

103. But thou wilt say, at least, art thou not to remember when thou art in the
presence of God, and often say to him, Lord abide within me; and I will give my
self wholly up to thee? I answer that there is no necessity for that, seeing
thou have a design to Pray, and for that end went to that place. Faith and
Intention are sufficient, and these always continue; nay, the more simple that
remembrance be, without words, or thoughts, the more pure, spiritual, internal,
and worthy of God it is.

104. Would it not be impertinent and disrespectful, if being in the Presence
of a King, thou should ever now and then say to him; Sir, I believe Your
Majesty is here? It Is the very same thing. By the eye of pure Faith the Soul
sees God, believes in him, and is in his Presence; and so when the Soul
believes, it has no need to say, My God thou art here; but to believe as it
does believe, seeing when Prayer-time is come^ Faith and Intention guide and
conduct it to contemplate God by means of pure Faith, and perfect Resignation.

105. so that, so long as thou retracte^ not that Faith, and Intention of being
resigned, thou walk always in Faith and Resignation, and consequently in
Prayer, and in virtual and acquired Contemplation, although thou perceive it
not, remember it not, neither exerte^ new Acts and Reflections thereon; after
the example of a Christian, a Wife, and a Monk who, though they exert us new
Acts and Remembrances, the one as to his Profession, saying, I am a Monk, the
other as to her Matrimony, saying, I am a Wife, and the third as to his
Baptism, saying, I am a Christian, they cease not for all that from being, the
one Baptized, the other Married, and the third Professed. The Christian shall
only be obliged to do good Works in Confirmation of his Faith; and to believe
more with the Heart, than with the Mouth: The Wife ought to give demonstrations
of the Fidelity which she promised to her Husband: And the Monk of the
Obedience which he made profession of to his Superior.

106. In the same manner, the inward Soul being once resolved to Believe, that
God is in it, and that it will not desire nor act any thing but through God,
ought to rest satisfied in that Faith and Intention, in all its Works and
Exercises, without forming or repeating new Acts of the same Faith, nor of such
a Resignation.

CHAP. XV. A Sequel of the same matter.
107. THis true Doctrine serves not only for the time of Prayer; but also after
it is over, by Night and by Day, at all Hours, and in all the daily Functions
of thy Calling, thy Duty and Condition. And if thou tell me, that many times
thou forgettest during a whol^ day to renew thy resignation, I answer, tha^
though it seem to thee, that thou art diverted from it, by attending the daily
occupations o^ thy Vocation, as Studying, Reading, Preaching, Eating, Drinking,
doing Business, and the like; thou art mistaken; for the one destroy^ not the
other, nor by so doing do thou neglect to do the Will of God, nor to proceed
i^ virtual Prayer, as St. Thomas says.

108. Because these occupations are not contrary to his Will, nor contrary to
thy Resignation, it being certain, that God would have thee to Eat, Study, take
Pains, do Business, etc. So that to perform these Exercises, which are
conformed to his Will and Pleasure, thou departe^^ not out of his Presence, nor
from thine own Resignation.

109. But if in Prayer, or out of it tho^ should willingly be diverted or
distracted suffering thy self deliberately to be transported into any Passion;
then it will be good for thee to revert to God, and return into his Divine
Presence, renewing the purest of Faith and Resignation. However it is not
necessary to exert those Acts, when thou find thy self i^ dryness, because
dryness is good and holy, an^ cannot, how severe soever it be, take from the
Soul the Divine Presence, which is establishe^ in Faith. Thou ought never to
call dryne^ distraction, because in beginners it is want (...) sensibility, and
in proficients abstractedness, b^ means whereof, if thou bear it out with
constancy, resting quiet in thine own emptiness, thy Soul will become more and
more inward; and the Lord will work wonders in it.

110. Strive then when thou come from Prayer, to the end thou may return to
it again, not to be distracted, nor diverted; but to carry thy self with a
total resignation to the Divine Will; that God may do with thee and all thine,
according to his heavenly pleasure, relying on him as on a kind and loving
Father. Never recall that Intention, and though thou be taken up about the
Affairs of the Condition wherein God has placed thee, yet thou wilt still be in
Prayer in the Presence of God, and in perpetual Resignation. Therefore St. John
Chrysostom said, A just man leaves not off to Pray, Suner. 5. ad Thessolon.
unless he leaves off to be Just. He always prays, who always does well; the
good desire is Prayer, and if the Desire be continued, so is also the Prayer.

111. Thou Wilt understand all that has been said, by this clear Example, when a
man begins a Journey to Rome, every step he makes in the Progress is voluntary,
and nevertheless it is not necessary, that at every step he should express his
desire, or exert a new Act of the Will, saying, I am going to Rome, I go to
Rome: Because, by virtue of that first intention he had of traveling to Rome,
the same Will still remains in him; so that he goes on without saying so,
though he does not without intending so; you will clearly find, besides, that this
Traveller, with one single and explicit of the Will and Intention, travels,
speaks, hears, sees, reasons, eats, drinks, and does several other things,
without any interruption to his first intention, nor yet of his actual
journying to Rome.

112. It is just so in the contemplative Soul: A man having once made the
resolution of doing the Will of God, and of being in his Presence, he still
perseveres in that act, so long as he recals not the same, although he be taken
up in hearing, speaking, eating, or in any other external good work or function
of his Calling and Quality. St Thomas Aquinas expresses all this in few words,
Contra Gentiles, l. 3. c. 138. Un 2.
Non enim Oportet quod qui propter deum aliquod iter arripuit, in qualibet
part itineris de Deo cogitet actu.

113. Thou Wilt say, that all Christians walk in this Exercise, because all have
Faith, and may although they be not internal, fulfill this Doctrine, especially
such as go in the external Way of Meditation and Ratiocination. It is true, all
Christians have Faith, and more particularly they who Meditate and Consider:
But the Faith of those who advance by the inward Way, is much different,
because it is a lively Faith, universal and indistinct, and by consequent, more
practical, active, effectual, and illuminated; insomuch as the Holy Ghost
enlightens the Soul that is best disposed, most, and that Soul is always best
disposed, which holds the Mind recollected; for proportionably to the
Recollection the Holy Ghost Illuminates. And albeit it be true, that God
communicates some light in Meditation, yet it is so scanty and different from
that which he communicates to the Mind, recollected in a pure and universal
Faith, that the one to the other, is no more than like two or three Drops of
Water in respect of an Ocean: since in Meditatation two or three particular
Truths are communicated to the Soul; but in the internal Recollection, and the
Exercise of pure and universal Faith, the Wisdom of God is an abundant Ocean
which is communicated in that obscure, simple, general and universal Knowledge.

114. In like manner Resignation is more perfect in these Souls, because it
springs from the internal and infused Fortitude, which grows as the in ternal
Exercise of pure Faith, with Silence and Resignation, is continued: In the
manner that the Gifts of God's Spirit grow in contemplative Souls; for though
these divine Gifts are to be found in all those that are in a State of Grace,
nevertheless, they are, as it were, dead, without strength, and in a manner
infinitely different from these which reign in contemplative Persons, by reason
of their illustration, vivacity and efficacy.

115. From all which, be persuaded, that the inward Soul, accustomed to go
daily at certain hours to Prayer, with the Faith and Resignation I have
mentioned to thee, walks continually in the Presence of God. All holy, expert
and mystical Masters, teach this true and important Doctrine, because they have
all had one and the same Master, who is the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XVI. A Way by which one may enter into internal Recollection, through
the most Holy Humanity of our Lord Christ.
116. THere are two sorts of Spiritual Men Diametrically contrary to one
another: The one say, That the Mysteries of the Passion of Christ, are always
to be Considered and Meditated upon. The others running to the opposite
extreme, teach, That the Meditation of the Mysteries of the Life, Passion, and
Death of our Savior, is not Prayer, nor yet a Remembrance of them; but the
exalted Elevation to God, whose Divinity Contemplates the Soul in quiet and
silence, ought only to be called Prayer.

117. It is certain that our Lord Christ is the Guide, the Door, and the Way;
as he himself has said in his own Words: John 14.
I am the way the truth and the life. And before the Soul can be fit to enter
into the Presence of the Divinity, and to be united with it, it is to be Washed
with the precious Blood of a Redeemer and Adorned with the rich Robes of his
Passion.

118. Our Lord Christ with his Doctrine and Example, is the Mirror, the Guide
of the Soul^ the Way and the only Door by which we enter into those Pastures
of Life Eternal, and into the vast Ocean of the Divinity. Hence it follows,
that the Remembrance of the Passion and Death of our Savior ought not wholly
to be blotted out: nay, it is also certain, that whatsoever high elevation of
Mind the Soul may be raised to, it ought not in all things to separate from the
most holy Humanity. But then it follows, not from hence neither, that the Soul
accustomed to internal recollection, that can no longer ratiocinate, should
always be meditating on, and considering (as the other Spiritualists say) the
most holy Mysteries of our Savior. It is holy and good to Meditate; and would
to God that all men of this World practiced it. And the Soul, besides, that
meditates, reasons and considers with facility, ought to be let alone in that
state, and not pushed on to another higher, so long as in that of Meditation it
finds nourishment and profit.

119. It belongs to God alone, and not to the spiritual Guide, to promote the
Soul from Meditation to Contemplation; because, if God through his special
Grace, call it not to this state of Prayer, the Guide can do nothing with all
his Wisdom and Instructions.

120. To strike a secure means then, and to avoid those two so contrary
extremes, of not wholly blotting out the remembrance of the Humanity; and of
not having it continually before our eyes; we ought to suppose, that there are
two ways of attending to the holy Humanity; that one may enter at the Divine
Port, which is Christ our well-being. The first is by considering the
Mysteries, and meditating the Actions, of the Life, Passion, and Death of our
Savior. The second by thinking on him, by the application of the Intellect,
pure Faith, or Memory.

121. When the Soul proceeds in perfecting and interiorizing it self, by means
of internal recollection, having for sometime meditated on the Mysteries
whereof it has been already informed; then it retains Faith and Love to the
Word Incarnate, being ready for his sake to do whatever he inspires into it,
walking according to his Precepts, although they be not always before its Eyes.
As if it should be said to a Son that he ought never to forsake his Father,
they intend not thereby to oblige him, to have his Father always in sight, but
only to have him always in his Memory, that in time and place, he may be ready
to do his Duty.

122. The Soul then that is entered into internal recollection, with the
opinion and approbation of an expert Guide, has no need to enter by the first
door of Meditation on the Mysteries, being always taken up in meditating upon
them; because that is not to be done without great fatigue to the Intellect,
nor does it stand in need of such ratiocinations; since these serve only as a
means to attain to believing, that which it has already got the possession of.

123. The most noble, spiritual and proper way for Souls that are Proficients
in internal recollection, to enter by the Humanity of Christ our Lord, and
entertain a remembrance of him, is the second way; eying that Humanity, and the
Passion thereof by a simple Act of Faith, loving and reflecting on the same as
the Tabernacle of the Divinity, the beginning and end of our Salvation, Jesus
Christ having been Born, Suffered, and Died a shameful Death for our sakes.

124. This is the way that makes internal Souls profit, and this holy, pious,
swift, and instantaneous remembrance of the Humanity, can be no obstacle to
them in the course of internal recollection, unless if when the Soul enters
into Prayer, it finds it self drawn back; for then it will be better, to
continue recollection and mental excess. But not finding it self drawn back,
the simple and swift remembrance of the Humanity of the Divine Word, gives no
impediment to the highest and most elevated, the most abstracted and
transformed Soul.

125. This is the way that Santa Teresa recommends to the contemplative,
rejecting the tumultuary opinions of some Schoolmen. This is the straight and
safe way, free from Dangers, which the Lord has taught to many Souls, for
attaining to repose, and the holy tranquillity of Contemplation.

126. Let the Soul then, when it enters into recollection, place it self at the
Gate of Divine Mercy, which is the amiable and sweet remembrance of the Cross
and Passion of the Word that was made Man, and Died for Love; let it stand
there with Humility, resigned to the Will of God, in whatsoever it pleases the
Divine Majesty, to do with it; and if from that holy and sweet remembrance, it
soon fall into forgetfulness, there is no necessity of making a new repetition,
but to continue silent and quiet in the presence of the Lord.

127. Wonderfully does St. Paul favor this our Doctrine in the Epistle which
he wrote to the Colossians, wherein he exhorts them, and us, that whether we
Eat, Drink, or do any thing else, we should do it in the Name, and for the Sake
of Jesus Christ. Omne quod cumque farit is in verbo, aut in opere, omnia in
nomine Jesu Christi facite, gratias agentes Deo and Patri per ipsum. God grant
that we may all begin by Jesus Christ, and that in him, and by him alone we may
arrive at perfection.

CHAP. XVII. Of Internal and Mystical Silence.
128. THere are three kinds of Silence; the first is of Words, the second of
Desires, and the third of Thoughts. The first is perfect; the second more
perfect; and the third most perfect. In the first, that is, o^ Words, Virtue is
acquired; in the second, to wit, of Desires, quietness is attained to; in the
third of Thoughts, Internal Recollection is gained. By not speaking, not
desiring, and not thinking, one arrives at the true and perfect Mystical
Silence, wherein God speaks with the Soul, communicates himself to it, and in
the Abyss of it is own Depth, teaches it the most perfect and exalted Wisdom.

129. He calls and guides it to this inward Solitude, and mystical Silence,
when he says, That he will speak to it alone, in the most secret and hidden
part of the Heart. Thou art to keep thy self in this mystical Silence, if thou
would hear the sweet and divine Voice. It is not enough, for gaining this
Treasure to forsake the World, nor to renounce thine own Desires, and all
things created; if thou wean not thy self from all Desires and Thoughts. Rest
in this mystical Silence, and open the Door, that so God may communicate
himself unto thee, unite with thee, and transform thee into himself.

130. The perfection of the Soul consists not in speaking nor in thinking much
on God; but in loving him sufficiently: This Love is attained to by means of
perfect Resignation and internal Silence, all consists in Works: The Love of
God has but few Words. Thus St. John the Evangelist confirms and inculcates it.
My little Children, Epist 1. Chap. 3. v. 18.
let us not Love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth.

131. Thou art clearly convinced now, that perfect Love consists not in amorous
Acts, nor tender Ejaculations, nor yet in the internal Acts, wherein thou
tellest God, that thou have an infinite love for him, and thou love him more
than thy self. It may be that at that time thou seek more thy self and the
love of thy self, than the true Love of God, Because Love consists in Works,
and not in fair Discourses.

132. That a rational Creature may understand the secret desire and intention
of thy Heart, there is a necessity that thou should express it to him in
Words. But God who searches the Hearts, stands not in need that thou
should make profession and assure him of it; nor does he rest satisfied, as
the Evangelist says, with Love in Word nor in Tongue, but with that which is
true and indeed. What avails it to tell him with great zeal and fervor, that
thou tenderly and perfectly love him above all things, if at one bitter word,
or slight injury, thou do not resign thy self, nor art mortified for the
love of him? A manifest proof that thy love was a love in Tongue and not in
Deed.

133. Strive to be resigned in all things with Silence, and in so doing,
without saying that thou love him, thou will attain to the most perfect,
quiet, effectual and true love. St. Peter most affectionately told the Lord,
that for his sake he was ready, willingly to lay down his Life; but at the word
of a young Damsel, he denied him, and there was an end of his Zeal. Mary
Magdalen, said not a word, and yet the Lord himself taken with her perfect
Love, became her Panagyrist, saying that she had loved much. It is internally,
then, that with dumb Silence, the most perfect Virtues of Faith, Hope, and
Charity are practiced, without any necessity of telling God, that thou love
him, hopest and believe in him; because the Lord knows better than thou
do, what the internal Motions of thy Heart are.

134. How well was that pure act of Love understood and practiced by that
profound and great Mistick, the Venerable Gregory Lopez, whose whole Life was a
continual Prayer, and a continued Act of Contemplation; and of so pure and
spiritual Love of God, that it never gave way to Affections and sensible
Sentiments?

135. Having for the space of three Years continued that Ejaculation, Thy Will
be done in Time, and in Eternity; repeating it as often as he breathed; God
Almighty discovered to him, that infinite Treasure of the pure and continued
Act of Faith and Love, with Silence and Resignation: so that he came to say,
That during the thirty six Years he lived after, he always continued in his
inward Man; that pure Act of Love, without ever uttering the least Petition,
Ejaculation, or any thing that was Sensible, or sprung from Nature. O Incarnate
Seraphim, and Dei-fied Man! how well did thou know how to dive into that
internal and mistical Silence, and to distinguish betwixt the outward and
inward Man?

THE Spiritual Guide, Which leads the Soul to the fruition of Internal Peace.
The Second Book. Of the Ghostly Father, the Obedience that is due to him; of
Indiscreet Zeal, and of Internal and External Penance.
CHAP. I. The best way to baffle the Craft of the Enemy, is to be Subjected to
a Ghostly Father.
1. IT is every way convenient, to choose a Master experienced in the inward
Way, because God will not do to all, what he did to St Catharine of Siena, whom
he took by the Hand, and immediately taught the mystical Way. If in the
Progress of Nature there is a necessity of a Guide; how must it be in the
Progress of Grace? If in the outward and visible Ways there is need of a
Master; how must it be for the internal and secret? If it must be so for the
moral, scholastic and expositive Theology, which are plainly taught; how must
it be for that which is mystical, secret, reserved and obscure? If in external
and political Actions and Practices it is so; how must it be in the internal
Transactions with God?

2. A Guide is in like manner necessary for resisting and overcoming the Craft
and Wiles of Satan. St Austin gave many Reasons why God appointed, that in his
Church, Doctors and Teachers, men of the same nature with others, should, for
Light and Doctrine, have the Precedence: The chief is, to free us from the
craft and cunning of the Enemy; for should we be left to our own dictates and
natural impulse, for the conduct of our Actions, we would trip and stumble
every foot, and at length fall headlong into the Pit; as it happens to
Heretics and proud People: Now if we had had Angels given to us for Masters,
then would the Devils have dazzled our eyes by transforming themselves into
Angels of Light: therefore it was convenient that for Guides and Counselors,
God should give us men like our selves. And if such a Guide be expert, he will
soon know the tricks and subtilties of the Devil; which being once known, as
wanting substance, they soon evanish.

3. A Ghostly Father ought to come from the Hand of God, and therefore without
previous Circumspection and Prayer; he is not to be chosen, but being once
chosen, he is not to be left, but for most urgent reasons; such as are, for not
knowing the Ways and States, through which God guides the Soul; because no man
can teach what he does not know, according to that true Maxim of Philosophy.

4. And if he conceive not (as St Paul says) the things of the Spirit, that
will be Ignorance in him; because they are to be examined Spiritually, and he
wants Experience: but the spiritual and expert Man sees every thing clearly,
and judges of it as it is. If a Guide then want Experience, it is a chief
reason why one should leave him, and choose another more expert; because without
such a one, the Soul will not profit.

5. To pass from a bad into a good State, there is no necessity of Counsel; but
to change what is good into better, there is need of Time Prayer, and Advice,
because every thing which is best in it self, is not best for every one in
particular; nor is every thing that is good for one good for all: Non omnibus
omnia expediunt Some are called for the outward and ordinary Way; others for
the internal and extraordinary, and all are not in the same State; so tha^
there being so many and various persons wh^ are engaged in the mystical Way, it
is impossible for one to make a step in those secret and internal Paths without
an experienced Guide^ because instead of going right, he will tumble into ^
Precipice.

6. When a Soul walks with Fear, doubting if it walk safely, and desires to be
clearly rid of these fears and doubtings, the securest way is to submit to a
Ghostly Father; because by the internal Light he clearly discovers what is
Temptation, and what Inspiration, and distinguishes the motions that spring
from Nature, from the Devil, and from the Soul it self, which ought totally to
be Subjected to him who has Experience, and he can discover the engagements,
the idols and bad habits that hinder the Soul's flight; which by this means
will not only be delivered from the Snares of the Devil, but will proceed more
in one Year, than it could have proceeded in a thousand, with other Guides of
no Experience.

7. In the Life of the Illuminated Father, Friar John Tauler, it is related
what that Layman who went before him in the State of Perfection, says of
himself, How that being taken off from the World, and desirous to be Holy, he
gave himself to great Abstinence, till at length being extenuated and weak, he
fell into a Dream, and heard a Voice from Heaven, which said to him, Man, if
thou voluntarily kill thy self, before the time, thou shall pay dear to thy
self for it. Being full of terror, he went into a Desert, and there imparted
the way he had taken, and his Abstinence, to a holy Anchorite, who, by the
favor of Heaven, freed him from that diabolical Delusion. He told him, That he
followed that course of Abstinence that he might please God. But the Anchorite
having asked him, By what Advice he did it? And he having made answer, By none.
The Anchorite replied, That it was a manifest Temptation of the Devil. From
that time foreward, he opened his eyes, and knowing his own Perdition, lived
always by the Direction of a spiritual Father; and he himself affirmed, That in
seven Years space he gave him greater Light, than all printed Books whatsoever
could do.

CHAP. II. A Sequel of the same Matter.
8. THere is far greater Advantage to be had from having a Master in the
mystical Way, than from the use of Spiritual Books; because a practical Master
tells in the nick of time, what ought to be done; but in a Book one may fall
upon a thing that is less proper, and by that means the necessary Instruction
is wanting: Besides, by mystical Books men raise to themselves many false
Notions, the Soul thinking to have that, which in reality it has not, and to
be farther on in the mystical State, than as yet it is; whence spring many
prejudices and dangers.

9. It is certain that the frequent Reading of mystical Books, which are not
founded in practical, but mere speculative Light, does rather hurt than good,
because it confounds, instead of enlightening Souls, and fills them with
discoursive Notions that mightily hinder them; since though they be Notices of
Light, yet they enter from without, render the Faculties dull, and fill them
with Idea's instead of emptying them, that God may replenish them with Himself.
Many do continually Read in these speculative Books, because they will not
submit to him who may tell them, that such Reading is not convenient for them;
whereas there is no doubt but if they do submit, and the Guide be a man of
Experience, he will not allow it them: And then they would profit, and not mind
such Studies as the Souls do who are submitted, have Light, and make
improvement. Hence it follows, that it contributes much to inward Quiet and
Security, to have an experienced Guide, who may govern and instruct with actual
Light, that the Soul may not be deluded by the Devil, nor by its own Judgment
and Opinion: However, we do not condemn the Reading of spiritual Books in
general, seeing here we speak in particular of Souls purely Internal and
Mystical, for whom this Book is written.

10. All holy and mystical Masters confess, that the Security of a mystical
Soul, consists in a cordial Submission to its Ghostly Father, communicating to
him, whatever passes within it. And therefore, he who lives after his own
Opinion, without applying himself to a spiritual Director, (though he take
himself to be, and is reputed Spiritual) opposes himself to the Doctrine of the
Saints, and of enlightened Souls; because the more a Soul is illuminated and
united with God, the more humble, submiss, subjected and obedient to the
spiritual Guide it ought to be. For proof of this truth, I Will relate what the
Lord said to Donna Marina d'Escobar: It is reported in her Life, that being
Sick, she asked the Lord, If she should be Silent, and omit the acquainting her
spiritual Father with the extraordinary things that happened in her Soul, that
she might not tire herself, nor trouble the same Father. To whom the Lord
answered, That not to give an Account of them to her Ghostly Father, would not
be well done for three Reasons: First, Because as Gold is tried in the Furnace,
and the value of Stones known by touching them with the Touchstone; so the
Soul is purified, and the worth of it known, when the Minister of God tryes it
by the Touchstone. Secondly, Because to avoid Error, it was convenient that
matters should be governed, according to the Order instituted by God in his
Church, in the Scriptures, and in the Doctrine of the Saints. Thirdly, That the
Mercies which his Divine Majesty shows to his Servants and pure Souls, may not
be concealed, but made manifest, that so Believers may be encouraged to serve
their God, and he be glorified in them.

11. In the same place she has the following words, conform to the aforesaid
truth: My Confessor being Sick, and having enjoined me that I should not make a
full Discovery of all things that happened to me, to him, to whom, in the mean
time, I Confessed my self, but only of some with prudence: I bewailed my
condition to the Lord, that I had not one to whom I might communicate my
Affairs; and his Majesty made me answer, Thou have one already who supplies the
want of thy Confessor; tell him all that happens to thee. I presently replied,
Not so Lord, not so Lord. (Why?) said the Lord. Because my Confessor commanded
me that I should not give him Account of all; and I ought to obey him. His
Majesty said to me, Thou have pleased me by that answer, and that I might hear
thee say so, I said what thou have heard: Do so; yet still thou may acquaint
him with some things, as he himself bad thee.

12. What Santa Teresa said of herself, comes in very pat in this place: When
ever (says she) the Lord commanded me any thing, if my Confessor told me
another, I turned to the Lord, and told him, that I must obey my Confessor.
Afterward his Majesty returned to him, to the end he might enjoin it me of new.
This is sound and true Doctrine, which secures Souls, and dissipates the
illusions of the Devil.

CHAP. III. The indiscreet Zeal of Souls, and the disordinate Love of our
Neighbor, disturb internal Peace.
13. THere is not a more acceptable Sacrifice to God, In Ezechiel, Hom. 12.
(says St. Gregory) than the ardent Zeal of Souls: For that Ministry, the
eternal God sent his own Jesus Christ into the World, and ever since it has
been the most noble and sublime of Offices. But if the zeal be indiscreet, it
brings a notable obstacle to the progress of the Spirit.

14. No sooner does thou find in thy self any new and fervent light, but thou
would lay thy self wholly out for the good of Souls; and in the mean time,
it is odds, but that that is self-love, which thou take to be pure zeal. This
uses sometime to put on a garb of a disordinate desire, of a vain complacency,
of an industrious affection, and proper esteem; all Enemies to the peace of the
Soul.

15. It is never good to love thy Neighbor, to the detriment of thine own
spiritual good. To please God in purity, ought to be the only scope of thy
Works; this ought to be thy only desire and thought; endeavoring to moderate
thy disordinate fervor, that tranquillity and internal peace may reign in thy
Soul. The true zeal of Souls, which thou ought to strive for, should be the
true love of thy God. That is the fruitful, efficacious, and true zeal, which
does wonders in Souls, though with dumb Voices.

16. St. Paul recommended to us first the care of our own Souls, before that of
our Neighbor. 1 Timoth. 4.
Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, said he in his Canonical
Epistle. Struggle not to over-do; for when it is time convenient, and thou
can be any way useful to thy Neighbor, God will call thee forth, and put
thee in the employment that will best suit with thee: That thought belongs only
to him, and to thee, to continue in thy rest, disengaged, and wholly resigned
up to the Divine Will and Pleasure. Do'nt think that in that condition thou art
idle: He is busied enough, who is always ready waiting to perform the Will of
God. Who takes heed to himself for God's sake, does every thing; because, one
pure Act of internal Resignation, is more worth than a hundred thousand
exercises for ones own Will.

17. Though the Cistern be capable to contain much Water, yet it must still be
without it, till Heaven favor it with Rain. Be at rest, blessed Soul, be
quiet, humble and resigned, to every thing that God shall be pleased to do with
thee, leave the care to God, for he as a loving Father, knows best what is
convenient for thee; conform thy self totally to his Will, perfection being
founded in that, inasmuch as he who does the Will of the Lord, Mat. 12.
is his Mother's Son, and Brother of the Son of God himself.

18. Think not that God esteems him most, that does most. He is most beloved
who is most humble, most faithful and resigned, and most correspondent to his
own internal Inspiration, and to the divine Will and Pleasure.

CHAP. IV. A Sequel of the same.
19. LET all thy desires be conform to the Will of that God, who can bring
streams of Water out of the dry Rock, who is much displeased with those Souls,
which in helping others before the time, defraud themselves, suffering
themselves to be transported by indiscreet zeal, and vain complacency.

20. As it was with the Servant of Elisha, 2 Kings, c. 4.
who being sent by the Prophet, that with his Staff he might raise a dead
Child; because of the complacency he had, it had not the effect, and he was
reproved by Elisha. In like manner the Sacrifice of Cain was rejected, being
the first that was offered to God in the World, through the vainglory he had
of being the first, and more than his own Father Adam, in offering Sacrifice to
God.

21. In like manner the Disciples of our Lord Christ, were infected with that
evil, feeling a vain joy, when they cast out Devils, and therefore were sharply
reproved by their heavenly Master. Before Paul preached to the Gentiles the
Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, being already a chosen Vessel, a Citizen of
Heaven, and chosen of God for that Ministry, it was necessary to try and
humble him, shutting him up in a close Prison; and would thou become a
Preacher, without passing through the trial of Men and Devils? And could
thou thrust thy self into so great a Ministry, and produce Fruit, without
passing through the fiery trial of temptation, tribulation, and passive
purgation?

22. It concerns thee more to be quiet and resigned in a holy ease, than to do
many and great things, by thy own judgment and opinion, think not that the
heroic Actions which great Saints have done, and do, in the Church, are Works
of their own Industry; for all things as well spiritual as temporal, to the
making of the leas^ Leaf are by Divine Providence Decreed from all Eternity. He
that does the Will of God, does all things; this thy Soul ought to endeavor,
resting in a perfect Resignation, to whatever the Lord is pleased to dispose of
thee; acknowledge thy self unworthy of so high a Ministry, as the guiding of
Souls to Heaven, and then thou wilt put no obstacle to the rest, internal peace,
and heavenly flight of thy Soul.

CHAP. V. Light, Experience, and a divine Call, are necessary for guiding Souls
in the inward Way.
23. Thou Wilt think and with great confidence too, that thou art in a condition
to guide Souls in the way of the Spirit, and perhaps, that may be secret
Vanity, spiritual Pride, and plain Blindness; seeing besides, that this high
employment requires supernatural light, total abstraction, and other qualities,
which I shall mention to thee in the following Chapters; the Grace of a Call is
also necessary, without which all is but vanity, confidence, and self-conceit;
because, though it be a holy and good thing to guide Souls, and conduct them to
Contemplation; yet how know thou that God would have thee so employed? And
though thou know (which yet is not easy) that thou have great light and
experience, yet what Evidence have thou that the Lord would have thee to be of
that Profession?

24. This Ministry is of such importance that it is not our parts to take it
upon us, until i^ please God, by means of our Superiors and spiritual Guides,
to place us therein; otherwise i^ would be a heavy prejudice to us, though i^
might be profitable to our Neighbor. What avails it us to gain the whole
World to God, if our own Soul thereby suffer detriment?

25. Howsoever evident it may be to thee, that thy Soul is endowed with
internal light and experience; the best thing still that thou can do, is to
keep quiet and resigned in thine own nothingness, until God call thee for the
good of Souls: That belongs only to him, who knows thy sufficiency and
abstraction: It is not thy part to make that judgment, neither to press into
that Ministry; because, if thou art governed by thine own opinion and
judgment, in an affair of so high concern, self-love will blind, undo, and
deceive thee.

26. If then experience, light, and sufficiency are not sufficient, without the
grace of a Call, to qualify one for that employment, how must it be without
sufficiency? how must it be without internal light? without due experience,
which are gifts not communicated to all Souls; but to abstracted and resigned
Souls, and to such as have advanced to perfect annihilation, by the way of
terrible tribulation, and passive purgation. Be persuaded, O blessed Soul, that
all works which in this profession are not governed by a true zeal, springing
from pure love, and a purged Soul, cloth the Soul with vanity, self-love, and
spiritual pride.

27. O how many self-confident men, by their own judgment and opinion,
undertake this Ministry; and instead of pleasing God, emptying and abstracting
their own Souls, (though they may do some good to their Neighbor) are filled
with Earth, Straw, and Self-conceit! Be Quiet and Resigned, renounce thy own
Judgment and Desire, sink down into the Abyss of thy own Insufficiency and
Nothingness; for there only thou wilt find God, the true Light, thy Happiness,
and greatest Perfection.

CHAP. VI. Instructions and Counsels to Confessors, and Spiritual Directors.
28. THe highest and most profitable Ministry, is that of a Confessor, and
spiritual Director; and irreparable are the damages, if it be not well
performed.

29. It would be prudently done, to choose a Patron for so great a Ministry;
and that should be the Saint to whom one has greatest Devotion.

30. The chief and most secure Document is, to endeavor the internal and
continual Retirement; and so he will walk well in all the exercises and
employments of his own State and Calling, particularly in that of the
Confession-seat; for when the Soul inwardly Recollected, sallies out to be
employed in those external and necessary Exercises, it is God who Illuminates
and Works in them.

31. In the Conduct of Souls that are Internal, Documents are not to be given
to them, but with mildness and prudence: The Obstacles which hinder the
Influences of God, are only to be taken out of their way; however, it may be
needful to arm them with that holy Counsel of, Secretum meum mihi.

32. Many Souls think, that all Confessors are capable of internal Matters; but
besides, that that is a mastake, it is found by experience to be a great
prejudice to communicate them to those who are not so: Because, though God has
placed them in the inward Way, yet they will not know these matters, nor advise
them to Souls, for want of experience; so that they will hinder the Progress to
Contemplation, enjoining them to Meditate by force, though they cannot; and by
that means, they stun and ruin instead of helping them in their Flight: for God
will have them to advance to Contemplation, and they draw them to Meditation,
because they know no other way.

33. If a Confessor would reap Fruit, he is not to look out for any Soul that
he may Guide it; it concerns them to come of themselves, and all are not to be
admitted, especially if they be Women, because they are not wont to come with
sufficient disposition: Not to make ones self a Master, nor be willing to
appear so, is an excellent means of doing good.

34. The Confessor is to make use of the name of Daughter, as little as he can;
because it is most dangerous, God being so Jealous, and the Epithet so Amorous.

35. The Employments which a Confessor accepts of, out of his Confession-seat,
ought to be but few; because God will not have him to be an Agent in Business;
and if it were possible, he should not be seen, but in his Confessionchair.

36. A Godfather, or Executor to a Man's last Will and Testament, he ought not,
so much as once, to be, all his life long, because it brings many disturbances
to the Soul, all of 'um contrary to the Perfection of so high a Ministry.

37. The Confessor or spiritual Director never ought to Visit his spiritual
Daughters, not so much as in case of Sickness, unless he should indeed be then
sent for, on the part of her that is ill.

38. If the Confessor procures an inward and outward Recollection, his words
will be (though he knows it not) like Coals kindled, setting their Souls afire.

39. In the Confessionary, his Reproofs must be ordinarily gentle and sweet,
although in the Pulpit they are severe and rigorous; because in this he ought
to be raging as a Lion, and in that, he ought to put on the meekness of a Lamb:
O how powerful is sweet Reproof for Penitents! In the Confessionary they are
already moved; but in the Pulpit their blindness and hardness, makes it
necessary to frighten 'um: yet these ought to be persuaded and reproved
rigorously, who come indisposed, and would have Absolution by force.

40. When all that is possible, is done for the benefit of Souls, the Fruit of
it is not to be looked after; because the Devil does subtly make that seem his
own, which is God's; and assaults with self-Conceit and vain Complacency, the
capital Enemies of Annihilation; which the Confessor always ought to bring
about for such a spiritual Dying.

41. Although he often see that Souls are not advantaged, and that those which
are edified, loose the Spirit; let him not be disquieted at this, but possess
himself in peace, like the Guardian Angels; then let him take courage inwardly,
with the sense of his own Sincerity; because sometimes God suffers such a
thing, among other ends, to humble him.

42. The Confessor ought to avoid himself, and persuade the Souls under his
Conduct also to avoid all sort of outwardness, because it is much abhorred by
the Lord.

43. Although he ought not to order Souls to be Communicated, nor take any
Communion from 'em, whether for Trial or Mortification, (since there are
infinite ways of Trying 'em and Mortifying 'em, without so great a prejudice)
yet he ought not to be niggardly with those Souls which are moved by a true
Desire, because Jesus Christ endured not to be shut up.

44. Experience shows us that it is a difficult thing to fulfill a Penance, when
it is great and immoderate: it is always best to have it of some profitable and
moderate matter.

45. If the spiritual Father shows, with any singularity, a greater Affection
to a Daughter, and such as gives very great disturbance to others of her Sex:
here he must use privacy and prudence, and must not speak to any with
particularity; because the Devil loves to make strife with the Guide of Souls,
and makes use of those very words to disturb others.

46. The continual and principal Exercise of Souls, purely Mistical, must be in
the interior Man, producing with privacy, the destruction of Self-love, and the
encouraging of 'em to the enduring of inward Mortifications; by which the Lord
Cleanses, Annihilates, and Perfects them.

47. The Desire of Revelations, uses to be a great hindrance to the interior
Soul, especially 10 Women; and there is not an ordinary Dream, but they will
Christen it with the name of a Vision. It Is necessary to show abhorrence to all
these hindrances.

48. Although Silence be a difficult thing to Women, in the things which the
Director orders 'em, yet must he procure it: since it is not good that the
things inspired into him from the Lord, should become the Mark for Censures to
shoot at.

CHAP. VII. Wherein the same thing is Treated of; Discoursing the Interests
which some Confessors and Spiritual Directors use to have; in which are
declared the Qualities which they ought to have for the Exercise of Confession,
and also for the Guiding of Souls through the Mystical Way.
49. THe Confessor ought to get Penitents encouraged to Prayer; especially when
they often present themselves at his Feet, and make known to him their Desire
that they have of their spiritual Good.

50. The Maxim which the Confessor ought mostly to observe, that he may never
come into Perdition, is, Not to accept any Present, though the whole World were
offered him.

51. Though there are abundance of Confessors, yet they are not all good ones,
because some of 'em know but little; others are very Ignorant; others betake
themselves to the Applauses of the Gentry; some seek the Favors of their
Penitents; some their Presents; some are full of spiritual Ambition, and seek
Credit and Fame, getting a multitude of spiritual Children to themselves;
others affect their Mastership and Command; others affect the Visions and
Revelations of their spiritual Children, and instead of despising 'em, the
only way of securing 'em to Humility, they commend 'em, that they may not
leave 'em off, and make them write 'em that they may show 'em abroad for
Ostentation: All this is Self-love and Vanity in these Guides, and great
prejudice to the spiritual Profit of Souls: since it is certain, that all these
respects and interests serve only to hinder the use and exercise of their
Office, with advantage and profit; which requires an universal freedom from
such things, and whose end and aim ought only to be the glory of God.

52. Other Confessors there are, which with ease and lightness of Heart, do
believe, and approve, and commend all Spirits: Others falling into the vicious
extreme, do condemn, without any reserve, all Visions and Revelations; such
things are neither to be believed all, nor condemned all: Others also there
are, who are so inamoured of the Spirit of their spiritual Daughters, that
whatever they Dream, let 'em be never so much Deceits, they reverence 'em as
sacred Mysteries! O what a world of Miseries are known in the Church by these
means! Other Confessors there are also, having on the Garb of wordly Courtesy
and Civility, having little regard to the holy Place of the Confessionary,
discoursing with their Penitents concerning things vain, superfluous,
distractive, and far from that decency which the Sacrament requires, and from
that disposition which should be fit to receive divine Grace; making
particularly like discourses and about the Household Affairs of their Penitents,
before they come to Accuse themselves of their Sins: whereupon that little
Devotion which they brought along with 'em to the Sacrament, becomes cooled and
good for nothing: Sometimes it happens that many Penitents are fain to wait to
be Confessed, who are full of business of their own, and when they see such a
long Demur, they grow weary and sad, and fall into impatience, losing the
actual disposition of Mind wherewith they were before prepared to receive so
healthful a Sacrament: whereupon the medley of these distractive, superfluous
and vain matters, not only makes 'em lose their precious time, but also
prejudiceth the holy Place, the Sacrament; the disposition of the Penitent who
is Confessed, and that of others who wait to be Confessed; all of 'em
considerable mischiefs, and worthy to be redressed.

53. For Confession, there are some good; but for the Government of Spirits by
the mystical Way, there are so few, (says Father John Davila) that in a
thousand, you shall possibly find one: St Francis of Sales says, One among ten
thousand: And the illuminated Thauler says, That in a hundred thousand, it was
a hard thing to find one expert Master of Spirit. The reason is, because there
are so few who dispose themselves to receive the mystical Science: Pauci ad eam
recipiendam se disponunt; said Henry Arpius, (Lib. 3. Par. 3. Cap. 22.) Would
to God it were not so true as it is. For then there would not be so many Cheats
in the World, and there would be more Saints and fewer Sinners.

54. When the spiritual Guide desires, effectually, that all should be in love
with Virtue, and the love which they have of God, is pure and perfect, with few
Words, and few Reasons, he will reap a very great deal of Benefit.

55. If the interior Soul, when it is in the Cleansing it self of Passions,
and in the time of Abstraction, has not a sure Guide to curb in the Retirement
and Solitude, to which its Inclination and great Propension draws it, it will
be unable and unfit for Exercises of Confession, Preaching, and Study, and also
for those of its own Obligation, State and Calling.

56. The skilful Director therefore, ought to mind carefully when the Powers of
it begin to be employed in God; that there may not be given too free access to
Solitude, commanding the Soul not to omit the outward Exercises of its State,
as of Study, and other Employments, although they should seem distractive, so
that they be not contrary to his Calling; because the Soul is so much
Abstracted in Solitude, is so turned Inward in its Retirement, and is removed
to such a degree from Exteriority, that if it afterward apply it self again,
it does it with toil and resistance, and with prejudice to its powers, and the
strength and soundness of Head: which is considerable hurt, and worthy the
weighing of spiritual Directors.

57. But if these have no Experience, they will not know when the Abstraction
is formed and at the same time, thinking it holy Counsel, will encourage 'em to
Retirement, and find Destruction in it: O how necessary it is that the Guide be
Expert in the spiritual and mystical Way!

CHAP. VIII. Pursues the same Matter.
58. THose that Govern Souls without Experience, go in the Dark, and arrive not
at the Understanding of the States of the Soul in their internal and
supernatural Operations: they only know that sometimes the Soul is Well, and
that it has Light; other times, that it is in Darkness; but what the State of
all these is, and what is the Root from whence these Changes grow, they neither
know nor understand, nor can verify it by means of Books, till they come to
find it experimentally in themselves, in whose Furnace the true and actual
Light is made.

59. If the Guide has not passed himself through the secret and painful ways
of the interior Walk, how can be comprehend or approve it? It will be no small
favor to the Soul, to find one only experienced Guide to strengthen it in
insuperable Difficulties, and assure it in the continual Doubts of this Voyage:
otherwise he will never get to the holy and precious Mount of Perfection,
without an extraordinary and singular Grace.

60. The spiritual Director, which lives disinteressed, longs more for the
internal Solitude than the Employment of Souls: and if any spiritual Master is
displeased when a Soul goes from him, and leaves him for another Guide, it is a
clear sign, that he did not live disinterested, nor sought purely the Glory of
God, but his own proper Esteem.

61. The same loss and evil comes, when the Director is secretly diligent to
draw some Soul to his Direction, which goes under the Government of another
Guide; this is a notable mischief; for if he holds himself for a better
Director than the other, he is proud; and if he knows himself to be a worse, he
is a Traitor to God, to that Soul, and to himself, during the prejudice he does
to the advantage and good of his Neighbors.

62. In like manner there is another considerable hurt that discovers it self
in spiritual Masters, which is, that they do not suffer the Souls Guided by
'em, to Communicate with others though they are more Holy, Learned, and Expert
than themselves: all this is Interest, Selflove, and Esteem of themselves. They
do not permit Souls thus to unburthen and vent themselves, for fear they should
loose 'em, and that it may not be said, that their spiritual Children seek that
Satisfaction in others, which they cannot find in them; and for the most part,
by these imperfect ends, they hinder Souls from being advantaged.

63. From all these, and infinite other imputations, the Director is free that
is once arrived at hearing the inward Voice of God, by having passed through
Tribulation, Temptation, and passive Purgation; because that interior Voice of
God works innumerable and mavelous Effects in the Soul, which gives place to
it, hearkens to it, and relishes it.

64. It is of so great Efficacy, that it rejects worldly Honor, Self-conceit,
spiritual Ambition, the desire of Fame, a wish to be Great, a presumption of
being the only Man, and thinking that he knows all Thnigs; it bids adieu to
Friends, Friendships, Visits, Letters of Complement, Commerce of the Creatures,
Interest with spiritual Children, Mastership, and Business; it turns away too
much inclination to Confessorship, the Affection that is disordered in the
Government of Souls, that makes a man think he is fitting for it; it removes
Self-love, Authority, Presumption, treating of Profit, making a show of the
Letters which a man writes, showing those written by his spiritual Children, to
make known what a great Workman he is; it turns away the Envy of other Masters
and Teachers, and the procuring more Customers to his Chair of Confession.

65. Lastly, this interior Voice of God in the Soul of the Director, begets a
mean Value, and Solitariness, and Silence, and Forgetfulness of Friends,
Relations, and spiritual Children; because it makes him never remember 'em, but
when they are speaking to him. This is the only sign to know the
Disinterestedness of a Master; and therefore such a one does more good by being
Silent, than thousands of others that make never so great a noise with their
infinite Documents.

CHAP. IX. Showing how a simple and ready Obedience, is the only means for
walking safely in this inward Way, and of procuring internal Peace.
66. IF thou do in good earnest resolve to deny thy Will, and do God's,
Obedience is the necessary means; whether it be by the indissoluble knot of thy
Vow, made in the hands of thy Superior in thy Religion, or the free tying of
thy self by the Dedication of thy Will to a spiritual and expert Guide, that
has the Qualities, shown before in the precedent Chapters.

67. Thou will never get up the Mountain of Perfection, nor to any high Throne
of Peace Internal, if thou art only Governed by thy own Will: This cruel and
fierce Enemy of God, and of thy Soul, must be conquered; thy own Direction, thy
own Judgment, must be subdued and deposed as Rebels, and reduced to Ashes by
the Fire of Obedience: there it will be found, as in a Touchstone, whether the
Love thou followest be thine own, or Divine; there in that Holocaust must thine
own Judgment, and thine own Will be Annihilated and brought to its last
Substance.

68. An ordinary Life under Obedience, is worth more than that which of its own
Will does great Penance; because Obedience and Subjection, besides that they
are free from the Deceits of Satan, are the truest Holocaust which can be
sacraficed to God on the Altar of our Heart. Which made a great Servant of God
say, That he had rather gather Dung by Obedience, than be caught up to the
third Heaven of his own Will.

69. You will know that Obedience is a ready way to arrive quickly at
Perfection: it is impossible for a Soul to purchase it self true Peace of Heart,
if it does not deny and overcome its own Judgment and Rebellion: And the means
of denying and overcoming ones Judgment, is to be willing in every thing to
Obey with Resolution, him that stands in God's Place; because the Heart remains
free, secure, and unburthen'd by all that which goes from the Mouth, with true
Submission, to the Ears of the spiritual Father. ( Effundite coram illo corda
vestra, Ps. 61.) The most effectual means therefore to advance in the Way of
the Spirit, is to imprint this in the Heart, that a man's spiritual Director
stands in God's Place, and whatever he orders and says, is said and ordered
from the Divine Mouth.

70. The Lord often times manifested to that venerable Mother Ann Mary of S.
Joseph, a Franciscan Nun, That she should rather Obey her spiritual Father,
than Himself, ( History of her Life, 42.) To the venerable Sister Catharine
Paulucci, the Lord also one day said, You ought to go to your spiritual Father,
with pure and sincere Truth, as if you came to Me, and not enquire whether he
be or be not Observant, but you ought to think that he is Governed by the Holy
Ghost, and that he is in My stead, ( Her Life, Book 2. Chapter 16.) adding, When
Souls shall Observe this, I will not permit that any be Deceived by him. O
Divine, Words worthy to be imprinted in the Hearts of those Souls which desire
to advance in Perfection!

71. God revealed to Lady Marina of Escobar, That if our Lord Christ would have
her Communicate after his mind, and her spiritual Father should say Nay; she
was obliged to follow the mind of her spiritual Father: And a Saint was lowered
down from Heaven to tell her the reason of it; which was, That in the first
there might be Cheat, but in the second, none.

72. The Holy Ghost advises us all in the Proverbs (Chapter 3.) that we take
Counsel, and trust not in our own Wisdom: Ne innitaris prudentiae tuae. And
says by Tobit, That, to do well, thou never ought to govern thy self with
thine own proper judgment; but always must ask others mind and judgment, ( Chapter
4.14. Consilium semper a sapiente perquire.) Although the spiritual Father Err
in giving Counsel, you can never Err in taking it, and following it; because
you act wisely: Qui judiceo alterius operatur, prudenter operatur. And God does
not suffer Directors to Err, that he may preserve, though it should be with
Miracles, the visible Tribunal of the spiritual Father; from whence is known
with all Safety, what is the Divine Will.

73. Besides, that this is the common Doctrine of all the Saints, of all the
Doctors and Masters of Spirit, Christ our Lord gave credit and security to it,
when he said, That the spiritual Fathers should be understood and obeyed just
like Himself: Qui vos audit, me audit, (St Luke 10.) And this even when their
Works do not correspond with their Words and Counsels; as is manifest by St
Matthew, Chap. 1. Quaecunque dixerint vobis facite, secundum autem opera eorum
nolite facere.

CHAP. X. Pursues the same.
74. THE Soul which is observant of holy Obedience, is, as St. Gregory says,
(35 Lib. in Job, Cap. 13.) Possessour of all Virtues: It is rewarded by God for
its Humility and Obedience, illustrating and teaching its own Guide, to whose
direction it ought (as being in God's place) to be every way subject,
discovering freely, clearly, faithfully and simply all the thoughts, all the
works, inclinations, inspirations, and temptations that it knows of it self: In
this manner the Devil cannot deceive it; and it becomes secure of giving an
account of its actions to God without fear, as well those actions which it does
commit, as those it does omit. Insomuch, that whoever would walk without a
Guide, if he is not deceived, he is very near it, because Temptation will seem
Inspiration to him.

75. Thou ought to know, that to be perfect, it is not enough to obey and
honor Superiors, but it is also necessary to obey and honor Inferiors.

76. Obedience therefore, to make it perfect, must be voluntary, pure, ready,
cheerful, internal, blind, and persevering: Voluntary, without force and fear:
Pure, without worldly interest and respect, or self-love, but purely for God:
Ready, without reply, excuse or delay: Cheerful, without inward affliction, and
with diligence: Internal, because it must not only be exterior and apparent,
but from the mind and heart: Blind, without ones own judgment, but submitting
that judgment with the will: to his that Commands it, without searching into
the Intention, End, or Reason, of the Obedience Persevering, with firmness and
constancy unto Death.

77. Obedience (according to St. Bonaventure (Tract. 8. Collationum) must be
ready, without a delay; devout without tyring, voluntary without contradiction,
simple without examination; persevering without resting; orderly without
breaking off; pleasant without trouble; valiant without faint-heartedness, and
universal without exception. Remember, O blessed Soul, that although thou have
a mind to do the divine Will, with all diligence, thou will never find the way,
but by the means of Obedience. When a man is resolved to be governed by
himself, he is lost and deceived: Although the Soul have very profound signs,
that it is a good Spirit that speaks to it; yet unless it submit to the
judgment of the spiritual Director, let it be esteemed an evil Spirit: So says
Gerson, ( Tract. de did. verar. Number. 19.) and many other Masters of Spirit.

78. This Doctrine will be confirmed by that case of St. Teresa. The holy
Mother, seeing that Lady Catherine of Cardona, led a Life of great and rigid
Penance in the Wilderness, resolved to imitate her, contrary to the judgment of
her spiritual Father, who forbid her: Then the Lord told her (in her Life 366.)
You must by no means do this, Daughter; the good way thou have secure; thou
see all the Penance that Catherine does, but I value more thy obedience. She,
from that time forward, vowed to obey her spiritual Father: and in the 26th
Chapter of her Life, we read, that God often told her, that she must not omit
to acquaint her spiritual Father with her whole Soul, and the graces that she
had done her, and that she should always take care to obey him in every thing.

79. Thou see how God has been willing to secure that heavenly and important
Doctrine by the holy Scripture, the Saints, the Doctors, by Reasons, and by
Examples, a-purpose to root out altogether the deceits of the Enemy.

CHAP. XI. When, and in what things this Obedience does most concern the
interior Soul.
80. THat you may know when Obedience is most necessary, I will advise thee,
that when thou shall find the horrible and importunate suggestions of the
Enemy, greatest upon thee, when thou shall suffer most darkness, anguish,
drowth, forsakings, when thou shall see thy self most beset with temptations,
wrath, rage, blasphemy, lust, cursing, tediousness, despair, impatience, and
desolation; then it is most necessary for thee to believe, and obey an expert
Director, resting thy self on his holy Counsel, that thou may not suffer thy
self to be carried away by the strong persuasion of the Enemy, who would make
thee believe in affliction, and heavy desertion, that thou art lost and
abhorred by God, that thou art out of his favor, and that Obedience is past
doing thee any good.

81. Thou shall find thy self encompassed with troublesome scruples, griefs,
anguish, distress, martyrdoms, distrusts, forsakings of the Creatures, and
troubles so bitter, that thy afflictions shall seem past comfort, and thy
torments unconquerable. O blessed Soul! how happy will thou be, if thou do
but believe thy Guide, and subject thy self to him and obey him? Then will thou
walk safe by the secret and interior way of the dark night, although thou
may seem to thy self to live in Error, and that thou art worse than ever;
that thou see nothing in thy Soul, but abomination and signs of condemnation.

82. Thou will think verily, that thou art possessed by an evil Spirit; because
the signs of this interior exercise, and horrible tribulation, seem as bad as
the invasions of infernal Furies and Devils. Then take care to believe thy
Guide firmly, for thy true Happiness consists in thy obedience.

83. You must consider that when the Devil sees a Soul totally denying it self,
and submitting to the obedience of its Director, he makes a strange uproar all
Hell over to hinder this infinite Good, and this holy Sacrifice: Full of envy
and fury as he is, he uses to make strife between the two, inspiring the Soul
with wearisomness, anger, aversion, resistance, distrust, and hatred against
the Guide, and sometimes he makes use of his Tongue to bespatter him with many
Reproaches: But if this Director be an expert one, he laughs at these subtle
Snares and diabolical Craftynesses And however the Devil may persuade the Souls
of such a state, with diverse suggestions, not to believe their Director, that
they may not obey him, nor profit under him; yet nevertheless they may believe,
and they do believe enough to obey, though it be without their own satisfaction.

84. Thou will ask of thy Guide some Liberty, or wilt communicate to him some
Grace received. If in denying thee that Liberty, or rejecting that Grace, that
thou may not grow proud, thou withdrawest thy self from his Counsel, and
leavest him, it is a sign that the Favor was false, and that thy Spirit walks
in danger: But if thou do believe and obey, although he do soundly displease
thee, it is a sign that thou art alive and unmortified; nevertheless, thou will
profit with that violent and working Medicine: Because, though the inferior
part be troubled and do resent, yet the superior part of the Soul does embrace
him, and will be humbled and mortified; because it knows that this is the
divine Will. And though thou do not know it, yet satisfaction goes on
emproving in thy Soul, and so does the confidence that thou have in thy Guide.

85. The means of denying self-love, and of laying down ones own judgment, you
must know, is subjecting it altogether with true submission to the Counsel of
the spiritual Physician. If he hinders you your pleasure, or demands what you
desire not, thousands of false and idle reasons do presently get about his holy
Counsel; where it is presently known that the Spirit is not altogether
mortified, nor his own judgment blinded, which are irreconcilable Enemies to a
ready and blind obedience, and the peace of the Soul.

86. Then it is necessary to overcome thy self and thy quick sentiments, to
despise those false and lying reasons, by obeying, holding thy tongue, and
executing his holy Counsel, because that is the way to root up thy appetite and
thine own judgment.

87. For this reason the ancient Fathers, as expert and skilful Masters of
Spirit, did exercise their Disciples in diverse and extraordinary Ways: To some
they gave order to plant Lettice with the leaves downward; to others, to Water
dry and withered Trees; to others, to sew and unsew again. many times, their
Clothes; all mavelous and effectual stratagems to make trial of simple
obedience and to cut by the roots the weeds of their own Will and judgment.

CHAP. XII. Treats of the same.
88. KNow that thou can not fetch one step in the way of the Spirit, till
thon endeavourest to conquer this fierce Enemy, thy own judgment: And the Soul
that will not know this hurt, can never be cured. A sick man that knows his
Disease, knows for certain that although he is adry, yet it is not good for him
to drink, and that the Physic prescribed him, though it be bitter, yet is
profitable for him: Therefore he believes not his Appetite, nor trusts in his
own Judgment, but yields himself up to a skilful Physician, obeying him in
every thing, as the means of his Recovery and Cure: The knowledge that he is
sick, helps him not to trust to himself, but to follow the wise judgment of his
Doctor.

89. We are all sick of the Disease of self-love, and our own judgment; we are
all full of our selves; we are always desiring things hurtful to us; and that
which does us good, is unpleasant and irksom to us: It Is necessary therefore
for him that is Sick, to use the means of Recovery; which is, not to believe
our own judgments and distempered sentiments, but the wise Judgment of the
spiritual and skilful Physician, without reply or excuse, despising the seeming
reasons of self-love; and so, if we obey, we shall certainly recover, and this
love of ours, which is the Enemy of our ease, and peace, and perfection, and
the spirit, will be overcome.

90. How often will thine own judgment deceive thee? and how much will thou
change thy judgment with shame, when thou have trusted to thine own self? If
any man should deceive thee twice or thrice, would thou ever trust him more?
Why therefore, do thou repose confidence in thine own judgment, which has so
often cozened thee? O blessed Soul, believe it no more, believe it not; subject
thy self with true submission and follow blindfold this Obedience.

91. Thou will be much satisfied to have an experienced Guide, and wilt esteem
him a great Happiness; but 'twill little avail thee, if thou valuest thine own
judgment more than his Counsel, and do not submit to it in all truth and
simplicity.

92. Suppose a great man be sick of a dangerous Disease: He has in his House a
famous and skilful Physician; and he quickly knows the Disease, the causes, the
conditions, and the state of it, and knowing for certain that that Distemper is
to be treated with severe Cauteries, he orders Lenitives for it: Now is not
this a great disorder? If he is sure that Lenitives will do little good, and
that Cauterizing is the proper way, why does he not apply it to him? Because,
although the sick person would have his health, yet the Physician knows best,
and that he is not disposed to take those strong Medicines, and therefore like
a wise man, orders him gentle Lenitives; because though he may not presently
get up again by 'em, yet he keeps the Disease from being mortal.

93. What matter is it, if you have the best Director in the World, if yet
notwithstanding you want true submission? although he be a man of skill and
knows the grievance and the remedy, he does not apply the proper Physic, which
concerns you most to deny your Will; because he knows your very Heart and
Spirit, that it is not disposed to let the infirmities of your own judgment be
removed. So you will never be cured, and it will be a Miracle, if he can keep
you in Grace, with so fierce an Enemy of your Soul about you.

94. Thy Director will scorn all manner of Favors, if he be a wise man; as if
thy Spirit may not be well grounded, believe him, obey him, embrace his
Counsel, because with this contempt, if the Spirit be feigned and of the Evil
One, the secret Pride formed by him that counterfeits these Spirits, will soon
be known; but if the Spirit be real, though thou find'st displeasure in this
humiliation, it will serve thee for an extraordinary good.

95. If the Soul take delight in esteem, and in having the favors which it
receives from God made open and public; if it does not obey and believes not
its Director, which thinks meanly of 'em, it is all a lie and cheat, and the
Devil is that Angel that transforms himself. The Soul seeing that the skilful
Director despises these cheats, if the Spirit be evil, withdraws the feigned
affection which it showed him, and endeavors by little and little to get from
him, seeking some other that its cheats may take with: for the proud can never
keep company with those that humble 'em: but on the other side, if the spirit be
true and of God, by these means the love and constancy increases by enduring
'em, desiring much more its own contempt, from whence the soundness and
sincerity of the Spirit becomes qualified without deceit.

CHAP. XIII. Frequent Communion is an effectual means of getting all Virtues,
and in particular, Internal Peace.
96. THere are four things the most necessary to get Perfection and internal
Peace: The first is, Prayer; the second, Obedience; the third, frequent
Communion; the fourth, internal Mortification. And now since we have treated of
Prayer and Obedience, it will be fitting to treat also of Communion.

97. You ought to know that many Souls there are that deprive themselves of the
infinite benefit of this precious Food, by judging that they are not
sufficiently prepared, and that no less than an Angelical Purity is necessary
for it. If thou have a pure end, a true desire of doing the Will of God,
without looking at sensible Devotion, or thine own Satisfaction, come with
confidence, because thou art well disposed.

98. On this Rock of Desiring to do the Divine Will, all difficulties must be
broken, all scruples overcome, all temptations, doubts, fears, resistances and
contradictions: and although the best Preparation for the Soul, be often
Communicating, because one Communion disposes it for another; yet I will show
the two ways of Preparation: The first for the exterior Souls which have good
Desire and Will; and the second, for the spiritual Ones which live Internally,
and have a greater Light and Knowledge of God, of his Mysteries, of his
Operations and Sacraments.

99. The Preparation for the exterior Souls, is to be Confessed and retire
from the Creatures; before the Communion to stand still and consider what is to
be received, and who it is that receives it, and that he goes to do the
greatest business in the World, which is to receive the great God. What a
singular favor is that Purity it self condescends to be received by Filth!
Majesty by Vileness! the Creator by the Creature!

100. The second Preparation in order to the interior and spiritual Souls,
must be to endeavor to live with greater Purity and Self-denial, with an
universal taking ones self off from the World, with inward Mortification and
continual Retirement: and when they walk in this Way, they have no need of any
actual Preparation, because their Life is a continual and perfect Preparation.

101. If thou do not-know these Virtues in thy Soul, for the same reason
thou must often draw near to this sovereign Table to get 'em. Never let it
hinder thee, to see thy self dry, defective and cold; because frequent
Communion is the Physic that cures those Diseases, and increases Virtue: for
the same reason that thou art Sick, thou must go to the Physician; and that
thou art Cold, to the Fire.

102. If thou drawest near with humility, with a desire of doing the Divine
Will, and with the leave of thy Confessor, thou may receive it every day, and
every day thou will grow better and better. Never be afraid for seeing thy self
without that affectionate and sensible love, which some men say is necessary:
because this sensible affection is not perfect and ordinarily, it is given to
weak and nice Souls.

103. Thou will say that thou feel thy self indisposed, without devotion,
without fervor, without the desire of this Divine Food, so as to ask how thou
must frequent it? believe for certain, that none of these things does hinder or
hurt thee, whilst you preserve this purpose firm, not to sin, and your Will
determined to avoid every offense: and if thou have confessed all those that
thou could remember, doubt not but that thou art well prepared to come to
this Heavenly and Divine Table.

CHAP. XIV. Pursues the same Matter.
104. THou must know that in this unspeakaable Sacrament, Christ is united with
the Soul, is made one thing with it, whose fineness and purity is the most
profound and admirable, and the most worthy of consideration and thanks. Great
was the pureness of him in being made Man; greater that of dying ignominiously
on the Cross for our sake; but the giving of himself whole and entire to man in
this admirable Sacrament, admits no comparison: This is singular favor, and
infinite pureness: because there is no more to give; no more to receive. O that
we could but comprehend him! O that we could but know him!

105. That God being what he is, should be Communicated to my Soul! that God
should be willing to make a reciprocal ty of union with it, which of it self is
mere misery! O Souls, if we could but feed ourselves at this Heavenly Table! O
that we could scorch ourselves at this burning fire! O that we could become one
and the same spirit with this Sovereign Lord! who withholds us? who deceives
us? who takes us off, from burning like Salamanders, in the Divine fire of this
holy Table?

106. It Is true; O Lord, that thou entrest into me a miserable creature, but
true also it is, that thou at the same time remainest in thy glory and
brightness, and in thy self. Receive me therefore O my Jesus, in thy self, in
thy beauty and Majesty. I am infinitely glad that the vileness of my Soul
cannot prejudice thy beauty^ thou enterest therefore into me, without going out
of thy self; thou live in the midst of thy brightness and magnificence,
though thou art in my darkness and misery.

107. O my Soul how great is thy vileness! ( Job 7 Chap.) how great thy
poverty! What is man, Lord, that thou art so mindful of him? that thou visitest
him and make him great? What is man, that thou put such an esteem upon
him, being willing to have thy delights with him, and dwell personally with thy
greatnesses in him? how, O Lord, can a miserable creature receive an infinite
Majesty? humble thy self, O my soul, to the very depth of nothing, confess thy
unworthyness, look upon thy misery, and acknowledge the wonders of the Divine
Love, which suffers it self to be mean in this incomprehensible Mystery, that
it may be communicated and united with thee.

108. O the greatness of love, which the amiable Jesus is, in a small host? who
is there subject in some manner to man, giving himself whole and sacrificing
himself for him to the Eternal Father! O Sovereign Lord, keep back my heart
strongly, that it may never more return to its imperfect liberty, but all
annihilated may die to the world, and remain united with thee.

109. If thou would get all Virtues in the highest degree, come blessed
Soul, come with frequency to this most holy Table; for there they do all dwell.
Eat, O my Soul, of this Heavenly Food, eat and continue, come with humility,
come with Faith to feed of this White and Divine Bread: for this is the Mark of
Souls, and from hence Love draws its Arrows, saying, Come, O Soul, and eat this
savoury Food, if thou would get Purity, Charity, Chastity, Light, Strength,
Perfection and Peace.

CHAP. XV. Declaring when Spiritual and Corporal Penances ought to be used, and
how hurtful they are, when they are done indiscreetly according to ones own
judgment and opinion.
110. IT is to be known, that there are some Souls, who, to make too great
advances in Holiness, become much behindhand in it, by doing indiscreet
Penances; like those who would sing more than their strength allows 'em, who
strain themselves till they are tired, and instead of doing better, do worse.

111. Many have fallen into this Precipice, for want of subjecting their
judgment to their spiritual Fathers; whilst they have imagined, that unless
they give themselves up to rigid Penances, they never can be Saints, as if
sanctity did only consist in them. They say, that he that sows little, reaps
little; but they sow no other seed, with their indiscreet Penances, than
Self-love, instead of rooting of it up.

112. But the worst of these indiscreet Penances, is, that by the use of these
dry and barren Severities, is begotten and naturalized a certain bitterness of
heart toward themselves and their neighbors, which is a great stranger to the
true Spirit: toward themselves, because they do not feel the sweetness of
Christ's Yoke, the sweetness of Charity, but only the asperity of Penances;
whereby their nature becomes embittered; and hence it follows, that such men
become exasperated with their neighbors, to the marking and reproving much
their faults, and holding of 'em for very defective, for the same reason that
they see 'em go a less rigorous way than themselves: hence they grow proud with
their exercises of Penance, seeing few that do after 'em, and thinking
themselves better than other folks, whereupon they much fall in the account of
their Virtues. Hence comes the envy of others, to see them less penitent and
greater favorites of God; a clear proof, that they fixed their confidence in
their own proper diligences.

113. Prayer is the nourishment of the Soul; and the Soul of Prayer is internal
mortification: for however bodily Penance, and all other exercises chastening
the flesh, be good and holy and praiseworthy, (so as they be moderated by
discretion, according to the state and quality of every one, and by the help of
the spiritual Director's judgment) yet thou will never gain any virtue by these
means, but only vanity and the wind of vainglory, if they do not grow from
within. Wherefore now thou shall know when thou art to use most chiefly
External Penances.

114. When the Soul begins to retire from the World and Vice, it ought to tame
the Body with rigor, that it may be subject to the Spirit and follow the Law
of God with ease; then it concerns you to manage the Weapons of Haircloth,
Fasting and Discipline, to take from the flesh the roots of sin; but when the
Soul enters into the way of the Spirit, embracing internal mortification,
corporal chastisements ought to be relaxed, because there is trouble enough in
the Spirit: the heart is weakened, the breast suffers, the brain is weary, the
whole Body grieved and disabled for the functions of the Soul.

115. The wise and skilful Director therefore must consider, not to give way to
these Souls to perform such excesses of Corporal and External Penance, to whom
he moves the great love of God, which they do conceive in the internal, darksom
and cleansing retirement of 'em; because it is not good to spend the Body and
the Spirit all at once, nor break their strength by rigorous and excessive
Penances, seeing they are weakened by internal mortification. For which reason
St. Ignatius Loyola said very well in his Exercises, That in the cleansing way,
Corporal Penances were necessary, which in the illuminating way ought to be
moderated, and much more in the unitive.

116. But thou will say, That the Saints always used grievous Penances. I
answer, that they did 'em not with indiscretion, nor after their own proper
judgment, but with the opinion of their Superiors and Spiritual Directors,
which permitted 'em to use them, because they knew 'em to be moved inwardly by
the Lord to those rigours, to confound the misery of sinners by their examples,
or for many other reasons. Other times they gave 'em leave to use them to
humble the fervor of their Spirit and counterpoise their Raptures; which are
all particular Motives and make not any general Rule for all.

CHAP. XVI. The great difference between External and Internal Penances.
117. KNow that the Mortifications and Penances which some one undertakes of
himself, are light (although they may be the most rigorous, which hitherto have
been done) in comparison of those he takes from another's hands: because in the
first, he himself enters and his own will, which abate the grief, the more
voluntary it is, whilst at last he does but that which he is willing: but in
the second, all that is endured, is painful; and the way also painful, in which
it is endured, that is to say, by the will of another.

118. This is that which Christ our Lord told St. Peter, (St. John 21.18.) When
thou wast young and a beginner in virtue, thou girdedst and mortifiedst thy
self; but when thou go to greater Schools and shall be a proficient in
virtue, another shall gird and mortify thee^ and then if thou will follow me
perfectly, altogether denying thy self, thou must leave that cross of thine,
and take up mine, that is, be contented that another crucify thee.

119. There must be no difference made between these and those, between thy
Father and thy Son, thy Friend and thy Brother; these must be the first to
mortify thee, or to rise up against thee, whether with reason or without
reason, thinking the virtue of thy Soul, cheat, hypocrisy or imprudence, and
putting stumbling blocks in the way of thy holy Exercises. This and much more
will befall thee if thou will heartily serve the Lord and make thy self pure
from his hand.

120. Hold it for certain, that however good those Mortifications and External
Penances be, which thou shall undertake of thine own self, thou will never by
those only purchase perfection: for although they tame the Body, yet they
purify not the Soul, nor purge the internal Passions, which do really hinder
perfect Contemplation and the Divine Union.

121. It Is very easy to mortify the Body by means of the Spirit; but not the
Spirit by means of the Body. True it is, that in Internal Mortification, and
that of the Spirit, it much concerns you, for conquering your Passions and
rooting up your own Judgment and Self-love, to labor even to death, without
any manner of sparing your self, although the Soul be in the highest state: and
therefore the principal diligence ought to be in Internal Mortification;
because Corporal and External Mortification is not enough, though it be good
and holy.

122. Though a man should receive the punishments of all men together, and do
the roughest Penances that ever have been done in God's Church, yet if he do
not deny himself and mortify himself with interior mortification, he will be
far from arriving at perfection.

123. A good proof of this truth is that which befell Saint Henry Suson, to
whom, after 20 years of rigorous Hair-cloth, Discipline, and Abstinence fo
great, that even to read 'em is enough to make ones hair stand on end, God
communicated light by means of an Ecstasy, by which he arrived at the knowledge
that he had not yet begun, and it was in such a manner, as that, till the Lord
mortified him with temptations and great persecutions, he never could arrive at
perfection, (his Life, chap. 23.) Hence thou will clearly know the great
difference that there is between External and Internal Penances, and Internal
and External Mortification.

CHAP. XVII. How the Soul is to carry it self in the Faults it does commit,
that it may not be disquieted thereby, but reap good out of it.
124. WHen thou fallest into a fault, in what matter soever it be, do not
trouble nor afflict thy self for it: for they are effects of our frail nature,
stained by Original Sin; so prone to Evil, that it has a necessity of a most
special Grace and Privilege, as the most holy Virgin had, to be free and
exempt from Venial Sins. ( Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Can. 23.)

125. If when thou fallest into a fault or a piece of neglect, thou do
disturb and chide thy self, it is a manifest sign, that secret pride does still
reign in thy Soul: did thou believe, that thou could not more fall into
faults and frailties? if God permits some failings even in the most holy and
perfect men, it is to leave 'em some remnant of themselves of the time that
they were beginners, to keep 'em more secure and humble, it is that they may
think always, that they are never departed from that state, whilst they still
keep upon the faults of their beginnings.

126. What do thou marvel at, if thou fal^est into some light fault or
frailty? humble thy self; know thy misery and thank God that he has preserved
thee from infinite sins, into which thou must have infallibly fallen, and
would have fallen according to thy inclination and appetite: What can be
expected from the slippery ground of our nature, but stumps, briars and thorns?
it is a miracle of Divine Grace, not to fall every moment into faults
innumerable. We should offend all the World, if God should not hold his hand
continually over us.

127. The common enemy will make thee believe, that, as soon as thou fallest
into any fault, thou do not go well grounded in the way of the Spirit, that
thou walk in Error, that thou have not in earnest reformed thy self, that
thou did not make well the general confession, that thou have not true grief,
and therefore art out of God and of his favor: and if thou shall sometimes
commit again, by misfortune, a venial fault, how many fears, frights,
confusions, discouragements and various discourses will the Devil put into thy
heart? he will represent to thee, that thou employest thy time in vain; that
thou do just as much as comes to nothing; that thy Prayer does thee no good;
that thou disposest not thy self, as thou ought, to receive the holy
Sacrament; that thou do not mortify thy self, as thou promisest to God
daily; that Prayer and Communion without Mortification is mere vanity: herewith
would he make thee distrust of the Divine Grace, telling thee of thy misery and
making a giant of it, and putting into thy head, that every day thy Soul grows
worse instead of better, whilst it so often repeats those failings.

128. O blessed Soul, open thine Eyes; suffer not thy self to be carried away
by the deceitful and gilded tricks of Satan, who seeks thy ruin and cowardice
with these lying and seeming reasons: Cut off these discourses and
considerations, and shut the gate against these vain Thoughts and diabolical
Suggestions; lay aside these vain fears, and remove this faintheartedness,
knowing thy misery, and trusting in the Mercy Divine: and if to morrow thou
do fall again, as thou did to day, trust again the more in that supreme,
and more than infinite Goodness, so ready to forget our faults, and receive us
into his Arms, as dear Children.

CHAP. XVIII. Treats of the same Point.
129. AT all times therefore thou ought, when thou see thy self in fault,
without loosing time, or making Discourses upon the failing, to drive away vain
Fear and Cowardice, without disturbing or chiding thy self, but knowing thy
fault with Humility, looking on thy misery, rolling thy self with a loving
Confidence on the Lord, going into his Presence, asking him Pardon heartily,
and without noise of words; keep thy self reposed in doing this, without
discoursing whether he has or has not forgiven thee, returning to thy
Exercises and Retirements, as if thou had not Sinned.

130. Would not he be a mere Fool, which running at Turneament with others, and
falling in the best of the Carrier, should lie weeping on the Ground, and
afflicting himself with discourses upon his Fall? Man (they would tell him)
loose no time, get up and take the Course again; for he that rises again
quickly, and continues his Race, is as if he had never fallen.

131. If thou have a desire to get to a high degree of Perfection and inward
Peace, thou must use the Weapon of Confidence in the Divine Goodness, night and
day, and always when thou fallest. This humble and loving Conversation, and
total Confidence in the Mercy Divine, thou must exercise in all faults,
imperfections, and failings that thou shall commit, either by advertence or
inadvertency.

132. And although thou often fallest, and see thy Pusillanimity, and
endeavor to get courage, and afflict not thy self; because what God does not
do in forty Years, he sometimes does in an instant, with a particular Mystery,
that we may live low and humble, and know that it is the Work of His powerful
Hand, to free us from Sins.

133. God also is willing, of ineffable Wisdom, that, not only by Virtues, but
also by Vices and the Passions wherewith the Devil seeks, and pretends to
strike us down to the bottomless Pit, we make a Ladder to scale Heaven with.
Ascendamus etiam per vitia and passiones nostras, says St. Austine ( Sermon. 3.
de Ascens.) That we may not make Poison of Physic, and Vices of Virtues, by
becoming vain by 'em; God would have us make Virtues of Vices, healing us by
that very thing which would hurt us: So says S. Gregory, Quia ergo nos de
medicamento vulnus facimus, facit ille de vulnere medicamentum, ut qui virtue
percutimur, vitio curemur, (Lib. 37. c. 9.)

134. By means of small failings, the Lord makes us know that his Majesty is
that which frees us from great ones; and herewith he keeps us humbled and
vigilant; of which our proud Nature has most need: And therefore though thou
ought to walk with great care, not to fall into any fault or imperfection,
if thou see thy self fallen once and a thousand times, thou ought to make
use of the Remedy which I have given thee, that is, a loving Confidence in the
Divine Mercy: These are the Weapons with which thou must fight and conquer
Cowardice and vain Thoughts: this is the means thou ought to use, not to
lose time, not to disturb thy self, and reap good: this is the Treasure
wherewith thou must enrich thy Soul: and lastly, hereby must thou get up the
high Mountain of Perfection, Tranquillity and internal Peace.

THE Spiritual Guide, Which brings the Soul to the getting of Inward Peace.
The Third Book. Of Spiritual Martyrdoms whereby God Purges Souls; of
Contemplation, infused and passive; of Perfect Resignation, Inward Humility,
Divine Wisdom, True Annihilation, and Internal Peace.
CHAP. I. The Difference between the Outward and Inward Man.
1. THERE are two sorts of Spiritual Persons, Internal and External: these seek
God by without, by Discourse, by Imagination and Consideration: they endeavor
mainly to get Virtues, many Abstinences, Maceration of Body, and Mortification
of the Senses: they give themselves to rigorous Penance; they put on
Sackcloth, chastise the Flesh by Discipline, endeavor Silence, bear the
Presence of God, forming him present to themselves in their Idea of him, or
their Imagination, sometimes as a Pastor, sometimes as a Physician, and
sometimes as a Father and Lord: they delight to be continually speaking of God,
very often making fervent Acts of Love; and all this is Art and Meditation: by
this way they desire to be great, and by the power of voluntary and exterior
Mortifications, they go in quest of sensible Affections and warm Sentiments,
thinking that God resides only in them, when they have 'em. This is the
External Way, and the Way of Beginners, and though it be good, yet there is no
arriving at Perfection by it; nay, there is not so much as one step toward it,
as Experience shows in many, that after fifty Years of this external Exercise,
are void of God, and full of themselves, having nothing of Spiritual Men, but
just the name of such.

2. There are others truly Spiritual, which have passed by the beginnings of
the Interior Way which leads to Perfection and Union with God; and to which
the Lord called 'em by his infinite Mercy, from that outward Way, in which
before they Exercised themselves. These men retired in the inward part of their
Souls, with true Resignation into the Hands of God, with a total putting off
and forgetting even of themselves; do always go with a raised Spirit to the
Presence of the Lord, by the means of pure Faith, without Image, Form or
Figure, but with great Assurance founded in tranquillity and rest Internal: in
whose infused meeting and entertainment, the Spirit draws with so much force,
that it makes the Soul contract Inwardly, the Heart, the Body and all the
Powers of it.

3. These Souls, as they are already passed by the interior Mortification, and
have been cleansed by God with the Fire of Tribulation, with infinite and
horrible Torments, all of 'em ordained by his hand, and after his way, are
Masters of themselves, because they are entirely subdued and denied; which
makes 'em live with great Repose and internal Peace: and although in many
occasions they feel Resistance and Temptations, yet they become presently
Victorious, because being already Souls of Proof, and endued with Divine
Strength, the motions of Passions cannot last long upon 'em; and although
vehement Temptations and troublesome Suggestions of the Enemy may persevere a
long time about 'em, yet they are all conquered, with infinite gain; God being
he that Fights within 'em.

4. These Souls have already procured themselves a great Light, and a true
Knowledge of Christ our Lord, both of his Divinity and his Humanity: They
exercise this infused Knowledge with a quiet Silence in the inward
entertainment, and the superior part of their Souls, with a Spirit free from
Images and external Representations, with a Love that is pure and stripped of
all Creatures; they are raised also from outward Actions to the love of
Humanity and Divinity; so much as they enjoy, they forget, and in all of it
they find that they love their God with all their Heart and Spirit.

5. These blessed and sublimated Souls take no pleasure in any thing of the
World, but contempt and in being alone, and in being forsaken and forgotten by
every body: They live so disinterested and taken off, that though they
continually receive many supernatural Graces, yet they are not changed, no not
at those inclinations, being just as if they had not received 'em, keeping
always in the in-most of their Hearts a great lowliness and contempt of
themselves; always humbled in the depth of their own unworthiness and vileness:
In the same manner they are always quiet, serene, and possessed with evenness
of mind in Graces and Favors extraordinary, as also in the most rigorous and
bitter Torments. There is no News that chears 'em; no Success that makes 'em
sad; Tribulations never disturb 'em; nor the interior, continual and divine
Communication make 'em vain and conceited; they remain always full of holy and
filial Fear, in a wonderful Peace, Constancy and Serenity.

CHAP. II. Pursues the same.
6. IN the external Way they take care to do continual Acts of all the Virtues,
one after another, to get to the attainment of 'em: They pretend to purge
Imperfections with Industries, proportionable to Destruction; they take care to
root up Interests, one after another, with a different and contrary Exercise:
But though they endeavor never so much, they arrive at nothing; because we
cannot do any thing which is not Imperfection and Misery.

7. But in the inward Way and loving Entertainment in the Presence Divine, as
the Lord is he that Works, Virtue is established, Interests are rooted up,
Imperfections are destroyed, and Passions removed; which makes the Soul free
unexpectedly, and taken off, when occasions are represented, without so much as
thinking of the good which God of his infinite Mercy prepared for 'em.

8. It must be known that these Souls, though thus Perfect, as they have the
true Light of God, yet by it they know profoundly, their own miseries,
weaknesses and imperfections, and what they yet want to arrive at Perfection,
toward which they are walking; they are afflicted, and abhor themselves; they
exercise themselves in a loving Fear of God, and contempt of themselves, but
with a true Hope in God, and Disconfidence in themselves. The more they are
humbled with true contempt and knowledge of themselves, the more they please
God, and arrive at a singular respect and veneration in his Presence. Of all
the good Works that they do, and of all that they continually suffer, as well
within as without, they make no manner of account before that Divine Presence.

9. Their continual Exercise is, to enter into themselves, in God, with quiet
and silence; because there is his Center, Habitation and Delight. They make a
greater account of this interior Retirement, than of speaking of God; they
retire into that interior and secret Center of the Soul, to know God and
receive his Divine Influence, with fear and loving reverence; if they go out,
they go out only to know and despise themselves.

10. But know that few are the Souls which arrive at this happy State; because
few there are that are willing to embrace Contempt, and suffer themselves to be
Refined and Purified; upon which account, although there are many that enter
into this interior Way, yet it is a rare thing for a Soul to go on, and not
stick upon the entrance. The Lord said to a Soul, This inward Way is tread by
few; it is so high a Grace, that none deserves it: few walk in it, because it is
no other than a Death of the Senses; and few there be that are willing so to
Die and be Annihilated; in which disposition this so sovereign a Gift is
founded.

11. Herewith thou will undeceive thy self, and perfectly know the great
difference which there is between the external and internal Way, and how
different that Presence of God is which arises from Meditation, from that which
is Infused and Supernatural, arising from the interior and infused
Intertainment, and from passive Contemplation; and lastly, you will know the
great difference which is between the outward and inward Man.

CHAP. III. The means of obtaining Peace Internal, is not the Delight of Sense
nor Spiritual Consolation, but the denying of Self-love.
12. IT is the saying of S. Bernard, That to serve God, is nothing else but to
do Good and suffer Evil. He that would go to Perfection by the means of
Sweetness and Consolation, is mistaken: You must desire no other Consolation
from God, than to end your Life for his sake, in the state of true Obedience
and Subjection. Christ our Lord's way was not that of Sweetness and Softness,
nor did he invite us to any such, either by his Words or Example, when he said,
-- He that will come after me, let him deny himself, and let him take up his
cross and follow me, ( St Matthew. 24.26.) The Soul that would be United to
Christ, must be conformable to him, following him in the way of suffering.

13. Thou will scarce begin to relish the sweetness of Divine Love in Prayer,
but the Enemy with his deceitful Craftiness will be kindling in thy Heart
defires of the Desert and Solitude, that thou may without any bodies
hindrance spread the sails to continual and delightful Prayer. Open thine eyes
and consider that this Counsel and Desire is not conformable to the true
Counsel of Christ our Lord, who has not invited us to follow the sweetness and
comfort of our own Will, but the denying of our selves, saying, Abneget
semetipsum: As if he should say, He that will follow me, and come unto
Perfection, let him part with his own Will wholly, and leaving all things, let
him entirely submit to the Yoke of Obedience and Subjection, by means of
Self-denial, which is the truest Cross.

14. There are many Souls dedicated to God, which receive from his Hand great
Thoughts, Visions, and mental Elevations, and yet for all that, the Lord keeps
from 'em, the Grace of working Miracles, understanding hidden Secrets,
foretelling future Contingencies, as he communicates these things to other
Souls which have constantly gone through Tribulations, Temptations, and the
true Cross, in the state of perfect Humility, Obedience and Subjection.

15. O what a great Happiness it is for a Soul to be subdued and subject! what
great Riches is it to be Poor! what a mighty Honor to be despised! what a
height is it to be beaten down! what a Comfort is it to be Afflicted! what a
credit of knowledge is it to be reputed Ignorant! and finally, what a Happiness
of Happinesses is it to be Crucified with Christ! This is that lot which the
Apostle gloried in, Nos autem gloriari oportet in cruce Domini nostri Jesu
Christi.) ( Gal. 6.14.) Let others boast in their Riches, Dignities, Delights
and Honors; but to us there is no higher honor, than to be denied, despised
and crucified with Christ.

16. But what a grief is this! that scarce is there one Soul which despises
Spiritual Pleasures and is willing to be denied for Christ, embracing his Cross
with love, Multi sunt vocati; pauci vero electi, ( Matt. 22.) says the Holy
Ghost: many are they who are called to perfection, but few are they that arrive
at it: because they are few who embrace the Cross with patience, constancy,
peace and resignation.

17. To deny ones self in all things, to be subject to another's judgment, to
mortify continually all inward passions, to annihilate ones self in all
respects, to follow always that which is contrary to ones own will, appetite
and judgment, are things that few can do: many are those that teach 'em, but
few are they that practice 'em.

18. Many Souls have undertaken, and daily do undertake, this Way; and they
persevere all the while they keep the sweet relish of their primitive Fervor;
but this sweetness and sensible delight is scarce done, but presently, upon the
overtaking of a Storm of Trouble, Temptation and Dryness (which are necessary
things to help a man up the high Mountain of Perfection) they falter and turn
back: a clear sign that they sought themselves, and not God or Perfection.

19. May it please God, that the Souls which have had light, and been called to
an inward peace, and by not being constant in dryness and tribulation and
temptation, have started back, may not be cast into outer darkness, with him
that had not on him a wedding garment; although he was a servant, for not being
disposed, giving himself up to self-love.

20. This Monster must be vanquished, this seven-headed beast of self-love must
be beheaded, in order to get up to the top of the high mountain of peace. This
Monster put his head every -- where; sometimes it gets amongst Relations, which
strangely hinder with their conversation; to which nature easily let us it self
be lead: sometimes it gets, with a good look of gratitude, into passionate
affection, and without restraint, toward the Confessor; sometimes into
affection to most subtle Spiritual vainglories and temporal ones, and niceties
of honor; which things stick very close; sometimes it cleaves to spiritual
pleasures, staying even in the gifts of God, and in his graces freely bestowed:
sometimes it desires exceedingly the preservation of health, and with disguise,
to be used well, and its own proper profit and conveniences; sometimes it would
seem well, with very curious subtilties: and lastly, it cleaves with a notable
propensity, to its own proper judgment and opinion in all things; the roots of
which are closely fixed in its own will: All these are effects of Self-love,
and if they be not denied, impossible it is that a man should ever get up to
the height of perfect Contemplation, to the highest, happiest of the loving
Union, and the lofty Throne of Peace Internal.

CHAP. IV. Of two Spiritual Martyrdoms, wherewith God cleanses the Soul that
he Unites with Himself.
21. NOw you shall know that God uses two ways for the Cleansing the Souls
which he would perfect and enlighten, to unite 'em closely to himself: The
first (of which we will treat in this and the following Chapter) is with the
bitter Waters of Afflictions, Anguish, Distress, and inward Torments. The
second is, with the burning Fire of an inflamed Love, a Love impatient and
hungry: Sometimes he makes use of both in those Souls which he would fill with
Perfection; sometimes he puts 'em into the strong steeping of Tribulations, and
inward and outward Bitterness, scorching 'em with the Fire of rigorous
Temptation; sometimes he puts 'em into the Crucible of anxious and distrustful
Love, making 'em fast there with a mighty force; because so much the greater as
the Lord would have the Illumination and Union of a Soul to be, so much the
more strong is the Torment and the Purgation; because all the Knowledge and
Union with God, arises from suffering, which is the truest proof of Love.

22. O that thou would understand the great Good of Tribulation! This is
that which blots out Sins, cleanses the Soul, and produces Patience: this in
Prayer inflames it, inlarges it, and puts it upon the exercise of the most
sublime act of Charity: this rejoices the Soul, brings it near to God, calls it
to, and gives is entrance into Heaven: The same is that which tries the true
Servants of God, and renders 'em sweet, valiant and constant: that is it which
makes God hear 'em with speed. Ad dominum cum tribularer, clamavi and exaudivit
me, (Ps^ 119.) It Is that which Annihilates, Refines and Perfects 'em: and
finally, this is that which of Earthly, makes Souls Heavenly, of Humane Divine,
transforming 'em and uniting 'em in an admirable manner with the Lord's
Humanity and Divinity. It was well said by St Augustine, That the Life of the
Soul, upon Earth, is Temptation. Blessed is the Soul which is always opposed,
if it does constantly resist Temptation. This is the means which the Lord makes
use of to Humble it, to Annihilate it, to Spend it, to Mortify it, to Deny it,
to Perfect it, and fill it with his Divine Gifts: By this means of Tribulation
and Temptation he comes to Crown and Transform it. Persuade thy self that
Temptations and Fightings are necessary for the Soul, to make it Perfect.

23. O blessed Soul, if thou know how to be constant and quiet in the Fire
of Tribulation, and would but let thy self be washed with the bitter Waters
of Affliction, how quickly would thou find thy self rich in heavenly Gifts;
how soon would the Divine Bounty make a rich Throne in thy Soul, and a goodly
Habitation for thee to refresh and solace thy self in it?

24. Know that this Lord has his repose no where but in quiet Souls, and in
those in which the Fire of Tribulation and Temptation has burnt up the dregs
of Passions, and the bitter Water of Afflictions has washed off the filthy
spots of inordinate Appetites; in a word, this Lord reposes not himself any
where, but where Quietness reigns, and Self-love is banished.

25. But thou will never arrive at this happy State, nor find in thy Soul the
precious Pledge of Peace Internal, although thou have gotten the better of the
External Senses by the Grace of God, till it become purified from the
disordered Passions of Concupiscence, Self-esteem, Desire and Thoughts, how
spiritual soever, and many other Interests and secret Vices, which lie within
the very Soul of thee, miserably hindering the peaceable entrance of that great
Lord into it, who would be united and transformed with thee.

26. The very Virtues acquired, and not purified, are a hindrance to this great
Gift of the Peace of the Soul; and more, the Soul is clogged by an inordinate
desire of sublime Gifts, by the Appetite of feeling spiritual Consolation, by
sticking to Infused and Divine Graces, intertaining it self in 'em, and
desiring more of 'em, to enjoy 'em, and finally, by a desire of being great.

27. O how much is there to be purified in a Soul that must arrive at the holy
Mountain of Perfection, and of Transformation with God! O how disposed, naked,
denied, annihilated ought the Soul to be, which would not hinder the entrance
of this Divine Lord into it, nor his continual Communication.

28. This disposition of preparing the Soul, in its bottom, for Divine
Entrance, must of necessity be made by the Divine Wisdom. If a Seraphim is not
sufficient to purify the Soul, how shall a Soul that is frail miserable and
without experience, ever be able to purify itself?

29. Therefore the Lord himself will dispose thee and prepare thee passively by
a way thou understandest not, with the Fire of Tribulation and inward Torment,
without any other disposition on thy side, than a consent to the internal and
external Cross.

30. Thou will find within thy self a passive dryness, darkness, anguish,
contradictions, continual resistance, inward desertions, horrible desolations,
continual and strong suggestions, and vehement temptations of the Enemy;
finally, thou will see thy self so afflicted, that thou will not be able to
lift up thy Heart, being full of sorrow and heaviness, nor do the least act of
Faith, Hope or Charity.

31. Here thou will see thy self forlorn and subject to Passions of impatience,
anger, rage, swearing, and disordered appetites, seeming to thy self the most
miserable Creature, the greatest Sinner in the World, the most abhorred of God,
deprived and stripped of all Virtue, with a pain like that of Hell, seeing thy
self afflicted and desolate, to think that thou have altogether lost God; this
will be thy cruel cutting and most bitter torment.

32. But though thou shall see thy self so oppressed, seeming to thy self to be
proud, impatient and wrothful; yet these temptations shall lose their force and
power upon thee, they shall have no place in thy Soul, by a secret Virtue, the
soveragin Gift of inward Strength, which rules in the in-most part of it,
conquering the most affrightening punishment and pain, and the strongest
temptation.

33. Keep constant, O blessed Soul, keep constant; for it will not be as thou
imaginest, nor art thou at any time nearer to God, than in such cases of
desertion; for although the Sun is hid in the Clouds, yet it changes not its
place, nor a jot the more loses its brightness. The Lord permits this painful
desertion in thy Soul, to purge and polish thee, to cleanse thee and dis-robe
thee of thy self; and that thou may in this manner be all his, and give thy
self wholly up to him, as his infinite Bounty is entirely given to thee, that
thou may be his delight; for although thou do groan, and lament, and weep,
yet he is joyful and glad in the most secret and hidden place of thy Soul.

CHAP. V. How important and necessary it is, to the interior Soul, to suffer
blindfold this first and spiritual Martyrdom.
34. TO the end that the Soul of Earthly may become Heavenly, and may come to
that greatest good of Union with God, it is necessary for it to be purified in
the Fire of Tribulation and Temptation: And although it be true, and a known
and approved Maxim, That all those that Serve the Lord, must suffer troubles,
persecutions and tribulations: yet the happy Souls which are Guided by God, by
the secret way of the interior Walk, and of purgative Contemplation, must
suffer above all, strong and horrible Temptations and Torments, more bitter
than those wherewith the Martyrs were crowned in the Primitive Church.

35. The Martyrs, besides the shortness of their Torment, which hardly endured
days, were comforted with a clear light and special help, in hope of the near
and sure Rewards. But the desolate Soul that must dye in it self, and put off,
and make clean its Heart, seeing it self abandoned by God, surrounded by
temptations, darkness, anguish, affliction, sorrows and rigid drowths, does
taste of Death every moment in its painful Torment and tremendous Desolation,
without feeling the least comfort, with an affliction so great, that the pain
of it seems nothing else but a Death prolonged, and a continual Martyrdom:
whereupon with great reason it may be said, that although there be many
Martyrs, yet there are few Souls which follow Christ our Lord with Peace and
Resignation in such Torments.

36. Then it was men that Martyred 'em; and God comforted their Souls: but now
it is God that afflicts and hides himself; and the Devils, like cruel
Executioners, have a thousand ways to torment the Soul and Body, the whole Man
being Crucified within and without.

37. Thy sorrows will seem to thee insuperable, and thy afflictions past the
power of comfort, and that Heaven rains no more upon thee: thou will see thy
self begin with griefs, and besieged with sorrows Internal, from the darkness
of thy powers, from the weakness of discourses: strong Temptations will afflict
thee, painful distrusts and troublesome scruples; nay, Light and Judgment will
forsake thee.

38. All the Creatures will give thee trouble; spiritual Counsels will bring
thee pain; the reading of Books, how holy soever, will not comfort thee, as it
used to do: If they speak to thee of Patience, they will exceedingly trouble
thee: the fear of losing God through thy unthankfulness and want of returns,
will torment thee to the Soul; if thou groanest and beggest help of God, thou will find, instead of comfort, inward reproof and dis-favour; like another
Canaanitish Woman, to whom he made no answer at first, and then treated her as
the Creature he was speaking of [* here Molines is beside his Text].

39. And although at this time the Lord will not abandon thee, because it would
be impossible to live one moment without his help, yet the succor will be so
secret that thy Soul will not know it, nor be capable of hope and consolation;
nay, it will seem to be without remedy; suffering, like condemned persons the
pains of Hell, ( Circumdederunt me dolores mortis, and pericula inferni
invenerunt me, Ps. 114.) and it would change 'em as such, with a violent Death,
which would be a great comfort; but (like those) the end of those afflictions
and bitternesses will seem impossible.

40. But if thou, O blessed Soul, should know how much thou art beloved and
defended by that Divine Lord, in the midst of thy loving torments, thou would
find 'em so sweet, that it would be necessary that God should work a Miracle,
to let thee live. Be constant, O happy Soul, be constant and of good courage;
for however intolerable thou art to thy self, yet thou will be protected,
enriched, and beloved by that greatest Good, as if he had nothing else to do,
than to lead thee to Perfection, by the the highest steps of love: and if thou
do not turn away but perseverest constantly, without leaving off thy
undertaking, know, that thou offerest to God the most accepted Sacrifice; so,
that if this Lord were capable of pain, he would find no ease till he has
completed this loving Union with thy Soul.

41. If from the Chaos of Nothing, his Omnipotence has produced so many
Wonders, what will he do in thy Soul, created after his own Image and Likeness,
if thou keep constant, quiet, and resigned, with a true knowledge of thy
Nothing? Happy Soul, which, even when it is disturbed, afflicted and
disconsolate, keeps steady there within, without going forth to declare
exterior Comfort.

42. Afflict not thy self too much, and with inquietude, because these sharp
Martyrdoms may continue; persevere in Humility, and go not out of thy self to
seek aid; for all the good consists in being silent, suffering, and holding
patience with rest and resignation: there will thou find the Divine Strength to
overcome so hard a warsare: he is within thee that fights for thee; and he is
strength it self.

43. When thou shall come to this painful state of fearful desolation, weeping
and lamentation are not forbidden thy Soul, whilst in the upper part of it, it
keeps resigned. Who can bear the Lord's heavy hand without tears and
lamentation? That great Champion Job, even he lamented; so did Christ our Lord,
in his forsakings: but their weepings were accompanied with resignation.

44. Afflict not thy self, though God do crucify thee and make trial of thy
fidelity; imitate the Woman of Canaan, who being rejected and injured, did
importune and persevere, humbling her self and following him, though she were
treated as she was. It is necessary to drink the cup and not go back: if the
scales were taken from thine eyes, as they were from St. Paul's, thou would
see the necessity of suffering and glory, as he did; esteeming more the being
Crucified, than being an Apostle.

45. Thy good luck consists not in enjoying, but in suffering with quiet and
resignation. St. Teresa appeared after her death to a certain Soul, and told
it, that she had only been rewarded for her pain; but had not received one dram
of reward for so many Ecstasies and Revelations and Comforts that she had here
enjoyed in this World.

46. Although this painful martyrdom of horrible desolation and passive
purgation be so tremendous, that with reason it has gotten the name of Hell
amongst mystic Divines, (because it seems impossible to be able to live a
moment with so grievous a torment; so that with great reason it may be said,
that he that suffers it, lives dying, and dying lives a lingering death) yet
know, that it is necessary to endure it, to arrive at the sweet, joyous and
abundant riches of high contemplation and loving union: and there has been no
holy Soul, which has not passed through this spiritual martyrdom and painful
torment. St. Gregory the Pope, in the two last Months of his Life; St. Francis
of Assize two years and a half; St. Mary Maudlin of Pazzi five years; St. Rose
of Peru fifteen years; and after such miracles, as made the world amazed, St.
Dominick suffered it even till half an hour of his happy exit.

CHAP. VI.
47. THE other more profitable and meritorious martyrdom in Souls already
advanced in perfection and deep contemplation, is, a fire of divine love, which
burns the soul and makes it painful with the same love: sometimes the absence
of its beloved afflicts it; sometimes the sweet, ardent and welcome weight of
the loving and divine Presence torments it: This sweet martyrdom always makes
it sigh; sometimes if it enjoys and has its beloved, for the pleasure of having
him; so that it cannot contain it self; other times, if he does not manifest
himself, through the ardent anxiety of seeking, finding and enjoying him: all
this is panting, suffering and dying for love.

48. O that thou could but come to conceive the contrariety of accidents,
that an enamored Soul suffers! the combat so terrible and strong on one side;
so sweet and melting and amiable on the other! the martyrdom so piercing and
sharp with which love torments it; and the cross so painful and sweet withal,
without ever being in the mind of getting free from it whilst thou liv'st!

49. Just so much as light and love increases, just so much increases the grief
in seeing that good absent, which it loves so well. To feel it near it self is
enjoyment; and never to have done knowing and possessing it, consumes its life:
it has food and drink near its mouth, whilst it wants either, and cannot be
satisfied: it sees it self swallowed up and drowned in a sea of love, whilst
the powerful hand that is able to save it, is near it; and yet does not do it;
nor does it know when he will come, whom it so much does desire.

50. Sometimes it hears the inward voice of its beloved, which courts and calls
it; and a soft and delicate whisper, which goes forth from the secret of the
Soul, where it abides, which pierces it strongly, even like to melt and
dissolve it, in seeing how near it has him within it self, and yet how far off
from it, whilst it cannot come to possess him. This intoxicates it, imbases
it, scares it, and fills it with unsatisfiableness: and therefore love is said
to be as strong as death, whilst it kills just as that does.

CHAP. VII. Inward Mortification and Perfect Resignation are necessary for
obtaining Internal Peace.
60. THE most subtle Arrow that is shot at us from Nature, is, to induce us to
that which is unlawful, with a pretense, that it may be necessary and useful. O
how many Souls have suffered themselves to be lead away, and have lost the
Spirit by this gilded Cheat! Thou will never last the delicious Manna [ Quod
nemo novit, nisi qui accipit, ( Apoc. chapter 2.) unless thou do perfectly
overcome thy self even to die in thy self; because he who endeavors not to die
to his Passions, is not well disposed to receive the Gift of Understanding,
without the infusion whereof it is impossible for him to go in into himself and
be changed in his Spirit; and therefore those that keep without have nothing of
it.

52. Never disquiet thy self for any accident: for inquietude is the door by
which the Enemy gets into the Soul to rob it of its peace.

53. Resign and deny thy self wholly; for though true self-denial is harsh at
the beginning, it is easy in the middle and becomes most sweet in the end.

54. Thou will find thy self far from Perfection, if thou do not find God in
every thing.

55. Know that pure, perfect and essential Love consists in the Cross, in
self-denial and resignation, in perfect humility, in poverty of spirit, and in
a mean opinion of thy self.

56. In the time of strong temptation, desertion and desolation, it is necessary
for thee to get close into thy center, that thou may only look at and
contemplate God, who keeps his throne and his abode in the bottom of thy Soul.

57. Thou will find impatience and bitterness of heart to grow from the depth
of sensible, empty and mortified love.

58. True love is known, with its effects, when the Soul is profoundly humbled,
and desires to be truly mortified and despised.

59. Many there be, who, however they have been dedicated to Prayer, yet have
no relish of God; because in the end of their Prayers, they are neither
mortified nor attend upon God any longer: for obtaining that peaceable and
continual attending, it is necessary to get a great purity of mind and heart,
great peace of soul, and an universal resignation.

60. To the simple and the mortified, the recreation of the senses is a sort of
death: they never go to it, unless compelled by necessity and edification of
their neighbors.

61. The bottom of our soul, you will know, is the place of our happiness.
There the Lord shows us wonders: there we ingulf and lose our selves in the
immense ocean of his infinite goodness, in which we keep fixed and unmovable.
There, there resides the incomparable fruition of our Soul and that eminent and
sweet rest of it. An humble and resigned Soul, which is come to this bottom,
seeks no more than merely to please God, and the holy and loving Spirit teaches
it every thing with his sweet and enlivening unction.

62. Amongst the Saints there are some gigantick ones, who continually suffer
with patience indispositions of body, of which God takes great care. But high
and sovereign is their gift, who by the strength of the Holy Ghost, suffer both
internal and external crosses with content and resignation. This is that sort
of holiness so much the more rare, as it is more precious in the sight of God.
The spiritual ones, which walk this way, are rare: because there are few in the
world, who do totally deny themselves, to follow Christ crucified, with
simpleness and bareness of spirit, through the loansom and thorny ways of the
Cross, without making reflections upon themselves.

63. A Life of Self-denial is above all the Miracles of the Saints; and it does
not know whether it be alive or dead; lost or gained; whether it agrees or
resists: this is the true resigned Life. But although it should be a long time
before thou come to this state, and thou should think not to have made one
step toward it, yet affright not thy self at this, for God uses to bestow upon
a Soul that Blessing in one moment, which was denied it for many years before.

64. He that desires to suffer blindfold, without the comfort of God or the
creatures, is gotten too far onwards to be able to resist unjust accusations
which his enemies make against him, even in the most dreadful and interior
desolation.

65. The spiritual man that lives by God, and in him, is inwardly contented in
the midst of his adversities; because the Cross and Affliction are his Life and
Delight.

66. Tribulation is a great treasure, wherewith God honors those that be his,
in this life: therefore evil men are necessary for those that are good; and so
are the Devils themselves, which by afflicting us do try to ruin us: but
instead of doing us harm, they do us the greatest good imaginable.

67. There must be tribulation to make a man's life acceptable to God; without
it, it is like the Body without the Soul, the Soul without Grace, the Earth
without the Sun.

68. With the wind of tribulation God separates, in the floor of the Soul, the
Chaff from the Corn.

69. When God crucifies in the inmost part of the Soul, no creature is able to
comfort it; nay, comforts are but grievous and bitter crosses to it. And if it
be well-instructed in the laws and discipline of the ways of pure love, in the
time of great desolation and inward troubles, it ought not to seek abroad among
the creatures for comfort, nor lament it self with 'em, nor will it be able to
read Spiritual Books: because this is a secret way of getting at a distance
from suffering.

70. Those Souls are to be pitied, who cannot find in their hearts to believe,
that Tribulation and Suffering is their greatest Blessing. They who are perfect
ought always to be desirous of dying and suffering, being always in a state of
death and suffering: vain is the man who does not suffer: because he is born to
toil and suffering; but much more the Friends and Elect of God.

71. Undeceive thy self, and believe, that in order to thy Soul's being totally
transformed with God, it is necessary for it to be lost and be denied in its
life, sense, knowledge, and power; and to die living, and not living; dying,
and not dying; suffering, and not suffering; resigning up, and not resigning up
it self, without reflecting upon any thing.

72. Perfection, in its followers, receives not its glories but by Fire and
Martyrdom, Griefs, Torments, Punishments and Contempt, suffered and endured
with gallantry and courage; and he that would have some place to set his feet
on and rest himself, and does not go beyond the reason of reason and of sense,
will never get into the secret cabiner of knowledge, though by reading he may
chance to get a taste and relish the understanding of it.

CHAP. VIII. Pursues the same Matter.
73. YOU must know, that the Lord will not manifest himself in thy Soul, till
it be denied in it self, and dead in its senses and powers: nor will it ever
come to this state, till being perfectly resigned, it resolves to be with God
all alone; making an equal account of Gifts and Contempts, Light and Darkness,
Peace and War. In sum, that the Soul may arrive at perfect quietness and
supreme internal peace, it ought first to die in it self, and live only in God
and for him: and the more dead it shall be in it self, the more shall it know
God: but if it does not mind this continual denying of it self and internal
mortification, it will never arrive at this state, nor preserve God within it;
and then it will be continually subject to accidents and passions of the mind,
such as are judging, murmuring, resenting, excusing, defending, to keep its
honor and reputation, which are enemies to Perfection, Peace, and the Spirit.

74. Know that the diversity of states amongst those that be spiritual,
consists only in dying all alike; but in the happy, which die continually, God
has his honor, his blessings and delights here below.

75. Great is the difference which is between doing, suffering, and dying;
doing is delightful and belongs to beginners; suffering, with desire, belongs
to those who are proficients; dying always in themselves, belongs to those who
are accomplished and perfect; of which number there are very few in the world.

76. How happy will thou be, if thou have no other thought, but to die in thy
self! thou will then become not only victorious over thine enemies, but also
over thy self: in which victory thou will certainly find pure love, perfect
peace, and divine wisdom.

77. It is impossible for a man to be able to think and live mystically in a
simple understanding of the divine and infused wisdom, if he does not first die
in himself by the total denying of sense, and the reasonable appetite.

78. The true lesson of the spiritual man, and that which thou ought to
learn, is, to leave all things in their place, and not meddle with any, but
what thy office may bind thee to; because the Soul which leaves every thing to
find God, does then begin to have all in the eternity i^ seeks.

79. Some Souls there are, who seek repose: others without seeking have the
pleasure of it; others have a pleasure in pain; and others seek it. The first
do as good as nothing; the second are in the way toward it; the third run, and
the last fly.

80. The disesteem of delights, and the counting of 'em torment, is the
property of a truly mortified man.

81. Enjoyment and Internal Peace are the Fruits of the Spirit Divine; and no
man gets 'em into his possession, if in the closet of his soul he is not a
resigned man.

82. Thou see that the displeasures of the good pass presently away; but for
all that endeavor never to have 'em, nor to stop in 'em: for they damnifie thy
health, disturb thy reason, and disquiet thy spirit.

83. Amongst other holy Counsels which thou must observe, remember well this
that follows: Look not upon other men's faults, but thine own: keep silence with
a continued internal conversation: mortify thy self in all things and at all
hours, and by this means thou will get free from many imperfections, and make
thy self Commander of great Virtues.

84. Mortify thy self in not judging ill of any body at any time; because the
suspicion of thy neighbor disturbs the purity of heart, discomposes it, brings
the Soul out and takes away its repose.

85. Never will thou have perfect resignation, if thou mind'st humane respects,
and reflectest upon the little idol of what people say. The Soul that goes by
the inward way, will soon lose it self, if once it come to look at reason
amongst the creatures, and in commerce and conversation with 'em. There is no
other reason, than not to look at reason; but to imagine that God permits
grievances to fall on us, to humble and annihilate us and make us live wholly
resigned.

86. Behold how God makes greater account of a Soul that lives internally
resigned, than of another that does miracles, even to the raising of the dead.

87. Many Souls there are, which, though they exercise Prayer, yet because they
are not mortified, are always imperfect and full of self-love.

88. Hold it for a true mixim, that no body can do a grievance or injury to a
Soul despised by it self, and one that is nothing in its own account.

89. Finally, be of hope, suffer, be silent, and patient: let nothing affright
thee: all of it will have a time to end: God only is he that is unchangeable:
patience brings a man in every thing. He that has God, has all things; and he
that has him not, has nothing.

CHAP. IX. For the obtaining of Internal Peace, it is necessary for the Soul to
know its misery.
90. IF the Soul should not fall into some faults, it would never come to
understand its own misery, though it hears men speak and reads spiritual Books;
nor can it ever obtain precious peace, if it do not first know its own
miserable weakness: because there the remedy is difficult, where there is no
clear knowledge of the defect. God will suffer in thee sometimes one fault,
sometimes another, that by this knowledge of thy self, seeing thee so often
fallen, thou may believe that thou art a mere nothing; in which knowledge
and belief true peace and perfect humility is founded: and that thou may the
better search into thy mystry and see what thou art, I will try to undeceive
thee in some of thy manifold imperfections.

91. Thou art so quick and nice, that it may be if thou do but trip as thou
walk or find thy way molested, thou feel even Hell it self: if thou
art denied thy due or thy pleasure opposed, thou presently briskest up with a
warm resentment of it. If thou spiest a fault in thy neighbor, instead of
pitying him, and thinking that thou thy self art liable to the same failing,
thou indiscreetly reprovest him; if thou see a thing convenient for thee and
can not compass it, thou growest sad and full of sorrow; if thou receivest a
slight injury from thy neighbor, thou chidest at him and complainest for it:
insomuch that for any trifle thou art inwardly and outwardly discomposed and
losest thy self.

92. Thou would be penitent, but with another's patience; and if the
impatience still continues, thou layest the fault with much pains upon thy
companion, without considering, that thou art intolerable to thy self: and when
the rancour is over, thou cunningly do return to make thy self virtuous,
giving documents and relating spiritual sayings with artifice of wit, without
mending thy past-faults. Although thou willingly do condemn thy self,
reproving thy faults before others, yet this thou do more to justify thy
self with him that sees thy faults, that thou may return again afresh to the
former esteem of thy self, than through any effect of perfect humility.

93. Other times thou do subtly allege, that it is not through fault but
zeal of justice, that thou complainest of thy neighbor. Thou believe for the
most part that thou art virtuous, constant and courageous, even to the giving
up thy life into the tyrant's hand, solely for the sake of divine love; yet
thou can scarce hear the least word of anger, but presently thou do afflict
and trouble and disquiet thy self. These are all industrious engines of
self-love and the secret pride of thy soul. Know therefore that self-love
reigns in thee, and that from purchasing this precious peace, that is thy
greatest hindrance.

CHAP. X. In which is showed and discovered what is the false humility, and
what the true; with the effects of 'em.
94. THou must know that there are two sorts of humility; one false and
counterfeit, the other true. The false one is theirs, who, like water which
must mount upward, receive an external fall and artificial submission, to rise
up again immediately. These avoid esteem and honor, that so they may be took
to be humble; they say of themselves, that they are very evil, that they may be
thought good; and though they know their own misery, yet they are loath that
other folks should know it. This is dissembled humility, and feigned, and
nothing but secret pride.

95. Theirs is the true humility, which have gotten a perfect habit of it;
these never think of it, but judge humbly of themselves; they do things with
courage and patience; they live and dye in God; they mind not themselves nor
the Creatures; they are constant and quiet in all things; they suffer
molestation with joy, desiring more of it, that they may imitate their dear and
despised Jesus; they covet to be reputed trifles and sport by the World; they
are contented with what God alots 'em, and are convinced of their faults with a
pleasing shame; they are not humbled by the counsel of Reason, but by the
affection of the Will; there is no honor that they look after, nor injury to
disturb 'em; no trouble to vex 'em; no prosperity to make 'em proud; because
they are always immovable in their Nothing, and in themselves with absolute
peace.

96. And that thou may be acquainted with interior and true Humility, know,
that it does not consist in external Acts, in taking the lowest place, in going
poor in clothes, in speaking submissively, in shutting the eyes, in
affectionate sighing, nor in condemning thy ways, calling thy self miserable,
to give others to understand that thou art humble: It consists only in the
contempt of thy self, and the desire to be despised, with a low and profound
knowledge, without concerning thy self, whether thou art esteemed humble or no,
though an Angel should reveal such a thing to thee.

97. The torrent of Light wherewith the Lord with his Graces inlightens the
Soul, does two things: It discovers the Greatness of God, and at the same time
the Soul knows its own stench and misery, insomuch, that no Tongue is able to
express the depth in which it is overwhelmed, being desirous that every one
should know its Humility, and it is so far from Vainglory and Complacency, as
it sees that Grace of God to be the mere Goodness of him, and nothing but his
Mercy, which is pleased to take pity on it.

98. Thou shall never be hurt by Men or Devils, but by thy self, thy own proper
Pride, and the violence of thy Passions; take heed of thy self, for thou of thy
self, art the greatest Devil of all to thy self.

99. Have no mind to be esteemed, when God incarnate was called Fool, Drunkard,
and said to have a Devil. O the Folly of Christians! that we should be willing
to enjoy Happiness, without being willing to imitate him on the Cross, in
Reproaches, Humility, Poverty, and in other Virtues!

100. The truly humble man is at rest and ease in his Heart; there he stands
the trial of God, and Men, and the Devil himself, above all reason and
discretion possessing himself in peace and quietness, looking for, with all
Humility, the pure pleasure of God, as well in Life as Death: Things without do
no more disquiet him, than if they never were. The Cross to him, and even Death
it self, are Delights, though he make no such show outwardly: But oh! who do we
speak of? for few there are of these sort of humble Men in the whole World!

101. Hope thou, and desire, and suffer, and dye without any bodies knowing it;
for herein consists the humble and perfect Love. O how much Peace will thou
find in thy Soul, if thou do profoundly humble thy self, and even hug
Contempt!

102. Thou will never be perfectly humble, though thou know thy own Misery,
unless thou desire that all men should know it: then thou will avoid Praises,
embrace Injuries, despise every thing that makes a fair show, even to thine own
self: and if any Tribulation come upon thee, blame none for it; but judge that
it comes from God's Hand, as the Giver of every good.

103. If thou would bear thy Neighbors faults, cast thine Eyes upon thine
own: and if thou think to thy self, that thou have made any progress in
Perfection by thy self, know that thou art not humble at all, nor have yet made
one step in the Way of the Spirit.

104. The degrees of Humility, are the qualites of a Body in the Grave; that
is, to be in the lowest place, buried like one that is dead, to stink, and be
corrupted to it self, to be dust, and nothing in ones own account; finally, if
thou would be Blessed, learn to despise thy self, and to be despised by
others.

CHAP. XI. Maxims to know a simple, humble, and true Heart.
105. ENcourage thy self to be Humble, embracing Tribulations as Instruments of
thy Good; rejoice in Contempt, and desire that God may be thy only Refuge,
Comfort and Protector.

106. None, let him be never so great in this World, can be greater than he
that is in the eye and favor of God: and therefore the truly humble Man
despises whatever there is in the World, even to himself, and puts his only
trust and repose in God.

107. The truly humble Man suffers quietly and patiently internal Troubles, and
he is the Man that makes great way in a little time, like one that sails before
the Wind.

108. The truly humble Man finds God in all things; so that whatever contempt,
injury or affront comes to him by means of the Creatures, he receives it with
great peace and quiet Internal, as sent from the Divine Hand, and loves greatly
the instrument with which the Lord tryes him.

109. He is not yet arrived at profound Humility that is taken with Praise,
though he does not desire it, nor seek it, but rather avoids it: because to an
humble Heart praises are bitter crosses, although it be wholly quiet and
immovable.

110. He has no internal Humility who does not abhor himself, with a mortal,
but withal a peaceable and quiet hatred: But he will never come to possess this
treasure, that has not a low and profound knowledge of his own vileness,
rottenness and misery.

111. He that is upon excuses and replies, has not a simple and humble heart,
especially if he does this with his Superiors; because replies grow from a
secret pride that reigns in the Soul, and from thence the total ruin of it.

112. Perfidiousness supposes little submission, and this less humility; and
both together they are the fuel of inquietude, discord and disturbance.

113. The humble heart is not disquieted by imperfections, though these do
grieve it to the Soul; because they are against its loving Lord: nor is he
concerned that he cannot do great things; for he always stands in his own
Nothing and Misery; nay, he wonders at himself, that he can do any thing of
Virtue, and presently thanks the Lord for it, with a true knowledge that it is
God that does all, and remains dissatisfied with what he does himself.

114. The truly humble man, though he see all, yet he looks upon nothing to
judge it, because he judges ill only of himself.

115. The truly humble man does always find an excuse to defend him that
mortifies him, at least in a found intention: Who therefore, would be angry
with a man of good intention?

116. So much (nay more) does false humility displease God, as true pride does;
because that is hypocrisy besides.

117. The truly humble man, though every thing falls out contrary to him, is
neither disquieted nor afflicted at it; because he is prepared, and thinks he
deserves no less: he is not disquieted under troublesome thoughts, wherewith
the Devil seeks to torment him, nor under temptations, tribulations and
desertions, but rather acknowledges his unworthiness, and is affected that the
Lord chastises him by the Devil's means, though he be a vile instrument; all he
suffers seems nothing to him, and he never does a thing that he thinks worth
any great matter.

118. He that is arrived at perfect and inward Humility, although he be
disturbed at nothing, as one that abhors himself, because he knows his
imperfection in every thing, his ingratitude and his misery, yet he suffers a
great cross in enduring himself. This is the sign to know true Humility of
heart by. But the happy Soul which is gotten to this holy hatred of it self,
lives overwhelmed, drowned and swallowed up in the depth of its own Nothing;
out of which the Lord raises him by communicating Divine Wisdom to him, and
filling him with Light, Peace, Tranquillity and Love.

CHAP. XII. Inward Solitude is that which chiefly brings a Man to the purchase
of Internal Peace.
119. KNow that although exterior Solitude does much assist for the obtaining
internal Peace, yet the Lord did not mean this, when he spoke by his Prophet, (
Hos. 2.14.) I will bring her into solitude, and speak privately to her: But he
meant the interior Solitude, which jointly conduces to the obtaining the
precious jewel of Peace Internal. Internal Solitude consists in the forgeting
all the Creatures, in disengaging ones self from 'em, in a perfect nakedness of
all the affections, desires, thoughts and ones own will. This is the true
Solitude where the Soul reposes with a sweet and inward serenity in the arms of
its chiefest good.

120. O what infinite room is there in a Soul that is arrived at this Divine
Solitude! O what inward, what retired, what secret, what spacious, what vast
distances are there within a happy Soul that is once come to be truly solitary!
There the Lord converses and communicates himself inwardly with the Soul, there
he fills it with himself, because it is empty; clothes it with light, and with
his love, because it is naked; lifts it up, because it is low: and unites it
with himself, and transforms it, because it is alone.

121. O delightful Solitude, and Cifer of eternal Blessings! O Mirror, in
which the eternal Father is always beheld! There is great reason to call thee
Solitude; for thou art so much alone, that there is scarce a Soul that looks
after thee, that loves and knows thee. O Divine Lord! how is it that Souls do
not go from Earth to this Glory! How come they to lose so great a good, through
the only love and desire of created things! Blessed Soul, how happy will thou
be, if thou do but leave all for God! seek him only, breathe after none but
him, let him only have thy sighs. Desire nothing, and then nothing can trouble
thee; and if thou do desire any good, how spiritual soever it be, let it be
in such a manner, that thou may not be disquieted, if thou missest it.

122. If, with this liberty, thou will give thy Soul to God, taken off from the
World, free and alone, thou will be the happiest creature upon Earth; because
the most High has his secret habitation in this holy Solitude; in this Desert
and Paradise, is enjoyed the conversation of God, and it is only in this
internal Retirement that that mavelous, powerful and divine Voice is heard.

123. If thou would enter into this Heaven of Earth, forget every care and
every thought; get out of thy self, that the love of God may live in thy Soul.

124. Live as much as ever thou can, abstracted from the Creatures; dedicate
thy self wholly to thy Creator, and offer thy self in Sacrifice with peace and
quietness of Spirit: Know, that the more the Soul disrobes it self, the more
way it makes into this interior Solitude, and becomes clothed with God, and
the more lonesome and empty of it self the Soul gets to be, the more the Divine
Spirit fills it.

125. There is not a more bessed life than a solitary one; because in this
happy life, God gives himself all to the creature, and the creature all to God
by an intimate and sweet union of love. O how few are there that come to relish
this true Solitude!

126. To make the Soul truly solitary, it ought to forget all the creatures,
and even it self; otherwise it will never be able to make any near approach to
God. Many men leave and forsake all things, but they do not leave their own
liking, their own will, and themselves; and therefore these truly solitary ones
are so few; wherefore if the Soul does not get off from its own appetite and
desire, from its own will, from spiritual gifts, and from repose even in the
Spirit it self, it never can arrive at this high felicity of internal Solitude.

127. Go on, blessed Soul! go on, without stop, toward this blessedness of
internal Solitude: See how God calls thee to enter into thy inward center,
where he will renew thee, change thee, fill thee, cloth thee, and show thee a
new and heavenly Kingdom, full of joy, peace, content and serenity.

CHAP. XIII. In which is showed what infused and passive Contemplation is, and
its wonderful Effects.
128. YOu must know, that when once the Soul is habituated to internal
Recollection, and acquired Contemplation, that we have spoken of; when once
it is mortified, and desires wholly to be denied its appetites; when once it
efficaciously embraces internal and external Mortification, and is willing to
dye heartily to its passions and its own ways, then God uses to take it alone
by it self, and raise it more than it knows, to a complete repose, where he
sweetly and inwardly infuses in it his light, his love and his strength,
inkindling and inflaming it with a true disposition to all manner of Virtue.

129. There the Divine Spouse, suspending its powers, puts it to sleep in a
most sweet and pleasant rest: There it sleeps, and quietly receives and enjoys
(without knowing it) what it injoys, with a most lovely and charming calm:
There the Soul raised and lifted up to this passive State, becomes united to
its greatest Good, without costing it any trouble or pains for this union:
There in that supreme Region, and sacred Temple of the Soul, that greatest Good
takes its complacency, manifests it self, and creates a relish from the
creature, in a way above sense and all humane understanding: There also only
the pure Spirit, who is God, (the purity of the Soul being incapable of
sensible things) rules it, and gets the mastership of it, communicating to it
its illustrations, and those sentiments which are necessary for the most pure
and perfect Union.

130. The Soul coming to it self again from these sweet and divine Embracings,
becomes rich in light, and love, and a mighty esteem of the divine Greatness,
and the knowledge of its own misery, finding it self all changed divinely, and
disposed to embrace, to suffer, and to practice perfect Virtue.

131. A simple, pure, infused, and perfect Contemplation, therefore is a known
and inward manifestation which God gives of himself, of his goodness, of his
peace, of his sweetness, whose object is God, pure, unspeakable, abstracted
from all particular thoughts, within an inward silence: but it is God
delightful, God that draws us, God that sweetly raises us in a spiritual and
most pure manner; an admirable gift, which the Divine Majesty bestows to whom
he will, as he will, and when he will, and for what time he will, though the
state of this life be rather a state of the cross, of patience, of humility,
and of suffering, than of enjoying.

132. Never will thou enjoy this Divine Nectar, till thou art advanced in
Virtue and inward Mortification; till thou do heartily endeavor to fix in
thy Soul a great peace, silence, forgetfulness and internal solitude: How is it
possible to hear the sweet, inward and powerful Voice of God in the midst of
the noise and tumults of the Creatures? And how can the pure Spirit be heard in
the midst of considerations and discourses of Artifice? If the Soul will not
continually dye in it self, denying it self to all these materiallites and
satisfactions, the contemplation can be no more but a mere vanity, a vain
complacency and presumption.

CHAP. XIV. Pursues the same Matter.
133. GOD does not always communicate himself with equal abundance in this
sweetest and infused contemplation: Sometimes he grants this Grace more than he
does at other times; and sometimes he expects not that the Soul should be so
dead and denied, because this gift being his mere Grace, he gives it when he
pleases, and as he pleases; so that no general rule can be made of it, nor any
rate set to his Divine Greatness: nay, by means of this very contemplation he
comes to deny it to annihilate and dye.

134. Sometimes the Lord gives greater light to the understanding; sometimes
greater love to the will. There is no need here for the Soul to take any pains
or trouble; it must receive what God gives it, and rest united, as he will have
it; because His Majesty is Lord, and in the very time that he lays it asleep,
he possesses and fills it, and works in it powerfully and sweetly, without any
industry or knowledge of its own: insomuch, that before ever it is aware of
this so great mercy, it is gained, convinced, and changed already.

135. The Soul which is in this happy state, has two things to avoid, the
activity of human spirit, and interestedness: Our humane spirit is unwilling to
dye in it self, but loves to be doing and discoursing after its way, being in
love with its own actions. A man had need to have a great fidelity, and
devesting himself of selfishness, to get a perfect and passive capacity of the
Divine Influences; the continual habits of operating freely, which it has, are
a hindrance to its annihilation.

136. The second is interestedness in contemplation it self: Thou must
therefore procure in thy Soul a perfect devesting of all which is not God,
without seeking any other end or interest, within or without, but the Divine
Will.

137. In a word, the manner that thou must use, on thy part, to fit thy self
for this pure, passive, and perfect Prayer, is, a total and absolute
consignment of thy self into the hands of God, with a perfect submission to his
most holy will, to be busied according to his pleasure and disposition,
receiving what he ordains thee, with an even and perfect resignation.

138. Thou must know, that few be the Souls which arrive at this infused and
passive Prayer; because few of 'em are capable of these divine influences with
a total nakedness and death of their own activity and powers: those only which
feel it, know it so, that this perfect nakedness is acquired (by the help of
God's grace) by a continual and inward mortification, dying to it all its own
inclinations and desires.

139. At no time must thou look at the effects which are wrought in thy Soul,
but especially herein; because it would be a hindrance to the divine
operations, which enrich it, so to do: all that thou have to do is to pant
after indifference, resignation, forgetfulness, and, without thy being sensible
of it; the greatest good will leave in thy Soul a fit disposition for the
practice of virtue, a true love of the cross of thy own contempt, of thy
annihilation, and greater and stronger desires still of thy greater perfection
and the most pure and affective union.

CHAP. XV. Of the two Means, whereby the Soul ascends up to Infused
Contemplation, with the Explication of what and how many the steps of it are.
140. THE means whereby the Soul ascends to the felicity of Contemplation and
Affective Love, are two; the Pleasure, and the Desires of it. God uses at first
to fill the Soul with sensible pleasures; because it is so frail and miserable,
that without this preventive Consolation, it cannot take wing toward the
fruition of heavenly things. In this first step it is disposed by Contrition,
and is exercised in Repentance, meditating upon the Redeemer's Passion, rooting
out diligently all worldly desires and vicious courses of life: because the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the faint-heard, the delicate never
conquer it, but those that use violence and force with themselves.

141. The second is the Desires. The more the things of Heaven are delighted
in, the more they are desired; and from thence there do ensue upon spiritual
pleasures, desires of enjoying heavenly and divine blessings, and contempt of
worldly ones. From these desires arises the inclination of following Christ our
Lord, who said, I am the way, (St. John 14.6.) the steps of his imitation, by
which a man must go up, are Charity, Humility, Meekness, Patience, Poverty,
Self-Contempt, the Cross, Prayer and Mortification.

142. The steps of Infused Contemplation are three. The first is Satiety. When
the Soul is filled with God, it conceives a hatred to all worldly things; then
it is quiet and satisfied only with Divine Love.

143. The second is Intoxication. And this step is an excess of Mind, and an
elevation of Soul, arising from Divine Love and satiety of it.

144. The third is Security. This step turns out all fear: the Soul is so
drencht with love divine, and resigned up in such a manner to the divine good
pleasure, that it would go willingly to Hell, if it did but know it so to be
the will of the Most High. In this step it feels such a certain Bond of the
Divine Union, that it seems to it an impossible thing, to be sesparated from
its beloved and his infinite treasure.

145. There are six other steps of Contemplation, which are these, Fire, Union,
Elevation, Illumination, Pleasure, and Repose. With the first the Soul is
inkindled, and being inkindled, is anointed; being anointed, is raised; being
raised, contemplates; contemplating, it receives pleasure; and receiving
pleasure, it finds repose. By these steps the Soul rises higher, being
abstracted and experienced in the Spiritual and Internal Way.

146. In the first step, which is Fire, the Soul is illustrated, by the means
of a divine and ardent ray, in kindling the affections divine, and drying up
those which are but humane. The second is the Unction, which is a sweet and
spiritual Liquor, which diffusing it self all the Soul over, teaches it,
strengthens it, and disposes it to receive and contemplate the divine truth:
and sometimes it extends even to nature it self, corroborating it by patience,
with a sensible pleasure that seems celestial.

147. The third is the Elevation of the Inner Man over it self, that it may get
fittest to the clear fountain of pure love.

148. The fourth step, which is Illumination, is an infused knowledge, whereby
the Soul contemplates sweetly the divine truth, rising still from one clearness
to another, from one light to another, from knowledge to knowledge, being
guided by the Spirit Divine.

149. The fifth is a Savoury Pleasure of the Divine Sweetness, issuing forth
from the plentiful and precious Fountain of the Holy Ghost.

150. The sixth is a Sweet and Admirable Tranquillity, arising from the conquest
of Fightings within, and frequent Prayer; and this, very, very few have
experience of. Here the abundance of Joy and Peace is so great, that the Soul
seems to be in a sweet sleep, solacing and reposing it self in the divine
breast of love.

151. Many other steps of Contemplation there are, as Ecstasies, Raptures,
Melting, Deliquium's, Glee, Kisses, Embraces, Exultation, Union,
Transformation, Espousing, and Matrimony, which I omit to explain, to give no
occasion to speculation: And because there are whole Books which treat of these
Points; though they are all for him who finds nothing of 'em, any more than a
blind man does of Color, or a deaf man of Music. In a word, by these steps we
get up to the chamber and repose of the pacifick King and the true Solomon.

CHAP. XVI. Signs to know the Inner Man, and the Mind that is purged.
152. THE Signs to know the Inner Man by, are four. The first, If the
Understanding produce no other Thoughts than those which stir up to the light
of Faith; and the Will is so habituated, that it begets no other Acts of Love,
than of God, and in order to him. The second, If, when he ceases from an
External Work, in which he was employed, the Understanding and the Will are
presently and easily turned to God. The third, If in entering, upon Prayer, he
forgets all outward things, as if he had not seen nor used 'em. The fourth, If
he carries himself orderly toward outward things, as if he were entering into
the World again, fearing to embroil himself in business, and naturally
abhorring it, u^less when charity requires it of him.

153. Such a Soul as this is free from the Outward Man, and easily enters into
the interior solitude, where it sees none but God and it self in him: loving
him with quiet and peace and true love. There in that secret center God is
kindly speaking to it, teaching it a new Kingdom, and true Peace and Joy.

154. This spiritual, abstracted and retired Soul has its peace no more
broken, though outwardly it may meet with combats; because, through the
infinite distance, tempests do never reach to that serenest heaven within,
where pure and perfect love resides; and though sometimes it may be naked,
forsaken, fought against and desolate, this is only the fury of the storm,
which threatens and rages no where but without.

155. This secret love within, has four effects: The first is called
Illumination, which is a savoury and experimental knowledge of the greatness of
God, and of its own nothing. The second is Inflammation, which is an ardent
desire of being burnt, like the Salamander, in this kind and divine fire. The
third is Sweetness, which is a peaceable, joyful, sweet and intimate fruition.
The fourth, is a swallowing up of the powers in God; by which immersion the
Soul is so much drencht and filled with God, that it cannot any longer seek,
desire, or will any thing, but its greatest and infinite good.

156. From this fullest satiety, two effects arise. The first is, a great
courage to suffer for God. The second is, a certain hope or assurance that it
can never lose him, nor be separated from him.

157. Here in this internal retirement, the beloved Jesus has his Paradise, to
whom we may go up, standing and conversing on the Earth. And if thou desire
to know who he is, who is altogether drawn to this inward retirement, with
enlightened exemplification in God, I tell thee, it is he that in adversity, in
discomfort of spirit, and in the want of necessaries stands firm and unshaken.
These constant and inward Souls are outwardly naked and wholly diffused in God,
whom they continually do contemplate: they have no spot; they live in God and
of him himself; they shine brighter than a thousand Suns; they are beloved by
the Son of God; they are the darlings of God the Father, and Elect Spouses of
the Holy Ghost.

158. By three signs is a mind that is purged, to be known, as St. Thomas says
in a Treatise of his. The first sign is diligence, which is a strength of mind,
which banishes all neglect and sloth, that it may be disposed with earnestness
and confidence to the pursuit of virtue. The second is severity; which likewise
is a strength of mind against concupiscence, accompanied with an ardent love of
roughness, vileness and holy poverty. The third is benignity and sweetness of
mind, which drives away all rancour, envy, aversion and hatred against ones
neighbor.

159. Till the mind be purged, the affection purified, the memory naked, the
understanding brightened, the will denied and set afire, the Soul can never
arrive at the intimate and affective union with God, and therefore because the
spirit of God is purity it self, and light and rest, the soul, where he intends
to make his abode, must have great purity, peace, attention and quiet. Finally,
the precious gift of a purged mind, those only have, who with continual
diligence do seek love and retain it, and desire to be reputed the most vile in
the World.

CHAP. XVII. Of Divine Wisdom.
160. DIvine Wisdom is an intellectual and infused knowledge of the divine
perfections and things eternal; which ought rather to be called Contemplation
than Speculation. Science is acquired and begets the knowledge of Nature.
Wisdom is infused and begets the knowledge of the Divine Goodness. That desires
to know what is not to be attained unto without pains and sweat: This desires
not to know what it does know, although it understands it all. In a word, the
men who are scientifical entertain themselves in the knowledge of the things of
the world; and the wise live swallowed up in God himself.

161. Reason enlightened in the Wise is a high and simple elevation of spirit,
whereby he sees, with a clear and sharp sight all that is inferior to him, and
what concerns his Life and Estate. This is that which renders the soul simple,
illustrated, uniform, spiritual, and altother introverted and abstracted from
every created thing. This moves and draws away with a sweet violence, the
hearts of the humble and teachable, filling them with abundance of sweetness,
peace, and pleasantness. Finally, the wise man says of it, that it brought him
all good things at once. Venerunt mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa, Wisd. 7.11.

162. You must know, that the greatest part of men lives by opinion, and judges
according to the deceivableness of imagination and sense: but the man that is
wise judges of every thing according to the real verity, which is in it; whose
business is to understand, conceive, penetrate into, and transcend every
created being, even to himself.

163. It Is a great property of a wise man to do much and say little.

164. Wisdom is discovered in the works and words of the wise; because he being
absolute master of all his passions, motions, and affections, is known in all
his doings, like a quiet and still water, in which wisdom shines with clearness.

165. The understanding of mystical truths is secret and shut up from men who
are purely scholastical, unless they be humble; because it is the science of
Saints, and none know it but those which heartily love and seek their own
contempt: Therefore the Souls, who by embracing this means, get to be purely
mystical and truly humble, dive even to the profoundest apprehensions of the
Divinity: And the more sensually men do live according to flesh and blood, the
greater distance are they at from this mystical Science.

166. Ordinarily it is seen that in the man which has much scholastical and
speculative Knowledge, Divine Wisdom does not predominate; yet they make an
admirable composition, when they both meet together. The men of Learning, who
by God's mercy have attained to this mystic Science, are worthy of Veneration
and Praise in Religion.

167. The external actions of the mystical and wise, which they do rather
passively than actively, though they are a great torment to 'em, yet are
ordered prudently by 'em, by number, weight and measure.

168. The Sermons of men of Learning, who want the Spirit, though they are made
up of diverse stories, elegant descriptions, acute discourses, and exquisite
proofs, yet are by no means the word of God, but the word of men, plated over
with false Gold: These Preachers spoil Christians, feeding 'em with wind and
vanity, and so they are, both of 'em, void of God.

169. These Teachers feed their Hearers with the wind of hurtful subtilties,
giving 'em stones instead of bread, leaves instead of fruit, and unsavory earth
mixed with poisoned honey instead of true food. These are they that hunt after
honor, raising up an idol of reputation and applause, instead of seeking God's
glory, and the spiritual edification of men.

170. Those that preach with zeal and sincerity, preach for God. Those that
preach without 'em, preach for themselves. Those that preach the word of God
with Spirit, make it take impression in the heart: but those that preach it
without Spirit, carry it no farther than to the ear.

171. Perfection does not consist in teaching it, but in doing it; because he
is neither the greatest Saint, nor the wisest Man, that knows the truth most,
but he that practices it.

172. It Is a constant Maxim, That Divine Wisdom begets Humility; and that which
is acquired by the Learned, begets Pride.

173. Holiness does not consist in forming deep and subtle conceits of the
knowledge and attributes of God, but in the love of God, and in self-denial.
Therefore it is frequentlier observed, that Holiness is more amongst the simple
and humble, than among the learned. How many poor old women are there in the
World, which have little or nothing of humane Science, but are rich in the love
of God! How many Divines do we see that are over head and ears in their vain
wisdom, and yet very bare in things of true light and charity!

174. Remember that it is always good to speak like one that learns, and not
like one that knows: Count it a greater honor to be reputed a mere Ignoramus,
than a man of Wisdom and Prudence.

175. However, the Learned, who are purely speculative, have some little sparks
of Spirit, yet these do not fly out from the simple bottom of eminent and
divine Wisdom, which has a mortal hatred to forms and species's: the mixing of
a little Science is always a hindrance to the eternal, profound, pure, simple,
and true Wisdom.

CHAP. XVIII. Treating of the same.
176. THere are two ways which lead to the knowledge of God. The one remote,
the other near: The first is called Speculation; the second, Contemplation. The
Learned, who follow Scientifical Speculation by the sweetness of sensible
Discourses, get up to God by this means, as well as they can, that by this help
they may be able to love him: But none of those who follow that way which they
call scolastical, ever arrives by that only, to the mystical Way, or to the
excellence of Union, Transformation, Simplicity, Light, Peace, Tranquillity,
and Love, as he does, who is brought by the Divine Grace by the mystical Way of
Contemplation.

177. These men of Learning, who are merely scolastical, don't know what the
Spirit is, nor what it is to be lost in God; nor are they come yet to the taste
of the sweet Ambrosia which is in the in-most depth and bottom of the Soul,
where it keeps its Throne, and communicates it self with incredible, intimate
and delitious affluence: Nay, some there are which do even condemn this
mystical Science, because they neither do understand nor relish it.

178. The Divine who does not taste the sweetness of Contemplation, has no
other reason to be given for it, but because he enters not by the Gate; which
St Paul points to, when he says, Siquis inter ves videtur sapiens esse, stultus
fiat ut sit sapiens, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any one among ye seem to himself to be
wise, let him become a fool that he may be wise, let him show his humility by
reputing himself ignorant.

179. It Is a general Rule, and also a Maxim in Mystic Theology, That the
Practice ought to be gotten before the Theory. That there ought to be some
experimental Exercise of supernatural Contemplation, before the search of the
knowledge, and an inquiry after the full apprehension, of it.

180. Although the mystical Science does commonly belong to the humble and
simple, yet, notwithstanding that, men of Learning are not incapable of it, if
they do not seek themselves nor set any great value upon their own artificial
knowledge; but more, if they can forget it, as if they never had it, and only
make use of it ^n its own proper place and time, for preaching and dispucing
when their turn comes, and afterward give their minds to the simple and naked
Contemplation of God, without form, figure or consideration.

181. The Study, which is not ordered for God's glory only, is but a short way
to Hell; ^ot through the Study, but the wind of Pride, which begets it.
Miserable is the greatest part of Men at this time, whose only Study is to
satisfy the unsatisfiable curiosity of Nature.

182. Many seek God and find him not; because they are more moved by curiosity
than sin^ere pure and upright intention: they rather desire Spiritual Comforts
than God himself; and ^s they seek him not with truth, they neither find God
nor Spiritual Pleasures.

183. He that does not endeavor the total de^ying of himself, will not be
truly abstracted; and so can never be capable of the truth and the ^^ght of the
Spirit. To go toward the mistical Science, a man must never meddle with things
which are without, but with prudence, and in that which his Office calls him
to. Rare are the men who set a higher price upon hearing than speaking: But the
wise and purely mystical Man, never speaks but when he cannot help ^t; nor does
he concern himself in any thing, but what belongs to his Office, and then he
carries himself with great prudence.

184. The Spirit of Divine Wisdom fills men with sweetness, governs 'em with
courage and inlightens those with excellence who are subject to its direction.
Where the Divine Spirit dwells, there is always simplicity and a holy liberty.
But craft and double-mindedness, fiction, artifices, policy, and wordly
respects, are Hell it self, to wise and sincere men.

185. Know, that he who would attain to the mystical Sceince, must be denied
and taken off from Five things: First, From the Creatures. 2dly, From Temporal
things. 3dly, From the very Gifts of the Holy Ghost. 4ly, From himself. 5ly, He
must be lost in God. This last is the compleatest of all; because that Soul
only, that knows how to be so taken off, is that which attains to being lost
in God, and only knows where to be in safety.

186. God is more satisfied with the affection of the Heart, than that of
worldly Science. It Is one thing to cleanse the Heart of all that which
captivates and pollutes it; and another thing to do a thousand things, though
good and holy, without minding that purity of Heart, which is the main of all
for attaining of Divine Wisdom.

187. Never will thou get to this Sovereign and Divine Wisdom, if thou have not
strength, when God cleanses thee in his own time, not only of thy adherencies
to temporal and natural Blessings, but further, to supernatural and sublime
ones, such as internal Communications, Ecstasies, Raptures, and other gratuitous
Graces, whereon the Soul rests and entertains it self.

188. Many Souls come short of arriving to quiet Contemplation, to Divine
Wisdom, and true Knowledge, notwithstanding that they spend many hours in
Prayer, and receive the Sacrament every day; because they do not subject and
submit themselves wholly and entirely to Him that has Light, nor deny and
conquer themselves, nor give up themselves totally to God, with a perfect
devesting and disinteresting of themselves: In a word, till the Soul be
purified in the Fire of inward Pain, it will never get to a State of
Renovation, of Transformation, of perfect Contemplation, of Divine Wisdom, and
affective Union.

CHAP. XIX. Of true and perfect Annihilation.
189. THou must know that all this fabric of Annihilation has its foundation
but in two Principles. The first is, To keep ones self and all wordly things in
a low esteem and value; from whence the putting in practice of this
Self-devesting, and of Self-renunciation, and forsaking all created things,
must have its rise, and that with the affection, and in deed.

190. The second Principle must be a great esteem of God, to love, adore, and
follow him without the least interest of ones own, let it be never so holy.
From these two Principles will arise a full conformity to the Divine Will. This
powerful and practical conformity to the Divine Will in all things, leads the
Soul to Annihilation and Transformation with God, without the mixture of
Raptures, or external Ecstasies, or vehement Affections: This way being liable
to many illusions, with the danger of weakness and anguish of the
understanding, by which path there is seldom any that gets up to the top of
Perfection, which is acquired by the other safe, firm and real way, though not
without a weighty Cross; because therein the Highway of Annihilation and
Perfection is founded; which is seconded by many gifts of Light and Divine
effects, and infinite other Graces, Gratis datae: yet the Soul that is
Annihilated must be uncloathed of it all, if it would not have 'em be a
hindrance to it in its way to Deification.

191. As the Soul makes continual progress from its own meanness, it ought to
walk on to the practice of Annihilation, which consists in the abhorring of
Honor, Dignity, and Praise; there being no reason that Dignity and Honor
should be given to Vileness, and a mere Nothing.

192. To the Soul that is sensible of its own Vileness, it appears an
impossible thing to deserve any thing; it is rather confounded and knows it self
unworthy of Virtue and Praise: it embraces with equal courage all occasions of
Contempt, Persecution, Infamy, Shame, and Affront; and as truly deserving of
such reproaches, it renders the Lord thanks, when it lights upon such
occasions, to be treated as it deserves; and knows it self also unworthy, that
he should use his justice upon it; but above all, it is glad of contempt and
affront, because its God gets great glory by it.

193. Such a Soul as this always chooses the lowest, the vilest, and the most
despised degree, as well of place, as of clothing, and of all other things,
without the least affectation of singularity; being of the opinion, that the
greatest Vileness is beyond its deserts, and acknowledging it self also
unworthy even of this. This is the practice that brings the Soul to a true
Annihilation of it self.

194. The Soul that would be perfect, begins to Mortify its Passions; and when
it is advanced in that Exercise, it denis it self; then, with the Divine Aid, it
passes to the state of Nothing, where it despises, abhors, and plunges it self
upon the knowledge that it is Nothing, that it can do nothing, and that it is
worth nothing: From hence springs the dying in it self, and in its senses, in
many ways, and at all hours; and finally, from this spiritual Death the true
and perfect Annihilation derives its original; insomuch, that when the Soul is
once dead to its will and understanding, it is properly said to be arrived at
the perfect and happy state of Annihilation, which is the last disposition for
Transformation and Union, which the Soul it self does not understand, because
'twould not be Annihilated if it should come to know it: And although it de get
to this happy state of Annihilation, yet it must know, that it must walk still
on, and must be further and further Purified and Annihilated. [Here is most
delicious Nonsense, and a very curious Bull.]

195. You must know, that this annihilation, to make it perfect in the Soul,
must be in a man's own judgment, in his will, in his works, inclinations,
desires, thoughts, and in it self: so that the Soul must find it self dead to
its will, desire, endeavor, understanding, and thought; willing, as if it did
not will; desiring, as if it did not desire; understanding, as if it did not
understand; thinking, as if it did not think, without inclining to any thing;
embracing equally contempts and honors, benefits and corrections. O what a
happy Soul is that which is thus dead and Annihilated! It lives no longer in it
self; because God lives in it: And now it may most truly be said of it, that it
is a renewed Phaenix; because it is Changed, Spiritualized, Transformed, and
Deified.

CHAP. XX. In which is showed how this Nothing is the ready way to obtain
purity of Soul, perfect Contemplation, and the rich Treasure of Peace Internal.
196. THe way to attain that high state of a Mind reformed, whereby a man
immediately gets to the greatest good, to our first original, and to the
highest peace, is his Nothingness: Endeavor, O Soul, to be always buried in
that misery. This nothing, and this acknowledged misery, is the means by which
the Lord works wonders in thy Soul. Cloth thy self with this nothing, and with
this misery, and see that this misery and this nothing be thy continual food
and habitation, even to the casting down thy self low therein; and then I
assure thee, that thou being in that manner, the Nothing, the Lord will be the
Whole in thy Soul.

197. Why, think thou, do infinite Souls hinder the abundant current of the
Divine gifts? It Is only because they would be doing something, and have a
desire to be great: all this is to come away from Internal Humility, and from
their own Nothing; and therefore they prevent those wonders which that infinite
goodness would work in 'em: They betake themselves to the very gifts of the
Spirit, and there they stick, that they may come out from the Center of
Nothing, and so the whole Work is spoiled. They seek not God with truth, and
therefore they find him not: For know thou must, that there is no finding of
Him, but in the undervaluing of our own selves, and in nothing.

198. We seek our selves, every time we get out of our Nothing; and therefore
we never get to quiet and perfect Contemplation. Creep in as far as ever thou
can into the truth of thy Nothing, and then nothing will disquiet thee: Nay,
thou will be humble and ashamed, losing openly thy own reputation and esteem.

199. O what a strong Bulwark will thou find of that Nothing! who can ever
afflict thee, if once thou do retire into that Fortress? Because the Soul
which is despised by it self, and in its own knowledge is Nothing, is not
capable of receiving Grievance or Injury from any Body. The Soul which keeps
within its Nothing, is internally Silent, lives resigned in any torment
whatsoever, by thinking it less than what it does deserve: It shuns the
suspicion of a Neighbor, never looks at other folks faults, but its own is
free from abundance of Imperfections, and becomes Commander of great Virtue.
Whilst the Soul keeps still and quiet in its nothing, it perfects it, it
enriches it, the Lord draws his own Image and likeness in it, without any thing
to hinder it.

200. By the way of Nothing thou must come to lose thy self in God, (which is
the last degree of perfection) and happy will thou be, if thou can so lose
thy self; then thou will get thy self again, and find thy self most certainly.
In this same shop of Nothing, Simplicity is made; interior and infused
recollection is possessed; quiet is obtained, and the heart is cleansed from
all manner of imperfection. O what a Treasure will thou find, if thou shall
once fix thy habitation in Nothing! and if thou once gettest but snugg into the
center of Nothing, thou will never concern thy self with any thing that is
without, (the great ugly large step that so many thousand Souls do stumble at)
unless it be as thy office may call thee to it.

201. If thou do but get shut up in Nothing, (where the blows of adversity
can never come) nothing will vex thee or break thy peace: This is the way of
getting to the command of thy self: because perfect and true dominion does only
govern in Nothing: with the Helmet of Nothing thou will be too hard for strong
temptations and the terrible suggestions of the envious Enemy. [I defy all the
Quakers in England to match this incomparable piece of Nonsense and
Enthusiastic Cant.]

202. Knowing that thou art nothing, that thou can do nothing and art worth
just nothing, thou will quietly embrace passive drynesses; thou will endure
horrible desolations; thou will undergo spiritual martyrdoms and inward
torments. By means of this Nothing thou must die in thy self, many ways, at all
times, and all hours.

203. Who must awaken the Soul out of that sweet and pleasant sleep, if once it
comes to take a nap in Nothing? This is the way that David got to perfect
annihilation, without so much as knowing it. Ad nihilum redactus sum and
nescivi, Psalm. 17. Keeping thy self in nothing, thou will bar the door against
every thing that is not God; thou will retire also from thine own self and walk
toward that internal solitude, where the divine Spouse speaks in the heart of
his Bride, teaching her high and divine wisdom. Drown thy self in this Nothing,
and there shall thou find a holy Sanctuary against any Tempest whatsoever.

204. By this way must thou return to the happy state of Innocence forfeited by
our first parents. By this gate thou must enter into the happy land of the
living, where thou will find the greatest good, the breadth of charity, the
beauty of righteousness, the straight line of Equity and Justice, and, in sum
every jot and tittle of Perfection. Lastly, do not look at nothing, desire
nothing, will nothing, nor endeavor nothing, and then in every thing thy Soul
will live reposed, with quiet and enjoyment.

205. This is the way to get purity of Soul, perfect contemplation and peace
internal: walk therefore in this safe path and endeavor to overwhelm thy self
in this Nothing, endeavor to lose thy self, to sink deep into it, if thou have
a mind to be annihilated, united and transformed.

CHAP. XXI. Of the high Felicity of internal Peace, and the wonderful Effects
of it.
206. THe Soul being once annihilated and renewed with perfect nakedness, finds
in its superior part a profound peace, and a sweet rest, which brings it to
such a perfect union of love, that it is joyful all over. And such a Soul as
this, is already arrived to such a happiness, that it neither wills nor desires
any thing but what its Beloved wills; it conforms it self to this Will in all
emergencies, as well of comfort as anguish, and rejoices also in every thing to
do the Divine Good pleasure.

207. There is nothing but what comforts it; nor does it want any thing, but
what it can well want: To dye, is enjoyment to it; and to live, is its joy. It
is as contented here upon Earth as it can be in Paradise; it is as glad under
privation, as it can be in possession; in sickness as it can be in health;
because it knows that this is the will of its Lord. This is its life, this its
glory, its paradise, its peace, its repose, its rest, its consolation and
highest happiness.

208. If it were necessary to such a Soul as this, which is gotten up by the
steps of annihilation to the region of peace, to make its choice, it would
choose desolation before comfort; contempt before honor; because the loving
Jesus made great esteem of reproach and pain: if it first endured the hunger of
the blessings of Heaven, if it thirsted for God, if it had the fear of losing
him; the lamentation of heart, and the fighting of the devil; now things are
altered and hunger is turned into satisfying, the thirst into satiety, the fear
into assurance, the sadness into joy, the weeping into merriment, and the
fierce fighting into the greatest peace. O happy Soul, that enjoys here on
earth so great a felicity! Thou must know, that these kind of Souls (though few
they are) be the strong Pillars which support the Church, and such as abate the
divine indignation.

209. And now this Soul that is entered into the heaven of peace, acknowledges
it self full of God and his supernatural gifts, because it lives grounded in a
pure love, receiving equal pleasure in light and darkness, in night and day, in
affliction and consolation. Through this holy and heavenly indifference, it
never loses its peace in adversity, nor its tranquillity in tribulations, but
sees it self full of unspeakable enjoyments.

210. And although the Prince of Darkness makes all the assaults of Hell
against it, with horrible temptations, yet it makes head against 'em, and
stands like a strong Pillar; no more happening to it by 'em, than happens to a
high mountain and a deep valley in the time of storm and tempest.

211. The valley is darkened with thick clouds, fierce tempests of hail,
thunder, lightning and hailstones, which looks like the picture of Hell: at
the same time the lofty mountain glitters by the bright beams of the sun, in
quietness and serenity, continuing clear, like heaven, immovable and full of
light.

212. The same happens to this blessed soul: the valley of the part below is
suffering tribulations combats, darkness, desolations, torments, martyrdoms and
suggestions; and at the same time, on the lofty mountain of the higher part of
the soul, the true sun casts its beams; it enflames and enlightens it; and so
it becomes clear, peaceable, resplendent, quiet, serene, being a mere ocean of
joy.

213. So great therefore is the quiet of this pure foul, which is gotten up the
mountain of tranquillity, so great is the peace of its spirit, so great the
serenity and cheerfulness that is within, that a remnant and glimmering of God
do redound even to the outside of it.

214. Because in the throne of quiet are manifest the perfections of spiritual
beauty; here the true light of the secret and divine mysteries of our holy
faith, here perfect humility, even to the annihilation of it self, the amplest
resignation, chastity, poverty of spirit, the sincerity and innocence of the
Dove, external modesty, silence and internal solitude, liberty and purity of
heart; here the forgetfulness of every created thing, even of it self, joyful
simplicity, heavenly indifference, continual Prayer, a total nakedness, perfect
disinterestedness, a most wise contemplation, a conversation of heaven; and
lastly, the most perfect and serene peace within, of which this happy soul may
say what the wise man said of wisdom, that all other graces came along in
company with her. Venerunt mihi omnia bona paritur cum illa, Wisd. 7.11.

215. This is the rich and hidden treasure, this the lost groat of the Gospel;
this is the blessed life, the happy life, the true life, and the blessedness
here below. O thou lovely greatness that passest the knowledge of the sons of
men! O excellent supernatural life, how admirable and unspeakable art thou, for
thou art the very draught of blessedness! O how much do thou raise a soul
from earth, which loses in its view all things of the vileness of earth! thou
art poor, to look upon; but inwardly thou art full of wealth: thou seem low,
but art exceeding high; in a word, thou art that which make men live a life
divine here below. Give me, O Lord, thou greatest goodness, give me a good
portion of this heavenly happiness and true peace, that the World, sensual as
it is, is neither capable of understanding nor receiving. Quem mundus non
potest accipere.

CHAP. XXII. A mournful Exclamation and lamentable Moan to God for the small
Company of Souls that arrive at Perfection, the Loving Union and the Divine
Transformation.
216. O Divine Majesty, in whose presence the Pillars of Heaven do quake and
tremble! O thou Goodness, more than infinite, in whose love the Seraphins burn!
give me leave, O Lord, to lament our blindness and ingratitude. We all live in
mistakes, seeking the foolish world and forsaking thee, who art our God. We all
forsake thee, the Fountain of Living Waters, for the stinking dirt of the world.

217. O we children of men, how long shall we follow after lying and vanity?
Who is it that has thus deceived us, that we should forsake God our greatest
good? Who is it that speaks the most truth to us? Who is it that loves us most?
Who defends us most? Who is it that does more to show himself a Friend, who
more tender to show himself a Spouse, and more good to be a Father? that our
blindness should be so great that we should all forsake this greatest and
infinite goodness.

218. O Divine Lord! what a few Souls are there in the world, which do serve
thee with perfection! how small is the number of those, who are willing to
suffer, that they may follow Christ crucified, that they may embrace the Cross,
that they may deny and contemn themselves! O what a scarcity of Souls is there,
which are disinterested and totally naked! how few are those Souls which are
dead to themselves and alive to God, which are totally resigned to his divine
good pleasure! how few those, who are adorned with simple obedience, profound
knowledge of themselves and true humility! How few those, which with an entire
indifference give up themselves into the hands of God, to do what he pleases
with 'em! how few are there of those pure Souls which be of a simple and
disinterested heart, and which, putting off their own understanding, knowledge,
desire and will, do long for self-denial and spiritual death! O what a scarcity
of Souls is there which are willing to let the Divine Creator work in 'em a
mind to suffer, that they may not suffer, and to die, that they may not die!
How few are the Souls which are willing to forget themselves, to free their
hearts from their own affections, their own desires, their own satisfactions,
their own love and judgments! that are willing to be lead by the highway of
self-denial and the internal way! that are willing to be annihilated, dying to
themselves and their senses! that are willing to let themselves be emptied,
purified and uncloathed, that God may fill and cloth and perfect 'em! In a
word, how small, O Lord, is the number of those Souls which are blind, deaf and
dumb and perfectly contemplative!

219. O the shame of us the Children of Adam! who, for a thing of mere
vileness, do despise true felicity and hinder our greatest good, the rich
treasure and infinite goodness! Great reason has Heaven to lament, that there
are so few Souls to follow its precious pathway. Viae Sion lugent, eo quod non
sint qui veniant ad solemnitatem, Lam. 1.4.

I submit every thing, with humble Prostration, to the Correction of the Holy
Roman Catholic Church.
THE CONTENTS.
First Advertisement. BY two Ways one may go to God; the first by Meditation
and Discourse, or Reasoning; the second by pure Faith and Contemplation. Second
Advertisement. Declaring what Meditation and Contemplation are, and the
difference that is betwixt them. Third Advertisement. What is the difference
betwixt the Acquired and Active Contemplation, and the Infused and Passive;
with the Signs whereby it is known, when God will have the Soul to pass from
Meditation to Contemplation. Fourth Advertisement. The Burden of this Book
consisting in Rooting out the Rebellion of our Own Will, that we may attain to
Internal Peace.
FIRST BOOK. Of the Darkness, Dryness, and Temptations wherewith God purges
Souls, and of Internal Recollection.
CHap. 1. To the end God may rest in the Soul, the Heart is always to be kept
peaceable in whatsoever Disquiet, Temptation, and Tribulation, Page 1. Chap. 2.
Though the Soul perceive it self deprived of Discourse, or Ratiocination, yet
it ought to persevere in Prayer, and not to be afflicted, because that is its
greater felicity, Page 4 Chap. 3. A Sequel of the same Matter, Page 8 Chap. 4.
The Soul is not to afflict it self, nor intermit Prayer, because it sees it
self encompassed with dryness, Page 12 Chap. 5. Treating of the same thing,
declaring how many ways of Devotion there are, and how the sensible Devotion is
to be disposed; and that the Soul is not idle, though it reason not, Page 16
Chap. 6. The Soul is not to be disquieted, that it sees it self encompassed
with darkness, because that is an instrument of its greater felicity, Page 19
Chap. 7. To the end the Soul may attain to the supreme internal Peace, it is
necessary, that God purge it after his way, because the Exercises and
Mortifications that of it self it sets about, are not sufficient, Page 21 Chap.
8. A Sequel of the same, Page 23 Chap. 9. The Soul ought not to be disquieted,
nor draw back in the Spiritual Way, because it finds it self assaulted by
Temptations, Page 25 Chap. 10. Wherein the same Point is handled, Page 28 Chap.
11. Declaring the Nature of Internal Recollection, and instructing the Soul how
it ought to behave it self therein, and in the Spiritual Warfare, whereby the
Devil endeavors to disturb it at that time, Page 30 Chap. 12. A Sequel of the
same Matter, Page 35 Chap. 13. What that the Soul ought to do in Internal
Recollection, Page 38 Chap. 14. Declaring, how the Soul putting it self in the
presence of God, with perfect Resignation, by the pure act of Faith, walks
always in virtual and acquired Contemplation, Page 44 Chap. 15. A Sequel of the
same Matter, Page 47 Chap. 16. A Way by which one may enter into Internal
Recollection, through the most holy Humanity of our Lord Christ, Page 52 Chap.
17. Of Internal and Mystical Silence, Page 56
THE SECOND BOOK. Of the Ghostly Father, the Obedience that is due to him; of
Indiscreet Zeal; and of Internal and External Penance.
CHap. 1. The best Way to baffle the Craft of the Enemy, is to be subject to a
ghostly Father, Page 60 Chap. 2. A Sequel of the same Matter, Page 64 Chap. 3.
The indiscreet Zeal of Souls, and the disordinate Love of our Neighbors
disturb Internal Peace, Page 67 Chap. 4. A Sequel of the same, Page 70 Chap. 5.
Light, Experience, and a Divine Call, are necessary for guiding Souls in the
Inward Way, Page 72 Chap. 6. Instructions and Counsels to Confessors, and
Spiritual Directors, Page 74 Chap. 7. Wherein the same thing is treated of;
discoursing the Interest which some Confessors and Spiritual Directors use to
have; in which are declared the Qualities which they ought to have for the
Exercise of Confession, and also for the guiding of Souls through the Mystical
Way, Page 79 Chap. 8. Pursues the same Matter, Page 83 Chap. 9. Showing how a
simple and ready Obedience is the only means for walking safely in this Inward
Way, and of procuring Internal Peace, Page 86 Chap. 10. Pursues the same, Page
89 Chap. 11. When, and in what things this Obedience does most concern the
Interior Soul, Page 92 Chap. 12. Treats of the same, Page 95 Chap. 13. Frequent
Communion is an effectual Means of getting all Virtues, and, in particular,
Internal Peace, Page 99 Chap. 14. Pursues the same Matter, Page 101 Chap. 15.
Declaring when Spiritual and Corporal Penances ought to be used, and how
hurtful they are, when they are done indiscreetly, according to ones own
judgment and opinion, Page 104 Chap. 16. The great difference between External
and Internal Penances, Page 107 Chap. 17. How the Soul is to carry it self in
the faults it does commit, that it may not be disquieted thereby, but reap good
out of it, Page 110 Chap. 18. Treats of the same Matter, Page 112
THE THIRD BOOK. Of Spiritual Martyrdoms, whereby God purges Souls; of
Contemplation Infused and Passive; of Perfect Resignation, Inward Humility,
Divine Wisdom, True Annihilation, and Internal Peace.
CHap. 1. The difference between the Outward and Inward Man, Page 115 Chap. 2.
Pursues the same, Page 119 Chap. 3. The Means of obtaining Peace Internal, is
not the delight of Sense nor Spiritual Consolation, but the denying of
Self-love, Page 121 Chap. 4. Of two Spiritual Martyrdoms, wherewith God
cleanses the Soul, that he unites with himself, Page 125 Chap. 5. How
important and necessary it is, to the Interior Soul, to suffer blindfold this
first and Spiritual Martyrdom, Page 130 Chap. 6. Of Divine Love, Page 135 Chap.
7. Inward Mortification and Perfect Resignation are necessary for obtaining
Internal Peace, Page 137 Chap. 8. Pursues the same Matter, Page 142 Chap. 9.
For the obtaining Internal Peace, it is necessary for the Soul to know its
misery, Page 147 Chap. 10. In which is showed and discovered what is the false
Humility, and what is the true, with the effects of 'em, Page 148 Chap. 11.
Maxims to know a simple, humble, and true heart, Page 152 Chap. 12. Inward
Solitude is that which chiefly brings a Man to the purchase of Internal Peace,
Page 155 Chap. 13. In which is showed what Infused and Passive Contemplation
is, and its wonderful Effects. Page 158 Chap. 14. Pursues the same Matter, Page
160 Chap. 15. Of the two Means, whereby the Soul ascends up to Infused
Contemplation, with the Explication of what and how many the steps of it are,
Page 163 Chap. 16. Signs to know the Inner Man, and the Mind that is purged,
Page 166 Chap. 17. Of Divine Wisdom, Page 169 Chap. 18. Treating of the same,
Page 173 Chap. 19. Of True and Perfect Annihilation, Page 177 Chap. 20. In
which is showed how this Nothing is the ready way to obtain purity of Soul,
perfect Contemplation, and the rich Treasure of Peace Internal, Page 181 Chap.
21. Of the high felicity of Internal Peace, and the wonderful Effects of it,
Page 185 Chap. 22. A Mournful Exclamation and Lamentable Moan to God for the
small Company of Souls that arrive at Perfection, the Loving Union and the
Divine Transformation, Page 189
FINIS.
A BRIEF TREATISE CONCERNING Daily Communion.

DIVIDED Into Three Chapters.

Composed in SPANISH By Dr Michael de Molinos Priest, And Translated into
ITALIAN And Published by another Devout Priest.

ENGLISHED From the COPY Printed at Venice in 1685.

Printed in the Year, M DC LXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Treatise was approved of at Rome by Friar Peter Damian, a
Discalceate Carmelite, Visitor General and Reader of Theology in the Convent of
S. Mary della Scala, in the Year 1675, when the foregoing Book was so highly
applauded and set out with so many Formallities: And after him, Nicholas
Martinez, a Jesuit, Chief Reader of Theology in the Roman College, (which is
one of the eminentest Offices in one of the most eminent Houses of Education in
the whole City) comes to set his Approbation to it: And then, after these two,
our old Friend, that we were beholden to before, Friar Dominick of the most
Holy Trinity, Qualifier of the Holy Office in Rome, etc. he tells us, that
forasmuch as he found nothing in it contrary to Faith or good Manners, or
repugnant to the Reverence due to the Sacrament, etc. he takes it to be worthy
to be Printed for diverse and sundry reasons. So that though it met not with
those Acclamations which the former Book did, (the reasons whereof you will
presently smell out, when you read it) yet these three Testimonies (besides the
pains that that devout Priest (as he calls himself) took to get it out of
Spanish into Italian) were enough to give it Credit and Authority in the World:
And as it came tack't to the other Book so 'twas pity to make it part Company.

But whilst these Reverend Gentlemen have been so kind to help it into the
World, and speak such good things of it, it is plain that they either wink't at,
or did not know one gross Contradiction that it makes to the foregoing Book;
and that is this: That this Mich. Molinos does lay it down as a Prineiple, in
his Spiritual Guide, That the Penitent ought to resign up his Will, his
Judgment, his Knowledge, his Choice to the determination of his Spiritual
Director. And produces Examples for it, and tells him, that he must be led
blindfold by his Confessor, though he should put him upon never so useless and
nonsensical Penance and Mortification, as planting Lettice with the Roots
upwards, etc, (a specimen of which sort of asinvne and und sputing Obedience is
to be seen pressed by the Founder of the Jesuitical Order, in his Epistle to
the Brethren of his Society, Reg. Soc. Jesu, Cap. 18. wherein he instances in
Abbot John, that watered a withered Tree for a whole Year together: (Which did
him as much good as if he had tied a Whiting to his Girdle.) And, at his
Superiour's command, tried to move a vast Stone which was beyond the strength
of many men together to do; (which he had no more reason to do, than to knock
his Head against it). And the reason that is given for this sort of affected
and foolish Humility, forsooth, must be because the Father Confessor is in
God's place, and whatever he enjoins his Penitent, must be done by an absolute
and unlimited Obedience, without asking, why or wherefore, or entering into any
thoughts of the reasonableness or unreasonableness, convenience or
inconvenience, good or hurt of such a ranting sort of Discipline: And what fine
work may there be sometimes done, when a silly Priest meets with a Penitent
that is as wise as himself? But if the business be really thus, then what is the
reason that this Author does so often in this Treatise, fly in the face of the
Ministers, (who, in his sense, are these Confessors) and tax them with I know
not what, and make most lamentable outcries against 'em for hindering their
Penitents from Daily Communion? This is going backward and forward, saying and
unsaying again: For if the Confessor have a power of disposing of his
Penitent's (I was going to say Client's) Will, etc. as he pleases, and an
unaccountable Empire and Government over him; I would fain see how he can
advise him amiss? And why should all this noise be made against these Ministers
who are made Judges of the disposition of their People, whom they Shrine, and
therefore are presumed to do no more than what there is reason for, in hindering
'em from Daily Communion?

If the foregoing Book were first Penned by the Author, then he either
retracted his judgment, in this Treatise, or else forgot himself, (which he
presses often as a Duty of Religion.) If this Treatise was Penned first, then
the Author was willing to give Confessors more scope and power in [his
Spiritual Guide] than he thought fit to allow 'em in his [Daily Communion.]
However the matter was, there is a filthy Mistake some where or other; to press
blind Obedience to Confessors in one Book, and yet bawl at 'em for requiring it
in another. The least that can be said of it, is, that it is an argument of an
inconstant or forgetful Head. And I leave it to him to make it out, or to any
body else that has a mind to clear the point. The Treatise it self is like
other Popish Treatises upon that Subject; only it is a question, whether the
Author be so far Annihilated yet (as his word is) as to believe
Transubstantiation so stoutly as others of that Communion would make us believe
they do. He has been mightily conversant in Modern Casuists and Schoolmen, and
that makes him so ill a Divine, as to tell us of receiving good by the
Sacrament ex opere operate; i. e. Never minding what is done, but only the
doing the bare action of it. I could not for^^^^ showing a mark of dislike,
when I found him qu^^^ing two such bouncing Authorities out of St Austine and
St. Jerome for delivering Souls out of Purgatory by the efficacy of Mass. I
confess they are very pregnant for his purpose, if he can but show us those
Words in the true Writings of those two Fathers: but to send us to the Man in
the Moon to know further, this is not fair nor Scholar-like. If any man else
will undertake to show us those Words in the undoubted and unforg'd Works of
St. Austine and St. Jerome, he will make me (for my part) in that point

A Quietist.

THE AUTHOR'S Advertisement.
IT IS none of my intention to Difcourse in this Subject by the way of Humane
Respects or Passion, nor to defend hard Controversies, nor promote my own
Opinions; and though I have Written this short Treatise at the continual
engagements and instances of Zealous Persons, yet God's greater Glory, and the
Spiritual advantage of Souls, have been my only desire: Nor is it any less my
design, that by this Treatise and these Reasons, the Faithful should govern
themselves in the business of frequent Communion, without the Prudent and Holy
Counsel of their Spiritual Fathers; because I always look upon it more fitting
to obey their Orders, though it should hinder the Communion, than to
communicate every day according to their own Sense and Judgment. This
Compendium of the Reasons and Authorities of Councils, Saints, and Doctors, is
only drawn up a-purpose, that Confessors may see the small reason there is to
hinder those Souls from taking the Communion, which desire it, receive good by
it, and are obedient to their Directions.

A Short TREATISE Concerning Daily Communion.
CHAP. I. No Minister ought to keep a faithful Person from the Communion, that
does desire and ask it, whilst he does not know his Conscience defiled with
mortal Sin.
THE Council of Trent, treating of the Preparation which Priests and Laymen
ought to make for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Eucharist, has these
following words, ( Sess. 13. Cap. 17.) The Custom of the Church makes it clear,
that Examination and Proof is necessary in order to the Communion; that no man,
knowing himself guilty of mortal Sin, though he may seem Contrite to himself,
come to the Sacrament, unless he have before been at Sacramental Confession.
Which comprehends all Christians, and even Priests, who are bound by their
Office to Celebrate it: from whence it is clearly to be inferred, that the
Council makes no other disposition necessary for the Communicating of Laymen,
and the Priest's saying Mass, than not to have any mortal Sin. Why then should
the Ministers be a hindrance to those which have that disposition?

The Ministers will not say that their Authority is greater than that of the
Council; nor that they are more Learned than all those Fathers of the Church
that came to it; nor will they say, less, that they have a greater light from
God, than that which he then communicated to his Spouse, the Church: Therefore
the Ministers ought not to require a greater disposition, than being without
mortal Sin, whilst the Council requires no more.

Either the Ministers and Priests, which say Mass daily, have this Holiness and
Perfection themselves, which they require in Laymen, or else they have it not:
they will not say they have it, because it would then be pride in 'em: If they
have it not, and yet Celebrate Mass every day, why do they require it from
Laymen, in order to the granting 'em the Communion daily? It Is good to advise
'em to this Perfection, but if they should not have it, it will not be
reasonable to deprive 'em of so great a good, because they may have reason to
fear that Christ our Lord may say to 'em as he did to the Pharisees, (St
Matthew 23.24.) That they bind heavy burdens upon men, and they themselves will
not touch 'em with one of their fingers: And that also is verified which David
said, ( Psalm 61.10.) That men are deceitful in the weight. Mendaces filii
hominum in stateris: Since they have one weight for themselves and another for
Laymen.

If the Council judges that not being in mortal Sin, is a worthy disposition
toward saying Mass daily, consecrating and offering Sacrifice, which is the
holiest Service, how much more worthy will such a disposition be for only the
receiving the Communion?

If Councils, the Church, Popes, Saints, and Doctors require no greater
disposition to receive fruit from this Sacrament, than not being in mortal Sin,
why must the Ministers require a greater?

The Council of Trent has the following words: (Sess. 28. Cap. 6.) Optaret
quidem Sancta Synodus ut in singulis missis fideles adstantes, non solum
spirituali affectu, sed Sacramentali etiam Eucharistiae perceptione
Communicarent, quo ad eos hujus sacrificii fructus uberior perveniret* That is,
the holy Council would look upon it as a very good thing that in every days
Mass, the Faithful, who assist at it, would be Communicated, not only
Spiritually and in their desires, but also Sacramentally, by receiving the Holy
Eucharist, that they might thus obtain the more abundant benefit by this most
Holy Sacrament. The Council therefore desires that the Faithful would
Communicate every day that they hear Mass, with the disposition of having no
mortal Sin, as it signified Sess. 13. Cap. 7. Will any Ministers say, that this
is not well; and so openly set themselves in opposition to the desires of the
Church?

The Congregation of the Council declared it an Error that any Bishops in a
Capriccio should limit and hinder Daily Communion from being taken by Merchants
and Housekeepers: The holy Rota reports it in the year 1587, (Barbos. in
Council. Trid. Sup. c. 22.) and after it had Decreed that all Laymen might be
communicated, even every day, though they should be Merchants and
Housekeepers, it adds the following words: -- Quapropter exhortandi sunt
fideles, ut sicut quotidie peccant, ita quotidie medicinam accipiant: That is,
wherefore the Faithful are to be exhorted, that as they Sin daily, so they
daily receive this Medicine of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And the same
Council of Trent says, (Sess. 13. c. 2. de Instit. Sanctiss. Sacr.) Qui
manducat me, ipse vivet propter me, and tanquam antidotum, quo liberemur a
culpis quotidianis and a peccatis mortalibus praeservemur: -- The Communion is
as an Antidote to free us from daily Sins, and preserve us from mortal Sins. If
the Council and its Decree speaks here, not of the Basils and Antonies, nor of
the Catharines and Clares, as some say it is required for 'em to be, but of
those that Sin daily; why should they be kept from the Medicine, that they may
not Sin?

The Council of Milan (3 de Euch.) and that of Cabilon (Cant. 46.) are of the
same mind.

The blessed Pius Quintus says, (Catech. Romans 2. p. c. 4.. 60.) The Curates are
bound to exhort the Faithful often, that as they hold it necessary to feed the
Body daily, so they hold it also necessary to feed the Soul as often with this
Sacrament: because the Children of Israel did eat Manna in the Wilderness
daily; and that Manna was the Figure of this sacred Food: And that sentence
[Thou sinnest every day, be communicated also every day] is not only St.
Augustine's, but the saying of all the Saints.

St. Ignatius, Bishop and Martyr, (Epist. ad Ephesians.) exhorts that we often come
and receive the Eucharist; because the frequency of it weakens the power of
Satan. The Council of Alexandria says, ( De Euch. c. 5.) That without this
frequency, it will be a hard matter to preserve Grace. St. John Chrysostom (In
Epist. S. Paul ad Tim.) says, It is no rashness for a Christian to come often
to the Sacrament: he that remembers not a great fault of himself, may come to
it every day.

Theophylact (In Prim. S. Paul ad Corinth. 11.) says, To know whether thou
may Communicate, be thou the Judge, and having examined thy self, thou
may do it, without staying for a Festival, unless thou find thy self
burdened with a great fault.

St. Cyprian (In Orat. Dom. Sermon. 6.) says, Let us ask this daily Bread, being
in no great fault, let us receive this Bread every day, which gives us Life
Eternal; and let us beg that our Bread, which is Christ our Lord, may be daily
given us, to keep us in his Grace: No small loss it is, to forbear
Communicating every day.

St. Hilary says, ( De Consecrat. did. 2. c. 51.) If thy Sins are not so
grievous as to deserve Excommunication, not being mortal, if they should be
mortal, after Confession, as Suarez expounds it, Disp. 60. Sess. 3.) never keep
off from the daily Medicine, which is the Body and Blood of the Lord.

St. Ambrose says, (5 de Sacram. c. 4.) Receive daily, that which is to help
thee daily: he that does not deserve to receive it every day, does not deserve
to receive it in a whole year: Sins are daily committed, and therefore this
Divine Bread is for every day. Thou offendest every day, wash thy self
therefore of thy Sin every day in the Fountain of Repentance; and if thou
come every day to this Divine Sacrament, thou will find wholesome Medicine,
and not the Poison of Judgment.

St. Jerome says, (In Apol. Cont. Jovin.) We should always receive the Holy
Eucharist, that we may be without mortal Sin: And in his time, which was the
Year 470, he says, the holy Custom of Communicating every day, continued in
Rome and in Spain.

St. Augustine says, (Tract. 26. in Johan.) If thou come without Sin, come
and welcome; it is Bread and not Poison.

Again, ( Ep. de verb. Dom. Ser. 28.) It Is better to Communicate for Devotion,
than let it alone for Reverence. And in another place, This is the daily Bread,
receive it daily, because it will daily do thee good, and thou may receive
it every day.

Some ascribe that sentence to the same Father, Quotidie Eucharistiae
Communionem percipere, nec laudo nec reprehendo. With which a Bishop reproved
S. Catharine of Siena, because she took the Sacrament every day: and the Saint
replied to him, How he durst reprove in her, that which St. Austine durst not
reprove? Bellarmine therefore ( De Script. Eccles. in the Year 420.) says that
this sentence is not St. Austine's, but Gennadius's of Marseilles; and so many
other Authors assure us.

St. Gregory ( De Conseor. d. 2. c. Quid sit Sanguis.) says, The Lord gave us
this Salutary Sacrament to pardon our daily Sins; let us receive it every day.

St. Bernard (In Sermon. de Caena Dom.) says, The wounded man seeks Medicine: we
are all of us wounded, when we have Sinned; our Medicine is the Divine
Sacrament: receive it daily and thou will recover daily.

St. Apollonius (In vitis Patrum, ejus vita.) advised his Monks to be
communicated every day, that they might be preserved in Grace.

St. Bonaventure, ( De Praecept. Relig. Process. 7. c. 21.) Though thou should
find thy self lukewarm, with little Fervor in thee, yet, trusting in the Mercy
of God, thou may safely come to the Communion: if thou think thy self
unworthy, (so that thou remembrest no mortal Sin of thine own) come; because
the weaker thou art, the greater need have thou of the Physician. Thou do
not receive Christ to sanctify Him, but that he may sanctify thee.

The Council of Alexandria ( Cap. 5. de Euchar.) says, Without this frequency,
it is hard to keep in Grace.

St. Antony of Florence ( Par. 3. lib. 14. cap. 12.. 5. and 6.) says, Those
that live well must be sure to be advised to receive this most holy Sacrament
frequently; because as long abstinence from bodily Food, weakens the Body, and
disposes it for Death, so the much abstaining from this spiritual Food, weakens
the Soul, spends the fervor, and by degrees inclines it to mortal Sin.

Pope Adrian ( In 4 Sent. Tract. de Euchar.) says, When once the preparation is
made according to Humane frailty, it is safer to receive than keep from the most
Holy Sacrament.

St. Thomas Aquinas (3 Par. quaest. 80. art. 10.) asks, If it be lawful to
Communicate every day? And answers with St. Austine, This is daily Bread:
receive it every day, that thou may every day be profited by it.

St. Isidore ( Lib. 3. de Eccles. Offic.) has this, Some say, that if there be
no Sin, the Communion ought to be taken daily; and they say well, if they
receive it with Veneration and Humility.

St. Anaclete, Pope, ( De Conscer. did. 1 and 2. ca. Peracta.) perceiving
Daily Communion grow into disuse, brought it up again, ordering, that after
Consecration all those that were present should be communicated, because this
Custom (as he says in a Decree of his) was established by the Apostles and kept
by the Roman Church: and those that did not communicate, were turned out of the
Church.

Innocent the Third ( in tract. Miss. lib. 4. cap. 44.) says, He may
communicate who has his conscience free from mortal sin, and is grieved for
that which is venial.

St. Athanasius, (1 ad Cor. probit autem) having examined thy Conscience,
always come to the Communion, without staying for a holy day.

Henriquez relates it, ( lib. 8. de Euchar. cap. 88. n. 2.) that St. Austin,
St. Ambrose, and St. Jerome, do commend those who communicate daily, without
sin. Those that the Confessor shall judge worthy of absolution, may be advised
by him to receive the Communion, though they fear an easy relaps. It Is not
necessary to make an experiment of frequent Communion from a man's good and
profit by it: because spiritual profit (which is insensible) is much less found
than corporal profit.

Thomas a Kempis ( lib. 4. de imit. Christi) says, If I am lukewarm when I do
communicate, what should I be, if I should not communicate? I would add, if I
am naughty when I do communicate, by not communicating I should offend the
whole world and damn my self.

The following Doctors defend Daily Communion with very strong reasons, which
for brevity sake are omitted.

Innocent the Third, tract. de Missa, lib. 4. cap. 44.

St. Athanasius, 1 Cor. 11. probit autem.

Henriquez, lib. 8. de Euchar. c. 88. n. 2.

Thomas a Kempis, lib. 4. de imit. Christi, cap. 3.

Alexander of Hales, 4 part. quaest. 51. art. 10.

Gerson, in opere tripart. cap. 19.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem, in 4 did. 12. quaest. 2.

John Celaya, in 4 sent. did. 12. q. 2.

Ranier of Pisa, 1 part. tract. Euchar. cap. 26.

Martin of Ledesma, p. 1. q. 4. art. 10.

Nider, in praecept. 3. cap. 12. n. 12.

Astensis, in sum. 2 par. lib. 4. tit. 27.

Father Salmeron, tom. 9. tract. 41.

Father Francis Suarez, tom. 3. disp. 63. sect. 3.

Durand. in 4 did. 12. qu. 5.

Victoria, in Sum. quaest. 76.

John of Friburg, Sum. lib. 3. de Euchar. tit. 24.

John Altestaing, lib. 4. cap. 5.

Gabriel Mayor, in sum. tract. 3. de Euch.

Raimond, in sum. tract. 3. de Euchar.

Peter de Soto, in 4 did. 22. qu. 1. art. 10.

Lewis Blois, dialog. Suson.

Stephen Boluser, lib. 4. did. 12. qu. 14.

Rosela, sum. tract. 3. de Euchar.

Father Christopher of Madrid, de frequent. Commun. cap. 1.

Reynalds, de prudent. Conf. c. 11.

Francis de Lavata, verb. Euchar. propos. 18.

Dionysius Carthusianus, de Euch. cap. 5.

John Mayor, in 4 did. 9. qu. 1.

Venantius Fortunatus, in Orat. Dominic.

Cardinal Hosias, de Cerem. fol. 371.

Bishop Perez, de Sacram. qu. 80. ar. 9.

Vivaldus, de Euch. n. 139.

Christopher Morenus, lib. Claridad de simples.

James Baius, de instit. relig. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 19.

The illuminate Father John Thaulerus, Sermon. 1. Dom. 7 post Trin.

Alphonse Rodriguez, 2 p. treat. 8. cap. 10.

Antony Molina, tract. 7. page 870.

Lewis Fandone, tract. de divin. Sacram. p. 2. cap. 11.

Father Joseph of St. Mary, tract. de Com.

Raimund Sebunde, dial. 7. cap. 17.

Maurus Antonius, de Euch. cap. 5.

Peter Marsilia, Memor. Compost. fol. 62.

Father Antony de Alvarado, in his Guide of Slaves, fol. 414.

Alphonse of Chinchilla, tract. Commun. document. 3.

Father Lewis of Granada, tract. 3. cap. 8. sect. 2.

Villalobos, 1 part. tract: 3. dif. 4. n. 3.

Almai, in 4 did. 26.

John Sanchez, did. 23. n. 13.

Palao, in 4 did. 31. disc. 2.

Basil, lib. 1 Matrim. cap. 12. n. 6.

Veracruz. 3 par. spec. art. 16.

Sa. de verb. Euchar. n. 12.

Henry Henriquez, in sum. lib. 8. de Euchar. cap. 48.

Ferrer, Art of knowing Jesus, 3 part, dial. 5.

Escobar, lib. 2. sess. 4. de notat. san.

Mendoza, par. 3. tract. de Sacr. instr. 32.

Cassian, in Vitis Patrum.

Medina, lib. 1. cap. 14.

Jerome Perez, in sum. Theolog.

Adrian, in 4 sent. tract. de Euchar.

Finally, the illuminate Thauler says, that to receive the most holy Sacrament
without mortal sin, as has been said, does more good than to hear a hundred
Masses, or a hundred Sermons: and so say many Authors, as Jerome Perez relates
(insum. Theolog. de Euch.) that he that does but once receive the most holy
Sacrament without mortal sin, gets more grace by it, than if he should go
thrice in Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem; and that never did any
body communicate, without obtaining particular Grace thereby, and a singular
degree of Charity which he had not before, though he were never so lukewarm and
dry.

A grave religious man adds this consideration, That if all the Charity should
be put together, which all men have had or shall have, which have been, are or
shall be, and the merits of 'em all, and the praises that have been given and
shall be given, and all the good works which have been done and shall be done,
and the torments of Martyrs, the Fastings, Disciplines, and Hair-cloaths of all
the Saints, Confessors, Patriarchs, Virgins and Prophets, with whatever else
that shall be done as long as the World indures; put it all together, and it
does not please God so much, as the receiving of this Divine Sacrament.

Others say, as the abovesaid Author relates, that if all the Quires of Angels,
all the Courtiers of Heaven, and the most holy Virgin (Mistress of 'em all, who
incomparably exceed 'em all) should meet together, it is not in their power to
do a more pleasing Sacrifice to God, nor a more acceptable Offering, than
Saying of Mass, or, when men communicate, to offer to his Majesty that Divine
Sacrament.

St. Cyril (in S. Johan. c. 37. and lib. 4. c. 17.) affirms, that the only
delaying of it never creates a better disposition to it; and it commonly
happens, that those who are slowest to come to the Communion, come less
prepared: and further, these following Reasons do make it evident. To
communicate worthily without mortal sin is good of it self; to forbear it, is
not so: To go often to the Sacrament is a product of Charity; to delay it,
comes from negligence or fear: better is the work of Charity than that of Fear.
He that communicates gets the better of him that lets it alone in the good he
receives by the Sacrament Ex opere operato: and at the most may easily be equal
to him, since the desire of communicating worthily, is no less good, than
keeping from it out of reverence. If it be sometimes good to abstain, it ought
to be for the obtaining or preserving the reverence and devotion of it: and for
this reason the frequency of the most holy Sacrament is not of less advantage,
since thereby the Soul gets cleansed of those evil habits and affections and
natural imperfections that we have.

If the Scripture therefore in many places, if the Apostles, Councils, Popes,
all the Saints and Doctors do advise us to daily communion, without limitation
or laxing, and if there be no Law divine or humane to forbid it to him that has
no mortal sin to hinder him, what is the reason that the Ministers should
forbid or limit that which neither Christ nor the Church nor any Law does
limit? 'Twill be prudence therefore not to oppose the Sayings of Doctors,
Saints, Popes and Councils, to get free from the punishment given to many
Ministers for forbidding of it.

Father Bernardino of Villegas, in the Life of St. Lutgard, chap. 25. says,
that among other persons that thought ill of the frequent communion of that
Saint, the Abbess was one, who being led by an indiscreet zeal, ordered her not
to communicate so often: to whom the humble Virgin returned this Answer, with
great reverence, That she was ready and prepared to obey her order with
content, but she knew for certain, that this disfavour she did her would
displease Jesus Christ, and that in the punishment which would follow, she
would quickly understand how ill she did, in depriving her of the Communion.
The Saint obeyed, and in recompense of her obedience, it seems, the Lord making
good the Voice of her Prophecy, sent the Abbess a great fit of sickness, which
afflicted her much with continual and sharp pains, till acknowledging her
fault, and that this chastisement befell her for her indiscreet zeal used to the
Saint, she sent for her and gave her leave to follow her holy custom, and so
the fault ending, the punishment ended also, and the disease which had brought
her to a very sad condition. Other persons also who in like manner used to keep
a pother with the Saint about her often Communions, repenting of what they had
done, asked her pardon. And other of their accomplices in their prate and
gossippings, because they never laid to heart what they had said of her, were
punished of God with a sudden death.

In the third Book of St. Gertrudes Life, chap. 23. it is told, that a certain
Preacher or Confessor, being a little warmed with the zeal of God's Honor,
took a pet at some religious Women, thinking that they were often communicated:
At this the Saint made a Prayer, and asked the Lord, Whether this were
acceptable to him, or no? The Lord made her this answer; It being my delight to
be with the children of men, and I having, of infinite love, left this
Sacrament to be often received in remembrance of me, and being in it to the
faithful to the World's end, whosoever shall, with words or other ways of
persuasion, to go about to hinder any from taking it, who are free from mortal
sin, does in a certain manner hinder me, and rob me of my pleasure and delight,
which I might have with 'em. Some Ministers there are who have had a mind to
restrain this matter too much; as if the Sacrament were not instituted for
Laymen, or as if they had no right to ask it as often as they are disposed to
receive it. O, as if Christ our Lord had instituted it with a limitation or
precept, that it should not be taken but by such and such men, and on such and
such days.

Expert Teachers do strangely wonder to see the scruple and cautiousness, with
which some Confessors speak about this matter, as if the Communion were a very
dangerous thing for Souls, or through the too much frequenting of it, the
Honor of God or the Virtue of the Sacraments must needs be lost or lessened:
whereas the frequency of it is the very remedy and health of Souls and the work
in which there is the greatest honor done to God and which they ought most to
endeavor, who desire his glory.

And if the Minister should at any time find himself dissatisfied at this, let
him peruse that holy Appointment of the Church, ( De Consecr. did. 2. Aug. in
Ps. 48.) Non prohibeat dispensator manducare pingues terrae in mensa Domini.
And if the dispenser himself cannot hinder this, much less can they hinder it,
who have nothing to do to dispense it: and if this which has been said is
notenough, let him be afraid of those, infinite Punishments which God has used
upon those Ministers which have forbid it.

But for all this, the Communion should always be used at the spiritual
Father's order, who neither ought to hinder nor delay it, when he knows the
Soul, that desires it and reaps good of it, to be so disposed as the Council
requires. And if another Confessor should order him the quite contrary, let him
follow the judgment of that ghostly Father, who knows better than any other,
how his Conscience is, and by whose Counsel he goes and acts safely.

CHAP. II. Answering the Reasons which those Ministers give, which hinder the
Faithful from Communicating, and the Priest from Celebrating, having their
Consciences free from Mortal Sin.
EIther the Communion must be forbidden to those that ask it and desire it
without the guilt of Mortal Sin, because they are not worthy of it, or for the
greater reverence of it, or, because much Familiarity breeds Contempt, or else
for Mortification and Penance: The first reason, of not being worthy, is not
sufficient; because if they make a Christian forbear, till he be worthy of the
Communion, then he must never receive it: because no man is worthy to receive
Christ, no not Heaven it self. Whereupon many holy men say, that the Communion
taken to day is a disposition for that to morrow.

Besides, that Councils, the Saints and Doctors do assure us, that not being in
Mortal Sin, is that necessary worthiness and disposition which is required for
the Communion; we are not to go to it, as worthy, but as having need of it: we
do not go to sanctify Jesus Christ, but to be sanctified and healed by him, by
the means of the Sacrament, as St. Ambrose tells us, -- I who do continually
sin, ought continually to receive the Medicine of this Sacrament against the
pestilent Disease of Sin. (Ep. 208.)

Nor may a Christian be debarred the Communion for the second reason, of
greater reverence, because it is contrary to St. Austin's Doctrine, who says, (
Ep. 26. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 28.) that it is better to communicate through
Devotion, than let it alone through Reverence. Dionysius Carthusianus says the
same thing, It Is better to communicate through Love, than abstain from it
through Humility and Fear. ( De Euch. cap. 5. sect. 6.) There is not more
devotion, love and respect showed to God by less frequent coming to the
Sacrament: but rather he loves and fears God most, who, without mortal sin, and
with a desire of his own spiritual advantage, comes every day to it: and the
delaying of it is not a greater disposedness nor veneration, but a manifest
temptation.

By keeping away, they think to find better devotion and fervor, and in the
mean time they are dry, lukewarm and cold, as we see by experience. These
people that will not communicate unless they be sensibly and actually devout,
are like those who are cold, who will not come near the fire, till they are
warm; or like those sick men that will not ask the Physicians counsel, till
they are grown well. Christ's Body is like a spiritual fire, let us approach
toward it, and it will warm us. The flesh of Christ, says Damascene, is a live
coal, which heats and burns.

The third reason which some give for the hindering Christians the Communion,
that desire and ask it, is a certain whimsey or capriccio which they imprint in
their minds, telling 'em, that to go frequently to the Sacrament is too much
familiarity, and that this breeds contempt. Nimia familiaritas parit
contemptum. O hurtful Deceit! O pernicious Doctrine! though taught by the
Ministers with no bad zeal. Is it possible, that, among so many Saints and
Doctors of the Church which have written professedly upon this Point, as is
manifest by the former Chapter, none of 'em should light upon the reason, that
these Ministers talk of? It Is well inferred therefore, that it is of small
consideration and account.

True it is, that too much familiarity is sometimes the occasion of contempt:
but of what, and to whom? The too much familiarity with a vile thing, occasions
contempt, but how can familiar conversation with a thing that is grave, good,
and amiable, how can this cause contempt? In earthly things familiarity begets
contempt; because the more one man gets acquainted and intimate with another,
he discovers his defects by degrees, and so values him less than he did at
first. But with God the thing is quite otherwise: because as the creature
proceeds in the knowledge of that fountain of true perfection, by the same
measure the love and esteem of that great Lord grows more.

If by communicating daily there could be any defect discovered in Jesus
Christ, certain it is, that this frequency and familiarity would breed contempt
of him; but the more that boundless ocean of perfection is received, the more
is his goodness known, and the greater does the love, the respect and the
reverence to him grow. And if it were true, that too much frequency occasioned
contempt, it would be necessary to give laws to God himself, and take care not
to render himself so easy and familiar to the Saints and Angels of Heaven,
with whom he has so great and continual an intimacy. Who is more familiar with
God than the Angels who continually behold his divine countenance? and what,
does this make 'em leave off honoring, reverencing and loving him?

But they will say, it is not good to abuse this familiarity and intimacy with
God. What a blindness is this! what should the meaning of this be, unless they
would not have us so united with God, and have a mind that we should serve him
at a distance, and not near, and more by name than affection. These words arise
rather from the little will they have that we should receive this divine Lord,
than from the respect of not displeasing him: if they had true charity, and did
but heartily love Jesus Christ, they would despise all fear, and not remove us
from the frequency of this divine Sacrament; nay, they would desire and prompt
us on to receive him daily, that we might be united unto God.

If they know, that Christ desires to be united with us, why should they be
unwilling that we should be united with him, our great Lord; fearing where no
fear is? if they see that an infinite God desires our familiarity and
friendship, what is it that they build upon, to hinder us from being his
friends? do they think that by this continual frequency that will be tedious to
us, without which every thing else is tedious? do they believe that that will
make our life uneasy, which gives us life? that that good will be a trouble to
us, from which all goodness proceeds? and, in a word, that he who is the
pleasure and delight of all Creatures, of all the Seraphims, of all the Saints,
and of the whole Court of Heaven, will be a tediousness to us? true it is, that
he satiates, but never becomes tedious.

Nor any less ought a Christian to be denied the Communion, to mortify him,
which is the fourth reason: because in Mortification, to be without the
Communion, he only exercises one Virtue, and in the Communion he exercises 'em
all. Would it therefore be well, that a Christian, for obtaining one Virtue,
should be deprived of all the rest? It Is great pity to deprive him of the great
good he receives in the Communion, only for mortification-sake: which being
well thought of, will prove rather a privation of good than the virtue of
mortification.

Besides, to be able to say Mass and communicate perfectly, it is not the best
way to leave off communicating and celebrating: but rather it is the best that
can be, to say Mass and communicate every day, though it be with some
imperfections. To enable a man to pray perfectly, or to obtain some virtue in
perfection, it is not a good way to leave off doing acts of that virtue. Who
will say, that to make a perfect Prayer, it is a good way to let it alone some
days? and that to have patience, it is a good way not do any acts of it? rather
the best means to obtain patience and to make a perfect Prayer, is to exercise
those things day by day, though there should be some imperfection in 'em.

If the divine Majesty vouchsafes to be with sinners, to lodge in their houses,
to eat with 'em at the same table, (for which he bears for his arms and
commands to be fixed on the doors of his house an Inscription, that says, This
Lord receives sinners and eats at one table with 'em) why is the Minister and
Servant of this same Lord so loath to receive a Christian, if he be changed and
mended by repentance? is it therefore reason that the Ministers of this Lord
should limit a thing not limited by their Master?

The Lord invites us, and calls us to his banquet: and will the servant pretend
to give leave to those who are invited, when they are introduced to God in his
own house? Let 'em come in, if they have no mortal sin about 'em: and if they
have, it is washed away in the fountain of repentance. Put this on the account
of their Lord, that will have it so, and commands it, though it seem
inconvenient to the Minister, wherefore the Lord may answer him with great
reason, It Is well known, that the sinner costs thee nothing, and that having so
narrow a breast as thou have, thou admittest him not to the Communion, though
he desires it and I invite him to it: but I came down from Heaven for him, and
was made man, suffering 33 years incredible torments, even to death it self. I
will have him, thus penitent as he is, and because I am God, I have a heart of
infinite extent, where all, how wicked soever they may have been, do come, if
they turn to me and become reformed by means of repentance.

Christ our Lord moves the tongue of Angels to exhort men to frequent
Communion, and the Prince of darkness moves the tongues of men to persuade 'em
the contrary. The Angel said to Elijah, (1 Kings 19.7.) Arise and eat, for thou
have a long journey to go. So the Angel persuades him to the Communion; and not
only once, but twice he waked the Prophet that was asleep, to eat Bread, the
figure of the Eucharist. It Is the property of Angels to invite to frequent
Communion. Well did St. Jerome say, -- He is an Angel to thee who puts thee upon
the Communion, and a Devil that hinders thee from it.

It Is plain, that the Devil shows himself against this Sacrament more than any
other, in that he seeks by so many disturbances and ways to hinder it, amongst
which it is not the least powerful and effectual which he makes use of by
Preachers and Confessors, and Ministers themselves, because many of 'em with a
cloak of zeal disturb it. Those who reckon themselves Ministers of Jesus
Christ, ought to make it their proper work and business to set themselves
against the Devil's intentions; not depriving people of their Daily Communion,
but advising 'em to it, and procuring it for 'em.

Friar Joseph of St. Mary, after he had told us the words of the holy Council
of Trent, where he says -- that he desires that all men would communicate daily
(in his Apology for frequent Communion) has these following words -- Is it
therefore possible, O my Christian Fathers and Brethren, that the Church should
have any such children who do so openly contradict her; and that, understanding
from their Mother, that it would be a good thing for Christians to communicate
every day, they should say it is not convenient, and so oppose themselves to
her and contradict her? Certainly this looks like the Devil's temptation, to
hinder the growth of Souls, though it be done with good zeal, and to such as be
zealous of God's honor, and of the Church their Mother, this will not look
well -- Thus far the Author.

Now let any Summist and Learned Man, that has a great opinion of himself, see
whether it be lawful to oppose the Authority of so great a Tribunal and the
laudable Custom of the Church and her Declarations, against the Practice and
Doctrine of the Apostles, and against the Preaching of the holy Doctors of the
Church.

Let no man mutter or deny the holy Communion, (says Lewis Fundone, tract. de
diu. Sacr. p. 2. c. 21. fol. 149.) as if there were no occasion for it, and let
him have a care that God do not deny him Heaven; since to condemn this, is to
condemn the commendable Customs and most ancient Practice of the Church and the
greatest Servants of God. -- Thus far the Author.

Father Peter of Marseilles, a Benedictine, ( addit. ad memor. Compostel. fol.
62.) says, That as often as a man communicates without the guilt of mortal sin,
either by not having committed it, or by being pardoned it, he receives grace
by it. This disposition is not of so small moment, as some think, since the
holy Council of Trent thinks it enough for reverence and holiness. They are
mightily to be commended, that do their best to persuade the faithful to
communicate daily; and consequently, what a great error and prejudice of Souls
are they that hinder Laymen the Sacramental Communion every day.

Nothing but Mortal Sin (says St. Thomas) can keep a Christian from the
Communion. How therefore does it come to pass, that the Ministers keep men from
it, when they have no Mortal sin to indispose 'em.

It would be well considered that Christ is in this Sacrament for salve for our
wounds, for comfort to our troubles, and for strength in our adversities, and
lastly for a pledge and memorial of the love that he bears to Souls, and that
this great Lord stands crying out whether there be any that would have him, and
the Souls answer that they will have him, but asking the Ministers of the
Church to give 'em their Lord, and divide to them their daily bread, the
Ministers turn the deaf ear to it, being Stewards of Gods house, and are very
pinching and niggardly in distributing that which the Lord commands, and so
freely gives.

Such a stinginess as this is to be lamented with Tears of Blood. Who would not
weep to see that when Gods hand is so open in giving, his servants should be so
close-fisted and covetous in distributing: and that God being so bountiful of
his own blessings which cost him his blood, they should be so greedy in a thing
that cost 'em nothing? and in a word, this Sacrament being that open fountain
of David, free to all the Sons of Jacob, who go to it for the precious water
without giving any thing for it, the Ministers sell it so dear, that it costs
many even tears of blood to obtain it: which gives 'em the lamentation of
Jeremy, that they are fain to buy the water which is their own, as dear as if
it did belong to some body else.

Master John d'Avila, a Man known sufficiently for his exemplary Goodness and
Learning, and Preaching, being asked whether a Superior or one that had the
cure of Souls, might deny the Communion to him that should ask it of him every
day, not having lawful impediment, made answer thus, My opinion is, that no
lawful impediment appearing, the Prelate (and he that in his room has the
business of Administrating the Eucharist) is obliged to give it to him that is
under him, every time that he asks it. He that denies the most holy Sacrament,
is unjust. and deprieves him of his right and due that asks it. A Christian (as
St. Thomas says) has so much a right to ask it, that the Prelate cannot deny it
him, except it be for a public sin. Asking it in public he ought to give it
him, though he knows that he has Sin in secret: and then how much more ought he
to one that asks it devoutly? he is cruel, he takes away the Spiritual Bread
from his Child, and I must condemn him for a sinner in it. All this says the
abovementioned Author (in his Treat. 23. Part 3.)

Will they say, if it be a good and holy thing to Communicate every day, why
does not the Church then command it? and why did not the Founders of Religions,
who were endued with so much light, leave it for a rule? and why did not some
Saints embrace this frequency? Saint Mark the Evangelist cut off his Thumb,
that they might not make him ordain. Saint Francis of Assize would never be a
Priest. Saint Benet was a long time without Communicating. Before I come to
answer, I will ask whether it be well, that a man in health should not eat
something every day, because the Law does not command it? why have some Saints
abstained from food some days? whether single life be good and not Marriage, as
St Paul says, (1 Cor. 7.) because the Law commands it not? and why some Saints
have not been Married? whether it be a good and holy thing to hear Mass daily,
because the Church does not command it? and why some Saints have retired into
the desert, where they could not hear it?

Again, before I come to answer, I will suppose that some examples of the
Saints are more to be admired than imitated, and that therefore they do not
make a general rule; that if some have not Communicated, they were only a few;
and they that did Communicate, numberless: and therefore 'twill be more safe to
follow the most and not the fewest. I answer the difficulty and the question;
that things necessary ought to be commanded, that which is evil ought to be
prohibited, and that which is good and holy ought to be advised. The holy
Church does always act rightly, and therefore she does not command the faithful
to Communicate daily: because how holy and good a thing soever it be, yet it is
not essentially necessary: and the precept of the Church always looks at the
benefit of the faithful and so great is our luke-warmness, and the frailty of
our times, that a precept of Daily Communion would be an occasion of sin and
ruin, and therefore the Church does not enjoin Christians by precept any more
than one Communion in a year, though the desires that through devotion men
would Communicate every day.

Many men shift off their coming daily to this Divine Banquet, that they may
not be taken notice of for it, and that they may give no occasion to others to
grumble: and the Ministers hearing this reason, hold their tongues and rest
satisfied. O hurtful silence! must they permit, for worldly respects, that the
faithful should lose so great a benefit? Is it possible that they should let
'em live at a distance, and separate from God and his sweet and loving
friendship, because the world should not censure 'em? if there should be any
great account made of what the world says, not only the Soul would be lost, but
also the judgment. Is it not known, that the world makes it its business to
speak ill of what good is, and to persecute those that do not take part with it?

All those that serve great men, do make open show of the degree of their
office, greatness and dignity; and shall a Christian think it a shame to
himself to Communicate, and be seen in the service of Jesus Christ? If it were
an evil work to Communicate every day, it might breed scandal; but if it be the
best work that a Christian can do, why should he keep from it through an idle
fear of offending his neighbor? The Jews were offended at the good works of
Jesus Christ, but for all that, his Majesty never left off doing 'em. He that
does ill and interprets the good that others do in an evil sense, it is he that
gives cause for the scandal: but to do well, was never a scandal, much less can
so great a good, as Communicating be one. If a man should take offense by
seeing us eat, surely we would not for all that be such fools as to starve our
selves.

We ought to take great heed of following vanities and worldly pleasures, that
we may not by them offend or scandalize our Neighbor: from these vices we
ought to keep our selves, not from Daily Communion, because this cannot cause
scandal, but will rather edify our Neighbor, and by our good example, it may
be, he may come to change his life and resolve, himself, to frequent the
Sacraments. O how many people are there that are cheated by these worldly
respects! O unhappy men! they are not ashamed to be base in their lives, and
yet they are ashamed to be Christians and to be known for such!

CHAP. III. Wherein are shown some of the great benefits, of which a faithful
man is deprieved, by being prohibited the Communion, when he is sufflciently
disposed for it.
THat the Minister may see and take good notice of the hurt which he does, by
deprieving the faithful of the Communion, that desire and ask it without the
guilt of Mortal Sin, it will be necessary to lie before him some of those
infinite benefits of which he defrauds 'em, only in one Communion, that he may
undeceive himself that deprieves 'em of infinite good for mortification sake.

First he deprieves such a one of the increase of grace and glory which he
receives in the Communion, whose effect is infallible, ex opere operato, though
he should have venial sins about him. He also deprieves him of the
mortification of all his five senses and powers, which he therein performs,
whilst his Eyes, his Smelling, his Taste, his Touch, his Imagination, his
Understanding and all his knowledge and capacity do tell him that that Host is
Bread: by all this he is humbled, mortified, and subdued, whilst he believes
that it is not that which he feels and tastes, but that his God and Lord is in
it. He deprieves him also, by taking the Communion from him, of the cleansing
of his sins and evil habits, and being preserved from 'em for the time to come;
of many helps which are therein administered to him for the performance of every
good thing, and avoiding every evil one; and it may happen, that the Eternal
Salvation or Damnation of a Soul may depend upon one of these helps. He
deprieves him of the lessening the pains of Purgatory, which is participated in
every Communion. He deprieves him of the high acts of faith, hope and charity,
which he exercises, by believing that he receives that God, whom he sees not,
nor feels, and hoping in him, whom he has not seen and being united with him by
love.

God is goodness it self, and he is willing to be communicated through love to
Souls, by means of the Divine and Sacramental Bread: Is there a greater
happiness in the world? can there be a greater felicity? and shall there be any
Minister to deprieve the Soul of this benefit? In this wonderful Sacrament
Christ is united to the Soul, and becomes one and the same thing with it. In me
manet and ego in illo (St. John 5.) which fineness of love is the most
profound, admirable, and worthy of consideration and gratitude, because there
is no more to give nor to receive: and what Minister shall deprieve the Soul of
this boundless grace?

All Blessings do here meet together in this precious Food, here all desires of
God are fulfilled, here is the loving and sacramental Union, here is the Peace,
the Conformity, the Transformation of God, with the Soul, and the Soul with
God. By receiving Jesus in this Sacrament, the Eternal Father and the Divine
Spirit is also received: here are all the Virtues, Charity, Hope, Purity,
Patience, and Humility: because Christ our Lord begets all Virtue in the Soul,
by means of this heavenly Food: and what a Heart must the Ministers have to
forbid the Soul so great a Happiness.

If one only degree of Grace is a gift of inestimable Value and so precious,
that it is not to be bought for a thousand Worlds, being a particle of God
himself, and a formal participation of the Divine Nature, which makes us his
Children and Friends, Heirs of Heaven, and the Habitation of the most Holy
Trinity: and if never so little Grace be worth more than all the Virtues, Alms,
and Penances, and the removing Mountains (as St. Paul says) and giving all away
to the Poor, is a mere Nothing without Grace: How then can it be well to
deprive the Faithful of the increase of Grace, which he might find only in one
Communion? How can the Minister deprive him of that and of many others that
follow it, without giving 'em other things equivalent to those they lose?

What can be of equal value with habitual Grace, which a faithful Man might
receive? neither can the Humility which he may exercise, nor the Reverence, nor
the Mortification, upon the account of which he leaves off the Communion, be
worth so much; nor are they equivalent to that Grace only, which he loses, and
which he might have had by receiving that Communion.

And now lets make up this Account. If Restitution ought to be (as all the
Doctors say) conformable to the Good, which was taken from one's Neighbor,
what can he restore, which deprives a faithful Man of God himself?

Would it not be great want of Charity to take from a Man a Mount of Gold,
only to gather up a little Grain? Only for one Grain of Mortification, (if
yet there is any in it) the Ministers do deprive a Christian of a whole Mount
of Blessings, which are heaped up together in the Communion: If there were no
other way to mortify and try the Soul, but this, it ought not to be used;
because by this Mortification they deprive him of a greater good: but there are
infinite ways of proving and mortifying the Soul besides, without doing it so
great a Spiritual Prejudice.

The Blessings of this Sacrament don't end here; because, besides, the increase
of Grace, it sustains and gives new strength to the Soul, to resist
Temptations; it satisfies the desires, takes away the hunger of temporal
things, unites with Christ and his Members, who are the Just and Righteous,
breaks the power of Satan, gives strength to suffer Martyrdom, pardons the
Venial Sins, to which he that Communicates does not stand affected; and keeps
from Mortal Sins, by virtue of the aid which it does contribute.

The Body of Christ (says St. Bernard, In Sermon. Dom) is Medicine to the Sick,
Provision for the Pilgrim, fresh Strength to the Weary, it delights the Strong,
it heals the wounded, it preserves the Health of Soul and Body. And whoever is
a worthy Communicant, is made more strong, to receive Contempt, more patient to
suffer Reproof, more fit to endure Troubles, more ready for Obedience, and to
return the Lord Thanks.

St. Leo Pope, ( de praec. ser. 14. de pass. Domini) says, that when a man is
Communicated, Christ comes to honor him with his Presence, to anoint him with
his Grace, to cure him with his Mercy, to heal him with his Blood, to raise him
by his Death, to illuminate him with his Light, to inflame him with his Love,
to comfort him with his infinite Sweetness, to be united and espoused with his
Soul, to make him partaker of his Divine Spirit, and of all the Blessings which
he purchased us by his Cross.

Do thou seek (says St. Bonaventure, de praec.) where God is? thou must
expect to find him in this Divine Sacrament, which being worthily received,
does pardon Sins, mitigate Passions, gives light to the Understanding, satiates
the Soul, revives Faith, encourages Hope, inkindles Charity, increases
Devotion, fills with Grace, and is the rick Pledge of Glory.

This Sacrament (says St. Thomas. Opusc. 58. de Sacr. cap. 21. 22, 23.) drives
away evil Spirits, defends us from Concupiscence, washes off the Stains of the
Heart, appeases Gods Anger, illuminates the Understanding, to know him,
inflames the Will, to love him, delights the memory with Sweetness, confirms
the whole man in Goodness, frees him from Punishment Everlasting, multiplies
the merits of good Life, and brings him to his Eternal Country. The Body of the
Lord (as he pursues it, cap. 24.) produces Three principal Effects. First, it
destroys Sin. Secondly, it increases Spiritual Blessings. Thirdly, it comforts
men's Souls; and in Chap. 25. he says, it satiates the Spirit to follow what is
good; it comforts and strengthens the Soul, to shun what is evil, it preserves
the Life always to praise the Lord. As it is a Sacrifice, it remits the Sins of
those who are alive, and lightens the punishment of those who are in Purgatory,
and augments the accidental Glory of those who are in Heaven. Lastly, the Body
of Christ is called the Sacrament of Charity; because it makes us partakers of
the Spirit Divine, of the sweet Abode of Christ himself, and the rich
Transformation of God.

'Twould be an endless thing to relate the Blessings, which, according to the
saying of Saints, they do receive from this Sacrament, who come to partake of
it without Mortal Sin: and of all these does the Minister deprive a Christian,
when he only forbids him one Communion.

But more than this, deprieving 'em of the Communion, he deprieves all the
Saints of Heaven, all the Angels, the most holy Virgin, and Christ himself of
that accidental glory which accrues to them by every Communion received in
grace. If the Saints in Heaven have a special accidental glory, by every good
work, though never so small, that is done here below, as many pious Authors are
of opinion, with how much more reason will they have it by a work so sublime as
the Communion is, wherein there is included an immensity of all the wonderful
works of God? Memoriam fecit mirabilium suorum, Psalm. 110.

And if from one only Communion there are so many blessings, as are specified
before, to be obtained, what will there be of the sacrifice of the Mass, the
gravest, the highest work that is in Heaven or Earth? And shall there then be
Ministers, who under pretense of Penance, Mortification, or the old way, must
hinder Priests so great, so holy, and so fruitful a sacrifice?

Saint Jerome said, in ( Missis defunct. Pavi. c. 14) that at the least the Soul
suffers not in Purgatory, whilst Mass is said for it ['twas well the Author did
not point to us where this blind passage is, in Saint Jeromes Works.] Saint
Austin assures us, ( Ballester in the Book of the Crucifix of S. Savior, f.
207.) that the Divine Sacrifice is never Celebrated, but one of these two
things follow upon it, either the Conversion of a sinner, or the leting loose
of some Soul out of Purgatory, [this is as much Saint Austins saying, as
the other is Saint Jeromes.] William Altisiodorensis was not contented with one
Soul; but affirmed, that by every Mass there were the Lord knows how many Souls
that got away from thence. Severus in Saint Martins Life gives an account, that
he set as many Souls at liberty with his Masses, as persons assisted at the
hearing of 'em.

Venerable Bede says, that the Priest, who, being not lawfully hindered, does
neglect to say Mass, deprieves the most holy Trinity of glory and praise, the
Angels of joy, Sinners of pardon, the Righteous of grace and help, the Souls in
Purgatory of cooling and refreshment, the Church of the heavenly benefit of
Jesus Christ our Lord, and the Priest himself of Medicine and help.

If every Mass therefore has all this of its own, what Minister under the
color of zeal shall be so bold as to hinder and defraud the Trinity, the
Angels, the Virgin, the Church, the Righteous, Sinners, the Souls in Purgatory,
and the Priests themselves that desire to celebrate, so much glory and so much
good? without doubt, though this be done with zeal, yet it is want of
consideration, and it will be well, to premeditate and consider it better,
before any goes about to hinder it.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. No Minister ought to keep a faithful Person from the Communion, that
does desire and ask it, whilst he does not know his Conscience defiled with
mortal Sin. Page 1 Chap. 2. Answering the Reasons which those Ministers give,
which hinder the Faithful from Communicating, and the Priest from Celebrating,
having their Consciences free from Mortal Sin. Page 17 Chap. 3. Wherein are
shown some of the great benefits, of which a faithful man is deprived, by being
prohibited the Communion, when he is sufficiently disposed for it. Page 31

