THE MERRY BAG-PIPES: The Pleasant Pastime betwixt a Jolly Shepherd and a
Country Damsel, on a Mid-Summers-Day in the Morning.
To the Tune of, March Boys, etc.
Licensed according to Order.





A Shepherd sat him under a Thorn,
he pulled out his Pipe and began for to play,
It was on a Mid-Summer-day in the morn,
for honor of that holy day:
I Dirty he did Chant along,
goes to the Tune of Cater-Bordee,
And this was the burden of his Song,
if thou will Pipe Lad, I Will Dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, etc.
And whilst this Harmony he did make,
a Country Damsel from the Town,
I Basket on her Arm she had,
a gathering Rushes on the Doin^:
Her Bongrace was of wended Straw,
from the Sun's hot Beams her Face is free
And thus she began when she him saw,
if thou will Pipe Lad, I Will Dance to thee, etc.
Then he pulled out his Pipe and began to sound,
whilst tempting on her Bark the lay,
But when his quivering note she found,
how sweetly then this Lass could play:
She stopped all jumps and the revealed,
she kept all time with harmony,
And looking on him, sighing said,
if thou will Pipe Lad, I Will dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, etc.
She never so much as blushed at all,
the Music was so charming sweet,
But ever and anon to him she would call,
and bid him be active, turn and meet:
As thou art a bonny Shepherd's Swain,
I am a Lass am come to woo thee.
To play me another double strain,
and doubt not but I will Dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, etc.
Although I am but a silly Maid,
who never was brought up at Dancing-School,
But yet to the Iig that thou have played,
you find that I can keep time and rule:
Now see that you keep your stops aright,
for Shepherd I am resolved to view thee,
And play me the Damsel's chief Delight,
then never doubt but I Will Dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, etc.
The Shepherd again did tune his Pipe,
and played her a Lesson loud and shrill,
The Damsel his Face did often wipe,
with many a thank for his good will:
And said I was never so pleased before,
and this is the first time that I knew thee,
Come play me this very Iigg once more,
and never doubt but I Will Dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee, etc.
The Shepherd he said, as I am a Man,
I have kept playing from Morning till Noon,
Thou know I am do no more then I can,
my Pipe is clearly out of Tune:
To ruin a Shepherd I Will not seek,
said the, for why should I undo thee,
I can some again to the Down next week,
and thou shall Pipe and I Will dance to thee,
To thee, to thee, derry, derry, to thee.
FINIS.
Printed for C. Batas next door to the Crown-Lavern in West-Smithfield.


