NEWS FROM PARNASSUS, In the Abstracts and Contents of three Crowned
Chronicles, relating to the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland.

IN A POEM, Divided into Two Parts: First, To the KING, Secondly, To the
Subjects of the said Three Kingdoms.

Dedicated to his Majesty.

By a Serv^^^ to Mars, and a Lover of the Muses, WILLIAM MERCER.

Sunt mala, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt bona plura. London, Printed by M. W.
for the Author, 1682.

TO THE Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND, CHARLES STUART, ANAGRAMS.
I Charles Stuart. Anagrams
1. A Cleart he'rt is sur' 2. T serve Christ at al 3. I al trust has Care 4. I
cure all hurt hearts.
Carolus Stuart. Anagram
5. At tu ros Clarus.
Charles Stewart, King. Anagram
6. Sucking as real truth.
Carolus Secundus, Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae, Re* Anagram
7. Ave* sinus longae arboris huic leni dexter est.
I Charles Rex. Anagram
8. I he 'xcels rare.
Scotland's King. Anagram
9. Scots kind Angel.
Charles Stuart. Anagram
10. Rule Chaste Star.
A Paraphrase on the Anagrams, in two Parts.
The Argument.
TEN Anagrams united, now agree;
Which when you know, fall down upon your knee:
Adore the King with works of Loyal wonder,
Whose Anagrams agree so, set asunder.
But Knaves combine, albeit they can be wrackt,
As will appear, perusing this Abstract.
O! if men might consider seriously
What is said here, by such an one as I;
For when the Ark is opened once, then they
Will wish the Hills heaped on their heads that day.
The First Part.
THough seven were set, three more I dared to do,
And then contrived King Charles Acrostick too:
Three more make ten, and draws the door to Look,
Paying my precious Prince both Tithe and Stoke.
Seven Anagrams I say, add three, and then
Three set to seven, make very truly ten.
I Charles Rex, and Scots natural King,
Whence these two Anagrams, truly too, I bring
1. I he 'xcels rare, and 2. Scots kind Angel,
None give such Anagrams in the whole Evangel;
No Kings name neither, but Charles Rex show these
I he 'xcels rare; unparalled in Praise;
Then in this Title of Scotlands King, I do
This Anagram also, Scots kind Angel too:
And all the rest, press whensoe're you please,
You get not nine such Anagrams as these:
Kind Angel coming down daily from above,
Makes Trinity in Unity, live in Love.
An Example also flows forth of the same,
Thus from King Charles his glorious diadem.
Whence one in three, and three in one now I
Do bind, but bring no blot of Blasphemy:
Nor do I neither rashly run on Rocks,
My Doctrine's duly rendered Orthodox:
Scotland's King's England's King, and his Throne
Owns Ireland also; now there is three in one.
So Trinity, in such a sacred sense
Acts Unity, without a false offense.
Nine Anagrams so united, now do stand,
And all are at one Gracious Kings command.
Charles Stuart, sto^^ King; one of the ten too are
His Anagram, and that is this, Rule Chaste Star.
Still rule, Chaste Star, and all your days adorn,
As did the Star that day that you were born.
Which decked that day; a very sacred sign,
A Star at noon, beside the Sun to shine.
Wherefore with these signs in your Arms that are,
Rose, Thistle, Luce, Harp, there also stands the Star:
All which Signs show us that our Sovereign must,
As he is Sacred, be so served Just.
For Kings are Gods, the Sacred Psalmist says,
Though Death, their Deity, daily disobeys:
And I say also, only this for that,
This being all I Am always aiming at,
King Charles is Christ's Anointed, no less now
Anointed and United also too.
Wherefore whom God does doubtless so combine,
At such no Subject should dare to repine:
For being Gods Vicegerent, and so Just,
Bound to Obedience all men meekly must:
I say, even must, and must as truly too
Do what such good King bid us daily do.
So all is said, which I professed before,
Even to a tittle, till I can say no more.
But for my fault, profaning of so high
A name as does demonstrate Majesty,
And put in Print my prattling thereupon,
So nigh the Scepter, and my Sovereigns Throne,
Deserves Death; but before I do condemn
My self, if I can humbly touch the hem
Which has the Honor as to be about
Your Sacred self, albe't it be without,
I can implore, and humbly prostrate lie
Before your Footstool, if I dye I dye.
But Caesar seldom was offended, when
A Soldiers faults flowed from affection, then
He smiled, and said, let him not from me fly
Till I relieve him for his Loyalty.
Poets are priviledg'd to put rags in Rhyme,
When they in Prose cannot proclaim a Crime:
So I, Great Sir, Swear you in Rhyme, read what
Knaves are in your three Kingdoms aiming at:
For not embracing Bribes for to forbear
(Though I Am abstruse in this my Abstract here)
My Chronicle shall every case disclose,
Not sparing Friends more than I favor Foes.
But I conclude, because I Am not Scholastic;
For to the King to constitute this Acrostick,
Offends: wherefore to cure all discontents,
I trust King Charles's grains of Ingredients.
Now having on the Anagrams played so plain,
Receive this Sonnet of our Sovereign.
Acrostick.
Can Art and Nature, in a Muse like mine,
Heaven not inspiring special power divine,
Attain unto a Princes parts so high,
Reigning and Ruling so Religiously?
Lo England only, more than Europe ever
Establish's Trophies t'be abolisht never.
Surely our Sovereign's covered with a Crown.
So three Crowns crave of Carolus Rex renown,
Triumphant Arches, Statues Crowned with Bays,
Unstained, as streams of Phoebus fairest Rays.
All his Achievements, Choice, mauger those that dare
Rebel; but if? then they as early are
Trod under foot. Triumphing awful Arms,
With help from Heaven, keep good K. Charles from harms
The Second Part.
I Charles Stuart. Anagram
1. A cleart he'rt is sur' 2. TO serv' Christ at al 3. Al trust has Care 4. I
cure al hurt hearts.
A Cleart heart is sure to serve Christ at all hours.
These Anagrams and Attributes are ours,
Says good King Charles, whose Virtues weigh not far
From what King Solomon's, and just King Joshua's are:
Then let all Subjects see his Sacred Throne
Established still in his Succession.
Al trust has Care, when Subjects it receives:
Kings care not much till Trusties turn to Knaves.
Al trust has Care, which when I well construe,
And on you cast it, Subjects should be true.
Such Skill exceeds all Sciences and Arts,
King Charles says truly, I cure all hurt: hearts:
As he is King, his Faith yet failed him never,
His Sacred Touch has cured one evil ever.
I trust all Cares, says King, and use all Arts,
I Cure all hurts that harbor in your hearts.
And though my self lie by Bethesda sure,
My Sovereign Master can command my Cure.
Carolus Stuart. Anagram
At tu ros Clarus.
A Religious roundel upon this Latin Anagram.

AT tu ros Clarus, we know can cleanse us clear,
Should the Devil outdare us, At tu ros Clarus,
His Malice could not mar us, though our spots appear,
At tu ros Clarus, we know, can cleanse us clear.
The Anagram Englished.

But thou clear dew.
Words of such worth, albeit but few,
When best men bad have been,
What stains can Satan on them strew,
But thou clear dew, can clean?
Charles Stewart, King. Anagram
Sucking as real truth.
SVcking as real truth in Streams
From his Queen Mothers Breast,
As it is true, that sucking seems
For newborn Babies best.
Because some Reader suddenly may censure
My roundel, I dare, as a desperate Fencer
Defend, from them that is so pursuing me,
As in these Lines ensuing, you may see.
Even so, since one word will the wrath provoke,
These few Lines following shall gain-stand the stroke.
This Anagram goes high, with a Sacred Wing,
In which I thus attribute to the King.
Great men (almost) of Kings great values want,
And yet (in Scripture) are called Gods, you will grant.
Then take my sayings in such sense, and I
Shall not be censured saying Blasphemy:
For such Expressions from Parnassus Pen
Prove not profane, but only amongst men.
Nor does the thing in order seem so odd,
Because the King does govern as a God.
On the Anagrams in General.
Or add, or alter, or leave out one Letter,
I may, to make the Anagram the better:
And if you say my hand in it does hault,
Make one, I Will wager you fall in the fault.
For this affords my freedom in the thing,
Cum Privilegio, it is for the King.
Though all these Anagrams I with care contrive,
The sixth sucked real truth to confirm the five.
I said I left my Latin at the School,
But I did lie, I lost it like a Fool:
For when I on this Anagram did fall
I found but these four Latin words at all,
Which I with gladness gave (indeed) for fear
My Latin failed, left them in English here,
But thou clear dew.
Upon Parnassus Mount this morning
I saw the Sacred nine adorning
Themselves; so I implored their Power
But to inspire my Pen one hour,
To humor it: They asked in what?
And promised when I told them, that
They would assist; and so should be
My Judges, do what is fit for me:
I told them this was almost all
My fault, whether I stand or fall,
Seven Anagrams I granted I
Had made upon his Majesty,
And saw each Syllable of the same
Within my Sovereign's Sacred Name;
As also wherein every one
Allude unto his Royal Throne:
And thought the things would better be
If they but blew their breath on me.
Saying, should they display their Banner,
The meaning must exceed the manner.
Though words would show but weak inventions,
In some things there lie strong intentions.
Four of them sure the same in sense,
Almost of equal consequence:
The fifth is easy to be seen,
A dew divine that washes clean:
Which lies in Latin, I allege,
Expressing Princely Privilege.
But though it lies in Latin now,
I turn't in English unto you.
Because I am no Book-bred Bard,
I play best with the plainest Card.
The sixth, much more than all the other,
Sucked real truth from his Queen Mother.
And if you ask how a King became
The Author of this Anagram:
No name but it can Parallel,
Unless you will some Treason tell;
For each so easily allude
To him of whom they are understood,
That I shall only say, but so,
Naming another, I Will say no.
God gave these goodly attributes
TO our Sovereign, whom such only suits:
And him allowed that name by lot,
In which these Anagrams are got:
Yea, I will live and dye your debtor,
If in the name you find one Letter,
But in the Anagram I ingrave;
And you are tied too to receive
What I so duly do set down
To deck our Sovereigns Sacred Crown.
My Theme's so easy, though my skill be scarce,
I could on it make multitudes of Verse.
But though men may in wide ways walk at will,
I think it is best for tired men to sit still.
A Paraphrase upon this Anagram
But thou clear dew. A Subjects Name, by Nature now is
All full of faults, I say,
But thou clear dew, thy self allows,
To wash the same away.
Five Anagrams I found before,
Which so concerns the Throne,
That I shall move on them no more,
But let these five alone;
The which, when in effect I found
The sense to be the same,
The sixth by Letters I collect
Out of the Latin Name.
No Subjects Name must make my Theme
One that is above must be,
It is my Sovereigns Sacred Name,
Carolus Stuart's self you see:
Which in effect, I found my Muse
So freely to unfold,
Praxiteles could not refuse
It to Engrave in Gold.
Though, I confess when I was young,
And very void of Wit,
And though I now seem something strong,
Am not much mended yet:
For what I gained, I then forgot,
And so such Fool became,
Though other Lines I learned not,
I gained this Anagram;
The which, as I have said before,
It does it self allow
To play the game, so clear a stream
of Dew has done it now.
But in regard a Subject should
One so Divine, adore,
I Will move (by making Anagrams)
My Monarch's name no more.
Upon White Hall, and over all,
Exposed to public view,
Unto our Sovereign only shall
But thou clear dew, be due:
Be only due, I say indeed,
So much (for this) the rather,
His Royal Name does now proceed
From his most famous Father.
Carlous Secundus, Angliae, Scotiae and Hiberniae, Rex. Anagramma
Ave sinus longae arboris Ecc' huic leni Dexter est. Cur Leni est Dexter Regi
sinus arboris altae
Exprimit hunc Sensum Nominis Ecc' tenor.
NOw those that think this Anagram not good,
Must study until the strain be understood,
Because the Name, which I presume to make
My Theme, is more than men may undertake,
Kings Names are nice; likewise no less than such
Uncircumcised Subjects must not much
Come nigh them; nor their breath let blow thereon.
Carolus Stuart demonstrates me a Throne.
Dare not divide the Letters as they lie;
An Anagram must not massacre Majesty.
My eyes stood staring, when I longed to look,
Then fell asleep; my senses me forsook:
For lo, what Latin I laid up at School,
It proved not prosperous, having played the Fool:
For when to Court, with my conceits I came,
I scarce could offer up this Anagram;
I dreamed it, and when I awaked, I vow,
I could not tell if it was false or true:
Nor did I alter one word of the thing,
But drew it, as I dreamed it, next morning.
Even so, I thought, it could not be called Treason,
But that it was much rather Rhyme and Reason.
Being sure my Sovereign takes the Subjects thought
(When he proves Loyal) as the work were wrought.
And then for to prevent the Carpers quarrel,
I rather rendered than opposed the peril:
Saying, He that thinks my stories are abstruse,
May mend them; but, I fear, my Friends refuse.
Great Sir,
I think you see in every Anagram
How faithful and effectual too, I am.
I do not tell, but I do stoutly stand,
And plainly spell first, E. N. G. L. and
S. C. O. T. L. A. N. D, and lo
Draw I. R. E. L. A. N. D even so.
Then read my Rhyme, so may your Majesty
Mark men in much dissimulation lie. Let them dye.
Anagrams on his Royal Highness (the Duke of York's Name) James Stewart.
MAny make Stewart with a Double VV,
And many make Stuart with a single too:
Which when I saw that both the ways were best,
On each of them two Anagrams I expressed.
James Stewart. Anagrams
1. A Wise Master. 2. Aims at Virtues.
James Stuart. Anagrams
1. As I am truest. 2. Trust me as I am.
A Wise Master aims at Virtues, then since,
As I am truest, trust me as I am, a Prince:
Your Ancient Acts say I from God alone
Derive the right of my Succession. Which being so
As I am truest, and (as Christ) I came
From God alone, then trust me as I am:
As I am truest, none denies but I
Am Lawful Brother to his Majesty:
On which account in confidence I came
Trusting to you, then trust me as I am.
My aim's at Virtues, even as I am true,
So you may trust me as I am to you.
My aim's at Virtues all the ways I work,
And I am called Just James the Duke of York.
These Anagrams are by the Art of Nature,
Not only, but by our Divine Creature
Contrived; then trust me as I am, for I
Acknowledge Scotland's Love and Loyalty.
No Power can press me, should it prove supreme
To deviate from the dictates of my Name.
^eing bound by Nature, no man must say no,
^o love the Nation and its Subjects so:
^hen truly, Trust me as I am, and I,
(...) I am true, in your defense shall dye:
(...) which I know no Kingdom can correct me,
because our Act of Parliament does protect me.
Reader.
York's inniate Name no Anagram gives me
So true as these four, pray you try and see:
Whence since the same so Aims at Virtues, I
Allude unto Jacobus Rex Righteously.
They run so ready, that I none can raise
So pertinent upon the point as these:
Because our Sovereigns Grandsire on the Throne,
Acknowledged this Royal Name his own.
The rather too it is of such Sacred season,
The Parliament proclaimed it to be Treason,
For to oppose a Prince that is so approved
(...) God and Nature, and by Millions moved.
(...) Lawful to his Sovereign Father, who
^eing Brother born unto King Charles too.
All Subjects should as fairly, is professed,
Content his Highness, taking of the Test:
The rather that they do remember when
The Covenant corrupted many men:
Which now upon Experience, they do say
Was nothing but Rebellion to obey:
The which if they do seriously consider,
They Will tie themselves unto his Highness hither:
Not only in the taking of a Test,
But also think all that he bids are best.
All which my Quill in Chronicles compleats,
Called for, consisting of nine hundred sheets.
The Scripture too, speaks of the matter much,
Saying, neither Crown, nor Christ's anointed touch.
Take notice then, and on the point appear,
As you profess for what is rehearsed here:
These Lines all Loyal Subjects will allow,
Your self being thought one of that number now:
And I (as in Sincerity I said it)
Annex my Name, maintaining Mercer made it.
Since I from Scotland do my days derive,
I am bound by nature truly to contrive
My best advice, being wise advice I vow,
As you will find, if you these words will view,
Which follow, freely from this noble Name,
Royal and Loyal, a too Sacred Theme
For my mean Muse, or such a one as I
To enterprise, such purpose to imply.
However, I wish you with all reverence read
The Name, and what does from the fame proceed
James Stewart. Acrostick.
^AMES justly aims to reign in high renown,
Apparent heir unto the Triple Crown.
Moses makes mention in his Testament,
Even so the Gospel gives us sure consent.
Solomon also uses all his Art
Such true instructions to us to impart,
That now three Nations own him as their own,
Either (as also earnestly) make known
What Interest and Eminency so high
Arise unto Great Britain's Monarchy:
Remembering Ireland does display its Banner
There on the Harp, in most melodious manner
Plays and Proclaims, agreeing all together,
Emulating who shall see him first come thither.
To stay in Scotland still in great renown,
The Kingdom where this diton is set down,
Nobis haec invicta miserunt centum sex proavi,
Where we shall make our Enemies houl, and also call peccavi.
Come these to Court, and could there come no more,
The King calls no Idolatry to adore
His Brother, whose greatness does ingratiate
Himself so in you, now remember that:
Not standing strict on things misunderstood,
But bowing, embrace York for your future good.
These Rhimes which for the Royal Duke I do
Gather by guess, trust to forgiveness too:
Which Rhyme, now Reader, though rashly I o're-run it.
It Is true, and you may be ashamed to shun it.
READER.
three crowns

THis Emblem of three Crowns in one
Contains such signs as suit the Throne,
A Rose, a Thistle, De Luce, and Harp:
Two smell, one sounds, and one is sharp.
England's Rose red, and smells beside;
Scotland's Thistle's sharp, and pricks at Pride;
The fragrant Flower de Luce from France,
Ireland a Harp to make men dance.
Three Crowns, Four Signs, one Rex, one Ring:
This Emblem is an endless thing,
Which none dare seek till the King ascend
Where Seraphims shall him attend:
Then that Prince may approach and speed
That Is next akin, three Crowns succeed:
Continuing still as endless Rings,
Reigning already nigh six-score Kings
In Scotland, and unconquered too,
The like till Doomsday let them do;
Producing due Succession so
As Atoms where Wind does not blow:
Which I am bent to beg, because
Divinity directly draws
Such Contemplations from my Pen
As are not meet for meaner men
^han mighty Kings; for Kings and Gods
(...) all one Name, but at great odds:
and though God gives great men the name,
^reat men must not assume the same.
^he King in jest can call a man
(...), but dare that man own it than.
(...) that by nature's sur-nam'd King
(...) no more Sovereign for the thing.
and one in acting of a Play,
(...) called a King for all that day;
^ext morning mention made thereof,
(...) will account it but a scoff;
Who was King in less than an hour,
(...) present they despise his power;
(...) Deity adore to day
Whom they did make a Fool at play:
(...) they have been both born and bred
(...) Naturalis that have sped:
(...) better but throw Scepters by,
and even as men, lie down and dye:
(...) Kings are Christ's anointed, and
^eing Treason to transgress command,
^ur King alive, I affirm it fit
^ll sorts of Subjects should submit:
(...) he is King, and reigns over all,
We should so, whether we stand or fall.
Then let no Subject seem such Slave,
(...) cross the King whom God them gave:
^cotch-men say they by them enjoy all,
Then Scotch-men must to Kings prove Loyal.
The Scots this in their Act contrives
Their King his Right from God derives:
^ew Kingdoms can make out so much,
Then Scotchmen sure will be non-such:
Which to extol, try my Extract,
(...) Paraphrase upon the Act.
And if they ask for whom it came,
His Name (in part) implies I AM.
I hope this now is no Blasphemy,
Alluding unto one so high.
To call men Gods, God does allow
Less Sin in this than I AM now.
But pray proceed, see how my Theme
Presumes to praise his Highness name:
And on King Charles, as I have skill,
But better is in my Chronicle.
Then see my Muses Complement,
In praising of the Parliament:
I praise't for this one Act, much more
Then fifty Parliaments before;
Or fifty Acts, with all consents,
Made in five hundred Parliaments.
A Paraphrase upon an Act of Parliame^^ held in Edenburg, August 4. Anno Dom.
16^ Acknowledging, Confessing, Ratifying and firming the Lineal and Lawful
Succession of Crown of Scotland to be derived in Royal Po^ from God Almighty
alone.
PArnassus Foeminines fairly put to touch,
Having wiser ways than Masculines by much;
I call on them a cause to carry on,
Concerns King Charles and his Succession:
My Ark includes all Acts since Thirty eight,
In Scotland; and now to fill up the freight,
I must this Act which Scotland does contrive
Enter it also; since they do derive
The same from Law, and links of Nature, lo
God ties them from that Government not to go:
(...) shall my Acts in Chronicles for ever
Proclaim this Act to be neglected never,
But thereunto adhere with heart and hand,
And to this Act of Parliament to stand:
Establishing by all the Acts of Art,
From true Successors never to depart:
Not weighing their Religion in our Scale,
But in the point, unto St. Paul appeal,
Who bids us to superior powers submit,
Grave Grecians also all affirming fit
What they have done; their Souls and Bodies both,
Becoming bent unto them to betroth
The Royal Rights; as Thales Milesius, and
Pythagoras, Plato, these three truly stand
To an effectual faithful definition
Of the Soul; even so in a condign condition,
Scotland concludes; and they of duty do
Define King Charles's Heirs his Successors too,
To Scotland; and, for them to prosper pray
All Faithful Subjects, that remain they may
Ever; even as no Act nor Art of man
Can know when first that Monarchy began.
When e're it entered, then when that King's dead
The next by nature shall that Crown succeed.
Agesilaus, Zeno, Xenophon, and other,
For your vast Virtues value you as Brother,
I say for your, because I know not whom
TO talk to truly till the true time come.
Your, you, us, we, are words pertain to Plurals,
Such as are Kings, not rendered unto Rurals.
All add their strength, and stand in stately manners
By Parliaments, for to display their Banners.
So by my Ark, and every Act therein,
This Crowning all, I humbly hope to win
My mean desires, who bound by duty, do
Pray for King Charles, and his Successors too.
Postscript.
Three Kingdoms now united are in one,
To glorify King Charles on the Throne:
But God and Grace, Law, Nature, now and all,
The Scots Crown, they call Kings Crown Imperial.
Now I Am afraid that I profane
Such famous Names with words in vain,
Wherefore to expiate my Pride,
I pray, so throw my Pen aside.
(...) NOtable News (peruse now) from Parnassus,
In which, to tell truth, not one point does pass us:
By one that did so much with Mars pass muster,
His Muse was beat to tell the truth, then trust her.
IN A POEM, Divided into Two Parts:

First, To the King, Secondly, To the Subjects of the said three Kingdoms.

Dedicated to the MAJESTY of Great Britain, France and Ireland.

By William Mercer.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1682.

An Epitome: OR, THE Abstract of Three CHRONICLES Which contains at large a
true Catalogue of the Passages, Parties and Persecutions within the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Irelan^
BEginning about 1638. about which time the troubles arose in the said
Kingdoms, with the Names and Titles of the most potent person that were, and
yet are the chief inventers and (...) menters of the same; together with a true
account of (...) occurrences and contrivances of all sorts of persons an^
employments from that time to the day of the date hereo^ according to the best
Informations, and under the hands (...) the most judicious indifferent
beholders thereof, togethe^ with my own personal presence, being an eyewitness
ther^unto, having had employment in good capacity, from the v^ry first, in
England, a Native of Scotland, a long-liver in Ir^land; being bribed by no man
to report partially, as wi^^ appear upon publication of the principal piece,
till which time let all men expect from my Pen as they find themselves free
upon consultation in their own Consciences (...) private, and no otherwise.

The Preface or Prologue to this Epitome. In Two Parts.
The effect of what is following you may find
Lying upon this first page here confined.
The First Part.
First when we met, my Master Mars allows,
and by his power proclaims a Rendezvous:
The Names are called, who as they answer, enter,
And so receive their wages at a venture.
(...) this Deluge, or dangerous shower of shot,
(...) build a big Barque, and a smaller Boat,
(...) save some by, but few will be found free,
When they have no Certificate of me.
(...) bring them all before my Sovereigns Throne,
(...) subtle, sinful Convocation:
^ssuring you too, that (in short) I think,
^oats will not bear them, they must swim or sink.
The Second Part.
^or having pressed Celestial powers,
And pierced the Sacred Throne,
(...) to assist, perceiving showers
To sink us every one.
^all them all to come to me,
Though some (to grant) do grudge,
(...) you shall such on sudden see
Drowned in a deep Deluge.
(...) though I herein do devise
Two things, I Will tell you what,
One may find favor in your Eyes,
Not*both, believe me that.
Yet if but one my Prince does please,
With some at whom I hint,
I shall be glad in some degrees,
I played the Fool in Print.
To the King
Perlege quodcunque est, quid Epistola lecta nocebit?
Te quoque in hac aliquid quod juvat, esse potest.
St. Mat. 24. 5. and 1 John 3. 26. Take heed,
These things have I written unto you,
Concerning them that deceive you.
A Sonnet.
May it please your Majesty.
Here now you have (I humbly talk in time)
Few pages following, which repeat in Rhyme;
The sense of all I aim at in my Ark:
Or shall I rather call it but a Bark?
Because the burden which it bears, is but
(Being weighed in value, worth a new cracked Nut:
Now never the less, may it like your Majesty,
Peruse my Rhimes where it appears plainly
Set forth at full, what does the piece import,
I call the Ark; but if the same seem short
Then drown it, and to do so do not grudge,
Such doings do deserve a deep deluge.
For I had rather been tried and tired tarrying,
Than come with Cargazon were not worth the carrying
Most Sacred Sir,
^f all the Muses of the Mount were mine,
Though they are noted for the Sacred nine)
And could they make Maeonides* of me,
All my Inventions were but vanity,
Weighed with the Wisdom Solomon did rehearse,
So often writing advice in every Verse,
Urging, as 'twere, by Arguments to win
Men's welfare: So I humbly here begin,
^eing prompted, or rather timely tempted to
What (in obedience) I am bound to do;
And that I would with Eagles Feathers fly
To fetch fruition for your Majesty:
All which (I say) assembled at the Throne,
(...) to assist my Resolution,
Were but to blame, me to make bold to bring
^uch empty Emblems to encroach a King:
Though in the close they come like claps of Thunder,
Moving the Mountains both above and under:
Then (seeing things in danger) do confess,
Determined timely to make this address:
So I in duty, and long date of days,
^pprest my Pen, till it in part displays,
Not sparing pains to put in rural Rhyme
The passages since first that fatal time.
There was a Cause cried up, whose pregnant Pride
Aspired three Kingdoms, and three Crowns beside;
A Cause, which Cause, had it but been so used,
As some men meant (though more men it abused)
It might done well; but O when power takes place,
On pure pretense to spit God in the face,
What fearful fall does follow? Then let none
Dare to invent works of Rebellion
Against that God who gives so good a King
To govern us, with healing under his Wing:
Contrary causes produce effects conform,
As we beheld the late destructive storm:
So that I should not seek the Sacred nine,
Though they are avoucht (through all the World) Divine,
To help me here, nor scale Parnassus Throne,
To fill my Quill in Holy Helicon;
Such glancing Glowworms glittering in the dark,
By such Dark Lanthorns I may miss my mark:
Wherefore for aid, since I this day am driven,
I Will scale the Skies, and have my help from Heaven,
Then to Jehovah, not to Jove, in jest,
I recommend my Muse to move at least:
And (in a cause) such crosses does afford,
In prayer at length must invocate the Lord:
My mighty maker then do thou inspire
Such power in me, my Tongue may never tire.
To tell the truth; that Angel, Lord, allow
Me that kept Eden; then when Adam flew
Forth from thy presence, be thou present still,
Assisting me, and work upon my will;
Such Sacred sense, that equally to all
Of whom I speak, I prove Impartial.
Lord let thy Spirit penetrate by power,
And melt my Soul in a celestial shower:
To sing the secrets that concern the King,
Wrapped up in Clouds of carnal covering:
To which effect I humbly prostrate pray,
To prosper me in all I think to say;
And where a fault appears in my Expression,
In such a case connive at my Confession,
Which I will now in clear Characters raise
Against my self, and those are only these:
When of my Age I was but twelve and three,
I fled from School, where few such followed me,
And served an Emperor; and in much ado,
I served in Denmark, and Gustavus too:
^erv'd all the three, but each of them one year,
^ook never pay, not sinning I may swear:
(...) that it seems, amongst so many men,
^oss'd a Pike more than I spoiled a Pen;
and I may tell as truly too, indeed,
^writ much more by Millions than I read:
^ot loving to get Learning, nor remain
(...) School, and now not greedy to get gain;
^ow should I then or render Verse or Rhyme,
^roving so prodigal of my precious time?
Wherefore I hope (albeit but bad excuses)
^our Majesty has meekness for such Muses.
Whence (being but simple) this present profit springs;
The perfect truth is taken from such things.
And so I shall in some degree go on,
To bring my Mite before my Monarchs Throne:
Though I say Mite unto your Majesty,
^ll make the Mite a Mountain in your Eye:
And then again I shall some Mountains make
Tremble, when I have tied them to the stake.
Great Sir, then that Confusion may not fill
This called the Abstract of my Chronicle,
Allow me leave to moderate my Muse,
So my constructions) be not too abstruse:
That in a Method seeming meet to me,
Your Majesty may many Secrets see.
As in a Mirror moral Miscreants,
Deeply dissembling as all such were Saints.
But as at first when all was only Chaos,
E're man was made, God (in himself) foresaw us,
That when we are, his Work would be in vain,
Man would in such Confusion fall again:
So also I, first when I undertook
Of such shrewd matter for to make a Book,
I did conjecture I the mark might miss,
As much indeed as I have done in this:
For I did in such sad confusion fall,
My Muse may make a Chaos of us all:
Yea, and assumed such zeal so on me too,
I for their sakes Idolatry did do:
And did as Saul once doubtless did in zeal,
But now at last I must as Paul appeal,
For even as Paul as Persecutor proved,
Being blind, but then became the Lords beloved:
So in blind zeal, I praised as men appeared,
But when I found my fond conjectures jeered,
Faithless Professors in their promise fail,
As Balaam's Beast, then I began to rail
Upon the Prophets; but to reprehend
Was work in vain, and therefore in the end
(Things to resent) said this, That they might see
Habet and Musca splenem proved in me*
Neglecting those to whom they never said no,
An Enemy would not be served so.
That when I viewed, they wickedly would venture
To add such Items to a bad Debenture:
Then I began a clear Account to cast,
And in the Close concluded this at last,
The persecutions not of all, but even
Out of a dozen I might draw eleven:
And so as Saul (who when he saw the sin)
Prayed to convert them that would scrape his skin:
So in my Book, albeit forbearing those,
My Persecutors, and I pray for foes:
Yet by so doing, as Divines do read,
I may heap Coals of fire upon their head:
Wherefore in all humility I here
In this Catalogue shall come something near:
To show by signs Wares at the Window vented,
Proclaiming worse within, if not prevented.
My Chronicles tells clearly when it comes,
Of Webs that weaving, wanted they the Thrums.
I say as did Diogenes in jest,
Then when he saw the greater Thieves in have,
Running to see the lesser hanged, he laughed,
And said the great Thieves should as Knaves be caught.
Both Throats and Thrums cut, Webs then better would
Fully unfolded, keep us from the cold.)
These things applied now in Parenthesis,
Much more make plain the meaning than of this:
So I return, though in familiar style,
To put in order all that is in this Isle:
But here I only do by tokens tell 'um,
The Chronicle more Scholar-like can spell 'um:
So I go on, as all are ranked there,
(For lo that piece I to the Ark compare)
Which Noah built, wherein I think to save
Such Righteous persons as I shall receive
Upon Repentance, finding of them free,
And them admit within the Ark with me.
But Noah had command to make the Ark
Three hundred cubits long, albe't that Bark
Must bear a burden only but of eight,
And all not faithful neither, such a freight
Might so be saved, and here it is even so,
Just and unjust, all generally do go
Within my Ark; which being opened once,
And all called out, 'twill be but as a Sconce
Composed of Paper, not of Planks and power;
So slight a Ship might sink in such a shower:
In cruel cases men may make conform
Both Bark and Fly-boat to withstand the storm:
So as my Ark at Anchor does prove nice,
My Fly-boat puts Fools in a Paradise:
For if some few, when they are called, can stand
By Faith as firm as they were on the Land,
So that the Waters were not their reward;
Yet when (at Court) they come to play their Card
They may mistake, I do not say they shall,
Though some's in danger for to fetch a fall;
For when so many did my Bark abuse,
I framed this Fly-Boat, and shall not refuse
To save some in it, as I in duty stand,
Though not presuming I can purge the Land.
As did St, Patrick (who though purging Vermin)
To put the spawn in people did not determine:
Or not that all are ill, though many may,
For in the general I have such to say,
That as the Angels were created good,
And so might in that Heavenly station stood,
Yet fell, and for no other reason neither,
But that they fell as they affected rather:
Even so shall many in their place appear,
Fallen from their first love too, too many here.
Cathedral Saints I do not now single any, Chur^^ men.

But rich and poor, all men must answer when I
Call by their Names, the Prophet and the Priest
Both are in danger of one days arrest,
Unless the people plainly make appear,
That they read prayers precisely once a year.
The big Book duly does demonstrate all
The famous Fathers Apostolical.
Whence one of twelve was once found false before,
But out of twelve I now name half a score.
Then for our Judges I go evenly on, Judg^

Comparing some to Homer's Sarpedon,
And in the big Book I do clear the case,
Compares with Pompey and Aristides.
Some Judges Justness here, I tell you that,
Moses and Joshua's Justice imitate:
Though they are dead, their deeds live nevertheless;
Good men's perfections death does not suppress:
And in my Book, albe't he be removed,
I point at one so for his Law beloved:
Not only Law (but to disparage none)
Equal in all things unto Sarpedon.
justice in Judges, ought as they survive
Each one the other, to appear superlative.
Pindarus, Plato, Cicero did say
Of Justice as good Judges do to day:
And as Theog^nes gives it us in Greek,
Take it in Latin, lest the thing you seek. ^ustitia in sese virtutes continet
omnes.
Even so as knowledge is on me conferred,
(To tell the Truth my Tongue being not deterred)
(...) do repeat the prudence then of those,
Examining when parties do oppose
Each one the other, and that make report Doctors.

Impartially in presence of the Court:
And all surrounding every Bench, a bit
I lay before them, for to bite on it.
Physicians that put poison in the Pill, Physicians, and such as profess.

I pay them Fees according to their Skill;
And those that have both skill and kindness too,
As they deserve, accordingly I do.
Hippocrates I challenge, not for cheats,
He fills the Files with well advised Receipts.
Galen has Gardeners gathering Herbs, I grant, Apothecaries.

Pliny's supplying every place with Plants.
Now those that plead, and such as play the Knave,
If they themselves by Sophistry can save,
Then be it so; much is made out by Art,
However it is, my Pen must play its part:
Some Clerks, and some the Terms tongue-turn'd Attorneys,
Talking to them, makes merry on my Journeys.
There is one well-cover'd with a Gown ingrain'd
Of base black dye, with stinking Coffee stained: Anagram O Base Cret'r' I.

In these few words his Name's anatomized,
And Answers to it, since he was Baptized.
All in which big Book brightly will appear:
In small Eclipses things are not seen clear.
I try all Trades, though some past Prenticeship,
Playing the Knave, such I severely whip.
Some take up Trades, and some untaught Attorney
Turns Lawyer; but by taking of a Journey: To Lon^^^

I strive to take such untrain'd Trades-mens Tools,
Send such Mock-Lawyers back again to Schools,
Not cherishing of Cheaters; but at large
My Chronicle casheers them from their charge.
But O alas! one thing's like to be lost,
His Majesty's Omissioners almost;
And yet I do not draw so deep a Debtor,
My big Book bears them in a larger Letter.
Though herein happens one mistake in me,
I do neglect that great Character C;
I should say Co when O came in the way;
But now I think them both are best to say.
Saint Paul, you know, he says and seals it,
The good, (he would) the ill (he will) commit;
But they I see in both are Righteous rather,
Omit and Commit fully for their Father.
Do as the Scots said, rightly understood,
The Soldiers swore they came for all their good:
But here is no such daubing now adays,
Whatever is called for, every one obeys;
No man gets wrong but of the toys they bring,
Take some themselves, the rest goes to the King;
God's good unto them, therefore every hour
Floods (on the Farmers) favors freely pour.
Many poor Merchants travel every Tide,
And give what they can rap and run beside:
They Are good to all, fetch when you can tell what,
Be what it will they will take it, what fault's that?
They cannot all fair Promises perform,
For fear their Fortunes fail them in a storm.
(...) would not wrong the Kings Omissioners,
More than the Priests wrong poor Parishoners,
Albe't I wrong them in one Letter, lo,
(...) would not wrong them too much, no, no, no;
(...) favor Farmers; they shall find so when
They come my Three-crown'd Chronicle to scan.
This thing's so secret, few know what I do,
The to other tells both Name and Title too.
Nor do I only those in Commission scan,
Now there, but every individual man.
Since first (in fashion) the King confirmed a Farm,
To praise one, not another, may do harm;
Wherefore, at best, I Will throw this Bauble by,
Because the big Book brings Authority;
And press no more, great Sir, but let you see,
So many Authors are assisting me,
To make things out, both Heathenish and Heavenly,
All their inventions every one as ev'nly
As all the Arts and Sciences, I think,
Could write, were all the Purple Ocean Ink;
Here are their Names, no man knows more than I,
And I Will repeat them to your Majesty:
Divine and Moral, some that knew not God,
But gave good Counsel, was not that then odd?
Aristotle and Plato, I have Cato too,
Socrates, and all Diogenes could do;
Themistocles and Solon, I have even so
The Romans General, Generous Scipio:
Demosthenes his Answer to Epimites,
I spoke with Plutarch and Aristides;
I tell you also of Emelius;
Apelles Painting, what will that avail us:
And I have catched Counsel too of Titus,
I also saw Egesilaus meet us:
Anaxagoras, Periander, I saw Zeno,
Pythagoras opinion spoke with pain, O,
Menander and Caligula, and lo
Domitian and Hippocrates also:
Lycurgus and Xenocrates, and such,
And talked to Epictetus as much:
Xenophanes called Coward, scarcely knocked;
Perseue lending his Money, he was mocked:
Hesiodus his Precepts understood,
Agathocles, a Potters Son, not proud. A King.

Darius and Artaxerxes with one score,
I yet could count, but I will name no more,
But only three, who I report for Pride,
Though here are thousands such as they beside;
Dioclesian the Emperor, he was one,
Herod Agrippa another, now I Am gone;
But Titus Flaminius takes it as a wonder
That I omit him, therefore comes he under.
All these are Authors in my Chronicle,
Comparing men unto them, good or ill;
I stay not now their Virtues to rehearse,
Nor will I put their praises here in Verse;
But every Subject (let them fawn or frown)
As they deserve, lo I have set them down.
By wise advice, and by whose cunning skill,
Your Majesty may know my Chronicle
Is composed; now on another task I intrude,
Comparing some to Tutors too, as rude.
Twelve famous Fathers, Sovereign Sir, consider
What pains I past, comparing them together:
Who to (themselves) can best the attribute
Apply, as to their knowledge they them suit.
But I allege when in the Scales they come
They will down-weigh, I well may wager, some;
Because they do their base debauch'dness bear
Almost as much as any named now here;
Who though they be here only but eleven,
I do not doubt to draw the dozen even;
So I begin, and in their greatness greet 'um,
But in the big Book like a man I meet 'um.
1. Caligula is common in the case,
2. Tiberius comes in with a flaming face,
3. Nero is never very far to find,
4. Heliogabalus has a vicious mind:
5. As Alexander, men are most malicious,
And I aver all men almost are vicious.
6. Cyrus is sly at Court, and catching still,
7. Ulysses likewise with his Wit does ill;
8. Mydas is mighty covetous you know*
9. Hannibal's a crafty Knave even so:
10. Zopyrus has in base dissembling skill,
11. And Aristippus will be flattering still:
Now doubtless I dare out the dozen do,
12. For I am sure here is a Judas too.
But I forbear until my big Book come,
Where on the Margin I have marked some.
I help the Heralds, when I Am brisk about 'um,
Blazing their Arms; but better be without 'um:
Yet it were ill all were alike, for lo,
Parcite paucorum Diffundere crimen, you know*
But since I in my Arithmetic move,
My Pen must more upon the point improve.
I search in Secrets, which unlookt on lie,
Impeaching persons that aspire too high;
I speak of Pride, the only evil even
Why Angels were so hurled out of Heaven.
Envy I own the justest ill of all,
It kills it self to cause its father fall.
Of Straits and Trenches, whom some call contriver,
The Chronicle that Doctrine does deliver.
I talk of Traitors, and I touch the Treason;
But Solomon for things assigns a season:
And I forbear, allowing you to look
Where you shall see abundance in the Book.
Only I bring, albeit I be forbid,
The thing in sight the Lacedaemons did;
But I Am afraid my Muse may be abhorred,
Or called a Fool for what she does afford,
Affecting to be found a Fool in Verse,
Rather than call me Knave upon my Hearse.
Of Government I grant I give a touch,
But meddle not with Governors too much,
Because St. Paul bids us that block forbear,
And I must also seem so godly here;
Lift Hands and Eyes, and bid the poor go pray:
But of such things see what St. James does say.
And I do tell some tokens, time and place,
How that the Romans ruled in such a Case;
And they did rule, and overruled indeed,
In all Dominions through the World we read.
I scan the cause Great Britain bore abuse,
How Ireland felt the effect who will refuse;
I point at persons whom I fear foment,
Make Memorandums how we may prevent;
I could speak plain, but should I so appear,
Though now I Am safe, it puts me in a fear.
Whenever my big Book shall be seen abroad,
I find such Friends as good Sir Edmund God --
But of the Romans, what I said before
Is true, and I can add too on the score,
When Government to any one was given,
All old adherents that same day were driven
Hence at great distance, as was done of late
At our Vicegerents general debate.
Which of the two would touch us to the quick,
The Covenanter or Roman Catholic;
What was concluded, must not with my will
Come here, but hazards in my Chronicle.
But, Royal Sir, by what is here I hope,
Your Majesty may soon conceive the scope
(...) this Complaint, and that it clearly comes,
(...) those before the Battle beating Drums
(...) bid alarms, albe't I be the man
that fetches fuel and the fire do fan
(...) warm my self: Sir, yet a King does know
When Coals are covered, one blast of Wind may blow;
^eing as 'twere the Watchword to awaken
^ecure men sleeping, thousands nigh forsaken;
^orgive me then, most Sacred Sir, to show,
Without offense, things that I cannot know
^learly concluded, because I Am none of them
^^ployed in private for to play the game;
(...) lookers on, though seeming in a Trance,
(...) see as much as those that play perchance;
^specially a person not employed,
When Tempests threaten, lest he be destroyed,
^ooks to himself, and sees whereat they aim,
and then in Conscience must the Cause proclaim.
(...) Sentinel Perdu to defend the shot
(...) such as sleep, but never get one Groat;
^he Chronicle of all these Plots complain,
(...) Prose and Verse; But and every word in vain;
(...) have not had, no not in thirty years,
^ore than Good morrow, as it plain appears;
(...) all that is said, served, suffered, sure I think,
(...) I lay sick, they would give me Gall to drink.
^ut though such things to our Creator cry,
^he present issue's in your Majesty,
(...) pain to ponder, and comparing it,
^ive what my Sovereign finds for present fit;
and for the future from such Sacred Throne,
(...) end the Ark, appoint a Pension.
should it be small, nine hundred sheets now nigh,
(...) put to press, whenever the Author dye.
(...) I am pleased this instant hour to Print
^he Piece, wherein (though here I only hint)
I publish all; I cannot Cheaters cherish,
Fight for it too, and if I perish, perish.
The Chronicle consisting, as I say,
Of bulk so big, did make my Brain obey.
Now eighteen times Twelve-months, at least, and mo^
Before my reckoning mounted to this score:
And is composed, as it will appear,
With great expense: I have two Patrons here
Who will approve, though I their Names suppress,
I never drew one Doit of broken Brass.
But what is told I will for truth aver,
And what is to come, none shall my Tongue deter:
To tell that too, though it looks like a lie,
I Will Paraphrase upon a Prophecy;
So praying for a powerful Inspiration
Of God, I Will venture on a new Narration.
And yet before I on the task intrude,
Because the course I am to run is rude,
I Will move my Muse in meekness) modestly,
With one word more unto your Majesty:
Peter perceived a Vessel with provision,
And Voice came down from Heaven, but no delusion,
The voice said three times, Peter kill and eat;
Peter replied, He must not meddle with meat
Polluted; so then presently espies
The sheet to vanish with the Sacrifice.
So in this sheet your Majesty may see
(I humbly hope this is no sin in me)
Such things as you may Sacrifice, but sure
They are so much polluted and impure,
As if my Sovereign please to search, you shall
Find few that is free, of twenty, one, that is all;
Then Sir, for safety, satisfy the best,
In mercy, but bid Sacrifice the rest:
Till they are free from all those foul offenses
Whereof they are full, for all their fair pretenses:
Which do they not, God will their Pride display,
^or demonstrations I have done to day.
and though my King may all my deeds undo,
^ must say something to the Subject too.
TO THE SUBJECTS.
^ehold I have told you before. Mat. 24. 25. ^vil pursues sinners, but to the
Righteous good shall be repaid. Prove. 13. 21.
To the Reader.
UPon this Paper are expressed
Some lines which long enough may last:
Or at the least, till they and I
Appear before his Majesty;
and with a Volume weighing more
^han this I told you of before:
^s the Prophet preached to Nineve,
^epent, or doubtless ye shall dye:
and now this quarrel I can pick,
^peak like a Roman Catholic,
^epentance will not pay the Fine,
^ou must in Purgatory pine
^^ll you restore, and till you do
^erform what you have promised too.
But since the Chronicle is coming,
I Will say as to one sinking, swimming,
Take hold of things that is shuffling by,
Or you may duck your head and dye.
Which is the sum now of the thing
I have composed for the King:
To show it self I think not fit,
But here is a little All of it.
Then Reader, since I have to do,
And talking too as many too,
I Will cease, lest some say you and I
Both had our fingers in the Pie.
And so if things (as said before)
May please my Prince, I press no more.
What I exhibit at the Throne
Being read with reverence, then go on In manner following.
To all of whom I write what I invent,
I cannot promise every one content:
However it be, let every man be mute
Till he behold how I do distribute.
Lighting of Lamps there where the Sun does shine
Were labor lost, such method is not mine;
Or to waste Wafers where I set no Seal,
I am not sure that secret to conceal:
So paraphrasing on a point that is plain,
Were but to prove a Prophecy profane:
All which I bring but only by the by,
'Cause to the purpose I do them apply.
Of Chronicles composed of Complements,
Because my Book to such a thing assents,
I shall say little: Yet I must something say,
My Tongue must not a task in trust betray:
But not to press the privilege of a Poet,
Nor crave connivence, as in danger do it:
I Will interpose in Poems, and repeat
Old Prophecies, lest I be challenged, Cheat;
And in the end, applying all to us,
Must pray my Speech prove not superfluous,
Nor perilous, since partly I compare
By Prophecies, some famous persons there,
Both good and bad, who when they come to scan,
May take themselves in secret for the man.
Then Reader, rudely pray you do not run
To tear the Thrums before a part be spun,
Spit in my face, and say the man is mad,
Writ like a Fool first, then begin to gad,
And tell such stories, which should some seem true,
Then all our Pomp might perish with a whew;
Not only Pomp, but Purse, Pride, Power and all,
A Frozen Kitchen, and a Hungry Hall,
And all the people pressing now so near us,
Would then disdain us, proving poor as Irus:
But why seem we so fearful till we see,
Who knows but these past Prophecies agree
With our designs? not doing us detect,
As do Hounds, when they follow on the Tract:
Therefore before his Dictates we condemn,
Because he knows we never did contemn
His Person nor his Poems, but so cloyed him
With Promises, albeit we never employed him:
I wish we had his fair desires redoubled,
So should we with his stories not been troubled:
But as the Piggs upon the Paps will wamble
Long e're they suck; he makes such proud preamble
That I suspect he does some piece prepare
Of purpose to pay every one a share:
Wherefore let us pray the Poet to proceed,
That we may know what knacks are in his head.
I hear you speak, and what I do propone,
Grudge not I pray, but let me prattle on.
Considering what says Seneca to you, Ab alio expectes quod alteri feceris.

Desiring as you would be done to, do;
But that you laid this lesson long aside,
Since some with such Postilions proudly ride.
It Is strange a famous man is not found fit
To be preferred until he purchase it:
When beardless Boys must be employed to play,
Because there is no danger in the day:
But if a Fight should follow, few do doubt,
Stout men might strive for to lead on the rout.
And yet there is no fear, though Fools profess,
That all must fight and dye, or go to Mass.
But these are stories men may talk in jest;
Before I perish I will play the Priest.
But this expression from a prattling Scot,
May make them think I am upon the Plot*
Then this were wiser in so plain a case,
A Gift of Guinea's can procure a place.
Though men must not take Bribes, by which neglect,
From Moses's Chair may chance to break their Neck.
But let this pass now, it appears no peril,
Look to your selves, Sirs, here comes on the quarrel:
All Neighbor Nations sins we dare outdo,
And I can count out four unto you too
Whom we exceed; The Dutch we do out-drink,
And we out-drabb the Italian too, I think;
Yea, we out-brave the Frenchman very far,
And to out-brag the Spanish too, we dare:
These are the sins now in the Synagogues,
Objects of Glory, and ungodly Rogues.
Acts of Orlando few men can perform,
Their hands being bound, they must stand in the storm.
Who would refuse now, if he were so bid,
As the worthy Cardinal of Toledo did:
To whom the Spanish Monarchy made suit,
Offering a Princely pension too to boot*
But as her Theologian, to assist
Her Royal Council, which the Monarch mist;
His Conscience could not give consent at all,
And so, I say, mist to be Cardinal:
For he did grant, that if he were to get
All she could give, set in her Chair of State,
But to betray the simpler peoples Tusk,
Make Assa foetida smell like sweetest Musk;
He vowed he would not wrong the work of God:
For those Temptations now I Will blaze abroad,
Not as a portion of the Prophecy,
Although, I think, it looks much like a lie:
Such Promises, if proffered to us all,
Might make a moderate man a Cardinal:
And I suspect, would all as plainly speak,
Some might become a Cardinal this week:
But I forbear, because I can but tattle,
And yet I vow for to abate the Battle,
That our Division should not go to Gath,
Our nakedness be published in the path,
Or as they are termed, the streets of Askelon,
I would be banished even to Babylon.
The Prophecy spreads further, if it speed,
Says that the Roman Catholics have a Creed.
To which we will say Credo in the close.
But Priests did pen this Prophecy, I suppose.
But, O behold, how men do gape, and goes,
Of Commonwealths men, now called Common foes:
Men who unto such projects did aspire,
And for their own inordinate desire
Would dash in pieces, says the Prophecy,
All that profess; nay, even you and I;
But what profession you and I may be,
I will not tell you more than you tell me:
So our disorders only do appear,
Most men are men, most irreligious here:
For as the time by Minutes moves, we must
Change so our selves, we cannot Traitors trust,
Albe't we be even so our selves; and lo
As you sur-name me, I shall not say no.
One day with O yes, cry God save King Charles,
Another day comes Covenanted Quarrels:
Then comes a Clerk creating a Collector,
Whom when you please can pray for our Protector.
Then Papists must not name a Parish Priest,
Or all must even be banished, every Beast.
Quakers and Shakers, all men must profess,
Preach when they please, the Law allows no less.
Of all these Free-wills you with one may venture,
Family of Affection, there a man may enter.
I shall not now more Prophecies profess,
To spend the time, nor tempt you more or less.
But lest I hurl you over the head and ears;
My self subject to Jealousies and Fears:
I will insist, seeing both by Rhyme and Verse,
I tell the truth in most I here rehearse.
But if I make the Kings Heart with a Lie
Merry, then you call that scurrility.
Although these Lies lie not in secret hid,
The Boys by jesting at Elisha did
The like: I love not, nor affect offense,
But would seem pleasant, that proves my pretense.
Elias jested, jested justly too, 1 King. 18. 2^

When at the Idol he the jest did do,
Here two extremes, one's called scurrility,
The Other extreme is termed Rusticity.
Such Nabal was, who was accounted Clown,
I jest not now, when I set Scripture down.
Desire of Honor is reputed proud,
But pusillanimity is not granted good:
Not too desirous, too averse not neither;
A moderation for to rule them rather.
He that desires (his desire is good) 1 Timothy 3. 1.

(...) Bishopric, but not to make him proud:
Nor must men neither do, as we do read
The Monk Amonius did, out of his head
Cut his Right Ear, rather than he would lie
To be made choice of to the Ministry.
These are extremes which wise men may amend,
Rather than in such cases to contend;
But who will be found such a Fool as that,
Cut off his Ear, unless he know for what?
Must not contend, nor shall he either thrive
Who does by Bribes the Priesthoods place derive:
But I believe none such as those are here,
To get by Bribes, or want it with an Ear.
Indifferent moral matters best to be
Procured by means of most indifferency:
But if it be a matter more divine,
Then you must to Divinity incline;
And if you doubt, then I desire you further,
By this Just Rule you do lay down your Order,
Being comprehended in this very Verse,
Consisting of eight words, I will rehearse:
Quis, quid, ubi, quibus, and cur, quomodo, quando, quibuscum: Try all your
actions by these as they come,
Who, what and why, by what means, and by whose;
How, when and where, do diverse doubts disclose.
If all these words work not, now wrote I the Evangel,
Then you will never alter for an Angel.
So all is ended, only this remains,
Would any of you patiently take pains,
And suffer such? Pray weigh this warning then,
Repent and mend, or perish by a Pen.
And if you find my Speeches are provokt,
You know how Philip railing Nicanor choakt.
I Will move no more now, earnest nor in jest,
But cease and say, Farewell, Sirs, So I rest.
Thus end the Contents of my Three Crowned Ch^^nicle, what follows, I humbly
hope, moves your (...) to laugh, and shall serve to some as a fore-warning to
low a Friends advice.

An Apologue in an Epilogue: OR, THE Pismire Displayed.
SCotland and England both are bound in Paper,
Ready for reading, and the charge is cheaper,
Than Print a piece so big, whence I forbear,
Being burdened with such scandalous questions here*
And must let Ireland lie a while, not end it,
Before I find a fault to discommend it.
Men must malign that have packt up the plunder
Of Ireland, and still strive to keep it under.
That I dare not now challenge such a cheat,
Until the Chaff be winnowed from the Wheat.
England and Ireland both receive my sense,
But I gave Scotland the pre-eminence
When I began, my Birthright bad me do it,
And know the Laws of Nations will allow it.
But having entered Ireland after all,
And, as I said, compared my self to Saul,
Who when a voice once entered in his Ear,
Confounding him, and bad him to forbear*
To Persecute, being hard for him to kick
Against his God, which touched him to the quick;
Converting Saul, who soon became a suitor
For those to whom he proved a Persecuter;
And for whose sakes whom cruelly he crossed,
For their Salvation wished himself were lost.
(...) which same sense, lo I as Paul do pray
All in my Ark may be redeemed to day
From what is determined, though indeed few do
Deserve; but I shall play the Pismire now,
And as I do this Apologue display,
(...) pray you read, then censure what I say.
The Lion sleeping, men laid Toils to take him,
A Pismire spied, and vexed the Lion to wake him;
Touching him with a Tandem resurges, till
The Lion proudly would the Pismire kill
For troubling him; to whom the Pismire prayed,
lord, look about you e're you are dismayed:
Which doing, saw them setting Snares and Bands
To take him; brake them, so escaped the Hunters hands.
Thus though the Pismire pricked the Lion, yet
The Pismire saved the Lions life by it.
Wherefore the Lion, though he is called a King,
said Pismire sure I thank thee for the thing:
^or had he not been by the Pismire pricked,
^he Hearts blood of the Lion had been lickt.
^ut better causes might make Christians calm,
(...) are at length set down in David's Psalm;
^nless they be such as Ulysses left,
^ubject to Circe, with her Witches craft,
Whom Circe turned to Tigers, Swine and Dogs,
and ever after loved to live like Hogs.
^ray quarrel not now, nor call me a Knave,
Which if? I can with other things receive)
^ut this Apologue you will apply it best
Into your selves, it is time to me to rest.
^owe're take notice what the Lion said,
When by the Warning he his freedom had:
^uos perdere vult Jupiter (such he infatuates wholly)
^uos tueri vult, suscitat, and them defends as fully.
The Moral then, if men might not mistake,
Well understood, this use may of it make:
Look to your selves, as Lions lying sleeps,
Make me the Pismire that in private peeps,
And sees the snare, as in my Monarchs mite
I set it out, boasting before I bite.
Look then about you, Lions lie in peril,
First thank the Pismire, then conceal the quarrel.
And since I do apply the point so plain,
I hope my pratlings prove not words in vain.
Praxiteles and Apelles with their Skill,
One with his Carving, the other with his Quill,
Could never paint your Pictures so perfect
In Colors as I do, in black and white.
This Abstract only owns you as a Glass,
The big Book brings you in a better dress.
Upon this Epitome of the Chronicle.
This my Abstract looks just as Janus did,
Two ways, albeit my big Book does forbid
Such double dealing, clearly does discover
Each person plainly these three Kingdoms over,
And of the King thinks it not much amiss
Unto his Councils clearly to tell this,
That neither Envy, Pride, nor Power take place,
As Rehoboam's Counselors in the case,
Who were Beardless Boys, but prove as you appear,
To put good Counsel in your Sovereigns Ear,
And so as Wife and Valiant Captains keep
Your King secure, your selves in safety sleep.
All which the big Book brings abroad indeed,
Though this conveys you with a shorter thread. Pro Aris and Focis.
NOw since my Muse my mind confines,
Read only these ensuing Lines,
^or ne'rtheless my weeping Verse,
(...) may be you may hear me rehearse
That of the Courser and the Ass
(...) Aesop, you know how it was,
To put such Latin Lines in Rhyme
Turns to no Treason at this time:
Then therefore take it as ye get it,
^or nolens volens, I Will repeat it:
(...) learned lines and skilful Scots,
^ook-bred up Boys may borrow notes:
(...) cannot miss in meter mix it,
^ene qui latuit been vixit.
(...) love to lurk well, live well too;
^oth Dives do so, what say you?
My Lines are like my self, I Am sure,
^oth bad, and both become obscure:
And yet though both come by the by,
So many make Tautology.
Though since again I must make bold
To bring in both to make you scold:
For both these Lines whereon you look
Are both the best that is in my Book.
You have more learning too than I,
Read them, and tell me if I lie.
Contemnentur ab iis quos ipse
Prius contempsere, with a whipse;
Et irridentur ab iis quos ipse
Prius irrisere, juggling Gypsy.
Englished.
Thou shall be laughed at, and forlorn,
By those thou first did scoff and scorn.
But now I should go seek a Surgeon.
These Lines so cruelly do scourge-on:
And yet your self my Judge shall be,
Many men merit as much of me,
And when my big Book goes abroad,
Too late to come to kiss the Rod. Mean time
If Wealth does vanish,
Which Pride does banish,
Grieve never-ever then thereat.
Irus and est subito, qui modo Croesus erat.
As Irus he is poor to day,
Who did with Croesus Coffers play.
Nequa quem
Si fortune me tormente,
Esperance me content*
If Scotch and English will not do,
Take Latin and Italian too;
If four will neither do nor drive,
I Will furnish French, to make them five.
But lest by Lines I lay on loads,
And puzzle you by Repeating,
I Will only tell of two feigned Gods
Charmed one another by Cheating: Thus.
When Jupiter, for Juno's sake,
Fell in a furious Shower,
Low in her Lap, and nigh a Lake,
The only way to woo her:
Even when he in his Courage came,
On full account to Court her,
Though he ran rudely, like a Ram,
He vowed he would not hurt her;
(...) only tell some merry tales,
No less than half a score,
^ffirming whatsoever fails,
He would have one word more.
^hen Juno (though she loved the jest)
Called Jupiter a Jew,
^urning her T -- to him in have,
She said, Great Sir, adieu.
and so say I, for should my Muse
Make Rhimes as I make room,
^hen we should have enough of News,
Until the Day of Doom.
Epistle Dedicatory.
Epistles come first, but this being Cursed, comes last.
TO all I aim at, one and other,
To Learned Bards, being born a Brother.
1. At Juggling Jesters enter I,
The subject of my Theme,
And if I cannot such descry
Let me then be by them.
2. Thousands of such are summoned in,
And in effect found faulty;
^ejected so, dare not begin
To plead one grain, Not Guilty.
3. Of all the ills whereat my Pen
Does point, and I believe
Amongst such multitudes of men
Some prove superlative.
4. In Envy, Avarice, and even
That sin that shut the Gates
Against the Angels; once in Heaven
Destroying all Estates.
5. Pride which my Pen cannot express,
And malice with it mixed,
Drowned in the depth by drunkenness,
With Sodoms sins annexed.
6. Base Pride that does the Flock infect,
For those that overlook
The Sheep, do not the sore dissect,
They want the Scriptures Crook.
7. For when the Shepherds self is so
Puffed up with Pride, the people
Must perish; haughty Herds-(...)
Herds you know
Do scorn to keep the Cripple.
8. Such cursed faults confounding all,
Of high and low degree,
That when they come to me the names to call,
My self scapes not Scot-free.
9. For Pride surpassing in a man,
Especially a Preacher,
Whose Tongue was trained not to trepan,
By being like a Lecher.
10. And still to Paraphrase on Pride,
(The Pulpit most polluting)
On such when simple Flocks confide,
The success must be suiting.
11. But I Am informed you fret that I
Preach in so poor a Pulpit,
When I with Patience must comply,
Because I cannot help it.
12. And yet although you see me from
Employment so suspended,
I doubt not but the day shall come
Perchance King Charles may mend it.
13. However I Will now employ my powers
To weigh your woes with mine,
And every eight and forty hours
One with the other Dine.
14. But that you have too deep a Dish
For me to dip into,
Though always wallowing in your wish,
May you indeed undo.
15. I know the Act you are angry at,
My Mote lies in your Eye;
But if you will not wink at that,
Cry out then, what care I?
16. My Book's the bit whereat you bite,
Though things lie therein locked:
Have ye cast off your Courage quite,
To cry before you are knocked?
17. Will you be as the full-fed Fish,
Snap at the shining Hook?
And then content to have that Dish
Called up for from the Cook.
18. Will that within your mouth be meat,
Or help your hungry maw,
You cannot any of it eat,
It is not from the raw.
19. Fall how it will, or well or worse,
I care not how it come;
Since you for me had no remorse,
I Will make you pay the sum.
20. The only Anchor easing me,
I Am not oppressed by pelf,
Nor am I so incenst to see
The Parliament it self.
21. But having wasted all the Ware
Which Ovid made to move her:
Excuse me, overcome with care,
The Crumbs for to recover.
22. To show our Sovereign Lord at last
In lines of Lamentation,
The many passages that past,
To's Majesty's admiration.
23. But since I on no name now call,
Nor clears it, though I can;
Frown not, lest your own Pride spoil all,
So make your self the man.
24. Which if? What can ye then expect,
(Such works of darkness do) Dan. 5. 2^

But when your Carcass is correct,
A Mean Tekel too.
25. A finger writing on the Wall,
O Fool, for all thy Feast, Luke 12. 20, 2^

This night thy self thy Soul and all,
Shall trot to Hell in haste.
26. These sayings are united now,
To give the more contents,
It is not that I talks to you,
But both the Testaments.
27. Who then can get those great degrees
To him due, do you think?
When Princes creeping on their knees,
Brought Baltshazzer Bowls to drink:
28. Though now he is on another score,
So soon such mercies miss,
To day his Dignities adore,
Then at his honors hiss.
^9. But better born a lower Sail,
When Boreas blew so high,
^or Fortunes frown can cast the Scale
On others, as on I.
^0. Now he that thinks me too severe,
Or too censorious either,
(...) tell him as a friend, what is fair,
Let him say nothing rather.
No spite (to speak plain) prompts my Muse
(Though on no change they choose me)
^ut to tell truth in Terms abstruse,
My Conscience could accuse me,
And make my Friends refuse me.
St. Augustine said,
Hiems Horrens, Aestas torrens
Virent prata, vernant Sata.
^hese Notes now that are here annexed,
(More Moral than Divine)
(...) only take them for my Text,
Words of St. Augustine.
A Paraphrase upon the Words.
^^ght Souls were once within the Ark,
And all not righteous neither,
^^ght thousand Bodies in this Bark,
Which I have raised rather.
though all (whence I have busied been)
Within the same, I say,
(...) Sympathy shall not be seen,
As in these Lines I lay.
(...) eight or four emphatick words
(The seasons of the Year)
In which such Concordance accords,
As hereby does appear.
The cold concurs with scorching heat,
Meadows grow green you see,
Corn carried home, made up to eat,
All things but men agree.
Wherefore my Muse shall move no more,
Such sores expect no Plasters,
But say (as I have thought before)
I serve unthankful Masters.
Throughout three Kingdoms, even to all,
I send my Jests in general.
Sonnet.
My foresaid fancies, in effect,
Must suffer censure, I suspect,
Though at no Innocents I aim,
My Chronicle can Knaves proclaim,
So Friends may my Reflections fear,
As much as Foes, where faults appear.
And if you say my Books abuse you,
And fight with me, I Will not refuse you
For lines do link conceits so on it,
They constitute a serious Sonnet.
Nothing ill spoken, if not ill taken,
The words themselves will you awaken;
Whose Emblems blazon my defense,
Honi soit qui Mal y pense.
The piece whereof I so much speak
At Anchor lies by London,
Where Passengers (by Sea) fell sick,
Of sixty not a sound one.
^ut in this same Epitome
(As safe as on the shore)
Though thousands drown, some shall go dry,
Or never trust me more.
The Argument.
(...) the Author of the Ark,
^all I rather say the Bark?
(...) this Fly-boat; one or another,
(...) you were my firstborn Brother?
and so faithless, not befriend me,
^hese fancies following will defend me.
(...) this strict Abstract moves you less or more,
(...) is a token something touched the sore,
and that as soon as e're the Book that bears
^he Burdens out, we will be by the Ears,
^nless the Lesson Ovid's Art does urge,
^rincipiis obsta, prove a perfect purge:
^ill then the Epitome of that good man's life, Sustine and Abstine.

^pictetus, can only end the strife.
^ear and forbear, first bear a bit with me,
and then forbear, so bad a Friend to be;
^owe're, could malice tie my Tongue in Tophet,
^nce more I tell you, I may prove a Prophet.
(...) tell much truth, though under waves I write,
^ut my Creator can my Cause requite.
(...) blow on me, but better buffet them,
that Pen lampoons for publishing your shame:
^ampoons put Bells upon the Ladies Beagles.
said in their Laps; then with the Wings of Eagles
^hey range abroad, but these are not as those,
My Rhimes as yet remain under the Rose:
though Beagles black spots will neither wash nor wither,
(...) modest Muse may many secrets smother.
Volumes of Verses wasted all in vain
On persons so polluted and profane,
Who though they are not mentioned in these Verses,
Dye when they will, that day I Will deck their Herses.
Their sins are such, most part indeed outdo
Both Sodom and Gomorrha's motions too.
I have recorded, as I could collect,
But failed in my performance, I suspect.
I enter Item, you are owing that,
And Item also you remember what:
Then waving words, I cast my Ciphers so,
That I can make up Millions with an O:
Add O to O, and yet with all the O's,
Cannot the half of all the Debts disclose
They owe; and so shall leave them in Arrear,
Until my Chronicle all Accounts make clear.
Their Gold's their God they trust, but I trust to
The God of Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego.
Seria mixta Jocis.
Scotland and Ireland's Constitutions, Dispositions and Resolutions.
SCotland keeps all within it self, and say
They Are bound in Conscience for the King to pray,
But give no money; Ireland's even as ill,
For there the King gets as much with their will.
Scotland's an ancient Kingdom that is well known,
The King, and all that is in it, is their own,
And yet gets nothing. But the Generous Jester, Lord Forbes in Scotland his
Fiddler.

^enkins, you know being merry with his Master,
Said, if your own must fast when others feast,
Devil be your own, said Jenkins in a Jest.
But in the big Book I disburse things better,
Which till it comes, the King knows not his debtor.
And extant once, his Majesty makes bold
By new Collectors to call off the old.
Seeing none that is in it (that is a a certain thing)
For nothing will serve neither God nor King.
But keeping Ireland for themselves, I Will swear't,
They will be faithful Subjects, never fear't.
As for my self, I shall expect no place,
There are such curious questions in the case:
One is, I no more must be called a Scot,
Or else eight hundred golden Guinea's got:
But then the third thing far exceeds those,
What need we Fighters when we fear no foes?
Old German Justlers were at beating best,
Now Boys are better, Papists being suppressed.
Before my sight four times six years had seen,
Throughout six Kingdoms had my body been,
Bore Arms in each; where seeing all that is there,
I viewed one vice much made of every where,
Ingratitude, marked by that deep Divine,
And pious Penman, wise St. Augustine,
Who surely says Ingratitude's ingrost
Next to the Sin against the Holy Ghost;
Which odious Ills innate in high ones here;
Where I have purchased my Experience dear.
How fare they then that do that Vice so woo,
For which my Muse does make so much ado?
Shall they not drown in that Deluge so deep,
Destroying Christians, and all things that creep?
Surely they shall, unless they draw advice
From what I writ, for I have told them twice
I have an Ark where all things are, whence I
Sent out a Dove above the Floods to fly:
Which Dove indeed, as Doves delight to do,
Returned, and turned round with a Cutry Cooe:
And in her Bill an Olive Leaf did bring,
Whence I observed the spending of the Spring.
So called all out, where finding few but free,
I did Record them in a high degree.
But for the rest whose Tarts upon their Tables
Taste not like trifles feigned in Aesops Fables:
On which I fed not, nor got Golden grains,
Nor parings of a Pudding for my pains.
If e're I had one Chip or Chaff to chew,
Whence I presume such to incense to show,
And those are these, because I would conclude,
To whom the Saint assigns Ingratitude:
That take so much, would fain for shame get off,
And then the giver they begin to scoff,
Says Augustine. Q^i quo plus debent, magis oderunt.
The Argument.
One comes, whom I Iscariot call,
(Which name denotes a Knave)
By questions to discover all,
But I the Thief deceive.
Iscariot came my feigned Friend at least,
For faithful Friends are now not in request,
And talked so much till his Discourse grew scarce,
Wooing me then to put his words in Verse:
Some Questions asked; I answered that, That Is true;
And what that was, the words themselves ensue:
Reading some things, he shak'd his head, and says,
How many Pamphlets have you penned in praise
Of powerful persons, and must now proclaim
The cold requitals you received of them.
He also urged, might he be bold to ask,
Were those I mentioned muffled with a Mask?
Or did I court them with a Complement,
Not daring to repay the punishment
I had endured? To which I answered thus,
The very words of wise Epictetus:
Him not to hurt that hurt me, but to do
In that even as says Cicero to me too:
When in thy hands thy foes to whip do lie,
Show thou them then most magnanimity.
Says he: but lest I should my self deceive,
By trusting of a Counterfeited Knave,
I said what is said is in my Chronicle,
And it may choke you, if it chances ill;
Adding but this, which construe if you can,
Your feigned profession shall not me Trepan.
It were not fair if for such faults as what
They do to me I should retalliate;
But in a matter, though of moral trust,
To give to all in general what is just.
Let Critical men and Momus,
Take this resolute reckoning from us.
The Critic can cry out perchance
Upon my Muse and Momus,
May do so, but one day they will dance,
Receiving something from us.
The bigger Book may bring a blush
For their abusing these:
In it the cunning Knave I crush,
In more emphatick phrase.
For there almost in every Leaf,
By help of Homer's head,
I something have to hang a Thief,
In dainty draughts indeed.
To Ireland's Partners of its pelf,
(Whereof though I am none my self)
Yet I leave them a Legacy,
In these ensuing lines you see.
The First Part.
All Ireland is the King's, and there
He keeps a multitude with care
Called Subjects, not much Revenue
To entertain such Retinue.
Subjects rightly understood,
In mind and manners that were good:
But when our wills are wavering, we
Are not such as we seem to be.
Our King is as Kings are in Play,
And Plays are altered every day.
Mistake me not now, search your thought,
And there the alteration's wrought:
For though our thoughts may seem to vanish,
Rebellious deeds we hardly banish.
Our thoughts and wishes weigh the same
As they were done, endeavoring them.
Of Ireland too, this story stands,
The Riches are in Hucksters hands.
Though none of Ireland's mine, I mean
How Ireland's ordered that is seen.
But speaking much makes Parrots prate,
And that is an ill I imitate:
Yea, speaking spoils men, some allege,
Though Poets prate per Privilege.
For my part, my Speech spreads so far,
Some think me not fit for the War,
But they do spare me to employ;
For if? they should no jests enjoy:
Nor is there fighting where we are,
Young men are meetest for such War:
All old men must sit still and sleep,
Being only apt to catch and keep.
Their actions are accordingly,
As Bacchus bib abundantly.
And yet they have not heard nor seen
Me catch one Cup two Meals between.
As for our feats in War, I Am sure
I fought one night near Elshoneur,
Hard work one day beside Stateene,
Trailsound, Gripswall, have you those seen?
In Pomerland, at Walagast,
I fully fourteen days did fast:
Nor Bread nor Beef, but one dead Horse,
Green Furs to fry him, that was worse:
We boiled his Buttocks into Baggs,
From top to tail, tore all in tags.
The German Ditches were so dry,
Could get no drink if I should dye.
At Wallagast was so aghast,
I fought and run away as fast:
For feet whereon a stout man stands,
He has to help him as his hands.
Then we marched on I know not where,
Hunger enough had to my share.
Through Sweedland, Poland, many places,
Saw thousands there with withered faces;
Sea-sick, Ship-broke, nigh drowned one day
Upon the Nose of Noraway.
For there the Sea did swell, I say,
With Froth and Cold; a cruel day:
Three hundred men that day were drowned,
All cast away within the Sound.
Fish on our Flesh fed as a prey,
And Neptune fled himself away.
Our roaring from the Rocks redound,
The Devil that day was well-nigh drowned.
But you may say truth will not hold,
Of all, the truth must not be told:
Yet I tell truth, if you will try,
Though I am priviledg'd to lie.
Elsenburg, Vstate, Landscrowne, and Malme,
By them foul Fortunes did befall me;
But quickly got good recompense,
By Young Fro-Sophia Rosincrance.
But what? unless you can compel,
'Twere Treason in my Tongue to tell.
Mistake not now my talking this,
The Danish Dames no man dare kiss
In Complement, before another:
Ladies only embrace their Brother.
But that being past, should I been drowned,
I swam in Shallops on the Sound,
Till I arrived at Copenhagen,
Where I did venture in a Wagon,
Though soon began to go afoot,
For want of one thing made me do it.
I traveled still from Town to Town,
Two days together, never sat down.
Where Pompey past in pomp and pride,
I ran, could have no Horse to ride;
Armenia, Media and Cilicia;
Came capering to Cappadocia:
A hundred houses (I would wonder)
So poor I could pick up no plunder,
I wandered where, I knew not how,
But where I saw much more than you.
And through all Germany did justle,
Sometimes so wanton I would whistle.
Then I resolved I would go over,
If I should swim, and drink in Dover.
So I came capering to Kent,
Next day lo I to London went,
Where I had much Command, being horst,
A Captain first 1642.
, that was the worst;
Then how I prosper'd, if you please
To prove: I past through all degrees.
In Ireland, now I Will write one wonder,
How I have past the Pikes by plunder,
Bore never Arms there, nevertheless
Yet you shall see how Devils me dress;
Though I in Ireland never won ought,
Four hundred Knaves came out of Connaught,
And in my absence, in an hour
Stripped Wife and Children, did devour
All things I had without, within,
Left nothing but the naked skin:
My Trunks, and all therein extorted,
And in an instant all transported.
A punishment perpetual,
Came home unto a hungry Hall:
My Wife and Children all did dye,
And left me in extremity:
Nor was it in a time of War,
But quietness, as now we are.
Think you then, since I was destroyed
So here, I should be here employed:
But being not, lo I perceived
How wickedly the World was waved:
And for the King composed a Book,
Wherein his Majesty may look,
And see things never seen before,
I hope I need not name them more:
But all such sorrows suffered I,
Then turned my Pen to Poetry,
Till I could tell you this and that,
In words that you would wonder at:
But if you please I shall suspend
My prattling now, and make an end:
For Rhiming proves not worth a Rush,
But Wind that is blowing in a Bush:
Though, as they say, if things so fall,
Some blows may blow us over the Wall.
By such Oppressions I may speed,
So said the Prodigal indeed,
Periissem nisi periissem now,
No doubt, he knew then what to do:
He also said, as I collect 'um,
Vexatio dat Intellectum.
And I may speed, as some suspect,
For this same Distich, it is so direct;
Remembering Ovid's well-read Rhyme,
Principiis obsta, now is the time.
But I speak humbly to my Prince,
For words few others will convince.
Envy with Ease, Pride, Power and Pelf,
Make men take most upon themself.
But all that's here is but by wording,
My big Book brings a better burden;
There what I wrote, I vowed to do,
In promise and performance too:
But what remains, must rest upon
A mental Reservation.
But I again am gone amiss,
(So prays you in Parenthesis,
To pardon me till I have wrote,
Some Towns by chance I have forgot,
From Amsterdam to Rotterdam,
I cannot tell well whence I came:
But two Towns more I Will tell to you,
And then I have not much to do;
Hamburg is one, Antwerp another,
Then I came home to meet my Mother.)
The Second Part.
Now if some things are here misplac't,
Receive two reasons, Sick and Haste,
Though not so sick nor hasty neither,
To spoil my Foe, nor spare my Father:
Be how it will, please you to read,
I Will give you all these when I Am dead.
For you deserve no less at least,
Than feed a while upon my Feast:
Proceed then, and consider why
I leave you such a Legacy.
Delivering likewise no stolen story,
But very real Inventory,
Of all my Goods and Chattels too,
And every thing I thought to do.
Where I have been, what I have seen,
And what fell often out between.
I tell my Crosses and my Losses,
My to's and fro's, and twenty tosses:
At every bait I bite a bit,
But all the holes I cannot hit:
Some points I press as Prophecy,
Which men may feel before they dye:
How these that boast now of their bravery
Shall suffer, and be seen in slavery;
For though what herein I have hinted,
Appear as Dreams till they be Printed.
But wise men's Wills are proved by Proby,
If my necessity should so be;
Be how it will, take notice now,
By Pen or Print I Will punish you.
Your self shall judge, in Justice I
Do deal with Knaves accordingly.
All that I say and do indeed,
May come to pass, I pray take heed:
May prove a day of Doom to many,
And to your self as soon as any:
I say your self, whoever you be,
But means of more than two or three:
And so my Soul I give to God,
I know my Carcass but a clod.
Being sure my Dictates, if I dye,
Deserve thanks of his Majesty:
For notwithstanding Testament,
Words, wishes and a long complaint:
That attribute that does belong
To God, I Will imitate, if not wrong?
By it being bound to wait on God,
Who Is long before he brings the Rod:
As by these following words I vow,
Which may fall heavy upon you.
Ad poenam tardus Deus est, and praemia velox,
Sed pensare solet vi graviore Moram.
I Am so manured, so plowed and puzzled,
Much worse than any one that is muzzl'd:
My Crosses and my Melancholy,
Make me write Rhimes religiously.
As does appear by these you read,
Albe't they are not mine indeed.
Perpetua impietas nec mensae tempore cessat,
Exagitat vesana quies somnique furentes.
Neither at Bed nor yet at Board,
Will great despair small rest afford.
Now those these touch not to the quick,
With me will not a quarrel pick.
Or if they do, I dare defend,
And doubts not some may condescend.
But lest you say I run in rage,
I Will end this purpose on this page:
And so shall put no more upon it,
But end my sorrow with a Sonnet.
A Sonnet.
My Testament consists of two
Parts, my false Friends I Will tell you how:
First day I fell fast in a Fever,
Sweating as swimming in a River;
Where all things not in order are,
Though not from purpose very far:
But then the next day you may find
I had a well composed mind.
My Tongue could tattle tales in Latin,
As Priests can mumble mornings Mattin:
For whatsoever's in the end,
Both Rhyme and Reason I Will defend:
Say what you will, or no or I,
If you refuse, truth Friend you lie.
However I Will add no more now on it,
But give you time to sing this Sonnet.
I Am sure now had you suffered such as I,
And by bad carriage been constrained to cry,
You would not stay to make the matter Meter,
Though mine be bad, yours might be scarce compleat^^
But you would scold, and pierce their Pride in Prose,
Rather than see the game go as it goes.
And to retalliate, not your strength restrain,
Though I have wasted my fair words in vain.
Now cast's my cause (in Chronicles) between 'um,
(My King and Courtiers) closing, Respice finem.
Two Witnesses make every question clear,
Then by that rule no man can call me Liar;
My Muse and I did on these Secrets sit,
And so gave Sentence as we found was fit:
Though here are Millions meeting at the Bar,
To two conditions all reduced are:
Or Good or Guilty, no party has appealed,
The Verdict's past, so is the Sentence sealed.
Reader,
My Book is now no better than a Bird,
Bound to the good behavior of a Herd,
That has it fast between his hungry hands,
As now my Book at your Tribunal stands,
Waiting the Verdict of a dangerous dozen,
Whose factious Foreman faithlesly undoes one:
But I despair not, Virtue wins reward,
I play above-board when I cast my Card.
And though I do the Bargain dearly buy,
The Mite belongs to millions more than I.
Weigh then the words wherewith I waste my Wit,
And you shall see your self concerned in it.
My main Mistake is in my method most,
For of my matter I may boldly boast,
But that I venture with a hand so high
To put advice unto his Majesty
Upon Record, things being so sublime,
The King can scarcely cure it all this time,
Unless my Sovereign in such moral matters
Try by the Touchstone, as we all are Cheaters,
To cure the Canker, which I do implore,
My Monarch may, but I dare move no more;
Because the fault wherein I dive, I do
Repent, and yet repeats it to you too,
For which on such, much, though I so insist,
I Am pardoned when the Kings hands I have kissed.
The Conclusion.
Now I Am persuaded I present
A piece so poorly pollisht,
That every Babbler will be bent
To have my Book abolisht:
But since you see within the thing
So many Authors are,
And that it so concerns the King,
If you be wise, beware.
Besides, if all are subjects, sure
I Am one amongst the rest:
And would a Dunghill Dog endure
to be by Pride suppressed:
No, no, the basest Beast I Will bring
That creeps, to escape your scorns;
The Snail I say, that silly thing,
Being hurt, shoots out his Horns.
But to conclude with calmness now,
(My Flesh was in a flame)
I shall say soberly to you,
Par pari referam.
Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat Arator,
Enumerat Miles vulnera, Pastor oves.
Soldiers and Sailers, Shepherds, Plow-men speak
Of Sheep, of Oxen, Winds, Wounds, all the week;
Cadgers talk too of Saddles, things to carry,
So I would tell you, had I time to tarry;
That in this Abstract I Would consess, but cannot,
The four last ride, the first's a Soldier, shannot.
Better been Shepherd, Cadger, Sailer, Plowman,
Than Soldier through seven Kingdoms; that is for you m^ And me too m^
A Sonnet.
These Abstracts are but as the Morning Star,
Which goes before a larger light by far:
So when the big Book goes abroad, be sure,
I think you shall its dazzling not endure:
For as a Cloud eclipse the clearest Sky,
The Chronicle covers the Abstracts, that is no lie.
Then happy is he whose Errors I omit,
But who can say, he has deserved it?
Let me lie at Bethesda's Pool, but not
Come in for cure, Knaves can keep out a Scot.
Our Sovereign sees a Rhyme can render reason,
And Solomon says, a thing that is said in season
Is sweet and sure; according to my Skill,
I say, I thank you, in my Chronicle.
A Paraphrase upon these Abstracts.
Abstracts are but the bits of good and ill,
This is the Quintessence of my Chronicle.
And Abstracts only show things but in shorts,
Quintessence all within one word imports;
Even so you can by Quintessence conceive
The full effect, things can you not deceive.
Abstracts of Abstracts may abstracted be,
As by this Abstract you receive, you see:
And since this Pamphlet plainly does appear
The Abstract of three Nations now so near;
Although I thought the substance of the thing
Was more than I in such a Book could bring.
Now ne'rtheless I find I might forborne
(...) have mentioned Ireland, and my Wits not worn
On such a Subject, or the Subjects in it,
Its Abstract grieves me that I did begin it:
Because upon Experience I may spell
Men's Sur-names, and then in an Abstract tell
Their Imperfections, and in effect afford
Their faults, and fix their frailties on Record.
As in a Prospect, things do seem, though far,
As fair as when nigh to the Eye they are.
And as in Maps a man may Mountains measure,
And in few Figures cast up Croesus Treasure:
So in this Abstract though you think you see
Motes in a mist, yet you may trust to me,
To make each Mote much like a Mountain: All
The Abstract is, as a Partition Wall,
Which I Will remove, so shall you surely see,
These few lines following, an Epitome
Of all the pains my Prayers could not prevent,
Till I proclaimed them by this Complement.
Seeing some here such sorrows never suffered
As I, but when a fair occasion offered,
Although one place them certain thousands paid;
They plead for two, until they are arrayed
In Robes that is rich, and till they really rise
Puffed up with Pride, poor Souls to Sacrifice.
Which when I saw their ways so vicious, I
Employed my Pen these praises to display.
1. Ignoble natures, nigh, innate in all,
2. And who can me a wrong Accomptant call?
3. All are unthankful signs are seen in me:
4. And though you fret, you find your self not free.
5. Wherefore for all your Pride, expect in Print,
6. Largely laid out, but whereat here I hint.
7. No Conscience, nor firm friendship find I neither,
8. In many, most men are unrighteous rather.
To spend more Paper, and to spoil my Pen,
Falsely to flatter such unfaithful men:
I Will not, but say, since most men me so urge:
Pious St. Patrick could not such people purge.
Wherefore some shall be forced, for what I say,
From where they are, but better been away. Turpius ejicitur, quam non
admittitur Hospes.
To such (if any are) as censure my sayings.
No man can act Acts humouring every ear,
More than these humors I have acted here:
If then you censure any Act at all
That Is in my Ark, or from my fancies fall:
Then for that Act, lo I this Act allow,
Amend my fault, e're I will fall on you.
The Act being easy, Verses to envy,
Know I the man, I Will make the Critic cry,
By heaping heavy burdens on his back,
Unless he mend the main mistakes I make:
And I believe, had you been baffled by
Them so, your self would write worse Verse than I:
For failing not to turn up my Abstracts,
You Will find that I was urged to all my Acts;
And if the Act be easy too to try,
If twenty years acts in extremity,
Might tempt a man to venture words (I vow)
With mine, then all my labors I Will allow,
Twenty years yet, for all I Am aiming at,
Would tempt few Fools, unless they knew for what.
But were the dictates desperate all I do,
I Am tempted most extremely thereunto.
St. Ambrose says of Temptation,
Nemo diu fortis est, by me these words are wrong,
(...) have stood out ^oo long at least against Temptation strong.
The Abstracts Apologue, And to all, the Epilogue.
Abstracts and extracts, twenty tricks I own,
Three Kingdoms evil Instruments to make known:
For just as Jonah preached to Ninevy,
Pressing Repentance on them all, so I
Have played the Prophet, but mistook my time,
Must therefore rest, rehearsing of this Rhyme.
At Chess, by chance, a pawn assumes the power
To make the King a Captive for an hour:
But then the Dwarf durst not that draught have drawn,
Had not the King put power into the pawn.
So Supreme Power precisely did employ
My Muse, till I almost became a coy
To train all in, and bring them to the Bar
To be condemned, as in your Arms they are:
Of whom I tell what in effect's found true,
Justice in general without doubt is due;
Even in the Abstract should I censure all,
I durst affirm it, whether I stand or fall:
Only a few for fashion I forbear,
Who will prove proud when my Epistles appear.
As Peacocks spread their precious Feathers when
They gaze upon their glory; so some men
Admire themselves, as I admire their manners,
And doubtless one day will display their banners.
Opening my Ark, and sending forth the fraught,
They Will think I reckon them Noah's righteous eight:
That as I found them faithful men and free,
I may requite their kindness unto me.
But to my Prince at present I appeal,
And humbly hereto set my Hand and Seal.
William Mercer.

Sonnet.
What Furnius said unto Augustus, I
Shall not the same to you say, lest I lie.
He heaped such grateful gifts upon his head,
Furnius affirmed, he damnified him indeed:
Such say I not, but I allege at least,
Res peremptoria ingratitudo est:
Says of my self, as Seneca said before,
They owe me so much, most men me abhor.
So my good will is wasted all in vain,
To give, not get, so much as thanks again.
Donat in hamo, I have no such lot,
But think some Hooks are hanging in your throat.
This Sonnet bids you be ashamed to sing
The same, or see it come before the King.
To the Reader.
Reader,
Take notice on what ticklish terms,
I wrap wise men up in my Arms:
And, ask you why? I Will answer it,
With ease, and in a phrase as fit:
Should I some whom I speak of, peel,
And cast in knots, even as an Eel,
They are so slimy, though they slip
Through all my fingers, with a whip
Forth from this Fly-boat that they are in,
Out of my Ark, they will not win,
Till I it open, then some there
Whose ugly acts infect the air,
Will say they are not (unless they lie)
Of Noah's faithful Family:
Who though some crosses they escape,
In time may taste a tarter Grape.
My Muse on most men may intrude,
That grieved me with ingratitude.
But I have warped a Vow I vow,
More than can well be woven now.
However as I Am a mortal man,
To every Ell I Will add a span.
Reader, my Rhimes sure are not so exact
As I would wish, you know a strict Abstract
Is still abstruse, ill to be understood,
Albeit the matter must be granted good.
And though this small Boat but appears a puff,
My Ark's at Anchor; sure, and safe enough.
Though 'u Laugh, and lay this bit below your burn,
Take care you cry not, when the big Books come.
Postscript.
In Answer to an Anser.
Because you ask what is in my Ark,
My Answer is, a man may mark
Millions of Miscreants, and I
Anatomize them merrily:
First, counts the knacks of all the Knaves,
Since thirty eight that is in their Graves:
And then as truly tells the names
Of Knaves alive, and them proclaims
In clear Characters, then I come,
With all the skill I can to some.
Salutes them too, and then repeats
The passages of three Estates:
And yet for all the points I press,
I spare some Knaves I must confess;
Though I know the Acts they are aiming at,
I take no notice now of that:
But as soon as the game begins
I Will make them laugh, at least that wins,
And when the big Book's brought abroad,
Creep on their knees to kiss the rod.
So I have done. Adieu.
Donat in hamo.
Who gets a gift, he has a hook at wish
Within his Jaws, fast as he were a Fish.
But none can say I am not fairly free,
Donat in hamo has no hold in me.
The Argument: OR,
The meaning of some things ensuing,
And Rhimes already read, renewing,
In a Sonnet.
These fancies (Sir) your fault affords,
If you rage, reading of the words:
Which words I venture to your view,
The Ark and Abstract both being true.
Seeing they a prosperous, pleasant gale
Wish you; if friendly words avail,
Read line by line, then as they lie,
Apply the same impartially.
Wherein I woo a foe as Father,
Though I ill natures win not neither:
My Muse in Rhimes must rather rail at
Bad passengers, paying not the Pilot.
Wherefore see how these lines alleges
A proud complaint within few pages.
The angry Authors strange distractions,
Strange Stratagems, and strange transactions:
His murdered Muse impartial praises
Friendless, Faithless, fruitless phrases:
With an impartial Paraphrase,
By one that daily duly draws
On Plutarchs precepts to intrude,
At Ireland's ills too to allude.
Of Plutarch's parallels in Prose,
At Ireland's Errors, worse than those.
Of Plutarch's proud ones write one day,
Of Ireland's evermore I may.
Of Plutarch's ills, if any are?
Of Ireland's evils too, too far.
In Ireland I find few that is free,
Plutarch reproves but one, I see.
In Ireland hundreds are that hault,
In Plutarch only one in fault.
Ireland has thousands such as these are,
Plutarch but speaks to one, as Caesar:
Which person if you would perceive,
His name now in this Rhyme receive,
Not by the Author of the other,
But made by one whom he calls Brother.
Whoever it made, I Am sure you must
Confess the fancy to be just.
Compared in part, read then but that
Which follows: What I Am aiming at.
So shall you guess as you go on,
The points are pressed at every one
Even in my Ark; and all I do
In it, and in these Abstracts too.
Try when you will, you will not want
Enough, though I of Coin am scant.
Plutarch parallels Irelands Animals, compared in part,
Whatever follows, see how it falls in an illiterate Art.
At Ireland's ignoble Animals here I hint,
Weighs worth with persons Plutarch puts in Print:
This I have done, and find but few with whom
I can compare, which makes me almost dumb.
Rather than press, as could my Quill prevail
To praise pretenders, when their friendship fail.
Nor know I one, whose evil actions either
Rewarded were, but yours may rout them rather:
Only Demetrius, though indeed I dare
Affirm your faults his to exceed by far,
Who suffered, and such sorrows so endures
For one offense, which will not weigh with yours.
Look Plutarch's Lives, Demetrius lived at least
Full three years out a slave, eat as a Beast,
But for one fault, which yours would weigh down now,
Yet it Demetrius merits did undo.
He brake his word but once with friends, when lo
You brake with me from time to time, you know.
I Will not apply, but this I may profess,
God did that then, and now may do no less,
If you repent not. Money make you, what,
You cannot know, as blind as is a Bat:
Come put your part then in the Scotch-man's Cap,
Pull out your lot, look what you have by hap:
And if this Fly-boat press to put you to it,
Prevent the Plot, before the Ark goes out. Mean time
This is most meet to recommend to you,
Since you desire no good at all to do,
Be careful to become a Subject thrall,
When lucre can as sure ensue withal:
Which doing, doubtless whensoe'r you're dead,
Upon your Urn this Rhyme then they shall read:
This Wretch, I vow, was worth no words of Art
At all, within his Epitaph to impart,
But words to draw in draughts that are not dim,
That men may run, read, and remember him.
The words I vow shall be but short, however
Such true words were not seen nor now nor never:
Put to continue on Record, because
I Am always careful for to keep the Laws.
The words indeed are no less sweet than short;
Themselves, I hope, will see me feasted for it,
For whom I speak of; but I chew but chaff,
Pray passenger peruse the Epitaph:
Which I intend to tell in terms that is true,
Or Sacrifice my self, I swear to you.
Epitaph.
Alas! lo here lies one, by Nature's Law,
Whose Second; sure, or such, you never saw:
He rather suffered faithful Friends to fail,
Than spare the poorest pairing of his nail:
And then those Bags, too big for him to bear,
He left for them that laughed to lay him here:
But here he lies, believed, both Beef and Bone,
Albe't I brag not where his Ghost is gone.
Weigh what I write, I to my Prince appeal,
Who soon can see corrupt men cast the Scale.
Traitors are true, that to themselves take all,
But questioned can, from their profession fall.
For when some Subjects find their tricks detect,
The King will know my Chronicle, collect
Their cunning Knav'ries, wherein when they are taken,
As Bullrushes, they will with Wind be shaken:
This Abstract needs employ no Oedipus,
Things to interpret; it self renders thus,
Truly to Readers; till with Hue and Cry
My Chronicles come, that knows not how to lie. None do deny.
Reader.
Volumes in Verse; I with the World do venture,
But you may think that I in anger enter,
Because I come with Ovid's very Vae! O
Ingenio perii, qui miser ipse meo.
But I dare do so, for this furious why,
Contest with you, whose carriage makes me cry.
Ovid was made too for his gift no gainer,
No more am I, whose Verses are not vainer:
But to compare, I know proceeds of Pride,
As Beggars be, when they are raised to ride.
Ovid was also in prison put for verse,
And so may I, because my skill is scarce:
But I forbear, my Pen's plucked from an Owl,
And I Am correct, because I crept from School,
Where had I studied still, for all I know,
My Verses would have weighed with Ovid's O.
But I have promised not for to compare
With Ovid, nor with any; but take care,
For though I say I shall compare with none,
I may with many that are dead and gone:
I mean I may compare with men oppressed,
In many points one grain is not transgrest.
Most men compare, take therefore this of me,
My Pen proclaims that very few are free,
Especially Poets compare in Poverties,
Though they disdain some in their Eminencies.
More men than I are for their Wit envied,
As by the Touchstone shall be truly tried.
I never acted any ill to any,
Though now my Muse is meddling with too many.
My Chronicle does these three Kingdoms scan
With no more force but what my Feathers fan:
But howsoever men must me correct,
Not caring though my fancies they infect.
They do postpone me, when preferments fall
Keep officers off; Here are no Wars at all:
Or if Mars march, and stout men should be chas't,
Hands helping not, quick Feet defend as fast.
For my part, I my duties daily do:
Being almost ended, I shall tell you too,
Follow what will, I am resolved to render
Some Rhimes to Caesar, though they should seem slender:
And if they do so, sure I shall not lie,
They may seem serious in my Sovereigns Eye.
Wherefore upon such ticklish terms I stand,
Prevents my Prince it not, my Pate's trepanned.
Memorandum.
These Fortunes fall on those that most do merit,
The bravest brains the basest lives inherit:
As by these following four examples here,
I show you how false Fortune does appear.
1. Bees suck the blossoms, but we have the Honey,
2. Poor men dig Mines, rich men have the Money,
3. Sheep furnish Fleeces, and we wear the Wool,
4. Wisemen plant Vines, the Grapes go with the Fool.
Now notwithstanding all these moral matters,
Whereof my Rhimes are real right relaters:
Which make men proud, the Female Sexes swell,
And fail, even as those fatal fancies fall.
The fair Rose fades, and so flies youth away:
It grows and blows, it is Beauty in one day:
So upstart honor, and from whence it flows,
Ill purchased pelf, how soon pulled down, who knows:
Take notice then, and shun not wise advice,
Nor run too rashly on such slip'ry Ice,
Bought by so dear a a price.
I, the Author on my self, and to my self, In Sonnets.
Because that no man praises me,
I Will praise my self now you shall see
Two ways; one is, by Comparing;
The other Patience, being so sparing:
And though men's praises first are Penned,
I put my own praise at the end.
First Sonnet.
I, Mercer, though my skill be scarce,
Compare with Maro making Verse:
Tell too, my tattling is not Treason,
Though it be not good Rhyme nor Reason:
And says my News now from Parnass,
Do let few faulty persons pass.
Second Sonnet.
Comparisons to bring abuse are bent,
But these ensuing seem to give consent:
For when wise Maro Penned Mecoenas praise,
He took not pains, as Mercer making these.
Then Mercer's merits may with Maro's Muse
Compare in this, few men may that refuse.
Maro praised one, and for his praise was paid;
Mercer to Millions praises has displayed,
In rich Encomiums, and has undergone
(Like Mars and Maro, both combined in one.)
For to defend what he has Penned by word,
Affirming he will sign it with a Sword.
So Mercer may to purchase modest praise,
Compare with Maro in composing these.
Then for which praise to make his Pen repine,
Were not praiseworthy, says Saint Augustine*
Third Sonnet.
Having plainly spoke to every Paroch people,
I Will Ring, and Sing, this Sonnet from the Steeple.
Even as the Priest when he has mentioned Mass
Unto the people, proclaims and cries, alas!
Remits all sins but one, which sin remains,
And must, till they have paid him for his pains.
So now, when I do most men's faults set forth,
Cry out, and call their Consciences scarce worth
One wink, because my Chronicle proclaims
All men's unkindness, but conceals their names:
Waiting with patience, till that they repay
My pains, and then I pardon them that day.
If not; themselves, and all the heaps they handle
Are cruelly cursed, both with Bell, Book and Candle.
As unto many I have Music made,
So to my self these Sonnets now are said.
As Martial says, so may my Muse in jest,
Lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba est.
My fancy's free, for though I herein hault,
I censure few but whom I find in fault.
It always has been lawful, and will be,
To speak of Vice, but let the name go free.
Which Law my fancy for a while fulfils
Within this abstract, but my Chronicles
Set both the Title and the Sur-name too,
Which I Am in pains both night and day to do.
If any carping Critic now
Should scoff in any School,
One Verse that I have written, I vow,
I Will Chronicle him a Fool:
But I believe if he look at
The point in every place,
He Will view that I have vented what
Will quash them in the case.
A Farewell Sonnet.
Twice twenty Terms, and almost every hour,
I tired my Pen, employing of my power
To prove these Poems; then in all I say
No Learning lies, though on the points I play*
The Latin I do grant, by guess I got,
Cannot well tell if it be true or not,
I bruised my brains; dare not deny indeed,
But in my haste, I have broke Priscian's head.
I played my part, can now not labor longer,
And am afraid, some hang themselves in anger.
This Pamphlet I of purpose publish cheaper,
My big Book's nigh nine hundred sheets of Paper.
In short, beside so many motions made,
This Sonnet says now, no more shall be said.
FINIS.

