On the Death of the most sadly, ever to be deplored, Most Illustrious, Right
Honorable, JAMES LORD MARQUESS of MONTROSE, etc.
Funeral Elegy.
TOgether Rendevouz, you Watery Clouds,
Distill your selves into Tears bitter Floods;
A new Deluge, whereby you may Compose
To weep the Death of th'Marquess of Montrose:
Death, Death, I Will not dyve in Thy Origin,
Let Divines judge, how Thou at first came in:
Vagrant, Ubiquiter, through the world does roam;
Yet in each House, still present is at Home:
Though Uncreated, Lifeless, yet to Thee,
The Lord of Life, on Cross did yielder be;
Though Thou the Wages be of Sin, it is strange
On the innocent Thy Wrath should bear revenge;
In Sickness-Bed, has stoll'n upon that Heart,
In Field with Sword could have out-dar'd Thy Dart:
The Mount has Levelled, where the Rose did grow,
From Foes Wound-wrinkles kept old Albions Brow,
Which brings all Flowers within our Paradise
Into a mourning withered sad disguise;
A dismal loss unto the Age does bring
Long before Summer, plucked in the Spring;
The Royal-Thistle causing to be sad
To see His Darling Rose so soon to fade,
Whose Fragrancy did please the Lions Scent,
His Guardian, for whom life would have spent;
For whom our lower Ranks of Subjects Groans,
The highers ears fills with unwonted Moans;
Princes and Peers together seem to strive
For Thee, the deepest sorrow to contrive:
A general grief does all the Land ov'rspread,
It Is Love and Joy, with Death's dark Vail is clade,
By Albany ought never be forgot,
Crowns-Royal-Line endeavored to promote:
When that in War engaged was against France,
In England did a Scottish: Troop advance:
Most quick Ingine, with Arms and Arts acquaint,
To Camp and College was an Ornament;
In Van led Royal-Guard with such a Grace,
Raised Courage in each Guarders Breast and Face;
In Cathredal desired the Miter shine
As well as Wars, observed Church Discipline:
Natures choice Jewel of Nobility,
Enliv'd, and honored Magnanimity,
On State-Stage early flourishing aspired,
Young Matchivilian, by the old admired,
In Council known, a perfect sober Wit,
Betimes called thereto, CHARLES thought requisite:
Keep'd secrecy as Clam-shels Closs Entire,
Councils designs to know, defied the Air:
Both Prudence and true Gallantrie maintained,
The ways of Emulation much disdained,
The Elixar of all highborn Eminence,
Fraught with both Heaven and Earths Intelligence,
In either, no thing is but Thou did know;
The Center of all Worthiness did show,
This in a quiet way, did make appear;
Scorned of a Victims Sacrifice to hear.
On Self-opiniators could not look,
Resolved with Reason what Thou undertook.
For Countries public Safety, ever stood;
Did before Greatness, study to be Good:
Plots and Conspiracies abhorred so,
Was to Rebellion a most severe Foe.
As Thy Grandsire this Character did Merit,
A Loyal-subject of Casarean Spirit:
His Valor had, that razed Adrians Wall,
Broke Abercorns; Severus Pride made fall.
Chief of Grames Name, who always have been great,
Has seventy one Kings Served in War and State;
Has Thirteen hundred twenty seven years stood;
With whom King Fergus-Second, Matched in Blood:
To Royalty may say, Truth to discover.
To King Eugenius-Second Bred Queen Mother.
Thy Jovial House, turns now the House of Woe,
No Heart of Stone unbroke, can therein go:
Alace to see thy Lady Marquess state,
Heartless become, by this sad Stroke of Fate,
With her young Marquess sits, whose doleful Cries,
With Her to Join, moves all our Spears and Skies;
Bereaved of Her dear Lord, t'wixt whom was Love,
That Imitate Heavens Hierarchy above.
Ah! ah! young Marquess in Thy Bud, to see
Of Thy Paternal-root, Robed to be;
By which Thy Name and House Enervat are,
Of Chief and Master, of both who had Care:
Chronologizers Theme t'inlarge long Story,
The Soul of Virtue now is gone to Glory.
M. M.


