Mark Noble's Frollick;
Who being Stopped by the Constable near the Tower, was examined where he had
been; whither he was going; and his Name and place where he dwelt: to which he
answered, where the Constable would have been glad to have been, and where he
was going he dare not go for his Ears; as likewise his Name, which he called
Twenty Shillings; with an Account of what followed, and how he came off.

To the Tune of The New Rant.
Licensed according to Order.







ONe night at a very late hour,
a Watch-maker home did repair;
When coming along by the Tower,
was stopped by the Constable there.
Friend, come before Mr. Constable,
to see what his Worship will say;
You Would have me do more than I Am able;
I fear I shall fall by the way.
Sir, tell me, and do not deceive me,
where have you been playing your part?
Kind Mr Constable believe me,
where you would have been with all your Heart.
Sweet Bacchus in Bumpers were flowing,
which Liquor all mortal Men cheers,
And now after all I am going,
where you dare not come for your Ears.
Your Words they are saucy and evil,
this may be a Charge to your Purse:
For why? you are something uncivil,
to answer a Constable thus.
Oh, where do you dwell with a whennion?
cross Humors we will not allow,
Sir, out of the King's own Dominion,
pray, what can ye say to me now?
Pray what is your Name, you cross Villain?
be sure that you answer me true;
Why Sir, It is just Twenty Shilling,
I think I have satisfied you.
What Trade are you, Brew^r or Baker?
or do you a Waterman ply?
No Sir, I Am an honest Watch-maker,
my Trade I will never deny.
Have you ever a Watch you can show, Sir?
we'll see how it suits with our Clocks;
Yes, Faith and a Constable too, Sir,
I wish you were all in the Stocks.
You saucy impertinent Fellow,
because you have answered me so,
Although your mad Brains they be mellow,
this Night to a Prison you go.
Therefore without any more dodging,
the Lanthorns was lighted straight way;
They guarded him to his strong Lodging,
to lie there while Nine the next day.
Next Morning the Constable brought him
before a Justice to appear,
And earnestly then he besought him,
a sorrowful Story to hear,
Of all the Transactions he told them
to which the good Justice replied;
From Liberty he would withold him,
till the Naked Truth should be cried.
The Tradesman returned this Answer,
the Truth I will never deny;
If I may speak without Offense, Sir,
I scorn to be caught in a Lie.
I said nothing which was unfitting,
as solemnly here I profess;
The King he is King of Great Britain,
and I live in Britain the Less.
The next thing that causes the Trouble,
my Name he would have me to show,
The which is right honest Mark Noble,
and that is Twenty Shillings you know.
Then asking me where I was going,
and I being void of all Fears,
Right readily made him this Answer,
where he dare not go for his Ears.
I rambl'd all day, yet the Center,
at night was to lie by my Wife,
Instead of his Ears should he venture,
IN Faith it might cost him his Life.
Now when he had given this Relation,
of all that had past in the Night,
It yielded most pleasant Diversion,
the Justice he laughed outright.
It seems that a Glass of Canary
conducted the Gallant along;
I find that he is nothing but merry,
intending no manner of wrong.
Therefore I will free him from Prison,
without any Charges or Fees;
It being no more than right reason,
you watch not for such Men as these.
Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back.


