The mournful Shepherdess of Arcadiah. OR, The solitary sollitudes of the
matchless Shepherdess:
Whose earthly joy did shine with luster bright,
But now is eclipsed and turned to dismal night;
The Tune is, Tell me you wandering Spirits, etc.




ASsist me Muses with your power divine,
to portract out the sable plaints of mine,
Melpominy direct my warbling quill,
Descending down from high Pernassus hill
And sing in queers a heavenly harmony
Whilst I, whilst I for want of Clora fain would die.
I was a Shepherdess of beauty, bright and fair
Indu'd with graces, honors passing rare,
And as the Phoenix is more excellent,
Then all the birds under the firmament,
So was I counted, though I live forlorn
My joys, my joys are all transposed which makes me mourn
I flourished like the lovely Mary-gold,
Or damask Roses beauteous to behold,
Whilst lustrous Phoebus with his splendour bright,
Did spread our blossoms with his glorious light,
Such operations had the powerful sun,
But now, but now it is dissol'd, my joys are done.
The rural Swains that were our friendly Mates
That knew our bliss, our joys, and happy states,
Unfeignedly in hearts they did rejoice,
To hear my Clora's sweet melodious voice,
His oaten reed did sound with pleasant glee,
But now, but now joys is turned to misery,
With silver tones, his Bag-pipes chanted shril
(In height of glory on Pernassus hill,)
Whose harmony delighted all the Swains,
That used to sport upon the lovely plains,
With dancing Galliards, Jigges, and Roundelayes,
And none, and none but Clora, Clora got the praise
When scorthing Tytan with his burning beams,
In midst of Summer was upon extremes;
Then to the green woods side he did convey
His pretty Lambs and Sheep to feed and play,
This was his care whilst Clora he did keep
In fields, in fields his render flock, and harmeles sheep.




The second part
to the same Tune
WHen blustering Boreas from the North blew cold
Then did he pen them safely in their Fold
And when that Winters bitter tempest came
His zealous care was to prevent the same,
But Clora's gone, unto another Sphere,
Instal'd, instal'd a Saint or blessed spirit there.
And since he is gone, whilst I am left alone,
The Rural Swains, with heaby sighs and moan
Do seem to call his to his place again,
But Oh alas, their wishes are in vain;
The harmless sheep, do seem to mourn and pinh,
Though he, though he, invested in with Saints divine
Our pretty Lambs are straggling gone astray,
(who wants a guide must surely loose his way)
The waters troubled where oun Herds did drink
And want that virtue to expel the stink,
His Crook and Scrip he left behind we see
For heaven, for heaven and glorious joys more rarer be.
The whistling Blackbird, and the Nightingale,
Whose silver tones were styled heroical,
The Queristers both of the Woods and Fields,
Whose harmony melodious music yields,
They Are metamorphoriz'd into sighs and cries,
Besides, besides the Swan that sings now mourning dies.
And I in pleasant story too have read,
That when the Turtle Dove is gone and dead
The Mate lives single in a mournful state,
So will I do till death strikes out my date,
In sollitudes, and pensive heart excel,
Then shall, then shall the world confess, I loved him well.
Oh that my date were out, my time were near
That I might meet him whom I love so deer,
In high Olimpus heavens celestial throne
(A place prepared for blessed Saints alone.)
The world is sin, and naughty beside,
O that, O that my death had been when Clora died.
FINIS.
A. S.
London printed for Fran Grove on Snow-hill.


