TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES EARL OF PERTH Lord DRUMMOND, and Stoh-hall, etc.
Lord High Chancellor of HIS MAJESTY'S most Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND. The
Congratulatory Welcome of an Obliged Quill.
SInce that the Muses, breathed first on Earth,
Had never more Noble Worthy Theme then Perth;
High Chanc'llour of old Albion, placed and made,
Which brings all Ranks of Subjects to be glade,
You welcoming, with Soul Alacratie,
Next unto Royal CHARLES, and Albanie;
Whose well deservings did them Animate,
Should to the office be Commissionate;
The fulfilled wishes, of both Low and High,
Triumphingly to day, do signify:
By Clement smyls; else putting all in Hope,
Impartial Justice, every Hand shall Grope.
Silence the Tongues will, that cry out for Wars;
Will pacify Whiggish Intestine-Jars:
To Grivances a Sovereign Medicine,
Rebellion and base Tumu^s will hedge in;
In High-Lands has already settled Peace,
None needs to fear a Thieving Robbers face;
To Low-Lands like shall be, by Thee obtained,
Conventiclers shall no resetting find:
None shall Aarons sacrifice gain stand;
The Priesthood at the Altar shall Command;
As Moses will our Israel govern,
No Bias shall the Sanhadrim discern:
In Solmons wit, and policy well known,
Kings Yours, and Contry's safety will be one:
Our Rights and Liberties will settle so,
That none before Thee ever did outgo:
The Errors of our Laws will rectify,
And to them add what necessary be;
Dangers fore-sees, skilled Pilote can Evite,
Those Rocks and Shelves, on which have others split:
Drea'd CHARLES His Wain in the straight Course will Guide,
To State-distempers, will a Cure provide;
The Nations needs, will furnish and supply;
Will Ease those think they under burden lie;
For great designs, in Council is most found,
With Goodness and with Mercy does abound:
Plenty shall on our Barren Mountains spring,
In Valleys Virtue shall have flourishing:
The Hearts of Peers in whom united are,
Among them shall no Incendarie appear:
Superlative in Learning and in Arts,
To Suit Thy place, Endowments has and parts;
Caesarean-Spirit, scorns the Egiptian Treat,
A Conquered Foe, to have disastrous Fate;
Scotlands Affairs, and all the Worlds beside;
Has by Your study in the furnace tried:
Frae whom shall Legislators, Dictats draw,
How Monarchs should make subjects stand in Awe;
Rejoice unto both Sol, and Cynthia that
Our Jove has Neptuns Waves so Estimate;
Good Reason why, To Stob-Halls House look in?
Eight Kings, one Queen, from thence have Crowned been:
Fames Family, cared never to be great,
Yet in both Peace and War served King and State;
With Fortune, and with Lives, in such away,
From Loyalty were never found Astray.
My Lord, when dieving in Your Soaring Praise,
Sees You the Dazling-Glory of our Skies;
Truth telling of Your welcome, all may say,
It Is as Sun is, to an Ecclipsed Day:
This You may Judge, in Grandour for to see,
Your Convoy and Reception so to be.
Comfort, and Bliss, will prove unto this Sphere,
Of which You Will have sure a Paternal Care.
M. M.


