News from the Camp, ON BLACK HEATH:
OR, The Noble Soldiers Resolution: EXPRESSING His Heroic Courage to serve
his King, and Country, to his utmost Abillity, Through all Dangers and
Exigences.
COme all you brave Gallants! away to the Field,
Where Honor her Crowns and her Laurels does yield:
Leave Drinking, and Fooling, and dandling of Wenches,
To take up your Lodging in Tents, and in Trenches:
Our Countries Foes we will strike with a Dampe,
And outshine the Reports of Tilbury-Campe.
Should Caesar's bold Army Revive once again,
Romes Eagles must stoop to the Cross of Britain;
Nor should that proud Bully, the Grand Alexander,
Henceforth style himself Universal Commander,
Nor Cry for more Worlds, for, lo! here he might find,
Another more stout, yet Unconquered behind.
Great Britain, That World by it self, which gives Law
To it is Neighbors, and keeps Usurpers in Awe,
Which letters the Ocean in Chains, as of old,
King Zerxes Attempted in vain, we are told,
But now it is her Captive, where each Man of War,
Rules as he lists, and all others can Bar.
Yet the Bounds to Increase of her spreading Command,
She endeavors to grow no less potent by Land,
For Forces, all places do Club, and the Shires:
Vye which shall send fastest their brave Volunteirs,
For he is a Cockscomb, a Coward, or worse
That Comes not his Country to serve, but on force.
From Yorkshire, I'se lately Marched up to the Town,
And the Dee'l Split my Crag if again I Will gang down,
Without doing something shall make it appear,
A Northern Lad scorns to be Hectored by fear,
Our Arms they are good, our bodies are strong
Let Old-men A^vise, we will Fight that are Young.
Then basten away to the noble Campaign,
And when the Drum Beats, Let us over the Main,
The Winds shall assist with a bountiful Gale.
And waft our Fleet over with a full spreading Sail.
Whilst the Skies being rent with our Cannons Loud Rore
Waves Dance to that Music, And set us on Shore.
No danger shall daunt us, no Toil, nor no Pain,
We, are Sons of the Blade, and not born to complain,
To our Foes we will appear as furious and Rough
As Seas, when Winds meet on their Brow with a Huff,
But straight to our Friends no less gentle are mad^,
Then Lovers kind Notes in a Sycamore shade.
Where e're our Prince pleases our Arms to employ,
We Will follow our Leaders with Courage and Joy,
By Land, or by Sea, whether Battle or Seige,
We Will Accomplish all things that our duties obleige:
This Generous Soul each true Soldier should have,
If he cannot Triumph, he'^ content with a Grave.
Farewell to our Friends, it shall never be sed,
We dishonor the parts wherein we were bred,
Farewell to our wives, poor hearts though we Roam.
It Is like we are as honest as they are at Home:
But a thousand Farewells to those Lasses so kind,
For whose sakes I am vexed we must Leave them behind.
Now let the Drums rattle, the Trumpets resound.
And Brazen-mouth'd Cannons, with breath tear the ground
We scorn for all this, the Least fears to betray.
More danger, more Honor, the Proverb does say,
When Bullets about us Like Atoms do fly, (
The Base may Retreat, the Brave rather will die.
FINIS.
With Allowance.

London, Printed for Thomas Vere, at the Angel without Newgate. 1673.


