The Maids Chastity that is troubled in mind,
Against Young-mens unconstancy who proves unkind:
She gives warning to all Maidens that are in the Row,
To take heed of false young men wheresoere they go,

To a pleasant new Tune.


YOu young Maids that would live chary
And live single and not marry,
Nor contract your selves to none,
For the Maid is the best that lies alone.
Cupid, Cupid, thou have done me wrong
I have been thy servant now too long,
My heart was never free from care,
Since I was entangled in thy snare.
In thy snare I have been settered,
And often have my business let,
In following after Venus train,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
Young Men they will cog and lie,
Maidens they may weep and cry,
Truth and Conscience they use none,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
In this Breast a heart I hear,
It Is none of mine, I wish it were,
Once it was mine, if I could but a kept it,
But now where it is, it is not respected.
Now I hope to have my heart again,
And keep it fast from Venus Chain,
Lock it in this Breast of my own,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
When I have gained it safe again,
Then I am free from all Young Men,
And never like to make this moan,
But live a single Maid alone.
Love is a torment, who can abide it,
who better knows than them ye has tried it
I count her a mad Woman shill,
That seeks for to humor a young-mans will.
The second part to the same tune.


Young Men they be much blinded.
Only to know a Maidens mind,
Maidens do not believe them if they swear,
Lest after they leave you in a snare.
But try their hearts and if you can,
Before that you love any Man,
Love it is fond and fickle still.
Then do not humor a young-mans will.
If a Lover be humoured in his condition,
Then he pleads with a strong Commission,
To get his intention if he can,
The Maid is the best that lies alone.
For in lying alone there is no harm taken.
And being of an unconstant Love forsaken.
Is better than Gold and Silver store,
If that she do never see him more.
A Maid that lives in an honest carriage,
Must be careful in her Marriage,
Young Men are so deceitful grown;
The Maid is the best that lies alone.
True Lovers knot may soon be tied.
And a Maid too may be made a Brid,
That Is not all in the conclusion shown,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
There is many things for to consider.
If a Man and a Woman go together:
If Love be wanting between them twain,
She had better still to lie alone.
When they come to a Maid a wooing,
They make no conscience of their doing.
But use all the deceit that ever they can,
But the Maid is the best that lies alone.
There is false young men in my mind,
Some proves cross, and some proves kind,
I will not condemn them all for one,
The Maids are best that lies alone.
Now I would have you consider my song,
I write to Maids fle do them no wrong
And still I do tell them every one.
The Maids are best that lies alone.
London, Printed for Richard Burton at the sign of the Horshooe in Smithfield.


