^Manner of Performing THE NOVENA, OR, The NINE DAYS DEVOTION TO St. Francis
Xaverius: Of the Society of JESUS, And Apostle of India. As also the Devotion
of the Ten Fridays To the same SAINT

THE Manner of Performing the NOVENA, OR, The Nine Days Devotion.
THis Novena commences on the 4th of March, and continues Nine Days, that is,
till the 12th of March, upon which Day, in the Year 1622. Pope Gregory the XV.
Canonized St. Francis Xaverius. The Persons who perform this Novena, are to be
employed upon each of the Nine Days in Prayer and Good Works, to the Glory of
Almighty God, and in Honor of his Servant St. Francis Xaverius; always
endeavoring to repose an entire Confidence in the Merits of this Apostle, and
hoping through his means to obtain from God, whatsoever they shall ask,
provided it shall be conducing to their Salvation, and the Good of their Souls;
or that otherwise, instead of that Blessing which they beg, and which is not
for their Benefit, this Saint will obtain for them of God some other Grace they
do not ask, and which tends more to their Eternal Felicity.

For the exact Performance of this Novena, they are to take for their Advocates
the Nine Quires of Heavenly Spirits, making particular mention of the Principal
Virtues of St. Francis Xaverius, and they are to observe other Directions which
shall be given hereafter. It will be convenient to Confess and Communicate the
first Day, that so the Soul being cleansed from Sin, and honored with the
Sacred Eucharist, all the Works we perform in the State of Grace, may be
meritorious of Eternal Life, and the more efficacious toward obtaining the
Benefit we ask. Those who do not Confess, must at least, begin every Day with
an Act of Contrition, to cleanse their Souls from Sin, and to secure themselves
of obtaining their Petition.

In Barcelona, Valencia, and other Cities of Spain, this Novena is performed in
the Church, with great Solemnity, great Concourse of People, and daily Sermons
upon the Virtues of St. Francis Xaverius. And this is the better way, not only
because God in the Church, as being the House of Prayer, is more inclined to
grant our requests; but also, because the Prayer of many together, is more
acceptable to God; and when all beg for all, every individual the more easily
obtains his desire, by reason that Charity adds Force to Prayer, and God is
more ready to hear us, when we are united in him; for Christ himself assured
us, that wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in
the midst of them. When this Novena is not performed in the Church with the
General Concourse of the People, it were convenient, that if it be done in a
private House, all the Family should join in performing it, altogether begging
that of God for every one, which each apart begs for himself.

For the Convenience of such as stand in need of farther Direction, we will
here set down those Prayers that are proper to be said every Day; nevertheless
such as are more Devout, may beg the same thing of this Saint, in such Terms
and Language, as their Devotion shall dictate, and may direct their Prayer as
they think fit: When many together perform the Novena, one of them may read the
Prayers, changing the Singular Number into the Plural, and saying, we desire,
we beg, etc. The others may repeat the Prayer after him, or else only hear it
with Attention, inwardly desiring and begging that which is asked in it.

INSTRUCTIONS For the exact Performing of the NOVENA.
THose who perform the Novena, are to observe these Instructions upon all, and
each of the Nine Days. First, They are to endeavor to imitate some one of this
Saint's Virtues, by practicing some exterior Act, or Acts thereof; as for
instance, his Zeal, Humility, Patience, etc. Secondly, they are to do some Work
of Mercy, either Spiritual or Corporal, for the Benefit of their Neighbor; as
giving of Alms, visiting the Sick, or those that are in Prison, comforting the
Afflicted, praying for the Souls in Purgatory, or for those that are in the
State of Mortal Sin, etc. Thirdly, They are to offer up to this Saint some
particular Mortification, as Fasting, wearing of Hair-Cloth, Disciplining,
using themselves with less Tenderness, etc. Fourthly, They are to curb their
Senses, their Eyes, and Ears, and their Tongue, endeavoring to avoid even the
least of Sins. Fifthly, They are to read some Chapter or Passage of the Life of
this Saint; or meditate a while upon some one of his Virtues (of which you will
find many in the Devotoin of the Ten Fridays) with an earnest desire to imitate
them. Sixthly, They are to endeavor, for the Glory of God, to excite some
Person to bear Devotion to this Saint. 7thly, It will be convenient they every
Day invoke the Intercession of some one Rank of the Saints, as they do of the
Quires of Angels, to the end, that their Advocates and Intercessors being
multiplied (as the Church expresses it) they may the more readily obtain what
they ask. The Classes of Saints may be divided into Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Bishops, Doctors, Priests, Religious, Confessors, Virgins,
and other Saints in Heaven. For the more effectual prevailing with St. Francis
Xaverius, it will be convenient every Day, to make a special Commemoration of
St. Ignatius of Loyola, whom St. Francis Xaverius honored, respected, and
loved, as his Father, Master, and Superior.

Upon one of the Nine Days, the Person performing this Devotion, must Confess
and Communicate, making a most diligent Preparation to please God and St.
Francis Xaverius, for the more ready obtaining of the thing desired.

Such as cannot read, may cause another to read these Prayers to them, they
giving great Attention to them, and offering them up to St. Francis; or instead
thereof they may say Ten Pater Nosters and Ten Ave Maria's, with Ten Gloria
Patri's, in Honor of the Ten Years that St. Francis Xaverius spent in
Preaching in the Indies; begging of the Saint whatsosoever they desire, and
praying, as he did, for the Conversion of Infidels.

Though the properest time for performing this Novena, be from the 4th of March
to the 12th, which is the Day of the Canonization of St. Francis Xaverius; yet
it may be performed at any other time of the Year. Pope Alexander the VII.
granted many Indulgences to those that Celebrate this Novena, in the Church of
St. Roch, of the Society of Jesus in Lisbon, which is a tacit Approbation of
this Devotion.

How much the Devotion of this Novena daily spreads, is well known: On this
account St. Francis has obtained Favors for several Persons, as they
themselves testify. In the Year 1688 it was performed at Madrid with
extraordinary Solemnity, in the Royal Chapel of the Palace, their Catholic
Majesty's being every Day there present.

THE First Day of the NOVENA.
THE Person performing this Devotion, kneeling before an Altar, or the Image of
St. Francis Xaverius, shall lift up his Heart to God, and profoundly humbling
himself in Spirit, and offering up all his Prayers, Thoughts, and Words to his
Glory, in Honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Francis Xaverius, and to all
the Angels and Saints of Heaven, he shall make the Sign of the Cross, and say
the following Prayer.

O Lord Jesus Christ, true God and Man, my Creator and Redeemer, for thy sake
alone, and because I love thee above all things; I am sorry from the Bottom of
my Heart, for having offended thee; and I do firmly purpose never to fall into
Sin again, to shun all Occasions of offending thee, to Confess my Sins, and
perform the Penance that shall be enjoined me; and to make Restitution and
Satisfaction, wherever it shall be due from me: For the Love of thee, I forgive
all my Enemies; to thee I offer up my Life, Actions, and Sufferings, in
Satisfaction for my Sins; and since I humbly beg it of thee, I trust in thy
Goodness and infinite Mercy, that thou will forgive me them, through the Merits
of thy precious Blood and Passion, and wilt give me Grace to amend my Life, and
to persever in thy Service unto my Death. Amen.

MOst Glorious St. Francis Xaverius, Apostle of the Indies, if it be for the
Glory of God and to thy Honor, that I obtain what I desire and beg, by
performing this Novena,; do thou obtain me this Grace of our Lord; if not, do
thou guide my Petition, and beg of our Lord for me, that which is most proper
for his Glory, and the benefit of my Soul.

O God and Lord of the Angels, whom thou do entrust with the Guardianship of
Men; I make thee an Offering of all the Merits of these Heavenly Spirits, and
of those of thy Servant St. Francis Xaverius, who was called an Angel for his
Purity; and because he preserved Men from many Spiritual and Corporal Dangers.
I beseech thee, grant me that Purity of Soul and Body, which thou did confer
on this thy holy Apostle, and that particular Grace, which I beg in this
Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

Here say three Pater Nosters and three Ave Mary's, and then the following
Prayer to St. Francis Xaverius.

MOst Holy Father Francis Xaverius, who receivedst thy Praises from the Mouth
of innocent Children; I most humbly implore thy bountiful Charity, for the Sake
of the most precious Blood of Jesus, and of the Immaculate Conception of our
Blessed Lady, Mother of God; to the end thou may obtain of God's infinite
Goodness, that at the Approach of my last Hour, my Heart may be separated and
withdrawn from all wordly Thoughts and Distractions, and be fixed in the most
ardent Love of him, and a vehement Desire of an happy Eternity; so that laying
aside the multiplicity of earthly things, which hitherto have perplexed me, I
may most diligently seek, and perfectly find that one thing which is necessary,
which is to Die, and rest in Peace, under the Protection of the most Holy
Virgin Mary, in the Wounds of Jesus her most Blessed Son, in the sweet Embraces
of my God, and in thy Presence, Holy Saint, through whose Intercession I hope
to obtain this Mercy. But yet, whilst it shall please the Divine Providence, to
preserve my Life, I beseech thee, my most loving Protector, and most
affectionate Father, to obtain for me of his Divine Majesty, that I may Live,
^s one that is to Die, and as I would wish to have lived at the Hour of my
Death; ever imitating thy Virtues, and fulfilling the most Holy Will of God;
that so my temporal Death may be to me a Passage into Life Everlasting: I also
beseech thee to obtain for me, that which I ask in this Novena, if it be for
the Glory of God and Good of my Soul. Amen.

In the next Place, you are to ask of St. Francis Xaverius the particular
Favor you desire to obtain, heightning as much as in you is, your Confidence
in him; with such Words as your affectionate Thoughts shall suggest, or with
such Aspirations, as your Devotions shall dictate.

Then the more to please this Holy Apostle, in Imitation of him, say that
Prayer, which he himself composed, and used to say every Day, for the
Conversion of Infidels, which is as follows:

ETernal God, Creator of all things, remember that thou alone did create the
Souls of Infidels, framing them to thy own Image and Likeness: Behold, O Lord,
how to thy Dishonor, Hell daily is replenished with them: Remember, O Lord,
thy only Son Jesus Christ, who suffered for them, most bountifully shedding his
precious Blood: Suffer not, O Lord, thy Son, and our Lord to be any longer
despised by the Infidels; but rather, being appeased by the Entreaties and
Prayers of thy Elect, the Saints, and of the Church, the most Blessed Spouse of
thy Son, vouchsafe to be mindful of thy Mercy, and forgeting their Idolatry and
Infidelity, cause them also to know him thou did send, Jesus Christ thy Son
and our Lord, who is our Health, Life, and Resurrection, through whom we are
made free and saved, to whom be all Glory forever. ^^en.

Then conclude with the Prayer proper to this Saint.

Antiph. Well fare thee, good and faithful Servant; because thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will place the over many things: Enter into the
Joy of thy Lord.

Verse. Our Lord has guided the just Man by right Ways.

Resp. And has showed him the Kingdom of God.

The Prayer.
O God, who were pleased to reduce to the Bosom of thy Church the Nations of
the Indies, through the Preaching and Miracles of S. Francis Xaverius, mercifully
grant us, that we may imitate his Virtues, whose glorious Merits we hold in
Veneration. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Commemoration of St. Ignatius de Loyola
Antiph. This man despising the World, and triumphing over Earthly things,
heaped up Riches in Heaven by Word and Work.

Verse. Our Lord has guided the just Man by right Ways.

Resp. And has shown him the Kingdom of God.

The Prayer.
O God, who for the Propagation of the greater Glory of thy Name, have by
Blessed Ignatius, strengthened the Church Militant with new Auxiliaries;
graciously vouchsafe, that we by his Assistance and Imitation, solicitously
combating upon Earth, may obtain with him an everlasting Crown in Heaven.

A Commemoration of St. Gregory the Great, Apostle of England.
Antiph. O most excellent Doctor, Light of the Holy Church, Blessed Gregory,
Lover of God's Law, supplicate the Son of God for us.

Verse. Our Lord has, as above.

The Prayer.
O God, who have bestowed the Rewards of Eternal Blessedness on the Soul of thy
Servant Gregory, Grant mercifully, that we, who are deprest with the Weight of
our Sins, may by his Prayers be delivered. Through our Lord.

The Second Day.
Lord Jesus Christ, true God and Man, etc. as before on the First Day.

Most Glorious St. Francis Xaverius, etc. as the First Day, and so on all the
following Days.

A Prayer for this Day.
LOrd God of the Archangels, whom thou do entrust in the most weighty
Concerns of thy Glory, and the Benefit of Men; I offer up to thee the Merits of
these most diligent Spirits, and those of thy great Servant St. Francis
Xaverius, whom thou made the Minister of thy Glory, and to whom thou
recommendedst the Spiritual Welfare of innumerable Souls. I beseech thee grant,
that I may perform those Duties, which thy most Holy and Divine Will has
imposed upon me, and also that I may obtain that particular Grace, which I beg
of thee in this Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Third Day.
LOrd God of the Principalities, who according to the Disposition of the Divine
Will, by means of Angels and Archangels, takes care of the Welfare of Mankind,
enlightening, instructing, and governing them; I offer up to thee the Merits of
these most zealous Spirits, and those of thy Servant St. Francis Xaverius, who
enlightened and converted many Kingdoms and Provinces, and in them innumerable
Souls, not only by himself, but by his Disciples and Followers, Instructing,
Teaching and Commanding. I beseech thee, grant me the zeal of this Holy
Apostle, and the particular Petition I tender in this Novena, to thy greater
Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Fourth Day.
LOrd God of the Powers, who have a special Prerogative to curb the Infernal
Spirits: I offer up to thee the Merits of these most potent Spirits, and those
of thy Servant St. Francis Xaverius, to whom thou gave singular Power of
expelling Devils from Bodies and Souls. I beseech thee grant me the Grace to
overcome all the Temptations of the Devil, and that which I beg of thee in this
Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Fifth Day.
LOrd God of the Virtues, by whose means thou workest Miracles and Prodigies
peculiar to thy Sovereign Power: I offer up to thee the Merits of these most
Stupendous Spirits, and those of thy Servant St. Francis Xaverius, whom thou
made a new Thaumaturgus, or Worker of new and prodigious Miracles, renewing
in him the Signs and Wonders of thy Blessed Apostles, that he might discover
the Gospel to new Nations. I beseech thee, grant me that profound Humility,
wherewith St. Francis Xaverius, amidst so many Miracles sought thy Glory, and
not his own Honor, as also that which I beg in this Novena, to thy greater
Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Sixth Day.
LOrd God of the Dominations, which preside over all inferior Spirits, as
Ministers of thy Providence, and submit themselves to thy Will, being ever
ready to fulfill it: I offer up to thee the Merits of these excellent Spirits,
and those of St. Francis Xaverius, who though Superior to many, yet humbly
submitted himself to all Superiors, in them acknowledging thy Majesty, and
readily fulfilling their Commands. I beseech thee, grant me a ready and perfect
Obedience to all my Superiors, and that special Petition which I make in this
Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Seventh Day.
LOrd God of the Thrones, on whom thou reposest as on the Seat of thy Glory,
and Chair of thy Majesty: I offer up to thee the Merits of these supreme
Spirits, and those of St. Francis Xaverius, that Throne of thy Glory, that
Vessel of Election to convey thy Name to new Nations, who denied himself to
himself, and to all worldly things, casting them out of his Heart, that thou
alone might possess it. I beseech thee, grant that I may despise all worldly
things, and rest in thee alone, grant me also the Petition I make in this
Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Eighth Day.
LOrd God of the Cherubins, who are adorned with most perfect Wisdom. I offer
up to thee the Merits of these most knowing Spirits, and those of thy Servant
St. Francis Xaverius, whom thou did grace with supereminent Wisdom, and to
whom thou did reveal most profound Secrets, that he might teach thy Law to
many People and Nations. I beseech thee, grant that I may learn to fear and
please thee, which is true Wisdom, and that by Word and Example I may teach
others to keep thy Commandments, and that thou will also grant me the Favor I
beg in this Novena, to thy greater Honor and Glory. Amen.

The Ninth Day.
LOrd God of the Seraphins, who are inflamed with most ardent Love of thee: I
offer up to thee the Merits of these most fervent Spirits, and those or thy
Servant St Francis Xaverius, who like a Seraphin, was enflamed with thy Love,
conquering innumerable Hardships and Dangers of his Life, to please thee, and
to make those know and love thee, who before offended thee and knew thee not. I
beseech thee, grant that I may love thee my only God, and my Lord, and
endeavor to bring all Men to the Knowledge and Love of thee; and also that
thou will grant me that which I ask in this Novena, to thy greater Honor and
Glory. Amen.

The Rapture of an affectionate Soul before a Crucifix: Composed in Latin by
St. Francis Xaverius.
O God, I love thee, not that thou
Should love me for it; nor love I do,
'Cause Hell for those that love thee not,
Will be their Everlasting Lot.
Thou, thou my Jesus did embrace
Me wholly on thy Cross of Grace,
Thou bor'st for me in thy last Trance
The Thorns, the Nails, the Gall, the Lance,
Pains, Anguishes, and bloody Sweats,
Much Ignominy, and more evil Treats;
And Death: and all for sake of me,
For me a Sinner. O Love's Prodigy!
Why then, most loving Jesus why,
Should I not love thee till I die?
Not to avoid the Pains of Hell,
Nor yet in Heaven for ever to dwell,
But merely 'cause thou lovedst me;
Not for Reward will I love thee,
Will I love thee with all my Heart;
Because my God, my Lord thou art.
Amen
This Prayer may be said at the End of both Devotions.
MOst Glorious St. Francis Xaverius, Apostle of the Indies, and mighty in thy
Works; for the great Compassion thou showest to all Men, and for that most
ardent Zeal, with which, during the Term of ten Years, thou did labor in the
East, for the Salvation of Souls; I beseech thee, that thou will efficaciously
interceed with God for the Conversion of Infidels, and of all Sinners; that
thou will pray for the afflicted Souls in Purgatory, and for the true Peace and
Prosperity of Christians, especially of those that are devoted to thee; and
that thou will obtain for me of our Lord this Grace and Favor, which I N. beg
of thee with the most sincere Affection I am able: Holy Saint, as thou art
favorable and loving to all Persons, be so also to me, though an unworthy
Sinner: Grant me this Request, to the Glory of God, and to thy own Honor. Amen.

FINIS.
AN INSTRUCTION TO Perform with Fruit, THE DEVOTION OF Ten FRIDAYS, In Honor
of St. Francis Xaverius, APOSTLE of the INDIES. Much practiced in Rome and
augmented particularly of late by some Authentic Miracles wrought by the
Intercession of this glorious Saint. Upon which Score he is taken as particular
Patron of almost all Italy.

Permissu Superiorum.

The Translator to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE Experience I had in Rome and other Parts of Italy, of the following
Devotions to the Glorious St. Xaverius, made me desirous, that our Nation, out
of Ignorance of the means of obtaining them, might not want the like; and
therefore I thought my time well spent in translating this Treatise, in which
you will find neither Quaintness nor Eloquence, but such a plain and easy
Style, as is most suitable to Devotion, and fitted for the meanest Capacities,
being desirous all should profit by it. Let not the perfect Practice of those
eminent Virtues proposed to you to imitate in this Great Saint, discourage you
from endeavoring their Imitation out of a pusillanimous Despair, ever to
arrive to as high a Pitch of Perfection; but endeavor to imitate, at least
this so admirable a Pattern, in a lower Degree; and the more sensible you are
of your own Weakness, the more confide in his powerful Intercession, who (as
the Writers of his Life testify) always obtained what was for the Spiritual
Advantage of those that begged his Intercession, as you may assure your self he
will think these Virtues to be. I cannot wish a better Success to this
Translation, than the Original had, nor better Effects of these Devotions in my
own Country then they have had in Italy; and I hope whoever experiences any
Advantage by them, will be moved to pray for the Translator of them, who is,

Dear Reader, Your most hearty well-wisher and humble Servant N. N.

AN EPITOME OF The LIFE of St. Francis Xaverius APOSTLE of the INDIES; OF THE
Society of JESUS.
THE Divine Providence, the same time it opened the way to the Indies and the
new World, disposed, that Saint Xaverius should come into this, and be born to
both, an elect Vessel, to carry his Holy Faith over all, and in the former,
establish a new Christianity; for which end, it qualified him with all those
Gifts we read were severally bestowed on several Persons in the primitive
Church, viz. of being an Apostle, of Prophecy, of Learning, of Virtue, of
Health, of succouring the Needy, of Government, and of Tongues.

Saint Francis was an Apostle, as sent by Christ's Vicar with Title of Nuncius
Apostolicus, to preach the Gospel to the Indians; in ten Years he ran over all
the East, making above a hundred thousand Miles. He revived that Faith, St.
Thomas the Apostle had there before taught; then foretelling, that when the Sea
should come up to that Cross (which he erected) as it did when St. Xaverius
entered those Parts, then should Europe send one that should preach the same
Doctrine he had already taught them. He converted many hundred thousands of
Infidels; with several Kings, Queens and Princes: He threw down the Temples of
Mahomet and of the Idols, whereof he broke forty thousand: He erected
innumerable Churches, Baptized with his own Hand above a Million and two
hundred thousand Persons: He was the first that ever preached to several
Nations and Islands, and particularly St. Paul 1. Cor. 12 c. 28. v.
Japony, which contains threescore and six Kingdoms: and designing to convert
that great Empire of China, dyed in the way, in the Island of Sanciano. You
see, how well is verified that Prophecy of a Holy Nun, his Sister, that desired
her Father to let him continue his Studies, for he should prove a great Apostle
of the Indies. St. Hierome appearing to him at Vicentia, promised him the like;
showing him the Indies, and what Fruit he was to reap there. Our Savior
himself declared the same, the Saint at Rome often hearing those Words. Act.
15.16.
A Vessel of Election is this Man unto me: For I will show him how great things
he must suffer for my Name. Representing to him withal an Indian weeping and
lamenting his own and his whole Countries woeful Condition, begging Help and
Comfort from him; which he most graciously and plentifully did afterward
bestow for the Space of ten Years upon the whole East.

He was also a Prophet foretelling things to come and far distant, and knowing
the very secretest Thoughts of Man's Heart, insomuch, that at the same time the
King in Portugal, and St. Ignatius at Rome, ordered things to be done, he in
the Indies, published and executed their Orders, and with that Certainty, that
once in a public Sermon from the Pulpit, he exactly related the Success and
Circumstances of a Battle, which in that very Nick of time, was fought between
the Aceni and the Christians, above three thousand Miles distant from the place
where he then preached, as by strict Examination afterward was found to be
true. This foretelling future things grew so customary to him, that he was
scarce called any thing but Prophet; whereupon a most Learned Man with good
Reason said, That the Spirit of Prophecy in many, was as it were by Fits, but
in St. Francis it was a continual Habit.

He was not only Master of Philosophy at Paris, but also Teacher of the Divine
Wisdom in the Indies, preaching the Gospel to all sorts of People, confuting in
several public Disputes the Brachmans of the Indians, the Imany of the Turks,
the Bonzi of the Japonians, (all false Preachers of Idolatry) with that Fame
and Renown, that a Pagan came six thousand Miles, only to hear his Doctrine;
whose Worth is sufficiently made known by the Sanctity of his own Life, and of
these his Disciples, Gasper Berzeus, Cosmo Torres, Antonio Criminale, the first
that was martyred there, and many others of his Order; and even by the Children
he nursed up in this Holy Doctrine, who became great Preachers, and wrought
many Miracles, cast out Devils, cured Diseases, threw down Idols, and finally
by the six hundred Martyrs in the Island of Manar, and infinite others of
Japony and the Indies, that were all his Disciples.

The fourth Gift of Virtues, meaning that which adorns the Soul, was in him
most admirable. His Love of God is sufficiently known all the world over; so
far from being bias'd by any self Interest, that seeing in a Vision all the
Labor he was to undergo, he cried out, Amplius Damine, Amplius; More Lord,
More. And at another time having a taste of Divine Consolations to that degree,
as he disowned himself any farther capable of receiving them, he said; Satis
est Domine, satis est. It is enough. Lord, it is enough. Such was his Charity,
that he went to preach the Gospel to the Infidels, barefoot, trampling upon
Thorns, loaded with a little Furniture for Mass, and some few pious Books;
provided only with a spare Quantity of Rice; waiting upon others running at
their Horses Heels, to hasten the sooner to the converting of Souls; always out
of himself with the Love of God; suffering so many Misfortunes at Sea by
Tempests and frequent Shipwracks, thrice sinking, under the Ship; always in
Dangers and Troubles, Crosses and Afflictions; persecuted by Infidels, Thieves,
Devils, false Brethren; had in Derision, scoffed at, and most barbarously
misused by those he had been most charitable and beneficial unto; beaten most
cruelly by the wicked Spirits, and molested with their Temptations; threatened
to be murdered by Cut throats; by Idolaters held for a Madman, even in the
Court of the King of Amangucci, where they reviled him with Curses, covered him
with Dirt, overwhelmed him with Stones, and treacherously laid Snares to take
away his Life; often endeavoring to poison him; twice giving him into the
Hands of Assasinates to be dispatched. Being stoned by the Gentiles of the
Island of Moro, he made his escape over a broad River, by the means of a great
Timber Beam, which he handled and turned like a little Wand. How often did he
give his Life for Christ? When he attended those that were infected with the
Plague; when he upbraided their Infidelity to the very Gentiles ready armed with
Stones to kill him; when in spite of Princes and Priests, he threw down their
Idols; when he alone resisted a whole Army of Badaga, that in a fury intended
to oppress the Christians; when he entrusted himself going into Japony in a
small Boat to Pirates, infamous for killing Passengers; when he entered the
Island of Moro, where they eat Man's Flesh; when he went to China, where it was
Death for any to enter: So much did he love God and his Neighbor, but
contemned and made himself most despicable; exercising all Severity imaginable
upon his tender Flesh. A Man that was so nobly born, of the Race of the Kings
of Navarre, and honored with the Title of Nuncius Apostolicus, kneeled to
every poor and ordinary Priest, to kiss his Hand; making and deeming himself a
Slave to all: In the Ships, Inns, Hospitals serving the very meanest Beggar and
basest Servants; looking after their Horses, sweeping their Chambers, washing
their dirty Linen and Vessels; exercising the lowest Offices, even cleansing
their Sores and Wounds, with that Charity and Victory of himself, as to sup up
the Water, wherewith he had washed one that had a Leprosy, and another time to
suck out the Putrefaction and Matter of a most leathsome Sore. I omit his other
Virtues: He eat only once a Day, and then only a little burnt Rice, and often
nothing for four, five, six and seven Days together: His Drink was Water; he
was clothed with a Hair-shirt, wore one single Garment of black Canvas, all
patched: His Sleep was either at Land upon the hare Ground, or the Cables on
Shipboard: His Penance so rigid and austere, that he fainted often through his
Fastings and severe Disciplines, wherewith he core his tender and innocent Body
If by Virtue you mean Miracles, he wrought infinite. In the Fire, stopping it
with his bare. Word, when a House was actually burning: In the Air, driving
away the Plague from Malaca, with the sweet Savor of his dead Corpse, and
making it rain Stones and Ashes upon the City of Tolo, rebelling from Christ
and the Portuguese, which filling up the Ditches, and demolishing the Walls,
forced them to a Surrender. In the Water, allaying Tempests, sweetning Salt
Water by the Sign of the Cross, or dipping his Foot therein. In the Earth,
causing Earthquakes. In his own Body, raising it in the Air, preserving it
incorrupt and in the Flower of Virginity, ever free from the least Motion of
Concupiscence. He still lived, though amongst so many Snares, Diseases, Labors,
Plagues and Poisons, even without the least Infection or Hurt untouched, and
after Death sending out a most odoriferous Savor, even amongst quick Lime, and
moist and wet Earth. The very Beasts obeyed him: a Lobster brought to Shore his
Cross, that had fallen into the Sea. The Devils feared him dispossessing all
that were brought to him. In the Island of Moro, at his first Sermon he
preached there; the Earth shaking and opening, hideous Cries and Shreiks or
Devils were heard, that fled from their so long inhabited. Dominions, insomuch,
that they appeared all surrounded with Fire in the Air, to the People; crying
out: You burn and torment us, Francis, you drive us from our Kingdom.

He was no less famous for the fifth Gift of curing Diseases: Witness Father
Francis Perez, Rector then of the College of Malaca, who upon the point of
Gasping, was perfectly cured by St. Francis's embracing him. He that he healed
of his Wounds, by only carrying him upon his Back. That Leper, whose Sores he
cured with only washing them. Witness also the Bishop of Malaca, who desiring a
Summary of all the Miracles the Saint had wrought, and finding after strict
examination eight hundred only in his own Diocese, ceased to prosecute his
first thoughts, despairing ever to reckon them. Let the Indies confess and
acknowledge his Power in this point, where, not he in his own Person only, but
his Hair, Girdle, Beads, the very Pulpit he preached in, the Lamps that burnt
before his Shrine, the Water wherein was dipped only a Medal of his, even his
very Shadow (which is yet more wonderful) cured many Diseases. Let him answer
for himself; he can testify, that in an instant, by Prayer, he was healed of
those most dangerous Incisions, mortal of themselves, and beyond the Art of
Man, as the Surgeons confessed, caused by the little Cords, wherewith out of
too much Fervor he had girded his Thighs and Arms.

This is inconsiderable, if compared to his Power of raising the Dead: Besides
many others, it is authentically proved, that five and twenty have obeyed his
Call; some as they were carried to their Graves; others have been buried
several Days, refreshing hereby the Memory of Christ's own Actions. A Noble
Gentil entreated him to come and raise his Daughter, now deceased, and
receiving this Answer, that she was alive, dissatisfied left St. Francis, but
was soon comforted by his Servants, that told him she lived. A Lady (like
Martha) lamenting her Loss, said; if you had been here my Daughter had not
died: Why, said the Saint; she is not dead: Yes, replied she, and three Days
buried: The Saint accompanying her to the Grave, restored the Daughter alive to
the afflicted and incredulous Mother.

His whole Life was nothing but an Exercise of the sixth Gift; of helping the
Needy: He was totally taken up in tending the Sick and the Poor, succouring the
Oppressed instructing the Ignorant and Sinners, assisting all that were in
Necessity and Danger, either Spiritual or Temporal, with so much Carefulness
and Industrious Zeal, that none is able to express it. One Saint Francis was
not sufficient to work according to the great Charity he bore to all: To the
end he might help several, he was actually present to each at the same time, in
different Places: As when called upon by a Merchant, who suffered Shipwreck; he
obeyed and staid with him three Days upon the Plank, till all the rest of the
Ship were dead, and then brought him safe to Shore: And when, with the same
miraculous Apparition, he saved ten Men in a little Boat. Such was the
Confidence Seamen had in his Presence, that the oldest and most shivered Ships
were reckoned the most safe; and Infidels themselves for more Security, loaded
all their Goods upon them, though with double Charges and Expenses, whom he
assisted even after his Death; for carrying his Body in a very tottered, unsafe
and ill-rigged Ship, and running upon a Rock; the Seamen betook themselves to
invoke the Saint's Aid; and presently the Rock split in two, and opened a
Passage for the Ship: Whereupon now at Sea, he is the Patron of Mariners even
amongst Infidels.

He was eminent for the Gift of Government and directing Souls, with no less
Satisfaction of Seculars, than Religious; Grateful always to the People, dear
to Kings and Princes, winning the Hearts of all. St. Ignatius would have made
him General of his whole Order: The King of Portugal reverenced his Words as
Commands, as did also the King of Bongo and Amangucci: The King of Travancor,
called the great King, put out an Edict, commanding all should obey the great
Father (so he called St. Francis) as the great King. He converted the King of
Tanor, and several others. Pope Paul the III. admired his Sanctity: Marcellus
the II. desiring to see him, sent for him from the Indies to come to Rome; so
much did he win the Hearts of all far and near: The Gentiles reverenced him, and
even erected a Church in his Honor; where some wicked Fellows out of Contempt,
having often stole the Oil from the Lamp and poured Water in its place; enraged
to see the Week yet burn, and themselves deluded, put it quite out, which as
often lighted of it self, to their greater Confusion and Christians greater
Comfort. Another time, being all alone, he met a whole Army of Enemies that
were Heathens, whom he frighted and put to flight with his bare Authority.

To conclude, his Gift of Tongues is no less wonderful than the former. They
spoke in those Countries a hundred different Languages, which St. Francis
spoke, not only well, but also with great Facility and Eloquence, yet with
these two Privileges; The first, That preaching to Men of different Nations, he
was perfectly understoad by every one; The second, that with one and the same
Word and Answer, he satisfied the Doubts and Questions of many together,
although concerning things, both hard and of different Matters. These and many
other things we read of him in Historians, and in the Process of his
Canonization. They add moreover, that he was not so well known, or so much
called by the Name of Francis, as sometimes of Angel or Prophet, sometimes
Raiser of the Dead; now by that of Holy Father, other times of Great Father;
but always and by all, with the Approbation of the Pope and Applause of the
whole World, he was called by the Name of Apostle.

To whose Holy Intercession and Patronage, by the Assistance of your Prayers, I
commend my self, hoping you will find his Holy Aid and Assistance in all your
Necessities (if for the good of your Souls) as you have seen others before you:
Observe moreover (as it has been more exactly noted in these our latter Days)
that none with Faith and Devotion, ever recommended themselves unto him, that
missed of their Aim, or at least, did not receive something more beneficial to
themselves and their Souls Good, which was and is his only Scope in conferring
Benefits. Let us comfort our selves with what he told F. Marcellus Mastrilli at
Naples, when appearing to him, he miraculously cured him: Non parum se posse in
Paradiso: That his Power was great in the Court of Heaven.

AN Advertisement Of the AUTHOR To the Devout Reader.
SAint Francis Xaverius is always ready to help those that devoutly implore his
Aid in all their Necessities of what kind soever, and even to obtain of God
most miraculous Favors for them, as all Christendom can testify; and for this
reason, he is called the new Thaumaturgus, that is, Worker of Miracles; which
are sufficient to fill whole Volumes, and we here in short will touch upon the
Heads only of some few, to animate the Reader to have recourse to this great
Saint.

Peter Veglio a Portuguese Merchant, of a very loose Life, by means of an Alms
he had once given in Necessity, deserved God's Mercy through the Saint's
Intercession, and was brought to Repentance, and relieved in all other Corporal
Necessities by the same Saint Francis, who likewise foretold him the Hour of
his Death, which accordingly happened.

He appeared to a Woman, that had been a long time sick in Malavar, and
promising to send her one that should hear her Confession, advised her of her
Death.

A Youth in the Hospital of Mozambichi raving, through the Sharpness of his
Distemper, by only the Touch of the Saint, was cured both in Body and Soul.

An Indian, by Profession a Schoolmaster, by Life a most lewd debauched Wretch,
was converted by the Saint's appearing to him, and obeyed that gracious Call of
God to a better Life.

Being desired by a Christian Lady to dispossess a Youth that was tormented by
the Devil; as soon as he entered the House the wicked Spirit quitted his
Habitation; and the Youth, before ready to die, was thereupon restored to
perfect Health of Body. An Indian Poet, that had accidentally lost his Eyes by
Gunpowder, after many Years applying himself to the Saint, recovered his Sight
better than before; which Miracle he published in Verse over all India.

He healed a Leper with washing his Sores, and drinking that filthy Mixture of
Matter and Water.

An Idolatrous Woman that was barren, at the Intercession of St. Francis was
blessed by God with a Son, who soon after dying, was restored to Life again by
the Saint.

He raised another that was drowned in a Well; and a third that died of the
Plague.

In the Kingdom of Travancor he raised one that had been buried; and another in
Murar, as he was carried to his Grave.

In Malaca, he brought to Life a Child that had been dead three Days; and in
the same place the Son of one that was devoted to him.

In Japony he gave Life to a Daughter of an Idolater. To two others in Manapar,
and to several elsewhere, as all the World can testify, and the Transactions
of his Canonization do authentically evidence.

He restored to a Seaman his Son, that had been lost six Days at Sea.

He filled a whole Sea with Fish, where none scarce could be found before; and
with his Blessing, turned the salt Water of the Sea into fresh.

He obtained Rain to free a King from his Enemies that surrounded him.

A desperate Gamester, that had lost all he had in the World, encouraged by the
Saint to try to mend his Condition, recovered his Losses; and withal obtained
the Conversion of his Soul, which was the Saint's only Aim.

He saved several Ships from perishing in Tempests and Storms.

He was in several places at once.

The very Children whom he taught the Christian Doctrine, with the Beads and
Medals of St. Francis, cast out Devils, and wrought many Miracles.

His very Handwriting cured the Sick, and his Pictures stopped and quenched a
great Fire.

The Oil that burns in the Lamps before the Saints Body at Goa, has cured many
infirm and sick of all Diseases.

A Christian Lady, by means of a Cross, that the Saint had erected in Amboino
to be honored, obtained, in time of a great Drought plentiful Rain, which the
Idolatrous Women were not able to obtain from their Idols with their enchanted
Witchcraft.

The Saint appeared to a Merchant, that had recommended himself to him, and had
a pair of Beads of the Saints with him, five Days after he had suffered
Shipwreck, and brought him safe to Shore; and stayed with another three Days
upon the same Plank, and at last landed him safe.

God blessed several barren Women with Issue at this Saint's Intercession.

An Indian in Punicale, that had three Daughtets, prayed to the Saint to beg of
God the Blessing of three Sons, which she obtained. We shall weary our selves
in rehearsing all the Wonders wrought by this great Saint; as the Vicar General
of God owned of himself, after he had reckoned up eight hundred.

We read of an hundred authentically approved of in the Process of his
Canonization. The Miracles that have been wrought at Potami, in the Kingdom of
Naples by a Picture of his, are sufficient to fill a whole Volume.

The Church therefore, with good reason, says of him on his Feast: This Saint,
so bountiful, so gracious and so loving, shines over all the World by his most
resplendent Miracles. Who will be no less ready and willing to assist you in
all your Necessities; if you amend your Life, and reform your Manners; the
Saint aiming by these temporal Favors he bestows, at nothing else, than the
Salvation of every ones Soul, which God of his infinite Mercy grant to all, by
the Intercession of St. Francis Xaverius.

To the Devout Clients of the Glorious Apostle of the Indies, St. Francis
Xaverius.
HEre is laid before you (Clients of this Great Xaverius) a little parcel of
the innumerable Actions and most Heroic Enterprises of St. Francis, which he
took in hand, only to the greater Honor of God, and for the Good of his
Neighbor.

If you like this small Compendium, and find your Heart enflamed with a desire
of more, betake your self to the History of his Life copiously written by many;
but yet far short of what he did.

Those that desire to honor this Saint, by imitating him, and to profit
themselves thereby, must reflect upon that Saying of St. Augustine: That, Non
pigeat imitari quod delectat celebrare; that is, They must not be ashamed to
imitate, what they delight to honor.

The Saints are willing to find in us some Similitude of their Virtues, which
they have practiced before us in this world, to the end they may be the easier
stirred up to obtain our Petitions. For which Reason, here are Ten Virtues of
this Saint allotted for Ten Fridays: And although this Glorious Saint was
admirable in all the Virtues of a most sublime Christian Perfection, yet these
seem more particularly necessary, and also in some sort fitter to be imitated,
which we shall here set down.

You shall every Friday read one with Reflection, and purpose to imitate him
therein, and beg it of God, by the Merits of this Saint for your self, not
forgetting me; whereunto it will help very much, to resolve from one Friday to
another to practice more or less the Virtue proposed in the former
Consideration, according to the Necessity you find thereof in your Soul: By
which frequent Acts you will greatly facilitate and advance your Spiritual
Profit.

General Advertisements, For those that desire to honor St. Xaverius, by
imitating these his Virtues.
1. BE Devout to the Holy Crucifix.

2. Pray for the Conversion of Infidels.

3. Pray for the Souls in Purgatory.

4. Be a Lover of Chastity.

5. According to your Condition endeavor to help your Neighbor, as well in
Spirituals, by teaching the Christian Doctrine to Children and ignorant People,
hindering their Sins, exhorting them to do well, and giving good Example; as in
Temporals, by giving Alms, visiting the Sick and Hospitals, defending the Poor,
and helping them in Necessity.

6. Confess often.

7. Examine your Conscience daily.

8. Reflect often upon those Words: Quid prodest Homini, si universum Mundum
lucretur, Animae vero suae Detrimentum patiatur? That is, What does it avail a
Man to gain the whole World with the loss of his own Soul?

9. Return Good to him that has displeased, or injured you.

10. Promote the Devotion to the Saint.

Antiph. Well fare thee, etc. with Verse. And Resp. as before, p. 13.

The Prayer.
LOrd God who have vouchsafed by the Preaching and Miracles of St. Francis
Xaverius, to join unto thy Church the Countries or the Indies: Grant
propitiously, we beseech thee, that reverencing his Glorious Merits, we may
also imitate his Example. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer to the five Wounds of our Savior, much used by St. Francis.
O Lord Jesus Christ, by the five Wounds thou wast pleased to receive upon the
Cross for Love of us: Help thy Servants, N. N. whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious Blood.

To the greater Glory of God, and Salvation of Souls. Amen.

Through the Intercession of St. Francis Xaverivs.

O God I love thee, etc. p. 23.

Ten Motives To excite all to a Devotion to St. Francis Xaverius.
1. HIS indefatigable Zeal, accompanied with an undaunted Courage in
undertaking, suffering, and overcoming all Difficulties for the Good of Souls.

2. His singular Affability, wherewith he accomodated himself to all sorts of
Persons, to gain them to God.

3. His total Contempt and Abstraction from all things of this World.

4. That great Fire of Divine Love, which betraying it self so often, even in
his very Countenance, showed how full his Soul was of God.

5. His living and dying a pure Virgin.

6. His extraordinary excelling in all kind of Virtues and Gifts of God.

7. The great Number of Souls he converted, which were above two hundred
thousand.

8. His Facility in working Miracles alive and dead.

9. The extraordinary Favors he shows to those that are devoted to him.

10. The common Experience, whereby we see that whosoever seriously recommends
himself to St. Francis, either obtains his Request, or Comfort and Strength to
conform to God's Will, if he has not his Petition granted (because not
expedient for the Good of his Soul,

An Explication of the Devotion of Ten Fridays, in Honor of St. Francis
Xaverius, and what is to be done therein.
THis Devotion is instituted to obtain some singular Favor of this Saint; who
as heretofore on Earth, so now in Heaven, is all Bowels of Mercy toward those
that invoke him, and does most graciously and abundantly favor his Devout
Clients.

Ten Fridays are ordained, and, if conveniently, without Intermission; in each
of which, he that will perform this Devotion, must Confess and Communicate; and
before some Altar, or Picture of the Saint, or where else most convenient, must
also say Ten Pater Nosters, and Ten Ave Maria's, and Ten Gloria Patri's, etc.
offering to God the Merits of this Saint, to obtain the Favor he desires.

In this, two things are to be observed: The First is, That before one applies
himself to this Devotion, he must purify his Intention concerning the Favor
he petitions, be it Temporal, or Spiritual; pretending nothing else but the
Glory of God and the Salvation of his own Soul; for seeing this was the only
Aim of this Saint, whilst he lived in this World, so it will be a more
efficacious means now in Heaven, to move him to favor us with his Intercession
to his Divine Majesty, to obtain us our Request.

The Second is, That none of these Devotions, omitted either in part or whole,
have any Obligation, even of a venial Sin; so that you may continue them or no,
when begun, without any scruple; and if Business permits you not to perform Ten
Fridays in order, go on with them at your leisure.

Friday is assigned in Memory of the Saint's dying on that Day in the Island of
Sanciano: The Number is in Honor of the Ten Years he labored in the Indies
for God's greater Honor, and the Good of Souls; and the same is to be
understood of the ten Pater's and Aves and Gloria Patri's.

To the end this Devotion may have more Fruit, and promote the Exercise of some
Virtue, some Considerations are here set down taken out of the Life of the
Saint; one for every Friday, which is to be read on that Day, by those that
practice this Devotion; stirring themselves up to a lively Imitation of the
Saint. To every Consideration there is annexed a Colloquy, in form of a Prayer,
begging of the Saint some Spiritual Grace suitable to the foregoing
Consideration, and profitable for the good of their Souls; wherein, with, a
little Labor, they may spend their time with much Profit.

The CONSIDERATION For the First FRIDAY.
Upon the singular Purity of Mind, and Body of St. Francis Xaverius.
BY Purity of Mind, is not only understood Innocence of Life, but also a right
Intention of doing all our Actions purely for the Glory of God, and for no
other end.

How great was this Purity in St. Francis! The sole Aim of his immense Labors
was the Glory of God; not seeking any thing else, either in his Voyages by the
most dangerous Seas of Europe, Asia, and Africa, or Journeys by Land; I may say
through both Worlds, or in his most troublesome Preaching, but that God should
be known praised and glorified. In a word* all he suffered (which as Francis
Mansilla, a great while Companion to the aint said, is not to be conceived how
much it was) was only for the Glory of God, never regarding any the least
private Interest.

The Reward of his Labors was a most sublime degree of Sanctity, which he
arrived unto, whereby afterward he deserved such a Glory in Heaven, and
received so many Favors here on Earth.

And our Savior, to show how pleasing his Labors were to him, wrought that
continual Miracle; that in his Father's House a Crucifix sweat Blood, every
time the Saint was in any difficult Enterprise, or Suffering.

Examine your self, Devout Soul, and see what Intention you have in all your
Actions; if to please God only, or else for some other private Interest: If the
first, give God thanks, and stir your self up to Perseverance: If the second,
be sorry and purpose an Amendment

But by Purity of Body, is chiefly understood the Virtue of Chastity, which
retrenches all sensual unlawful Pleasures.

He excelled so much in this Virtue, that as long as he lived he preserved the
Lilly of his Virginity unstained, and therefore is generally painted with one.
And which is yet more to be admired, he preserved it most pure, even living in
the World, amongst the Delights and Enticements of his own House, in the Heat
of his young blood, and Liberty of the Students of the University of Paris,
where he lived, and even in the most licentious and loose Manners of the
Mahometans and Gentiles, with whom he conversed so many Years.

God rewarded this his Angelical Purity with the Incorruption of his Body after
his Death, and with infinite other Miracles. For George Alvarez having buried
it in quick Lime, that he might the easier carry his Bones from Sanciano (the
Island where he died) to God, after three Months found it as entire as if newly
buried; and which is more, the body being cut, bled as fresh as if alive.

This Miracle extended it self also to his Clothes, which were preserved from
receiving any Harm from the Lime, which naturally would have consumed both.

The Body also sent out a most fragrant Odor, far surpassing any in this
World, The carrying the body through Malaca, freed it from a most desperate and
infectious Plague: And when it was brought to God, the Miracle of its
Incorruption did no less continue; for several times it bled afresh, and even
to this day (being now above a hundred Years) ceases not, the Body being as
incorrupt as ever. Every one may easily see how he behaveth himself in this
Virtue, according to his State and Condition.

The COLLOQUY To St. Francis Xaverius.
To obtain Purity of Body and Soul.
MOst Glorious Apostle of the East, most pure in Body and Soul; I, a most
miserable Creature, with all Humility have recourse to you; begging you would
by your Intercession obtain for me such a pure Intention in all my Actions,
that I may never aim therein at any thing else but the greater Glory of God,
and such a pure Chastity, that neither in Thought, much less in Word, or Deed,
I may ever displease the most pure Eyes of our good God. Amen. Through the
Intercession of St. Francis Xaverius, God grant me Purity of Mind and Body.

The CONSIDERATION For the Second FRIDAY.
Upon the profound Humility of St. Francis Xaverius.
ACcording to St. Bernard, Humility is a Contempt of ones own Worth; according
to St. Thomas, it is a Virtue whereby a man knowing his own Defects and
Imperfections, keeps himself within his own Bounds, in a low Degree.

St. Francis pracrtised this Virtue in a most perfect manner toward all sorts
of Persons: For though he was born of the Race of the Kings of Navarre, by Office
Nuncius Apostolicus, and besides, endowed with most rare Talents of Nature and
Learning, yet he humbled himself below all, whenever it was for the greater
Glory of God. He writ to St. Ignatius his Superior always upon his Knees.

He answered a Friend of his, who examined him concerning a dead Child he had
raised in the Coast of Comorino, with all Humility, as it were confounded: I
raise the Dead to Life? And can you believe such a thing of me, such a great
Sinner as I am?

In a word, all his Life is full of Examples of his most profound Humility; and
was held for such over all Spain, Italy, France, Portuga, India, Japony, and
innumerable other Countries, wherein he exercised this Virtue in diverse Ways,
and in a most perfect Degree with the poor Prisoners, Children, Slaves,
Soldiers, Seamen and what not? And this in a most abject and contemptible
manner; choosing for his Lodging the Hospitals, for his Cloths course Canvas,
and for his Meat Dry Bread, Burnt Rice, and the like.

But God ordered it so that the more he humbled and debased himself, the more
he should be esteemed by others.

Hence it was Pope Paul the third admired him, and that he was honored and
respected by the King of Portugal in an extraordinary manner, and no less by
the Vice Roys of India, by Governors of Towns and Countries, and by all
Persons of Note. The Portuguese, even in Portugal, gave him the Name of
Apostle; the Gentiles stuck not to give him Divine Titles; the Mahometans held
him for a great Prophet; many Idolatrous Kings called him Great Father; whole
Towns and Countries came to meet him: The Missioners of the Society, that were
designed for the Indies, thought it a Paradise to be sent to never so hard
Enterprises, if Saint Francis were but there; so little did they think of
themselves to enjoy him. Gonzalo Fernandez crept upon his Knees to St. Francis,
who knocked at the Door to speak with him: Angero, a Japonian, came from the
farthest part of the East to the Island of Molucche, above two thousand Miles,
only to treat with the Saint about the Affairs of his Soul: After the Saint's
Death, a new Convertite sailed from Goa to the Castle of Xavier in Spain, above
fifteen thousand Miles only to see and reverence the Chamber St. Francis was
born in. You see how true God's Promise is, and how much it is verified in this
great Saint. Luc. 18.14.
He that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Let every one reflect upon this, and see how he behaveth himself according to
his State, with his Superiors, with his Equals, and with his Inferiors: Let him
see if he carries himself as a good Christian ought, with Charity and
Submission, or rather, with Pride and Haughtiness; and accordingly let him
purpose to persever in the good, or mend what is amiss.

The COLLOQUY To St. Francis Xaverius.
To obtain Christian Humility.
MOst humble St. Francis! I most earnestly desire, you would beg of Almighty
God for me Strength and Courage to overcome my Pride, and imitate your
Humility; whereby I may offend no body, either in Thought, Word or Deed, out of
Pride or Contempt: I purpose on my part, to use all possible Diligence
thereunto, that I may glorify God, and edify my Neighbor. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Third FRIDAY.
Upon the Penance and Mortification of St. Francis Xaverius.
PEnance here is not taken for a part of the Sacrament, but it is a Virtue that
embraces hard Difficulties and painful Afflictions, for Satisfaction for Sins
committed against God.

Most sharp were the Mortifications this Holy Apostle used and inflicted upon
himself; besides the insupportable Sufferings annexed to his Apostostolical
Charge and Office; His Fasts were very frequent; and, had not God particularly
inspired him to undertake them, might be called most indiscreet; for he passed
three, four, and sometimes seven Days without the least Sustenance; though his
ordinary Diet might be justly called a perpetual Fast; as has been gathered
out of one of his Letters to a Friend of his, wherein he confesses, that he
lived more like a Bird than a Man, with nothing but water and Rice. His
Watchings were continual; spending the best part of the Night in Prayer: His
Sleep and Rest (which he even unwillingly allowed to Nature) were rather to
torment, than ease him; for at Sea he lay upon the Cables, and at Land upon the
hard Ground, or a Bed of Cords. He wore Day and Night a continual Hair-Shirt.
He girded himself with Chains, riveted with Points of Iron: He disciplined
himself to Blood with Whips armed with Rowels of Steel. His Eyes were in a
perpetual Bath of Tears for the Offenses he knew were committed by others
against God. Confessing himself always a Sinner, and being both Confessor and
Penitent, he shared with others in their Penances, and undertook to satisfy
for them himself; witness that Heroic Act upon the Coast of Cananor, where to
move a Sinner to Sorrow for his inveterate Sins, he retired himself into a
Grove hard by, and there cruelly tore his Body with Whips, till such Quantity
of Blood trickled down his Back, as provoked the Sinner to abundant Tears, and
a true Compunction; and so he reconciled him to God.

But what Wonder he should practice these most cruel Mortifications in this his
Office of Apostle; seeing, from the first Moment he begun a perfect Lise, he
accustomed himself to most rigid Austerities? Who is ignorant, that to satisfy
God for his too great Niceness and Spruceness in Cloths, and Nimbleness in
Dancing, he tied his Thighs so strait with little Cords, that he was not able
to breath; so far had he let them eat into his Flesh, that they could not be
seen; whereof he must necessarily have died, had not God most miraculously
cured him, whom he had designed for the Apostle of the new World. Every one
knows that in the Hospital of Vicenza, to get a total Victory over himself, he
lucked the Corruption and Matter of a most pestiferous and loathsome Impostume:
And before he said his first Mass, he spent forty Days in most rigid Penance,
shut up in a little Grot of Mount Celso, within the Confines of Padoua. In
fine, these Austerities were so dear to him, that he never left them off to his
dying Day; so that with good reason, he might say with St. Paul: Cor. 15.31.
I die daily: and * for thy sake we are mortified all the Day.

As God is a most just Rewarder of the least thing done for his sake, so he did
abundantly recompense and sweeten these Pains of St. Francis with Infinite and
Divine Consolations; which his Heart not being able to bear, they appeared even
in his very Countenance; seeming to be always enflamed, yet always cheerful and
pleasant, even in the most difficult Enterprises; showing to the World, that he
was really in his Heart a Citizen of Heaven. This abundance of Heavenly
Comfort, forced him to cry out; Satis est Domine, Satis est: Psalm. 43. ver. 23.
It is enough, Lord; it is enough: Begging that an end might be put to those
Delights, his Heart of Flesh was incapable to endure. That Posture of opening
his Breast, which he was often seen in, was only to mitigate a little that
Divine Heat of the Love of God, that without Intermission, burnt and consumed
his Heart. I Will omit those Ecstasies or Rapts wherein his Body was often seen
lifted from the Ground; and those frequent Rays of Light, that so environed
him, that he seemed rather a Seraphim of Divine Love than a Man of Earth.
Thomas Fernandez found him often in Manapar of Piscaria elevated a Cubit from
the Ground, with his Face surrounded with Rays, and his Eyes sparkling like
Stars. Many Eyewitnesses attested, that at Mass and Communion in Malaca and
Meliapor, he was several times seen quite alienated from his Senses, and
elevated in the Air. These are some Tokens of those Divine Consolations this
Angel of Heaven enjoyed here upon Earth in Reward of the Sufferings he
undertook for the Love of God.

What have we now to say for our selves miserable and tender Creatures that so
much shun all occasions of suffering, even when our state of life and condition
require it? How ignorant are we of the true good! It is no wonder divine
consolations are so scarce with us, since we fly all Trouble and Difficulties,
that might else in some manner deserve, and draw down those Favors upon us.

The COLLOQUY To St Francis Xaverius:
To obtain a desire of Penance and Mortification.
O Most Mortified Apostle! Behold at your Feet the greatest Sinner of the
World, and yet the most delicate; the most deserving of Penance, and yet the
greatest shunner of it, who Implores your Help that he may begin to love that
once, which he ought always to perform, and thereby satisfy God for his Sins.
You, O Dear Saint! Most Innocent, and yet so generous an Embracer of Austerity,
obtain for me of my suffering Savior your Spirit, that I may set my Affection
more thereon, and thereby diminishing the pains of Purgatory due to my Sins, I
may the sooner come to enjoy with you the Beatifical Vision. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Fourth FRIDAY.
Upon the Patience of St. Francis Xaverius.
PAtience is a Virtue that Strengthens our Mind against all Difficulties, that
might otherwise deter us from our Duty.

This Holy Apostle was so abundantly Endowed with this Virtue that he might
justly say with St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6.4.
Let us exhibit our selves as the Ministers of God in much Patience. Truly it
was very necessary in those his long and most Troublesome Sicknesses; as when
Destitute of all Human Comfort he was obliged in Vicenza to lie in the same Bed
with a most filthy and loathsome Sick man; and in his Journey from Amangucci to
Meaco, to live only upon Water and Burnt Rice; and in the Island of Sanciano,
to dye totally abandoned by all. Yet these inconveniences were nothing to those
he suffered in changing so often to so contrary Climats, from one excess to
another, accommodating himself to the Barbarous Incivilities of People so
different from the Europeans in Life and Manners: In the Excessive Heats of the
Torrid Zone, in the Incommodities of Sea Voyages, in Tempests and Dangers of
Shipwreck. What shall I say of Persecutions from Men and Devils? He was often
in the Public Marketplaces laughed at by the People, sought for to Death by
the Gentiles and Bonzi their Priests, as a Destroyer of their Idols and Gods:
most Shamefully and Unhumanly reviled by Governors of Towns and Countries,
Captains of Ships, Soldiers and Seamen; and even by Christians (amongst whom
some bad are always to be found) utterly hated, as a reformer of their manners
and wicked Lives: finally left and betrayed most ungratefully by those he had
been most Beneficial unto. The Devils also set upon him diverse times, and once
beat him most unmercifully in Meliapor, as he prayed all Night at the Tomb of
St. Thomas the Apostle; and they always Persecuted him, as their Sworn and most
Bitter Enemy.

Yet what did St. Francis do? What would you a most Delicate, Nice, and
Cowardly Creature have done? Quitted what you had undertaken, fainted and
yielded at the first seeming Difficulty, and fled back? No, no, quite contrary;
he like an undaunted Soldier not the least struck with these Oppositions, stood
his Ground, and Faithfully Discharged himself of his Apostolical Duty and
Commission; witness his Journeys in his Ten Years, amounting to an hundred
Thousand Miles, equivalent to almost five times the whole Circumference of the
Earth; wherein he abolished innumerable Superstitions, Rooted out many Abuses,
Corrected many Wicked and Inveterate Manners, threw down Idols, Converted
Innumerable Souls, and Baptized with his own Hand above a Million and Two
Hundred Thousand, Persons. Worthy Fruits indeed of the invincible Patience of
St. Xaverius.

But what do I, miserable Creature? How do I bear even the least things that
happen daily? How ought I to be ashamed, that have not the Heart to Suffer the
least Word, Check, or Cross Answer from another, which makes me so often
neglect my Duty to God, and fail so frequently in the Employment I am in? I am
truly Confounded seeing with how little Patience I might so much Promote God's
Glory, and that failing in the first, I am so Notoriously Deficient in the
Latter.

The COLLOQUY To St Francis Xaverius:
To obtain the Virtue of Patience.
YOU see most Patient Apostle, the baseness of my Heart, so straight and
narrow, as not to dare to open itself to receive the least Cross, or
Adversity, but presently it yields and Faints. Yet my Crosses are not like
yours, which were so hard and Painful, but slight Troubles, and small
Difficulties, and yet I am most impatient in all occurrences. O most Patient
Xaverius! Obtain of the Divine Goodness for me your Spirit of Patience, that
manfully resisting all Difficulties annexed to my State and Condition, I may
Faithfully comply with God's Holy Will. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Fifth FRIDAY.
Upon the Continual Prayer of St. Francis Xaverius.
PRayer is an act of Religion whereby we have recourse to God, begging what is
fit we should ask of him. St. John Damascen calls it an ascent of our Minds to
God, whereby we treat and Converse with him.

St. Francis's Prayer was continual, fulfilling that, St. Luc. 18.1.
It behooves always to Pray, and never to cease: And that of the Apostle Phil.
3.20.
Our Conversation is in Heaven. Although he was always United to God, yet he had
some particular times allotted for it; spending the Night chiefly in continual
Prayer and Contemplation; never allowing himself above two or three Hours for
natural Rest. On Shipboard for Prayer he prefixed from Midnight till Morning,
whereupon the Seamen used to say, the Ship Sails securely, seeing Father
Francis stands Sentinel, In Manapar he was at several Hours in the Night
observed by his Host, and sound always upon his Knees at the Foot of a
Crucifix. But what sort of Prayer was it? Worthy indeed of that Seraphical
Heart all Burning and set on Fire, and carrying him to his only Center God, In
so much that many Confessed they could not look him in the Face, even in
Familiar Conversation amongst them, his Countenance so Dazzled their Eyes. His
short, though most Inflamed Jaculatory Aspirations give us sufficiently to
understand, what Fire Consumed his most Ardent and loving Soul; having been
often heard to say even in his Sleep and Raging Sickness, and commonly in
Latin, O Sanctissima Trinitas! O mi Jesu! O Dulcis Jesu! O Jesu cordis mei? O
most Holy Trinity! O my Jesus! O Sweet Jesus! O Jesus of my Heart! These show
us that although he was in Body on Earth, yet in his Mind he was in Heaven. A
second Daniel, who in Babylon, that is, amongst Idolatrous, Barbarians, and a
Thousand Hindrances and Distractions, was in a continual and most perfect
Prayer. Our Savior enriched this Prayer of his Servant with many Favors.
First, of most high Contemplation, which seemed so natural unto him, that he
used it at his Pleasure in Uniting himself with God. Then of most Divine Wisdom
and Prudence in knowing the Will of God, and Executing it to his greater Glory.
The Third was a most admirable Gift of Prophecy, not only in seeing things
afar of, and foretelling things to come, but even Penetrating into the Secrets
of Man's Heart. Several of these Prophesies are Famous, as that of the Death of
John Arausio at Amboinum, Two Hundred and Seventy Miles distant from the Place
where St. Francis was: that at Malaca, of the Victory of the Portuguese against
the Acenians. When he promised to James Pereira continual Prosperity, which he
ever after enjoyed. When he acquainted Peter Veglio of his Death after a most
Peaceable and happy Life, which accordingly happened: of the destruction of the
City of Tolo: of the Misery of Alvarez Ataide, who endeavored to stop his
journey to China, and innumerable others; in so much that in the process of his
Canonization, the Holy Inquisition of Rome approved and allowed of a Hundred
and Fifty most evident and manifest Prophesies.

I perceive, Devout Soul! you are desirous of these Favors, and would
willingly betake your self to such Prayer, were you to reap such Fruit: But
confider a little with your self, and see what time you allow for Prayer? Ah! I
am ashamed to tell, what is too true, It is but little or none, and that the
worst part of the day: If you have any time to spare, and know not what to do
with it that you give to God: And yet how is that spent too. As for your
Exterior carriage and comportment, is it fit to appear before that God with
whom you treat? For your inward attention and affection I fear it is so Poor
and Weak, that you easily admit distractions, or at least are very negligent in
putting them away. And do you think God will bestow his Favors on a Soul so
ill prepared to receive them? You are deceived. Do then what is requisite on
your part, and correct your defects, and then God will not be wanting on his.

The COLLOQUY. To St. Francis Xaverius:
To obtain the Grace of Prayer.
I Aspire not, O Holy Apostle, to those admirable Favors God enriched your
Prayer with; No! those were properly yours and peculiar to that great Soul, to
which God did in so singular a manner communicate himself. I am contented with
the more solid part of Prayer, and do humbly beg you to obtain of God for me a
true Love and Affection to it, Attention in it, and Fruit out of it. Such a
Love of it, as never to omit it or assign the worst part of the day for it.
Such, an Attention to it, that I may ne^^^ be voluntarily distracted in it.
Such Fruit from it, as may correct my Defects and Manners, and increase the
Virtues most requisite for my State and Calling. This is what I beg of you, O
most glorious Apostle! and for this end I make a purpose to use such Means as
are requisite.

The CONSIDERATION For the Sixth FRIDAY.
Upon the Magnanimity and Generosity of St. Francis Xaverius.
GEnerosity is a Virtue that so emboldens the Mind, as not to be daunted at
hard Enterprises, that usually deter it from virtuous Actions. This Virtue and
Disposition of Mind, was but necessary to this Holy Apostle to strengthen him
against so many Difficulties, Oppositions, and Dangers; which were not the
easier and less to be feared, because necessarily annexed to his Office of
Apostle. Dangers at Sea, at Land, from treacherous Companians, Strangers,
Thieves and Cutthroats, both in public and in private, were no less
inseparable Companions of St. Francis, than of St. Paul. The Difficulties he
encountered (as we read in his Life) were such that nothing but a most Heroic
Courage could have overcome them. He crossed from the Indies to Japony the most
dangerous Tract of all those Seas, by reason of the raging South Winds; and
that in a little Boat (the Seamen being all Pirates, and the Master both
Idolater and Pirate) running continual risque of either being drowned at Sea,
or cast upon some desert Island, there necessarily to have starved. In his
Journey from Meliapor to the Molucche crossing from one Island to another, he
suffered thrice Shipwreck, and once lighting upon a Plank of a Ship, tossed
three Days and three Nights by the tempestuous Waves, was at last rather dead
than alive cast ashore. His Dangers at Land were no less than at Sea. For though
he was generally esteemed by Viceroys, Governors, and other Officers, yet he
wanted not most strong Oppositions as in the Shore of Pisca^ia, in Travancor,
and in Goa. Most obstinate was that of Alvarez. Ataide then Governor of
Malaca, who neither by Entreaties nor Threats could be brought to allow of
James Periera's sailing to China, with whom Saint Francis intended to go to
convert that great Empire. He went to the Islands of Molacche and Moro (famous
for its barbarous Cruelty) against the Consent of all his Friends, and in spite
of all the Threats of the Devils. In Amangucci the Bonzi with armed men
continually sought to kill him. In the most Heroic Enterprise he framed in his
Soul of the Conversion of China, Death was the least Danger he apprehended:
Fearing not a World of Dangers to free another from the Tyranny of the Devil.

Whoever you are, Dear Soul, that reads these generous Acts of Saint Francis
Xaverius, reflect with yourself and see, how you carry yourself in the Service
of God. I am afraid the very Shadow of Difficulties do quite dishearten and
deter you from all good Works. If it be so, be confounded at your own Weakness,
and beg of the Saint a noble Heart, that may not only not yield but even
surpass at least ordinary and small Hindrances in the Service of God.

The COLLOQUY. To St. Francis Xaverius.
To obtain a Generous Heart.
BEhold at your Feet, O most generous Apostle! a Soul that most shamefully
neglects all things belonging to the Service of God. I fear, I confess, the
least thing that either seems difficult or any ways terrible; and by this my
inordinate Pusillanimity I fly back and quit many a noble Action, that
otherwise might very much increase the Glory of God. O Holy Apostle, grant me
but one Spark of your great Courage, wherewith you underwent such Difficulties.
Animate and strengthen my Pusilanimity, that frightened by no Opposition, I may
most manfully and readily fulfill God's Holy Will. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Seventh FRIDAY.
Upon his great Love of God and Power over all Creatures.
HEre are, Devout Reader, two Considerations; the first to be imitated, the
second to be admired; yet both very profitable for you; for whether you imitate
or admire Saint Xaverius, you may assure your self of his Protection and
Intercession. The first is his Love of God; the second his Power over all
Creatures.

As for the first, what do you think, Devout Client of St. Francis, of the Love
he bore to God. His whole Life is a sufficient Proof thereof, according to that
great Saying, Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis. Deeds are the Marks of
Love, But yet to give you some more particular Signs thereof, here are some few
Reflections no less true than wonderful. This Love of God did so inflame his
Heart, and set it all on fire, that he was not able to suffer it is
insupportable Heat, nor scarce endure his Clothes. Once as he was walking in
the Streets of Goa, he was so totally absorped with the Love of God, that he
took no notice of an Elephant that broke loose and threatened Death to all it
met; but yet afterward to the great Wonder of all it retired. The like
happened to him going from Amangucci to Meaco, when he run like a Servant
behind a Noblemans Horse, never feeling the Thorns that continually tore his
Feet; so much was his Mind absorpt in the Abyss of the Love of God. Every where
he was out of himself and totally in God: But above all in Prayer, Mass, and
Thanksgiving after the Divine Sacrifice. His Soul betrayed it self so clearly
in his very Countenance, that the Pope said of him, that he was Vultu adco
inflammatus, ut Angelicam prorsus Charitatem repraesentaret. Seeming rather a
burning Seraphim and a blessed Spirit upon Earth, than a Man.

What say you pious Reader? you do wonder and admire him, and I am comforted
thereat, because hereby you may frame some Conceit of the great Love St.
Xaverius bore to God. But why do not you endeavor also to love the same God?
For he is the same he was then, ever deserving to be beloved above all things
Created; and should you not love him, you would always prove the most miserable
Creature in the World, for not placing your Affection upon a God that is so
worthy of Love, seeing to Love him is the sole happiness of Man.

As for the second Point proposed in the beginning, God even in this Life
seemed to reward his Saint with an universal Power and Dominion over all
Creatures. The Heaven, saw the Day increased three Hours by the Prayers of this
second Josue, that the Christians might give a total Overthrow to the Infidels.
The Earth rent it self with most horrid Earthquakes to frighten the Citizens of
Tolo to the Christian Faith, which they had so shamefully forsaken; the Air
bore him up from the Ground several times both by Night and Day. The Fire
raging and threatening several Houses, obeyed his Command, and offered not to
pass the Limits prescribed by St. Xaverius. But the Water seemed to acknowledge
most of all his Power. He was an Anchor to Ships in the greatest Storms; a
favorable Gale to carry them through the most dangerous Shallows and Sands of
the Seas; a Calm allaying Tempests; and a Haven for those that suffered
Shipwreck. The very Idolaters called him the God of the Sea, and spared no
charge for themselves and their Goods to sail in the Ship Saint Xaverius went
in. In the Indies he often changed Salt Water into Fresh; and once by only
dipping his Foot into the Sea. He allayed tempests sometimes by Prayer, other
times with Relics he wore, or with the Sign of the Cross; and once by letting
his Cross into the Water; which God to double the Wonder, permitted a Wave to
snatch away, and so bereft him of his o^^^ Comfort; when behold soon after a
Lobster with open Claws above Water brought it to St. Francis again.

It is impossible to specify every particular Miracle wrought in this kind by
St. Francis: let these few in short suffice, to convince you that in this
Glorious Saint you have a Patron ready to command all Creatures for your Good;
so that in all Occasions and Necessities you may have recourse to him with
Confidence, and hope in his most powerful Intercession and Assistance.

The COLLOQUY To St. Francis Xaverius*
To obtain the Holy love of God.
WHat did you aim at throughout the whole course of your life, O Holy Apostle,
but to bring all the World to the love of God? And now, will you not, O great
lover of God! obtain for me a poor helpless creature, an ardent desire of
loving him above all things? Ah! I doubt not of your help and intercession but
I apprehend my own Weakness, least permitting my self to be deceived by the
foolish Love of Creatures, I may swerve from the true love of my Creator. Help
me then, O Holy St. Francis! That I may not be so deluded, but yielding up my
will to God, I may by a holy necessity, always love him both in this life and
in the next. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Eighth FRIDAY.
Upon the Love of St. Francis Xaverius toward his Neighbor.
HE that truly loves God, does extend his Affection also to his Neighbor, as
being dear to God and his lively Image. So that Saint Xaverius loving God as
you have seen, ought consequently to love his Neighbor; which he did in the
perfectest manner he could, fulfilling those Words of St. Paul, * Omnibus omnia
1 Cor. 9.22.
factus, to all men becoming all things that he might save all. 2 Cor. 6.6.
In Charitate non ficta sed vera, In true, not feigned Charity.

He never spared any Labors, Troubles, Difficulties, nor even Life it self to
benefit him either in his Temporal or Spiritual Necessities, though he labored
most to succor the Soul as being the more noble Part. The only Aim and Design
of his Apostolical Missions and hard Enterprises was the Salvation of Souls;
and where he proposed to himself any Hopes of converting any to God, he let
slip nothing that might any way promote or further his Intentions. With
Children he was one, always so concerned for their Spiritual Profit, that though
he was a Man of that Authority and Esteem, yet he disdained not to go about
with a little Bell, exhorting Parents to send their Children to be instructed
in the Christian Doctrine. With Sinners he became, as I may say, a Sinner,
familiarly treating and conversing with them, that so he might bring them to
God: for pretending to be ignorant of their Vices, Blasphemies, Murders,
Usuries, and all their whole Life, he changed the Hatred they bore him into
Love, and the Love they bore to all vicious Habits and Propensions, into a
detestable Hatred of Sin. To Infidels (as particularly recommended to him from
Heaven) he showed such Charity that no body can express it. And if the Height
of this, according to the Oracle of Truth it self, be to give his Life for his
Beloved, he was always ready to do it for them: which did so mollify and win
their Hearts, that it is incredible, how many through this only Motive did
embrace the Christian Faith; whereupon Father Melchior Nugnez then Superior of
the Indies, a Man of rare Prudence and no less Virtue, said, that converting
Infidels to Christ in St. Francis Xaverius did not seem a Gift infused, or a
Virtue got by Habit, but a natural Inclination: So bent was he upon that only
Work, that he could not live nor take any Satisfaction in any other Employment,
than the Instructing and bringing Souls to the Knowledge and Love of the only
true God. This perpetual Motion of Charity was his only Respite, this Exercise
his only Repose. Nothing will be better able to show the Greatness of this his
Charity and zealous Assiduity therein, then the Number of those he Baptized
with his own Hand, which amounted to a Million and two hundred thousand
Persons. As for what belongs to the temporal Assistance of his Neighbor, who
can reckon up the Deeds of Charity he showed to every one, as well poor as
rich; nor was there any Work of Mercy that he did not practice either in his
own Person, or when he could not himself, by using others Help for the
succouring the poor and needy. His tender Care of the sick will be a sufficient
Proof of his boundless Charity. He was to them a Father, Mother, Brother,
Physician, and a Nurse in the meanest Offices, in private Houses, and in
public Hospitals; if any died, he washed and laid them out with his own
Hands, dug their Graves, and buried them himself. God seeming to second
these Heroic Desires of St. Francis, so much bent upon serving his Neighbor,
endowed him in a particular manner with that divine Gift of Curing the Sick:
For in the Deeds of his Canonization you will find the wonderful Cures of all
Diseases, wrought by the Power of this great Xaverius, to be innumerable. The
Blind received the Benefit of their Eyes, the Lame the use of their Limbs, the
Lepers were cleansed, the Dumb restored to Speech, the Deaf to their Hearing,
Possessed Persons freed from Malignant Spirits that Tormented them. To be
short, so many were these Prodigious Cures, that in and about the City of
Naples only, there are sufficient to fill a whole Book. Yet these Cures of
Diseases are nothing if compared to those he raised from Death to Life, which
amount according to the Authentic Transactions of the Saints Canonization to
above Five and Twenty. What has been here said is but an Abridgement; and only
helps to frame some conceit, or Idea of the Saints great Charity to his
Neighbor, referring you to the Writers of his Life to see the innumerable
other Graces and Favors through his means and Intercession confered upon all
sorts of Persons, as Seamen, Merchants, Barren Women, or in Childbed, Soldiers,
etc.

We may gather two Fruits from what has been said. The First a Holy Confusion
in our selves for helping and furthering so little the good of our Neighbor,
either Spiritual or Temporal. Who of us is troubled or concerned to see him
offend God? Who is there, that either hinders him from falling, or gives his
helping hand to raise him again from Sin? Which of us grieves at his losses, or
suffers any thing to Promote his Good! Do we Visit him in the Hospitals, and
Prisons? Are we Charitable unto him? Do we relieve his Wants with Alms? Or
rather do we not spend that on Beasts that only serve for Sport and Pastime,
which ought to be employed in Succouring and Assisting our Neigbour, the very
Image of God himself? The Second Fruit is a lively confidence of being assisted
by this Holy Apostle in our Necessities as well Corporal as Spiritual, if we
apply our selves unto him as we ought.

The COLLOQUY To St. Francis Xaverius.
To obtain a true Love of our Neighbor.
I Know too too well O most zealous Apostle! the Coldness of my Heart toward
my Neighbor* I own, and condemn my self for the small Charity I show, in
succouring his Necessities either Temporal or Spiritual; and I am ashamed and
totally confounded considering your admirable Zeal and Concern for his Good.
Obtain for me, O true Lover of your Neighbor! the least Spark of that great
Fire that consumed your Heart, which may kindle in my Soul a true Zeal and Love
of others Good, that grieving at their Misfortunes, and equally compassionating
them in mind, comforting them in Words, and helping them in Deeds, I may the
better imitate you in this. Virtue of Charity, which is so properly termed
yours.

The CONSIDERATION For the Ninth FRIDAY.
Upon St. Francis Xaverius's great Desire to Dye for Christ.
THE Consideration of this Day is far different from the former; for though in
some you have seen, Devout Reader, the Desire this Saint had to suffer for
Christ, yet we have not spoken of what belongs, to the dying for him, and
giving testimony of his holy Faith by the Shedding of his Blood and becoming a
Martyr.

Saint Francis had this Desire in the greatest excess imaginable, that he could
with reason say with St. Paul, Quotidie morior, I dye daily, by always desiring
to dye, and because I never am so happy as to die, and give my Life for my God.
And though Almighty God preserving him alive for his greater Honor and Glory,
would not grant him the Favor of a Martyrdom consummated by Death, yet he
tried his Constancy by several Combats not inferior to those of Martyrs, and
above all, permitted him to survive to that languishing desire of dying, that
he might at least live a Martyr, though he could not die one.

He was apprehended twice in Japony, sent to Sea, arid delivered over to
Murderers to be dispatched; who upon the point of Executing their cruel Design
were so terrified and frightened by a sudden Tempest, that they spared his Life.
He was also twice led to the common place of Execution by the furious incensed
People. Twice stoned by the Moors. Often beaten, several times shot at with
Arrows, and as often presented with Poison. Upon the Sea Coast of Piscaria the
Idolatrous Badagi sought to kill him.

The Mahometans persecuted him with no less Malice and Rage: And because their
own Children, whom the Saint had Baptized, stood often Sentinels to defend him
from their Parents Fury, and sometimes found ways for the Saint to escape their
cruel Hands, they set fire to the Houses where they suspected him to lie hid.
Whence a grave and learned Doctor Martino Navarra reflecting upon the Life of
St. Francis Xaverius always exposed to Danger of Death, sticks not to call it a
perpetual Martyrdom. All I have touched upon here and more that I omit, is
nothing to the real Desire he had to dye for so honorable a cause as the Faith
of Christ: And certainly he endured more Anguish in his Mind, by always (though
in vain) desiring to lose his Life, then he could have suffered in his Body by
once dying a Martyr. Through the excess of these ardent Wishes he was forced to
cry out, Amplius Domine, Amplius, More, Lord, more, when in his Sleep he seemed
to carry upon his Back a heavy Moor, and in him the new World of the Indies:
Out of the same inflamed Desire he bore a holy Envy to the Fathers of the
Society, who were in future Ages to convert all the Islands of Moro, hoping
withal, as he said, that those Islands would come to change their Names and be
called the Islands of Martyrs:

To one that endeavored to dissuade him with the Apprehensions of Death from
those his heroic Enterprises, he answered with no less Humility than
Generosity, that it was what he so much desired, but he knew himself unworthy
of such a signal Favor. What he writ to a Friend of his shows most clearly
what were the Desires of his Great and Noble Soul: I (says he) sometimes do
abhor even Life it self, and covet rather to die than to see God so much
offended, without being able to hinder it, as I desire. So that the Acts of his
Canonization say with reason of this Glorious Apostle; Varia infidelium loca
peragravit, non minus ut pro Christi fide sanguinem profunderet, quam ut fidei
lucem gentibus inferret. That he travalled over so many Countries of the
Infidels, with no less desire to shed his Blood for the Faith of Christ, than
to enlighten the Gentiles with the Light of the true Faith.

Reflect, weak Soul, upon what has been said, and be ashamed of your Carriage
so little resembling this great Pattern and Example, and ask your self this
Question: Was not Xaverius of Flesh and Blood, as I am? Was not he a Man, a Son
and Child of Adam as my self? and yet how comes it to pass, that he is so much
enflamed with the Divine Love, and I so little? And you will find the Origin of
his so singular Perfection to have been a total Abnegation of him self, and
Alienation from all Self love, whereby being transformed into God, he desired
to dye to the World, that he might live to him alone. Ah! if you could but once
resolve to dye to Self Love, then assure your self, the Holy Love of God would
abundantly increase in your Soul.

The COLLOQUY
To St. Francis Xaverius. To beg the Grace to dye to Self-love.
YOU bad reason to say, Holy Xaverius, with St. Paul; Gal. 2.20.
I live, now not I, but Christ lives in me, who kindled in your Soul those
great Desires of dying once to Flesh and Blood, that so by Death you might be
united to your Spirit, which was Christ. But I, unhappy Wretch live still to my
self, I live to my own Flesh, to my Body, and to Self-love? And what wonder if
I desire not to dye for Christ, thereby to be united to him? What Wonder, if I
love him not as my Life? Beg of Almighty God for me, Dear Saint, that I may dye
to Self-love, to the end that every day so dying, I may become wholly dead
thereunto, and begin to live to Christ; that then I may likewise with truth say
with St. Paul and you Glorious Saint, I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Amen.

The CONSIDERATION For the Tenth FRIDAY.
Upon the perfections of St. Francis Xaverius.
ST. Francis Xaverius was an Apostle sent by Jesus Christ, by command of his
Vicar Paul the third, with the title of Nuncius Apostolicus, to Preach the
Gospel to the Indians, and Convert them to our Holy Faith. Whereof he Converted
many hundred Thousands, amongst whom were several Kings, Queens, Princes and
Great Men. His Sister, a Holy Woman, Abbess of the Poor Clares at Gandia,
foretold he should be such an one; for desiring her Father to let him Study
Divinity, she said, he should prove a Great Apostle of the Indies.

He was a Prophet, and in such a manner that a most Virtuous and Wise Man
sticked not to say, that in some the Spirit of Prophecy was by fits, but in St.
Xaverius it seemed a constant Habit. He was not only Master of Human Philosophy
at Paris, but of the Divine also in the East; where to all sorts of People he
Preached the Gospel and Instructed them in what belonged to our Holy Faith; He
Confuted many Masters of the Idolaters in several Disputes; the Brachmans of
the Indians, and Carizi of the Moors, and the Bonzi of the Japonians.

He was endowed with all manner of Virtues whether you mean Power of Working
Miracles, as you have seen in the former Considerations, or Virtuous Habits
that adorn the Soul, as Humility, Chastity, Patience, Charity, etc.

He had the Gift of Curing Diseases, as we have shown you by several wonderful
examples.

He had the Gift of Helping the Needy, in so much that he never refused his Aid
to any if conducing to their Eternal Salvation. He governed all with rare
Prudence as well Seculars as Religious, which Talent made him esteemed by the
greatest Princes. The King of Portugal Reverenced him as an Oracle, receiving
and following his Directions as Commands. The King of Travancor, called the
Great King, published an Edict, commanding every one to obey the Great Father
(St. Xaverius) as the Great King. St. Ignatious resolved to make him General of
the Society of Jesus.

Lastly he had the Gift of Tongues. In those Countries they speak above a
Hundred several Languages; Thirty whereof are quite different; yet St. Francis
when he entered those parts did not only understand the Natives, but spoke the
very same Languages most Elegantly; yet with these two privileges; first of
being understood (though Preaching to an Auditory of different Nations) by every
one in their Mother Tongue: secondly of Satisfying with one only answer the
demands of several proposed to him at the same time, though relating to different
matters. Hereby we see that God by a special Favor seems to have Endowed St.
Francis with all those Gifts St. Paul speaks of, to have been divided amongst
several in the Primitive Church. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Some God has placed in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Doctors, next Miracles, then the graces of Curing Diseases, Helps, Governing,
kinds of Tongues. All these gifts and graces were requisite for that great
Enterprise of Converting the New World to the Faith of Christ, for which God
had Designed his great Servant St. Francis Xaverius.

These things mentioned in short ought, Devout Reader, to stir up in you a
lively Confidence and Devotion to this great Saint so much beloved by God, and
for his Extraordinary Sanctity enriched with such singular and rare Graces and
Favors by the hand of his so Bountiful Creator. Seeing therefore the nature of
love is to change him that loves into him that is beloved, and to create such a
likeness in their Lives and Actions, that they seem to live in one another, you
ought to endeavor to liken your self according to your state and condition, in
all your Actions to St. Xaverius, that finding in your Soul some of his Virtues
he may love you the more, and loving you recommend you to our Lord, and obtain
for you the Favors you ask of him. To which end you shall finish your Ten
Fridays with this following Colloquy.

The COLLOQUY To St. Francis Xaverius.
To obtain Grace to Imitate his Virtues.
IF I love you, O most Holy Apostle! I have just reason for it, finding in you
a Thousand Motives, to wit, your many perfections that render you worthy of all
love. But if you love me, as I am sure you do, it is purely your Goodness and
only upon the account of my being a Sinner. I am ashamed O Holy Xaverius that I
have nothing that can win your Love, but the deformity of my Soul, nor any
other Title that may any way seem to challenge your Affection, then what in
reality deserves your hatred; wherefore I most earnestly beseech you to obtain
for me the grace to Imitate your Virtues, and those chiefly that did
particularly render you so dear and pleasing to the Divine Goodness: That being
so adorned I may both please you, and be acceptable in this life to the most
pure Eyes of the all-seeing God, and have an assurence of enjoying him with you
in the next for an Eternity. Amen.

THE LITANIES OF St. Francis Xaverius.
Composed by the most Illustrious Francis Gaspar de Villarouel, Lord Bishop of
St. James 's, in the Kingdom of Chile, in Honor of this Saint; by whose
Assistance, after having been buried in the Ruins of an Earthquake, he was
miraculously delivered, and in Performance of a Vow he had made, said them upon
set Days, and imparted them to the public, to awaken and stir up the Piety of
the Devout. And have been approved and published by the Order of several
Prelates in the Low Countries and lower Germany.

LOrd have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ
hear us. Christ graciously hear us. God the Father of Heaven, Have mercy on us.
God the Son Redeemer of the World, Have mercy on us. God the Holy Ghost, Have
mercy on us. Holy Trinity, One God, Have mercy on us. Holy Mary, Pray for us.
Holy Father Ignatius, Pray for us. St. Francis Xaverius most worthy Son of St.
Ignatius, Pray for us. St. Francis Xaverius Apostle of the Indies, Pray for us.
St. Francis Xaverius evangelizing Peace, Pray for us. St. Francis Xaverius,
evangelizing all Good, Pray for us. Vessel of Election, carrying the Name of
Jesus before Gentiles, Pray for us. Vessel full of Divine Grace, Pray for us.
Firmament of the Oriental Church Pray for us. Defender of the Faith, Pray for
us. Enemy of Infidelity, Pray for us. Preacher of Evangelical Truth, Pray for
us. Destroyer of Idols, Pray for us. Chosen Instrument of the Eternal Father
for the Propagation of Divine Glory, Pray for us. Faithful Follower and
Companion of Jesus Christ, Pray for us. Trumpet of the Holy Ghost, Pray for us.
Pillar of the Church of God, Pray for us. Light of Infidels, Pray for us.
Master of the Faithful, Pray for us. Mirror of true Piety, Pray for us. Guide
in the Way of Virtue and Perfection, Pray for us. Pattern of Apostolical Spirit
and Sanctity, Pray for us. Light of the Blind, Pray for us. Curer of the Lame,
Pray for us. Helper of those, who suffer Shipwreck, Pray for us. Health of the
Sick, Pray for us. Protector in time of Plague, Famine and War, Pray for us.
From whom the Devils fly, Pray for us. Life of the Dead, Pray for us. Whose
Power the Sea and Tempests obey, Pray for us. Whose Command the Sea and all
Elements reverence, Pray for us. Wonderful Worker of Miracles, Pray for us.
Refuge of the Miserable, Pray for us. Comfort of the Afflicted, Pray for us.
Splendour of the East, Pray for us. Tabernacle of Incorruption, Pray for us.
Treasury of Divine Love, Pray for us. Glory of the Society of Jesus, Pray for
us. Xaverius most poor, Pray for us. Xaverius most chaste, Pray for us. Xaverius
most obedient, Pray for us. Xaverius most humble; Pray for us. Xaverius most
desirous of the Cross and Labors of Christ, Pray for us. Xaverius most
vigilant in the Safety of your Neighbor, Pray for us. Xaverius most zealous of
God's Glory, and the Good of Souls, Pray for us. Angel in Life and Manners,
Pray for us. Patriarch in Affections and Care of God's People, Pray for us.
Prophet in Gift and Spirit, Pray for us. Apostle in Dignity and Merit, Pray for
us. Doctor of Gentiles in all sorts of Languages, Pray for us. Martyr in
desiring to dye for Christ, Pray for us. Confessor in Virtue and Profession of
Life, Pray for us. Virgin in Body and Mind, Pray for us. In whom alone we
reverence through the Divine Goodness the Merits of all the Saints, Pray for us.
Lamb of God who take away the Sins of the World, Spare us O Lord. Lamb of God
who take away the Sins of the World, Hear us graciously O Lord. Lamb of God
who take away the Sins of the World, Have mercy on us. Christ hear us. Christ
graciously hear us. Lord have mercy on us. Christ have mercy on us. Our Father,
etc. Verse. Pray for us, St. Francis Xaverius. Resp. That we may be made worthy
of the Promises of Christ.
Let us pray.

LOrd God, who have vouchsafed by the Preaching and Miracles of St. Francis
Xaverius, to join unto thy Church the Countries of the Indies, grant
propitiously, we beseech thee, that reverencing his Glorious Merits, we may
also imitate his Examples, Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A PSALM IN TRIBULATION.
This Psalm was said by the Saint in time of Trouble.
WHen I was in Tribulation, I cried to our Lord, and he heard me.

O Lord, deliver my Soul from unjust Lips, and from a deceitful Tongue.

What may be given thee, or what may be added to thee to a deceitful Tongue?

The sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with Coals of Desolation.

Woe is to me, that my sojourning is prolonged, I have dwelt with the
Inhabitants of Cedar: My Soul has been long a sojourner.

With them that hated Peace, I was Peaceable, when I spoke to them, they
impugned me without Cause.

FINIS.

