The Mystery Discovered; OR, Frollick upon Frollick.
A Pleasant New Play Song, Greatly in Request,
Snow melts not sooner when the Sun Regains
His long lost heat, and beats upon the Plains,
With scorching Rays, then Female hearts do yield
If men be bold and Brave in VenusField:
Shame on the softer sex Impression makes,
And though they wish, yet words their tongues forsakes
But put them to it, and though (though faintly they)
Do strugle long, they will gladly loose the day.
To the Pleasant New Tune of, Come Let us be Frollick, etc.




COme Let us be Frollick and Gay,
it is now merry days let us quaff it,
And kiss each brisk Lass in our way,
there is not one in ten but would have it,
Oh fain they would Firk it,
Caper and Jerk it,
Though they are ashamed for to crave it.
Their's Jenny with Roling Black eyes,
With Silence does court you to do it,
Your kindness she scorns to despise,
if once that you dare put her to it;
Oh fain she would Firk it,
There Is Margery minces along,
The Prize of the bonny brisk Lasses,
A Buckle she has for your Thong,
when ever you dare to meet faces:
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and Jerk it,
Though she seems cold in Carresses.
Brisk Betty's both Witty and fair,
her Locks they are curled most Neatly,
Her Amorous looks do declare,
that she does desire it greatly;
Oh fain she would Firk it.


Simpering Molly comes next to hand,
her Smiles do foretell she would be doing
Constable like she would make you stand,
and take an account where your going;
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and Jerk it,
Though she is ashamed to be Wooeing.
Dorothy next with Rosy Cheeks,
where Lillies for Conquest are striving,
To win your Liking plays mad freaks,
and a Bargain would fain be driving;
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and Jerk it,
Although she is ashamed to crave Swiveing,
Fair Susan so Courteous and toward,
would never the less be a gaining,
At put Inn and Inn, or All-Fours;
she will play for what Bett you would be naming
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and Jerk it,
Although she is ashamed of defaming.
Kind Nancy with panting white breasts,
so pleasant, delightful and Loving,
Would afford you those delicate rests,
whilst her Buttocks nimbly were moving
Oh fain she would-Firk it,
Caper and jerk it,
Though she is ashamed to be proveing.
Brisk Joan she will never stick out,
but with plain broad signs she will dare
For to give her a breathing bout
during which she will never spare you
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and jerk it,
Although she will not ask for to bear you.
Blithe bonny Frances comes the next,
to lie alone alas! she is grieved,
She Would have you Comment on the Text,
that is written in her Book Two-Le(...)
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and jerk it,
But alas she fears she is deceived.
Grave Rachel does fall in the Rear
whose sighs do betray her deep passion
She moves to delight with much fear,
yet denis not the Recreation;
Oh fain she would Firk it,
Caper and jerk it,
Though she is ashamed to Petition.
Thus boldness in Love it does all,
whilst he is despised that wants cour(...)
Push hard and the Lasses will fall,
when you in each Field may find forr(...)
For fain would they Firk it,
Caper and jerk it,
With Ay, or without the thing M(...)

