A mournful Caral: Or, An Elegy, Lamenting the Tragic, en(...) unfortunate
Faithful Lovers, Frankin and Cordelius, he being slain, she flew herself with
her Dagger.
To a new Tune, called, Franklin is fled away.


F^in my loyal friend, O hone, o hone,
In whom my joy do end, O hone, o hone,
Frankin my hearts delight,
Since last he took his flight,
bids now the world good night, O hone, o hone,
Frankin, is fled and gone, O hone, o hone,
And left me here alone, O hone, o hone,
Frankin is fled away,
The glory of the May,
Who can but mourn and say, O hone, o hone
Frankin beloved of all, O hone, o hone,
Ladies lament his fall, O hone, o hone,
Come mourn upon his shrine,
You Lady Muses nine,
And Matrons all divine, O hone, o hone,
Frankin with comely grace, O hone, o hone,
Courted with kind embrace, O hone, o hone,
Till Mars did hear control,
And his affection stole,
to heaven bequeathed his soul O hone, o hone
Frankin did please the Dames, O hone, o hone,
None could resist his Flames, O hone, o hone
Virgins lament the day,
That Frankin fled away,
How can we choose but say, O hone, o hone.
Frankin why would thou go, O hone, o hone,
To Battle with thy Foe, O hone, oh hone,
Thy solemn obsequies,
With watery dropping eyes,
A mournful sacrifice, O hone a hone.
frankin which graced the swains, O hone o hone
Sported upon the Plains, O hone, o hone,
With all the Royal train,
Faithful he did remain,
Until my Lord was slain, O hone, o hone,




FRankin why would thou dye, O hone, o hone,
Regarding not my cry, O hone, o hone,
Lovesick in every vein,
Oppressed with grief and pain:
And so I shall remain, O hone, o hone.
Frankin the pride of men, O hone, o hone,
None flourish like him then,
till death without remorse,
took Frankin hence by force,
I must bewail his Course, O hone, o hone,
In the Elysium Fields, O hone, o hone,
Much joy and pleasure yields, O hone, o hone,
there Frankin Sainted is,
enjoying Lovers bliss.
The Earthly mold I Will kiss, O hone, o hone,
(...) under this stone, O hone, o hone,
His ^orps remain alone, O hone, o hone,
Come drop with me a tear,
All you that faithful are,
Such zealous thoughts I bear, O hone, o hone
Frankin I come to thee, O hone, o hone,
To end my misery, O hone, o hone,
The world I plainly find,
A hell unto my mind,
Thou art so true and kind, O hone, o hone.
I count there is no bliss, O hone, o hone,
But where my true love is, O hone, o hone,
To toul my mournful bell,
There Is heaven where Frank does dwell
Now must I bid farewell, O hone, o hone,
This Dagger in my hand, O hone, o hone,
My life shall soon command, O hone, o hone,
And with this fatal Dart,
I Will stab my Lovesick heart,
Ending a Lovers part, O hone, o hone.
Thus did she end her life, O hone, o hone,
Which should have been his wife, O hone, o hone
Young Men and Virgins all,
Lament these Lovers fall,
Gracing their Funeral, O hone, o hone.
Printed for M. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, I. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passenger.


