A most Excellent Ballad of Joseph Carpenter and the sacred Virgin Mary, who
was the Mother of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the ever blessed Redeemer
Mankind.




Joseph an aged man truly,
Did marry a Virgin fair and free,
a purer Virgin did no man see,
then he chose for his dear his dear.
This Virgin was pure, there was no nay,
The Angel Gabriel to her did say,
Thou shall conceive a boy this day,
the which shall be our dear our dear.
No sooner the Angel his message had said,
But all in her she was afraid.
Now may this be? and I a pure maid,
say unto me my dear my dear,
The holy Ghost ( Mary) shall come in thee,
The power of Heaven shall shadow thee,
And thou shall hear a Son truly.
the which shall be our dear our dear,
Then Joseph being a perfect man,
Perceiving that Mary with Child was gone
Said tell me Mary now and anon.
who has done this my dear my dear
Then answered Mary neek and mild
I know no Father to my Child,
But God alone, and I undefiled,
he has done this my dear my dear.
Yet (thinking ^e had been unjust,
Yielding her body to lawless lust,
Out if his house he thought to thrust,
his only love and Lady dear.
And so pu^ her from him quite,
Who was his joy and hearts delight,
That blessed Virgin fair and bright,
whom he did love so dear so dear.
And while in heart he thought the same
To him the Angel Gabriel came,
As he lay sleeping on a Frame,
and coming to his dear his dear.
Who s^, fear not to take to thee,
Thy true and faithful wife Mary,
Most true and constant sure is she,
turn not off thy dear thy dear.
When Joseph rose from his sleep so sound,
His love to Mary did more abound,
He would not for a thousand pound,
forsake his Love and Lady dear.
They lives both in joy and bliss,
But then a straight Commandment is,
Through Judea land no man should is,
to go with h^s Love and Lady dear.
Unto the Temple where they were born,
And to the Emperor to be sworn,
To pay a tribute duly known,
both for himself and Lady dear,
Then Joseph and his Mary free
Who looked each hour delivered to be,
To Bethelem came that sweet City,
with his true Love and Lady dear.
But when to Bethelem they were come,
The Inns were filled all and some,
When Joseph entreating every groom,
could get no bed for his dear his dear
Then was he constrained presently,
Within the Stable all night to lie,
Wherein they did Oxen and Asses tie,
with his true love and Lady dear.
The Virgin fair thought it no scorn,
To lie in such a place forlorn,
Which night she had a young-son born,
even Jesus Christ our dear our dear.
Thou King of Peace, in Bethelem born
That wore for our sake a crown of thorn,
Preserve King Charles evening and morn,
whom England Loves so dear so dear.

