The Noble Fisherman.
Or, Robin Hood's perferment, showing how he won a Prize on the Sea, and how he
gave one half to his Dame, and the other to the building of Alm-houses.

The Tune is, In Summer time, etc.


IN summer time when leaves grow green,
when they grow both green and long,
Of a bold Outlaw called Robin Hood,
it is of him I sing this Song.
When the Lilly Leaf and the Elephant,
both bud and spring with a merry cheer,
This Outlaw was weary of the Wood-side,
and chasing of the Fallow-Deer.
The Fishermen brave, more money have,
than any Merchant two or three,
Therefore will I to Scarbrough go,
that I a Fisherman brave may be.
This Outlaw called his merry men all,
as they sat under the Green-wood-tree,
If any of you have gold to spend,
I pray you heartily spend it with me.
Now quoth Robin, i will to Scarbrough go,
it seems to be a very fair day,
Who took up his Inn at a widdow-womans house
hard by upon the waters gray.
Who asked him where were thou born,
or tell to me where do thou fare,
I am a poor Fisherman, said he then,
this day intrapped all in care.
What is thy Name thou fine Fellow?
I pray thee heartily tell it to me,
In mine own Country where I was born,
men call me Simon over the Lee.
Simon, Simon, said the good Wife,
I wish thou may well brook thy name,
The Outlaw was ware of her courtesy,
and rejoiced he had got such a Dame.
Simon, will thou be my man?
and good round wages i will give thee,
I have as good a Ship of mine own,
as any sails upon the Sea.
Anchors and Planks thou shall want none,
Masts and Ropes that are so long,
And if that you thus furnish me,
said Simon, nothing shall go wrong.
They plucked up Anchor, and away did sail,
more of a day than two or three,
When others cast in their baited hooks,
the bare lines into the Sea cast he.
It will be long said the Master then,
e're this great luber do thrive on the sea,
I Will assure he shall have no part of our fish,
for in truth he is no part worthy.
The second Part,
to the same tune,


O Woe is me said Simon then,
this day that ever I came here,
I wish I were in Plomton Park,
in chasing of the Fallow Deer.
For every Clown laughs me to scorn,
and they by me set nothing at all,
If I had them in Plomton Park,
I would set as little by them all.
They plucked up Anchor and away did sail,
more of a day then two or three,
But Simon espied a ship of war,
that sailed toward them valourously.
O woe is me, said the Master then,
this day that ever I was born;
For all our Fish that we have got,
is every bit lost and forlorn.
For yon French Robber on the Sea
they will not spare of us one man.
But carry us to the Coast of France,
and lay us in the Prison strong.

But Simon said, do not fear them,
neither Master, take you any care,
Give me my bent bow in my hand,
and never a Frenchman will I spare.
Hold thy peace thou long Lubber,
for thou art naught but brags and bost,
If I should cast thee overboard,
there is but a simple Lubber lost.
Simon grew angry at these words,
and so angry then was he,
That he took his bent bow in his hand,
and to the Ship-hatch go does he.
Master tie me to the Mast he said,
that at my mark I may stand fair,
And give me my bent bow in my hand,
and never a Frenchman will I spare.
He drew his Arrow to the very head,
and drew it with all might and main,
And straightway in the twinkling of an eye,
does the Frenchmans heart the arrow gain.
The Frenchman fell down on the ship-hatch
and under the hatches down below,
Another Frenchman that him espied,
the dead corpse into the Sea does throw.
O Master loose me from the Mast he said,
and for them all take you no care,
And give me my bent bow in my hand,
and never a French man will I spare.
Then straight they boarded the French ship,
they lying all dead in their sight,
They found within the ship of war,
twelve thousand pound in money bright.
The one half of the ship, said Simon then,
i will give to my Dame and children small,
The other half of the ship i will give,
to you that are my fellows all.
But now bespake the Master then,
for so Simon it shall not be,
For you have won it with your own hands,
and the owner of it you must be.
It shall be so ^s I have said,
and with this gold for thee oppressed,
An Habitation I will build,
where they shall live in peace and rest
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


