^INDICIAE JUDAEORUM, OR A LETTER In Answer to certain Questions propounded by
a Noble and Learned Gentleman, touching the reproaches cast on the Nation of
the JEWS; wherein all objections are heartily, and yet fully cleared.

By Rabbi Menasseh Ben Israel a Divine and a Physicyan.

Printed by R. D. in the year 1656.

Most Noble, and Learned Sir,
I Have received a letter from your worship, which was welcome to me; and I
read it, because yours, with great delight; if you will please to allow for the
unpleasantnesse of the subject. For I do assure your worship, I never met with
any thing in my life which I did more deeply resent, for that it reflecteth
upon the credit of a nation, which amongst so many calumnies, so manifest, (and
therefore shameful) I dare to pronounce innocent. Yet I am afraid, that whilst
I answer to them, I shall offend some, whose zeal will not permit them to
consider, that self vindication, as defensive arms, is natural to all; but to
be wholly silent, were to acknowledge what is so falsely objected. Wherefore
that I may justify my self to my own conscience, I have obeyed your worships
commands: for your request must not be accounted less, at least by me. I
presume your worship cannot expect either prolix, or polite discourses upon so
sad a subject; for who can be ambitious in his own calamity? I have therefore
dispatched only some concise, and brief relations, barely exceeding the bounds
of a letter; yet such as may suffice you, to inform the Rulers of the English
nation, of a truth most real, and sincere; which I hope they will accept in
good part, according to their noble, and singular prudence and piety. For
innocence being always most free from suspecting evil, I cannot be persuaded,
that any one has either spoken, or written against us, out of any particular
hatred that they bare us, but that they rather supposed our coming might prove
prejudicial to their estates, and interests; charity always beginning at
home. Yet notwithstanding I propounded this matter under an argument of profit
(for this has made us welcome in other countries) and therefore I hope I may
prove what I undertake. However, (...) but small encouragement to expect the
happy attainment of any other design, but only that truth may be justified of
her children. I shall answer in order to what your worship has proposed.

THE FIRST SECTION.
ANd in the first place, I cannot but weep bitterly, and with much anguish of
soul lament that strange and horrid accusation of some Christians against the
dispersed, and afflicted Jews that dwell among them, when they say (what I
tremble to write) that the Jews are wont to celebrate the feast of unleavened
bread, fermenting it with the blood of some Christians, whom they have for this
purpose killed: when the calumniators themselves have most barbarously and
cruelly butchered some of them. Or to speak more mildly, have found one dead,
and cast the corpse, as if it had been murdered by the Jews, into their houses
or yards, as lamentable experience has proved in sundry places: and then with
unbridled rage and tumult, they accuse the innocent Jews, as the committers of
this most execrable fact. Which detestable wickedness has been sometimes
perpetrated, that they might thereby take advantage to exercise their cruelty
upon them; and sometimes to justify, and patronize their massacres already
executed. But how far this accusation is from any semblable appearance of
truth, your worship may judge by these following arguments.

1. It is utterly forbid the Jews to eat any manner of blood whatsoever,
Levit. Chapter 7.26. and Deuter. 12. where it is expressly said (...), And ye
shall eat no manner of blood, and in obedience to this command the Jews eat
not the blood of any animal. And more then this, if they find one drop of blood
in an egg, they cast it away as prohibited. And if in eating a piece of bread,
it happens to touch any blood drawn from the teeth, or gummes, it must be
pared, and cleansed from the said blood, as it evidenely appears in Sulhan
Haruch and our rituall book. Since then it is thus, how can it enter into any
man's heart to believe that they should eat humane blood; which is yet more
detestable, there being scarce any nation now remaining upon earth to
barbarous, as to commit such wickedness?

2. The precept in the Decalogue Thou shall not kill is of general extent; it
is a moral command. So that the Jews are bound not only, not to kill one of
those nations where they live, but they are also obliged by the law of
gratitude, to love them. They are the very words of R. Moses of Egypt in Iad a
Razaka, in his treatise of Kings, the tenth Chapter, in the end, Concerning the
nations, the ancients have commanded us to visit their sick, and to bury their
dead, as the dead of Israel, and to relieve, and maintain their poor, as we do
the poor of Israel, because of the ways of peace, as it is written, God is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm. 145.9. And in
conformity hereto, I witness before God blessed for ever, that I have
continually seen in Amsterdam where I reside, abundance of good correspondency,
many interchanges of brotherly affection, and sundry things of reciprocal
love. I have thrice seen when some Flemine Christians have fallen into the
river in our ward, called Flemburgh, our nation cast themselves into the river
to them, to help them out, and to deliver their lives from death. And certainly
he that will thus hazard himself to save another, cannot harbor so much cruel
malice, as to kill the innocent, whom he ought out of the duty of humanity to
defend and protect.

3. It is forbidden Exodus 21.20. to kill a stranger; If a man smite his
servant, or his maid with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall surely be
punished, notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be
punished, for he is his money. The text speaks of a servant that is one of the
Gentile nations, because that he only is said to be the money of the Jew, who
is his master, as Aben Ezra well notes upon the place. And the Lord commands,
that if he die under the hand of his master, his master shall be put to death,
for that as it seems, he struck him with a murderous intent. But it is
otherwise if the servant dies afterward, for then it appears, that he did not
strike him with a purpose to kill him; for if so, he would have killed him out
of hand, wherefore he shall be free, and it may suffice for punishment that he
has lost his money. If therefore a Jew cannot kill his servant, or slave that
is one of the nations, according to the law, how much less shall he be
empowered to murder him that is not his enemy, and with whom he leads a quiet
and a peaceable life? and therefore how can any good man believe that against
his holy law, a Jew (in a strange country especially) should make himself
guilty of so execrable a fact?

4. Admit that it were lawful (which God forbid) why should they eat the
blood? And supposing they should eat the blood, why should they eat it on the
Passover? Here at this feast, every confection ought to be so pure, as not to
admit of any leaven, or any thing that may fermentate, which certainly blood
does.

5. If the Jews did repute and hold this action (which is never to be named
without an epethite of horror) necessary, they would not expose themselves to
so eminent a danger, to so cruel and more deserved punishment, unless they
were moved to it by some divine precept; or at least, some constitution of
their wise men. Now we challenge all those men who entertain this dreadful
opinion of us, as obliged in point of justice, to cite the place of Scripture,
or of the Rabbis, where any such precept, or doctrine is delivered. And until
they do so, we will assume so much liberty, as to conclude it to be no better
then a malicious slander.

6. If a man, to save his life, may break the Sabbath, and transgress many of
the other commands of the law, as has been determined in the Talmud; as also
confirmed by R. Moses of Egypt, in the fifth Chapter of his treatise of the
fundamentalls of the law; yet three are excepted, which are, idolatry, murder,
and adultery; life not being to be purchased at so dear a rate, as the
committing of these heinous sins: an innocent death being infinitely to be
preserred before it. Wherefore if the killing of a Christian, as they object,
were a divine precept, and institution, (which far be it from me to conceive)
it were certainly to be nulled and rendered void, since a man cannot perform it,
without indangering his own life; and not only so, but the life of the whole
congregation of an entire people; and yet more, since it is directly a
violation of one of these thtee precepts, Thou shall do no murder^ which is
intended universally of all men, as we have said before.

7. The Lord, blessed forever, by his prophet Jeremiah Chap. 29.7. gives it in
command to the captive Israelites that were dispersed among the heathens, that
they should continually pray for, and endeavor the peace, welfare and
prosperity of the city wherein they dwelt, and the inhabitants thereof. This
the Jews have always done, and continue to this day in all their Synagogues,
with a particular blessing of the Prince or Magistrate, under whose protection
they live. And this the Right Honorable my Lord St. John can testify; who
when he was Ambassador to the Lords the States of the united Provinces, was
pleased to honor our Synagogue at Amsterdam with his presence, where our
nation entertained him with music, and all expressions of joy and gladness,
and also pronounced a blessing, not only upon his honor, then present, but
upon the whole Commonwealth of England, for that they were a people in league
and amity; and because we conceived some hopes that they would manifest toward
us, what we ever bare toward them, viz. all love and affection. But to return
again to our argument, if we are bound to study, endeavor, and solicit, the
good and flourishing estate of the city where we live, and the inhabitants
thereof, how shall we then murder their children, who are the greatest good,
and the most flourishing blessing that this life does indulge to them.

8. The children of Israel are naturally merciful, and full of compassion.
This was acknowledged by their enemies, Kings 1.20, 31. when Benhadad King of
Assyria was discomfited in the battle, and fled away, he became a petitioner
for his life to King Ahab, who had conquered him; for he understood that the
Kings of the house of Israel were merciful Kings; and his own experience
confirmed it, when for a little affection that he pretended in a complement, he
obtained again his life and fortunes, from which ^he event of the war had
disentitled him. And when the Gibeonites made that cruel request to David,
that seven of Saul's sons who were innocent, should be delivered unto them, the
pro^het says, now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, Sam.
^.21, 2. as if he had said, in this cruelty, the piety of the Isra^lites is not
so much set forth, as the tyranny, and implacable rage ^f the Gentiles, the
Gibeonites. Which being so, and experience withal declares it, viz. the
fidelity which our nation has inviolably preserved toward their superiors,
then most certainly i^ is wholly incompatible, and inconsistent with the
murdering o^ their children.

9. There are some Christians, that use to insult against the Jews as
Christian homicides, that will venture to give a reason of these pretended
murtherous practices. As if the accusation were the^ most infallibly true, if
they can find any semblance of a reason why it might be so. As they say, that
this is practiced by them in hatred and detestation of Jesus of Nazareth. And
that therefore they steal Christian Children, buffeting them in the same manne^
that he was buffetted; thereby to rub up, and revive the memory of the
aforesaid death. And likewise they imagine that the Jews secretly steal away
crosses, crucifixes, and such like graven images, which Papists privately and
carefully retein in their houses, and every day the Jews mainly strike, and
buffet, shamefully spitting on them, with such like ceremonies of despite, and
al^ this in hatred of Jesus. But I admire what they really think, when they
object such things as these, laying them to our charge. For surely we cannot
believe, that a people, otherwise of sufficient prudence, and judgment, can
persuade themselves into an opinion that the Jews should commit such
practices, unless they could conceive they did them in honor and obedience to
the God whom they worship. And what kind of obedience is this they perform to
God blessed for ever, when they directly sin against that special command Thou
shall not kill? Besides, this cannot be committed without the imminent, and
manifest peril o^ their lives and fortunes, and the necessary exposing
themselves to a just revenge. Moreover, it is an Anathema to a Jew to have any
graven images in his house, or any thing of an idol, which any o^ the nations
figuratively worship, Deuteronomy. 7.26.

10. Matthew Paris p. 532. writes, how that in the year 1240* the Jews
circumcised a Christian child at Norwich, and gave him the name Iurnin, and
reserved him to be crucified, for which cause many of them were most cruelly
put to death. The truth of thi^ story will evidently appear upon the
consideration of its citcumstances. He was first circumcised, and this
perfectly constitute^ him a Jew. Now for a Jew to embrace a Christian in his
arms, and foster him in his bosom, is a testimony of great love and
affection. But if it was intended that shortly after this child should be
crucified, to what end was he first circumcised? If it shall be said it was out
of hatred to the Christians, it appears rather to the contrary, that it
proceeded from detestation of the Jews, or of them who had newly become
proselytes, to embrace the Jews religion. Surely this supposed pranck (storied
to be done in popish times) looks more like a piece of the real scene of the
Popish Spaniards piety, who first baptized the poor Indians, and afterward out
of cruel pity to their souls, inhumanely butchered them; then of
strict-law-observing Jews, who dare not make a sport of one of the seals of
their covenant.

11. Our captivity under the Mahumetans is far more burdensome, and grievous
then under the Christians, and so our ancients have said, it is better to
inhabit under Edom then Ismael, for they are a people more civil, and
rational, and of a better policy, as our nation have found experimentally.
For, excepting the nobler, and better sort of Jews, such as live in the Court
of Constantinople, the vulgar people of the Jews that are dispersed in other
countries of the Mahumetan Empire, in Asia and Africa, are treated with
abundance of contempt and scorn. It would therefore follow, that if this
sacrificing of children be the product and result of hatred, that they should
execute and disgorge it much more upon the Mahumetans, who have reduced them to
so great calamity and misery. So that if it be necessary to the celebration of
the Passover, why do they not as well kill a Mahumetan? But although the Jews
are scattered, and dispersed throughout all those vast territories,
notwithstanding all their despite against us, they never yet to this day forged
such a calumnious accusation, Wherefore it appears plainly, that it is nothing
else but a slander, and such a one, that considering how the scene is laid, I
cannot easily determine whether it speak more of malice, or of folly: certainly
Sultan Selim made himself very merry with it, when the story was related him by
Moses Amon his chief Physicyan.

12. If all that which has been said is not of sufficient force to wipe off
this accusation, because the matter on our part is purely negative, and so
cannot be cleared by evidence of witnesses, I am constrained to use another way
of argument, which the Lord, blessed for ever, has prescribed Exodus 22. which
is an oath; wherefore I swear, without any deceit or fraud, by the most high
God, the creator of heaven and earth, who promulged his law to the people of
Israel, upon mount Sinai, that I never yet to this day saw any such custom
among the people of Israel, and that they do not hold any such thing by divine
precept of the law, or any ordinance or institution of their wise men, and that
they never committed or endeavored such wickedness, (that I know, or have
credibly heard, or read in any Jewish Authors) and if I lie in this matter,
then let all the curses mentioned in Leviticus and Deuteronomy come upon me,
let me never see the blessings and consolations of Zion, nor attain to the
resurrection of the dead. By this I hope I may have proved what I did intend,
and certainly this may suffice all the friends of truth, and all faithful
Christians to give credit to what I have here averred. And indeed our
adversaries who have been a little more learned, and consequently a little more
civil then the vulgar, have made a halt at this imputation. John Hoornbeek in
that book which he lately writ against our nation, wherein he has objected
against us, right or wrong, all that he could any ways scrape together, was
notwithstanding ashamed to lay this at our door, in his Prolegomena page 26.
where he says, An autem verum sit quod vulg o in historiis legatur, etc. i.e.
whether that be true which is commonly read in histories, to aggravate the
Jews hatred against the Christians, or rather the Christians against the
Jews, that they should annually upon the preparation of the Passover, after a
cruel manner sacrifice a Christian child, privily stolen, in disgrace, and
contempt of Christ, whose passion, and crucifixion the Christians celebrate, I
will not assert for truth; as well knowing, how easy it was for those times
wherein these things are mentioned, to have happened, (especially after the
Inquisition was set up in the Popedom) to forge, and fain; and how the
histories of those ages, according to the affection of the writers, were too
too much addicted, and given unto fables and figments. Indeed I have never yet
seen any of all those relations that has by any certain experiment proved this
fact, for they are all founded; either upon the uncertain report of the vulgar,
or else upon the secret accusation of the Monks belonging to the inquisition,
not to mention the avarice of the informers, wickedly hanquering after the
Jews wealth, and so with ease forging any wickedness. For in the first book
of the Sicilian constitutions tit. 7. we see the Emperor Frederick saying, Si
vero Iudaeus, vel Saracenus sit, in quibus prout certo perpendimus Christiano
cum persecutio minus abundat ad praesens, but if he be a Jew or a Saracen,
against whom, as we have weighed, the persecution of the Christians do much
abound, etc. thus taxing the violence of certain Christians against the Jews.
Or if perhaps it has sometimes happened, that a Christian was killed by a Jew,
we must not therefore say that in all places where they inhabit, they annually
kill a Christian Child. And for that which Thomas Cantipratensis lib. 2. cap.
23. affirms, viz. that it is certainly known, that the Jews every year, in
every province, cast lots what city or town shall afford Christian blood to the
other cities. I can give it no more credit then his other fictions and lies
wherewith he has stuffed his book. Thus far John Hoornbeek.

13. Notwithstanding all this, there are not wanting some histories, that
relate these and the like calumnies against an afflicted people, For which
cause the Lord says, He that touches you touches the apple of my eye, Zach.
2.6. I shall cursolarily mention some passages that have occurred in my time,
whereof, I say not that I was an eye witness, but only that they were of
general report and credence, without the least contradiction. I have
faithfully noted both the names of the persons, the places where, and the time
when they happened, in my continuation of Flavius Josephus, I shall be the
less curious therefore in reciting them here. In Vienna the Metropolis of
Austria, Frederick being Emperor, there was a pond frozen, according to the
cold of those parts, wherein three boys (as it too frequently happens) were
drowned* when they were missed, the imputation is cast upon the Jews, and they
are incontinently indicted, for murdering of them, to celebrate their
Passover. And being imprisoned, after infinite prayers and supplications made
to no effect, three hundred of them were burnt, when the pond thawd, these
three boys were found, and then their innocence was clearly evinced although
too late after the execution of this cruelty.

In Araguza about thirty years ago, there was a Christian woman, into whose
house there came a little girl (of eleven years of age, daughter to a
neighboring gentleman) richly adorned with jewels: this wretched woman, not
thinking of a safer way to rob her, then by killing her, cut her throat, and
hid her under her bed, the girl was presently mist, and by information they
understood that she was seen to go into that house, they call a Magistrate to
search the house, and find the girl dead, she confessed the fact, and as if she
should have expiated her own guilt by destroying a Jew, though never so
innocent, she said, she did it at the instigation and persuasion of one Isaac
Jeshurun, for that the Jews wanted blood to celebrate their feast: she was
hanged, and the Jew was apprehended, who being six times cruelly tottur'd, they
employing their wits in inventing unheard of, and insufferable torments, such
as might gain Perilous the estimation of merciful and compassionate, still
cries out of the falsehood of the accusation, saying, that that wickedness
which he never committed, no not so much as in his dreams, was maliciously
imputed to him, yet notwithstanding he was condemned to remain close prisoner
for twenty years, (though he continued there only three,) and to be fed there
through a trough, upon the bread and water of affliction, being close manacled,
and naked, within a four square wall, built for that purpose, that he might
there perish in his own dung. This man's brother Joseph Jeshurun is now living
at this time in Hamborough. This miserable man calling upon God, beseeching him
to show some signal testimony of his innocence, and citing before his divine
tribunal the Senators who had with no more mercy, then justice, thus
grievously and inhumanely afflicted him; the blessed God was a just Judge, for
the Prince died suddenly at a banquet, the Sunday next ensuing the giving of
the sentence, and during the time of his imprisonment, the aforesaid Senators
by little and little dropped away, and died, which was prudently observed by
those few that yet remained, wherefore they resolved to deliver themselves by
restoring him to his liberty, accounting it as a particular divine providence:
this man came out well, passed throughout all Italy, where he was seen, to the
admiration of all that had cognizance of his sufferings, and died a few years
since at Jerusalem.

14. The act of the faith (which is ordinarily done at Toledo) was done at
Madrid, Anno 1632. in the presence of the King of Spain, where the Inquisitors
did then take an oath of the King and queen, that they should maintain and
conserve the Catholic faith in their dominions. In this act it is found
printed, how that a family of our nation was burnt, for confessing upon the
wrack the truth of a certain accusation of a maid servant, who, (provoked out
of some disgust) said, that they had scourged, and whip't an image, which by
the frequent lashes, issued forth a great deal of blood, and crying with an out
stretched voice, said unto them, why do you thus cruelly scourge me? the whole
nobility well understood that it was all false, but things of the inquisition
all must hush.

15. A very true story happened at Lisbon, Anno 1631. A certain Church missed
one night a silver pixe or box, wherein was the popish hosts. And forasmuch as
they had seen a young youth of our nation, whose name was Simao pires solis,
sufficiently noble, to pass by the same night, not far from thence, who went
to visit a Lady, he was apprehended, imprisoned, and terribly tortured. They
cut off his hands, and after they had dragged him along the streets, burnt him.
one year passed over, and a thief at the foot of the gallows confessed how he
himself had rifled and plundered the shrine of the host, and not that poor
innocent whom they had burnt. This young man's brother was a Friar, a great
Theologist, and a preacher, he lives now a Jew in Amsterdam, and calls himself
Eliazar de solis.

16. Some perhaps will say, that men are not blame worthy for imputing to the
Jews, that which they themselves with their own mouths have confessed. But
surely he has little understanding of wracks, and tortures that speaks thus.
An Earl of Portugal, when his Physicyan was imprisoned for being a Jew,
requested one of the inquisitors, by letter, that he would cause him to be set
at liberty, for that he knew for certain that he was a very good Christian, but
he not being able to undergo the tortures inflicted on him, confessed himself a
Jew, and became a penitentiary. At which the Earl being much incenst, feins
himself sick, and desires the inquisitor by one of his servants, that he would
be pleased to come and visit him. when he came, he commanded him that he should
confess that himself was a Jew, and further, that he should put it down in
writing with his own hand, which when he refused to do, he charges some of his
servants to put a helmet that was red hot in the fire, (provided for this
purpose) upon his head; at which, he not being able to endure this threatened
torment, takes him aside to confess, and also he writ with his own hand that
he was a Jew: whereupon the Earl takes occasion to reprove his injustice,
cruelty, and inhumanity, saying, in like manner as you have confessed, did my
Physicyan confess. Besides that, you have presently, only out of fear, not
sense of torment, confessed more. For this cause in the Israelitish Senate, no
torture was ever inflicted, but only every person was convicted at the
testimony of two witnesses. That such like instruments of cruelty may enforce
children that have been tenderly educated, and fathers that have lived
deliciously to confess that they have whipped an image, and been guilty of such
like criminal offenses, daily experience may demonstrate.

17. Others will perchance allege, these are histories indeed, but they are
not sacred, nor canonical. I answer, Love and hatred says Plutarch, corrupt
the truth of every thing, as experience sufficiently declares it; when we see
that which comes to pass, that one and the same thing, in one and the same
city, at one and the same time, is related in different manners. I my self in
my own Negotiation here have found it. For it has been rumoured abroad, that
our nation had purchased S. Paul's Church for to make it their Synagogue,
notwithstanding that it was formerly a temple consecrated to the worship of
Diana. And many other things have been reported of us that never entered into
the thoughts of our nation; as I have seen a fabulous Narrative of the
proceedings of a great Council of the Jews, assembled in the plain of Ageda in
Hungaria, to determine whether the Messiah were come or no.

18. And now, since that it is evident that it is forbidden the Jews to eat
any manner of blood, and that to kill a man is directly prohibited by our law,
and the reasons before given are consentaneous and agreeable to every ones
understanding, I know it will be inquired by many, but especially by those who
are more pious, and the friends of truth, how this calumny did arise, and from
whence it derived its first original. I may answer, that this wickedness is
laid to their charge for diverse reasons.

First, Ruffinus the familiar friend of S. Hierome in his version of Josephus
his second book that he writ against Apion the Grammarian (for the Greek text
is there wanting) tells us how Apion invented this slander to gratify
Antiochus, to excuse his sacrilege, and justify his perfidious dealing with
the Jews, making their estates supply his wants. Prophet a vero aliorum est
Apion etc. Apion is become a Prophet, and said that Antiochus found in the
temple, a bed, with a man lying upon it, and a table set before him, furnished
with all dainties both of sea and land, and fowls, and that this man was
astonished at them, and presently adores the entrance of the King, as coming to
succor and relieve him, and prostrating himself at his knees, and stretching
out his right hand, he implores liberty; whreat the King commanding him to sit
down and declare who he was, why he dwelt there, and what was the cause of this
his plentiful provision? the man with sighs and tears; lamentably weeps out
his necessity: and tells him that he is a Grecian, and whilst he traveled
about the province to get food, he was suddenly apprehended, and caught up by
some strange men, and brought to the temple, and there shut up, that he might
be seen by no man, but be there fatted with all manner of dainties, and that
these unexpected benefits wrought in him at the first joy, then suspicion,
after that astonishment, and last of all, advising with the Minister that came
unto him, he understood that the Jews every year, at a certain time appointed
according to their secret and ineffable law, take up some Greek stranger, and
after he has been fed delicately for the space of a whole year, they bring him
into a certain wood, and kill him. Then according to their solemn rites and
ceremonies, they sacrifice his body, and every one tasting of his intrails, in
the offering up of this Greek they enter into a solemn oath, that they will
bear an immortal feude and hatred to the Greeks. And then they cast the
relics of this perishing man into a certain pit. After this Apion makes him
to say, that only some few days remained to him, before his execution, and to
desire the King that he, fearing and worshipping the Grecian gods, would
revenge the blood of his subjects upon the Jews, and deliver him from his
approaching death. This fable (says Josephus) as it is most full of all
tragedy, so it abounds with cruel impudence, I had rather you should read the
confutation of this slander there, then I to write it in this place, you will
find it in the Geneva edition of Josephus, page 1066.

Secondly, The very same accusation and horrid wickedness of killing children,
and eating their blood, was of old by the ancient heathens, charged upon the
Christians, that thereby they might make them odious, and incense the common
people against them, as appears by Tertullian in his Apologia contra gentes,
Justin Martyr in apologia 2. ad Anton. Eusebius Caesareensis l. 5. cap. 1. and
4. Pineda in his Monarchia Ecclesiastica l. 11. c. 52: and many others, as is
known sufficiently. So that the imputation of this cruelty, which as to them
continues only in memory, is to the very same purpose, at this day charged
upon the Jews. And as they deny this fact, as being falsely charged upon them,
so in like manner do we deny it, and I may say perhaps with a little more
reason, forasmuch as we eat not any manner of blood, wherein they do not think
themselves obliged.

Now the reason of this slander was always the covetous ambition of some, who
desiring to gain their wealth, and possess themselves of their estates, have
forged and introduced this enormous accusation, to color their wickedness,
under a specious pretense of revenging their own blood. And to this purpose, I
remember that when I reproved a Rabbi (who came out of Poland to Amsterdam) for
the excess of usurie in Germany, and Poland, which they exacted of the
Christians, and told him how moderate they in Holland and in Italy were, he
replied, we are of necessity constrained to do so, because they so often raise
up false witnesses against us, and levy more from us at once, then we are able
to get again by them in many years. And so, as experience shows, it usually
succeeds with our poor people under this pretext and color.

19. And so it has been diverse times; men mischieving the Jews to excuse
their own wickedness; as to instance one precedent in the time of a certain
King of Portugal. The Lord, blessed for ever, took away his sleep one night,
(as he did from King Ahashuer us) and he went up into a belcony in the palace,
from whence he could discover the whole city, and from thence (the moon shining
clear) he espied two men carrying a dead corpse, which they cast into a Iew's
yard. He presently dispatches a couple of servants, and commands them, yet with
a seeming carelessness, they should trace and follow those men, and take notice
of their house; which they accordingly did. The next day there is a hurly burly
and a tumult in the city, accusing the Jews of murder. Thereupon the King
apprehends these rogues, and they confess the truth; and considering that this
business was guided by a particular divine providence, calls some of the wise
men of the Jews, and asks them how they translate the 4. verse of the 121
Psalm, and they answered, Behold, he that keeps Israel will neither slumber
nor sleep. The King replied, if he will not slumber then much less will he
sleep; you do not say well, for the true translation is, Behold, the Lord does
not slumber, neither will he suffer him that keeps Israel to sleep. God who
has yet a care over you, has taken away my sleep, that I might be an eye
witness of that wickedness which is this day laid to your charge. This with
many such like relations we may read in the book called Scebet Iehuda, how
sundry times, when our nation was at the very brink of destruction, for such
forged slanders, the truth has discovered it self for their deliverance.

20. This matter of blood has been heretofore discussed and disputed before
one of the Popes, at a full council; where it was determined to be nothing
else but a mere calumny: and hereupon gave liberty to the Jews to dwell in
his countries, and gave the princes of Italy to understand the same, as also
Alfonso the wise King of Spain. And suppose any one man had done such a thing,
as I believe never any Jew did so, yet this were great cruelty to punish a
whole nation for one man's wickedness.

21. But why should I use more words about this matter, seeing all that is come
upon us, was foretold by all the prophets? Moses Deuteronomy. 28.61. Moreover, every
sickness and every plague which is not written in the book of this law, them
will the Lord bring upon thee, etc. because thou have not hearkened to the voice
of the Lord thy God. David in the 44. Psalm makes a doleful complaint of those
evils, and ignominious reproaches, wherewith we are environed round about in
this captivity, as if we were the proper center of misery, saying, For thy sake
are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter. The
same he speaks Psalm 74. and in other Psalms.

Ezekiel more particularly mentions this calumny; God, bles-for ever,
promising Chap. 36.13. that in time to come the devouring of men, or the eating
of man's blood shall be no more imputed to them, according to the true and
proper exposition of the learned Don Isaac Abarbanel. The blessed God,
according to the multitude of his mercies, will have compassion upon his
people, and will take away the reproach of Israel from off the earth, that it
may be no more heard, as is prophesied by Isaiah, and let this suffice to have
spoken as to this point.

THE SECOND SECTION.
YOur worship desired jointly, to know what ceremony, or humiliation the Jews
use in their Synagogues, toward the book of the Law; for which they are by some
ignorantly reputed to be idolaters. I shall answer it in Order.

First, the Jews hold themselves bound to stand up when the book of the Law
written upon parchment, is taken out of the desk, utill it is opened on the
pulpit, to show it to the people, and afterward to be read. We see that
observed in Nehemias, cap. 8.6. where it is said, And when he had opened it,
all the people stood up. and this they do in reverence to the word of God, and
that sacred Book.

For the same cause, when it passes from the desk toward the pulpit, all that
it passes by, bow down their heads a little, with reverence; which can be no
idolatry for these following reasons.

First, it is one thing adorare, viz. to adore, and another venerari, viz. to
worship. For Adoration is forbidden to any creature, whether Angelical, or
Earthly; but Worship may be given to either of them, as to men of a higher
rank, commonly styled worshipful. And so Abraham, who in his time rooted out
vain idolatry, humbled himself, and also prostrated himself before those three
guests, which then he entertained for Men. As also Iosuah the holy Captain of
the people, did prostrate himself to another Angel, which with a sword in his
hand, made him afraid, at the gates of Jericho. Wherefore if those were just
men, and if we are obliged to follow their example, and they were not
reprehended for it, it is clear, that to worship the Law in this manner as we
do, can be no idolatry.

Secondly, The Jews are very scrupulous in such things, and and fear in the
least, to appear to give any honor or reverence to images. And so it is to be
seen in the Talmud, and in R. Moses of Egypt in his Treatise of idolatry: That
if by chance any Israelite should pass by a Church, that had images on the out
side, and at that time a thorn should run into his foot, he may not stoop to
pull it out, because he that should see him, might suspect he bowed to such an
image. Therefore according to this strictness, if that were any appearance of
idolatry to bow to the Law, the Jews would utterly abhor it; and since they
do it, it is an evident sign that it is none.

Thirdly, to kiss images is the principal worship of idolatry* as God says,
in the 1 of Kings 19.19. Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the
knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him.
But if that were so, it would follow, that all men, who kiss the Testament
after they are sworn, should be idolaters. But because that is not so, since
that act is but a simple worship, by the same reason it will follow, that to
bow the head, cannot be reputed for idolatry.

Fourthly, Experience shows, that in all Nations the ceremonies that men use
mutually one toward another, is to bow the head: And also there are degrees
thereof, according to the quality of the person with whom they speak; which
show that in the opinion of all nations, it is no idolatry, and therefore much
less, to reverence the Law with bowing of the body.

Fifthly, In Asia (and it is the same almost in all the world) the people
receiving a decree, or order of the king, they take it, and kiss it, and set
it upon the head. We owe much more to Gods word, and to his divine Commandments.

Sixthly, Ptolomeus Philadelphus, receiving the 72 Interpreters with the book
of the Law, into his presence, he rose from his seat, and prostrating himself
seven times, worshipped it, (as Aristaeus assures us.) If a Gentile did this to
a law which he thought did not oblige him, much more do we owe reverence to
that Law which was particularly given unto us.

Seventhly, The Israelites hold for the Articles of their Faith, that there is
a God; who is one in most simple unity; eternal, incorporeall; who gave the
written Law unto his people Israel, by the hand of Moses, the Prince, and chief
of all the Prophets; whose Providence takes care for the world which he
created; who takes notice of all men's works, and rewards or punishes them.
Lastly, that one day Messiah shall come to gather together the scattered
Israelites, and shortly after shall be the resurrection of the dead.

These are their Doctrines, which I believe contain not any idolatry; nor yet
in the opinion of those that are of other judgments; For, as a most learned
Christian of our time has written, in a French book, which he calls the
Rappel of the Jews (in which he makes the King of France to be their leader,
when they shall return to their country,) the Jews, says he, shall be saved,
for yet we expect a second coming of the same Messiah; and the Jews believe
that that coming is the first, and not the second, and by that faith they shall
be saved; for the difference consists only in the circumstance of the time.

THE THIRD SECTION.
SIr, I hope I have given satisfaction to your worship, touching those points.
I shall yet further inform you with the same sincerity, concerning the rest.
Sixtus Senensis in his Bibliothaeca, lib. 2. Titulo contra Talmud, and others,
as Biatensis, Ordine 1. Tract. 1. Titulo Perachot. aver out of the Talmud.
cap. 4. that every Jew, thrice a day, curses all Christians, and prays to
God to confound, and root them out, with their Kings and Princes. And this is
especially done in the Synagogue, by the Jews Priests, thrice a day. I pray
let such as love the truth, see the Talmud, in the quoted place; and they shall
find nothing of that which is objected: only there is recited in the said
fourth Chapter, the daily prayer, which speaks of Minim, that is, Heretics,
ordained in Tabne, (that is a town not far from Jerusalem, between Gath and
Gazim, etc.) the Talmud has no more. Hence Sixtus Senensis by distillation,
draws forth the foresaid calumny, when as, what the Talmud rehearses briefly,
to be made only by the wise men in the said Town, he says, was a constitution
in the Talmud long after.

Now let us see what was done by those wise men in the said Town; and let us
examine, whether that may justly offend the Christians.

There is in the daily prayers a certain Chapter where it is thus written,
la-Mumarim, etc. that is, For Apostates, let there be no hope, let all
Heretics be destroyed, and all thine enemies, and all that hate thee, let them
perish. And thou shall root out the kingdom of pride forthwith, weaken, and
put it out, and in our days. This whole Chapter speaks nothing of Christians
originally, but of the Jews, who fell in those times, to the Zaduces, and
Epicureans, and to the Gentiles, as Moses of Egypt says, Tract. Tephila. cap.
2. For by Apostates and Heretics are not to be understood all men, that are of
a diverse religion, or heathens, or Gentiles, but those renegado Jews, who did
abrogate the whole Law of Moses, or any Articles received thence; and such are
properly by us called Heretics. For according to the Law of Christians, he is
not properly an Apostate, or Heritick, who is originally bred a scholar and a
candid follower from his youth of a diverse law, and so continues: otherwise
native Jews and Hagarens, and other Nations that are no Christians, nor ever
were should be be properly called Apostates, and Heretics in respect of
Christians; which is absurd, as it is absurd for the Jews to call the
Christians Apostates, or Heretics. Wherefore it speaks nothing of
Christians, but of the fugitive Jews, that is, such as have deserted the
standard, or the sacred Law.

2. Lastly, neither the kingdoms, nor kings that are Christians, or Hagarens,
or followers of other Sects are cursed here, but namely the kingdom of Pride.
Certain it is that in that time (wherein, our wise men added to the daily
Prayers the foresaid Chapter) there was no kingdom of Christians. what
therefore that kingdom of pride was, should any man ask, who can plainly show
it? So much as we can conjecture by it, it is the kingdom of the Romans which
then flourished, which did rule over all Nations tyrannically and proudly,
especially over the Jews. For, after that, Vespasian, with his son Titus, had
dissipated all Judea. And though some Roman Emperors after that became
Christians, or had a good opinion of Christianity, yet the kingdom of the
Romans was heathenish, and without distinction, was proud, and tyrannical And
however the Jews repeated the same words of the prayer when the Prince was
very good, and they lived under a just government, that they did, only of an
ancient custom, without any malice to the present government. And now truly in
all their books printed again, the foresaid words are wanting, lest they should
now be unjustly objected against the Jews; and so for Apostates and Heretics,
they say, secret accusers, or betrayers of the Jews. And for the kingdom of
pride, they substitute all Zedim, that is, proud men.

3. After this manner, to avoid scandal, did the 72 Interpreters, who coming
in Leviticus, to unclean beasts; in the place of Arnebeth which signifies the
Hare, they put (...), that is, rough foot; leaving the Name, and keeping the
sense. They would not retein the Hebrew word Arnebeth, as they have done in
some other appellatives, lest the wife of Ptolomy whose name was Arnebet,
should think that the Jews had mocked her, if they should have placed her name
amongst the unclean beasts. Neither would they render it (...) lagoon, or (...)
lagon, which in the Greek language signifies a Hare, lest Ptolomy himself who
was the son, and nephew of the Lagi, should be offended, to see the name of his
family registered among the creatures that were unclean. Besides, Plutarch
records, how that it was deeply resented, as a very high affront, and contempt,
when one asked Ptolomy, who was Lagus his father, as if it scoffingly reflected
upon his obscure extraction and descent.

4. The very like calumny fell out concerning the very same Chapter of our
Prayer, when Mulet Zidan reigned in Morocco. A certain fugive Jew, to show
himself constant in the Mahumetan Religion, and an enemy to his own Nation,
accused the Jews before this king, saying, that they prayed to God for his
destruction, when they mention in their prayers all Zedim, as though they would
have all the Family of Zidan destroyed. They excused themselves with the truth,
and affirmed, in praying against Zedim, that they prayed only against proud
men, (as that word in their Hebrew language properly signifies) and not
against his Majesty. The King admitted of their excuse; but said unto them,
that because of the equivocation of the word, they should change it for another.

5. For certain, the Jews give no occasion, that any Prince, or Magistrate
should be offended with them; but contrariwise, as it seems to me, they are
bound to love them, to defend, and protect them. For, by their Law, and Talmud,
and the inviolable custom of the dispersed Jews, every where, upon every
Sabbath day, and in all yearly solemnities, they have prayers for Kings and
Princes, under whose Government the Jews live, be they Christians, or of other
Religions, I say by their Law, as Jeremiah chapter 29. commands, viz. Seek ye the
peace of the city, whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and
pray for them, unto the Lord, etc. By the Talmud ord. 4. Tract. 4. Abodazara.
cap. 1. there is a prayer for the peace of the Kingdom, from custom, never
intermitted of the Jews: Wheresoever they are on the Sabbath day, and their
annual solemnities, the Minister of the Synagogue before he blesses the
people of the Jews, does with a loud voice, bless the Prince of the country
under whom they live, that all the Jews may hear it; and they say Amen. You
have seen the Form of the prayer in the book entitled The humble Addresses.

6. In like manner the ancients observe, that whereas God commands in Numbers
29.13. that seventy bullocks should be sacrificed upon the seven days of the
feast of tabernacles, that this was in respect of the seventy nations (who
shall one day come up to Jerusalem, year after year, to keep this feast of
tabernacles, Zechar. 14.16.) for whose conservation they also sacrificed. For
they say, that all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in Abraham, and in
his seed, not only spiritually, and in the knowledge of the one first cause,
but also that at this time they shall enjoy temporal, and earthly blessings,
by virtue of that promise. And so in the time of the second temple, they
offered up sacrifice for their confederate nations, as may appear by these
ensuing instances.

In Megilat Tahanit. cap. 9. it is reported, that when Alexander the great, at
the instigation of the Samaritans, that inhabited mount Gerizim, went with a
resolution to destroy the temple, Simeon the just met him in the way, and
amongst diverse reasons that he urged to divert him from his purpose, told him,
this is the place, where we pray unto God for the welfare of your self, and of
your kingdom, that it may not be destroyed, and shall these men persuade you
to destroy this place?

The like we find in the first book of the Maccabees, cap. 7.33. and in
Josephus his Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 17. when Demetrius had sent Nicanor the
General of his army against Jerusalem, the Priests, with the Elders of the
people went forth to salute him, and to show him the sacrifice which they
offered up to God for the welfare of the King.

In the same history lib. 2.3. and in Josephus Gorionides lib. 3. cap. 16. we
may read, that Heliodorus General to Selencus, came to Jerusalem with the same
intent, Onias the High Priest, besought him, not to destroy that place, where
they prayed to God for the prosperity of the King, and his issue, and for the
conservation of his kingdom.

In the first Chapter of Baruch, the disciple of Jeremiah, we find that the
Jews, who were first carried captive into Babylon with Iechonias, made a
collection of money, according to every ones power, and sent it to Jerusalem,
saying, Behold, we have sent you money, wherewith ye shall buy offerings, and
pray for the life of Nebuchadnezzar, and for the life of Baltasar his son,
that their days may be upon earth as the days of heaven, and that God would
give us strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may live under their shadow,
that we may long do them service, and find favor in their sight.

The Jews in Asia did the same, as is reported by Josephus Gorionides, lib. 3.
cap. 4. they sent letters, with a present to Hircanus the High Priest, desiring
that prayers might be made for the life of Augustus Caesar, and his companion
Marcus Antonius.

Philo Judaeus, in the book of his Embassage to Caius, making mention of a
letter which Caius sent, requiring his statue to be set up in the sacred
temple, and Agrippa's answer thereupon, unto the said Emperor, reports, that
there were these words in it, viz. The Jews sacrifice for the prosperity of
your Empire, and that not only upon their solemn feasts, but also every day.

The like is recorded by Josephus, (lib. 2. cap. 9. De bello Judaico) the Jews
said to Petronius General to the Emperor Caius, we daily offer up burnt
offerings unto God, for the peace of the Emperor, and the whole people of
Rome. And in his second book against Apion, he says, we Hebrews have always
accustomed to honor Emperors with particular sacrifices.

Neither was this service ever entertained unthankfully, as appears by the
decree of Cyrus, Ezra 6.3. where also Darius commands, that of the Kings goods,
even of the tribute, expenses should be ^orth-with given unto the Elders of the
Jews etc. and that which they had need of, both young bullocks, and rams,
and lambs for the burnt-offerings of the Lord of heaven, and wheat, salt, wine;
and oil, etc. that they might offer sacrifices of a sweet savor, unto the God
of heaven, and pray for the life of the King, and of his sons.

The same also was commanded afterward by Artaxerxes, who also conferred
liberally many large gifts, as well toward the building of the temple, as the
maintaining of the sacrifices. As for Alexander the great, he lighted down out
of his chariot, and bowed himself at the feet of the High Priest, desiring him
to offer up sacrifice to God on his behalf. And who can be ignorant of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, how richly he endowed the temple, as is recorded by Aristeas? Nor
did Antiochus king of the Greeks unlike this, when by a public edict, he
forbid that any stranger should enter the temple, to profane that place, which
the Hebrews had consecrated to religion, and divine worship. (Josephus lib. 12.
cap. 3.) Demetrius did the like, ( Josephus lib. 13. cap. 5.6. To which may be
added, that when they of Jerusalem contended with them of Samaria, about the
honor and dignity of the temple, before Alexander the great, the Jerusalem
Priest in his plea, urged, that this temple was ever had in great reverenee by
all the Kings of Asia, and by them enricht with sundry splendid and magnificent
gifts. In the second book of Josephus against Apion, we read, that Ptolomy
Euergetes, when he had conquered Syria, offered up Eucharisticall sacrififices,
not to idols, and false Gods, but to the true God, at Jerusalem, according to
the manner of the Jews. Pompey the great, as is mentioned by Josephus de bello
Iudaico (lib. 1. cap. 5.) durst not spoil, no nor so much as touch the
treasures of the temple, not because (as Tully in his Oration for Plancius
supposes, to whom Augustine in his book de civitate Dei assentos) he feared
lest he might be thought too avaritious; for this seems in comparison, very
ridiculous, and childish; for military law would soon have acquitted him for
this; but because of the reverence to the place with which his mind was so
affected. Philo Iudaeus, (p. 102. 6.) relates a letter of Agrippa's, where he
writes, that Augustus Caesar had the temple in so great reverence, that he
commanded a sacrifice of one bullock, and two lambs, to be offered up every day
out of his own revenues. And his wife Iulia Augusta, adorned it with golden
cups, and basins, and many other costly gifts. Neither did Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt, fall short of her liberallity. Tiberius throughout the 22 years of his
Empire, commanded sacrifices to be offered up unto God, out of his own tribute.
The like did Nero, till the unadvised rashness of Eleazar in refusing his
sacrifice, alienated the mind of the Emperor, that he became the cause of a
bloody persecution.

And by all this, we may the better interpret that 11 verse of the 1. chap. of
Malachy (who flourisht in the second temple,) The words are, From the rising of
the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering; for my name shall be great among the heathen, says the Lord of
hosts. For besides that the heathens termed the the temple the house of the
great God, ( Ezra 5.8.) they and their Monarchs, and Emperors, both of Persia,
Greece, and Rome, desired, as we have heard, to have sacrifices, and incense,
offered for them in Gods name.

9. And let the reader be pleased further to observe, that the Jews were
accustomed, not only to offer up sacrifices, and prayers to God, for the
Emperors, their friends, confederates, and allies, but also generally for the
whole world. It is the custom (says Agrippa to Caius according to Philo p.
1035.) for the High Priest, at the day of atonement, to make a prayer unto
God, for all mankind; beseeching him to add unto them another year, with
blessing and peace. The same Philo Iudaeus in his second book of Monarchy
says, The priests of other nations pray unto God only for the welfare of
their own particular nations, but our High Priest prays for the happiness and
prosperity of the whole world. And in his book of sacrifices, p. 836. he says,
Some sacrifices are offered up for our nation, and some for all mankind. For
the daily sacrifices, twice a day, viz. at morning, and evening, are for the
obtaining of those good things, which God the chief good, grants unto them, at
those two times of the day.

And in like manner, Josephus in his second book against Apion says, We
sacrifice, and pray unto the Lord, in the first place, for the whole world, for
their prosperity, and peace, and afterward more particularly for our selves,
forasmuch (as we conceive) that prayer which is first extended universally, and
is afterward put up more particularly, is very much acceptable unto God. Which
words are also related by Eusebius Caesareensis, in his Praeparatio Evangelica,
lib. 8. cap. 2.

10. It Is true, that no outward material glories are perpetual; and so the
temple had its period, and with the paschall lamb, all other sacrifices ceased:
But in their stead, we have at this day prayer, and as Hoseah speaks Cap. 14.2.
For bullocks, we render the calves of our lips. And three times every day, this
is our humble supplication, and request to God, Fill the whole world, O Lord,
with thy blessings; for all creatures are the works of thy hands; as it is
written, the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are ever all his works
Psalm. 145.9.

11. Yea further, we pray for the conversion of the nations, and so we say in
these most excellent prayers, upon Ros a sana and the day of atonement, Our
God, and the God of our Fathers, reign thou over the whole world in thy glory;
and be thou exalted over all the earth, in thine excellency; cause thy
influence to descend upon all the inhabitants of the world, in the glorious
majesty of thy strength; and let every creature know that thou have created
him; and let every thing that is formed, understand that thou have formed it;
and let all that have breath in their nostrills say, the Lord God of Israel
reighneth, and his kingdom is over all dominions. And again, Let all the
inhabitants of the earth know, and see, that unto thee every knee shall bow,
and every tongue swear; before thee, O Lord our God, let them bow, and
prostrate themselves; let them give honor to the honor of thy name, and let
them aell take upon them the yoke of thy kingdom, etc. And again, Put thy
fear, O Lord, our God, upon all thy works, and thy dread upon all that thou
have created; let all thy works fear thee, and let all creatures bow down
before thee and let them all make themselves one handful, (that is, with joint
consent) to do thy will with a perfect heart. etc. A most worthy imitation of
the wise King Solomon, who after he had finished the building of the Temple, in
that long prayer King. 1.8. was not unmindfull of the Gentiles, but v. 41. he
says, Moreover, concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people of Israel,
but comes out of a far country, for thy names sake, for they shall hear of
thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched-out arm, when he
shall come, and pray toward this house, hear thou in heaven thy dwelling
place, and do according to all that the stranger calls to thee for, that all
people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as do the people of
Israel, and that they may know that thy name is called upon this house which I
have builded. Where it may be observed, that when the Israelite comes to pray,
he says, 29. and give every man hccsrding to his ways; but upon the prayer of
a stranger, he says, and do according to all that the stranger calls to thee
for. And this distinction is made to this end, that by the evident, and
apparent return, and answer of their prayers, all Gentiles might effectually be
brought in to the truth, and knowledge, and fear of God, as well as the
Israelites.

12. Moreover, since the holy prophets made prayers, and supplications for all
men, as well for the nations, as the Israelites, how should not we do the same,
for the nations, among whom we inhabit, as engaged by a more especial
obligation, for that we live under their favor and protection? In Deuteronomy
23.7. God commands Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, notwithstanding the
heavy burdens they afflicted us with, only because thou wast a stranger in
his land, because that at the first, they entertained, and received us into
their country.

As on the other side, Ezekiel. 23.11. he says, As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live. We ought therefore to imitate his actions, and not to hate any
man, upon the mere account of religion, but only to pray to the Lord for his
conversion; and this also, without giving offense, or any kind of molestation.
To detest, or abhor those, to whom we owe that prosperity which we enjoy, or
who endeavor their own salvation, is a thing very unworthy, and ill becoming;
but to abhor their vices, and sins, is not so. It was a very excellent
observation, of a most wise, and virtuous Lady, Beruria, who (as it is recorded
in the Talmud, Berachot cap. 1. when her husband R. Meir was about to pray to
God, to destroy some of his perverse, and froward neighbors, that had no less
grievously, then maliciously vexed, and molested him, gave him this seasonable
admonition, that such a thing ought not to be done in Israel; but that he
should rather make his prayer, that they might return, and break off their
sins by repentance', alleging that text, Psalm. 104.35. Let ssn be consumed
out of the earth; it is not said sinners, but sins; and then the wicked shall
be no more.

13. We have now in this Section shown, that it is a mere calumny to imagine,
that we Jews should pray to God, so as to give an offense to the Christians,
or cause scandal, by any thing in our prayers, unless it be that we are not
Christians. we have declared to the contrary, how we daily pray for them. As
also that during the temple, we offered up sacrifices, for nations
confedederate with us, and how all Emperors desired this. Yea, and we offered
sacrifices, not only for particular princes, but for all mankind in general.
How, since sacrifices ceased, with the temple, we at this day, do the same in
our prayers, and how we beseech God for their salvation, without giving any
scandal, or offense in respect of religion; and how we think our selves
obliged to perform all this, by the sacred Scripture. By all which laid
together, I hope I have sufficiently evidenced the truth, of that I have
asserted.

THE FOURTH SECTION.
BY consequence, the accusation of Buxtorphius, in his Bibliotheca Rabbinorum,
can have no appearance of truth, concerning that which he puts upon us, viz.
that we are blasphemers, I will set down the Prayer it self.

We are bound to praise the Lord of all things; to magnify him, who made the
world, for that he has not made us, as the Nations of the earth; nor has he
placed us as the families of the earth; nor has he made our condition like
unto theirs, nor our lot, according to all their multitude. For they humble
themselves to things of no worth, and vanity, and make their prayers to gods
that cannot save them; but we worship before the King of kings, that is holy,
and blessed; that stretched forth the Heavens, and framed the Earth; the seat
of his glory is in heaven above, and his divine strength in the highest of the
Heavens; He is our God, and there is no other; He is truly, our King, and
besides him, there is no other; as it is written in the Law. And know this day,
and return into thine own heart, because the Lord is God, in Heaven above, and
upon the Earth beneath, there is no other. Truly, in my opinion, it is a very
short, and most excellent prayer, and worthy of commendation. The Sultan Selim,
that famous conqueror, and Emperor of the Mahumetans, made so much account of
it, that he commanded his Doctor Moses Amon, (who translated the Pentateuch
into the Arabian and Persian languages) that he should translate our prayers.
And when he had delivered them to him in the Turkish Tongue, he said to him,
what need is there of so long prayers? truly this one might suffice, he did so
highly esteem and value it. This is like an other prayer which was made at that
time. viz.

Blessed be our God, who created us for his honor, and separated us from those
that are in errors, and gave unto us a Law of truth, and planted amongst us
eternal life. Let him open our hearts in his law, and put his love in our
hearts, and his fear, to do his will, and to serve him with a perfect heart,
that we may not labor in vain, nor beget children of perdition. Let it be thy
will, O Lord our God, and God of our Fathers, that we may keep thy statutes,
and thy laws in this world, and may deserve, and live, and inherit well, and
that we may attain the blessing of the world to come, that so we may sing to
thy honor, without ceasing. O Lord my God, I will praise thee for ever. But
neither the one, nor the other is a blasphemy, or malediction against any other
Gods, for these reasons following.

1. It is not the manner of the Jews by their law to curse other gods by name,
though they be of the Gentiles. So in Exodus cap. 22.27. Thou shall not revile
the Gods. Heb. (...), that is Gods, or God, as Philo Iudaeus in libro de
Monarchia, does interpret, and not Judges, as Onkelus and Jonathan translate in
their Chald. Paraphr. Where Philo adds this reason, which is, lest they
hearing their own Gods blasphemed, should in a revengefull way of retaliation,
blaspheme the true God of Israel. And we have examples enough, how the
idolatrous heathen used to revile, and defame each others Gods, both in Cicero,
and Iuvenal.

And in that sense Flavius Josephus in his book written against Apion, says
these words: As it is our practice to observe our own, and not to accuse, or
revile others; so neither may we deride, or blaspeeme those, which others
account to be Gods. Our Lawgiver plainly forbad us that, by reason of that
compellation, Gods. According to this, by our own religion, we dare not do that
which Buxtorfius charge us with. And upon this account the Talmudists tell
us, that we ought to honor, and reverence, not only the Kings of Israel, but
all kings, princes, and governors, in general, forasmuch as the holy
Scripture gives them the style of gods, in respect of the dignity of their
office.

2. The time wherein these, as also the other prayers were composed, and
ordered, was in the days of Ezras, who, with 120 men, amongst whom were three
Prophets, Haggai, Zechary, Malachy, composed them, as we have it in the Talmud.
Wherefore he cannot say, that there is any thing intended against honor, or
reverence of Christ, who was not born till many years after.

Moreover, the Jews, since that calumny was first raised, (thouh that was
spoken of the Gentiles, and their vain gods, humbling themselves to things of
no worth, and vanity) because they desire to decline, and avoid the least
occasion of scandal, and offense, have left off to print that line, and do not
in some books print any part thereof. As John Hoornbeek also witnesses, in his
forementioned Prolegomena, and William Dorstius, in his observations upon R.
David Gawz, p. 269. and Buxtorf in his book of Abbreviatures. And perhaps it
will be worthy our observation, that all these three witnesses say, that it was
first made known to them, by one Antonius Margarita, who was a Jew, converted
to the Christian says. That this part of the prayer was intended Contra idola
Papatus, against the Popish idols, which they therefore, as by a necessary
consequence, interpret, as against Christ; but how justly, let the unprejudiced
and unbiased reader judge.

3. If this be so, how can it be thought, that in their Synagogues, they name
him with scornful spitting, (far be it from us.) The Nation of the Jews is
wise, and ingenius. So said the Lord, Deuteronomy. cap. 4.6. The Nations shall say,
surely this is a wise, and an understanding people. Therefore, how can it be
supposed, that they should be so brutish in a strange land, when their
Religion depends not upon it? Certainly, it is much contrary to the precept
we spoke of, to show any resemblance of scorn. There was never any such thing
done, (as it is well known) in Italy, and Holland, where ordinarily the
Synagogues are full of Christians; which with great attention, stand
considering, and weighing all their actions, and motions. And truly they should
have found great occasion to find fault withal, if that were so. But never was
any man heard thus to calumniate us, where ever we dwell and inhabit, which is
a reason sufficiently valid, to clear us. Wherefore, I suppose, that I have
sufficiently informed you, concerning our prayers, in which we purpose nothing,
but to praise God, and to ask spiritual, and temporal blessings, and by our
service, and worship, implore the divine benevolence, protection, and defense.

THE FIFTH SECTION.
BUt forrasmuch as it is reported, that we draw, and seduce others to our
religion, etc.

1. Never unto this day, in any part has this been suspected, where the Jews
are dispersed; nor can it find place here. Truly, I have held friendship with
many great men, and the wisest, and most eminent of all Europe; and also they
came to see me, from many places, at my house, and I had many friendly
discourses with them, yet did not this give occasion to make us suspected of
any such things. Yea, Gaspar Barleus, the Virgill of our time, and many others,
have written many verses in my commendations, which I mention not, for vain
glory (far be it) but for vindication of my innocent repute.

2. By our rituall books we are clear of this seducing. For if any man offer to
become a Jew, of what Nation soever he be, before we receive him, and admit him
as a member of our Synagogue, we are bound to consider, whether he be moved by
necessity to do it, or if it be not for that he is in love with some of our
nation, or for any other worldly respect. And when we find no reason to suspect
him, we have yet another obligation upon us, which is, to let him know the
penalties he subjects himself unto, if he breaks the Sabbath, or eats
blood, or fat, which is forbidden Levit. 3.17. or disannulleth any precept of
the Law, as may be seen in the Targum upon Ruth. And if he show himself
constant, and zealous, then is he admitted and protected. Wherefore we do not
seduce any one, but contrarily, avoid disputing with men, concerning religion,
not for want of charity, but that we may as far as it is possible, avoid
scandal, and hate; and for this cause we refuse to circumcise them that come
to us, because we will give no offense. Yea, I have known some, that for this
cause have circumcised themselves. And if Ferdinand and Isabella, King and
Queen of Castile did make an order to expel the Jews, because they seduced
many Christians, and some of the Nobility to become Jews, this was but a
pretense, and color for their tyranny, and only, as it is well known, having
no other thing to object against us. Truly, I do much commend that opinion, not
only of Osorius, de rebus Immanuelis, but of our Flavius Josephus, the most
famous of all Historians, which he relates in his history of his own Life.

At that time (says he) there came unto me, two Noble men, of the Trachomites,
subjects of the king; bringing with them horsemen, with arms, and money. These,
when the Jews would compel to be circumcised, if they would live amongst
them; I would not suffer them to trouble them; maintaining that every man ought
to serve God, of his own free will, and not be forced thereto by others. For,
should we do this thing (says he) it might make them repent, that ever they
fled unto us. And so persuading the multitude, I did abundantly afford unto
these men, their food, according to their diet. Truly, this was an action
worthy or a noble, and wise man, and worthy of imitation, for defending common
liberty, leaving the judgment, and determination to God alone. The Spanish
Inquisitions, with all their torments, and cruelties, cannot make any Jew, that
falls into their power, become a Christian. For unreasonable beasts are taught
by blows, but men are taught by reason. Nor are men persuaded to other
opinions, by torments, but rather, on the contrary, they become more firm, and
constant in their Tenet.

THE SIXTH SECTION.
HAving thus discussed the main exceptions, I will now proceed to smaller
matters, though less pertaining to my faculty, that is to business of
Merchandise. Some say, that if the Jews come to dwell here, they will draw
unto themselves the whole Negotiation, to the great damage of the natural
Inhabitants. I answer, that it has been my opinion always, (with submission
to better judgments) that it can be no prejudice at all to the English Nation:
because, principally in transporting their goods, they would gain much, by
reason of the public payments of customs, excise, etc.

Moreover, they would always bring profit to the people of the land, as well
in buying of commodities, which they would transport to other places, as in
those they would trade in here. And if by accident, any particular person
should lose by it, by bringing down the price of such a commodity, being
dispersed into many hands; yet by that means the Commonwealth would gain in
buying cheaper, and procuring it at a lesser rate.

Yea, great emolument would grow to the natural Inhabitants, as well in the
sale of all provision, as in all things else that concern the ornaments of the
body. Yea, and the native Mechanics also would gain by it, (there being rarely
found among us, any man that uses any such art.)

2. Add to this, that as our nation has sailed into almost all parts of the
world, so they are always herein profitable to a nation, in a readiness to
give their opinions, in favor of the people amongst whom they live. Beside
that, all strangers do bring in new merchandises, together with the knowledge
of those foreign Countries wherein they were born.

And this is so far from damnifying the natives, that it conduces much to
their advantage; because they bring from their countries new commodities, with
new knowledge. For the great Work-Master, and Creator of all things, to the
end, to make commerce in the earth, gave not to every place all things, but
has parted his benefits amongst them; by which way, he has made them all
wanting the help of others. This may be seen in England, which being one of the
most plentiful countries that are in the world, yet wants diverse things for
shipping; as also, wine, oil, figs, almonds, raisins, and and all the drougs of
India, things so necessary for the life of man. And besides, they want many
other commodities, which are abundant in other countries, with more knowledge
of them; though it be true, that in my opinion, there is not in the world, a
more understanding people, for most Navigations, and more capable of all
Negotiation, then the English Nation are.

3. Farther, there may be companies made of the natives; and strangers, (where
they are more acquainted) or else Factors. All which, if I be not deceived,
will amount to the profit of the natives. For which, many reasons may be
brought, though I cannot comprehend them, having always lived a sedentary
life, applying my self to my studies, which are far remote from things of
that nature.

4. Nor can it be justly objected against our Nation, that they are deceivers;
because the generality cannot in any rational way, be condemned for some
particulars. I cannot excuse them all, nor do I think, but there may be some
deceivers amongst them, as well as amongst all other nations and people,
because poverty brings baseness along with it.

5. But if we look to that which we ought by our Religion, the moral precept
of the Decalogue, Thou shall not steal, it belongs in common to all Jews,
toward all Gentiles. As may be seen in Rab. Moses of Egypt, Tract, Geneba,
cap. 1. and Gazela. cap. 1. It is a sin, (says he) to rob any man, though he
be a Gentile. Nor can that be alleged out of the sacred History, concerning
the jewels and household stuff, of which the Israelites spoiled the Egyptians,
as I have heard it sometimes alleged by some, to some men; because that was a
particular dispensation, and a divine precept for that time. So it is recorded
in the Talmud, in the Tract of the Sanhedrim, cap. 11. that in the time of
Alexander the great, those of Alexandria accused the Jews for being thieves,
and they demanded restitution of their goods. But Guebia Ben Pesria answered
them, our Fathers went down into Egypt but seventy souls, there they grew a
numerous nation, above 60000. and served them in base offices, for the space of
210 years, according to this, pay us for our labor, and make the accounts
even, and you shall see you are yet much in our debt. The reason satisfied
Alexander, and he acquitted them.

6. By consequence, the Jews are bound not to defraud, nor abuse in their
accounts, negotiation, or reckonings, any man whatsoever, as it may be seen
expressly in R. Moses of Egypt, and R. Moseth de Kosi in Samag.

7. Yea, they farther say, that by restitutions, there is a result to the
praise of God, and the sacred Law. whence that holy, and wise man, R. Simeon
Ben Satah, having bought an ass of a Gentile, the head stall whereof was a
jewel of great value, which the owner knew not of, afterward he found it, and
freely, and for nothing, he restored it to the seller, that knew not of it,
saying, I bought the ass, but not the jewel. Whence there did accrue honor
to God, and his Law and to the nation of the Jews, as Midras Raba reports in
Parasot Hekel.

8. After the same manner they command, that the oath which they shall make to
any other nation, must be with truth, and justice, and must be kept in every
particular. And for proof thereof, they quote the history of Zedekias, whom God
punished, and deprived of his kingdom, because he kept not his word, and oath,
made to Nebuchadnezzar, in the name of God, though he were a Gentile, as it is
said, 2 of Chronicles, cap. 36.13. And he also rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar,
who made him swear by God.

9. These are the laws and obligations which the Jews hold. So that the Law
that forbids the Jews to kill any Gentiles, forbids them also to steal from
them. Yet every one must look to it, for the world is full of fraud in all
Nations. I remember a pretty story of what passed in Morocco, in the Court of
the king of Mauritania. There was a Jew that had a sort of false stones, etc.
-- He making a truck with a Portugal Christian, for some Verdigrease that he
had, which was much sofisticated, (as they are wont to do there) being all
falsified with Earth; one of the Portugals friends laughed at him, saying, the
Jew fitted thee well; he answered, If the Jew has stoned me, I have buried
him. And so they ordinarily mock one another.

This I can affirm, that many of the Jews, because they would not break with
other men's goods, were very poor at Amsterdam, lived very poorly, and those
that did break with other men's goods by necessity, became so much the more
miserable, that they were forced to live on alms.

And whereas in the time of K. Edward 1. the Jews were accused of clipping the
Kings coin; it appears that this accusation drew its original mainly from the
suspicion and hatred the Christians bare against the Jews, as appears in the
story, as it is set forth by Mr. Prynne, In his second part of a Short Demurrer
to the Jews etc. p. 82. where quoting Claus. 7. E. 1. n. 7. De fine recipiendo
a Iudaeis, brings in the King, writing to his Judges in Latin, in these words.
Rex dilectis, and fidelibus suis Stephano de Pentecester, Waltero de Helyn. and
Th. de Cobham Iusticiariis ad placita transgressionis monetae audienda,
salutem. Quia omnes Judaei nuper rectati, and per certam suspicionem indictati
de retonsura monetae nostrae, and inde convicti cum ultimo supplicio puniuntur;
and quidam eorum eadem occasion, omnia bona, and catalla sua satisfecerunt,
and in prisona nostra liberabantur, in eadem ad voluntatem nostram detinendi.
Et cum accepimus, quod plures Christiani. ob ODIVM Judaeorum, propter
discrepantiam fidei Christianae, and ritus Judaeorum, and diversa gratia minus
per ipsos Judaeos Christianis hactenus illata, postquam Judaeos nondum rectatos
in indictatos de transgressione monetae, per levas, and voluntarias
accusationes accusare, and indictare de die in diem nituntur, and proponunt,
imponendas eis ad terrorem ipsorum, quod de ejusmodi transgressione culpabiles
existunt super ipsos Judaeos faciendae, and sic per minas hujusmodi
accusationis, ipsis Judaeos metu incutiant, and pecuniam extor queant ab
eisdem; Ita quod ipsi Judaei super hoc, ad legem suam saepe ponuntur in vitae
suae periculum manifestum. Volumus quod omnes Judaei qui ante primum diem Maii
proximo praeterit, indictati, velper certam suspicionem rectati non fuerunt de
transgressione monetae predictae; and qui facere voluerint finem juxta
discretionem Vestram, ad opus nostrum facere pro sic, quod non occasiorentur,
etc. hujusmodi transgressionibus factis ante primum diem Maii propter novas
accusationes Christianorum post eundem diem inde factas non molestentur, sed
pacem inde habeant in futurum. Proviso, quod Judaei indictati, vel per certam
suspicionem, rectati de bujusmodi transgressione ante praedictum diem Maii,
Iudicium subeant coram vobis, juxta form am prius inde ordinatam and provisam.
Et ideo vobis maneamus, quod fines hujusmodi capiatis, and praemissa fieri, and
observari faciatis in forma praedicto. Test Rege apud Cantuar. 8. die Maii.

THE SEVENTH SECTION.
ANd now by this time, I presume (most noble Sir) I may have given abundant
satisfaction, (so far as the nature of an epistle will permit) to all your
objections, without giving just ground of offense, or scandal to any. And
forasmuch as you are further desirous to know somewhat, concerning the state of
this my expedition, and negotiation at present, I shall now only say, and that
briefly, that the communication and correspondence I have held, for some years
since, with some eminent persons of England, was the first original of my
undertaking this design. For I always found by them, a great probability of
obtaining what I now request; whilst they affirmed, that at this time the minds
of men stood very well affected toward us; and that our entrance into this
Island, would be very acceptable, and well-pleasing unto them. And from this
beginning sprang up in me a semblable affection, and desire of obtaining this
purpose. For, for seven years on this behalf, I have endeavored, and
solicited it, by letters, and other means, without any intervall. For I
conceived, that our universal dispersion was a necessary circumstance, to be
fulfilled, before all that shall be accomplished which the Lord has promised
to the people of the Jews, concerning their restoration, and their returning
again into their own land, according to those words Dan. 12.7. When he shall
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things
shall be finished. As also, that this our scattering, by little, and little,
should be amongst all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other; as it is written Deuteronomy. 28.64. I conceived that by the end of the earth
might be understood this Island. And I knew not, but that the Lord who often
works by natural means, might have designed, and made choice of me, for the
brsnging about this work. With these proposalls therefore, I applied my self,
in all zealous affection to the English Nation, congratulating their glorious
liberty which at this day they enjoy, together with their prosperous peace. And
I entitled my book named The hope of Israel, to the first Parliament, and the
Council of State. And withal declared my intentions. In order to which they
sent me a very favorable passe-port. Afterward I directed my self to the
second, and they also sent me another. But at that juncture of time my coming
was not presently performed, for that my kindred and friends, considering the
checquered, and interwoven vicissitudes, and turns of things here below,
embracing me, with pressing importunity, earnestly requested me not to part
from them, and would not give over, till their love constrained me to promise,
that I would yet a while stay with them. But notwithstanding all this, I could
not be at quiet in my mind, (I know not but that it might be through some
particular divine providence) till I had anew made my humble addresses to his
Highness the Lord Protector (whom God preserve.) And finding that my coming
over would not be altogether unwelcome to him, with those great hopes which I
conceived, I joyfully took my leave of my house, my friends, my kindred, all my
advantages there, and the country wherein I have lived all my life time, under
the benign protection, and favor of the Lords, the States General, and
Magistrates of Amsterdam; in fine (I say) I parted with them all, and took my
voyage for England. Where, after my arrival, being very courteously received,
and treated with much respect, I presented to his most Serene Highness, a
petition, and some desires, which for the most part, were written to me by my
brethren the Jews, from several parts of Europe, as your worship may better
understand by former relations. Whereupon it pleased his Highness to convene
an Assembly at White hall, of Divines, Lawyers, and Merchants, of different
persuasions, and opinions. Whereby men's judgments, and sentences were
different. Insomuch, that as yet, we have had no final determination from his
most Serene Highness. Wherefore those few Jews that were here, despairing of
our expected success, departed hence. And others who desired to come hither,
have quitted their hopes, and betaken themselves some to Italy, some to Geneva,
where that Commonwealth has at this time, most freely granted them many, and
great privileges.

Now, O most high God, to thee I make my prayer, even to thee, the God of our
Fathers. Thou who have been pleased to style thy self the keeper of Israel;
Thou who have graciously promised, by thy holy Prophet Jeremiah, (cap. 31.)
that thou will not cast off all the seed of Israel, for all the evil that they
have done; thou who by so many stupendous miracles, did bring thy people out
of Egypt, the land of bondage, and did lead them into the holy land;
graciously cause thy holy influence to descend down into the mind of the
Prince, (who for no private interest, or respect at all* but only out of
commiseration to our affliction, has inclined himself to protect, and shelter
us, for which extraordinary humanity, neither I my self, nor my nation, can
ever expect to be able to render him answerable, and sufficient thanks,) and
also into the minds of his most illustrious and prudent Council, that they may
determine that, which according to thine infinite wisdom, may be best, and
most expedient for us. For men (O Lord) see that which is present, but thou in
thy omnisciencie see that which is afar off.

And to the highly honored nation of England, I make my most humble request,
that they would read over my arguments impartially, without prejudice, and
devoid of all passion, effectually recommending me to their grace and favor,
and earnestly beseeching God that he would be pleased to hasten the time
promised by Zephaniah, wherein we shall all serve him with one consent, after
the same manner, and shall be all of the same judgment, that as his name is
one, so his fear may be also one, and that we may all see the goodness of the
Lord, blessed forever, and the consolations of Zion. Amen, and Amen.

From my study, in London, April the 10. in the year from the creation 5416.
and in the year, according to the vulgar account, 1656.
As to give satisfaction to your worship, being desirous to know what books
have been written, and printed by me, or else are almost ready for the press,
may you please to take the names of them in this Catalogue.

A Catalogue of such books as have been published by Menasseh Ben Israel, in
Hebrew.
NIsmachaim, four Books, concerning the Immortality of the soul, wherein many
notable, and pleasant Questions are discussed, and handled, as may be seen by
the Arguments of the particular Chapters, prefixed to the book, in Latin,
dedidicated to the then Emperor Ferdinand the third. Pene Rabba, upon Rabot,
of the Ancient Rabbis, in Latin and Spanish. Conciliatoris pars prima in
Pentateuchum. De Resurrectione mortuorum libri tres. Problemata de creatione.
De termino vitae. De fragilitate humana, ex-lapsu Adami, deque divino in bon^
opere auxilio. Spes Israelis. This is also in English. Orationes panegyricae,
quarum una ad Illustrissimum principem, Aurantium, altera ad serenissimam*
reginam Sueciorum, in Spanish only. Conciliator the second part, upon the
first Prophets. the third part, upon the later Prophets. the fourth part upon
the Hagiographa.
Humas, or the Pentateuch, with the several precepts in the margin. Thesoro de
los dirim five books of the rites* and ceremonies of the Jews, in two Volumes.
Humas the Pentateuch, with a commentary. Piedra pretiosa, of Nebuchadnezzar's
image, or the fifth Monarchy. Laus or ationes del anno, the Jews prayers for
the whole year, translated out of the original.
Books ready for the Press.
De cultu Imaginum contra Pontificios Latin. Sermois, Sermons in the Portugal
tongue. Loci communes Omnium Midrasim, which contains the divinity of the
ancient Rabbis, in Hebrew. Bibliotheca Rabbinica, together with the arguments
of their books, and my judgment upon their several editions. Phocylides in
Spanish verse cum Notis. Hippocratis Aphorismi in Hebrew. Flavius Josephus
adversus Apionem, in Hebrew, ejusdem Monarchia rationis in Hebrew. Refutatio
libri cui titulus Praeadamitae. Historia sive continuatio Flavii Josephi ad
haec usque tempora. De divinitate legis Mosaicae. De scientia Talmudistarum, in
singulis facultatibus. Philosophia Rabbinica. De disciplinis Rabbinorum.
Nomenclator Hebraius and Arabicus.
I have also published, and printed, with my own press, above 60 other books,
amongst which are many bibles in Hebrew, and Spanish, with all our Hebrew
prayers corrected, and disposed in good order.

FINIS.

