TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, JOHN Earl of Lauderdale, etc. His Majesty's High
Commissioner for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, HIS GRACE, A Congratulatory welcome
of an Heart-well-wishing Quill: HECATOMBE.
AWake, dull Muses, from Lethargick Trance;
Apollo calls, in Raptures to advance.
Each Quill has freedom; now is time or never
The Treas'rie of Invention to discover.
All Hopes are frustrate of Rebellions Band,
Now manacl'd, in blood can no more stand.
The venomed, waspish, mutinous Tongues are known;
'Twill fruitless prove the language such have shown:
Enigma Ridling-Satyrs, upon Stage,
Self-ruine does to The Authors but presage:
As Night- Owls dare in Day not show their faces,
Repining State-Moths would destroy all Peaces.
Behold! behold! comes the Atlas of Our Crown,
(Its Good, and Kingdoms Shield) foes to pull down:
His PRINCES Thoughts, Wishes, Desires (expressed)
Seal'd's in a Loyal Secretaries Breast:
Nay more, His Royal Heart He does present,
To signify His Love to Parliament.
What male-contented spirit can he be,
Thee does not welcome with alacrity!
While others sleep'd, Thy Contemplation waked,
Fearing Thy Countries glory should be shak'd
By Circumveening Councels of strange Foes,
Whose Vigilance all Machiavils outgoes.
No Native, sure, can Thy Intents mistrust;
Proved, by Experience, all along, Most just:
'Twixt KING and Subject, betwixt Church and State,
Impartial Vmpire, reconciles Debate.
In Albions wildest, and remotest Ground,
Makes Concord flourish, and in Fruits abound:
A Sovereign Balm, (Men judging now supposes)
Will cure all Jars 'twixt Thistle and the Roses;
Yea, link Them fast into a Gordian-Knot,
And make Amneste bypast wrongs out-blot:
So by the Couching Lions 'twill be vaunted,
The Rampant's Courage makes Them now undaunted:
Then who dares touch the Rose to do it harm!
Will find the Thistle a defensive Arm:
Whose Pricking Valor, Fatal Chair, and Crown,
A Birthright pleads: no Nation like can own.
But who will judge who hes the prior Seat?
'Gain when Renuptiat's Britains divorced State:
Thy Countries Honor late has so preferred,
(Unvoyc'd) Her Case may to Thee be referred:
Her dearest Son of Merit, 'bove whose Head
The Garlands of Her Throne never withered;
Whose Fragrant Leaves to Scepter will, by Thee,
As Verdent looks, as when first pulled from Tree:
Strong, Stately Twist, does keep unrent asunder
The unconquered Ophir Closs- Crown, (Ages Wonder)
Whose Privileges Thy foreseeing Wit
And Martial Prudence makes in safety sit.
But mark! the Voice of Caesar's great Command,
Hes measured Britain with His Mighty Hand,
Surrounded with the Ocean (as a Wall
Of Brass) whose force the World can not make fall:
Without partition, the undivided Center,
Heavens Sey-piece of Creations first adventure:
Free from the Evah-bondage of that Tree,
Tempt'd Man's Free Will to infelicitie:
Where Providence has fixed Her ruling Hand,
Under one Head makes Britains Body stand;
Whileas of old upon Her shoulders stood
Numbers of Kings, thirsting each others blood:
Composed now in one fit Monarchy,
Of Head and Members Glorious to see.
May His Great World-terr'fying work go on,
That Kings may become subjects to His Throne;
Perplexed too long, by sad Intestine Broyls,
Which might have Conquered all resisting soyls.
O how in fear each Foreign State may stand,
Left Britains unknown strength shall Them Command,
Thral'd in past Ages, never to light could come,
Hid as twinn'd-Children wrestling in one womb;
The Mothers Bowels often have almost burst,
Striving who should the other first out-thrust:
Whose succinct Laws (made from Corruption free)
To Athens Schools will prove the Library;
Nay, 'twill be found, Lacedemoneas Court
Of Students, will to Britains Coasts resort:
Then by a common Freedom in This Union,
Her Natives may Traffic in each Dominion
With Canvass winged, beyond the Line may fly,
And make our Britain Europs Emporie:
So may Thy splendour unto our Horizon
The Scepter sway, and Royal power Blazon:
Calm stormy Clouds, dispell our Babel Tongues,
Compesce Sedition and imagind wrongs:
Let Britain become in one State Pollitick,
And that Her Church be Scriptures Apostolic,
That others may to Her Conformists be,
Purged from the impostumes of black Heresy:
Thus hence our Law, Religion, and Commerce,
Be one, and free throughout the Universe:
Then Happy Thou This Union if prove wrought,
Which former Times never to perfection brought;
A future blessing to Thy Monarchs Line,
Succesfull Heir t'an Hundred Kings and nine.
Heavens second Thee to Better CHARLES His Waine, JOHN MET^L^N Anag: THE ONLY
MAN.

Our Boreas Pole, for it THE ONLY MAN.
M. M.
*

