The Speech of Patrick Earl of Marchmont, etc. Lord High Chancellor, to the
Parliament of SCOTLAND,
On Tuesday 29. October 1700.
My Lords and Gentlemen, NOW We see the Estates of this Kingdom again met in
Parliament, so soon as the Kings other weighty Affairs, and his absence from
Britain could allow it; whereby all may be satisfied that the Suspicions which
have been vented, as if their Meeting would be delayed and put off, were
altogether groundless.

His Majesty in his Letter to you when you last met, told you of His firm
Resolution to make it the chief design of His Reign to do every thing that may
tend to the Advantage and Good of His Subjects, and the Commissioners Grace
acquainted you in that Meeting that he had full power and Instructions for
every thing that appeared necessary or convenient for the Good and Advantage of
the Nation, as to Religion, Property, Liberty, Trade, and particularly what
could be of most solid use to the African and Indian Company.

Since that time, His Majesty by a Letter to His Privy Council, published by
his Order, for the Satisfaction of His Good Subjects, has repeated the same
Assurances which were formerly given you, and has expressed his good Intentions
toward this Kingdom.

Now again His Majesty by His most Gracious Letter Read in your Audience, is
pleased fully and kindly to certify you, that he continues firm in the same
good Intentions, still reckoning the Ease and Prosperity of His good Subjects
to be His greatest Honor and Happiness.

These ample and full Assurances which His Majesty has in His Letter given you,
are so distinctly expressed in it, and in the Discourse the Commissioners Grace
has had to you, that it were superfluous to me to add much to what you have
heard. Only I must much take notice, and I wish that you may do so too, of the
large extent of His Majesty's good Intentions toward his Subjects of this
Kingdom.

His Majesty is resolved to give the Royal Assent to all Acts for the better
establishing the true Protestant Religion and the Presbyterian Government of
the Church which we Enjoy. For the more effectual preventing the grouth of
Popery, for the repressing of Vice and Immorality, and Encouragement of Piety
and Virtue, for the preserving and securing of personal Liberty, for the
Regulating and Advancing of Trade, for making up the Losses, and promoting the
Concerns of the African and Indian Company, and for the setting forward and
Improving of Manufactories.

By these seven Channels, His Majesty is disposed and ready to let out unto
this Nation a Stream of most valuable Advantages, which cannot miss (by the
Blessing of GOD) to make it happy.

Yet least these Heads might come short of importing the extent of His
Majesty's good meaning, He is pleased to add, that generally he is ready to
give the Royal Assent to all other Laws for the further clearing and securing
Property and Civil Rights, for strengthening and facilitating the Administration
of Justice, for restraining and punishing Crimes, and for settling the Peace and
Quiet of the Kingdom, so that nothing shall be wanting upon His Majesty's part
to make his people both Happy and Contented; What more can we reasonably Hope,
what more can we reasonably Wish.

Upon the other hand, all that His Majesty demands of us, is that we will
provide proper and competent Supplies for such Forces as shall be necessary for
the Kingdoms Security, and to maintain it in its present happy Settlement.

And here I must say, what less can reasonably be demanded, what less can
reasonably be expected.

The many cross Providence which the African and Indian Company has met with
in the prosecution of its Designs, with the great Loss both of Men and
Treasure, which has been the event of the Companies attempt, for settling a
Colony in the Province of Darien, have much disturbed and perplexed the minds
of many, and it is too evident, that there are not wanting some who would raise
and foment Jealousies in well-meaning People of Our Sovereign the King, as if
he were not enough concerned to protect and assist this Nation in what relates
to its Trade.

I would in treat you to take heed how you harbor so bad a guest as Jealousy
is, it is apt to darken the Understanding, and to disturb the motion of the
Mind, it will create Fear where no Fear is, and no ground for it, I pray you
beware of it.

This is undenvable, that the Scots Nation never had a King, whom it had better
reason to trust and confide in, never had a Parliament which it had better
reason to trust and confide in; Seeing it is so, we have all the reason in the
World to do what is possible to us for maintaining a good Understanding betwixt
this King and this Parliament, even as we wish the Prosperity and Peace of this
Kingdom.

There is one thing which has made a difference of Opinion amongst us, some
would have an Act asserting the Right of the Company to the Colony, which it
planted upon Darien. In this matter the King has been much straightened, and has
declared to you with regrate, that he cannot agree to the asserting a Right to
that Colony, and that for invincible reasons, which His Majesty is pleased to
communicate to you.

That it would infallibly disturb the general Peace of Christendom, and bring
inevitably upon this Kingdom a heavy War, wherein we could expect no
assistance. This is very evident, for the power of the Spanish Monarchy, and of
those concerned in the Support of it, would be united against us, and we in all
appearance left to our own strength, without expectation of any Assistants.

Besides we are to consider, that the Company has not now the Colony in
Possession to support and maintain, but to recover by force of Arms, and we
have good Reason, this Kingdom having so lately come off from a great and long
War, to take notice in what Condition and Preparation the Nation is to engage
in a new one, and what Assistance we may expect.

These plain Reasons, I do not doubt, will satisfy all these who are
satisfiable, and not too indifferent of keeping up a mutual Trust and
Confidence betwixt His Majesty and his People and Parliament.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

As you have great Assurances and Kind offers from your Sovereign at this time,
whereby this Nation may be made very happy, its most important Interests further
secured, its Peace preserved, and its Trade advanced. Let not the humor or
jealousy of any who have access to the doing Business in this Juncture, hinder
or obstruct so great a Blessing as we have in prospect.

But seeing our King is so ready to concur with us, let us not be backward or
slow to concur with Him for the good of our Nation, that the people now living,
and the posterity which shall come after us, may have this Session of Parliament
in Veneration, and for a Pattern worthy to be regarded, and fit to be imitated.

FINIS.

