PRELIMITED FORMS of Praising GOD, Vocally sung by all the Church together,
Proved to be no Gospel-Ordinance.

In a Sober Discourse concerning SINGING.

With a Large APPENDIX Thereunto added, Containing several Things not treated
of before; and wherein the Case of SINGING is more fully opened and discussed
in diverse principal Branches of it: Greatly tending to the clearing and
confirmation of the Truth discoursed of in the Former Part.

By ISAAC MARLOW.

1 Samuel 15.22. Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than
the Fat of Rams.

London, Printed for the Author, 1691.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE Baptized Churches Of Christ in England and Wales.
Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied unto you, from God our Father, and Jesus
Christ our Savior.
Honored and Beloved Brethren,
AS the subject Matter of the following Discourse is in defense of the true
Apostolical Scripture manner of Divine Service, and of the Spiritual Worship of
God, which you have owned and suffered for, and in which through the Grace of
Christ you still continue, and as it tends to the mutual Peace and Unity of the
Churches; so I hope that my Work and Service herein will find the greater
acceptance with you.

And seeing it has graciously pleased God to preserve you so steadfastly in the
Truth under the greatest Trials and Sufferings of our Age, it is to be hoped
that the Errors of some Persons shall never corrupt your Minds from the
Simplicity that is in Christ, in any part of Divine Worship, or to offer your
Praises to God in such humane Forms, and after such a manner, as we have no
example for, nor can be any ways warranted from the Word of God: And that those
Churches which have had a watchful eye against the finestspun Errors of their
Day, will not be now lulled asleep by any among themselves, to suffer the
bringing in of such a humane Tradition as is utterly inconsistent with their
professed Principles, and to their Practice in other parts of Divine Worship;
but that they will labor to have Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps, that
so when the Bridegroom comes, they may be ready to enter into the Joy of their
Lord. For though this Error is dearly fondled by some Christians, and as it is
observed mostly by such among us who have not well digested those things which
they have received; yet of about an hundred Churches in England, according to
the best and strictest Information I have received, I hear of but seven or
eight, and those are in and about Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, one of them
lately in London, and but four or five of all those Churches in South Wales,
which own the Doctrine of Personal Election and final Perseverance; and but two
of all those Churches that are for the general Point that practice such formal
Singing in the public and constant Worship of God with the Ministry of the
Word. Some few also there are that use it at the Administration of the Lord's
Supper: To whom and to all others in particular of my Christian Brethren, that
herein differ from the Body of the Churches, and are declining from the Truth
and Spirituality of Gospel Worship, I humbly present that which the Lord has
convinced me of through the Light of the Holy Scriptures, to remove the Mistake
you are under concerning Singing. And truly the Sense I have of the sad Effects
of this apostatizing Principle in some Christians, if it should grow and
increase among us, and the unwearied Endeavors of some Persons to lead us back
to such Traditions of Men from which we were clean escaped, with the Love I
have for the Truth and Simplicity of the Gospel, are the only Motives of my
appearing in this Work or Service.

And it is matter of Grief and Lamentation to many Christians, that while the
Lord is saving his Church and People, and is drawing of us with the gracious
Cords of his Love, that any should be departing from the Truth and Purity of
his Worship, which after so clear a light and recovery of it from the mists and
darkness of Men, is now called in question amongst our selves.

And it is somewhat mavelous to consider, that some Persons who are studious
and understanding in the Holy Scriptures, should not see their Practice to be
opposite to the positive Command of Jesus Christ, through whose knowledge others
that are weak are made to sin. And that any should be so cold in their Love and
Affections to Christ, and so indifferent in their Obedience unto his revealed
Will, as that they should rather trust to others for what is truth, than to
take the pains to search the Scriptures for satisfaction from a good
Understanding within themselves, whereby they follow the Dictates of Men more
than the Precepts of Jesus Christ.

But forasmuch as humane Forms of Worship do naturally proceed from a carnal
and worldly Spirit, we may then fear that some Christians (excepting others
that err through a mistaken Zeal) having left their first Love, begin to cast
off their first Faith, and to turn unto Men's Traditions, of whom and to whom,
we may say, as the Apostle did to those who were turning again to the weak and
beggarly Elements of the Law, O foolish Gal. 3.1, 3, 4.
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? -- Are
ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the
Flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? And is it
a small and indifferent thing with you, how and in what manner you worship God,
and offer your Praise unto him? Have ye not as much reason to observe the Rule
of Christ in praising, and giving Thanks, as well as in Prayer, Baptism, and
other Ordinances in the Church? If any should tell you, that because Prayer and
Baptism are commanded by Jesus Christ, therefore you must use Forms of Prayer,
and Infants-sprinkling, will you not say to them again, That the Conclusion is
not rational? For though these are commanded, yet the manner how these
Ordinances are to be performed, whether in and through the Gifts and Graces of
the Holy Spirit, and by dipping, or by humane precomposed Forms, and
sprinkling, is not left to our own Wills, but are also showed to us in the holy
Scriptures, which are the Rule for the manner of performance of all the
essential Parts of Gospel Worship. And if any should further say, that Infants
sprinkling is not expressly forbidden in the Scriptures, and therefore it may be
used by us: will you not make reply, that though it is not forbidden in such
express words, yet there being but one manner of Water Baptism commanded by
Christ and his holy Apostles, whose Precepts and Examples therein we are bound
to follow, it is a sufficient Warrant for our practice of it, and to exclude
the form of Sprinkling as a sinful Practice, in that it changes the Ordinance,
and makes void the Command of Christ, through Men's Traditions? And therefore
if you will not reject your Manner and Forms of Singing, from the observation
of the Command and Rule of Christ for the manner of Praising God, which is
contrary to your Manner and Forms, I see not how you can escape the battering
and confounding of your own Profession in other things.

Do ye provoke the Lord to jealousy? 1 Cor. 10.22.
are ye stronger than he? Has he not said, What things soever I command you,
Deuteronomy. 12.32.
observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it? And have
we not diverse instances of his sore Displeasure for breaking his Rule of
Worship, as in Nahab and Abihu, Lev. 7.11, to 19.
who for offering of strange Fire, died before the Lord? And might not some
have thought it a small matter to have eaten of the Peace or Thank-offering
after the First Day, or of the Vow-offering, if any of it had been left on the
Third-day? but we see how great an Offense it was to make so small an Addition
to God's Ordinance, as that it should not be accepted, neither should it be
imputed unto him that offers it: it should be an Abomination, and that Soul
should bear his Iniquity. 2 Samuel 6.6.
Moreover, We read how Vzzah lost his Life for touching the Ark of God, because
that they sought him not after the due order; and how Vzziah the King for
meddling with God's Ordinance, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
and burning Incense before the Lord, contrary unto his revealed Will, was
smote with Leprosy unto his dying Day. But notwithstanding these Old Testament
Examples, and the Word of Christ which says, In vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; yet some there are amongst us,
that dare adventure to break the Commands of Christ in their Vocal-singing
together in the Worship of God, contrary to the Rule of Worship and Institution
of Jesus Christ.

And therefore, seeing that their Practice is charged with the guilt of Sin;
yea, and of such a Sin as indangers the well-Being and Peace of the Church of
Christ, and the bringing of God's Displeasure upon us: I hope they will be
awakned to a serious Consideration of what is proposed to them herein, as the
Mind and Will of God: And surely if they were truly sensible of the natural
Consequences of such a Practice of formal Singing, that the introducing of it
into those Churches that have been established on contrary Principles, is the
ready way to divide and break them into pieces, and that those Persons who
should be instrumental therein, would be looked upon as the Troublers of the
Churches, and may be justly charged with Schism, it would be a Bar to their
zealous promoting of it.

And it is rational to believe, that if such formal Singing should be admitted
and embraced by the Churches, it would lay such a Foundation for other formal
and carnal Worship, that if it be followed in its natural Tendences and
Consequences, it will greatly endanger our reformed Separation, and make it
easy for us to glide into the National Way of Worship. And therefore whatever
our mistaken Brethren may think of themselves, as if they were reforming the
Gospel Church, and restoring the Primitive Worship of God therein; yet the holy
Scriptures witness against them, and I believe that they will be found in this
matter Leaders to Apostasy, and Defilers of the pure Worship of God with Men's
Traditions: Which that the Lord may graciously prevent, and preserve the
Churches in Peace and Union, and in the mutual fellowship of the Gospel, and
that they may flourish and grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ,
and become a great Mountain, and fill the Face of the whole Earth, is, and
shall be, the Prayers of your unworthy, but affectionate Brother and Servant to
his power, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

I. M.

THE Author's EPISTLE TO Mr. Benjamin Keach.
Christian Brother.
AS the holy Apostle Paul praised the Church of Corinth in all things so far as
they kept the Ordinances of Christ as they were delivered to them, and yet
faithfully reproved their disorderly manner of eating the Lord's Supper; 1 Cor.
11.2, 17.
so in imitation of him, as our Example, I commend you in those things wherein
you are praiseworthy, and do honor you for your labor in the Ministry of the
Word which God has been pleased to bless, to the awakning of many Souls, and to
the comfort of many Christians: But yet, Sir, seeing you have diverse ways (I
think I may safely say) singled forth your self more than others in London, in
pushing forward the Practice of formal Singing, and in your private and public
Challenges of Disputes, which have been diverse times accepted of by some of our
worthy Elders, but were never thought convenient by others, and so have been
laid aside; and in that you have lately brought in the practice of it into your
own Church, to the grief and trouble of many of your Members; I conceive that
it is not improper for me to acquaint you in this manner, That I think I am
diverse ways engaged, and do believe it is my Duty to employ the Talent which
God has given me, according to my Capacity, in the defense of his sacred
Truth, against that mischievous Error which you so vigorously promote, to the
disturbance of your Brethren. Have not you been for many years a Preacher up of
spiritual Worship? how is it then that you are now so zealous for that which is
asserted to be natural? Have you begun in the Spirit, and do you leave the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ to go on unto perfection in natural
Worship? On what Foundation does your Practice stand? We do all agree that it
is our Duty to praise and thank God as well as to pray unto him; and I believe
that you will not say but that we do thank and praise him in his Worship, tho
not with Songs in your way. And I am persuaded that our thanking and praising
God in Prayer or Prayer-wise is suitable to the other ordinary Gifts of the
Holy Spirit, which are only attained unto in our present Day, and is
proportionably accepted of God: and that as your manner of vocal singing
together has neither Divine Command nor Example for it in either the Old or
the New Testaments, so your singing of formal precomposed stinted matter is no
better than counterfeitiag that excellent Gift of the Holy Spirit which was in
the Primitive Gospel Church. And herein also I believe that we do not differ,
That by the Light of Nature the Eternal Power and Godhead is made manifest unto
us from the things that do appear; and that we are capable thereby to
understand that we should perfectly keep the Law of God, and praise and worship
him. But from hence arises a double Question.

1. Whether the Light of Nature it self, as it is in us, can direct us the
Manner how we should worship God, and whether we should rely on it under the
Gospel as our Rule of Worship?

2. Whether you will assert that merely natural Worship without
Gospel-Institutions and Qualifications (for that which is Legal and Ceremonial
is done away) will please God, and ought to be exercised in his Gospel Church?
Or,

3. Do you say that the acceptable manner of praising God in his Gospel Church
(for that is the chiefest Point in question) is discovered and warranted to us
both from the Light of Nature, and Divine Revelations and Gospel-Institutions;
and so because you have no Warrant from either of them for your Practice of
formal Singing together, do you shuffle between them both? If you say, that
your Practice of singing Praises to God in his Church, is a constant Ordinance
by Divine Revelation and Institution only; then you cannot pretend to the
Practice of it from the Law or Instinct of Nature: and if you found it on the
Law of Nature only; then you bring it into the Gospel Church, without regard
being had to the Tenor of the Gospel, which is, that as God is a Spirit, so
they that worship him must worship in Spirit and in Truth: as Christ says, The
Hour comes and now is, Joh. 4.23, 24.
when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for
the Father seeks such to worship him. Which is not to be understood of
worshipping in our natural Spirits only: For the Apostle says, Romans 8.8, 26,
27.
that they that are in the Flesh, cannot please God. But ye are not in the
Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if
any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And that the Spirit
also helps our Infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with Groanings which
cannot be uttered. And we are commanded to pray always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit: Ephesians. 6.18
And to pray in the Holy Ghost; and to be filled with the Spirit: Chap. 5.18,
19.
speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. And I will
pray with the Spirit: 1 Cor. 14.15.
and I will sing with the Spirit. And the Apostle says in his Epistles to the
Romans and Galatians; Romans 8.15.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, Gal.
4.6.
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. So that Gospel-Prayer and Singing is in, with,
and by the help of the Holy Spirit. And therefore if no regard be had to
Gospel-Institutions and Qualifications for Prayer and Singing, but that they
are to be practiced from the Law, Light, or Instinct of Nature only; then such
Prayer and Singing, so performed, cannot be part of Gospel Worship; nor should
they be knowingly suffered in any Gospel Church. For the design of God in
erecting the Gospel Church was, that he might have a Spiritual House, 1 Pet.
2.5, 9.
an Holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual (not natural) Sacrifices, acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ. Moreover, if Singing and Prayer are put together, and
performed by you as spiritual Duties, why do you not follow the spiritual Rule
and plain Gospel Order for Singing as well as Prayer? And if you put them
together as natural Duties from the Law or Instinct of Nature only, without
regard being had to Divine Institutions and Qualifications, it is the ready way
to bring the World by Shoals into the Gospel Church, and so to turn it by major
Votes, which is no argument of Truth, into a natural Church State. And it also
opens a wide door for Forms of Prayer, as well as for Forms of Singing: for if
the Practice of both are alike from the Law of Nature, and Singing be performed
in stinted precomposed Forms; what reason can you render, why such Forms of
Prayer should not be used as well as such Forms of Singing? But if Singing and
Prayer are not put together by you, as founded alike on the Law of Nature; how
can you demonstrate their Essences to be from the different Principles of
Nature and Grace, when true Gospel spiritual Singing is from the Fountain of
the Holy Spirit, as well as Prayer; and preserve the Gospel Church from the
Confusion of apparently-known natural and spiritual Persons, in having full
Communion together, if natural Worship, merely as such, should be allowed
therein? Farthermore, what Scripture-Grounds and Reasons can you render (when
you perform Prayer according to Gospel Order in the Church, with a single
Voice, by one at once, in subjection to the Rule of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.26 to 34.
though Prayer is not expressly mentioned therein) wherefore you do reject the
Psalm expressly named and annexed with other Gifts unto the Rule, from coming
under the Order of it? And what can you say to the Practice of Women's vocal
Singing in the Church, when it is so directly against the plain and positive
Command of Christ?

To conclude this Epistle to you; it highly concerns you to consider whether
your practice of Singing, or what I have herein asserted in this Treatise, 1
Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 2.16.
can stand our Trial at the Day of Jesus Christ, when both you and I shall
appear before him, and receive our Loss or Gain according to the Gospel. And
therefore that the Lord would graciously awaken you, and convince you of your
Error, (which I am persuaded that one day or other you will be made ashamed of)
and pardon your Sin and Injury to the Church of Christ therein, and prevent
your building of Hay and Stubble on the true Foundation, and make you an
Instrument of his Glory, and his Peoples Comfort, as it has been my earnest
Prayers to God for you, so I desire in Love and Faithfulness to continue.

I. M.

The CONTENTS of the Brief DISCOURSE, or the First Part.
1. A Brief Exposition of Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.26. Page 5 2.
Of the Essence or Being of Singing, Page 5 3. Of David's Psalms, Page 9 4. Of
Precomposed Songs and Hymns, Page 15 5. Of Women's Singing, Page 21 6. Of the
Order of Singing, Page 22 7. Objections answered. (1.) Of Moses, Deborah, and
Barak's Singing, Page 24 (2.) Of Music used by the Prophets in Readiness Time,
Page 25 (3.) That Music and Singing was an Institution to continue till
Temple-Worship was made void, is no Argument to prove that Gospel-Singing
should continue in constant use from the Primitive Church till the second
Coming of Christ, Page 26 (4.) To Isa. 52.8, 9. Page 28 (5.) To Matthew. 26.30.
Page 29 (6.) To Acts 16.25. Page 32 (7.) To Ephesians. 5.19. Page 33 (8.) Of Wicked
Men's praying and singing Praises, Page 36 (9.) That true Believers having cause
to praise God, is no proof that they must constantly sing his Praise in his
Worship, Page 38 (10.) That Formal Prayer and Singing under the Law, is no
Argument for such under the Gospel, Page 43 (11.) That Prayer, and consequently
Singing, are of the same Nature under the Gospel as they were under the Law, is
explained and answered, Page 44 (12.) Precomposed Forms of Preaching, is no
ground for using such Forms of Singing, Page 46

The CONTENTS of the APPENDIX.
Sect. 1. Shows that God was and is otherwise praised, than by singing only,
Page 2 Sect. 2. That the Word Hymnos a Hymn, signifies simply a Praise, Page 6
A Discourse of Christ's Hymning or Praising at his Institution of the Supper,
Page 12 Sect. 3. Of the Nature of the Command, or rather the Exhortation to
sing, and that the Singing used in the Primitive Church was from a special Gift
of the Holy Spirit: and also further proof, that by Old-Testament-Names to
New-Testament-Things, are intended different Things than in the Old, etc. Page
13, 14, 20, 24 Sect. 4. Of praising God as a Moral Duty, and from Moral
Qualifications only, opened and clearly answered, Page 27 Sect. 5. Women's
Singing is more fully discussed and confuted, Page 32 Sect. 6. A General Answer
to those Prophetical Places of Scripture, of All the Earths singing unto the
Lord, Page 38 Sect. 7. Premeditated stinted Forms for Prayer or Singing,
unlawful to be used, Page 38 Sect. 8. Object. That prestinted Forms of Singing
are Spiritual Worship, if their matter are agreeable to the Word of God, and if
sung with Grace in our Hearts, opened and answered, Page 43
Advertisement.
THere is no Alteration here made in the former Part, or Brief Discourse
(before published) except a larger Exposition of Ephesians. 5.19. See page 5.

ERRATA.
In Appendix Page 10. Line 26, 27. add to lauds, dixerunt, they said Praises.
Page 21. line 3, and 9. to singing, add together.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE CONCERNING SINGING IN THE Public Worship of GOD IN THE
GOSPEL CHURCH.

By J. M.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, MDCXC.

Concerning SINGING in the Worship of God.
SEeing it has pleased the Almighty God by his special Providence to deliver
his poor afflicted People in this Nation out of the Hands of their greatest
Enemies, to serve him without fear; what then is expected from us, but that in
all things we should serve him with one Consent, in Holiness and Righteousness
all the Days of our Lives? To which end he has given us his blessed and holy
Word as a Rule for our Faith and Practice.

But that which is most unhappy to many Saints who sincerely labor for, and
long after the perfect Union of the Church of Christ, is, That we cannot all
attain to one and the same Conception of the Mind and Will of God revealed to
us in the holy Scriptures. And though there are diverse Things of lesser moment
in which we differ, yet there are others of greater Consequence that ought to
be duly weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, lest through the Imbecility
or Weakness of some Christians, and by the seeming plausible Arguments of
others, there should be a falling away from the Truth so clearly manifested to
us by the Holy Scriptures, and witnessed to by the Sufferings of the purest
Churches in our Age, who have born a lively Testimony not only against the
humane prescribed and precomposed Forms of Prayers, but of singing of David's
Psalms, and other Hymns or Songs precomposed by Man, as they are frequently
used as part of the constant and ordinary Worship of God instituted in his
Gospel Church.

This being the Subject of the following Discourse, I shall proceed to treat of
it with as much Brevity and Clearness as I can, to convince the Judgment of the
mistaken Readers (and to confirm and prevent others) from the practice of so
great an Error as will lead them to Apostasy or Backsliding, who in this matter
have less to say for themselves, than others have who are for a Form of Prayer.

Ephesians. 5.18, 19. And be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; but be filled
with the Spirit: Speaking Gr. In. See Pool's Annotations.
to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making
Melody in your Heart to the Lord.

Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; teaching
and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord.

That which is needful, before we come to take notice of the several Heads to
be treated of, is, to consider of those three Texts which are made a Foundation
for a vocal Singing together in the constant Worship of God in the
Gospel Church, tho some things therein I leave to discourse hereafter.

1st. Ephesians. 5.19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs. 1. From these words there is not any Necessity for a vocal Speaking to
be here understood, but otherwise of speaking to your own Heart, as it is said,
1 Cor. 14.28.
But if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, and let
him speak to himself, and to God. So that speaking to your selves, may be
taken, as that is expressly said to be, of keeping silence in the Church, and is
not limited to a vocal Speaking. 2. This is farther confirmed, as the aforesaid
Mr. Pool in his Annotations read it Gr. [in,] Speaking [in] your selves, in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making Melody in your Heart
to the Lord. 3. That both the speaking and the Melody in this Text, cannot be
limited to be vocally understood, but is inwardly in the Heart, is manifest
from the preceding part of this Chapter, wherein the holy Apostle, naming of
diverse gross Sins and Enormities, exhorts the Church of Ephesus to flee from
them, and to have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but
rather reprove them, and not to be drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but to
be filled with the Spirit. Whereby it appears, that this Exhortation to the
Church of Ephesus to speak to themselves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, and to be giving Thanks always, Ver. 20.
etc. was principally designed, that instead of Filthiness and foolish Talking
and Jesting, which are mentioned in the former part of the Chapter, they should
rather be giving of Thanks, Ver. 4.
as it is expressly said; and instead of having Fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness, and being filled with excess of Wine, to be filled with the
Spirit, and to exercise themselves in private Devotions toward God in Psalms,
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making Melody in their Heart to the
Lord. So that from the main design of the Apostle's Discourse relating to the
Text, both the Speaking and the Melody here intended is to themselves, in their
Heart: and whether you read the Text speaking [to] or speaking [in] your
selves, it cannot necessitate a vocal Singing together, but a speaking inwardly
in their Hearts. 4. Neither can this Text be taken, as some would have it, for
a vocal Singing [together,] from the words to [your selves,] as if that did
limit the Text to prove a Singing [together,] any more than building up your
selves on your most holy Faith, ^ude 20.
praying in the Holy Ghost, does confine that Text to be understood of teaching
or edifying one another in a disorderly way, speaking all together: or that
from those words (your selves -- praying in the Holy Ghost) spoken in general
unto the Saints, they are commanded to pray all vocally together. Moreover, if
any say that the following words, ver. 20. Giving Thanks always for all things
unto God and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; are explanatory
of the former Verse; and being in such general terms, cannot exclude a vocal
Singing and Thanksgiving to God of the Church all together, from being
understood therein: I do make reply, That though speaking to your selves in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, ver. 19. and Giving Thanks always for
all things, ver. 20. are from the Fillings of the holy Spirit, yet I make a
difference between them; for the one is limited (to your selves, and making
Melody in your Heart) to private Edifications, Praises, and Thanksgivings; but
the other is in such general Words as may comprehend all Thanksgiving both
vocal, and mental in the Heart. So that the Apostle Paul is here pressing the
Saints of Ephesus to endeavor after a plentiful measure of the holy Spirit of
Christ, and to put forth his Gifts and Graces both in mental, and vocal, in
private, and more public Praising and Thanksgiving to God, according to the
different occasions and circumstances that might attend them.

2dly. Coloss. 3.16. I confess that vocal Singing is here to be understood,
otherwise it could not be teaching and admonishing to others in Word and Deed,
ver. 17. but yet herein is nothing to prove a vocal Singing together by all the
Church: For teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. is meant of
the ministering Brethren, whose Work and Office it was to teach and admonish the
other Members, according to the Gift of the Holy Spirit they had received: And
none can prove any more by these words [one another,] than what must be
understood from Heb. 3.13. But exhort one another daily, while it is called, To
day, etc. And therefore as the Word of Exhortation is not used in the Service
of God in the Church, but in an orderly ministerial Way, by one at once; so
teaching and admonishing one another, etc. must be used also according to
Gospel-Rule, 1 Cor. 14.30, 31. 3. Nor can 1 Cor. 14.26. How is it then,
Brethren, when you come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a
Doctrine, etc. be understood of a vocal singing all together; for I think none
will say that those words, Every one of you has, etc. were spoken of their all
having of all those spiritual Gifts, which cannot be thought of every Minister
in that Church, ver. 28. and much less of all the Members: therefore it
follows, that as all the ministering Brethren were not supposed to have all
those Gifts, but every one of them had one or more of the Gifts of the Holy
Spirit; so there is no Conclusion can be made, that all the Ministry had the
Gift of Singing, or that there was any distinction of its Universality in
Delivery more than of other Gifts in the same Text; besides, the Context from
ver. 27, to 32. speaks of single Persons that must exercise in the Church, and
therefore those words, Every one of you, cannot be meant of all together.

That Spiritual and Vocal Singing was used in the Primitive and Apostolical
Church of Christ, is undeniable; and that such spiritual Singing is you
allowed, is freely granted: but the Question is, Whether David's Psalms, or any
humane prescribed, or precomposed Matter, may or ought not to be vocally sung
by all the Church together, as part of the public, constant and ordinary
Worship of God, instituted in his Gospel Church. To demonstrate which, I shall
treat of these six Particulars.

I. Of the Essence or Being of Singing. II. Of David's Psalms. III. Of
prescribed or precomposed Songs and Hymns. IV. Of Women's Singing. V. Of the
Order of Singing. VI. Of Scriptural and other Objections.
I. Of the Essence of Singing.
Though intelligible Singing for teaching and admonishing others cannot be
without the use of the Organical Instruments of the Voice, yet the Essence or
Being of Singing consists in an inward spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind
of Man. And this must be granted: for we all do own that true Prayer may be
made in our Hearts to God without the use of our Voice; otherwise we deny all
worshipping of God in the Church, save only what is done by the Minister, and
exclude the Members of it from adding to, joining with, or having any share in
Divine Worship; and consequently that nothing can be properly called Sin that
is only in the inward exercise of the Spirit, but that which is so manifested
by Words or Deeds. And as I think that none will deny either the Principal, or
its contrary Consequences; so the Scriptures do clearly witness that the
Essence of Prayer and Praises, and of Sin, do all consist in an inward Exercise
of the Soul or Spirit.

First, The Essence of Sin is in the Spirit; for Paul says, Romans 7.7.
That he had not known the Sin of Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet. Psalm. 94.11
And the Lord knows the Thoughts of Man that they are Vanity: And that every
Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart are only evil continually. Genesis 6.5.
And Christ says, That whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, Mat.
5.28.
has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. So that the Essence of
Sin consists in the corrupt and evil Thoughts and Imaginations of the Hearts
and Minds of the Sons of Men, tho not expressed by Words or Actions.

Secondly, The Essence of Prayer is in the Heart or Spirit: Neh. 2.4.
for Nehemiah while he was in the King's Presence made his Prayer to God; which
most rationally must be taken for secret Ejaculations and Heart-Prayer. And
Hannah in the bitterness of her Soul prayed and spoke in her Heart; 1 Samuel
1.13, etc.
only her Lips moved, but her Voice was not heard. And for the sighing of the
Needy now will I arise, Psalm. 12.5. Psalm. 79.11 Ps. 102.20
says the Lord. Let the Sighings of the Prisoners come before thee. And the
Lord hears their Groanings. And this kind of Prayer our Lord himself used;
for looking up to Heaven, Mar. 7.34.
he sighed when he was opening the deaf Ears. Romans 8.26
And these are the Prayers that the Apostle calls unutterable: for many times
there is more in our inward Sighings, Groanings, Longings, Pantings,
Breathings, and Supplications of Heart and Spirit, than can be expressed by our
Tongues; and God looks on the Heart more than on the outward Appearance: 1 Samuel 16.7
for he being a Spirit, seeks spiritual Worshippers: And they that worship
him, John 4.23, 24.
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And herein lies the Excellency of a
true Christian, who being sanctified by the Holy Spirit in the Faculties and
Powers of his Soul, he outdoth the most refined Hypocrite in the World, who may
glorify God with his Tongue, while his Soul is destitute of the Graces of the
Holy Spirit; but the true Christian being bought with a Price, 1 Cor. 6.20
glorifies God not only in his Body, but in his Spirit, which are the Lord's.

Thirdly, If the Essence of Prayer be inwardly in the Spirit, why not of
Singing also? 1 Cor. 14.15.
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: I
will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also. The
Apostle expresses them alike, because their Essences are alike inwardly in the
Soul or Spirit.

But some will say, This is meant of vocal Singing in the Church, and therefore
comes short of proving the Essence of Singing in the Spirit.

True, this is meant of Vocal Prayer and Singing in the Church, Ver. 11, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17.
which the Apostle calls Speaking, viz. in Prayer, Singing, and giving Thanks.
But in ver. 28. it is said, That if there is no Interpreter, let him keep
silence in the Church, and let him speak to himself, and to God. And that this
speaking to himself, and to God, relates to the Gift of Singing as well as to
other Gifts, is manifested, ver. 26, 27. in that, with other Gifts, a Psalm is
there mentioned, and to be delivered or interpreted in a known Tongue: but in
case there is no Interpreter, then the Psalm, etc. must be spoken to God, and
to himself, for improving his own Soul. Now what can be more plain than that
Singing and other Gifts of the Holy Spirit, have their Essences in our Spirits,
Phil. 3.3.
wherein we are capable of worshipping God without the verbal and vocal
Instruments of the Body? Moreover, as the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Prayer;
so the same Spirit is also the Spirit of Joy: Romans 8.26.
and as there is unutterable Prayer, so there is unspeakable Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8.
and Rejoicing full of Glory, viz. inward Glory and Melody in the Heart; see
the Text. The Essence of Singing is in the Heart, such as cannot be vocally
expressed by Words of the Tongue. And though vocal Joy and Singing may be
teaching to others, yet the speaking to (Gr. in) your selves ( viz. in your own
Hearts) in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making Melody in
your Hearts to the Lord, is Music of an higher strain, surpassing all verbal
and vocal Melody in the Ears of God; as unspeakable Joy and rejoicing full of
Glory, excels that which is speakable.

Indeed we find in Scripture another kind of unspeakable Singing, which is more
inferior than this we have treated of, viz. the virtual Singing of the
Creatures. 1 Chronicles. 16.32, 33.
Let the Fields rejoice, and all that is therein; Then shall the Trees of the
Wood sing out --. Psalm 65.13.
The Pastures are clothed with Flocks; the Valleys also are covered over with
Corn; they shout for Joy, they also sing. Now if the flourishing State of the
Creatures, and of the Fruits of the Earth, are called a Singing, how much more
properly may the harmonious Melody of the Spirit of God with our Spirits be
called Singing, which is the Essence and Being of it.

II. Of David's Psalms.
First, There was no Institution of Singing before David's time: for though we
find the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. Ex. 19.19. chapter 20.22. Genesis 31.11. Genesis 37.7,
8, 9, 10. chapter 15.12, 13.
containing a prophetical Description of the State and Accidents of the Jewish
Church for time to come, yet this was no present Institution for the Church in
the constant Service of God, but a way of Conveyance of his Word, which in
those times was in diverse manners delivered to us, Number. 24.4.
viz. by Dreams, Heb. 1.1.
Visions, Words, Songs and Music, but now by Jesus Christ. And though we find
the Songs of Moses, Number. 12.6, 7.
and of Deborah, occasioned from those great Deliverances of the Children of
Israel, 2 Kings 3.15.
yet none was instituted for the Levitical Worship and constant Service of God
till David's time, 1 Samuel 10.5.
who had prepared, prescribed and set in Order, Matter, Persons, and Things for
the most splendid and perfect Worship of God, and Temple-State of the Church
which should be in Solomon's Days. Now as the Law was a Shadow of good things
to come, let us see what the Jewish Church in her Wilderness afflicted unsettled
Tabernacle-State may be said to prefigure out to us in the case of Singing.

As for her Minority in the Wilderness through Sin and Unbelief, they had many
Judgments which did befall them, and cut them short of the promised Rest, so
that of six hundred Thousand Footmen that came out of Egypt, there was but two
that entered into the Land of Canaan, wherein there were many Wars and Troubles
that did attend them till the latter end of David's Reign: therefore while the
Jewish Church met with so many Sorrows, Troubles and Afflictions, the Worship
of God was suited to her State; but when they had Rest from all their Enemies
in David's time, 1 Chronicles. 23.25.
and Solomon a King of Peace and Type of Christ to reign over them, God was
pleased to beautify, enlarge, and perfect his Service and Worship according to
the Temple-State, top-Glory and Happiness of his Church and People.

Now if these things were a Figure of Gospel Times; what may we then say, but
that as Moses and Deborah, for the signal Deliverance of that Day, sung to God
through the Gift of the Holy Spirit; so the Church of Christ under the New
Testament have their occasional Songs, as the 144000, being the first Fruits
unto God and to the Lamb, who sang not David's Psalms; Rev. 14.3, 4. chapter 5.9.
for no Man could learn their Song, but the 144000 which were redeemed from the
Earth. And the new Song for the opening of the Book of the Revelations, and the
Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, chapter 15.2, 3, 4, 6, 7.
by those that had gotten Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over
his Mark, and over the Number of his Name, about the going forth of the seven
Vial-Angels with the seven last Plagues of the Wrath of God; but none of these
were David's Psalms, or do warrant the singing of them, or any other
precomposed Songs in Gospel Times, in the constant and ordinary Worship of God
by all the Church, any more than those particular Songs of Moses and Deborah
were an Institution for the Jewish Church for the constant Service of God in
their Day. For there was no such Institution of Songs in the Wilderness, nor
while that Church was under Troubles, until David's and Solomon's time, Eccl.
3.11. Prove. 25.20.
for the Temple-Worship. For every thing is beutiful in his time. As he that
takes away a Garment in cold Weather; so is he that sings Songs to an heavy
Heart. And sometimes it was unseasonable while it was yet an Institution. Psalm.
137.1, 2, 3, etc.
By the Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, -- we hanged our Harps upon the
Willows --: They that carried us Captive, required of us to sing one of the
Songs of Sion. How shall we sing the Lord's Song in a strange Land? Is any
afflicted? Jam. 5.1.
let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. So then if Singing be the
expressing of Joy, Gladness, and Mirth of Spirit, and the Church of Christ be
now in a Wilderness, Mourning, Sackcloth-State; why should we imagine that
Christ should appoint such an Ordinance for her constant universal Practice,
while she is in such Estate that is so improper and contrary to her State and
Spirit, but that the Typical Glory of the Jewish Church in Solomon's time shall
be completely answered in the external and spiritual Glory of the Church of
Christ in her Kingdom-State.

Secondly, The Singing of David's Psalms were suitable to all the rest of the
Levitical, Ceremonial, and external instituted Worship of God in the
Old-Testament-Church, in its most perfect splendant State in David's and
Solomon's Days, consisting of a wordly Temple; Heb. 9.9, 10, 23. and chapter 7.12.
chapter 8.13. chapter 10.1.
for if the Sanctuary was worldly, the Temple was also worldly; and of carnal
Ordinances, which was a Figure for the time then present, and Pattern of
Heavenly things, and Shadow of good things to come, but not the very Image of
the things; and were imposed on them until the time of Reformation, and change
of the Priesthood, Law, Temple, and Service, or Worship of God; which things
being all removed by Christ the Body and Substance of them, Acts 15.10.28. Romans
7.6.
who has taken off that Yoke, and delivered us from the Law, that we should
serve in Newness of Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6.
to bring in any part of the Levitical Ceremonial Institutions into
Gospel Worship; for that is a mingling of Letter and Spirit, of Law and Gospel
together.

Thirdly, David's Psalms were instituted, appointed and appropriated, not only
to vocal Singing, but to diverse kinds of musical Instruments, which are all
named, 1 Chronicles. 15.16 to 25. See Dutch Annot. on Psalm. 9. Psalm. 22. Psalm. 16.
and 1 Chronicles. 15.20, 21. 1 Chronicles. 13. chapter 14. chapter 28.12, 13.
viz. Cymbals, Harps, Psalteries and Trumpets, together with vocal Singing; and
limited by the Spirit, as diverse are of opinion, to certain Tunes or Parts of
Music, ordained and commanded by the Spirit of God, and of as great Force as
Singing was. And therefore to follow the Old-Testament-Institution of David's
Psalms, there will be a Necessity of having David's Instruments of Music, and
Tunes or Parts; and of the Courses and several Orders of the Levites: which
Antichrist somewhat imitates, mixing together the Christian, Jewish, and Pagan
Religion, instead of conforming to the true Apostolical Institutions and
Pattern of Divine Worship.

Fourthly, The matter of David's Psalms, and of other Holy Men's, contained in
the same Book, suited to the Levitical Service, and not to Gospel Worship; for
many of them were suited to particular Occasions and Experiences, and Accidents
of that Day, as you may see by diverse of their Titles; others were general, of
Israel's Deliverance out of Egypt, and from diverse other Enemies. Some were
clear Prophecies of the Sufferings of Christ (which to sing now were to deny
that Christ is come in the Flesh) and of his Church, and the Glory that should
follow, under the Types and Names of David and Solomon; and many legal things,
in which Gospel-Mysteries are wrapped up: some of which are hard to be
understood by the greatest Proficients of our Day; and therefore improper to be
sung by all the Church, who cannot sing them with Understanding; and others of
them being Prayers and miserable Complainings, may as well justify the singing
Prayers as finging Praises.

Fifthly, The Psalms of David were limited to Persons, viz. the Levites, who
were the Ministers of the Songs, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, etc. to 31. 1 Chronicles. 16.4. to
8. and ver. 36. chapter 25. 1 to 8. ver. 36, 41. Psalm. 106.48.
both by Voice and Musical Instruments; for the People did not sing together
with the Levites, but only bowed the Head and worshipped, and concluded with
Amen, and praised the Lord with Amen, Hallelujah; or, Amen, Praise ye the Lord.
Therefore from this Davidical Institution there is no Ground, Pattern, or
Example, for the Gospel-Churich to sing together.

Sixthly, Such singing the Psalms of David is no where instituted, ordained or
practiced, either by Christ or his Holy Apostles; there is no Instance can be
given in the New Testament that any of David's Psalms were ever sung by any
Persons or Churches, or that Christ or his Holy Apostles did ever use them, but
as they did other Scriptures; or that the Holy Apostles when ever they had
occasion to translate any one Text out of the Hebrew into the Greek Tongue, did
ever turn them into Meter; and therefore finding no Institution nor Example, we
have no Warrant for the Singing of them.

III. Of prescribed and precomposed Songs and Hymns.
First, If the Essence of Singing (as before is showed) consists in an inward
spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man, and that (as I shall farther
demonstrate) both the Matter and the Melody of it proceeds from the inward
Graces and Operations of the Holy Spirit with the Word; then surely no humane
prescribed or precomposed form of Singing can be accepted of God, but that
which proceeds from the Word of God, by the Dictates and Teachings of the
Holy Spirit, which is manifest from those two Texts, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col.
3.16. says the Apostle, Be filled with the Spirit --. Let the Word of Christ
dwell richly in you, in all Wisdom, etc. Here is the Fountain of
Gospel Worship, viz. the Word and Spirit of Christ, not the Word alone, for
that cannot enrich the Soul in all Wisdom, without the Spirit of Wisdom to
understand it: for to have the Word in the Head only, is but a poor thing, but
we must have it to dwell richly in our Hearts by the Holy Spirit, to sing with
the Understanding and with Grace in our Hearts to the Lord. And as the Word in
the Head only cannot create Melody in the Heart without a Fullness of the
Spirit; so the Spirit works not without the Word, but fills us with matter from
the Word, and is witnessed to by the Word; otherwise we know not the Spirit of
Truth from the Spirit of Error. Now the Essence of Singing consists of these
two Parts, viz. Matter from the Word, and Melody by the Spirit; so that neither
the Word nor the Holy Spirit can be wanting: and therefore whatsoever Forms are
used which proceed not from within us, out of a Fullness and Enrichings of the
Word and Spirit, cannot be spiritual Gospel-Singing.

Secondly, That no humane prescribed or precomposed Forms are to be used in
Gospel-Prayer or Singing, appears from the Ministration and Conveyance of the
Spirit and Power by the Gospel.

First, The Gospel conveys the Spirit, as Paul says, Who also has made us
able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for
the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life, or quickneth. Here the Law is
called the Letter, and the Gospel, Spirit; not because the Law was not
spiritual, and the Gospel was not transcribed in the Letter; but 1st, Because
the Law required perfect Obedience to the Letter, on Pain of Eternal Death, and
the Gospel sincere Obedience through the Spirit. 2dly, Because the Legal
Worship was more formal in the Letter, than the Gospel-Ministration, which is
in Spirit. For we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit --; and
have no Confidence in the Flesh, viz. in the formal and carnal Ordinances of
the Law, and much less in the humane precomposed forms of Men. 3dly, Because
the Law did not minister nor convey the Spirit to us it commanded in the
Letter, but gave no spiritual Power to perform Obedience to it, which the
Gospel did, by giving the Spirit with the Word. Therefore the Apostle calls the
Gospel, the Law of the Spirit of Life. Romans 8.2.
And it is not through the Works of the Law that we receive the Spirit, nor
minister the Spirit, but through the hearing of Faith. Gal. 3.2, 5, 14.
And this agrees with that great Commission which Christ himself gave to his
Disciples, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations --. Lo, Math. 28.19, 20.
I am with you always even to the End of the World. Not only by his outward
Providence, which is over others as well as they, but by his Spirit, which
shall abide with us for ever. John. 14.16.
And the Prophet says, As for me this is my Covenant with them says the Lord,
My Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall
not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the
Mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Here the
Word and the Holy Spirit are conveyed throughout all Generations to the end of
the World, by the Covenant or Gospel of Jesus Christ. And as none can say that
the Words which the Lord had put in his Mouth, were a humane prescribed form:
but, as Christ himself says, John 6.63.
The Words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life: So the
same Words proceeding from us by the same Spirit, are Spirit, in opposition to
humane and legal forms, which reject and deny the sufficient successive Gifts
of the Spirit. So that it is clearly manifest, that the sufficient Gifts of the
Holy Spirit do still remain, and shall remain, for the Service and Worship of
God, to the end of the World.

Secondly; The Gospel does minister and convey Power. For where the Spirit is,
there will be Power. The Apostle says, Ye have not received the Spirit of
Bondage (viz. of the Law) again to fear; Romans 8.15, 16.
but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
Spirit gave a sufficient Power not only to the Apostles as such, or to the
Saints in Rome, as partaking of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit in
that present Day, but, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Here is the Reason of
their Power, because ye are Sons: therefore all that are Sons according to the
measure of the Spirit of Adoption, which bears Witness with our Spirits that
we are the Children of God, have Power to pray to God as to their Father. 2 Timothy 1.7.
For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, and of Love, and
of a sound Mind. 1 Cor. 4.19, 20.
And the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. There were some in the
Church of Corinth that were puffed up in their Minds, whose Speech the Apostle
would not know or regard: but the Power of Religion was that which he looked
for, and did expect to find amongst them; because the Kingdom of God ( viz. his
Gospel Church) is not in Word, but in Power. A humane prescribed Form is no
Power, and therefore is none of this Gospel-Kingdom. Jude 19. These are they
that separate themselves sensual, having not the Spirit. And the Apostle Paul
prophesied of such a professing People that should arise in the last Days;
Having a form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but denying the Power thereof; and from such we must turn away. They had an
outward Form of Godliness, but not the inward Power; contrary to true
Godliness, which has its Form from the inward Power and Workings of the Holy
Spirit with the Word. Now it is no Wonder that this formal People deny the
Power of Godliness; for an invented Form, and the Power are Opposites, and are
inconsistent with each other: for if there be a spiritual Power, it refuses and
denies the invented Form; for then there is no need of a prescribed nor
pre-composed humane Form: and if we use such a Form, we deny the Power, and
reject the sufficient successive Gifts of the Holy Spirit, by relying on that
Form. And so the Apostle argues, that as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so
do these resist the Truth: 2 Timothy 3.8.
Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith.

Thirdly, Seeing that those Persons with whom I am chiefly concerned, do not
only oppose, deny, and refuse the Use of a humane prescribed and precomposed
Form of Prayer, but also of that Prayer which our Lord taught his Disciples; of
which they rightly say, that it was but an Epitome of all Prayer, and was never
intended to confine Prayer to the Compass and Form of those Words. For we find
that none of those many Prayers in the New Testament were so limited, but
according to the State and Circumstances of Persons and things, they made
Supplication by the Holy Spirit: and so must Singing also be left to the
Liberty of the Holy Spirit of God. And one might think that I need not use
farther Arguments; for their own Practice confutes their Error in Singing
prescribed Forms, and testifies the Truth I am pleading for: for what Reason
can be given for Forms of Singing, when they deny all Forms of Prayer? and how
can they reject a Form of Prayer, or the Form of Prayer which Christ has left
us in the New Testament, while they maintain the use of a humane Form of
Singing, which is no where found in the Holy Scriptures?

IV. Of Women's Singing.
That Women ought neither to teach nor pray vocally in the Church of Christ, is
generally believed by all Orthodox Christians, and is asserted from 1 Cor.
14.34, 35. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches: for it is not permitted
unto them to speak: And 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. Let the Women learn in Silence with
all Subjection: but I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp Authority over
the Man, but to learn in silence. I therefore greatly marvel that any Man
should assert and admit of such a Practice as Women's Singing; and that any
Woman should presume to sing vocally in the Church of Christ, when he
positively and plainly forbids them in his Word: for Singing is Teaching,
Coloss. 3.16. and Speaking, Ephesians. 5.19. both of which are plainly forbidden to
Women in the Church. And besides, they are commanded to learn in silence with
all Subjection. And if this be not Truth, I am at a loss how to find it. And
such as deny the Authority of these Scriptures to forbid Women's Singing, do of
necessity destroy the Authority of the Word of God, and leave us destitute of a
Rule of Worship.

But some may say, Were there not Singing-Women in the Time of the Law? True,
we read of Singing-Women; but as there was no Institution of them amongst the
Priests and Levites, who were set apart by Name in their several Orders; so we
find them no where concerned as such in the Worship of God, but either for
Mirth and Delight, or as Mourners for the Dead, in which they were very skilful
in making of Lamentations both by Voice and Instruments of Music, as was the
Jewish Custom: which you may plainly see by these Scriptures, 2 Samuel 19.35. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. Jer. 9.17, 18. Amos 5.16. Eccles. 2.1, 8. Mat. 9.23.

V. Of the Order of Singing.
This we have plainly and clearly delivered to us in 1 Cor. 14.26 to 34. How is
it then, Brethren? when ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a
Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation. Let all
things be done to Edifying. Here the Apostle speaks of the several Gifts of the
Holy Spirit, and lays down a general Order for their Delivery. 1. The Tongue
must be by two, or at most by three, and that by course: And let one interpret;
that is, That in case there were many could speak with Tongues, they should not
all exercise, to take up the whole time with that Gift, but only two or three
of them, and that by course or turns. And if any thing be revealed to another,
that sits by, let the first hold his Peace: for ye may all prophecy one by
one: the Dutch translate it, one after another. Here is the Rule for our
Practice, one by one, or, one after another, by course or turns, they may speak
with Tongues, and prophesy. And though only these two Gifts are particularized
in the Rule, yet the Order stands for all the rest, as having relation to it.
The universal Practice of all Christians allows this Order in the Gift of
Doctrine, and we our selves in the Gift of Prayer, that but one is to pray at
once. And therefore seeing that this Order is observed in the Gift of Prayer,
which is not mentioned amongst those several Gifts; then surely we must allow
the Psalm, as one of those Gifts named in the Text, and relating to the Rule to
be delivered after the same Order appointed for the other Gifts. And there is
not the least color of pretense why any should break the Rule in one of these
Gifts more than others, but that as they are named together, and a general
Order appointed for their Use and Delivery in the Church, so it must be
observed for the Psalm, as well as for any other of those spiritual Gifts. And
if I should see a Song delivered by the Gift of the Holy Spirit in this Order,
I hope I should bloss the Lord for so great a Presence of his Spirit amongst
his People.

VI. Objections Answered.
First Objection is, That Moses, and Deborah and Barah, sang together with the
Children of Israel: and therefore it was in use before David 's Time in the
Church.

Answer 1. It is certain that Moses delivered his Song by the Gift of the Holy
Spirit, and wrote it, Exodus 15.1
as he did other Scriptures, for a Memorial of Israel's Deliverance to future
Ages: but that it was then brought in, or any part thereof, till David's Time,
to the Levitical Service in the ordinary Worship of God, is no where evident.
Nor can this Singing be any Rule either for Levitical or Gospel-Institution:
for then we must bring in Dancing as well as Singing; for Miriam the
Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women
went out after her with Timbrels, and with Dances.

2. If we should suppose that Moses, Miriam and Israel sang vocally together at
one and the same time; we may rather take it for an extraordinary Exstasy of
Mirth, Joy, and Gladness before the Lord, expressed by Dancing as well as
Singing, (as David when he danced before the Ark,) than for any part of
instituted Worship.

3. If we should conclude that all Israel did not vocally sing with Moses, but
those whose Hearts the Lord had touched with a sense of that great Deliverance
joined in Spirit with him, Acts 2.42.
it is no more than what is evident from the like manner of Speech of the three
thousand new Converts that continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer: for they did not all
vocally pray together, nor actually break Bread; but joined with, and partook
of those Ordinances by the Ministry. So that if you take it in either sense, it
will make nothing for the establishing of a vocal Singing together in
Gospel Worship.

Secondly, It is said, Judge. 5.1.
It is said, Then sang Deborah and Barak: But Deborah did only vocally sing,
and Barak joined in Spirit with her in the chiefest part of the Song: for how
could Barak call himself Deborah? saying, Until that I Deborah arose, that I
arose a Mother in Israel? And it is plain that she only did vocally sing unto
the Lord, ver. 12. Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake, utter a Song: Arise
Barak, and lead thy Captivity captive, thou Son of Abinoam.

Second Objection is, That in Saul 's Time Music was used by the Prophets; 1 Samuel 10.5
and therefore why not Singing and Music too in their Worship?

Answer. Numb. 11.16, 24, 26, Ex. 24.11.
As others besides the Levites were Prophets; so I do not find that any of
those Prophets were Levites, to whom alone both the Songs and Music were
afterward limited, as the Ministers thereof in God's Service: and there being
neither Institution nor Practice of it to be found, we have no ground to
believe that it was in use in the constant Worship of God before David's Time.

Third Objection is, That if Music and Singing commences its Date from David's
Institution, and was to continue for constant Temple-Worship, till Temple and
Temple-Service was made void, by the Coming of Jesus Christ to erect a more
spiritual Worship; why should not Gospel-Singing continue in constant use while
Gospel-Temple remains, viz. till the second Coming of Jesus Christ without Sin
unto Salvation?

Answer 1. As God did separate literal Israel from the Egyptians, and all other
Nations, Exodus 19.5, 6.
to be his peculiar Treasure and Kingdom of Priests, to worship him: so by the
first Promulgation of the Gospel, he called his Church out of the World, and
separated them as a Chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.
for a Royal Holy Priesthood and Nation, to worship him according to his Will.

2. Though the words Temple and Tabernacle are variously used in the New
Testament, and sometimes for one and the same Thing and State of the
Gospel Church; Heb. 8.
yet the Apostle does plainly show that the Dedication of the Tabernacle by
Moses with the Blood of the First Testament, was the Pattern and Figure of the
Erection and Dedication of the Gospel Church, Chap. 9.
the Heavenly Tabernacle, by the Blood of the Second Testament, viz. of Jesus
Christ; so that the first setting up of the Gospel Church is not the Antitype
of David's and Solomon's Temple, but of Moses's Tabernacle; and Solomon's
Temple is a Figure of greater things to come.

3. As in the time of the Levitical Tabernacle-Worship, Singing was not
established as part of that constant Service, but was only a Gift on
extraordinary Occasions, till the more glorious and perfect Temple-State of the
Church should be erected: so under the first Institution of Gospel Worship
there were extraordinary Gifts of Singing, suitable to the then extraordinary
Circumstances and Presence of God in his Church, which may possibly on
extraordinary Occasions, now and then on fresh Effusions of the Holy Spirit,
still appear in the Church in her now not perfect Temple, but rather
Tabernacle-State, till this be ended, and that more glorious and perfect
spiritual Temple and Temple-Worship, whatever it be, shall be erected, when the
Winter of Afflictions is past, Cant. 2.11, 12.
and the time of singing of Birds is come, at the Appearing and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, in which time there shall be the most glorious Perfection and
full Completion of the spiritual Temple and Worship of God that ever was or
shall be extant upon Earth.

4. And as the Old Testament-Tabernacle-State of the Church was to be
beautified, perfected and enlarged in the Temple-State and Temple-Worship, and
was to continue till the Change and Translation of it into the Gospel Church or
Kingdom of Heaven: so this Gospel-Tabernacle-Church-State shall be perfected,
enlarged, and beautified in the glorious New- Jerusalem-Temple and Worship of
God, which shall continue to the end of the World, and then be translated into
the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven. Now as David and Solomon were Types of Christ;
and the Old-Testament-Temple and Worship were Shadows of the New-
Jerusalem-Temple and Worship of God in the thousand Years: So the Institution
of Singing in the Levitical Temple-Worship, shall be completely answered in the
glorious Antitype and spiritual Temple-State in the thousand Years of Christ's
Kingdom here on Earth, after such manner as God shall be pleased to appoint for
suitable Worship to that Day, when the whole Creation that now groaneth under
the Bondage of Corruption, shall be then delivered into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God. Romans 8.21, 22.


Fourth Objection is from Isa. 52.8, 9. Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice,
with the Voice together shall they sing: for they shall see Eye to Eye, when
the Lord shall bring again Zion. Break forth into Joy, sing together ye waste
Places of Jerusalem: for the Lord has comforted his People, he has redeemed
Jerusalem. From whence some do assert a Singing together in the Gospel Church.

Answ. 1. That this Scripture has no proper Relation to the mere Gospel- Sion
and Gentile- Jerusalem, is clear from the Text it self, which speaks of the
waste Places of Jerusalem, and Redemption of literal Jerusalem, the Captive
Daughter of Zion, when there shall no more come into her the Uncircumcised, and
the Unclean; which cannot be accomplished until the Return of literal Israel
into their Kingdom-State at the second Coming of Jesus Christ.

2. Then her Watchmen; it is not said her People, but her Watchmen, viz. her
Prophets and Ministers, they shall sing together. The Dutch Tranflation reads
it, they shall jubilee, or cry, or shout for Joy, or rejoice together: and verse
9. they translate, make ye a noise or sound, jubilee, or shout for Joy together,
ye waste Places of Jerusalem. Which Scripture most properly relates to the
great Jubilee, or thousand Years of Christ's Kingdom; and cannot be understood
of a constant vocal Singing together by all the Church in the Worship of God in
the Gospel-Tabernacle-State.

Fifth Objection is from those Words, Matthew. 26.30. And when they had sung an
Hymn, etc. From whence they do assert, that Christ and his Disciples sung an
Hymn vocally together.

Answ. 1. The Word sung is not in the Greek, but it is there read, And they
having hymned; which Word is taken by diverse learned Men to be of a general
Signification of all kinds of Praises or Thanksgivings, and not confined to
Songs only. Some of our old English Translators read that Text, And when they
had said Grace. And the Dutch, do not limit the word Hymnos only to Songs of
Praise, but do admit of it to signify saying Thanks, See Dutch Annot. on Ephesians.
5.19.
or Thank-giving to God.

2. There is no Reason to conclude that the Disciples vocally sung together
with Christ; but that Christ as their Minister hymned, and they in their
Spirits joined with him: 1 Samuel 1.11, 13.
as Hannah said: -- And spoke in her Heart: for I have not met with any of our
Reformed, how zealous soever they are to promote a vocal Singing together, that
will admit that the Disciples, in Acts 4.24, etc. prayed all vocally together;
but that they lift up their Voice by their Minister, with whom they joined only
in Spirit, but not with Voice: Notwithstanding the Text is stronger for it,
than any Text in the New Testament is for their way of Singing: read the Text,
ver. 23, 24. And being let go, they went to their own Company, and reported all
that the Chief Priests and Elders had said unto them. And when they heard that,
they lift up their Voice to God with one Accord, Ver. 31.
and said, etc. And when they had prayed, the Place was shaken, etc. It is here
said, they lift up their Voice to God with one Accord: But in Matthew. 26. it is
only said, They hymned. Now if the word [they] must prove their vocal Singing
together with Christ, much more will those words, [They lift up their Voice to
God with one Accord and said] prove their vocal Praying together. And let me
plainly tell you, that if you assert a vocal Singing together from Matthew. 26.
you cannot deny a vocal Praying together from Acts 4. And if you assert a
prescribed Form of Singing, you cannot possibly avoid the bringing in of a Form
of Prayer: for the same Arguments used for the one, will serve to promote the
other, with this Advantage, that we have a form of Prayer prescribed by Christ
himself in the New Testament, but none of Singing, except what relates to those
mysterious Prophecies in the Book of the Revelations, which are no Rule for
constant Singing.

But lest any weak Christians should from hence imagine that there is some
ground for a vocal Praying together, as the manner of some is, I shall say
something farther, to demonstrate that this Prayer was not made by all the
Church vocally together, but by the Minister only, as their Voice to God. For
the proper Signification of the words cannot be otherwise understood; It is
said [they] in the plural Number, because not only the Minister, but the whole
Church did with one Accord and Agreement of Spirit lift up their Voice (Gr. the
Voice) to God; not Voices, in the plural Number, for then all did vocally pray
together, but Voice, in the singular Number; so that though many were of one
Accord in Spirit, yet they all had but one single Voice, viz. of their
Minister, which they, by Agreement of Spirit with him, lifted up, as their
Mouth to God in Prayer. And after this manner the Apostle proves that the
Promises made to Abraham's Seed, Gal. 3.16, 29.
were made to Christ, because they were made to Abraham, and to his Seed, in
the singular Number. And therefore if the Apostle proves that the Promises
were made to Christ from the Word Seed, as of one, in the singular Number,
there is as much Reason to assert that the Word Voice was put in the singular
Number; properly to explain that by one voice they expressed themselves to God
in unanimous Prayer. And we find that the Spirit of God uses the singular and
plural Number, not so much to follow the Grammatical Rules of humane Learning,
as to express and demonstrate the Truth to us, as Genesis 1.1. See William Street,
in his dividing of the Hoof.
Elohim Bara, the Almighties he created; which is significantly expressed for
our learning, that a Plurality of Divine Persons, the Trinity in the Unity of
Essence, were concerned and wrought together in the Works of Creation. So that
these seeming Difficulties do not arise from any real Absurdities or Errors in
the Holy Sriptures, but from our Iguorance and want of Light to understand the
Mysteries of God contained in them.

Sixth Objection is from Acts 16.25. And at Midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and
sang Praises unto God; and the Prisoners heard them. Here also the word [sang]
is not found in the Greek Tongue, and the Word hymnos, is to praise; they
prayed and praised God in Prayer so loud, that the Prisoners heard them. And as
this could not be by a prescribed form, for then we should deny them to have a
sufficient Gift of the Holy Spirit; so there is no Evidence that they prayed
and praised vocally both together, but while the one prayed and praised, the
other might only join in Spirit, and so each of them might vocally pray and
praise the Lord by turns.

Seventh Objection is from Ephesians. 5.19. See Ainsworths Annot. on Psa. 3.
Speaking to (Gr. in) your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
etc. which three Words are three several sorts of Titles of Psalms, taken out
of the Book of Psalms, viz. 1st. in Heb. Mizmore, Gr. Psalmos, Hymns or Praise.
Psa. 145. Songs, Psa. 30. Psalm 45. Psalm. 48.120, etc. to Ps. 134. Psalms, on
many other Psalms.
Engl. Psalm. 2dly. in Heb. Tehilla, Gr. Hymnos, Engl. Hymn or Praise. 3dly.
Heb. Shir, Gr. Ode, Engl. Song or Lays: which three Words are found in the
Titles of these Psalms. And some do say they signify three things or kinds of
Songs, viz. 1st. Psalms, the Psalms of David; others, all sorts of spiritual
Songs to be sung with Music. 2dly. Hymns for humane pre-composed Songs of
Praise. And 3dly. Spiritual Songs from the immediate Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit; and, as others say, are Songs composed, wherein are contained all sorts
of spiritual Teachings. And from hence they assert the Singing of David's
Psalms, and precomposed Hymns, as well as spiritual Songs.

Answ. 1. I think it is clear from the Scriptures, that however the Words may
differ the one to the other, as to the Extent of their Significations, yet they
are used but for one manner of compounded Worship. 1st. For though the matter
of a Song is so confined that it cannot be externally expressed without a
humane Voice of Words, yet the Tone or Tune may be expressed either by Voice,
(though never used in the Worship of God without the matter) or by musical
Instruments: both of which, as they were used according to the Institution in
the Old Testament-Worship, were Praises, or praising God; sometimes both in
matter and manner; but at other times, the matter not properly being Praises,
it consisted only in the manner of Delivery; as Psalm 17, is called a Prayer of
David, and Psalm 50 was a mournful Prayer when Nathan came to David after he
had gone in to Bathsheba; but yet it was delivered to the chief Musician. And
so are Songs sometimes Praises, and sometimes Prayers and Complainings, Psalm
48, 120, 123, 130. And the whole Book of Psalms, though the matter of it is not
all Praises but Prophecies, mournful Prayers and Lamentations, yet it is titled
Tehillim, Hymns or Praises, because, as all of it, whether called Psalms,
Hymns, or Songs, were after the same manner composed by the infallible
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, 1 Chronicles. 16.19. 2 Chronicles. 29.27, 28. 1 Chronicles.
16.5, 6. chapter 15.16, to 25.
so they were (many of them, if not all) alike delivered to the chief Musician,
and sung by melodious Voices and Instruments of Music together; which outward
Glory and Grandeur, suitable to that Temple-State, was to the external Honor
and Praise of the most high God, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, 26, 30. Psalm. 4. Psalm 6.
Psalm 48. Psalm. 120. Psalm. 123. Psalm. 130. Psalm. 145.
whatever the matter of those Songs were. And as the matter of those Songs
differ (not from the Titles of them) but yet were alike composed and delivered
for Temple-Worship: So what spiritual Songs has been, or hereafter may appear
in the Gospel Church, by the special Gift of the Holy Spirit, though the matter
may somewhat differ (not from the Titles of them, nor as those in Mourning and
Lamentation) yet they were and shall be composed and delivered alike by the
Holy Spirit according to Gospel Order.

2. Those three Words, Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, cannot be understood
of three different things in the New Testament from the different Extent of
their Significations. 1st. Because no Old-Testament-Names do prove the Nature
of New-Testament-Things, as Circumcision, Censer, Incense, Alter, Sacrifice,
Passover, City Jerusalem, Temple, are all things of a different Nature in the
Old Testament, to what they are sometimes used for in the New: So that
Old-Testament-Names given to New-Testament-Singing, do no more prove either the
matter or manner to be the same, nor establish Old-Testament-Singing in the
Gospel Church, than the other Old Testament Names do those Old-Testament-Things
in Gospel Times. 2dly. As those three Words are before proved to be
indifferently applied to one and the same thing in the Old Testament; so there
is less Reason that they should have different Significations in the New: for
you may find that several Old Testament Names are given to one Gospel-Thing; 1
Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Romans 2.29. Heb. 4.14. chapter 9.26. chapter 13.10. 1 Cor. 5.7.
as the Saints are called a spiritual House and Temple, an Holy Priesthood, and
Jews; and Christ is called an High Priest, a Sacrifice, an Altar and Temple:
and therefore it being usual to call Gospel-Things by diverse Names of different
Natures, in the Old Testament, there is no Reason that those three Names,
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, John 2.19, 21. See Pool 's Annot on Col.
3.16.
which, as Pool confesses, were promiscuously used, and which are here
demonstrated to intend but one thing in the Old Testament, should be understood
of any more than of one thing or sort of Gospel-spiritual-Singing, respecting
its Composure and Delivery.

Eighth Objection, It is a moral Duty for wicked Men to pray and sing Praises
to God, which they are not able to do without a Form; and therefore Forms are
lawful.

Answ. 1. Prove. 21.4, 27. chapter 15.8.
The Scriptures say that the plowing of the Wicked is Sin, and that the
Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord: and wherefore, but
because whatsoever Good he does, or desires, it is not for good Ends, to serve
and glorify God, but to consume his Mercies upon his Lusts; he turns all into
Sin, Jam. 4.3.
and therefore all he does is but Sin: if he prays for Grace, he does but play
the Hypocrite with God, for as he knows not what it is, so he does not desire
it, for he loves his own Sins and Lusts more than Grace; and therefore his
Prayers cannot be pleasing to the Lord, whilst he remains a hardened Sinner.

2. All Men ought not only to pray, and praise God as their Creator, but to
keep the whole Law in the perfect State of Innocence in which they were created
in Adam; but now they have no power in themselves to perform the inward
spiritual Works of the Law, to love the Lord their God with all their Hearts,
etc. and to pray, and sing Praises to him; they can do neither of these
sincerely in their Hearts: Romans 7.14.
for the Law is spiritual, and requires spiritual Obedience; but they are
carnal, sold under Sin, and blinded in their Minds. And as they have not a true
sense of their Sins, nor see their need of Christ; so they know not that they
have cause to sing his Praise for their Being: And therefore for such to use a
Form of Prayer or Singing, when they have no Sense nor Understanding of what
they pray for, or that they have cause to sing, is to mock God with their Lips
with that which they have not in their Hearts. Besides, the putting of Persons
on formal Worship, is not the way to get the Spirit, but to rest on formal
Duties, which hinder their coming to Jesus Christ.

3. As Forms are many ways sinful and hurtful to the Souls of Men, so there is
no need of them, as Crutches for Lame Men, to bring them to Jesus Christ; for
where there is a true Conviction and sense of Sins, that Soul can cry against
them; and if it be but with Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner, he shall (as
Christ says) be rather justified than with a formal Prayer, without
Convictions: And when they are Sons, God sends forth the Spirit of Adoption
into their Hearts, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
that cries, and teaches them, whereby they cry, Abba, Father, without the
help of humane Forms.

Ninth Objection, All true Believers and sincere Christians have continual
cause to rejoice in the Lord, and magnify God in the highest Celebration of his
Praise: and therefore it is their Duty in his constant Worship to sing his
Praise.

Answ. Whatever Cause we have to rejoice in the Lord, and to glorify God in the
highest Celebration of his Praise, for Redemption-Grace, and those sure and
everlasting Mercies confirmed to us in the Blood of Jesus Christ, yet it does
not from thence follow that we should constantly sing to God in his public
Worship.

1. Because that in this Life the Joys and Consolations of our
Redemption-Grace, is mixed with Sorrows for Sins, Temptations, Troubles and
Afflictions, which deprive us of the constant exercise of the Grace of Joy in
our Souls. And, as Solomon says, To every thing there is a Season, Eccles.
3.1, 4.
and a Time to every Purpose under the Heaven: A Time to weep, and a Time to
laugh; a Time to mourn, and a Time to dance. And the Times of the Church of
Christ are differently set forth, Cant. 2.11.
and compared by the Holy Spirit to Winter and Summer; when the Flowers appear
on the Earth, and the Time of the singing of Birds is come. And, as I showed
before, that the Jewish Church, through Sin and Unbelief, had her Wilderness
and Tabernacle-State and Time of Trouble, which called for Mourning and
Humiliation more than Singing, so the Gospel Church has her Wilderness and
Sackcloth-State, in which she must prophesy 1260 Days. Now as Sackcloth, Isa.
22.12.
which betokens Mourning, and Singing, are inconsistent with each other; so we
should not imagine that God requires such Opposites in Nature both together.
For he has appointed unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty
for Ashes, Isa. 61.3.
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. And as the Apostle says, Jam. 5.13.
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms.
From which it is manifest that Affliction and Prayer, and Rejoicing and
Singing, have their different Seasons: and that until the one be taken away,
the other is not given. But some may think that the two Sackcloth-Witnesses in
Rev. 11. are not the Church of Christ, but two particular Persons and eminent
Witnesses that should arise. But to me it is plain that they must be understood
of the visible Church of Christ: for if the three Days and an half of their
lying dead, as is generally owned, and cannot be otherwise understood, be the
space of three Years and an half of Time; then also by the same Rule the 1260
Days of their prophesying in Sackcloth must be taken for 1260 Years, which is
too long a time for one Age, or two particular Persons to continue: And
therefore the two Sackcloth-Witnesses are the visible Church of Christ, Rev.
13.7.
which the Beast shall make War upon and overcome. Chapter 12.14.
And so also must the Woman in the Wilderness be understood of the Church of
Christ under her Troubles and Persecutions in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus
Christ. Rev. 1.9.
For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
shall suffer Persecution. And we must through much Tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God. Acts 14.22
Seeing therefore it is given to us not only to believe on Christ, but also to
suffer for his Sake; Phil. 1.29.
and that God has appointed his Church her Days of Mourning; and that through her
falling away from her primitive Love and Zeal, she has lost much of those
blessed Gifts of the Holy Spirit she then had. Let us not deceive our selves,
and think to recover the Gift of Singing with our carnal Spirits, Isa. 22.12,
13.
in an improper and contrary Season, Israel-like, when we should mourn for the
great Apostasy, Pride, Covetousness and Carnality of Spirit which is found in
the Church of Christ, and fast and pray for the Pardon of Sins, Isa. 32.15.
the full Deliverance of the Captive Daughter of Sion, and the Return of the
Holy Spirit, that the Wilderness may become a fruitful Field. And therefore as
our Sins deprive us, and as God has not allotted to us a Heaven of continual
Joy and constant Singing in this present evil World; so the different Graces of
his Holy Spirit, and Duties required of us, are suited to the different
Circumstances of our Lives, which are mostly filled with Troubles, Sins and
Temptations. And though particular Saints may and oft-times do rejoice and
glory in Tribulations when the Spirit of Glory rests upon them, and raises
their Hearts above their Troubles; yet this is but now and then at certain
Times through a sight of Faith, when God is sealing his Love upon their
Spirits, to encourage their Souls to persevere: Otherwise if it were constant,
Troubles would be no more Troubles, nor Afflictions no more Afflictions; or, if
their Joys were greater and more constant than their Sorrows, it could not so
properly be called a Sackcloth, mournful, afflicted State; for either of them
which is most constant, and in which we have the greatest Share and Exercise of
our Lives, deservedly bears the Name. And therefore if particular Souls, or
the Church of Christ in general, be in a State of Trouble and Affliction, they
are so far incapable of the constant Exercise of the Grace of Joy, and
consequently of constant spiritual Singing in the public Worship of God, as
their Troubles and Sorrows must needs exceed their Joys; and then the Graces
and Duties suitable to that State should be in exercise, as Long-suffering,
Patience, Faith of Reliance, Meekness, Watching, Praying, etc. which are more
strongly injoined, and oftener pressed on us in the New Testament for our
constant Practice, than Singing is, and that because our Troubles and Sorrows
are more constant than our spiritual Raptures: So that from our Incapacity of
maintaining a constant and sufficient Exercise of the Grace of Joy in our
Souls, through the Troubles, Sins and Temptations of this World, the Weakness
of our Faith, and want of the sufficient Gift of the Holy Spirit, we are not
now able to sing with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also, in the
constant and public Worship of God, and to press it beyond our Understanding,
proportion of Faith, and measure of the gracious Gift of the Holy Spirit, when
other Graces should be in exercise, is a Sin.

2. Every true Christian, nor the Church of Christ in general, is not capable
to sing Praises to the Lord in his public and constant Worship; because the
greatest number of Christians, as it is believed, especially in our Day, have
not attained to a sufficient Faith of Assurance of the Love of God in Christ
Jesus unto their Souls, Rom 5.1 to 5.
(which made the Apostles to rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory)
but have their doubtings between Hope and Fear of what shall become of them to
all Eternity: 1 Pet. 1.8.
And therefore while they are in the new Birth, or Babes in Christ, and have
not met with the witnessing Power, Romans 8.15.
or persuasive Influence of the Holy Spirit with their Spirits, that they are
the Children of God, they cannot sing his Praise for their Redemption: for if
they are not sufficiently assured of it by Faith, they cannot so rejoice in it.
And we should not think that God requires more of his Church and People than
he has given Ability and Qualifications to perform.

Tenth Objection, Formal Prayer and Singing were used under the Law: and
therefore why not formal Prayer and Singing under the Gospel?

Answer. As the visible and successive Ministers of the Worship and Service of
God under the Law, were not called as spiritual converted regenerated
Believers, but were an Election out of the natural and carnal Seed of Abraham
in their Generations, by Succession unto the Ministerial Office: so the Body of
the Old-Testament-Church were not called into that visible Church State as
spiritual regenerated Believers, but as the natural and carnal Seed of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. And therefore as that People were carnally and nationally
imbodied into a visible Church State; so their instituted Worship was formal,
literal, ceremonial, carnal and typical, suitable to them, and the Design of
God to make them and their Church State a Type, Shadow and Figure of his
calling a spiritual People into a more spiritual Church State, to serve him in
more spiritual Ordinances in Spirit and in Truth: And therefore since Christ is
come in the Flesh, and has removed and abolished the Mosaical and Levitical
Church State, Heb. 7.12, 17, 18. Chap. 9.8 to 11.
the New-Testament-Writers have described Gospel-Things in opposition to them,
as Power to Form, Romans 2.20, 29. 2 Cor. 3.11. Gal. 3.2, 3. 2 Cor. 3.6. Romans
7.6. Chap. 1.28, 29. Phil. 3.3. Gal. 3.29. Chap. 4.21, etc. 29 to the End. Heb.
10.1. Chap. 9.1, 11, 23. Col. 2.17.
as Spirit to Flesh, as Spiritual to Literal and Carnal, as spiritual Seed to
fleshly or carnal Seed, as Shadows to Bodies, as Worldly to Heavenly, as Types
and Figures of good Things to come: So that there is no legal instituted
Worship, as found in the public Levitical Service and Circumstances, that can
be either proper or a sufficient Warrant for our Practice in Gospel Times; and
therefore it is our Duty to look more directly into the Gospel-Institutions for
Gospel Worship, than to confuse the Minds of weak Christians with Questions
from the dark Shadows of the Law, which tend to Bondage, and have proved very
mischievous to the Gospel Church; for which cause many, whom God has
graciously enlightened in the Holy Scriptures, have been forced to treat the
more largely on Legal Ceremonies, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 17.
to remove the Vail of the Law, which to this day too too much remains on the
Minds of many Christians.

Eleventh Objection, Prayer under the Gospel is an Ordinance of the same Nature
as it was under the Law; and therefore Singing under the Gospel may also be of
the same Nature, and intend the same thing as it did in the Legal Worship.

Answer. It is true that private Prayer is a Duty of the same Nature under the
Gospel as it was under the Law, both with respect to the like Occasions, Wants
and Necessities of the Saints; and to the same Spirit, by which all true
Believers do offer up spiritual and effectual Prayers to God. But as to the
Conveyance and Delivery of Prayer as an Ordinance, in and for the public
ministerial and ordinary instituted Service of God in his Church, there is a
Difference in Gospel Times to what it was under the Law: for such public
Prayers were conveyed and delivered formerly with dark Shadows, and carnal
Ordinances, by which means the Spirituality of spiritual Persons (as David, of
whom it is said, that he praised God by the Ministry of the Priests and
Levites) in the public Worship of God was greatly veiled to what it now is, 2 Chronicles. 7, 6. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15. 2 Chronicles. 29.25 to 31. Nehem. 11.17, 22.
since all those Forms, Ceremonial Shadows, and carnal Ordinances are removed:
for while the Priests were offering the Sacrifices, the Priests and Levites, in
Songs with Instruments of Music, delivered such Psalms of Prayers and Praises
as were appointed for the public Service of God. So that public Prayers in
the ordinary and constant Worship of God in the Old-Testament-Church, was
ministered in a different manner to what it now is, and ought to be under the
Gospel; and therefore whatsoever Singing has been, or still may be in
Gospel Times, may as well differ from the Old-Testament-Temple-Singing. But
having before showed that Temple-Singing was no Type of Singing in the
Gospel-Tabernacle-Church-State, there is the less need of any Reply to this
Objection.

Twelfth Objection, Since the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit are
ceased, we must now pray and preach by its ordinary Gifts; and if we are
allowed to use precomposed Forms of Preaching, why not of (they might say
Prayer and) Singing also.

Answ. 1. I do acknowledge and assert that we should not neglect Prayer, till we
have an extraordinary Gift or Impulse of Spirit unto Prayer; but we should
constantly go to God as we can, not only for Continuance of those Mercies we
have, but for further Supplies of our inward and outward Wants, which are the
chiefest part of Prayer. But Singing proceeds from a Fullness of Enjoyment, and
is called a Breaking forth, Isa. 52.9.
and therefore requires a greater Measure of the Holy Spirit. For we can pray
for what we have not, but we should break forth into Singing from what we have;
otherwise we mock God, and draw nigh unto him with our Mouths, Isa. 29.13.
and honor him with our Lips, when our Hearts are far from him; and our Fear
toward him is taught by the Precepts of Men; and therefore when I consider the
present State and Frame of the Churches of Jesus Christ, I much wonder that so
many should be for Singing, when their Hearts are so much below Prayer: for if
we should go from Saint to Saint, we should find that this is the general Cry,
I have a dead and stony Heart, says one; and another mourns under the
Strength and Power of Sins and Temptations; and a third for the Light of God's
Countenance: and the great Complaint is, I am dull and heavy, and cannot profit
in Ordinances; and that which is worst of all, I am shut up in my Spirit, that
I cannot pray, I want the Spirit of Prayer and Supplications. Now if thus it
be, then where is the Spirit of Singing? Will you lie, and express that with
your Lips to God which you have not in your Hearts?

But some of these will say, Singing will raise my Spirit, I find Refreshment
by it, and therefore I am for Singing.

To this I answer, That there may be a natural sensual Joy in the Heart when it
is not from the Light and Influence of the Holy Spirit, and therefore we must
beware that we make not our Spirits a Standard for the Worship of God, but that
we try our Spirits by the Scriptures.

2dly. As to Forms of (Prayer and) Singing, I have sufficiently treated of them
before, and that the sufficient Gifts of the Holy Spirit shall continue for the
Worship of God in the Gospel Church to the end of the World; and therefore my
Business here, is, only to show that the using a Form of Preaching, is no
Example for a Form of Singing: if it be, why not of Prayer also? which you
deny, because there is Reason for a Form of Preaching from the Word of God, and
Example of Christ himself, who read a Text, and then preached from it; though
as he was not, so others are not limited to that, or any other particular
Forms; yet it is lawful for them, and required of them, to compare spiritual
things with spiritual; to attend on Reading and Meditations, 1 Cor. 2.13. 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. 2 Timothy 1.13. chapter 2.15. 1 Cor. 4.6.
and to hold fast the Form of sound Words, rightly dividing the Word of Truth
as a Workman that needs not to be ashamed of his Work: as Paul, who says,
These things, Brethren, I have in a Figure transferred to my self, and to
Apollos for your sakes. So that where the Scriptures do give us Liberty, we may
use it: but it is our Sin to take it where it is forbidden; as I have showed it
is to use a Form of Prayer or Singing.

I could say more of the different Nature of Preaching to that of Prayer and
Singing, but I think it is needless here, and therefore I shall conclude, with
my humble Request to all those that are for Singing of David's Psalms, or any
prescribed Forms of Singing, as the Custom is, that they would be pleased
seriously to consider of these several things following.

1. That the vocal Singing together, either of David's Psalms, or any humane
precomposed Forms, is a corrupting of the pure Worship of Jesus Christ, in
mingling of Law and Gospel, or humane and divine things together.

2. It will lead us to Apostasy, to return from whence we came, as a Dog to his
Vomit, and as a Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the Mire.

3. Consider seriously, you that are Leaders of the Lord's People, and are for
such formal Singing, Whether the same Arguments you now urge to your
Fellow-Brethren will be pleadable for your Practice at the Bar of Jesus Christ:
you may plead them here to us, but will you not be ashamed to own them there?
The Lord give you a true Sight and Sense of the evil Consequences of this your
Error, that you may not cause his People to sin, but may yet with sound
Doctrine strengthen the weak Hands, and confirm the feeble Knees, and make
straight Paths for your Feet, Heb. 12.12, 13.
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed.

4thly. Consider, that if you err from the Rule of Christ in offering your
Praises to God, contrary to his own appointed Way, therein you do worship God
in vain: and I fear it will be said of you, as it was to him that offered the
Thank-offering under the Law, Levit. 7.11 to 19.
which was to be eaten on the first and second Days: and if any of the Flesh of
the Sacrifice of his Peace or Thank-offering were eaten at all on the third
Day, that it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that
offers it: it shall be an Abomination, and that Soul shall bear his Iniquity.

5thly and lastly. It is the Duty of all, and of every individual Christian,
studiously to judge of the Doctrine delivered to them, whether it be of Man or
of God; and to conform to the Authority of the Holy Scripture; as the noble
Bereans did, Acts 17.10, 11.
who searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things, preached by Paul and
Silas, were so or no. And I am persuaded that it is for want of Zeal and Love
to the Truths of Christ, and through that slothful and idle Spirit attending so
many Christians, that the Errors of Men do so prevail.

But to leave what I have said, I do beseech you courteous Reader, christianly
to overlook that Weakness you may espy in my Delivery, and seriously to take
notice not so much of that, as of the main of this Subject, without straining
my Words beyond the drift and design of the body of my Discourse; and to
consider, that the Authority of the Holy Scriptures is repugnant to such formal
and customary Singing herein mentioned, and treated of, not with any Design to
move Controversies, or trouble others, but to prevent the Divisions that
possibly may arise amongst our selves, through the Endeavors of some Persons
to promote this Error in our Churches. And as I hope the Lord has engaged my
Heart herein; so he will bless my poor Endeavors, to settle the Minds of my
wavering Brethren, and to prevent any farther Encroachments of this Error,
which has been so generally rejected by us for many Years.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 45. line 8. for formerly read formally. P. 47. near the end in Margent,
add the Text Luke 4.17, etc.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now coming forth a Book entitled, A Treatise of the Holy Trinunity,
in two Parts: The First asserteth the Deity of Jesus Christ and the Holy
Spirit, in the Unity of Essence with God the Father. The Second, in Defense of
the former, answers the chiefest Objections made against this Doctrine. By J.
M.
Chap. I. THE Case is briefly stated. Chap. II. Shows that there is but one
God, the Creator and Former of all things. Chap. III. Asserteth a Plurality of
Divine Subsistences. Chap. IV. Of the Father. Chap. V. Proves the Deity of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1. By his Names. 2. That God in the Old Testament in diverse
Places is Christ in the New. 3. By seven particular Texts of Holy Scriptures.
4. That Christ preexisted his Incarnation in his Divine Nature, and is no Angel
incarnate, but is Coeternal with the Father. 5. His Deity is proved by his
Works. And 6. By Divine Worship given to him. Chap. VI. Proves the Deity of
the Holy Ghost. 1. That he is a Person. 2. His Deity is asserted from several
Texts of Scripture. 3. By his Works. 4. By Divine Worship given to him. Chap.
VII. Proves the Unity of the Holy Trinity. Chap. VIII. Contains some
Explications of the Holy Trinunity. 1. Of the essential Being of God. 2. Of the
Divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 3. Of the
Distinctions of the Divine Nature and the Persons, and some Shadows by way of
Comparison of the incomparable and inconceivable Being of God, and of the Union
of Christ's two Natures.
PART II.
Chap. I. Answers Objections against the Scriptural Proofs of Christ's Deity.
Chap. II. Answers to Objections drawn from several Texts of Scriptures. Chap.
III. Answers to several Arguments against the Deity of Christ. Chap. IV.
Answers to several Objections against the Scriptures, that prove the Deity of
the Holy Ghost. Chap. V. Answers to some Objections drawn from diverse
Scriptures to disprove the Deity of the Holy Spirit. Chap. VI. Answers to some
Scriptures from whence our Adversaries assert that the Father only is the true
God. With a general Answer and Conclusion.
Price bound one Shilling.

AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER DISCOURSE, Concerning SINGING in the Worship of GOD
in the Gospel Church.
IN the former Part of my Discourse on this Subject, I laid a Foundation
according to the proportion of Faith which I received from the Light of the
holy Scriptures, and have asserted something of the nature, manner, and order
of Singing agreeable to the Dispensations of the Mind and Will of God unto his
People, both under the Old and New Testaments. And finding my self concerned in
the defense of the Truth of Christ, which some have erred from in their
practice of formal Singing, I shall farther treat on this Subject for the
better clearing of it from diverse things that lie in the way of some Christians
establishment in the Truth.

SECT. I.
1. I Shall premise, That to praise God, or praising of God, is not confined to
Songs of Praise; but that there are other ways and manners of praising God,
than with such melodious Singing, as in Psalm. 145.10. [All thy Works shall
praise thee, O Lord,] and thy Saints shall bless thee; and in Psalm. 148.
throughout, the whole Creation is required to praise God, for he commanded, and
they were created. Their very Being and Subsistence, and the order of Nature,
is a Praise to the glorious Wisdom and Power of God. And David says, Psalm.
50.23.
Whosoever offers Praise glorifieth me, viz. God. And as praising God is
glorifying, honoring, and magnifying of him, so also is glorifying God, often
put for the same as praising of him, which in the following Scriptures do also
differ from that of Singing; as in Mat. 21.16. where the Children crying
Hosanna to the Son of David, [that is, Save now] is by Christ called Praise;
and Luke 19.37. The whole Multitude of the Disciples began to rejoice and
praise God, -- saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord:
Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest. And this praising God, and Glory in
the Highest, is, in Matthew and Mark, said to be crying Hosanna to the Son of
David, Hosanna in the highest. And Luke 18.43. And immediately he received his
Sight, and followed him, glorifying God; and all the People when they saw it,
gave Praise unto God. And Acts 3.8, 9. The lame Man walking and leaping,
praised God. And also Thanking, 2 Cor. 4.15. chap. 9.11, to end. Phil. 4.16.
chap. 1.3, 4. 1 These. 1.2. Phil. 1.4.
is glorifying or praising God, which is by the ordinary Gift of the Spirit,
always to be mixed with Prayer, as Paul did, making mention of the Saints with
Thanksgiving always in every Prayer; and therefore as God is thus praised,
glorified, and thanked, I can see no reason to confine his Praises to [Songs]
of Praise only, which the Learned Dr. Owen strongly opposes in his Exposition
of Heb. 2.12. notwithstanding the word in the Greek that is there put for
Praise, is Hymneso se, I will hymn thee, viz. I will praise thee; his Words are
these: It is declared farther, (1.) What Christ will moreover do, He will sing
Praises unto God; and (2.) where he will do it, in the midst of the
Congregation: The Expression of both these is accommodated unto the Declaration
of God's Name, and praising of him in the Temple. The Singing of Hymns of
Praise unto God in the great Congregation, was then a principal Part of his
Worship. And in the first Expression, two Things are observable. (1.) What
Christ undertakes to do, and that is, to praise God. Now this is only
Exegetical of what went before: He would praise God by declaring his Name.
There is no way whereby the Praise of God may be celebrated, like that of
declaring his Grace, Goodness, and Love unto Men, whereby they may be won to
believe and trust in him, whence Glory redounds unto him. (2.) The Cheerfulness
and Alacrity of the Spirit of Christ in this Work, he would do it as with Joy
and Singing; with such a frame of Heart, as was required in them, who were to
sing the Praises of God in the great Assembly in the Temple. (3.) Where would
he do this (...) in the midst of the Congregation, the great Congregation, as
he calls it, ver. 25. that is, the great Assemblies of the People in the
Temple. And this was a Type of the whole Church of the Elect, under the
New Testament. The Lord Christ in his own Person, by his Spirit in his
Apostles, and his Word, by all his Messengers unto the end of the World,
setting forth the Love, Grace, Goodness, and Mercy of God in him the Mediator,
sets forth the Praise of God in the midst of the Congregation. I shall only add
(says he) that whereas Singing of Hymns unto God, was an essential Part of the
instituted Worship under the Old Testament, to whose use these Expressions are
accommodated; it is evident that the Lord Christ has eminently set forth this
Praise of God in his Institution of Worship under the New Testament, wherein
God will ever be glorified and praised. And he farther says, -- That he ( viz.
Christ, no sooner was delivered from his Sufferings, but) as he lands upon the
Shore from that Tempest wherein he was tossed in his Passion, he cries out, I
will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the Congregation will I
sing praise unto thee. And thus we find that upon his Resurrection he did not
immediately ascend into Glory, but first declared the Name of God unto his
Apostles and Disciples; and then took order that by them it should be declared
and published to all the World. This was upon his Spirit, and he entered not
into his glorious Rest until he had performed it. The Words themselves also do
evidence it, in that Expression of celebrating God's Name with Hymns, with
Singing. It was a Joy of heart unto him to be engaged in this work. Singing is
the frame (...), James 5.13. of them that are in a glad, free, rejoicing
Condition. So was the Lord Christ in this Work. -- Moreover, Psalm. 258.
the Lord Christ by declaring, that he will set forth the Praise of God in the
Church, manifests what is the duty of the Church it self, namely, to praise
God. -- This is indeed the very end of gathering the Church, and of all the
Duties that are performed therein, and thereby. -- This is the end of the
Institution of all Ordinances of Worship in the Church, Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10. and in
them do they set forth the Praises of God unto Men and Angels. This is the
tendency of Prayer, the word of Faith, the fruit of Obedience. It is a fond
Imagination which some have fallen upon, that God is not praised in the Church
for the work of Redemption, unless it be done by Words and Hymns particularly
expressing it. All Praying, all Preaching, all Administration of Ordinances,
all our Faith, all our Obedience, if ordered aright, are nothing but giving
Glory to God, for his Love and Grace in Christ Jesus in a due and acceptable
manner. So that it is manifested from the aforesaid Premises, that praising of
God is not limited to Songs of Praise.

SECT. II.
Of the word Hymnos, a Hymn.
THat the word Hymnos signifies [Praise] and is of such a general
Signification, as that it is not to be confined only to Songs of Praise, is
showed briefly in my former Discourse, Par. 1. p. 29, 33.
wherein I cited Ainsworth on Psalm 3. who translates it Praise; and the Dutch
Annotations, which do not limit it to Songs, but do also admit of it to signify
saying Thanks to God; to which former Testimony, I shall add some farther
Evidence for the confirmation thereof.

And first, in Constantine's Greek Lexicon, though it tells us that Hymenaeus
is a Nuptial Song; and Hymnos, Hymnus, Laus Deorum, the Praise of the Gods,
etc. Yet he also confesses hymneo, dico hymnum, I say an Hymn, (as well as)
hymnos canto, I sing Hymns; cano vel dico lauds, I sing or say Praises. Neque
solum de Diis, ut quidam tradunt, dicitur, sed etiam de hominibus and aliis
rebus: Neither is it spoken only of the Gods, as some say, but also of Men and
other Things. Hymno, etiam Kateuphemismon pro conqueror; that is, Hymno, also
Kateuphemismon, is put for conqueror, to complain; convicior, to accuse or
reproach; Hymnein, for lamentari, to lament. So in the English Greek and Latin
Lexicon by Andrew Symson Minister, it is Hymnus, Ephesians. 5.19. Coloss. 3.16. a
Song containing Praises to God: yet he also says Hymnum cano, Hymnum dicto, to
sing an Hymn, to say an Hymn, Mat. 26.30. Mar. 14.26. to praise, to give Thanks
unto God. This word ( viz. Hymnus, says he) signifies also to complain, which
is a more foreign Signification. And though these Lexicon-Writers do apply the
use of the word to Songs of Praise and Nuptial Songs, yet we see they do also
admit of its simple signification to praise without Songs. But that which
chiefly concerns us, is to consider the use that is made of it in the Holy
Scriptures. And,

1. The LXXII learned Translators of the Old Testament out of the Hebrew into
the Greek Tongue, were not so well acquainted with it, as such a proper limited
word, to signify Marriage-Praise, or Songs of Praise; for if they had, then
surely they would have used the word Hymnos in Psalm. 78.63. -- And their
Maidens were not given to Marriage: in the margent it is, Heb. praised; lo
hullalu, shall not be praised, which the Septuagint translate Epenthesan, and
use not the word Hymnos for Marriage-Praise.

2. In Mr. Leigh's Critica Sacra on Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14.26. Acts 16.25. Heb.
2.12. I find these three Authors cited, who do witness clearly for me, though
he also brings two more to gloss the matter over, and with himself endeavors
to balance his other Evidence in favor of our modern Translators.

First, it is there said that Hymneo signifies laudare, gratias agere, to
praise, to give Thanks. 2. Arabs, and laudem dederunt, Mat. 26.30. and they
gave Praise. 3. Novarinus, Quum dixissent lauds, when they had spoken Praises.
4. Interpres Euthimii, Dictis laudibus, having spoken Praises. He also shows
us, that the Hebrew word Odah in Isa. 25.1. is from the word Jadah, and
signifies Confession, and is applied sometimes to Man's Sins, as in Joshua
7.19. and sometimes to God's Properties and Works, Psalm. 26.27. and 107.8, 15,
21, 31. And also Arius Montanus translateth Odaeh in Latin Confitebor, that is,
I will confess; which is in the aforesaid Text in Greek Hymneso, and in our
English Bibles I will praise. And in Isa. 12.4. in Hebrew Hodu la Jehovah, in
Greek Hymneite Kurion; by Montanus in Latin is translated Confitemini Domino,
in our English Bibles, Praise the Lord.

3. There are diverse Places of Scripture where the Hebrew word Tehillah, and
the Greek word Hymnos, are in our Modern Bibles now in use, translated Praise;
as Psalm. 40.3. And he has put a new Song in my Mouth, even Praises unto our
God; in Hebrew Shir Chadash, Gr. asma kainon, a new Song; Heb. Tehillah, Gr.
Hymnon, Praise. And Psalm. 65.1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion; Heb.
Tehillah, Gr. Hymnos, Praise. And Psalm. 71.6. My Praise shall be continually of
thee; Heb. Tehillathi, Gr. Hymnesis mou, my Praise. And Psalm. 22.22. I will
declare thy Name unto my Brethren; in the midst of the Congregation will I
praise thee; Heb. Ahalelaecha, Gr. Hymneso se, I will praise thee. And Psalm.
119.171. My Lips shall utter Praise; Heb. Tehillah, Gr. Hymnon, Praise. And
Psalm. 148.14. He also exalts the Horn of his People, the Praise of all his
Saints; Heb. Tehillah, Gr. Hymnos, the Praise. And in all the aforesaid
Scriptures Tremellius and Junius in their Latin Translation render it Laus,
that is, Praise.

4. Our more ancient English Bibles bear a fuller Testimony to the proper
Signification of the word Hymnos in diverse other places, than the later modern
Bibles do. In Psalm. 40.3. Tehillah and Hymnon are rendered a Thanksgiving: See
the Bible printed by Thomas Raynolds 1549. and by Edward Whitchurch 1540, and
1541. and by Christopher Barker 1585. and his Deputies 1591. All these old
Bibles, except Tho. Reynold's, are to be seen in Sion-Colledg, London.
and in a Bible printed in 1535. And in Heb. 2.12. the word Hymnos. is
translated Praise, without the addition of the word sing, according to Psalm.
22.22. where Hymneso se is translated, I will praise thee. See Tho. Raynolds,
Ed. Whitchurch, Chris. Barker, and in his Deputies, and in the Old Bible
printed 1535. and in Acts 16.25. the word Hymnos is translated Laud, that is,
Praise: Paul and Silas prayed and lauded God, without the addition of the word
sing. See Tho. Raynolds, the Deputies of Chris. Barker, and in Ed. Whitchurch's
Bible, and in the Old Bible printed 1535. the same Text is translated Praise:
And in Mat. 26.30. and Mark 14.26. it is translated, And when they had said
Grace, that is, given Thanks (from the Latin word gratias Thanks) See Tho.
Raynolds, Edw. Whitchurch, and in the Bible printed in 1535. And in Mat. 26.30.
and Mark 14.26. it is translated, And when they had praised, they went out,
etc. See in Christoph. Barker's and in his Deputies Bibles. And by Tremellius
and Junius in their Latin Translation out of the Syriac Tongue, the two last
Scriptures are rendered Lauds, that is in English, Praises.

Seeing therefore that there is such clear and undeniable Evidence, that the
word Hymnos a Hymn signifies simply Praise, we have the less reason to marvel
wherefore the aforesaid learned Doctor Owen did not limit the word to singing
of Hymns, Heb. 2.12. For inasmuch as he allows of Singing in general terms,
omitting there to express his Mind in the manner of performing of it, he would
surely have asserted vocal melodious Singing from the word Hymneso, as the most
proper Exposition of the Text, if its proper Signification were confined to
Songs of Praise, and consequently had given a far different Exposition of those
words than what is clearly asserted by him: and therefore the Doctor by his
expounding of the Text so indefinitely of praising God, he does plainly allow
of the general Signification of the Word, and so denies its particular
limitation to Songs of Praise. Moreover, Augustine Marlorate in his Catholic
and Ecclesiastical Exposition of the holy Gospel after St. Matthew, gathered
out of all the singular and approved Divines, and translated out of Latin into
English by Thomas Tymme Minister, on Matthew. 26.30. says, It is uncertain with
what words they praised God here, and whether they sang this Praise, or spoke
it simply. The Greek word in this Place signifies that they gave the Praise
due unto God, but it does not thereupon follow that they did sing it.

So that the aforesaid Evidence clearly proves that the word Hymnos signifies
simply Praise, which though our late Modern English Bibles in Matthew. 26.30.
Mark 14.26. Acts 16.25. Heb. 2.12. do read it, sung an Hymn, and sing Praise,
yet there is ground to believe that their affectation to vocal singing together
of the metrical Psalms of David, through their mistake of the Mind of Christ
concerning Singing under the New Testament, have overswayed them more than the
natural signification and particular limitation of the word it self to Songs of
Praise. For what reason can be given for its different and particular
Signification in the New Testament, from its general Signification given by the
same Translators in the Old? And why should not the same words Hymneso se be in
Heb. 2.12. translated, I will praise thee, without the addition of the word
sing, as well as they are so translated in Psalm. 22.22? And wherefore should
our later Translators differ from those more ancient in the New Testament more
than in the Old? Surely it must be granted that the words sung and sing in
those four Scriptures, were an imprudent Addition to those sacred Texts. And
therefore there can be no foundation nor warrant from the word Hymnos for such
vocal melodious Singing at or after the Lord's Supper, seeing the word cannot
be any proof either that Christ did or did not sing at his Institution of that
Ordinance: and in that, as I have premised, God is otherwise to be praised than
by vocal Singing. Moreover, if there were, as there is no proof that Christ did
then sing with melodious Voice, yet that could be no warrant for such formal
vocal Singing together as is used in our day: For as we should not suppose but
that the Practice of Christ therein should agree with the Rule of Worship,
whereby the Gifts of the Holy Spirit were to be appointed, otherwise to be
exercised in his Church; so we should rather conclude, that because Christ did
sing (if it could be proved, as it cannot) who had the Spirit without measure,
and because the primitive Gospel-Churches had the special Gift of Singing, that
therefore we might also sing in the public Worship of God, or at the Supper,
after the same Order with a single Voice, if we had the sufficient Gift of the
holy Spirit for it. But to affirm, that because Christ did sing at that
Ordinance, if it were so (as it is not to be proved that he did) and because
that Singing was used in the primitive Church, therefore it is binding on us
now as a constant Ordinance, is to bind us to the constant use of that Gift of
the Holy Spirit we never had.

SECT. III.
I Come now to discourse of that which I find is made the greatest Plea for
such vocal Singing together; and that is, say they, It is commanded by Christ
in the New Testament, and therefore we must practice it in the constant Worship
of God. And that I may the better remove this grand Obstacle of the Truth, as
they make it, in not understanding the true Nature and Intentment of Christ's
Command concerning Singing, I shall premise two things.

1. That such Spiritual Singing as was used in the Primitive Apostolical
Church, was from a special Gift of the Holy Spirit. 2. That the Gifts of the
Holy Spirit were not given alike to every particular Member of the Church of
Christ for public Worship.
First, It is evident that such Spiritual Singing as was used in the Primitive
Apostolical Church was from a special Gift of the Holy Spirit. Gal. 5.22. 1 John 2.27. Isa. 61.3. Ephesians. 1.14. Romans 5.2.
For as the Grace of Joy is a Fruit of the Spirit; and as God had promised the
[Oil] ( viz. the Spirit) of Joy for Mourning, so the primitive Church had some
Earnests of it, and did rejoice in hope of the Glory of God; and through the
abundance of the Spirit wherewith she was baptized, her Ministers delivered the
Word of God in extraordinary ways and manners, viz. by Prophesy, Tongues, and
melodious Singing, which I shall here demonstrate, was also a special Gift of
the Holy Spirit; for after the Apostle had exhorted the Corinthians to covet
earnestly the best Gifts, and to desire Spiritual Gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. chap. 14
1, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and to seek, that they might excel to the edifying of the Church; and that he
that spoke in an unknown Tongue, should pray that he might interpret, for if
(says he) I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, but my Understanding
is unfruitful. He mentions Prayer and Singing, saying, What is it then? I will
pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: I will sing
with the Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also. Else when thou
shall bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of Thanks, seeing he understands not what
thou say? From whence I observe, that as the Saints of Corinth were moved by
the Apostle to covet after the best Gifts; so it is evident, that both the
Prayer and Singing here mentioned, were from the special and excellent Gifts of
the Holy Spirit; for as the strange Tongues, and the Interpretations of them,
which were then given to the Gospel Church, were from the extraordinary Gifts
of the Spirit, so this Prayer and Singing with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also, being with the Inspiration of strange Tongues, and from the
extraordinary Gift of Interpretations of them, delivered in a known Tongue for
the edifying of the Church, must needs be granted to be an extraordinary Gift
of Prayer and Singing: For though Prayer in some other places may be taken as a
more common Gift of Grace from the holy Spirit, and so might occasion some
scruple, if it were to be found joined with Singing without any adjunct, to
demonstrate Singing to be a Gift of an higher attainment than Prayer is; that
Singing also was a more common Gift than is here asserted: yet seeing that it
is no where in the New Testament so expressed and joined with Prayer, but with
a sufficient adjunct, to show that it is an higher Gift than ordinarily Prayer
is (as James 5.13. where Affliction exerts Prayer, but spiritual Mirth in a
sufficient fullness of Joy from the Holy Ghost, puts forth Singing) and that it
is here joined with a more than ordinary Gift of Prayer; there is no reason for
such a doubt, but to conclude that Singing is an extraordinary Gift of the holy
Spirit. Moreover, common Reason tells us so far as it is elevated, to discern
spiritual Things, that spiritual Singing is an excellent Gift of the Holy
Spirit from its different manner of delivering the Word of God; for as the
excellent Gifts of the Spirit that were for the ministering of the Word,
consisted in an extraordinary Inspiration of Light and Understanding, together
with a sufficient Power and Capacity to open and declare the wonderful Counsels
and Works of God; so they were sometimes farther evidenced to be such excellent
Gifts, in that the same sort of Worship that was performed by a more ordinary
gift and way of Delivery, viz. Prayer, giving Thanks, and Teaching, and
Admonishing, were delivered with Interpretations of Tongues, and some of them
with melodious Singing, which were both a Witness of and suitable to the
extraordinary Gifts and Inspirations of the holy Spirit, but not of the common
Gifts: Nor does the Blessing and Thanksgiving mentioned in the following
Verses, afford an Argument to make Singing a common Gift; for as the Dutch
Annotations on the word [Bless] allow that it is to be understood with respect
to this Gift ( viz. of Singing) of the holy Spirit, being given to make public
Thanksgiving in the Church; so to me it is plain, that this Singing, Blessing,
and Thanksgiving, are meant of but one and the same Gift, which the Apostle is
here speaking of under these several Names; the Nature of the two latter as
having relation to the Gift of Singing, as the immediate preceding, and
annexed subject Matter treated of, are Denotives of the nature of the Song
beforementioned. For though we do allow and maintain that Blessing and
Thanksgiving have relation to Prayer also, yet seeing that Singing is here last
mentioned, and that the Apostle speaks of giving Thanks, not so as any ways to
intimate to us, that it is to be understood of ordinary Thanksgiving mixed with
Prayer, but treating of the extraordinary Gifts of the holy Spirit, and of
Thanksgiving as such a Gift, saying, For thou verily give thanks; and, Amen,
at thy giving of Thanks: by which words, relating to the Gift of Singing, and
both of them, as appears in the Text, being accompanied with the extraordinary
Gift of an unknown Tongue or Tongues, See Samuel Clark's Annot.
must be taken to denote a Thanksgiving, or a Blessing of God, with the
extraordinary Gift of Melodious Singing.

2ly. In ver. 26. it is said, How is it then, Brethren, when ye come together,
every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a
Revelation, has an Interpretation: Let all things be done to edifying. All
had, or doubtless might have had, the Psalms of David to read; and therefore as
none can say, but that to have the Doctrine, and other Gifts of the holy
Spirit, were something more than to be able to read, or make a bare recital of
some part of the holy Scriptures: So there is the same reason to conclude, that
the having a Psalm, was something farther than to be able to read or sing them
out of a Book; and that as sometimes the Doctrine as well as the Tongue, the
Revelation and the Interpretation, were the special Gifts of the Spirit, so was
the Psalm also.

3ly. Singing, is a special Gift of the holy Spirit, because it is annexed to
the fillings of it as his Fruits and Effects. Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Be filled with the
Spirit; speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs;
which plainly shows it to be the Fruits of a more than ordinary Fullness and
Gift of the holy Spirit.

Secondly; That the Gifts of the holy Spirit were not given alike to every
Member of the Church of Christ for public Worship, appears from 1 Cor. 12.4,
6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 28, 29, 30. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the
same Spirit. And there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same God,
which works all in all. For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of
Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit: To another Faith
by the same Spirit: To another the Gifts of healing by the same Spirit: To
another the working of Miracles; to another Prophesy; to another decerning of
Spirits; to another diverse kinds of Tongues; to another Interpretations of
Tongues: But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally as he will, etc. and Romans 12.4, 6, 7. So that the Gifts of
the holy Spirit, are severally divided and distributed as God is graciously
pleased to bestow them for the benefit and edification of the Church; and
though the Gift of Singing is not expressly named, yet it is included in the
Word of Wisdom and Gift of Teaching, which are comprehensive of all manner of
Teaching, as well in Singing as otherwise.

Having proved that such spiritual Singing as was used in the Primitive
Apostolical Church was from a special Gift of the holy Spirit, and that the
Gifts of the Spirit were not alike distributed to the Members of the
Gospel Church for public Worship: From whence it follows, that every Member,
or the whole Church, as they have not the like spiritual Gifts, so they are not
capable of the like spiritual Singing; I now come to answer the said Objection,
and to open those Scriptures that are brought to prove, that Singing is
commanded by Christ in the New Testament, so as to bind us to the constant use
of it in the Gospel Church.

1st. Scripture that is brought to prove vocal Singing commanded for constant
Worship, is 1 Cor. 14.15, See more part 1. page 8.
26. I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also.
How is it then, Brethren, when ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm,
has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an Interpretation? Let
all things be done to edifying. 1st. In verse 15. there is no positive Command
but Paul's Example, which we should follow according to the measure of the Gift
of Christ which is not now attained by us for such vocal spiritual Singing.
2dly. Nor can verse 26. be taken for a positive Command to sing a Psalm, seeing
it is put by way of Question: If they had a Psalm, a Doctrine, etc. and that
what Gift or Gifts of the Spirit every one of the ministering Brethren had, the
Command was that they should put them forth for the edifying of the Church. Nor
can this Text be a positive Command for singing a Psalm in the constant Worship
of God, any more than it is a Command for the constant Use of the other
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit together mentioned with the Psalm: Neither is
there any color of Reason to think that the Psalm should be vocally sung by
all the Church together, any more than that the Doctrine, and the Revelation,
and other Gifts of the Holy Spirit, should be delivered or said vocally
together, or any of them, otherwise than according to the general Rule in the
following Verses.

2dly. Ephesians. 5.18, See more part 1. page 4, 5, etc.
19. From this Scripture I have showed before that there is no warrant for
vocal Singing; but that speaking to your selves may be properly taken for
inward speaking in the Heart, and have cited Mr. Pool, who renders it speaking
[in], which the word to, in this Text, as we read it, is there showed to
import. But if it were granted (as it is not) that vocal Singing was here
intended, yet this Exhortation is no such positive Command, as to make it
binding for the constant Worship of God, any farther than to such a Gift of the
Spirit; for this Exhortation respects our being filled with the Spirit, and
speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, are annexed as
his Fruits and Effects; and therefore the latter cannot be attained without the
former: so that we are under as strict a Command to be filled with the Spirit,
Col. 3.16.
for the enriching of us with the Word of Christ to dwell in us in all Wisdom,
as we are to sing, yea, to be filled with the Spirit, being primarily commanded
(as the efficient cause) to Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: then to be
filled with the Spirit, should be primarily sought after, and instead of running
into humane Forms of Worship, to obtain the Spirit, and the Increase of his
Graces in our Souls, we should seek more earnestly for the Spirit, to raise up
our Hearts above our ordinary frames to worship the Lord in the Beauties of
Holiness. Besides, this Exhortation given to endeavor after the fillings and
inrichings of the Word and Spirit, warrants none either disorderly to improve
his Gifts, or to counterfeit their Attainment of them.

3dly. Col. 3.16. See more part 1. page 7.
This Command, or rather this Exhortation, to teach and admonish one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, is given neither absolutely, to require
Impossibilities of us, nor yet to break any other Command, nor to interfere
with the order and manner of God's Worship, and therefore this Scripture
intends no more than to stir up the Church of Coloss to the Attainment of this
spiritual Gift of Singing, 1 Cor. 12.31. Chap. 14.1. Phil. 3.11.
as well as of other Gifts, exhorted to covet after: and as the Apostle gives
us an example by his own Endeavors to press after the Perfection of a
Resurrection-state: and we are also as strictly commanded to be perfect, Mat.
5.48.
as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect; to walk as Christ walked; 1 John
2.6. 1 Pet. 1.15.
and as he which has called us is holy, so to be holy in all manner of
Conversation; as we are to sing. And therefore the nature of this Command for
Singing, is no more absolute than the others are, for our pressing after the
Perfection of Grace, and of other special Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

And if this Command be so absolute and so universal, as to require the vocal
Singing together of all the Church in the constant Worship of God, because it
is written in general to the Saints at Ephesus and Coloss: Then surely those
positive Commands for Prayer, which are more universally and strongly injoined
on all Christians, may be said to require their vocal praying together; for we
are commanded to pray always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18.
and to pray without ceasing. Yet surely you will not say from these
Exhortations, because they are general to the Saints of Ephesus, and to the
Church of the Thessalonians, that the whole Church must vocally pray together,
or that Women should pray at all vocally in the Church; nor is there any reason
from the Text, or any other part of this Epistle, or from any other Word of
God, why those Exhortations for Singing, should include the Women and all the
Church, more than the others do for Prayer.

But some may object and say, that Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, are
for teaching and admonishing of the Church, and therefore they must continue as
part of the constant Worship of God to the end of the World. To which I reply;

1. That if you will have this Argument serviceable to prove the constant use
of Psalms and Hymns, it will be equally serviceable to prove the constant use
of spiritual Songs, for all three are alike set forth in the Text for teaching
and admonishing. And if you will grant that there is an absolute necessity of a
successive Gift of the Holy Spirit, by his immediate Dictates for Spiritual
Songs (which some do, though others do not) why is there not as much reason to
grant a necessity for the Gift of the Holy Spirit, for Psalms and Hymns? For to
be filled with the Spirit, is primarily set forth as the Fountain of all three,
which are his Fruits and Effects, and therefore there is no Reason to deny a
necessity of the special Gift of the Holy Spirit for any one or two of them,
more than for the others; and then if all three are from a special Gift of the
Holy Spirit, there is an Exclusion of humane precomposed stinted Forms. But
though I thus argue to clear the Truth from these Objections, yet I make no
difference between them, as respecting their composure by the special Gift of
the Spirit, so of their manner of Delivery in the Gospel Church, for all three
are alike, as has been proved before. To which I shall here add: See more part
1. page 35.
That seeing we have three or four several Names together of
Old-Testamentthings and Types, viz. Rev. 8.1, 3, 4. There was silence in Heaven
for half an hour, while the Angel offered up the Incense, with the Prayers of
the Saints, alluding to the custom of the Jews, Luke 1.8, 9, 10. who while the
Priest was offering Incense, they made their private Prayers before the Lord,
as appears in that it was by the whole Multitude in the outer or great Court of
the Temple, where the Priests did never use to minister their public Service
in God's Worship, but in the inner Court, called therefore the Court of the
Priests, for which cause it could not be public ministerial Prayer. See the
Dutch Annotations on these Scriptures, Luke 1.8, 9, 10. 1 Kings 6.36. 2 Chronicles.
4.9. Exodus 40.26, 33. and Dr. Franois Roberts in his Key of the Bible, on Rev.
8.1. and Mr. Joseph Mede in his Key of the Revelations, on Chap. 8.1. And the
aforesaid Dr. Roberts in Page 112, and 122. also shows, That Psalms, Hymns,
and Songs, do answer the three Hebrew and Greek Words in the Titles of the
Psalms; as 1st, (...) Mizmor, (...), a Psalm: Psalm. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. 2dly,
(...) Tehillah, (...), an Hymn: Psalm. 145. in which Psalm, though the LXXII.
have not (...), an Hymn, but (...), a Praise, which for sense are one and the
same, Hymn signifying Praise; yet the very word (...) is in Greek in the Titles
of Psalm 6, 54, 60, 66. and in the close of Psalm 71. according to the Greek,
but which is Ps. 72. according to the Hebrew, ver. 20. The Greek says, Ended
are Hymns of David Son of Jesse. 3dly, (...) Schir, (...), an Ode, -- a Song:
Psalm. 30, 45, 46, 65, 68, 108, and 120, to 135. which account of these three
Words, serves to confirm what was cited before out of Ainsworth, Part 1. page
33.
Censer, Incense, the Golden Altar, and the Smoke that pertained to and
accompanied the Peoples Prayers at the Temple, to express the Antitype, viz.
the Intercession of Jesus Christ accompanying Gospel-Prayers. We may as well
understand Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, not to intend the same that
were prescribed under the Law for Temple-Worship, but rather in such like
manner; that the word Psalmos, which comes from another Greek Word, which
signifies gently to beat or strike, and relates to Psalterium, a Psaltery, a
musical Instrument, like a Harp; to Psalmista, a Psalmist, or a Composer of
Songs to musical Instuments; and signifies a Psalm or Lessen to be sung to a
musical Instrument; does set forth the sweet Strikings or Touches of the Spirit
of Christ upon our Souls, which produces Melody in our Hearts, and was
sometimes vented by the Melody of the Voice: and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, the
matter of Praise, and Doctrine exerted or put forth by one and the same special
Gift of the holy Spirit, though expressed under so many Old Testament Names.
But if we go about to limit these three Words, Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, to their legal Use and Significations; we may by the same Rule confine
the others also, to intend a legal material Censer, Incense, Golden Altar, and
Smoke, and so bring in this legal Ceremony, that accompanied Prayer as well as
Old-Testament-Singing, into the Gospel Church. Moreover, to understand those
Words of the legal Use and Signification of David's Psalms, Hymns, and Songs,
affords a strong Argument for the lawful Use of prescript and stinted Forms of
Prayer, as Dr. Roberts observes; saying, that the Scripture-Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, are most of them Prayers to God, and Praises of God, and so
they are set Forms of such Prayers and Praise. And if it be warrantable to sing
prescribed and set-Forms of Prayer and Praise, it is equally lawful otherwise
to deliver such set-Forms of Prayers (and Praises Prayer-wise) and to say them
as well as sing them; and I cannot see it possible for those that are for
singing of David's Psalms, and yet deny the Lawfulness of prescribed and
precomposed Forms of Prayer, to answer the Doctor's Argument, but that such
forms of Prayers and Praises must stand or fall together.

2. These Words teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, are no more binding for the constant use of them, than
teaching and admonishing by the extraordinary Gifts of Prophecy, Doctrine and
Revelation, proves that such Gifts shall continue for the constant Worship of
God in the Gospel Church to the end of the World.

SECT. IV.
IT is objected, See more Part 1. page 36.
That it is a Moral Duty to praise God, and therefore we ought to sing his
Praise in his constant Worship.

Answer. This I have spoken somewhat unto already in the former Part; but
finding it is made the Refuge of some Persons, who cannot maintain their
Practice of formal Singing by Gospel-Institution, I shall take the more notice
of it here: For though they do assert their manner of Singing, both from the
Gospel-Institution, and the moral Law, (for if it be a moral Duty, it must be
so by the moral Law) yet as I have plainly proved before, that there is no
foundation in the New Testament for such a Practice; so their flying to the
moral Law seems virtually to confess the same; seeing that other Worship has
been maintained by them from Gospel-Institutions: and therefore they not being
able to produce (that which is not, viz.) such a Gospel-Institution, nor to
make their Practice to appear in any example of the Apostolical Churches found
in the New Testament, I shall now demonstrate how little relief they can have
from the Moral Law, either given by Moses, Romans 2.12 to 17.
or written in the Heart of Man by Nature, which is in substance the same.

1. As to the Moral Law of Moses, Exodus 20.3, 5. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 4.10.
though it requires Worship to be given to God alone, yet the Manner of it
under the Old Testament was not alike Moral, but Ceremonial, Temporary and
Changeable, according to the Revelation of the Mind and Will of God to his
Gospel Church; otherwise if the manner of Worship under the Law, were alike
moral and durable as the Command it self to worship God, we are then as firmly
bound to the observation of that which we call, and in truth is, Mosaical and
Ceremonial Worship, as of the moral Command to worship God: But that which was
Ceremonial, was no other than the peculiar manner of exerting or putting forth
of that, morally commanded in the Worship of God during the Time and
Dispensation of the Law.

2. It is an absurd and irrational thing for any to make the Moral Law, or
Light of Nature written in the Heart of Man by Nature, a Rule to exert the
Worship of God by; when nothing is more certain, than that the Law and Light of
Nature is through the Fall much obliterated and corrupted, that we know not
perfectly what it was in the state of Innocence, or that it did simply of it
self discover to our first Parents, before they sinned, the perfect manner how
they should worship God: For God by Institution allowed Adam to eat of every
Herb, and of the Fruit of every Tree of the Field yielding Seed; Genesis 2.16, 17,
and 3.1, 2, 3, 23.
and by Institution he commanded Adam in the state of Innocence, that he should
not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. And therefore seeing that
Adam had a supernatural Revelation of the Mind and Will of God therein for his
Obedience, and not unlikely for his resting on God's Sabbath, otherwise he
might have been dressing the Garden of Eden on that day, or tilling the Ground
from whence he was taken, it not being possible for him to know what time had
passed before he was created, but by a supernatural Revelation given to him. It
is rather rational to believe that he had other Institutions given to him for
the manner of exerting or putting forth his Worship unto God; otherwise we must
allow, that from his very instinct of Nature he knew the Mind of God, as it was
in God himself, though unrevealed to Adam by supernatural Revelation; which I
think will hardly be affirmed by any. And then if the pure Light of Adam's
Nature before the Fall was not sufficient of it self to discover the Will of
God for his perfect Obedience to it, why should any go about to make it a Rule
for the manner of exerting the Worship of God now when it is corrupted, and
when we are so opposite in our Natures to the Law of God? As the Apostle says,
Romans 7.14 Chap. 8.7
The Law is Spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under Sin. And that the natural
Man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God. Because the natural Mind is
Enmity against God; 1 Cor. 2.14
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans 8.8.
So then they that are in the Flesh, cannot please God. For though the visible
things that are seen, do declare the Eternal Power and Godhead, and the Law of
Nature binds us to worship God; yet as Moses said, Exodus 10.26.
We know not with what we must serve the Lord, until we come thither. So the
manner how, is not known by this Law, but by the Divine Revelation and
Institutions of God unto us, without which the Sons of Men are left to the
uncertain Dictates of their own Hearts; by which, as their Practice in all Ages
has witnessed, they have greatly varied from each other, and grofly erred from
the Mind and Will of God in his Worship. Yea, and if Christians do so much
differ in their Apprehensions concerning the Will of God recorded in his
written Word, what Union can be expected, if instead of cleaving to that as our
Rule of Worship, we should adhere to the Light of Nature, which cannot savingly
reveal Christ? Mat. 11.27 1 Cor. 2.11 to 15.
How should it then reveal unto us the manner of Christian Worship, which is
now discovered by Gospel-Institutions, through which alone our moral Duty is
exerted? Moreover, as Gospel-Institutions do not destroy nor repugn, but exert
and show forth the moral Commands; so our moral Obedience to them, Romans 8.3.
through our weakness in the Flesh, and want of Perfection in them, Gal. 5.6.
cannot be accepted of God, but as they are performed according to
Gospel-Qualifications. Heb. 11.6.
So that whatever may be said for the Morality of praying or praising God, yet
if it be not done in Gospel-manner, according to Gospel-Institutions, and in a
New-Testament-Spirit, it is no more accepted of God, than it was under the Law
to sanctify and purify themselves with eating of Swines Flesh, Isa. 66.17.
and the Abomination, etc. And as the moral Law of Moses, nor the Law written
in the Heart of Man by Nature, does not discover the way and manner of
Gospel Worship; so no essential part of such Worship is merely Moral without
Institution: for if it were, and on this bottom to be exercised in the
Gospel Church, then Moral Persons, as such, being only in a moral Spirit, and
destitute of the saving Grace of Christ, and Gospel-instituted-Qualifications
for Church Fellowship, must be admitted into the Community of the Church, and
to the vocal Exercise of the Worship of God therein: For such Worship and such
Persons must naturally go together, and cannot be divided. So that if this
moral Principle be followed in its natural Tendencies and Consequences, it will
lay Church Communion common to Believers and such visible Unbelievers, and
endanger the Overthrow and utter Destruction of the Gospel Church, and the pure
spiritual Worship of God therein; and lay a foundation for a moral
Church State, for mere natural Persons, in a mere moral and natural Spirit, to
exercise moral and natural Worship unto God.

SECT. V.
THat Women should not vocally sing in the Worship of God in his Church, Par.
1. page 21, 22.
is already showed in the former Part of this Treatise. But because I find that
the Truth meets with great difficulties to be received, though it comes with
Divine Authority, I shall say something farther here to this particular Head.

1 Cor. 14.34. Let your Women keep silence in the Churches: for it is not
permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the Law. This Scripture, though it has such a relation to the
following Verse, as to forbid the Women's asking of any Question in the Church,
during the Worship and Service of God therein; yet it intends more than barely
to restrain them from such a sort of speaking, because by the moral Law they
are put under subjection to the Men. Genesis 3.16.
And therefore seeing that the Moral Law, which Christ will have preserved, as
confirmed by him in his Gospel Church, takes away all Authority from the Woman,
then surely she must not teach nor admonish the Church of Christ in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs; for that is an exercise of Authority: The Apostle
makes it so, 1 Timothy 2.11. Let the Woman learn in silence with all subjection,
viz. Subjection in all things; and ver. 12. I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor
to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence: So that Christ makes it
a Usurpation of Authority for a Woman to teach or to speak, or any ways to
break her silence in the Church. And ver. 13. Adam was first formed, then Eve:
And Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was in the
transgression: And therefore she is not suffered, because of her weakness to
teach the Man, but to show her Subjection by keeping silence, and therefore she
must not vocally sing in the Church of God.

But some will object and say, That these Scriptures that forbid Women's
teaching and speaking in the Church, and that command them to learn in silence,
do intend only that they should not be the Mouth of the Church, as in Prayer
and Doctrine, to speak to God for them, or from God unto them; and that in
Singing, they do neither of these, nor teach, nor learn, and therefore Women's
vocal Singing in the Church is not forbidden.

Answer 1. This Objection and Exposition of these two Texts in favor of Women's
Singing, cannot possibly be the mind of Christ in them, because it is contrary
to the letter of those Texts: For the Apostle says indefinitely, that Women
must not speak nor teach in the Church, and therefore we cannot in reason make
an exception for their speaking or teaching, in Singing any more than in
Prayer, or other Gifts of the holy Spirit.

2. For any to assert that the Peoples vocal Singing together, is neither for
Learning, Teaching, nor Admonishing to one another, but that this is from the
Minister only by his Delivery of the Psalm or Hymn, etc. is at once to deny the
usefulness of their vocal Singing together, and thereby to condemn their
practice of it; for all things are for edifying of the Church, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 14.26, 28.
How is it then, Brethren, when ye come together, every one of you has a
Psalm, has a Doctrine? -- let all things be done to edifying; that is, for
building and instruction for our profit. And we may see in the Gift of Tongues,
that if there be no Interpreter, he must keep silence in the Church, and speak
to himself, and to God: and so in this case of Singing, if it be not for the
Edification of others to sing together, it must not be vocally in the Church.
And in the former part of this Chapter, it is mainly urged that the Gifts of
the Holy Spirit should be put forth to the edifying of the Church, Ver. 14, 15,
16, 17.
as ver. 12. Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual Gifts, seek
that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. 1st. To pray and sing in a
known Tongue; and 2ly. To deliver the Psalm, the Doctrine, and other Gifts of
the holy Spirit, by course or turns, Ver. 27, 31.
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted: And therefore if the
vocal Singing together of the People and of Women, be not for the edification
of the Church, it is unprofitable, and so is rejected by the Apostle. Nor can
such unedifying Singing that is neither for learning, teaching, nor admonishing
one another, be that Singing exhorted unto in Col. 3.16. Because that is for
teaching and admonishing, which is opposite to this Objection, and therefore by
the plain literal sense of the Text, it is overthrown. And if you should say,
that such vocal Singing together, is for teaching and admonishing to one
another; then where are the Learners, if all be Teachers? and how do the Women
learn in silence, when all do vocally sing? for it is impossible to reconcile
such Contradictions of speech, as Women's speaking, teaching, and admonishing
one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, vocally altogether, to
their not speaking nor teaching, but keeping silence, and learning in silence
in the Church. Neither is there any reason to make the whole Church a Mouth
(which is compared to a Body having many Members) as some would have it from
Romans 15.6. That ye may with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God: for this cannot
be meant of every Member, or of the whole Church of Rome vocally together, but
of their being of one accord in Spirit, and by one Mouth, ( viz. of their
Minister) to glorify God the Father, Par. 1. page 31.
like as in Acts 4.24. which is fully opened before.

Object. There has been Women Prophetesses who have prophesied in the Church,
and it is said that their Sons and their Daughters shall prophesy, and
accordingly we have mention made of Women's praying and prophesying; and
wherefore may they not vocally sing as well as pray and prophesy?

Answ. First, It is doubtless lawful, and the duty of Women to improve the
several Graces of the holy Spirit, and that if their Hearts are raised by such
a Gift of the Spirit in the joy of the holy Ghost, they may sing as well as
pray and prophesy; but none of these must be done by them in the assembly of
the Church, for part of the instituted vocal Worship of God therein: For I see
no ground to believe that any of those Women Prophetesses sent of God, and
mentioned under the Old Testament, did ever deliver their Prophecies to the
People in a Church-ministerial way and order; but as they were inspired by the
holy Ghost, and as occasion offered, so they delivered the Word of God; 2 Chronicles. 34.22.
as the Prophetess Huld^^ did to Hilkiah, and other Messengers which Josiah the
King sent unto her. And as Anna did, who though she delivered her Prophecy to
the People in the Temple, yet it was not as part of the instituted, constant,
legal Temple-Worship, for that was appropriated only to the Priests and
Levites; but she accidentally coming in at the same instant while Simeon was
testifying of Christ, she also spoke of him unto all them that waited for
Redemption in Jerusalem. Luke 2.27, 28.


2. Though there is mention made of Women's praying and prophesying in 1 Cor.
11.5. yet this cannot be meant of Prayer and Prophesy in the public Worship
and Service of God in the Gospel Church, for that is not lawful, as has been
showed; for though they have the benefit, and may partake, and put themselves
under all the Ordinances and Privileges (excepting those that relate to
Government) in the Church; yet Women must not administer any public vocal
Worship therein, and therefore it is spoken of more private Prayer and Prophesy
out of the Church in their Families or otherwise, as they were spirited, and
occasion presented, as Aquila and Priscilla expounded the Way of God more
perfectly to Apollos, Acts 18.26. or as Elizabeth by the holy Ghost blessed
Mary, or as Philip's four Daughters who did prophesy as it is most probable in
their Father's House, Acts 21.8.
or as those Prophetesses before cited under the Old Testament. And therefore
if Women's praying and prophesying, expressly mentioned in the Scriptures, cannot
be understood of their vocal exercise in the constant Worship of God instituted
in his Church; then surely there can be no reason given for their vocal Singing
in the constant Service of God, when there is no such mention made of it as
there is of their praying and prophesying in the New Testament.

SECT. VI.
AS to those prophetical places in the Psalms, Psalm. 96.1, 2. and 100.1, 2.
etc. of all the Earth's Singing unto the Lord, it is not worth my labor to
answer unto them in particular, seeing there is so much in the former part of
this Treatise to reconcile them to the Truth in hand; and therefore I shall
only say, That inasmuch as the Apostles sound went into all the Earth, Romans
10.18
and their Words unto the Ends of the World, viz. of the known World, and that
there was then the Spiritual Gift of vocal Singing; those Scriptures may be
applied to that primitive Gospel-time, but their more complete fulfilling,
shall be in the great Sabbath, which I believe will be the seventh 1000 years
of the World, which is that Rest that remains to the People of God, Heb. 4.9.
Isa. 52.9. Psalm. 96, and 97, and 98.
so much prophesied of throughout the Scriptures, when the whole Earth shall be
at rest and quiet, and shall break forth into Singing.

SECT. VII.
IF it be lawful to premeditate on the matter of Prayer, we may also as well
premeditate on the matter of Singing; and if such premeditated matter of Prayer
and Singing, may be delivered in the Worship of God, and limited to those
premeditated Words, wherefore is it not lawful to use prescribed Forms?

Answ. First, This Argument takes that for granted, which is no wise to be
granted, viz. that vocal Prayers: and consequently Singing, may be limited to
premeditated Words. True, it is lawful to premeditate on the matter of Prayer,
for if we deny this, we cannot go to God in that Duty, with a sense of our
wants upon our Hearts, and that the same wants which we are sensible of before
we pray, may and ought to be spread at the Throne of Grace in Prayer; but yet
we are not to limit our selves in Prayer to any premeditated matter nor words
before Prayer. For though our wants, or the matter of Prayer, be thought on
before Prayer, yea, and it may be sent up to Heaven by inward Prayer, before we
come to our vocal Duty; as we should always strive to maintain the Workings of
Grace in our Hearts, either in Prayer or Praises to God, or otherwise, for the
improving of our selves in the Knowledge of spiritual things, yet we should not
form that premeditated matter, to tie our selves in those very words, to
express our Minds no God in the Duty of vocal Prayer: for tho such premeditated
words may express our present Requests as fitly as any others; yet to limit our
selves to them, is a quenching of the holy Spirit, in that our Hearts are
engaged and limited to the matter of those words only (otherwise our Hearts are
either idle or differing from our Lips, which is Confusion) whereby we are
barred from any farther Inlargings on the same or other new matter, that may be
presented to us by the various Workings and Leadings of the Spirit of Christ in
us, while we are praying; and therefore as we experience and own such a thing
as the various Workings and Leadings of the holy Spirit sometimes in Prayer, we
must then deny the use of limited Forms of Words to be lawful; for in Prayer we
are sometimes broken in Spirit, under a sense of our Sins, and have our Hearts
chiefly engaged in humble Supplications for the Pardon of them; and at other
times our Faith is most active to lay hold on the precious Promises, and to
plead with God; and when the Spirit raises our Souls in a sense of the Mercies
and Grace of God to us in Christ Jesus, and sheddeth the Love of God abroad in
our Hearts; then our Mourning is turned into Thansgivings and Praises by the
Spirit. Now such various Workings as these, might not all be on the Heart in
Premeditations, Romans 9.1, 2. Chap. 10.1. and Chap. 5.2, 3. Ephesians. 1.15, 16, 17,
18. Chap. 3.14, 16. Phil. 1.3, 4.
as they may pass on the Soul in one single Duty of Prayer, as may be collected
from these Scriptures. From whence we may see that the holy Apostle in his
constant Prayers for those Churches, had the mixture of Sorrow, and of the
Grace of Joy and Thanksgiving to God.

But some may farther say, That the Spirit of Christ can variously affect our
Hearts, and direct us to premeditate such a Form of Prayer, that may suit the
different Actings of his Graces in us in Prayer; and this reconciles the use of
a stinted premeditated Form, with the various Workings of the holy Spirit in
Prayer.

My Answer is, That the Spirit of Christ can predirect our Meditations in those
various things that he himself may help to engage our Hearts in, in vocal
Prayer, according to the same stinted Words as were premeditated in our Hearts
before. But as we cannot find any warrantable Footsteps thereof in the New
Testament; and as this is not the known way of the Spirit in Gospel Worship, so
to assert that the Spirit of Christ does predirect and limit the Form of
Prayer, so as to suit his various Actings in us while we are praying, does
create these following Consequences. 1. That no Improvement can be made of
other matter in Prayer, Psalm. 78.41.
and that no other things can be expected from God in Prayer, than what our
Thoughts were fixed upon before Prayer, which is a limiting and tempting of the
Holy One of Israel, not to meet with his People as he has promised, those who
remember him in his ways; Isa. 64.5. Chap. 65.24. Dan. 9.20, 21. Acts 10.30.
Luke 3.21. Acts 11.6.
and as the Lord by the Prophet says, While they are yet speaking, I will
hear; and as Daniel and Cornelius while they were praying, had a Message from
God in answer to their Prayers; and also Jesus Praying, the Heaven was opened,
and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily Shape like a Dove upon him. Which
Examples do demonstrate that God was wont of old, to meet with his People in
the Duty of Prayer; and it is the daily Experience of many Christians, James
4.8.
that while they are drawing nigh to God in the Duty of Prayer, God is drawing
nigh to their Souls, and giving them many Tokens and fresh Assurances of his
Love and Favor to them. 2. It is a Temptation to us to neglect Prayer, unless
we find the matter preformed in us, fit for vocal Prayer; for if the Spirit
composes the matter in our Premeditations for us to be stinted to in our verbal
Prayers, then we must wait for those Workings of the Holy Spirit in us, before
we can go to Prayer; or else we must approve of our going to Prayer, without a
premeditated stinted Form, and to rely on the gracious Income and Guidance of
the holy Spirit, for the well-performance of it; as the Apostle says, Romans
8.26.
The Spirit also helps our Infirmities; for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought (that is, we have not the full Fore-knowledg of what we should
pray for, viz. of the matter of our Prayer) but the Spirit it self makes
Intercession for us ( viz. in Prayer) with Groanings which cannot be uttered.
So that the Spirit it self does help our Infirmities, and supply our
fore-Ignorance of the matter of Prayer, which we may not have a full and
sufficient knowledge of, but by the help of the holy Spirit in Prayer; and
therefore Prayer must not be limited to premeditated Forms. 3. This seems to
reflect on the Spirit's sufficient Power to form an extemporary Prayer, as
though he were not able to furnish the Soul with sufficient matter and words to
express it by, immediately from his Dictates, but that he must first have time
to precompose the matter of Prayer, and afterward limit himself to it, lest
his immediate Help and Guidance of us in Prayer, should not be so good a
Composure for our Acceptance with God through Jesus Christ, as his premeditated
stinted Form. And therefore seeing that we are not to tie our selves in Prayer
to premeditated Forms, this Argument cannot draw in a prescribed Form of
Prayer, nor Singing, to be allowed in Gospel Worship.

SECT. VIII.
Obj. THE singing of humane precomposed stinted Forms of Psalms, and Hymns, and
Songs in the Church, are spiritual Worship, if their Matter be agreeable to the
Word of God, and if they are sung with Grace in our Hearts.

Answer. First, Par. 1. page 15, 16, etc. and page 43.
That such Forms are not spiritual Worship, is proved in my former Discourse;
and appears from the proof I have made herein, that the primitive
Gospel-Singing was from the special Gift of the holy Spirit, and also from the
foregoing Section: for if such premeditated or prescribed Forms are not lawful,
we cannot expect that the Spirit should own them with his actual Presence in
his Graces, to make them spiritual Worship: Unto which preceding Evidence I
refer the Reader: and shall farther add, in answer to the latter part of this
Objection, That it is not the use of precomposed Forms of spiritual Words, or
matter so called, because they are scriptural, or agreeing to the sense of the
holy Scriptures, which were given by the Spirit, that are Spiritual Worship;
because a Soul that uses such forms of Worship, may have Grace in his Heart.
For true Spiritual Worship does not barely consist of spiritual Words, and some
Grace, unless they be spiritual Words from Grace. For if a Soul should be
praying or singing to God with spiritual Words, and with the habit of Grace in
his Heart, and is not in some exercise of it together with these words, will
you say that this is spiritual Worship, when it is only verbal, and the Graces
of the Spirit of Christ, in the Heart of the Person, is in no degree active
with them? no surely.

2. Though we are exhorted to sing with Grace in our Hearts, Col. 3.16.
yet it is not enough barely to sing with Grace, but with the Grace of Melody
(see the other Text, Ephesians. 5.19.) that is, so to be filled with the Spirit, as
that by his gracious influencing Power, not only the Matter is formed from the
Word, and according to the Word of God; but that the Grace of Joy is raised up
in our Souls to that height of Melody, as wants to be vented forth by the
Tongue. For Singing is called a breaking forth; Jam. 5.13. Isa. 52.9. Chap.
65.14
and it proceeds from the Joy of Heart, and Mirth of Spirit. And if any should
farther say, that there is as much reason to conclude, that no Prayer also is
spiritual Prayer, if there be not a powerful Influence of the holy Spirit to
form it in our Hearts: I shall thus answer; That the more or less our Prayers
are formed and produced by the Influencings of the holy Spirit in us, the more
or less our Prayers are spiritual Prayers. And as we cannot deny, but that the
least exercise of true Grace in our Hearts in Prayer, gives essence or being to
inward spiritual Prayer; so the least exercise of gracious melodious Joy gives
essence to inward spiritual Singing. And as we ought not vocally to pray in the
public Worship of God in the Church, without a sufficient Gift of the Spirit;
so also we ought not vocally to sing in the Church, unless it be by a
sufficient Gift of the Holy Spirit. And seeing we have not such a Gift, we are
not capable of vocal spiritual Singing. But as for Prayer, it is believed, and
it is apparently manifest, that there are many Christians that are in the
exercise of the Grace of Prayer for many years, that do not attain to the full
assurance of the Love of God, in his eternal Purpose of their Salvation; much
less so as to have the melodious Joy of the Spirit filling their Hearts with
the Comfort of it. Moreover, Prayer is a lower Attainment, and therefore there
is not the same necessity for an extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to qualify us
for the exercise of it in the public Worship of God, as there is for Singing.
And as there is reason to believe, that suitable to the vocal melodious
Singing, and other excellent Gifts of the holy Spirit, that were in the
Primitive Church, there were also extraordinary Gifts of Prayer and
Supplications, so as we have now only attained to the ordinary Gift of Prayer
and Prophecy, Col. 3.9, 12 Ephesians. 1.16 Phil. 4.6. Col. 4.2.
we have suitable to them the ordinary way of praising and thanking God, which
we find were ordinarily mixed with Prayer. And therefore with respect to the
Essence of spiritual Singing, yea, and of vocal Praises Prayer-wise, we are in
a suitable degree sometimes in the true exercise of it, as we are of other
Gifts of the Holy Spirit: And as these increase in the Church of Christ in
their proper times, so may that of Singing also from the Essence of Melody in
the Heart, and of vocal Praises Prayer-wise, till we come to the primitive
pattern and perfection of Divine Worship, going from strength to strength, till
every one appears before the Lord in the heavenly Zion. Psalm. 84.7.
But while we are in this Wilderness-state, if we worship God sincerely
according to that measure of Grace which we have received, it is accepted of
him according to that a Man has, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that he has not: And it is more pleasing to God to hear
our Heart-Melody without or with an ordinary Voice, than to hear a melodious
Voice without a suitable melodious spiritual Heart, somewhat like (tho not in
personal Qualifications) the Publican's Prayer, that was rather heard, Luke
18.11 to 15.
than the Pharise's self-righteous thanking God. And for any to say, that they
have the inward Melody in the use of outward melodious Forms: we may rather
conclude, that it is carnal and sensual, instead of spiritual; and from the
sense and workings of Nature, rather than from the gracious actings of the holy
Spirit of Christ. I will not say but that God may somewhat own a sincere Soul,
that has no greater Light in his way of Worship. But this I dare affirm, that
the more we come up to his perfect Rule, the greater our Peace and Comfort
shall be, and that whatever Comfort a Soul may meet with in any part of Divine
Worship, coming short, or going beyond the Rule of Christ, it is no Seal of
God's Acceptance of it as so performed, but it is rather a Token of his
unexpressible condescending Love, in taking notice of such a Soul that
sincerely loves his ways; though perhaps the Mist of Antichrist is not
perfectly cleared from off his Eyes. But though I confess a Possibility of a
sincere Soul meeting with something of God's Presence in such an irregular way
of Worship, and dare not presume to limit the free Grace of God; yet there is
little reason to expect any comforting Presence of God in such a way, for the
holy Scriptures run contrary to it. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and
works Righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: not in our ways,
but in God's ways we may expect to meet with his blessed Presence. And
therefore as such humane prestinted Form are opposite to the prescribed Ways of
God and are a bar to the free exercise of the Graces of the Holy Spirit in us,
there is reason to fear, that the inward Joy (tho of a sincere Christian) in
the use of outward melodious Forms, is not from the Fountain of the Holy
Spirit. And herein I humbly conceive the Mistake lies, that such a Soul being
somewhat affected with spiritual things, and the vocal Melody pleasing the
sensual Appetite, and raising a natural Joy in the Heart; then because there is
something spiritual, it is all counted spiritual, not considering that as we
have two Natures, so the workings of each of them may meet together; as in
James and John, who had doubtless a true spiritual Zeal for Christ, which their
natural Passion fell in with to a sinful Revenge against those Samaritans that
slighted their Lord and Master: But Christ rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of.

And now, Christian Reader, I renew my Request unto you in the close of my
former Part: And if my labor herein has been any ways helpful to you for your
establishment in the Truth, render to God the Father of Lights, and giver of
every good Gift, the Glory and Praise, to whom alone it is due. Amen.

FINIS.

