MUSGRAVE Muzled: OR THE TRADUCER Gagged Being a Just VINDICATION Of the Right
Honorable Sr. ARTHUR HASLERIGG, And all other Persons herein Concerned.

From the Scandalous Imputations, and Forged Articles Exhibited by * JOHN
MVSGRAVE.

* -- His niger est, bunc tu Roman caveto. Newcastle, Printed by S. B. 1650.

MUSGRAVE Muzled: OR THE TRADUCER Gagged, etc.
THe Devil, who still repines at the Justice of God in his Damnation, does
always meditate revenge against the Righteous Power which condemned him. But
because he is not able to oppose God in himself, he assaults him in his
Creatures, and carries on his Theomacky with attempts upon weak mortality: And
first, he endeavors to make us (like himself) sons of perdition, and so
deprive us of that felicity which he has forfeited; but where he cannot rule he
tyranniseth; whom he cannot pervert, he persecutes; like a savage enemy, who
being denied the possession of a City, falls on with fire and sword to ruin
it. Thus that wicked spirit share; his malice upon the whole race of humanity,
seduceth us to be wicked, as he did Adam; or afflicts us for being good as he
did Job: undermines our souls, or disturbs the comfort of our lives, and seeks
to rob us of our temporal or eternal happiness.

Now the chiefest adjuncts and properties of the Devil, are his malice and
falsehood, which two, furnish him with Artillery enough to be what he is
denominated, Diabolus, an Accuser. From this grand Accuser (who is both the
Tempter and Informer, betrays us to bad actions, and belyes our good) do
proceed all those Spirits of obloquy, and hatred: who, while they traduce other
men's integrity, endeavor to make them, and wish they were, as criminous as
they pretend to prove them; and so, in a manner, contribute to the advancement
of sin, study nothing but mischief and division, and glory in the destruction
of oppressed innocence; whereby they evidently appear the Solliciters of Hell,
to be tutourd by the Devil, and to receive Instructions from that spirit of
Malignity and error.

But, Quos perdere vult Jupiter, dementat. And sure some Spirit of Delusion has
infatuated this inconsiderate wretch to assume these desperate Resolutions, and
to discharge aloft this pernicious darts, which may justly descend with
deserved Vengeance upon his own head; to calumniate and provoke so much
eminence and worth, and like besotted Haman, prepare the Instrument of his own
Execution, whilst the luster of that luminary which he covets to obscure,
grows more conspicuous by this eclipse and all the scandalous imputations make
up a veil, not to cloud, but cover; not to deface, but defend him from the
casual spots and accidental blemishes, which otherwise might have sollied the
purity of his high actions, and great employments: For false Articles, are good
memento's to prevent true ones: and this occurrence will be a seasonable
advisce to this Honorable Personage to beware of real miscarriages, since
forged and pretended ones give such loud Alarms.

That Innocence (how singular and superlative soever) should be depraved, is a
contingency inevitable in this World, which is composed of good and bad. In
Shime^'s mouth, David is a man of Belial. Joseph was accused of Incontinency,
merely because he would not consent to be dishonest, and suffered for that
impiety which he refused to commit. No wonder then to hear the clamours of
this Rabshekah, who only vomits out his own shame, and proves himself the
retainer to that filth, which he has with so much impious sedulity raked
together and delights to wallow in. For all the guilt proceeds from his
corrupted mouth, and can be traced no further then his own scandalous
Pamphlet, which like a soul overchar'd piece, will recoyle in his own face,
and bestow upon him the reward of Cain, due to all such, who repine that others
service should be more acceptable then their own, and pursue meritorious
actions with enmity and revenge.

P. Scipio Aff^^eanus, that admirable Roman, who in a plunge of Public
calamity (when all their Forces in Spain were defeated. Hannibal ad Portas and
all Rome was but one coward) durst only undertake the Spanish expedition went
on Victoriously conquered all Spain, subdued Carthage, and utterly vanquished
Hannibal, was after all this cited before the Senate, and a Public charge
exhibited against him by the Pet^lis the same day, whereon formerly he had
defeated Hannibal and the Carthagenians. But he instead of contesting with his
litigious Adversaries, bad them all go give thanks for the happiness of that
day, and pray for more such as he had been, and so immediately repayring to his
anniversary devotions, drew all the people after him, and appeared more
glorious that day, then when he rode in Triumph through the City.

The consideration of this pregnant instance may give some satisfaction to the
World, and this worthy Person upon this occasion and be an example how to treat
all such Impudent incendiaries, and their seditious Articles: which are best
answered with contempt and deserve no other confutation, then to be neglected:
as was the prudent deportment of this present Lord General Cromwell, when he
was bayted by a keener whelp of this accusative Litter, and bespatterd with the
contumelies of that Arch-boutefeu, who might employ his own manufacture upon
himself and creatures, and spend all his Soap to wash his own and their
corrupted mouths.

There are some Pictures which at several distances represent different
Forms. These Articles are such a piece of Imposture: For at the first cursory
superficial view, they delineate only John Musgrave, but after a serious
perusal, and a strict examination of particulars, they evidently betray a
Lilburne. Our eyes or spectacles, discern only a smaller Meteor, but by the
benefit of a telescope, we may behold a prodigious Comment, ominous to the
peace of this Commonwealth. These conjectures may be deduced from several
particulars in the Articles: For much of the injustice which is imputed to Sir
Arthur Haselrigge, has principal relation to Mr. George Lilburne, and most of
those persons which are here excepted against, were great sufferers under Mr.
Liburnes tyranny, and were Agents and Witnesses in the prosecution of several
charges against him, as Mr. Wrey, Mr. Lampton, Mr. Colston, etc. as will
appear hereafter. Thus it is very probable, that Mr. Lilburne is the retird
contriver, and close dictator and John Musgrave only the trunk he speaks
through, a vizard, stalking horse, and mercenary Soliciter: In brief, George
Lilburnes hackney, and John Lilburnes Ape.

And now it is time to enter the Lists with this Hydra this monster of seventeen
heads, and without returning any thing to his opprobrious scurrilities (which
are but false fires, and give no report) bid defiance to his Articles, which
though they make a noise, and smoke are charged with Powder only, can do no
execution and are indeed but scandalls in array, and reproaches marshalled into
rank and file.

The Articles.
1. THat Sir Arthur Haslerigge contrary to his Engagement to the Council of
State, and Council of States Declarations upon the Petitioners exceptions,
procured lately such in the County of Cumberland, to be Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners for Sequestrations, Commissioners for the Ministry, and
Commissioners for the Militia there, as were known Delinquents, and such as are
disaffected to the present Government, and complying with the Scottish
Interest, as by the charge against them hereunto annexed, and another charge
against them, formerly exhibited to the Council of Sat may appear.

That Sir Arthur upon the clamours of a busy impertinent, should give
Engagement of his fidelity to the Council of State, does show how tender he is
of the satisfaction of that great Court, as to prefer their security before his
own honor; and after a continued series of so many years active, cordial,
important service, to allow his integrity to be questioned, and renew his
security for his future industry.

As for Delinquent Commissioners, if any such there be in Cumberland (for in
the three other Counties he objects none) it is probable Sir Arthur understands
them better then the Accuser; has had experience of their fidelity and knows
the Commonwealth may without prejudice commit Public Employments to their
trust: and how discreet and happy he has bin in his election is evidenced by
their faithful service to the Army in Scotland, and by their care and
expedition in raising and sending considerable and mature supplies from these
four Northern Counties. Thus they were worthy of his choice before he
admitted them, or were made so by his trusting them; For we may obleige some to
be faithful and by confiding in them, make many honest; and it is more glorious
to convert a Delinquent, then to punish him. Again, if there be any
Delinquents made use of it is to be presumed they are in places of no great
concernment, or joined in Commission with others of known integrity and
judgment, who would easily discover, and over power their designs should they
attempt to be perfidious; and perhaps that County has been so generally
overrun with the stream of Malignancy, that there were few left untainted;
and consequently some Delinquents were admitted, to prevent strangers, (and
that crime which is anon objected) unless such as Musgrave should have been
prefern'd who by his perverseness in this private condition, discovers how
unruly he would be were he backed with authority and credit; and is indeed
fitter to set his Clients together by the ears, then manage the peace of a
Commonwealth.

For the giblets and garbage of his train the Articles exhibited against the
Commissioners in Cumberland. because they include nothing but what is repeated
here, and does serve him for all Persons whom he is pleased to bring upon the
stage, they will be sufficiently refuted in the Vindication of some Persons
more directly concerned in these Articles. For in defeating this main body of
his Army, those paddees will easily be routed; when downright blows be well
awarded, collateral ones can break no pates: and if this triple Goliath of
seventeen cubits can be conquered, the rest oath Philistines, without further
dispute, will quit the field.

2. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge being the chief, and leading
Commissioners for the Ministry at Newcastle, approved of such Ministers in
Cumberland at Newcastle as refused the Engagement, were so andalous and
Delinquents; and such Ministers as were well-affected, without any charge,
removed from their Ministry, and put them out of their places, whereby be
descovers his dis-affection to the present Government, by upholding and
countenancing the Malignant party in Authority and keeping under the
Parliaments friends, all which this Petitioner is able to prove and further,
refers himself to the Copies of Letters hereunto annexed, the Originals being
in the Petioners hands.

To this we answer, that Sir Arthur is often compelled to be absent from that
Committee, being diverted by many great employments, and especially by his
attendance upon the reliese of the Army in Scotland and taking order for all
manner of Provision raising new I evies and sending supplies of Horse and Foot;
whose diligence and expedition in every particular (sometimes out laboring
common Porters, and other whiles contriving beyond the most retired
contemplations) is a sufficient discovery how disaffected he is to the present
government, which he so studies to preserve and advance.

If that Committee in Sir Arthurs absence have transgressed, must their
miscarriages be laid upon Sir Arthur? He might as well charge the Council of
State with Sir Arthurs pretended Crimes, and make them guilty of these
Articles. But it is a question whether any injustice was done or not, for he
only says he can prove them, but does not. To which we answer, we can
disprove them, but will not. The Coppies of Letters which he refers us to,
whose Originals are in his own hands, are perhaps (both Copies and Originalls)
forgeries of his own, or by his infligation; or else the peevish motions of
some refractory Spirits, who (like the ^scalites) murmur in all conditions, and
would loathe their food-should they be crammed with Manna; Unthankful men! who
are never sull, or quickly surfeit, and are guilty of satiety or
unsatiablenesse.

3. That Sir Arthur Haslerigge undertook to the Council of State to examine the
Articles exhibited by the Petitioner to the Council of State, against M.
Charles Howard, high Sheriff of Cumberland, but veglected the same, and came
privately into the Country to Naward. and there feasted with the said Sheriff,
who is a dangerous, and most notorious Delinquent, as appears by the charge
exhibited against him by the Petitioner to the Council of State.

The Accuser here exclaims against Sir Arthur for neglecting to be his
Solliciter, in examining some Articles as hibited against the High Sheriff of
Cumberland; whose examination he confesses the Council of State (to be quit of
him) had referred to Sir Arthur, and consequently, judged them unworthy their
considerations. And Sir Arthur too upon examination, found them scandalous,
Musgrave's, and such as these. This is all, save only that Sir Arthur came and
supped at Naward; as if it were petty Treason for a Gentleman to visit the high
Sheriff of a County, chosen, and still approved by the Council of State; yet
he prosecutes the fact with as much vehemence, as if they had sat down to
Atreus Feast, and risen from the Table Anthropophagists.

4. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge suffers Captain Howards Troop to lie
upon free Quarter upon the Country, for these four Months last past, and does
countenance one Dobson Captain Howards Lieutenant, who obeated the Troop of
1350 pound. And when complaint was made to Sir Arthur Haslerigge, he never
punished how for the same.

The Free Quarter is mistaken for quartering upon trust. For Captain Howards
Soldiers were some Months without their Pay, which was assigned them in
Yorkeshore, and somewhat long ere it came to them, but now it is distributed,
and their Quarters (if any did go oath score) are since discharged.

It Is possible Dobson did endeavor to cousen the Soldiers of some of their
pay, and Sir Arthur was certified as much, who thereupon sent for Dobson and
confined him, till he had given 500 pound bond, with other Bail, to answer it
before a Council of War, which he did, and upon the examination it appeared
that not above thirty pound of the Soldiers money remained in his hands; asumme
far short of 1350 pound. But I am afraid greater matters then these would be
discovered, should we peruse the story of Lilburne, and examine the Records of
Tinmouth Castle.

5. That the said Sir Arthur Hasletigge gave Commission to Edward Brigs, to be
Lieutenant Colonel for Carlisle Garrison, and made him a Commissioner for the
Militia and Ministry in Westmerland, a man known disaffected to the present
Government, and lately cashiered for his drunkenness and other miscarriages by
the now Lord General Cromwell. That the said Sir Arthur gave Commissions to
Thomas Craystour, Cuthbert Studholme, Captain Brown, and others, to be Captains
and Lieutenants in Carlisle Garrison, men known to be disaffected to the present
Government, profess Enemies to honest men, most of them having now laid down
their Commissions, when they were to march into Scotland. And the said Sir
Arthur does countenance none in Cumberland, but such as are professed Enemies to
the honest party. and are for the Scottish Interest.

John Musgrave (it seems) upon some occasion is not well-affected to Lieutenant
Coll Brigs, and therefore would have us think, that Lieutenant Coll. Brigs is
disaffected to the State; when the antecendent, in any rational man's opinion,
does infer the contrary. Casheerd he might be upon some misinformation and
both the General, and he abused. But however. suppose the Accuser can speak
truth, Sir Arthur cannot warrant every ones fidelity, knows not the hearts of
men, and what it is possible they may be afterward, as this Accuser pretends to
do, who peremptorily be stowes his charracter upon all he meers, Those
Gentlemen who laid down their Commissions when they were to March into
Scotland; did it, not out of any dis-affection to the present Government, but
upon some natural Imperfection, and infirmity of Body, unable to endure those
many extremities in Scotland, which the strongest Complexions and best tempered
men had much ado to overcome; and it was an act of singular affection to the
Commonwealth in the late Lord General, to lay down his Commission, upon such
considerations, whose heart (as theirs too, no doubt) went into Scotland,
though their bodies did not, which would have been but cumbersome, not
advantageous to the service.

6. That by the said Sor Arthur Haslerigg's intrusting the Authorities, and
Militia in the hands of Delinquents, and men for the Scottish Interest, the
well-affected in Cumberland and Bishopriek lie under greater oppressions, then
formerly under King and Prelates. And the said Sir Arthur is a protector of
Papists and Delinquents, forbidding the Subsequestrators, and Sollicitours for
Sequestration in Bishopric to Sequester Papists, Ordered to be Sequestered of
which the Papists and Delinquents do much boast, and honest men thereby are
much cast down.

Here the Accuser railes at eleven-score, and inveighs that by Delinquent's
(pretended) authorities, the well-affected in Cumberland, (that is he and his
whining crew) and Bishopric (George and Richard Lilburns) suffer more then
under King and Prelates (which is) he is not suffered to rail himself into an
estate, nor they permitted to oppress others our of their estates. But that
Sir Arthur should be a protector of Papists and Delinquents, is a scandal
Papists themselves would swear to be a lie, and the most notorious Delinquent
will absolve him from.

Sure the fellow intends to erect a new kind of Academy, and maintain
Paradoxes. Were he of any Religion. I should take him to be a Papist, and that
he pretends to Infallibility: For else, with what confidence could he hope the
most incredulous Solifidians, would assent to these impudent untruths? He might
as well have said my Lord President was disaffected to the present Government,
and the General complied with the Scotch Interest? that John Musgrave is an
honest man, has no gall, is a Dove, meek, patient, Prays for his Enemies, and
is in Charity with all men.

Sir Arthur indeed at first commenced his authority with a severe hand such as
was wisdom to treat Delinquents with; but after sweetened his justice with
some mercy, the method of all such, who seek not game in humane blood; for
which perhaps, the ingenuity of some, render him the homage of good language,
an argument of their gratitude, and conversion too

7. That Sir Arthur Haslerigge hinders and obstrusts the ordinary proceeding of
Law and Justice in favor of Papists and did take (...) of the Sheriffess
custody Ralph Lampton, a notorious Papist, and Delinquent, being under arrest,
and formerly arraigned for poisoning his Wife; with which Lampton, the said Sir
Arthur is very kind and familiar.

The Accuser now is advane't into Bishopric and both the Scene and Actours
changed: For this Article concerns Mr. George Lilburn, as will appear by Mr.
Lampton, who now (it seems) must enter.

Mr. Ralph Lampton being under Sequestration, much oppressed by Mr. George
Lilburne, and not only he, but the State likely to be cheated of 3000 l.
estate of the said Mr Lamptons did in behalf of himself and twelve children,
miserably distressed for want, humbly Petition Sir Arthur Haslerigge, and the
rest of the Committee of Sequestration, against Mr. George Lilburne and one
Gray his Mate; whereby he manifested that the said Lampton, being a joint
sharer with George Gray, and George Lilburne in a Colliety, called Lampton
Colliery and having disburst great sums of money for the winning thereof;
Gray and Lilburne taking advantage of his Recusancy, and Delinquency,
endeavored to defraud him of his Interest therein; and when Mr. Lampton (upon
order) came to prosecute, and attest his Petit on, Lilburne and Gray
barbarously procured him to be Arrested. Sir Arthur having notice of this
injustice, caused the Sheriff to set him at liberty. This is all the grand
partiallity the Accuser here pursues with open mouth, and Mr. Lampton desirs of
Sir Arthur no other favor then what the justness of his cause shall deserve,
and a fist part for his Children of that which he shall make appear Gray and
Lilburne have in their hands, and that the State may redeem the rest. For his
being Indicted for poisoning his Wife (if any such thing were) he has undergone
the Law for it, as George Lilburne did when he was Arraigned for stealing a
Gray Mare. Loripodem rectus derideav.

8. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge procured Ralph Delivall Esquire a
Delinquent in arms against the Parliament, and disaffected to the present
Government, this last year to be high Sheriff for Northumberland.

This is a most lamentable, infirm, cobweb Item, and only charges Sir Arthur
with Mr. Dalavells Sheriffalry, when it is the Judges, that after the Circuit,
present the names of three Gentlemen, and the Parliament pricks him whom they
think most worthy of that dignity: If Sir Arthur interposed his commendations,
or was concerned in the business, the deportment of that worthy Gentleman has
justified his good opinion; for he has most faithfully and gallantly (like
himself) discharged that place of trust and honor. But sure there is something
in the Wind, that makes John Musgrave thus disgust high-Sheriffs. I am afraid
he has had ill luck in horseflesh too, has been too busy with some Gray
Mare, and ever since quarreled with the Assires.

9. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge, contrary to an Act of Parliament,
suffered Lieutenant Collonell John Jackson, a notorious Delinquent, and in arms
against the Parliament, both in the first and second War, a great plunderer, to
go and ride up and down the Country with his arms, and against Law put the said
Jackson in Possession of certain grounds and Collieries in Bishopric belonging
to men well-affected, whom the said Sir Arthur by strong hand dispossessed
thereof without Law, and the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge against the
fundamental Law of the Land, most arbitrarily and tyrannically did by his
power take from the now high Sheriff of Bishopric the said Jacksons goods
taken in Execution, after judgment, and restored the said goods to the said
Jackson. contrary to all the rules of the Law.

Not one syllable of this is true as it is charged. M. Iackson did indeed
sometimes wear a Sword (yet without Sir Arthurs permission or privacy) and he
had good reason for it; For having occasion to go to Washington a Town not
far from his own abode; and Mr. John Hedworth. son in law to George Gray and
Richard Gray son also to the said George, having notice of it, they with
others in their company, dogged him into the house of one James Pearson, and
there inhumanely assaulted him, Heaworth holding him, while Gray made a thrust
at him, which thrust (had not one Mr. Moorecraft but it by) had Slain the
Gentleman; This Mr. Iackson complaind of and proved by the Oath of three
several witnesses before Collonell Wren and Mr. Thomas Dalavall.

As for Sir Arthur's giving him possession of Lands etc. It Is true, that after
Mr. Iackson had made his Composition with Sir Arthur and the rest of the
Commissioners, and had secured the payment of his money, they thought it fit to
order, that such houses, lands, and Collieries as he had compounded for, and
was seized on before his Delinquency, should be restored unto him; which were
accordingly, save the Ginns belonging to his Colliery, whereof Gray and
Lilburne had cheated both him and the State.

The last part of this Chymaera, is a most egregious mistake, or a most rare
piece of Legerdemane. There were, for a debt of Master Iacksons, certain Goods
grasing in his Grounds, but belonged to an Officer in the Army; these indeed
were mis-taken in Execution, and the Sheriff being satisfied of the truth,
delivered the Cattle back again to one Mr. Browin, who was entrusted with the
care of them in the owners absence. Here were no goods of Mr. Jackson's either
seized or, or reprieved; and Sir Arthur was so mere a stranger to the
business, that perhaps this Article brought him the first news of it; but if
John Musgrave will have it so, he must do things he never heard of and be
guilty of Delinquents arms, because others fail to murder them; when the most
pernicious Weapon is the Accusers Pen whose tongue is a sharp Sword, and whose
mouth a Magazin of Poniards.

10. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge is very familiar, and keeps company
with Thomas Wray, a Papist, in arms against the Parliament, and upon search for
a Popish Priest, there was lately found in the said Wrayes house, Copes, and
other Popish Relickes, and much Gold and Money, most whereof Sir Arthur
Haslerigge caused to be returned backs to M. Wrayes Wife, a Papist. And the
said Sir Arthur by his Soldiers put sundry honest men out of Possession of the
Collieries settled upon them by Law under color the same belonged to the said
Wray, whose Debts Sir Arthur Hasletigge undertook to pay, (as Wray confessed)
for the said Collieries, being worth ten pounds per diem, as the said Sir
Arthur gives forth, to the utter undoing of the owners of the said collieries.

To this loud nothing, we oppose this clear discovery of abused truth. Mr.
Wray has at present, and for many years has had a just and legal interest in
a Colliery at Harratton. For in the year 1644 it was Sequestered by Sir William
Ermin and the Commissioners, then in the County of Durham, for the Papacy and
Delinquency of the said Mr Wrey; and again in 1646 by Mr Lilbourne and Mr. Gray
make themselves the States Tennants for the said Colliery; and having found the
sweetness of it, labourd to purchase the same of M. Wroy: and they concluded
to give him 5000 l. But afterward, pretending to have got some Interest from
others in the said Colliery, and knowing their own power would justify them in
any action, they declined the Agreement with Mr. Wray, and enterd upon the
Colliery, and disposed thereof to their own uses, and so defrauded both Mr.
Wray of his Interest, and the State of the Sequestration. There was no hopes of
redreffe for Mr. Wray (for the was under hatches, and the Lilburnes then were
uncontrollable) till Sir Arthur Haslerigge came into these Parts, who being
certified of Lilburnes unjust act by Mr. Wrays Peititioning to him and the
Commissioners, Sequestered the foresaid Colliery for the States use. After this,
Orey draws in young Hedworth to set a foot his Title in the Colliery (whose
inheritance indeed it is, buth was bought of his Father by Mr. Wray for a term
of years which are not yet expired) and they taking advantage of Mr. Wrays
confinement (who suffered a judgment by defaulc) re-entred upon the Colliery.
Of which plot and knavery, Sir Arthur likewise having notice, he rescued it
from their cawes again, and re-sequenstred it. Thus Sir Arthur is charged with
putting honest men out of their Possessions, because he prohibited George
Lilburne and George Gray to defraud both M. Wray of his Right of Title, and the
State of their Right of Sequestration and did an act of Private and of Public
justice.

In answer to the former part of this Article, we must relate another excellent
device of M. Lilburne, who to get M. Wreyes evidences of Harratton Colliery
from him, pretended M. Wray had a Popish Priest in his hause, and under that
color ramacks the house, took away all deeds and evidences could be met with,
Copes and other Church stuff, some old Gold of Mis Wrayes, her Watch and
several Rings, to the value of 200 l. the Watch, and a Wedding Ring, which
were ravished from them by public order too; but the Deeds and Writings (though
of great concernment) no orders whatsoever could recover. What strange mistakes
were here, to seize on old Gold for Relickes and take Evidences for a concealed
Priest: That Sir Arthur should undertake to pay M. Wrayes debts, is as
ridiculous as to think M. Lilburne will discharge them with the Gold be
plundered from him.

11. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge does comply with and countenance
Collonell John Hilton, a Delinquent, in arms, both in the first and second
War, and assists the said Hilton to defraud the poor in sundry Parishes in
Bishopric, or great legacies given by the said Hiltons Elder Brother.

In this is involved another grand cheat of M. George Lilburnes against the
State of 300 1. per annum, viz. The manor of Ford in Bishopric; which
manor, M. Lilburne himself caused to be Sequestered for the Delinquency of
Collonell Hilton, and converted the Profits to his own use; and all this while.
not a word of any Testament or Legacy. But after, when he saw himself
questioned for this, and other tricks, and feared he should disgorge some of
the thousands he had swallowed, he contrived himself a dextrous escape, by
rowsing a Dormant Will of Baronett Hilton, made upon some discontents between
him and his Brother, under pretense of charity to several Parishes, where by
he was to merit pardon for 30 years vicious life led with the Lady Shelly.
Pious M. Lilburne prosecuted the s;uite in Chancery at his own charge, and had
a Decree thereupon, which the Council of State may happily retrieve, and
examine better the depredation of so considerable a Composition. Thus we see
how charitable master Lilburne is with other men's Estates, how finely he robs
the State, to enrich the poor, and had rather build Hospitals, them pay his
debts!

12. That Sir Arthur Haslerigge brought Collonell Hacker into the Country, who
contrary to an Act of Parliament Quarters his Soldiers, and others, under the
name of Soldiers, who are none, upon the well-affected in Bishopric, and
would but pay what they pleased, and in some places nothing; but upon complains
Collonell Hacker gave the people no relief, but threatened them to have them
before Sir Arthur Haslerigge for complaining; afterward Captain Thomas
Lilburne brought the matter in question before a Council of War an
whitehall, but by Sir Arthurs power, it could nover be fully heard, which if it
had, there would have appeared many thousand pounds kept wrongfully from the
Soldiers, besides the great oppression of free quarter, some Examinations
whereof were taken by master Margets, which Sir Arthur Haslerigge keeps
hitherto from Reading, and the said Sir Arthur sore threatened the said Captain,
for appearing for the Soul-diery and Country against him, and Collonell Hacker.

Sir Arthur was the cause, it is probable, of Collonell Hackers advance into
these parts, considering how behovefull and necessary the attendance of that
gallant Collonell would be for the security of these Northern Counties, where
the malignant Party had been so active, and were still so numerous. But
straight master George Lilbourne thinks himself opposed in the business,
falls presently to disgust the Collonell, and conjures his son Thomas the
Captain to assist him with some design againsthim. Dear Tom. lays the scene
with some of Collonell Hackers Soldiers betrays them to some misdemeanors,
and persuades them not to pay in manv places. These incivilities make up a
charge against Collonell Hacker; and one master Margets came busling into the
Country, by order from the Lord General (as he pretended but falsely) to
examine it. All things being prepared, and the day come Geo: kich: and Tho:
Lilburnes face the busiesse; Collonell Hacker attended also to receive his
charge; but Margets told him he must stay for it, and both he and his
Soldiers immediately leave the Town. Hereupon the Gollonell complains to the
General; who sends an order to examine Margets, which was done accordingly,
and this truth discovered and certified. This is all concerns that worthy
Collonell, whom none but Lilburne and Mosse-troopers disaffect.

13. That the said Sir Arthur Haslerigge to dissable master George Lilburne to
serve his country, and the more to discourage the well-affected in Bishoptick,
caused him to be put out of the Commission of Peace, ministry, and militia,
and much endeavors to Sequester the said master George Lilburne, who has
commonly been reputed the most active, stirring, and suffering man for the good
of this nations, both before the Parleament began, and since, of any that has
been, or is in the Country.

This is the Grand signeour Article, to which the former were but Ushers, and
all the rest a guard and convoy: This is the master waspe, yet quite without a
sting. It Was the discharging of master George Lilburne from his shriving
employments, that derived a g^^^^ upon all Sir Arthur's other actions. But
since that active, stirring, suffering Gentleman affects Encomiums, loves to be
popular, and show himself; let him surrender up those borrowed Plumes, and
wear this Charecter, and second Livery.

For his first rise was little better then from the Cloak and Trencher; and of
late years an ordinary Fitter was his greatest Title. But since he scrued
himslfe into the Committee for Sequestrations, by letting Sequestrations to
himself in others names for small values, and bying Plundered Goods at under
Rates, he has purchased many thousands, and now endures the burden of being
very Rich, and suffers the misery of a Vast Estate.

Quid esse nostro fortius potest Pato?
Ducentiens accepit, and tamen vivit.
In the Earl of Newcastles time, he signed and sent out Warrants for raising
men and horse for the service of the late King, and when that Earl was in the
North, he sent out men and arms to his assistance; and this is called his good
affection.

He was so Imperious in his Sequestratorship, and so shamefully overawed the
rest of the Commissioners, that most of them were abused out of their stations,
and M. George Lilburne was left a petty monarch, attended only with his
brother Richard (such anothere haughty spirit as himself) and one Tom Turk,
alias Coll: Midford, a creature of their own stamp, who durst not dispease
them, lest they should question him for a murder he committed upon one Mr.
Grosier in Newcastle upon Time. The well-affected are so far from being
discouraged at dispacing of him that they all deprecate his Tyranny next the
Pestilence, incert it in their Liturgy, and prefix it to their -- Libera nos
Domine.

14. That Sir Arthur Haslerigge has dispaced all the well-affected men in
Bishopric that were of the Committee for Sequestations there, and put in their
stead one Thomas Haslerigge his Kinsman, and a stranger, and does continue one
Collonell Francis Wren, who in the head of his Regiment upon his first march
into Scotland was disgracefully, and justly cashiered, by the now Lord General
Cromwell for Plundring, and other gross and foul misde-meanours; and one
Thomas Dalavall, an arch Malignant, and disaffected to the present Government,
who lived in the Enemies Quarters all the time the Earl of Newcastle had his
Forces there.

What the displaced were, the Accuser may see if he but face about; and who
these present Commissioners are he shall quickly be informed; so that were he a
Janus, he might employ all his Optics, and backward or forward behold his own
untruths and scandalls.

Mr. Thomas Haslerigge is a Gentleman of such Universal abilities, and so
richly furnished with Foreign and Domestic experience. that every Country is
his own, and he is a Stranger no where. Collonell Wren and master Thomas
Dalavall are Gentlemen no less (...)serving, and make up an accomplished
Triumvirate of fidelity and merit: they have improved the States service to the
utmost, given satisfaction to all reasonable men, and are every way worthy of
their great Employments.

Collonell Wren has ever been an active, faithful Gentleman, and though it
was his misfortune to suffer some obscurity by the disorders of his Soldiers
(suborned and hired thereunto perhaps by some men's malice to prejudice the
Collonell) yet never any thing was charged upon himself, and the merit of his
own deportment did soon expunge that casual blemish which translated him only
from his military attendance, to do the works of Peace; nor was he dismissed,
but lent us by the General; we borrowed him oth'Army, and he was conferred
upon the County to examine the actions, and censure the Injustice of the
Lilburnes, who not for any miscarriages, but that good service do here traduce
this worthy Collonell.

It Is only objected to master Thomas Dalavall that he lived in the Enemies
Quarters; and well, it is not charged against him, that he lived. We may say the
Accuser lived in the Enemies Quarters when he was in Prison there (as he
pretends) and master Dalavals residence there was to him parhaps but little
better. However, it is to be presumed he was guarded with no small slock of
Innocence, which could there secure him even amongst his Enemies, who were more
reasonable (it seems) and less injurious, then this Accuser, who is obliged
to be his friend.

15. That the said George Lilburne being Surverer of the Bishops Lands in Bish
oprick with one Edward C Iston, which said Colston joined with one Saunders,
and counterfeited master Duncalfes hand without his privity for the abatement
of a thousand and odd pounds merely to cousin the State thereof which cheat and
^^usenage, the said George, Lilburne discovered. But the said Sir Arthur
Haslerigge much labored and Solicited the said George Lilburne to conceal
the said cheat and forgery of the said Colston, and though the said Colston be
a man disaffected to the present Government and married to a Papist, yet does
the said Sir Arthut Haslerigge much countenance the said Colston and made him a
Commissioner for the Ministry, and his court keeper.

Had the Accuser been as busy to discover truth as to pervert it, he might
have been convinced of this loud scandal two years ago. For master Colston
himself gave this false charge, a clear confutation, and in Print Published
his own Vindication which gave full satisfaction to the Trustees. Contractors,
and all Persons whom it did concern, and to which the Accuser may repair if
he desires, or can abide the light; where he shall find that all the cheat is
in himself or Lilburne, who would cousen the World of truth, a Gemme more
precious then any thousands.

What service the Council of State or Sir Arthur Haslerigge shall impose upon
master Colston, no question but that able Gentleman will industriously
discharge, and gratify their Trust by his Fidelity. In the mean time, he
esteems it next to Public Employments (of which at present it is Vacation with
him) to be of use to that eminent member of the Commonwealth, whose nobleness
and worth he is many ways obliged to serve and honor; and would profess as
much should Musgrave every day endite new Articles.

16. That your Petitioner has been much Petitioned by the well-affected in his
Country, to present their grievances, and oppressions, and crave relief in
their behalf, as appears by their Letters, Coppies whereof are hereunto
annexed.

This contains nothing of Importance, and only is an Allegory which must be
thus Expounded. A Pack of mutinous Incendiaries that pretend oppressions to
their seditious Phrensies, have made John Musgrave their Bell-Weather, or Jack
Straw, as may be collected from their Letters etc.

17. That your Petitioner has lately discovered sundry concealed and
unsequestred Delinquents of great Estates, which will bring in to the State ten
thousand pounds and more, if the Commissioners for Sequestration made by Sir
Arthur Haslerigge were honest, and faithful men; but in regard most of the
said Commissioners are Delinquents, and Sequestrable themselves, and all of
them disaffected to the present Government, they do what in them lies to
hinder your Petitioner in the prosecution thereof.

The Accuser has now gone over all his Posts, and left himself no marks to
shoot at; yet he has more Darts behind still, which must be discharged, and
therefore are let fly at random, exclaiming in general against Deliquent
Commissioners; which had an Answer in the return to the first Article: for he
but conn's his Lesson here, and begins before he be quite out: Orly it is
observable here (as all along) that disaffected to the present Government, and
complying with the Scotch Interest is the burden of his Song, and a card that
is always turned up tramp, when he would something, but can say nothing else.

Indeed here is something of new matter, and that is his activenesse in the
discovery of unsequestred Delinquents, as if he were more industrious for the
advantage of the Commonwealth then Sir Arthur Haslerigge? But the truth of all
he tells plainly in his Remonstrance, where he Petitions that his discovery of
concealed Delinquents may be taken into consideration, and then no doubt but he
will bestirr himself to seek whom he may devour, then shall every Rich man be
a Delinquent, and guilty of his Estate, when covetousness and malice shall
have a Salary, and Sin have any Wages but Death.

For should ill Presidents pass without reproof, should it be permitted once
to Scandal with Impunity, and Inform cum Privilegio; every one would turn
Accuser, and there would be no such thing as Innocence in the world: Each City
would be worse then Sea^^ not furnished with one righteous Lot, against whom the
malice of some would not Exhibit their Exceptions: The Thief would Arraigne
his Judge, and the Offender Impeach his Jury: There would be left no Council
of State Inviolable to Sentence or Absolve, no Lord President to appeal unto.

Saturday the 25. of January, 1650. At the Council of State at White Hall,
Ordered,
UPon Information given to this Council by Sir Arthur Haslerigge, that one Mr.
John Musgrave had caused a Book to be Printed and Published, and that in the
Epistle and Charge, the said John Musgrave did Accuse him the said Sir Arthur
Haslerigge of breach of Promise and Engagement to the Council, and for acting
contrary to the same, and contrary to the Council of States Declaration. The
said Mr. John Musgrave being called before the Council, did acknowledge the
whole Book, excepting only some Errata's of the Printer, which he offered to
amend with his Pen, and said he would justify it, and offered to put in
security to make it good. Thereupon the said Master Musgrave being fully heard
as to the particulars of the Epistle and Charge in his Book against Sir Arthur
Haslerigge for a supposed breach of Trust and Engagement by him to the
Council, and also for Acting contrary to the Councels Declarations, concerning
the Examining the Charge of Mr. Howard late High Sheriff of Cumberland, for
the not displacing and putting in certain Commissioners of the Militia for
Cumberland, who were objected against by Mr. Musgrave. The Council Declares,
that it does not at all appear unto them, that Sir Arthur Haslerigge has
broken the Trust reposed in him by the Council, or made any fail of Promise
or Engagement to them in any of those particulars. But do find that the
Imputations therein laid as a Charge upon Sir Arthur Haslerigge, are False and
Scandalous: And do therefore touching the said Scandals, leave Sir Arthur
Haslerigge for his due Vindication and Reparation, to take such Course as he
shall think fit.

Ex. G. Frost, Seer.

FINIS.

