PROCLAIMING OF KING WILLIAM AND QUEEN MARY, At WHITE HALL, and in the CITY of
LONDON, Feb. 13. 1688/9
ABout half an hour past Ten in the Morning, the Lords and Commons came from
Westminster to White hall, in their Coaches, and alighting at the Gate, went up
into the Banqueting house, where they presented the Prince and Princess of
Orange with an Instrument in Writing, for Declaring their Highnesses King and
Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging; desiring them to accept the Crown pursuant to the said
Declaration, which their Highnesses accepting accordingly, the said Lords and
Commons came down again to Whit-hal-gate, preceded by the Speakers of their
respective Houses, each attended with a Sergent at Arms; where they found the
Heralds of Arms, the Sergeants at Arms, the Trumpets, and other Officers, all
in readiness, being assembled by Orders from the Duke of Norfolk, Earl-Marshal
of England. And Sir Thomas St. George Knight Garter, Principal King of Arms,
having received a Proclamation, and an Order from the Lords House to the Kings
Heralds and Pursuivants of Arms, for Publishing or Proclaiming the same
forthwith: The persons concerned, disposed themselves in order before the
Court-gate, for making the said Proclamation; And the Trumpets having founded a
Call three several times, the last of which was answered by a great Shout of
the Vast Multitudes of People there assembled; the Noise ceasing, the said
Garter, King of Arms, read the said Proclamation by short Sentences or Periods,
which was thereupon Proclaimed aloud by Robert Devenish, Esquire York Herald, being
the Senior Herald, in these words:

Whereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his great Mercy to this Kingdom. etc.
Which being ended, and the Trumpets sounding a Flourish, was answered by
several repeated Shouts of the People.

And Directions being given to proclaim the same within Temple Bar, in Cheap
side, and at the Royall-Exchange, the Proceeding marched in this manner:

First, the several Beadles of the Liberties of Westminster; Next the
Constables of the said Liberties, all on foot, with the High-Constable on
Horseback; After them the Head Bailiff of Westminster, and his Men, all with
white Staves, to clear the way, on Horseback; Then the Knight-marshals Men,
also on Horseback; Next to these a Class of Trumpets, Nine in all viz. 2, 2,
2, and 3. followed by the Sergeant-Trumpeter, carrying his Mace on his
shoulder, all likewise on Horseback; Then a Pursuivant of Arms single; Then a
Pursuivant and a Sergeant at Arms: Anorher Pursuivant and a Sergeant at Arms;
Then four Heralds of Arms, one after another, each with a Sergeant at Arms on
his left hand, the Heralds and Pursuivants being all in their Rich Coats of the
Royal Arms, and the Sergeants at Arms, each carrying his Mace on his shoulder,
and all on Horseback, Then Garter King of Arms in his Rich Coat of Arms,
carrying the Proclamation, accompanied by Sir Tho. Duppa, Knight. Gentleman Usher
of the Black-Rod, in his Crimson Mantle of the Order of the Garter, and his
Black-Rod of Office, likewise on Horseback.

These immediately preceded the Marquess of Halifax, who executed the Place of
Speaker in the House of Lords, in his Coach, attended by Sir Roger Harsnet,
eldest Sergeant at Arms, with his Mace. Then followed Henry Powle Esquire Speaker
of the House of Commons, in his Coach, attended by John Topham Esquire Sergeant at
Arms to the said House, with his Mace. After the two Speakers of the Houses,
followed the Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal, and Primier Duke of England in his
Coach, with his Marshals Staff in his hand. And next to him all the Peers in
order in their Coaches. And last of all the Members of the House of Commons in
their Coaches. In this Order they proceeded toward Temple Bar: and being come
as far the Maypole in the Strand, two of the Officers of Arms with a Sergeant
at Arms, and Two Trumpets went before to Temple Bar, and the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Sheriffs, being by this time arrived there, and having ordered
the Gates to be shut, the Herald at Arms knocked thereat, whereupon the
Sheriffs, being on Horseback, came to the Gate, and the said Herald
acquainting them, That he came by Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
assembled at Westminster, to demand Entrance in that Famous City, for the
Proclaiming of William and Mary, King and Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, and the dominions and Teritories thereunto belonging; and therefore
required their speedy Answer. The said Sheriffs ordered the Gates to be opened.
Whereupon leaving the Head-Bayliff, Constables, and Beadles of Westminster
without the Bar, the rest of the Proceeding entered, where they found the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, all in their Formalities and on
Horseback, except the Lord Mayor who was in his Coch, attended by the
Sword Bearer, and other of his Officers, who joyfully receiving them, they made
a stand between the two Temple-Gates, and Proclaimed their Majesty's a second
time. From whence they marched toward Cheap Side, a Class of the
City-Trumpets, and the Lord Mayor's Livery-men leading the way, and the said
Aldermen, and Lord Mayor falling into the Proceeding: And near Wood-street end
(the place where Cheap-side-Cross formerly stood) they made another stand, and
Proclaimed their Majesty's a third time. And arriving at the Royal Exchange
about Two of the Clock, they Proclaimed them a fourth time; and at each
Proclamation the vast multitudes of Spectators who thronged the Streets,
Balconies and Windows, filled the Air with loud and repeated shouts and
expressions of Joy. Within Temple Bar, and all along Fleetstreet, the Orange
Regiment of the City Militia, lined both sides of the way, as did the Green
Regiment within Ludgate and St. Paul's Churchyard; the Blew Regiment in
Cheap Side, and the White in Cornhil.

By the King and Queen A PROCLAMATION.
William R.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased God to Call Us to the Throne, and that thereby it
is Incumbent upon Us to Prevent any Inconvenience to Our Subjects that may
arise by not Executing the Laws Necessary or Conducing to the Peace and better
Government of Our People. We therefore do hereby Declare Our Royal Pleasure to
be, That all Persons being Protestants, who upon the first day of December last
past, were in the Offices of Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Collectors,
Receivers, and other Offices and Places concerning the Collecting, Receiving,
and Paying of the Revenue of this Kingdom, shall be, and shall hold themselves
continued in the said Offices and Places respectively, until Our Pleasure be
further known. And that they and every of them do take on them the Execution of
their said respective Offices and Places; and that all Our Loving Subjects do
give their due Obedience, (...)nd be Aiding and Assisting unto them therein.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, this 14 th day of February 1689. In the
First Year of Our Reign. WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
London, Printed by John Starkey and Awnsham Churchill, and Reprinted at
Glasgow, Anno Dom. 1689.


