Nick and Froth; OR, The Good-fellows Complaint for Want of full Measure.
Discovering the Deceits, and Abuses of Victuallers, Tapsters, Ale-Drapers; and
all the rest of the Society of Drunkard-makers: By filling their Drink in False
Flaggons, Pimping Tankerds, Cans, called Ticklers; Rabbits, Jugs, and short
Quarterns, To the Grand abuse of the Society of Good-fellowship.

Good Fellows Drinks their Liquor without flinching;
Then why should Knavish Tapsters use such pinching.
Tune of, We Will Drink this Old Ale no more, no more.


ALl you yt are Freemen of Ale-Drapers hall
And Tapsters where ever you be,
Be sure you be ready to come at my call,
And your Knavery here you shall see.
A knot of Good-fellows we are here inclined,
To Challenge you out if you dare,
A very sharp Trial you're like to find,
Although it be at your own Bar.
Your Cheats and Abuses, we long did abide,
But times are so wondrous hard,
That Loosers may speak, it cannot be denied,
Of our Measure we have been debarred.
But now we will show you a trick you knaves
And lay you all open to view,
It Is all for your froth and your Nick you slaves
And tell you no more then is true.
If in a cold Morning we chance to come,
And bid a good Morrow my Host,
And call for some Ale, you will bring us black Pots,
Yet scarce will afford us a Toast.
For those yt drink Beer, it is true as i am here
Your Counterfeit Flaggons you have,
Which holds not a Quart, scarce by a third part,
And yt makes my Hostis go brave,






But now pimping Tankerds are all in use
Which drains a Man's Pocket in brief:
For he that sits close, and takes of his Dose,
Will Find that the Tankerd's a Thief.
Be It Tankard or Flaggon, which of them you brag on,
We Will trust you to Nick and to Froth;
Before we can Drink, be sure it will shrink,
Far worser then North Country Cloth.
When Summer is coming, then hey brave boys,
The tickling Cans they run round.
Pray take it in good part, for a Winchester Quart
Will fill sir, I dare lay you a Pound.
Your Rabbits and Iugs, and Coffee-house Mugs
Are ready when e're you do call,
A P -- take his Trade, such Measures that made,
I wish that Old Nick had them all.
When we have a Fancy our Noses to Steel,
And call for some Nance of the best,
Be sure the short Pot, must fall to our lot,
For now they are all in request.
Scarce one House in twenty, where measure is plenty;
But still they are all for the Pinch;
Thus every day, they drive customs away,
And force us good Fellows to flinch.
Sometimes a man may, leave something to pay
Though seldom he did it before:
With Marlborough Cholke you his patience provoke
When ever he clears all his score.
The women likewise, which are not precise,
But will take a Cup of the best,
Tho they drink for pleasure, they will have their measure
Or else you shall have little rest.
There Is Billings-gate Nan, and all her whole gang
Complaining for want of their due:
True Topers they are, as over scor'd at Bar,
For they will drink till their Noses look blew.
A Pot and a Toast, will make them to boast,
Of things that are out of their reach:
So long as a Groat, remains in the Coat,
They over good Liquor will Preach.
In Shoo-makers Row, there is true hearts you know
But give them their Measure and weight,
They Will scorn for to stir, but stick like a Bur,
And Tope it from Morning till Night.
Then there is honest Smug yt with a full jug
Will set all his Brains on a float:
But you are such Sots, to fill him small Pots
Will scarce quench ye spark in his Throat.
With many such Blades of several Trades
Which freely their Money will spend;
But fill them good drink, they value not chink
Where ever they meet with a Friend.
Most Trades in ye Nation gives there approbation
How that you are much for to blame:
Then make us excuses, but cease your abuses
And fill up your Measure for shame.

