(...) THE SHADOW OF THE Tree of Life: Or a Discourse of the Divine Institution
and most effectual Application of Medicinal Remedies. In order to the
Preservation, and Restoration of Health.

By J. M.

LONDON. Printed for John Wilkins, and are to be sold at his shop in
Exchange-Alley, by the Exchange-Coffee-House, 1673.

Courteous Reader,
WHen we reflect upon the erroneous Principles, and impertinent Practices of
men in the Application of Medicines, and observe how many destroy themselves
thereby, some possessed with Turkish Principles, think to palliate all
omissions in this kind, by reflecting upon a Devine determination abstracted
from the concurrence of second causes.

Others looking not upon it as a Divine Institution, but only as a Pollitick
trick to maintain a Society of men, though grofly mistaken. And some whose
ignorance has betrayed them into the hands of the unskillfull, and not finding
the event answer their expectation, they make bold to condemn the whole Faculty
for an Imposture: As if because a man went to Sea with an unskilful Pilot, who
runs his Vessel upon a Rock, and lost all his Goods, therefore the Art of
Navigation must be condemned for unprofitable and vain.

Nay some are so fantastical, as to think extreme Unction sufficient, to
answer all intentions of Physical applycations.

And many other such evil conceits may be seen under the Sun, whereby men
cheat themselves of their lives.

It being in Physic as in Divinity, for the most sacred institutions, are
insignificant unto the Souls of men, if not rightly received and applied.

So the most wholesome remedies, are unprofitable unto the bodies of men, if not
used in a due manner.

Now the design of the Author of this small Treatise is only to take notice of
the bounty of our great Creator, in his provision of necessaries, conducing to
the health of natural life; and also to direct to those proper Rules, requisite
to be observed in the right administration of natural remedies, here are no
private receipts to amuse the vulgar, and it may be the more useful because
discourses of this nature are seldom seen in public.

Therefore read and improve to the best advantage, viz. the preservation of
health, which is the greatest temporal Blessing we can enjoy. Without it the
most delicious dainties will not please the palate, the most fragrant Odors
will not delight the smell; the most Harmonious melodies, will not gratify the
ear; the most beautiful objects, will not please the eye; the softest down,
will not ease the bones: It is that which makes all our delights delightful,
without which we can sollace our selves in no temporal enjoyments.

Health is that which renders the body serviceable to the soul; for when our
flesh upon us is in pain, our souls within us do usually mourn: and we are
unfit for holy services.

Health is that which renders us fit for the enjoyment of humane Society; it
preserves the faculties of the mind in strength and vigor, makes the wit acute,
and the memory retentive.

Seeing then that Health is a blessing, attended with so many privileges, and
men are subject to dash upon so many quick sands, in the persuite of it, surely
it cannot be unprofitable to humane nature to direct to those means which may
be most likely to preserve, or restore it; but rather of the greatest, and most
comfortable Importance, next to the salvation of our Souls.

Yours, J. M.

THE SHADOW OF THE Tree of Life. Or a Discourse of the Excellency and Divine
Institution of Medicinal Remedies.
Chap. I.
THat every man is bound by the Law of God and Nature to keep the clayey
Cottage of his Body in reparation, and to use all possible means to preserve
his natural life in health and vigor; none can question: we being tenants at
the will of our Great Landlord in these houses of Earth, it ought to be our
concern to take care least they run to ruin through neglect, and so we expose
our selves to an Indictment at the bar of Heaven for Delapidations; he that is
no life preserver is a self murderer, a felo de se in the sight of God: that
command thou shall not kill, does strictly obliege us to preserve life, both
our own and others.

CHAP. II.
THe Jews were to be at the charge of any man's cure, whom they had hurt, or any
way prejudiced in their bodily health, so as to expose them to expense or
danger, much more ought we to take care of our own cure, if Divine providence
lay any distemper upon us.

He who breathed into man the breath of Life, at first, and in whom we still
live and move and have our being; has commanded us to pray for our daily
bread, viz. the necessary supports of this life, and if we must pray for them,
certainly we must use them.

Chap. III.
ALthough we live not by bread alone, but by the word of blessing, which
proceeds out of the mouth of God, yet the blessing is annexed to bread, not to
stones; that man will not trust God, but tempt him who shall expect to have
stones turned into bread; if God have appointed stairs it is not faith but fury
to go down by a Precipiece.

Holy David, trusting in the Name of the Lord, made him not throw away his
sling, when he went against Goliath: Jacob's supplicating of God made him not
neglect to send a present to his Brother; the fast of Hester, made her not
forget to feast the King; second causes are to be used in obedience to Gods
order, not in confidence of there own help.

Faith should cause us to be so diligent in the use of means, as if God did
nothing for us; and yet so draw us from trusting in the means, as if God were
to do all for us.

CHAP. IV.
Saint Paul's Mariners could not expect preservation, unless they did abide in
the Ship, notwithstanding they had a promise of their lives.

Balaams Ass may instruct men, that a merciful man, should be merciful to his
Beast, much more to himself.

Our blessed Savior makes it a great piece of Religion to visit the Sick, and
one of those actions according to which our final sentence will be determined.

The Shunamite woman took a journey, and importuned the Prophet to use the best
means he could to cure her Son.

CHAP. V.
NAman was commanded to wash seven times in Jordain, for the cure of his
Leprosy, although he would have had the Prophet only prayed for him.

If the Centurion were importunate with our Savior to cure his servant, when
sick of a Palsy; certainly all pious men ought to be concerned for the cure
and ease of there servants, and themselves, when laid upon the bed of sickness,
and to apply themselves to the most proper remedies.

If the body of the Priest under the Law, were to be without natural blemishes
and distempers, who were to offer Sacrifices in the material Temple, why should
not Christians under the Gospel, whose bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost, be careful to use those means which may preserve them in health and
vigor.

King Asa was not condemned for using, but for trusting to the Physicians.

CHAP. VI.
IT is a great sin upon the pretense of Gods power to be disobedient to his
will, in despising Physic, which God has ordained to be the means to restore
us to health; this is to try what God can do, and yet neglect what he
commands, in not adminstering those things which are necessary for the body,
etc.

The miraculous cures which the Apostles effected by their Handkerchiffs, and
by Ointment, and laying on their hands, these wholly ceased, according to that
rule, cessante causa cessat effectus: the cause of that miraculous power being
only to confirm their Doctrine in its first preaching; that being done, that
miraculous way cease, and therefore now men must use more ordinary means,
found out by reason and experience: as the extraordinary way of understanding
tongues is ceased, we must do it by humane industry and natural study.

The life is more then meat, and the body then raiment, and therefore queen
Hester preferred life before liberty, and importuned the King to grant the life
of the Jews; and told him if they had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen she
had held her peace.

CHAP. VII.
THe father of lies never spoke a greater truth then when he said, skin for
skin and all that a man has will he give for his life. It is a precious Jewel,
and Solomon says the Adulteress hunts for the precious life. That which was
sick was not to be offered in Sacrifice, why should we not therefore endeavor
to present our bodies a healthful, as well as a holy Sacrifice; which is but
reasonable service.

When the body is in a weak and languishing condition, it is not fit for holy
service, and therefore one part of the happiness of heaven consists in a
freedom from sickness and distempers; there Leah shall not be blear eyed nor
Mephibosheth halt.

Saint John prays for Gaius that his body might prosper and be in health even
as his soul was. And Saint James bids us pray for one another that we may be
healed

Now if it be our duty to pray for one another health, much more ought we to
endeavor to preserve our own.

CHAP. VIII.
THe soul sits uneasy in a diseased body. The body it is the sheath of the
soul, as Daniel calls it; if the sheath be defective, or impaired, it is
prejuditial to the blade, so when the Golden bowl is broken, and the sound of
the grinding is low, and the strong men bow themselves, then the Sun and the
Moon and the Stars will be darkened. That is, all the faculties of the Soul will
be clouded, and not so fit to perform their several offices, the understanding,
the memory, and the fancy, will not be so clear, strong and lively, and desire
it self must needs fail.

Barzillai took small delight in the pleasures of the Court when his sight and
his taste fail him.

Our bodies are members of Christ therefore we ought to have a respect for them,
neglecting of the body is by St. Paul reckoned as a piece of will Worship.

The best way to keep the body under is by a virtuous mind.

CHAP. IX.
THe cure of the Leprous persons under the Law was appointed to be managed by
the Priest, rather then by the Physician, because it concerned him to keep back
men, who were Leprous from the Sanctuary, although it is probably though he
might have the advice of the Physician, for their profession was ancient, as we
may observe in the 50 of Genesis. It is very remarkable, the conformity between
the Leprous contagion, and the Law of cleansing: the Leprosy did putrify the
skin, and opposite to that was Cedar-wood, commended against putrefaction; it
was of an offensive color, opposite to that, was the color of scarlet; of an
ill sent, contrary to that was the sweetness of Hysop; it did consume the flesh
and bring death, there was the sparrow let loose, a significant sign of
recovery and continuance of life.

It is probably thought that the prohibition of many sorts of meats in the 11
of Leviticus, was not only upon a moral but also upon a physical account,
because they yield no good nourishment, but are unwholesome.

CHAP. X.
THe world is very full of complaints of the ineffectual application of
Medicines in order to the procuring of Health, when it is lost or the
preservation of it when enjoyed, and doubtless the the cause of these
complaints must arise from the imprudent and preposterous use of so excellent
an ordinance of God, for the good of mankind, for who but a person whose
reason is unhinged, and whose intellectuals are Eclipsed with the fogs of
ignorance or prejudice can reflect any deficiency in those remedies themselves,
which are designed, by the God of nature, to be good for food, and physic even
every herb bearing seed, therefore he that dare to say in his heart there is no
God, who has given, every herb for the service of man, his folly is manifest
to all men, doubtless that profession which has received a pattent from the
King of Kings and the great preserver of men, must needs be of great utillity
and transcendent excellency. Shall the Almighty himl f prescribe an Emolient
Cataplasme, for the plague sore of Hezekias in order to the addition of 15
years to his life, and shall any condemn so noble a faculty as physic is in it
self, if rightly applied.

CHAP. XI.
HOw many singular examples of physical applications do the inspired penmen of
holy writ exhibit to us, and whatsoever was written aforetime was written for
our learning.

Were not the waters of Mara made salutiferous by the casting in of medicinal
ingredients.

Without doubt the sons of the prophets had a physical intention in the
composition of there Broth, with physical herbs, although it was attended with
a mistake, as to the nature of the simple.

CHAP. XII.
KIng Solomon who had the privilege granted him from the only wise God, to be
the only wise man, made it his business to enquire into the nature of
vigetables from the tallest Cedar to the contemptible Hysop, and shall we cast
the Imputation of folly upon him whom the spirit of God, has recorded, for the
most eminent example of Wisdom, and imagine that he spent his time in such a
study, as was not likely to be profitable to human nature, shall he whose brow
was incircled with a glittering Diadem, whose Gold was so plentious as to pave
his palace, whose orchards were replenisht with delicious fruits, whose ears
were entertained with the most harmonious melodies, and had all the delights of
the sons of men, shall he I say condescend to the study and improovement of
physic, and yet Contemptible fools despise it. The wiseman does not only
tell us, with what remedies the Almighty heales men, and takes away their pains
in his description of the variety of plants, a book which possibly the world
has lost, or else goethunder the name of some other Author, but also in his
divine discourses wherein he acts the part of a Preacher, he declares to the
world that these remedies must be applied, for he says there is a time to
heal, and that a medicine does good if rightly used, for he compares it to a
cheerful spirit, or rather a good conscience which is a continual feast.

CHAP. XIII.
CErtainly Ahab would never have been so sinfully ambitious to abtain the
vineyard of Naboth for a garden of herbs, If he had not understood their virtue
as well as delight.

Doubtless the good will of him that dwelt in the bush is further declared to
mankind, by the fruit the leaves and the flowers growing thereon, which he has
impregnated with such virtues that they are good for the healing of the
nations, in a corporal, as well as in a spiritual sense, those contemptible
persons Job speaks of, who cut up mallows by the roots, probably understood
they were nutrative and medicinal as the experience of many ages demonstrate.

CHAP. XIV.
THe bitter herbs appointed to be eaten with the pascal Lamb, were not only
typical but medicinal if we may believe some of the ancients.

Nay, a Dinner of herbs with Evangelical charity, is preferred by Solomon before
a costly banquet. Medicinal herbs as Mint, Anniss, Rhue, and Cummin, etc. were
so much in use amongst the Jews, that they laid tithes and costomary
impositions upon them.

CHAP. XV.
WHen the Church would make a Metaphorical description, of the external and
internal qualifications of her beloved; does she not compare him to those
things that are most excellent and useful; as Myrrh, Aloes, Cassia, and all
the chief Spices?

Without controversy Physicians are not only useful for the Embalming of the
Dead, as Joseph used them; but for the recovering of the dying, as our Savior
intimates, when he says the whole have no need of the Physician, but they that
be sick have.

Who can be so weak as to imagine that the Art of the Apothecary should be
employed only to prepare the Holy Ointments, for the Consecration of Priests
and Kings of old; and not to prepare variety of Medecines for the restoration
of virtuous and pious Souls who through, the meritorious death of the Son, are
made Kings and Priests unto God the Father?

CHAP. XVI.
THe Evangelical Prophet Esaias, reflecting upon the deplorable condition of the
Church, with the whole head sick, and heart faint; full of wounds, bruises, and
putrefying sores, being not bound up nor mollified with ointments; does plainly
intimate how necessary he thought, the natural as well as the spiritual
application of fit remedies, in such a case; which must needs be sad indeed,
when there is no Balm in Gilead, and no Physician there.

Jothams Parable may be useful thus far, to instruct the world, that not only
the Olive, the Fig Tree, and the Vine are useful to Honor and cheer the Heart
of God and man but also the bramble may have an excellency, and superiority in
some distempers: for although its thorns do tear the flesh, yet of its leaves
are made a healing application.

Such is the Beneficence of our great Creator, that since the Appearance of the
second Adam, we may eat of every tree in the garden, without any prejudice to
us or our posterity, asking no question for conscience sake, for the Earth is
the Lords and the fullness thereof.

It is wonderful to observe the miraculous providence of God, in preserving
the seminal virtues of plants, from perishing by the deluge, when we read not
of any seeds preserved in the Ark; the innocent Dove showing a leaf to the new
world, preached a Sermon of Divine goodness, so that the Poet might well say,
Quaelibet herba Deum, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
EZechiels vision through Gods goodness may be daily seen, a tree whose fruit
is good for food; and leaves for medicine.

Our Savior the Physician of Souls, was Physician of bodies too, and not only
commended the good Samaritan, but acted the part of one throughout his whole
life.

Saint Luke, the beloved Physian, was the quill of the holy dove, the Divine
Amanuensis.

The Angelick Spirits think it not an office inferior to their natureto be
instrumental in the healing of the sick, as may be seen in the stirring the
waters of Bethesda.

Although our Saviors restoring sight to the blind man was miraculous, yet
means was used although but clay and spittle.

Saint Paul himself prescribes wine to Timothy as a medicinal cordial to cheer
his spirits, and to support him under his infirmities.

CHAP. XVIII.
ANd the utility of Physical Remedies, is not only demonstrated from
Scripture, but it may be evinced from the use of it, by the most knowing and
intelligent part of mankind; both Jews and Pagans.

In the Temple of Esculapius, there was a fountain of oil, with a golden Arch,
a perfect symbol of Physic; the one denoting its usefullness, the other its
honor.

Again it is founded upon reason, and attended with the experience of many
Ages. Therefore the unsuccesfulnes of it cannot be from the nature of the
thing, but from the misusings of it.

CHAP. XIX.
THe Design of medicines being not to prevent death, for it is the unalterable
Decree of Heaven that men must dye, but it is to make life comfortable, and to
preserve natures lamp, so long until there is no more oil left to feed it.

And if we rightly understand the excellency of natural life, it being that
space of time alloted us for the securing our eternal state; it highly concerns
us to use those means which may be most likely to preserve it. Now there are
several things absolutely needful, in order to the preservation, or
restoration of natural life; and must be observed, or we cannot rationally
apply the remedies.

The ability of the Physician in prescribing. The faithfulness of the
Apothecary in preparing. The regularity of the Patient in observing. The care
of Nurses in attending. The strength of Nature in Assisting. The Providence of
God in influencing.
CHAP. XXI.
Concerning the choice of an able Physician, which is the unum necessarium in
sickness, next to the imploring the Divine Benediction; This I may say, that
there is no action of a man's life of greater consequence, neither does any,
discover more of wisdom or folly, then a preposterous or prudent choice.
There Is no wife man, but will choose a person of learning, experience, and
known integrity; If a man's horse be troubled with the glanders, it is a point
of prudence to apply himself to the ablest Farrier for advise, and not to every
Hostler that has a confidence to prescribe a drench.

If my watch want mending, I would choose to send it to the most ingenious
Artist.

People seldom are so imprudent in other things; as they send not their Bellows
to a lookinglass maker to mend, but their bodies shall be sent to any mungrel
Physician; who can sooner cure all Diseases then one

The curing of Diseases being like mending a watch, if not don by a skillfull
Artist, the rectifying of one spring may disorder the regular motion of the
whole.

How many persons destroy themselves by imprudence, in the choice of
Physicians; more dying of soft places in their heads hen ulcers in their lungs;
and multitudes digging their graves with their thick sculls.

CHAP. XXII.
THe generallity of people, if a person be but nicknamed Doctor, and took his
degree in a drinking School, and ascendit gradum sine gradibus. It may be one,
who did his exercise in Fees, and will be a Doctor although he wants the
participle Doctus, spells Physic with an F. and Surgeon with an S. such a
one shall serve turn.

Some called Doctors, are as unskilful in Physic as the Athenians were in
Religion; they dedicate their medicines to an unknown disease. People had
better fall into the hands of the common Executioner; for then they will be put
out out of their pain; then into the hands of Illiterate Doctors, or confident
Quacks. He deserves to be killed that runs against the point of a sword in the
hand of a madman; and little better are many, who pretend to secrets or rare
arcana's, and kill men without making any noise; like white Gunpowder, that
none shall know who hurt them. Pretend privacy in the preparations of their
medicines, that the world may not see what poisoned the Patient.

These imitate Evah, or rather the Serpent, pretend to give that which shall be
pleasant to the taste, and good for food and Physic, but in the end, beguile
men of their health, and few days after the Patient dies the death. Like the
Lion, that pretends to pull the thorn out of the Lambs foot, and devours him;
like Gypsies tell you your fortune, and pick your pockets.

These waterologers, or rather piss Prophets, will make a man believe they know
every thing by the water, even how many stairs a man falls down when he
bruises himself; these are like mousetraps, when a man is in their hands; their
is no getting out but with the loss of life; si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

CHAP. XXIII.
SOme go altogether by books, which are only a collection of conjectural
experiments, and never consider Age, Constitution, Sex, Time of the disease;
never regard the rational intentions of cure, lop the branches of the disease,
but never pluck up the root, nor remove the cause, but cry they are safe, if
they do no good they can do no hurt, whereas they do much hurt in omitting
more effectual remedies, while they use weak and insignificant ones.

Some blind Bayards there are, who pretend to three or four universal remedies
to cure all distempers, and these will sometimes cure the disease, and kill the
Patient, and like some Gardners pluck up the root of the plants and sow the
seeds against the next year at the same time, and snuff the candle so rashly,
as to put it quite out; but so long as none but themselves know what the thing
was, that made the man breath his last, all is well enough. Whereas a learned
experienced Physician cares not who views his prescripts upon the file,
supposing the Patient dye, it being nothing but what was safe, what he would
have taken himself, and what would have certainly recovered the Patient, if God
would have had it so.

Some are so confident they will tell you they will be hanged if they don't
cure you: they can cure the Gout when the cause is removed; and the Dropsy
proceeding from neither wind nor water, and pains in the head if not
distempered in body; and restore any man to health, although never so crooked.

These will tell a woman she is with child, when the course of nature has been
stopped half a year, and no ill symtomes, and that a man's liver grows too much on
his right side, and that there is water near his heart, and such like things
which every fool may do if he please.

But none are so confident to talk and undertake, as those that have least
judgment; it is therefore a great indiscretion in the vulgar, to condemn the
most learned and most experienced Physicians, because they do not preach over
the water, and enter into impertinent discourses with people, as ignorant
pretenders to Physic are apt to do.

He that says least and does most, is the best Physician. His business is to
cure the Patients body not to inform his judgment; to procure health, not
knowledge in Physic; vulgar apprehensions are not capable of understanding,
either the terms or the notions of Physic.

Dogs may indeed lick men's sores and make them whole with their tongues;
Physicians must cure by reason and experience.

CHAP. XXIV.
INdeed illiterat Practitioners will sometimes let fly such strange words that
with a small addition, being taken in the pap of an apple, would give a man a
purge; that must needs be a simple composition in the cure of my distemper,
that has more of words then deeds for its ingredients. But frequently it
happens that amongst such Doctors, the most corrosive, venomous Chimical
medicine, has nothing to kill it, but fasting spittle or a smooth tongue.

Beware of that medicine, whose best corrective is a poison, though gilded
over with never so plausible pretenses, their spirits generally prove evil
spirits, and such as cannot be cast out by natural means, their powders are
worse then Gunpowder, for they blow up many good subjects, and with so much
privacy, that none but he that did it can tell who hurt them.

CHAP. XXV.
ONe of these desperadoes may possibly be more talked on, and admired by the
vulgar then an able Physician, because never used but in desperate cases,
wherein they either kill or cure: now if the Patient dye, they are not blamed
as others are, because it is nothing but what was expected, namely that the
Patient should dye, being given over by all, but if the Patient recover, then
their skill is proclaimed, but what a madness is it to run a sword in a man's
bowels, to cure him of an impostume, because one was once cured so by accident.

It is no wonder to see such men's prodigious actions admired; for do we not
gaze more upon a blazing Comet that infects the Air, and poisons men with
pestilential vapors: then on the regular motions of the glorious Sun, whose
cherishing beams yield light and health to humane nature?

Who has more followers then the Prince of Darkness?

CHAP. XXVI.
GIve me the Physician whose Prescriptions are safe, and yet effectual, who
imitates nature, and allures her into a healthful state, and by plausible
insinuations opens obstructions, evacuates superfluities, corrects crudities,
checks violent fermentations, and in a mild and friendly way helps her to shake
hands with the disease.

I desire no acquaintance with those malignant remedies, who assault the
disease with such imprudent rashness, that they destroy the disease, and kill
the patient; as Sampson did his enemies and himself.

It is good to use chimical remedies very warily, a child is in more danger of
doing mischief with a knife of steel then of Bone.

We choose the ablest Carpenter for our buildings: but indebted Tradesmen,
disbanded Soldiers, wandering Mountebanks, wicked Jews; the very scorn of the
people, serve for our bodies: a Tailor shall as soon mend a stitch fallen in
our bodies as a learned Physician. The Proverb is changed, from all are fools
or Physicians, to all fools are Physicians. Tractent fabrilia fabri; let every
one handle his own tools, but men will not learn wisdom until the dust of the
grave, that powder of experience be cast in their eyes. Many Patients become
Martyrs to their Physicians ignorance.

Degrees and trials of men's abilities, are good political Shiboleths and very
needful.

The English people strangely betray their simplicity in affecting strangers
and foreign Physicians; he that came the last tide from Gravesend, has but
Englsh enough to write, me cure all these Diseases par la grace of God; having
cured the Ala-mode distemper in himself, is well studied in Hypocras and
Gallon, rather then Hippocrates and Galen, is a rare Doctor. Their practice
being like country dance called hit or miss. Possibly they may cure some old
Distemper just taking its leave, and through the energy of a former course
thrust out of doors; but they may as well promise a man success from thence as
that a blind man shall hit the mark a second time because he did it once.

In an able Physician there is required natural abilities, advanced by study,
and confirmed by experience.

CHAP. XXVII.
TAke heed of dashing your health upon these Rocks, least you shipwreck all,
when your body is in a storm, call in the help of a skillful Pilot, I mean an
able Physician; and in bleeding, purging, sweating, vomitting and blistering,
depend not on the advice of any, without an able Physician; for with the well
advised is wisdom and in Council there is safety: men do not depend upon the advice of an Attorney when their estate is in danger, but fee a Councellor; why
should they dally with their health more then their estates? There are many
considerable motives may be urged to persuade, to take the advice of able
Physicians.

As our own safety, Physicians being better acquaintanted with the nature of
all remedies, and with the Anatomy of the body of man, understand the
situation of the parts, and the circulations of the blood, better then any
Artist whatsoever.

Again, for the satisfaction of the world, that all may be convinced that the
best means were used that could be: I have known some that have been almost
distracted after the death of relations because they advised not in time with
some able Physicians.

Again, Because we cannot rationally expect the concurrence of a Divine
influence, unless we make use of the most probable of second causes, and the
most likely means; we must use our best endeavors, if we would have them
effectual in the production of any end.

Again, Because a person dying in the omission of the most proper and rational
means, may be in danger of an indictment for self murder, which few consider.

CHAP. XXVIII.
MOreover it is very requisite that care should be used in the choice of
faithful Persons, to prepare and compound, those remedies which learned and
experienced Physicians prescribe: a business of so great consequence ought not
to be committed to serving men, who never served Apprentiship to any Employment
of that nature. And therefore the wisdom of Authority has established a
Society of Apothecaries to be instructed and employed in that useful Art, and
they have demonstrated to the world their care to prevent abuses in medicines,
by erecting a Public Elaboratory for the preparation of Chymicall remedies, in
the most exact manner.

CHAP. XXIX.
ANother excellent Rule to be observed in order to the cure of distempers is,
that the Patient be very exact in observing the directions of the Physician in
his Diet, Air, Exercise, Evacuations, Sleep and Passions of the Mind: there
arc many Patients that will promise their Physician fairly, but as soon as
their back is turned observe no rules, yet be very ready to censure the
Physician, if they do not recover. They will not persevere until the distemper
be removed. If a man lays a plaster to an ulcer and takes it off presently,
it can never heal.

If the Physician throws water, and the Patient throw on fuel, how can the
fire be extinguished?

What folly is it to blame our food for not satisfying our hunger, when we eat
but a bit?

Many Patients are like the Babel builders, when the Physician prescribes a
trowel they will use a hammer, when the distemper calls for sweats they will
use none but cooling Juleps; and consult more the antique picture in the
Almonack, then the stare, increase, and declination of the distemper.

If sleep be wanting, then Syrup of Poppy must be had, which translates the
morbifick matter to the brain, and causes a frenzy, or else such a sleep is
procured, which only the last trumpet can awake. And it is an endless thing to
argue with some people to whom sense is a riddle, and reason a Paradox.

If people would put on their considering caps they might sooner put off their
sick caps.

Although some people may be called Patients, because they exercise the
Physicians Patience; yet they are not so in using their own, for they will not
persevere in a regular course, until the remedy can have its due operation, if
they are not cured of those distempers in a day which they have been
contracting a year; then leave the medecin, and chop and change, and run from
one thing to another, and be constant to nothing.

And one imprudent rib shall slay more persons then the Jaw Bone of an Ass. And
practice by book receipts, where through the default of the printer, a dram of
Mercurius vitae shall be prescribed in stead of a few grains, yet down it goes
because the judgment of the reader knows not the exact dose. In Diet they will
not be confined but like Timothy to drink a little wine.

CHAP. XXX.
ANother rule to be observed in the restoring of health, is the care of the
attendance; a good nurse is a good sign of recovery. If the attendance are not
careful, the abillities of the Physician, and the goodness of the medicine is
but in vain. Now the care of attendants is evident in giving the remedies which
are prescribed, and in hindering the Patient from those things which are
hurtful; but the generality of attendance are like Eva, instead of
discouraging will tempt and invite to the eating forbidden fruit, to the ruin
of the patient, and sometimes of the posterity.

CHAP. XXXI.
THE rule to be observed in the right use of remedies is, to apply our selves
to the use of proper means before nature is vasted: delay in this case proves
always dangerous, therefore the Poets rule is good: Principiis ob^sta sero
medicina peratur.

People generally flatter themselves into their graves, with the conceits of
colds and surfeits, and so confounding diseases, with their symptoms, and
nicknamed distempers, and giving them some common denomination, and
apprehending that it being nothing else but what they have known some recover
of, they neglect the properest remedies until it be too late; or until the
distemper be complicated, and has taken deep root. It costs many a man his
life, whilst he eyeth only the external causes of distempers. It is usual to
discourse thus; I have left off a coat, or put on a damp shift, or eaten
something that did not agree with my stomach, or drank cold beer when hot, or
over walked my self, or have been frighted or grieved, or the like; when at the
same time the stomach is disordered by a load of corrupt humors, and a mere
Quagmire; the Blood inflamed; the Liver and Spleen obstructed, and the Lungs
perished, and this is not taken notice of; as if a man when his house is on
fire should not mind it, so as to quench it, but satisfy himself with this
consideration, that it came only by a boy throwing a squib, etc. And many times
they will depend upon the advice of some friend, or apish Doctor, until cold
sweats affright, and then the learned Physician is sent for, when the time for
purgation and bleeding is let ship, and so the Physician shares with the
Patient in the infamy of miscarriage; and he is sent for, not to cure, (that he
cannot, because nature is spent) but to try whether he can antidate
resurrections. Nothing destroys more Persons, then imprudent harkening to the advice of persons, of other professions, and neglecting learned Physicians,
until it be too late;

CHAP. XXXII.
A Another effectual ingredient in the cure of distempers, and that which is
most necessary, is the concurring influence of a divine blessing: unto God the
Lord belong the issues from death, and therefore it concerns us so to behave
our selves, that we may procure a divine Benediction.

The best way to procure a divine influence to cooperate with the means, is by
a Holy and a pious life: so says God Almighty to the Jews, If you obey my
statutes, and hearken to my Judgments, I will bless your bread and your water,
and remove sickness from the midst of you. Solomon urges the consideration of
our health as a very strong argument to promote divine fear, It shall be health
our Navel and marrow to our bones. Wisdom is a Tree of life to them that lay
hold upon, it, what man is he that loves life, and many days, let him depart
from evil and do good.

Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as well as of that which
is to come

Solomon's asking of wisdom was attended with the addition of long life.

If the obedience of our natural Parents has the promise of long life annexed
to it, much more the service of our spiritual parent, especially so far as life
is good; life is yours says the Apostle. because you are Christ's.

CHAP. XXXIII.
PIety it secures men from the power of evil Angels, who have a great influence
in the procuring of distempers, by a Divine permission, as in the case of the
excommunicated Corinthian, and the incestuous persons, about Lots House struck
blind, Herod destroyed by an Angel, and the evil angels sent amonst the
Israelites, and several other examples of the like nature, and the Demoniacks
in the Gospel. Again Piety it usually secures men from the stroke of Humane
Justice, as it guards them from those flagitious impieties which expose them to
the penalties of humane laws, as murders, thefts and rapine.

And it also preserves men from the terrors of an evil conscience, which makes
men many times wash their hands in their own blood as Judas did.

Again, Piety preserves life, as it teaches men temperance and moderation in
the use of those means that preserve life.

We find in Sacred Oracles, that immature death is threatened as the penalty of
disobedience; and that the Penmen of Holy writ do often inculcate the benefit
of the fear of God, as it is attended with the promise of longaevity.

So that to imagine the life of man to be fixed beyond the possibility of the
Almighties abbreviation or prolongation, is vain and inconsistent with
scripture and reason.

CHAP. XXXIV.
THe Turks dream that the manner and moment of every man's death, is prefixed by
the Immutable laws of fate, and that his lot is written in invisible Characters
in his forehead, that they account it vanity and cowardice to arm themselves
against the blows of war by defensive weapons, but it is to be hoped that
Christians have learned better. It being a confessed verity that every natural
motion, has its beginning, duration, and period, dependent on the will of the
first motive, now the life of man being a natural motion, our nativity and
death, are both ordered by divine providence, for in him we live and move and
have our being.

The natural life of man consisting in a requisite harmony of the first
qualities, and in a proportionate comixture of the natural heat and radical
moisture, which harmony is more or less, according to the more or less,
exquisite temperament of body, assigned to each single person by the free
dispensation of the divine will. It follows that the continuance of every
individual, in this natural life, depends upon the pleasure of the first
cause, as Holy Job intimates when he says, our days are determined and the
number of our Months are with him, who has set bounds to humane nature, so
that no man can live beyond the durability of his specificall temperament, the
principles of his vitality and permissions of providence.

CHAP. XXXV.
THe only wise God has composed our bodies like a lamp of heat and moisture,
has given appetites of hunger and thirst to feed this lamp, and so supply the
expenses of the moisture by the heat, he has given us reason and understanding
to govern our appetites, and the revelation of his will to guide our reason;
now if we through the depravation of our natures, and the predominancy of
temptation, do suffer our appetite to dethrone our reason, and give way to
Ebriety, Gluttoners salacity, and other immoralities which have a natural
tendency to extinguish, the lamp of life, we may justly exspect to be cut off
in the midst of our days, and to dye before our time, by being wicked over
much as Solomon expresses it.

Whereas piety and obedience like the Tree of life in paradise, not only
sacramentally but really conduces to health and long life, so far as it is a
blessing: and this it does by impregnating our elements with the tincture of a
divine benediction, by meliorating our temperaments and constitutions, by
infusing salutiferous dispositions in the air, and propitious influences in the
host of heaven, which many times impress the seminalities of diseases upon the
blood and spirits, so that the period of our days, and all the second causes
conducing thereunto, are circumscribed within the circle of a divine prenotion
and limitation.

CHAP. XXXVI.
A man may dye in a time when God forbids, and yet dye when God permits, and
live out all Gods time, who wickedly shortens his own.

The murmuring Isralites were buried in the wilderness notwithstanding, their
promise of seeing Canaan, their infidelity anticipated their funerals.

The wages of sin is death, and may as justly be paid in the morning as in the
evening of our lives. Indeed temperance does not always prove an Antidot
against the Pestilence, nor Abstinence a preservative against Famine, nor
innocence a security from the stroke of injustice, but they are likely means.

The flagitious impiety of the old world sent a Deluge, which possibly might
have been prevented had their repentance been as visible as the Ninevites was,
who were repreived from execution after the sentence of death had passed upon
them, whereby omnipotence did demonstrate that he has reserved a power in his
own hands to length then or shorten the lives of men as he pleases, and to
make the sands in the glass of time run swift or slow according to his
pleasure, it is very observable how the Patriarks outlived all their titles of
consanguinity, yet none lived to a complete thousand years, some indeed give
this reason for it, be cause God would make good his threatening to Adam, that
in the day he eat he should dye the death, and so they would compute, a day for
a thousand years as St. Peter speaks, but this is trifling and foolish.

A more probable reason may be to declare to the world the vanity of life, when
those who lived longest could not arrive to such a period, which in comparison
of Gods eternity is but a day.

CHAP. XXXVII.
SIn brought death at first, and as sin increased, death came near er by 500
years, presently after the flood; man sinned still and built Castles in the
air, and then it is reduced to 200 years, and by Moses time half that remnant
is taken away, and threescore and ten is the period, had God gone on still to
shorten our days as we increased in sin, our life by this time had not been a
day long, and therefore he no longer destroys the kind, but punishes the
individual, and sets it down for a rule viz. evil shall slay the wicked.

So that not one in 500 arrive at that state, which they might attain unto by
the course of nature but end their days in sin and folly, and in a period
appointed in anger: we may easily observe how the blessing of health is
contradicted by an impious life, for from surfeting proceeds disolution of
members, relaxation of nervs, fractures of bones, inflammation of the liver, and
crudities of the stomach, which Solomon sums up, besides the uncleanly
consequences of lust, which hunt for the precious life, and like a dart strike
through the liver; and the casual deaths caused by Jealousies and animosities:
thus providence intervenes, and suffers not nature to take its course by reason
of impieties.

CHAP. XXXVIII
IT is observable that not a Son dyed a natural death before the Father for
three thousand years until Terahs time who was the first that taught the
people to make Images of clay, and corrupted the Worship of God, his son Haron
was snatched away by death before him.

The Jewish Rabbis do observe that during the standing of the second Temple
there were 300 high priests, but in the time of the first but 18, which stood
within 10 years as long as the first, which may be much attributed to their
impieties.

It is thought by some of the ancients, that Balaam's wish to dye the death of
the righteous, was not only that he might be saved at last, but also seeing
what judgments God had purposed to bring upon the Moabites, that he might come
to his grave in a good old age, with his father in peace: we live by the word
of blessing out of the mouth of God every command if observed, like food and
physic tends to the length of our natural as well as spiritual lives.

CHAP. XXXIX.
THe fear of God is the best Antidote against sickness, as it is a direct enemy
to sin which brought in death. If sin destroy soul and body, why should not
piety preserve both? If the sting of conscience torment body as well as soul,
doubtless peace of conscience releives both.

Why may not the soul as well conduce to the prolongation of the body, as to
the immortality of it?

Why may not the body have the perfection of life ( viz. health) from the soul,
as life it self?

CHAP. XL.
THe circumstantial actions of piety are influential toward the lengthening
the lives of men, as the sweet sleeps of temperate persons, and their freedom
from violent and enraged passions, and the admirable contentment that dwells in
a holy conscience, these must necessarily conduce to a healthful life.

Dying to sin is an excellent means to preserve life, if men would try the
experiment.

It is observed that the male heir of Ely's family dyed as soon as born, for
many generations, according to a divine threatening, until they set themselves
unto a serious humiliation and solemn repentance.

We live not at an adventure, but the manner and moments of our death, come
under a divine appointment; the Jews could not prejudice our Saviors life
until his hour was come, viz. that hour which by a special providence was
appointed to be his last hour, although St. Paul was in deaths often, yet he
dyed not before providence thought meet: it is appointed to men once to dye,
that is, it is once appointed to men to dye.

CHAP. XLI.
A Man may shorten his own days, but he cannot shorten a Divine determination:
the date of Hezekia's life was lengthened with respect to himself, but not in
respect of Divine purpose; that is the same, be our time long or short.

CHAP. XLII.
Object. But if Piety do so prevail with God to lengthen our lives, how comes
it to pass that many good and holy men dye, whilst in the prime of their years?

Answer, Those that reason thus do not consider that the righteous may be
taken away from the evil to come; and by their deaths God may serve other ends
of his Providence, and yet make his promise good, by recompensing Temporal with
Eternal life. Although God has promised long life to them that obey, yet he
never promised that he would not borrow our natural lives as it were, and make
a glorious exchange.

CHAP. XLIII.
DEath may sometimes be a great mercy, and life a great misery.

It is observed that from Adam to to the Flood by the Patriarks, were eleven
Generations, but by Cains line eight, they being shorter lived, because God
intending to bring a flood upon the World, rescued the Elect from the fatal
Deluge. And the same reason is generally given in case Infants dye before the
use of reason, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Although Abijah came to
his grave whilst young, yet there was some good thing found in him toward the
Lord God of Israel.

Many times providence may make use of those distempered humors which the
child derived from its Parent, to be the instruments of death; a holy person
may dye in battle, and be surpised by every accident; all these things
falling alike to all.

Yet these examples do not contradict a general rule, viz. that Piety, and
Faith in Christ; is a good preservative of natural life. Enoch and Elias never
dyed, and became examples that a spotless life might possibly have been
immortal.

CHAP. XLIV.
SO that the best way to secure our health, is to endeavor to procure the
providence of God to be our life guard; but when he withdraws his protection we
are exposed to the aspect of a Star, the contingencies of a battle, and the
accidents of a humor: every day, and every minute we escape a thousand deaths
surrounding us, it is as natural for a young person to dye as an old, because
that is most natural which is most common, and has most natural causes; but to
dye with age is a very rare thing; but the sins of youth are the immediate
instruments of death; and although a man in a consumption be under the
preparations for death, yet one in health may be as near it, upon more fatal
and less discerned accounts, by a sudden Fever or Apoplexy, etc. There are
some vices that carry a knife in their hand, and cut of man before his time;
every sinful pleasure tops off a branch from our short life.

Although we fly from death, yet it follows us, and we do like the poor
creatures in Noah's flood, when one flour drowned, go to the next, and so higher
and higher, and more and more diffracted with the horror of death, and when at
the uppermost story, yet drowned at last; so we run from one disease, and
another overtakes us, and we are pursued until destroyed at last by the king
of Terrors.

CHAP. XLV.
DAvid endeavors to use all the means possible to secure his life,
notwithstanding he had been told by Samuel he should live to wear the Crown, so
that the Divine determinations concerning our lives should not lessen our care
to preserve our lives. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death,
was Adams sentence; the wicked and blood thirsty man shall not live out half
his days; as the Patridge sits on eggs and hatcheth them not, so he that
gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days.
The covetous rich man shall have his soul or life taken away, and then whose
are all his goods? Saul's disobedience, Ahaziahs evil consultations, Jeroboams
Idolatry, Benhadads curiosity, Ahabs cruelty, Hananiahs false Prophecy, Herod's
vainglory, Saphyras perjury, the Samaritan lords infidelity, the forty two
childrens calumny; these impieties had a particular influence upon the
contracting of their days, as sacred writ demonstrates.

CHAP. XLVI.
MOreover, the infirmities of virtuous and good men, may so far provoke the
Almighty, as to take away their natural lives, although he reward them with
Eternal life; as in the example of Moses and Aaron, and the good Israelites
that murmured; the good Prophet slain by the Lion, Ely and Vzziah. Sometimes God
cuts off children for the sinful miscarriage of Parents, as in the case of
Abijah, the widows child, David's child, Elies children. Sometimes Subjects for
the Ru^ers Impieties, as David's Sub^ects.

CHAP. XLVII.
ANother thing that is necessary toward the procuring the fluence of a Divine
blessing with the means, is to endeavor to find out the cause of the
distemper, I mean the supernatural cause; and to learn those lessons which
providence intends to teach by sickness; the Prophet's quaere, wherefore does
the living man complain? does plainly intimate that there is a reason; there is
an Achan o^ Babylonish garment, or something that causes the thorn in the
flesh, and this must be removed, for the Almighty does not afflict willingly;
the rod has a voice; there are many ends tha^ God aims at in all afflictions:
A^ to correct for sinful miscarriages* our minds have diseases as we^ as our
bodies; the tympany o^ pride, the fever of passion, the dropsy of
covetousness; an^ therefore we are fed with the bread of affliction, and the
water of adversity; the plagu^ of the heart, is many times cure^ with the
plague of the body* there is a root of bitterness, from whence all our troubles
spring: As there is a vanity lies hid in the best worldly good, so there is a
blessing lies hid in the worst worldly evil; we should imitate the Be, gather
sweet fruit out of bitter flowers.

CHAP. XLVIII.
WE should not like Baalam strike the Ass, look only upon the second cause of
our sickness; but behold the Angel, that is the immediate instrument. We are
very prone to attribute too much to second causes: but holy Job was of another
mind, when his children were killed by the fall of a house, he says, The Lord
took them away.

Sometimes the Almighty takes away a person by death in mercy to the person, as
Abijah and Josiah and others.

Sometimes he removes the child to exercise the parents faith, as Jobs
children, and in the case of Isaac. One reason why our distempers are no sooner
removed, is because the design of it is not answered.

CHAP. XLIX.
THere are many happy intentions that Divine providence aims at in laying
sicknesses and diseases upon the bodies of men.

One end that Divine Goodness aims at, is to demonstrate his own glory, in
healing and restoring, so says our blessed Lord concerning Lazarus; this
sickness shall not be unto death, but for the glory of God; and indeed
deliverance from sickness is a singular mercy both to a man's self and others.
Epaphroditus was sick nigh unto death, but God had mercy on him, and on me also
says holy Paul, and therefore we should bless the Lord with our souls, and all
that is within us should praise his holy name, and that upon this account,
because he heals all our diseases.

CHAP. L.
THis consideration ellivated the holy soul of Hezekias, and transported him
into a divine Doxology, viz. the living, the living, they shall praise thee, as
I do this day.

When men are miraculously delivered from death, after they have received the
sentence thereof in themselves, it is given to this end that thanks may be many
on their behalf.

When our souls are delivered from going down to the grave, and our eyes are
enlightened that we sleep not the sleep of death, then should we praise the Lord
in the great congregation, and our songs should be unto the God of our lives.

CHAP. LI.
ANother design of providence in sickness is to prepare men for greater
sufferings, it prepares us for death. St. Paul whose bodily presence was weak,
was ready to dye for the name of Christ, why should he be afraid of them that
kill the body, they can do no more then an Ague, or a Consumption, the sickbed
is the attiring room of the grave, in which we should be preparing our selves
for the solemnities of our funerals: sickness it is a gradual putting of this
vail of flesh, that we may be clothed upon, with our house, which is from
heaven, it is the the harbinger of death; that we may say with that holy man
when sickness comes, death works in us: death works apace, it works away our
health, it works away our strength, it works away our ease, and works us into
our graves.

CHAP. LII.
LOrd make me to know my end, was the sickbed prayer of holy David.

When patient Job was almost suffocated with the violence of his distemper, he
concludes thus, I know, thou will bring me to death and to the house appointed
for all living.

CHAP. LIII.
ANother design of God in sickness is to communicate experience of his power
and goodness in strengthening and supporting under it. Then is his strength made
perfect in weakness, then has the pious soul experience of Divine power
strengthening him upon his bed of languishing and making all its bed in its
sickness, when flesh and heart fails then God demonstrates to the soul, that
he is the strength of its heart and portion for ever

Thus sickness is sometimes laid upon us, is that we may experience the
excellency of divine visits, that in the end we may say thy visitation has
preserved my spirit.

CHAP. LIVE.
SOmetimes sickness is laid upon us to make us sympathize with others in the
same condition, David speaking of his very enemies, when they were sick,
sackcloth was his clothing, how much more should we sympathize with the members
of our spiritual head, and be sensible of the afflictions of Joseph.

CHAP. LV.
ANother end of sickness is to teach us to pray when our bodies are the sinks
of filthy humors, our souls should be vialls of precious Odors, Hezekias turned
his face to the wall and prayed when his life was like to be cut off with
pining sickness, when our natural beauty does consume away like a moth then we
begin with an O spare me that I may recover strength before I go hence and be
seen no more. And we begin to pour out a prayer when heavens chastising hand is
upon us.

CHAP. LVI.
SIckness is many times sent to try whether we will resign our selves and
Relations up by Death, as Job did his children, and as holy Ely said, It is the
Lord let him do what seems him good. Sometimes the knife of sickness is ready
to slay an Isaac, to try whether we will be willing to sacrifice him to the
will of God. If he will have our friends to eternity, who can give a randsom
for them?

We are apt to cry after them as Elisha did when Elijah was taken to heaven, My
Father, my Father, but he stopped not to answer him. O Absalom, my Son, my Son,
(cries the affectionat parent) would God I had dyed for thee?

Why should we mourn and weep for our dying Relations when all tears are wiped
from their eyes, and they are singing Hallelujahs, with harps in their hands,
to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

The more lovely and excellent the friend was we parted with, the more
admirable was our obedience.

CHAP. LVII.
SIckness sometime coms to try whether we are willing to leave this world and
to come to glory.

We should live so as to be ready at an hours-warning to leave all and to go to
eternity, Thou shall call me out of this life and I will answer thee, said the
holy man.

Sometimes a Fever, or a consumption stands at the bedside and cries, Husband
come away from thy wife, Parent come away from thy child: now how ready should
we be to be offered, and how willing that the time of our departure be at hand
that upon the least intimation we may readily go up to mount Nebo and dye?

CHAP. LVIII.
MAny times divine providence bids us go into a distemper and dye and go into a
sick bed and dye, and certainly did we but with an eye of faith see whether our
diseases would carry us, it would be a thousand times harder duty to be content
to live then to be willing to dye if sincere Christians.

CHAP. LIX.
ANother arrant, that sickness comes upon, it is to try whether we will hold
fast our integrity, when the hand of Heaven touches our bone, and our flesh,
he that can trust God although he kill him, the trial of that man's faith is
more precious then Gold, and will conduce to his praise honor and glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. LX.
ANother end it is to conform us more and more to the divine Image, one great
part of sick bed chastisements, is to make us partakers of Gods holiness,
although the outward man decay, the inward man is thereby renewed day by day,
after the image of him that created it; outward pains often procure inward
peace. The loadstone of mercy draws us not so nearly unto the likeness of God
as the cords of affliction.

CHAP. LXI.
ANother arrant sickness comes upon, it is to turn men from the ways of sin and
iniquity, unto virtue and obedience; hence God complains of the Jews, I have
sent amongst you the pestilence, yet have you not returned many times a fit of
sickness, it does more good than an hundred Sermons. Sickness it comes to
convince of sin, which is the meritorious cause of all diseases.

When our own wickedness does correct us, we should then know and see, that it
is an evil thing and a bitter, to forsake the Lord: in all our weaknesses God
looks upon us, to see if any say, I have sinned and it profits me not. This
was the effect of holy David's sickness, for he cries out, There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my
bones because of my sin.

CHAP. LXII.
IF we did but behold the plagues the Consumptions, the inflammations, and the
extreme burnings that attends as page^ upon our pride, wantoness, carnallity
and intemperance, we should stand in awe and sin not, but commune with our own
hearts upon our sick beds, and our spirits would make a more dilligent search
into the causes of our distempers.

CHAP. LXIII.
ANother errant of sickness is to convince us of the vanity of the creature;
what a vain treasure is that which a lump of phlegm may take from us; a dead
corpse is a poor thing, it must return naked as it came into the world. If we
could but view our selves, as we lie in our Graves and Coffins, what a poor
thing would the World be in our eyes.

When a man looks upon his stately buildings, and sees the sweet situation, the
wholesome air, the convenient rooms; oh what golden dreams a man is involved
in; but did, we see Death coming up into our windows, what pleasure then has a
man in his house after him, when the number of his months are cut of in the
midst.

How vain are Noble Pedigrees, and generous extractions, and ancient Families,
when we must say to corruption thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my
mother and sister.

CHAP. LIVE.
ONe end of sickness it is to hide pride from man; what a vain thing is humane
power? it will not avail in the day of sickness and death; if God do not
withdraw his anger the proud helpers stoop under him, men of high degree are
vanity; although a man flourish like a green bay tree, yet he shall soon be cut
down like the grass, and wither like the green herb.

Sickness teaches us the vanity of strength: though a man's bones be full of
marrow, yet when sickness coms his strength, shall be dried up like a potsherd.

How can our hands be strong in the day that God contends with us by sickness,
although a bow of steel has been broken by our arms, yet when sickness comes
we are powered out like water and all our bones are out of joint, then the
keepers of the house, the arms will tremble and the strong men, the limbs will
bow themselves, and we shall have reason to say verily every men, at his best
estate is all together vanity.

It may convince us of the vanity of children, they are indeed mercies in
themselves. O that I were as in months past says Job, when my children were
about me, though the fare be but course yet it is the more pleasant to have
these plants about the table, but sickness eomes and then these sweet flowers
like a posey wither that we must conclude childhood and youth are vanity.

An aching tooth will damp all the pleasures of the world.

CHAP. LXV.
HOw vain must the World be whose comforts are not valuable then whiles we have
them not.

What will all the glittering nothings of the world be worth, when God shall
let fall great drops of burning wrath upon that part of our souls which is most
tender when he shall with a heavy hand chafe our consciences with fire and
brimstone, when the worldling that wallows in thick clay shall behold that
judge which Gold and Silver cannot bribe, when the voluptuous will relish
little pleasure in carnal delights, God writing bitter things against him: what
a vain thing will music be to him that hears nothing but the screeches of his
own conscience? what will cups avail him that must drink only a cup of Fury?
what are titles of honor to a man whose conscience calls him Reprobate?

CHAP. LXVI.
SUppose our tongues faultering, our eye-strings broken, our limbs trembling,
for fear of an arrest by this grim sergeant death; mingle the best ingredients
the world can afford, it cannot make a cheering Cordial.

Honor is but a blast of Popular breath, and, like an echo, vanishes into
silence.

The misers Angils are all winged, and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven.

Does any man lie the safer because his bed posts are gilt, does our meal
relish the better because served up in gold? are our clothes more fit because
more fashionable? what is gold and silver but diversified earth and shining
clay? the entrails of the earth, the place of its birth, upbraid us for
accounting them so precious; the best perfumes are but the sweet of trees, or
the mucous excrement of a beast, the softest silks are but the workings of a
vile worm, the most generous wines but puddle water straind through a vine; and
our choicest dellicacies are but dirt Cooked up in various forms. Why should we
lay the foundation of our happiness upon such phantacies? But sickness comes
and gives us right notions of these things: and it teaches us the right
conduct of our Passions, to love these things as if we loved them not, it is
like wormwood, to wean us from the breasts of the creature. The most
considerable design of sickness, is to prepare us for Death and Judgment; to
make us listen to the strikings of the clock of time with the more attention,
to bring us to a more familiar acquaintance with that stinglesse Serpent, and
makes us apprehensive of our pilgrim state: there is nothing in death to make
it dreadful to a good Christian; many times our bitter cups are but as
mornings draughts to eternity; by sickness we knock at the gates of the grave,
every little accident stops our breath, the roughness of a grape stone, the
reflections of a Sun beam, the dust of a wheel, the aspect of a star introduce
death; let us therefore with Joseph take a turn or two in our garden, and visit
our Sepulcher.

Old age is but a young death, and a man may read the sentence of death in some
men's foreheads written in the lines of a lingering disease.

CHAP. LXVIII.
ALthough we came into the world but one way, we may go out a thousand.

Thus we see, sickness has many ends when it comes, and unless these be
answered we cannot expect its removal. It is like a faithful messenger, it
will not go without its message.

CHAP. LXIX.
ANother means to procure the influence of a Divine blessing, is, by imploring
a Heavenly benediction, by fixing our eyes upon Him who laid the sickness upon
us.

We should look to the hills from whence comes our help, for our help comes
from the Lord that made heaven and earth; it is he that wounds that must heal;
it is his hand that must make whole. Hence David calls the Pestilence a
falling into the hands of God, and when diseased, he cries out, Thy hand
presses me sore, and I am consumed by the blow of thy heavy hand. Diseases are
called Gods arrows: he shoots the arrow of a Consumption into the lungs of a
man; the arrow of a Fever into the heart of a man; or the arrow of the Gout
into the limbs of a man and like a shot dear, he walks and eats and sleeps, yet
the arrow sticks; friends pull, and Physicians pull, but he may say, Thy arrows
stick fast in me. If he give a commission to the Smallpox, or any other
disease, then the wounds stink, and are corrupt, and the body is filled with a
loathsome disease, and there is burnings in stead of beauty.

Our times are in Gods hands, he appoints the frequent returns of our
distempers, At the noise of his water spouts, his waves and his billows pass
over us. He appoints how long the distemper shall last, many continue in a
languishing condition some years, so that their lives hang in doubt, as Moses
expresses it, or as Heman says of himself, I am afflicted and ready to dye
from my youth up; and so Job complains, I am made to possess months of vanity
and wearisom nights are appointed to me.

CHAP. LXXI.
SO may we observe men spitting their lives away, notwithstanding their friends
provide good diet; the Physicians prescribes good remedies; the Minister puts
up fervent prayers; yet, as Job speaks, God is of one mind, and who can turn
him to restore health? But, when he speaks the word, the man is healed; I am
the Lord that heals thee, is the name he gives himself: and this is
acknowledged by the Leper; Lord if thou will, thou can make me whole; and
Christ did it, I will, Be thou clean. Thou art my King, command deliverances
for Jacob, said David, when the water-spouts came pouring upon him. Unto God
the Lord belong the issues from Death.

CHAP. LXXII.
WHat a great impiety is it to go to Witches or Wizzards, or such as have
familiar Spirits, nay to the Devils for cure? A thing absolutely forbidden in
Scripture.

A sad thing for a man to procure the Devils blessing with Gods curse; It is
called Idolatry and Whoredom. It is a violation of our Baptismal Covenant.
Shall not a Nation seek to their God in Covenant? Our Savior abhorred to
worship them, and shall his members do it? They use good words the better to
deceive the ignorant. They use charms, circles, spells, words, and other
signs, which have no natural virtue; nor can we with any ground pray for a
blessing upon these. The Devil being herein God's Ape: for, As God has made a
Covenant with his people; and has appointed signs and Seals upon the
faithful use of which he is present to perform what he has promised: So the
Devil makes a Covenant with Witches, upon which he has given signs and tokens
that if they use the one, he will perform the other. Let such as are guilty in
this kind repent, and pray that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven
them, as the Apostle counseled Simon Magus.

The power of Christ is the same now in Heaven as when on earth; in his hand
our breath is, and all our ways; in him we live and move and have our being;
we live not by bread alone, but by the word of blessing out of his mouth. Many
a man loses his life for want of asking it.

We are apt to blame this means and that accident, but seldom say as she did;
Lord, if thou had been here, My Brother or Sister had not dyed: the means
alone, are but like Elijahs staff, it will not do unless he come himself.

By fervent prayers we should invite Omnipotence to our beds sides; And call
for the Elders of the Church to pray for us.

All second causes are but the instruments in Gods hand to lengthen or shorten,
as He pleases.

CHAP. LXXIII.
THere are three general second causes of the death of all men, assigned in 1 Samuel 26.10.

As, some inward corrupt Humor or Disease, that smites the vitals, and
extinguisheth Nature's lamp; as a Lamp goes out when the oil it putrefied or
corrupt; as Asa's Gout, Jehoram's bloody flux, the plague of Leprosy, the
woman's child's Headache; and those diseases mentioned in the 28. of Deuteronomy.

Another second cause, is some external accident, as a Lamp is putout by the
Wind; so the unbelieving lord killed in a crowd, Ahab slain with an arrow; the
Captain of fifty with Lightning, Jobs children with the fall of a house; the
good Prophet by a Lion; Absalom hanged in a tree by the hair; Sodem by fire;
the fifty two children by the Bears; The old world by water; the Rebels against
Moses, the earth swallows up.

CHAP. LXXIV.
ANother second cause is when the natural heat and radical moisture is
consumed, as in old age as Jacob: when a man comes to his grave in a full age,
as a shock of corn comes in its season; as a Lamp must go out when there is no
more oil to feed it.

Yet, Providence has a hand in all these second causes: so that men provoke
God by their impieties to cut the thread of their their lives: and by Piety and
Obedience they may prevail with Him to lengthen their days, if he see good.

CHAP. LXXV.
ANother means toward the procuring the concurrence of a Divine blessing with
the means, is, To act faith and a holy confidence in God, with the use of
proper means; one touch of faith will cure, our faith will make us whole,
therefore trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. I had failed unless I had believed, said David. Faith is the best
cordial; in quietness and confidence lies our greatest strength; why should we
be cast down, let us hope in him who is the health of our countenance? What
time we are afraid we should trust in God, and beware of slavish fear and
carnal confidence; former experience is a good ground of confidence, He has
delivered, and in him we trust he will deliver us. Stand still and see the
salvation of God is good counsel toward recoery of health: it is a sign of
carnal confidence in the means, when we are continually trying new
experiments, and run from one thing to another, and leave rational and
experimental remedies.

CHAP. LXXVI.
REpentance and humiliation, is another means toward recovery from sickness;
if we humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, he will exalt us in due
time; the way to hasten the cure is to hasten repentance; our desire of life
should be in order to our preparations for death; if we break off our sins by
righteousness, it may be a lengthning of our tranquillity: Nineveh's repentance
spared their lives: if men will not reform, then God resolves to make them sick
with smiting them: as the Prophet speaks.

The last means to procure a Divine blessing, it is a patient waiting the good
pleasure of God without murmuring and repining, They that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength: God has his times for deliverance. It is goad for
a man to hope, and quietly to wait for the salvation of God, and not to say,
This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for him any longer? God has his
time to an hour, as our Savior intimates, Father, save me from this hour.

The Promise is, that Women shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue
in faith and patience; and it is of force in all other dangerous distempers. A
meek and a quiet spirit under all Divine chastisements, is a very great
ornament.

Some make Afflictions seem amiable by a pious and a patient Deportment.

CHAP. LXXVII.
MUrmuring is a dangerous sin; we have the Jews for an example, who were
destroyed thereby. A dreadful thing, when a man's body is so weak that he cannot
rise up in his bed, yet his corruptions are so strong, as to rise into an
uproar against Gods will and Authority.

It may be, some in Sickness may let fly their discontented spirits against
their children or relations; but they may answer as Moses to the Israelites;
What are we? your murmurings, are not against us, but against the Lord. Some
men practice what Jobs wife attempted, viz. curse God and dye.

Murmurers shall be judged at the last day as ungodly men, as Jude speaks.

Some in sickness howl upon their beds, when they should be blessing God.

In all sickness we should say with Naomi, Truly the hand of the Lord is
against me, and not in a stupid senseless way cry out, Indeed I am not well,
but I shall shake it off; it is only a flight distemper, I will work it out.
This is like the Jews, Truly this is my grief, and I must bear it as well as I
can; thus men put from them the evil day, and talk as if they were but
beginning to live when they are ready to dye, and boast as if they made a
covenant with death. It highly provokes God, that when his hand is lifted up,
they will not see it. Frowardness exasperates our calamities. Now there are
several considerations that may move Christians to patience and a willing
submission unto the hand of God in sickness, as to consider, That it is laid
upon us by a loving and wise Father, and this may compose our spirits. Shall we
not drink the cup which our Father has given us to drink? we have had fathers
of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much
rather be subject to the Father of Spirits and live? they chastened us after
their own pleasure, but He for our profit.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
SIckness it is a pledge of our Adoption: God afflicts in faithfulness, He aims
at our good thereby; and in making sore, he binds up; faithful are the wounds
of such a friend; when the righteous God smites, he does us a kindness; we are
not in heaviness except need be; let us not say, We are sick, so as to
complain, if sin be pardoned.

Again, Consider how many years of health you have enjoyed formerly, this may
compose the spirits; And shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not evil?

Again, Consider that it might be worse: It is a mercy we are not utterly
consumed, that we are out of hell, that we are scourged with rods not with
scorpions, that our calamity is a natural infirmity, not a wounded spirit, for
that is intolerable.

Again consider, that if our sickness be never so painful, we brought it upon
our selves, We should therefore bear the indignation of the Lord because we have
sinned against him.

CHAP, LXXIX.
A Gain, the best of men, in all ages, have been exposed to the same distempers
of body; Lazarus whom Christ loved, was sick. It is nothing but what is common
to man, and we may take the Prophets and Apostles for our examples in suffering
affliction of the like kind, and of patience.

Lastly, look beyond all these sorrows and sickness, the Time is short, the
Coming of the Lord draws nigh, Heaven will make amends for all; take a prospect
of the Land of Promise, where there shall be no more crying nor pain, but
sorrow, sighing, and sickness shall fly away.

And these Rules being observed in sickness would be an effectual way to
procure the concurrence of a Divine blessing, with the means that are used
toward the preservation of natural life.

A serious contemplation of Heaven, and a future State where these vile weak
languishing bodies, shall be made like the glorious body of Christ, in
spiritual agility and immortallity, may exhilarate the spirits of a Christian,
when his flesh upon him is so in pain, as to cause his soul with in him to
mourn. Spiritual peace is the best cordial to cheer up the heart against bodily
pains: the inhabitants of Sion complain not of sickness, if sin be but
pardoned. Our bodies are like Nebuchadnezzar's Image, whose feet were of clay:
our foundations are in the dust, and it is as natural, for our bodies to be out
of frame, as for a Watch to be irregular in its motions, nay far more natural;
besides, our indispositions depend upon supernatural causes. Sometimes sickness
and divine wrath, are concomitants, as Solomon intimates, and then its sad
indeed; and sometimes it comes to good purposes; if Naaman had not been
Leprous, he would not have given the Prophet a visit. Detrimenta Corporis,
incrementa virtutis; Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I am weak, and my bones
are sore vexed, says holy David, when Gods chastning was upon him.

The sickness of the body many times brings the body of sin into a Consumption,
and the holiness of the heart is many times promoted by the weakness of the
body; when Jacob's thoughts were in Heaven, he minded not his Thigh being out
of Joint. Surely it is a mercy that God has abridged so much of the term of
man's life, in these last days, wherein so much of Heaven is discovered, that it
would put a Saints patience to it, to know so much of the upper worlds glory,
and yet to be kept so long from it, as the Fathers in the first Ages were. Such
is the Saints state in this world, that their very life, and the pompous
entertainments of it, are but their cross, because they detain them from their
Crown.

CHAP. LXXX.
When we seriously consider and reflect upon the nature of man in this State
of mortality, and observe the wonderful composure of our Bodies; the Situation
of the Parts; the circulations of the Blood; the secret meanders of the Veins
and Nerves, and the curious distributions and digestions of our aliment into
Blood and Flesh, and take notice how small an obstruction in any part will
discompose our health, and stop the current of our ease; how small an
inflammation will transport us into an other world, as if we went in a fiery
Chariot; how mean a putrefaction is able to crumble us into our first Original;
These things considered, may not only compose our spirits under sickness, but
fill us with admiration, that we live an hour in health and ease.

Did we but consider our frame and remember we are but dust, how should we
wonder that every blast of air does not blow us into our sick beds, and graves?

We are as naturally exposed to trouble and sickness, as the sparks are to fly
upwards, why then should we not be thankful, that pains and anguish are not
our constant companions?

CHAP. LXXXI.
Were it possible for a man to stand upon one of the Battlements of Heaven,
and with one glance of his eye, to behold all the wounds and Diseases; and so
hear all the groans and complaints of all the sick persons in the world, how
would the blessing of health be prized by such a one? how uneasy a place is a
sick bed, when the man is full of tossing to and fro, until the dawning of the
day; and when it is day withing twere night, and when it is night wishing for
day, employing his time in telling the Clock, and entertaining melancholy
apprehensions of the blackness of the night? Sick men as Seneca observes;
Aegrotantes mutationibus ut remediis utuntur, use changes as if they were
remedies. How miserable in outward appearance is that man's case whose flesh is
clothed with worms, as holy Jobs was: Some Critics do observe, that the word
translated flesh, it springs from a root, which signifies, to bring glad
tidings, and the Gospel is expressed by it Evangelium, and they give this reason
for it, because there must be a taking off Flesh, viz. the incarnation of
Christ; which would bring the best news the world ever heard of.

CHAP. LXXXII.
OUr Bodies as they come out of the hands of sin are vile Bodies; and before
they can be made like unto Christ's glorious Body, This corruption must put on
incorruption. As they are the works of God they are wonderfully made, and all
our parts are exactly and curiously wrought, Os homini sublime de dit, etc.
says the Poet.

But yet sickness coms as a weavor; and cuts off our thread of life, as Hezekiah
upon his sickbed expresses it; nights and days pass the shuttle of our lives
backwards and forwards, but time quickly wears off the thread of life.

The Poets had a fiction, answering this allusion of the Holy Ghost, they tell
us of three Sisters, whereof one held the Distaff; the second drew the Thread;
the third cut it off; in this they shadow the State of man's life.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
WE may take notice of the vanity of our lives, by our frequent returns of
sicknesses and distempers. It is a good observation of Pineda, Abel viventium
Omnium typus and representatio, Adam called his Son Abel, which signifies
vanity, Psalm 144, there is an allusion unto those names, we translate it, Man
is like to vanity, but in the Hebrew it is, Adam is as Abel, Adam being a
common name to all men, are: Abels vain. Moreover says he, the word Abel, is
translated Idol in Deuteronomy. 32.31. and the Apostle tells us that an Idol is
nothing, and such is our life.

A mere man is but mere earth; the Prophet tells him so three times over with
one breath, Jer. 22. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; He is
earthly in the constitution of his Body, and earthly in the corruption of his
mind; why then should the living man complain and think it strange to meet with
sickbed trials? Sin is the mother that breeds all our Benonies, or sons of
sorrow and sickness; man had never tasted these sower herbs if he had not eaten
the forbidden fruit: yet we may like Sampson fetch meat out of this Eater, and
take this sickness which is so unpleasing to our flesh, for the advantage of
our spirit. If bodily health help us to relish our outward comforts, surely
saving health will sweeten the bitterest cup. One of the Ancients tells us, that
the image of the goddess Angerona was with a muffler at her mouth, placed at
the Alter of Volupia, to signify that pleasure shall be their portion who bear
sicknesses with patient silence, and submission.

When Pompey was sick, his subjects wore garlands and triumphed, they
apprehending it to conduce much to his advantage.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
A great Statesman of ours observes that we English are best when we are in
black. Anglica gens est optima flens, in the days of Edward the Sixth, when
the sweating sickness raged in England, then the Churches were thronged, and
the Ministers were sent to, to come to such a Lord and such a Lady, to pray
with them, and a bag of Money sent to give away to the poor, as a good Historian
observes.

Sometimes God does with his rod of correction, as Moses with his rod in Egypt,
viz. work wonders, although the Christian has been pressed by sickness out of
measure above strength insomuch that he has despaired even of life, and has
been ready to cry out, Master save me or I perish.. Yet he has lived to see
the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living, so efficatious has the
divine blessing been, that has attended the means of restoration, the
concurrence of which Benediction is a thing too much neglected, and the
generallity look upon the successes of remedies to depend altogether upon
second causes.

CHAP. LXXXV.
HIppocrates gave this Council to Physicians, when they they went to visit
their Patients, to consider whether there were not. Divinum aliquod in morbo.

And Galen says in medicina nihil exiguum: O how great a blessing is health,
vita non est vivere sed valere.

And doubtless the means to procure it must be both Honorable and profitable
and must be acknowledged, to be so by every one, that is, sanae mentis, and
does not want hellibore, so says the wiseman honor the Physician with that
honor due unto him, for God has created him, he has given men skill that he
might be honored in his marvelous Works; God has created Medicines out of the
earth with which he heals men, and takes away their pains, of which the
Apothecaries make a confection Ecclesiasticus

CHAP. LXXXVI.
THe Heathen, did so highly value there Pharmacia, that Apollo and Aesculapius
(esteemed by some) the first founders of physic, were adored as Gods, for the
excellency of their invention, and Hippocrates amongst the Grecians and
Cornelius Celsus amongst the Latins, are highly commended for there
improvements therein. Homer, does Heroically trumpet the Physicians praise.
(...).

Were it the divine pleasure to give men a constant frame of health, during
there pilgrimage, it were a wonderful favor, for Misere vivit qui medice vivit.
But it can not be, nature must be upheld by Art: as Hippocrates in his first
Aphorism, (...). Our bodies like standing waters will gather mud and collect
ill humors, so that as Hippocrates observes, ultimus sanitatis gradus est morbo
proximus. Never was there a greater piece of folly committed by the Romans,
then when they banished their learned Physicians.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
THe Blessed God is pleased to style himself Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the
Physician Exodus the 15, and the holy Jesus has his name (...) ab (...) sano
(though chiefly in a spiritual sense) from his healing nature.

It is observable that those words in the 147 Psalm. 3. in our old English
translation are expressed thus viz. He gives medicine to heal their sicknesses.

Health is the Prince of outward blessings, the widow in the Gospel disesteemed
her substance in comparison of this jewel. The Physician is therefore called
manus dei to hand it to us.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
SOme indeed there are may be called manus Diaboli, both for their ignorance
and baseness, like that French man, who gave these verses in writing to all his
Patients, for the cure of their diseases. Sivis curari de morbo nescio Quali
Accipias herbam, sed Qualem nescio nec Quam.
Ponas nescio Quo, curabere nescio Quando.
English thus, Your pain I know not what, do not fore-slow
To cure with herbs, but what I do not know
Place them well bruised, I know not where and then.
You shall be perfect, whole. I know not when.


It is a great privilege to have one who will cure by friendship as well as by
Physic, as Seneca, huic ego non tanquam medico sed tanquam amico obligatus
sum, although we ought in the first place to acknowledge our gratitude to the
great Physician for our recovery, as the Lepers under the Law, after they were
cleansed, were to offer their gifts to the divine Majesty, and the same word
which signifies to heal signifies to Worship because after healing men should
Worship, yet the Physician is worthy of a liberal fee, the Abderites when they
wrote to Hippocrates for the cure of Democrates (whom they thought distracted
because he always laughed, at the rediculousness, of m^ns lives) sent him
word. Quicquid auri apud nos est libenter, persolvemus etiamsi; tota urbs
nostra aurum esset, it is a great mercy to be in a condition, to administer
help to the sick in their distress, the generallity being like the Priest and
Levite, if they see a man wounded though to death, pass on the other side of
the way, nay like Hazaels wet cloth, prove deadly to their friends lives and
healths.

Sickness says one is, officina virtutis, morum disciplina, the shop of
virtue, the school of manners; the tide time of devotion.

King Alfred was wont to say I always find my self best in soul when worst in
body.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
BEnhadad the King of Syria an enemy to goodness in his health, will send to
Elisha with a large present, and submissive expressions in his sickness; a sick
bed, being the highway to the grave makes men serious.

The Rabbis say that when Adam eat the forbidden fruit his head aked, it is
clear, sin is the original of sickness, when we are chastised with pain upon
our beds, and the multitude of our bones with strong pain, then the Almighty
seals up our instructions and the sick bed becomes a pulpit in which the Spirit
of God preaches to us, many serious truths, and convinces us of our sin and
folly: our Redeemer is said to bear our sicknesses, because he bears our sin in
his body on the tree, yet, so incorrigible are some under Divine corrections,
that having been smitten, they have revolted yet more and more, and like
Jeroboam, been worse after his hand was withered, and will not acknowledge the
sovereignty of God, as Naaman did after his recovery, that when there are ten
cleansed we may well say where are the nine, that return thanks, such is the
power of infidellity, and Ingratitude.

CPAP. XC.
A healthful life is a right hand blessing, Prove. 3.16, Adam the first man,
lived near a thousand years, after his creation 930 years, being then a perfect
man, we may reckon him nearer a thousand years than Methusalah when he dyed.
There might be many reasons consigned for the long lives of the patriarchs, as
that mankind might be multiplied, that Arts and sciences might be perfected,
and that men might be acquainted and skilled in the course of nature, having no
books, from which to collect observations, but alas the case is not so with
us, fewand evil are the days of our pilgrimage, and we cannot arrive at the
years of our Fathers, in the days of their pilgrimage we are but of yesterday
and know nothing; (comparatively to what we might know,) because our days upon
earth are but as a shadow: indeed Adam in his sinless state, might possibly
have been Imortal, and his eating of the tree of life, might have conduced to
the supplying of his radical moisture as fast as it suffered depredation, by
his vital spirit: Moreover the tree of life in Paradise might be of a
Sacramental signification, that perseverance in a state of Evangelical
obedience unto the father, by the son through the Spirit, is the most effectual
way to obtain a long and a healthful life in this world, (so far as it
conduces to the creatures good and the Creators glory,) and a blessed
Immortallity in the next.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
Courteous Reader, thou art desired to correct with thy pen, these following
Errata's, or any other if thou observest them.

PAge. 8. line. 4. read precious, p. 9. l. 5. r. prejudicial, p. 10. l. 12. r.
thought, p. 16. l. 7. r. nutritive, p. 24. l. ul. r. then, p. 42 l. 21. r.
paratur, p. 50. l. 21. r. gluttony p. 75. l. 8. r. shall, p. 76. l. 11. r.
errand, p. 82. l. 8. r. for not read only, p. 107. l. 14. r. all men are Abels,
vain.


