A New Song of Lulla By, OR, Father Peter's Policy Discovered.
A Pretty Bade, and Hopeful Son,
of late we much did boast,
But now, alas! we are undone,
was ever Rome so croft.
To the Tune of, Green Sleeves. Or, My Mistress is to Bulling gone.


IN Rome there is a most fearful Rout,
And what do you think it is about?
Because the Birth of the Babe's come out,
Sing Lulla by Babee, By, by, by.
The Nuns and Friars fret and brawl,
And tell the Pope, the Heretics all
Does swear it came in at the Hole in the Wall,
Sing Lulla, etc.
His Holiness did stamp and stare,
Biting his Thumbs and tearing his Hair,
And said, why did you not take greater care.
Sing Lulla, etc.
The Jesuits swear the Midwife told Tales,
And ruined his Highness the Prince of Wales;
She Is Jade for her pains, Cots-plutter-a-nails.
Sing Lulla, etc.
Another laid all the whole blame on the Nurse
His Holiness Swore 'twas so much the worse;
By Bell, Book and Candle he straight did her Curse,
Sing Lulla, etc.
What though it was but a forged device;
Why yet by singing of Mass once (...) twice,
I Would a made it an absolute Heir in a trice,
Sing Lulla, etc.
The Popish Crew did all protest,
That twenty great Men would swear at least,
They see his Welsh Highness creep out of his Nest,
Sing Lulla, etc.
The Goggle-ey'd Monster in the Tower,
He peeped at his Birth for above an hour,
And 'twas a true Prince of Wales he swore.
Sing Lulla, etc.
There was another Renowned Spark,
He see as well what was done in the dark,
As if he had stood in the City of York.
Sing Lulla, etc.
And both were so well satisfied,
They knew the sweet Babe from a thousand they cried
'Twas born with the Print of a Tile on his side,
Sing Lulla, etc.
This shows he came of the Royal Race,
And therefore ought indeed to take place;
But alas! alas, I pity his case.
Sing Lulla, etc.
Some say it is a Prince of Wales by right,
And those that deny't, it is out of spite,
But God send the Mother came honest by it,
Sing Lulla, etc.
With holy water, and sweet perfume,
And a holy Smock that was sent from Rome,
Did cause a young Infant to spring in her womb,
Sing Lulla, etc.
The Papists thought themselves greatly blessed,
Before the young Babe was brought to the Test;
But now they call Peter's a Fool of a Priest,
Sing Lulla, etc.
The Priests in order to fly to the Pope,
Are gotten on Board of the Foreign Hope,
For all that stay here will be sure of a Rope,
Sing Lulla by babee, by, by, by.
Printed in the Year 1688.


