A new Carroll compyled by a Burgess of Perth, to besung at Easter next 1641.
which is the next great episcopal feast after Christmasse:
To be sung to the tune of Gra-mercie good Scot.
WHen Jock of broad Scotland went South to complain
That, Prel^ts-and pick-thanks this land had ov'rgane,
He came unto Tweed, Heaven favored him so,
The waters soon fell, and so let him go,
That without great trouble his foot came to land,
Where Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand.
Jack bade him beware there were knaves in the way,
That would meet him and kill him, at least make a fray.
But Jock went on with a bag full of bloes,
He had ay two for one, to give to his foes,
With a club and a cudgel whom ever he fand;
Yet Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand.
But Jock being weary he took him to rest,
The winter being cold, where the fire was best.
He sent his complaint, to him who commands,
It was found to be just, with all his demands.
How the prelat and pick-thank had joynd in a band;
Yet Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand.
They banded to put both the body and saull
Of the poor Scot at home in a terrible thrall,
By loosing the bands of the Kirk and the State,
Comforming to Rome their Imperial seat,
Where beast after beast has still had command,
Yet Jack of fair England has took Jock by the hand.
The Scot had a good and an honorable cause,
For still he protested to live by the laws,
And that made his courage both courteous and keen
Although that his purse was sober and mean:
By begging or stealing he sure could not stand;
But Jack of fair England has took Jock by the hand.
Jack told him so long as his cause was so good,
He should neither want money, nor fuel, nor food,
Un(...) it were clearly ^oth heard and discust,
And prelates and pick-thanks both dung to the dust.
Be merry good Scot, they shall both understand
That Jack of fair England has thee by the hand.
When Jock did send home, he wrote it for news,
That England warred Ireland in wearing of trewes.
For Ireland but wears them on their nether parts,
But England on both their heads and their hearts.
Let Scotland and Ireland praise God in a band,
That Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand.
And also he wrote, that made Scots to dance,
That England for manners warred the kingdom of France
For still they were giving, God knows what they got,
Yet they said and they sang, grand mercy good Scot.
French manners, an sword, and an idol we fand,
For purity and peace, Jack took Jock by the hand.
Now good Scot return, thy prelates are gone
As beasts to their dens; thy pick-thanks each one
Are all to the rout, and have quat their cause.
Take them home with thy self, and after thy Laws
Sit and judge the false traitors that joynd in a band,
For Jack of fair England has thee by the hand.
Come here good Scot as a friend when thou will,
Go camp with thy friends in Ireland thy fill;
Keep order at home, serve GOD and thy Prince,
Thy Kirk and thy Countery are settled from hence:
It shall be proclaimed through many a land,
That Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand.
When Jack of fair England has to do with a man,
Let Jock of broad Scotland advertised be than.
For Jock shall be ready when Jack has to do,
With his club and his cudgel, and his wallet too.
Till the whore be hunted by sea and by land,
It Is for God and the King, Jack and Jock joineth hand?
FINIS.

