The Names of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Who Deserted, (not Protested)
against the Vote in the House of Peers, the Sixth Instant, against the Word
Abdicated, and the Throne Vacant, in the same Method as they Entered their
Names in the Journal Book.
Somerset. Exeter. Clarendon. Bp. of Winchester. A. Bp. of York. Bp. of
Lincoln. Aylsbury. Bp. of Norwich. Bp. of Chichester. Bp. Bath and Wells. Bp.
of St. David's. Bp. of Peterborough. Bp. of Gloucester. Nottingham. Litchfield.
Rochester. Feversham. Berckley. Bp. of Landaff. Dartmouth. Griffin. Bp. of
Bristol. Pembrook. Ormond. Beauford. Brook. Jermayne. Scarsdale. Maynard.
Northumber land. Arundel. Chandois. Leigh. Delaware. Grafton. Abingdon. Craven.
A Form of Settling the CROWN and Succession agreed on in the House of Commons,
and by them Communicated to the House of Lords for their Concurrence.
HAving therefore an Entire Confidence, that his Highness the Prince of Orange,
will perfect the Deliverance so far Advanced by him, and will still preserve
them from the Violation of their Rights which they have Asserted, and from all
Attempts upon their Religion, Lives, and Liberties, the said Lords and
Commons, do Declare and Proclaim, that the said Prince and Princess of Orange,
be Proclaimed and Declared KING and QUEEN of England, France, and Ireland, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the
said Kingdoms and Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their
Royal Lives, and the longer liver of them, and that the Administration of the
Government be only in and Executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names
of the said Prince and Princess during their Lives; and after their Decease,
the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, to the
Heirs of the Bodies of the Prince and Princess; and in Default of such, to the
Princess, and the Heirs of her Body; and in Default of such, to the Princess of
Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and in case of such Default, to the Heirs
of the Body of the Prince of Orange; And the Lords and Commons Pray the Prince
and Princess of Orange, to accept of the same. And that the Oaths mentioned in
our last, be taken by all the Persons of whom the Oaths of Allegiance may be
required by Law; And that the Oaths of Allegiance to King James the Second be
Abrogated.

Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


