THE KINGS Entertainment at GUILD HALL OR; Londons Option in Fruition.
COome all ye Muses nine, assist me pray,
Here Is, work enough to hold you all in play;
Lend me your aid also, you Graces three,
Aglia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne;
And yet you're all too few to guide that quill
That means in this Days Praise to try its skill;
Wonder and silence would it more proclaim,
Than words or Poetry it self by name.
Scarce was the Sun arose from Tithon's bed,
But London was with Galileans spread
Gazing at those Solemnities that were
Performed in reverence to their good Lord Mayor;
Who for his most unparall'd Loyalty,
His signal Faithfulness and Charity,
Unto the King, the City, and the Poor,
Was of the Citizens Elect, by more
Unanimous consents than have been known
Conferred these many years on One alone.
Who (being attended gallantly by all
The Senators and Companys of each Hall,
All in their several Barges) hence was bor'n
Before the Exchequer Barons to be sworn,
Westminster-Ceremonies being past,
To London he returns again at last.
The River Thames being all overspread
With Boats and Barges was quite covered.
Hark how the Drums do beat, and Trumpets play,
As if Bellona here, or Mars did stay.
The very Sirens, they themselves would be
Entrapt to hear so sweet a melody.
Look how the Streamers and the Flaggs do flutter,
And little Fishes frisking seem to mutter.
Nereus and all the Nymphs did sport and play,
Rejoicing at the Tryumphs of that day.
The very water seemed to be proud
To have the honor to bear such a crowd.
Now the Lord Mayor on Shore being safely Landed,
To the Guild Hall is as before Attended;
Him all the Pageants with applause saluted,
Others with Admiration to him shouted;
And in this sumptuous state they all
Pass through the Streets to Dinner at Guild Hall
Where they the Judges meet, and all the Princely T(...)
The Duke, the Queen, the King, whom God gran^ to R(...)
To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Viner, K(...) and Baronet, Lord Mayor of
the City of London
Great SIR,
SUpporter of our famous City,
Now almost gone to ruin, more's the pity!
Be you our Sun, and with your rays expel
Those threatening Clouds which in our Orb do sw(...)
Our greatest expectations, Sir, do lie
In your great Prudence, and your Clemency;
Londons Viceroy, may you our Joseph be,
Lay up our Corn against a scarcity;
That through your Care, this City London may
Help all the Neighborhood when they are at a sta(...)
And that it may with Wealth so much abound
That Mints of Money may in the 'Streets be found:
Which to effect be you our Solomon,
Who Silver caused to be as flush as Stone;
And when you have so done, may you enjoy
There greatest blessings free from all annoy.
May London, You, her great Astrea find;
May London to you thankful prove and kind;
May you of London take a special Care;
May London proud be of so good a Mayor;
O blessed Conjunction! In one man to see
Honor and Arts, Wisdom and Piety!
Londons great Hector, and Augustus may
You outlive Nestor many an happy day.
By John Norton, AEtat. suae
LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, for Rowland Reynolds at the Sun and Bible in
the Poultery, 1674.


