Natures Wonder?
OR, (...) ^^^ount how the Wife of one John Wate^man an Ostler in the Parish of
Fisherton-Anger, near Sali^bury, was Delivered of strange Monster upon the
26th. of October 1664. which lived until the 27th. of the same Month. It had
two Heads, four Arms, and two Legs. The Heads standing contrary each to the
other; and the Loins, Hipps and Legs Issueing out of the middle, betwixt
both. They were both perfect to the Navell, and there joined in one, being but
one Sex, which was the Female. She had another Child born before it (of the
Female Sex) which is yet living, and is a very comely Child in all proportions.
This is Attested for truth, by several Persons which were eye witnesses.

The Tune is, London Prentice: Or, Jovial Bachelor.




COme take a view good People all,
observe it well with heed
A stranger Wonder Nature did
never frame of Humane Seed;
A Monster of misshapen Form
I here to you present,
By this Example you may learn
to fear Gods Punishment.
Strange Wonders has been lately shown
within our English Nation;
But none so strange as this was known,
you will find by this Relation;
Then give attention to the same,
I Will show you how it was,
To tell the truth it is no shame,
for thus it came to pass.
At Fisherton near Salisbury,
a Husbandman does dwell
John Waterman so called is he,
his Neighbors all can tell;
It was his Wife which did bring forth
this strange Misshapen Thing:
From East to West, from North to South
the News thereof will ring.
It was but in October last,
the Six and twenty day,
No longer since it was done and past:
I can for certain say
This Woman was Delivered well,
and with her Life she escaped
Of this same Monster I Will tell
how strangely it was Mishap't.
The se^ond Part,
to the same Tune.
TWo Heads it had, grew opposite,
the Picture plain appears
With all proportions fair in sight,
Mouths, Noses, Eyes and Ears,
Two Bodies shaped perfectly,
down to the Navel seen,
And there they joined wondrously,
the Hipps and Legs between.
The bodies being joined in one,
were of the female Sex,
The like thereof was never known,
they strangely did Connex;
Four Arms were on the body placed,
it had of Legs but two;
Thus Nature had her work defaced,
which she does seldom do.
The Women they were all afraid
to see this fearful sight,
(...) eke the Midwife much dismayed
when as it came to light,
But most of all the Mother weak
her grievious Pains was much,
She had not power long time te speak
her sorrow it was such.
Two days and nights this Monster lived
in woeful misery,
The Parents they were sadly grieved,
the Neighbors came to see;
At length it died, and was conveyed
for Chyurgeons to Dissect,
And what Report thereof had said,
they found it in Effect.
Another Babe this Mother sad
brought forth at the same birth,
A comelier Ch^ld on woman had
upon the face o'th Earth;
Nature in that did make amends,
proportioning each Part;
She may bring joy unto her Friends,
and cheer her Mothers heart.
Afflictions God does sometimes send
to Parents for their sin,
When they will not their lives amend,
then does the Lord begin
With Judgments for to humble them,
and make them feel his hand;
O turn unto the Lord in time,
for none can Him withstand.
Our God has many ways to make
vile Sinners come to shame:
If once they do his Laws forsake,
and wrong his holy Name,
A thousand Judgments (worse then this)
he on that People brings,
That will not mend what is amiss,
but act such heinous Sins.
Then Parents all Example take,
at all times seek the Lord;
Fruit of your bodies he can make
by your own selves abhorred:
Your Children which should be a joy
and comfort in the end,
The Lord in fury will destroy,
if you do him Offend.
FINIS.
A true Relation of this strange and wonderful MONSTER.
AT Fisherton-Anger, near the City of Salisbury (called New Saram) near to the
sign of the Angel, Lives one John Waterman an Ostler, His Wife (whose name is
Mary) was Delivered (on Wednesday the 26th. of October 1664. about two a Clock
in the Morning) first of a very comely Daughter (which is yet living) And after
of a strange Monster which was formed Triangular, two Heads (at either end one)
four Eyes, two Mouths four Arms, two Stomachs, And joined together at the
Navell; and below that two Legs and Thighs, with Natures Passage (as other
Female children have) and a Foundament: They were Baptized at 3 a Clock the
same Morning, the first was named Eefelet: and the Monsters were named Martha
and Mary; they had very comely faces, and both received Sustinance, but not
together: This Monster lived two days and then dyed, and is Imbalmed, and to
be brought to London to be seen. There has been both Lords, Ladys, and much
Gentry to see it; The Father (bring a poor man) had twenty pound given him the
first day, by persons of Quality.

I Josiah Smith, Practitioner of Physic, saw them all three alive.

With Alowance,

November. 12th. 1664.


Printed for E. Andrews at White-Lyon in Pye-corner.


