A NARRATIVE Of the Progress of His Most CHRISTIAN MAJESTY'S ARMS AGAINST THE
DUTCH, With the Names of the several Places taken.

Likewise, A LETTER from his said Majesty to the QUEEN of France, giving an
Account of his passing the Rhine at Tolhuys: With a List of the French Nobility
killed and wounded in that Action.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the Year, 1672.

A NARRATIVE OF His Most Christian MAJESTY'S Conquests obtained over the DUTCH;
with the Names of the several Places taken.
Likewise a Letter from His said Majesty to the Queen of France.
YOu have with too much impatience, expected the opening of this Campaign, to
be any longer deprived of the Account of those prosperous beginnings which have
already signalized it, wherein the Success of the King has evidenced and
asserted the Justice of his Arms. However, Historians are obliged to a more
then ordinary diligence, to be able to keep pace with that swift course of
Victory that attends his Majesty. We scarce had heard, that this glorious
Monarch was preparing to undertake an action of the highest reputation to his
designs, but that we were immediately told he had gone through with it, with
all the advantage imaginable; but I fear I do too long provoke your appetite,
it is now time to satisfy it. I shall enter upon the matter with the
particulars of the defeat of a considerable part of the Garrison of Rhineberg,
which was but a praeludium to the rest.

The Vicount de Turenne (being arrived the Twenty ninth of May with a Body of
Horse, at a small Place situate upon the Rhine, within a Leage of Keiserwart,
belonging to the Elector of Cologne, which they began to fortify toward the
River) went to see part of the Kings Troops, to the number of 10000 Men, who
lay entrenched near the Head of a great Bridge of Boats which they had fitted
up in that Place, besides another built over the Rhine, which is of a
particular make, and is defended by a Floating Redoubt, that bears both Men and
Artillery.

After having well viewed these Troops, which he found in excellent order, he
appointed the Count Montai (that Commanded them) to go the next night and
discover the Country, in order to the Armies marching securely by Rhineberg,
and Burick, up to Wesel. The Count set out to execute this Command with 200
Horse, belonging to His Majesty's Guards, under the Command of the Sieur
Mombrun, Captain Lieutenant of the second Company of the Kings Musketeers,
with the like number of Light Horsemen under the Command of the Marquess of S.
Gelais, Colonel of the Regiment of Dauphine, and Thirty Dragoons.

After having marched all night, he arrived next morning by break of day at
Abbaye de Camp, within a League of Rhineberg, where he heard, That the Garrison
of that Town went out very often to cut Wood, in the adjoining Forest which
belongs to the Elector of Cologne, for the making of their Palisadoes, and
desiring to make his advantage of it for the Kings service, he resolved to lay
an Ambush for them about a League and an half from the Abbey. To that end, he
went to a place which was showed him by his Guides, but not finding that
convenient, he would choose one nearer to Rhineberg: so leaving his Troops
there, he only took with him three of the Guard, as many Musketieres and six
Dragoons, with whom were the said Sieur de Mombrun, the Count de Druy, the
Chevalier de Bethune; these two serving as Adjutants, and the Sieur de Bois aid
Major of Charle Roy.

Being come into a close Road, he discovered 150 Musquettiers which came from
Rhineberg; whereupon (Fortune seeming so to favor his Design) he sent back the
said Sieur de Mombrun in all have to his Troops, to bring him a 100 Horsemen and
the Dragoons, hiding himself in the mean while from being seen. But the Enemy
continuing their march on that side where he was, he commanded the three
Musketeers and six Dragoons that were with him to light of their Horses, and
go into a Ditch, hard by the way. But the Vantguard of the enemy, which marched
near 50 paces distance from their Body, perceiving them, and crying out, Who
are you for? they fired at them.

The Enemy immediately filled all the way, and discovered the Count of Montal,
who was forced to charge them with those few people he had with him, who
bravely broke through them, after having received great part of their shot, and
got between two Hedges very thick set with Bushes, that grew all along on the
sides of the Ditches.

The noise hastened forward the Sieur de Mombrun, with the Troop of Gensdarms,
consisting of fifty Men, who set upon the Hollanders; but they (without being
any way disordered) going into the Ditches, shot so thick, that he was forced
to cause all his Dragoons, Gensdarms, and the Kings Musketeers to light off
their Horses.

The Enemy seeing that, and that the other Troop of Light-Horsmen came on,
began to think of taking the safest course, which was to retreat cross a Corn
Field, to other Hedges which were yet stronger; by the means of which, they
might get into Rhineberg, not imagining that our people should have been able
to pass a Ditch ten foot deep.

But Fortune presented a Passage to the Count of Montal, which he leaped over
with his Horse, being followed but by a few, by reason of its difficulty; and
those that were on foot, getting over in other places, the Hollanders saw the
way was intercepted, and so were forced to return to their old post, whence
they continued their shooting; but were immediately set upon by those that were
on foot, and by the Fifty Light Horsemen, at the Head of which, was the Sieur
St. Gelays, and at the same time the Count de Montal fell upon them in the way,
where every one behaved himself so gallantly, that they came up to one another,
till at last the Hollanders were forced to call for Quarter, after having had
Fifty of their number killed. So the rest were made prisoners, the greatest
part of which were wounded, in which number were a Lieutenant, two Ensigns, a
Lieutenant Colonel, that commanded the party; the Governor of Rhineberg's Son
in Law, who was wounded in the Body with two Musket shots. The Count de Montal,
brought them that night to the Camp, where he found the Vicount de Turenne, and
the Marquess de Louvoy, who were extremely satisfied with the success they had
against the Enemy, who were almost equal in number to the Assailants, and had
besides an unquestionable advantage of the Ground.

And one may justly say, That never did Soldiers fight with greater courage
then these did on this occasion, as if they had represented to themselves, that
it was the first exploit of the Campaign, and were thence encouraged to
signalize in a particular manner their Zeal and Valor. But the Sieur de
Mombrun, the Marquess of St. Gelays, the Chevaliers de Bethune and de
Marsillac, and several others, were prodigal of their persons, in imitation of
the Count de Montal, who has merited the greatest share of glory, by his wise
conduct and forward valor in this Action: Which is so much the more memorable,
in that there was killed on our side but two private Soldiers, three of the
Kings Musketeers, one Guarde du Corpse, some Horsemen, and three Horses. There
were two Dragoons wounded, and the Chevalier de Marsillac Cornet of
Light Horse, who was shot in the Body with a Pistol, but if he escape, we shall
obtain a Victory at a very easy rate, and teach our Enemies not to dare to
venture out while our Troops are abroad. But I shall leave this, for to give an
account of the Conquest of four Towns, which were almost as soon taken as
attempted. I here send you the first Advices from the Camp, still expecting the
farther particulars.

The King having resolved the 30. past to form these four Sieges, arrived the
2. instant about nine in the morning before Orsoy; that day being spent in
observing the Situation of the place, it was resolved, to begin the Siege the
night following: Which was put in execution about ten at night, according to
the Orders of the Duke of Orleans, to whose care his Majesty had committed the
Conduct of this Attack, whilst the Prince of Conde besieged Wesel, the Viscount
Turenne Burick, and the rest of the Troops Rhineberg, whither his Majesty was
gone himself to the Cavalry, commanded to invest that place, and their several
Posts, afterward returned to Orsoy. It was ordered to make two real, and two
false Attacks, the former to be commanded by the Duke of Roanez,
Lieutenant General, the Chevalier de Lorrain, Maistre de Camp, and the Marquis
de Beringhen, Colonel; and the false Attacks to be made by two Companies of the
Kings Regiment, under the conduct of the Count de St. Geran, and the Marquis de
Moussy. The Assault was made with so much vigor and bravery, that they began
to lodge their Men at the foot of the Counterschape, the Breach having been
made at the head of it.

His Majesty, who no more spares himself than the least Officer or Soldier of
his Troops, resolved, being accompanied by Monsieur, to observe himself the
opening of this Breach, behind a small Battery, to preserve him from the Cannon
of the Enemy, though with so little security, that the Chevalier d' Arquien was
killed there upon the place.

As well the Besiegers as the Besieged, continued shooting very furiously all
night; the besieged not being wanting to make some resistance to favor the
humor of the French, to whom no Action seems to merit any Honor, that is not
accompanied with some difficulty.

About Nine next Morning, Monsieur sent a Trumpetter with the Count of Grammont
to Summon the Town, but notwithstanding that, he assured the Governor, that
they could not hold out two days longer, and in case he deferred to Surrender
the Place, that all the Garrison should be put to the Sword, and the Town left
to the Pillage of the Soldiers: The said Governor answered with all the Courage
poffible, That the States General had not entrusted him to that Post, to quit
it so easily. But, notwithstanding this Dutch Bravado, he quickly cooled, and
was oblidged to surrender the Place, upon no other Terms, then that he and his
Garrison should remai^^ Prisoners of War.

All those that were employed in this Attack, strove to out-doe each the other
in performing wonders; The Count de Grance, and the Sieur de St. Hilaire, were
dangerously wounded with Musket Shot, the one in the Knee, and the other in the
Reins. The Sieur de Beauvire Captain in the Dolphins Regiment was Mortally
wounded, the Count de Valin was killed, with a Lieutenant, about Eight common
Soldiers, there having been only Five wounded.

The Fourth Instant, the Viscount Turenne, who had opened the Trenches before
Buricke the day before, came early in the morning to acquaint His Majesty with
the taking of that Place, on (...) ^^^ditions that Ors^y was; The same day the
(...) sent likewise to give His Majesty an Account of the Surrender of Wesel
upon the first Attack they had made on the Fort on the Lip not far from the
said Place.

So that only Rhynbergh remained untaken, where in was resolved to open the
Trenches the next day, at night, but the loss of these three other places had
so disheartened the Garrison of this, that not daring to expect an Attack, they
Implored the Kings Mercy, who accordingly permitted the Garrison to draw out
the next morning with Drums beating, Colors flying, and with their Baggage,
having ordered a Convoy to conduct them to Maestricht.

Thus Victory and Glory delight to heap their Crowns upon the head of this
great Monarch, who with so much ardor undergoes the Toiles of the War, that he
seems to Merit the Favors of the one and the other, having subjected under his
Power Four Places, in so small a time, and with the Loss only of 100 Men, who
have been killed in these Actions.

From the Rhine near Wesel, June 9.
THe Eighth Instant His Most Christian Majesty arrived at Ossembergh, where he
received advice from the Viscount de Turenne, That Rees had Surrendered upon the
first approach of the French Troops, without making the Least resistance; And
the same day the Prince of Conde sent to acquaint His Majesty with the taking
of Emmericke.

From the Camp at Rees, June 10.
HIs Most Christian Majesty arrived here, having received Advice, that the
Sieur de Beauvire with 600 Horse, and 100 Dragoons had taken Doetechem, and on
the other side the Sieur de Choiseul had taken the Castle of Vlm^, and in it
150 Soldiers, whom he made Prisoners.

His Most Christian Majesty's LETTER to the QUEEN of France.
From the Rhyne near Tolhuys.
YEsterday before Night I received the News of the taking of Groll by the
Bishop of Munster, who besieged it in Person with the Forces of the Elector of
Cologne and his own, Commanded by Monsieur de Luxembourg, it is one of the best
places the Hollanders had, it held out but four days. The Prince having given
me an Account of the Fords and Passages that I had ordered him to discover
along the Rhine, from Schenck as far as Arnheim; I passed through Rees with my
Gensd'armes, and came into his Camp near Emmerick, where I supped; and, as soon
as I rose from Table, took Horse together with him, after I had given Orders
for the drawing out of a Thousand of his Foot, and the Marching of a body of
Horse and Dragoons with some Artillery, and the Boats for Transportation, and
arrived this morning before day. I had with me a Guide that knew exactly all
the Fords of this River, upon whose Information ^ Commanded the Count de Guiche
to discover a part of it over against a place called Tolhuys, which upon trial
he found Fordable. I planted two Batteries upon the Banck of the Rhine to play
upon them that should offer to oppose the Horse I intended to send over on the
Right and Left of the Batteries, while I was making a Bridge of Boats in the
mean time to pass over the Foot upon; upon the Information brought me by the
Count de Guiche, I commanded Two Thousand Horse of the Left Wing to pass the
River under the command of the said Count, at the Ford which he had discovered
over against Tolhuys, The Regiment of Cuirassiers was to pass first, of which
ten or twelve commanded men to pass over, sometimes by Fording it, and
sometimes by Swimming, espied Three Squadrons advancing toward them from
behind the Hedges and Willowes and were at first briskly charged by the
Officers of the first Squadron, they Drawing back some few steps in the River,
till those that followed to second them could come up, made their way
afterward with their Swords in their hands so bravely and resolutely, that the
Second and Third Squadron (with the fright of it) discharged at random in the
Air, and ran. The first, which hitherto had set a good face upon it, gave back
as well as the other, to which the continual Fire of our Canon did not a little
contribute; and now the rest of the Horse were all passed over at the Ford, one
party of them advanced toward the Enemy under the Command of the Count de
Guiche, and the rest stood in Battalia on the Bank of the River.

This Action was accompanied with all the Success and Glory we could desire,
having lost very few Horse in the Passage. Nogent being the only Person of
Note that was drowned: But afterward, as ill Fortune would have it, the
Prince, to whom I had sent, not to pass the River, was already gone, before my
Orders reached him, in a small Boat, to see what Men we should put into the
Castle of Tolhuys, and to inform himself better of what passed on the other
side of the Water; so that not knowing any thing of my Design, and seeing the
Prince of Conde and Duke de Longueville advance upon the Spur toward a
Barricade, where the Three Squadrons I mentioned before had joined themselves
with some other Horse and Foot, he made all the haste he could thither, and was
followed by several others, who now began to keep no Measures, after such an
Example.

At first, the Prince, and those other Gentlemen astonished the Enemy with
their Threatenings, and their Presence, and besides the Count de Guiche
surprising them in the Rear with some Squadrons, had pressed them so close,
that they put themselves in a posture of yielding, on Condition they might have
Fair Quarter* But, Monsieur de Longueville having passed the Barricade, and
crying, Kill, kill, No Quarter; and, as some say, discharged a Pistol upon
them; out of pure despair they made one Volley more, in which the Prince of
Conde had the bone of his Left wrest broken, Monsieur de Longueville and Guitry
were killed upon the Spot, and several others were killed and wounded, which
you will see in the following List. If we had had a little patience, not one of
those men had escaped our hands, the Comte de Guiche had begirt them close on
one side, and should have fallen upon them on the other with the other
Squadrons, and the Foot which by this time were almost all passed in their
Boats; whereas through our own precipitation, the routing them has cost us very
dear; this excepted all things are in a very good condition as to the Bettaw,
and I have much cause to praise God for the happy Success of this Enterprise,
and to promise my self great advantages by it.

Dead and Wounded.
Dead.
Monsieur de Longueville. de Guitry. De Nogent, drowned. Danbusson. Marq. de
Too^on. Brouilly mortally wounded. Some Gentlemen wounded. The Chevalier des
Essars, dead of his Wounds.
Wounded.
The Prince his Wrist broken. Mons. de Marsillac his Shoulder Bone broken.
Mons. de Vivo^ne lost his Hand. The Comte de Saul's, wounded in the Chin. De
Beringhen through (...) Body. The Duke de Coastin his Ha^ broken. Terms cut
cross the Face. La Salle Aid de Camp F^ Wounds with a Sword. Re^elle, of the
Cuirassie wounded in three places. Du Mesnil Montanban, wounded with a
Partizan. The Marq. De A^beterre. The Marq. de Manrevert, F^ wounds. Beauvan,
Aid de Camp (...) Mons. Rochefort, wound^ in the Face.
FINIS.

