A NEW BALLAD OF Jocky's Journey into England, in the Year, 1681.
With his Remarkes upon the Times.
When Jockey had discovered all he sought,
Weighing how many were to Troubles brought
For being Loyal, which since here a Crime,
In England will mispend no longer time;
But by his Friend advised, Concludes to stay,
To know the Author of our Sham-Plot Play,
Which being done, to Scotland he Returns,
Prays for his King, and our Divisions Mourns.
To the Tune of, Mogey was Moved, etc. 29. Sept. 1681.
I.
FArewell Bony Scotland, and Saundy adue;
And a Prosperous Journey poor Jockey attend,
For tul England Ise gang, where is se mickle ado,
Tul Speir gen their Plotting will never have an End.
II.
I Learned as I past that Religion and Right,
As in the Year Forty One, was the Cause of it all;
And the Presbyter now had found out a New Light,
Which they lowdly (though falsely) Propriety call.
III.
But when I at London had found that their Strife,
And occasion of au their Factious ado,
Was: That in Cabals, they were striving for Life,
To overthrow Bishops, and Monarchy too.
IV.
Where Politic A nthon -- y Earl of Shaftsbury.
whispered the Crowd:
Lawn Sleeves were ye mark of the Visible Whore;
And his Engines' against Pop^ry raileth aloud,
While Sedition was waiting his Kew at the Door.
V.
And still in this Council, each Factious Lord,
Did Second this Earl in his Traitorous Design,
That a State Commonwealth, may again be restored;
Which to Compass, 'twas fit that Young J emm -- y ^uke of ^^onmouth.
su'd Join.
VI.
Who Guld with the glittering Hopes of a Crown;
And with Fatal Applause, was to side with 'em, led:
Therefore owes his Misfortune to th'Treacherous Loon;
And for which, Jockey's Curse light on his fause Head.
VII.
For the Poison which daily does flow from this Elfe,
Invenoms Three Kingdoms from Head to the Heel;
And his Fumes make him Nautious, ene to his own self,
And the Crowd with the Vapor, begin for to Reel.
VIII.
Who Drunk with Sedition, were drawn to attempt,
What au geud Christians sud Tremble to hear
Their Monarch to Seiz, and au Laws Circumvent,
Which au we'se Scotland do value so Dear.
IX.
The Blood of a Monarch, these Zealously Shed,
And willingly wad gang the same get again;
For they au 'ith noose of Religion were Led,
Which the best of geud Kings to the Scaffold did bring.
X.
Therefore sin Plotting has made sike a din.
And Perjured Loones wad Govern the State;
Then back for Life, Jockey to Scotland again,
Sin Loyalty here is grown quite out of Date.
XI. His English Friends Advice.
NAy, Prithee stay Jockey, and make not such Speed,
For Truth, we see plainly, begins to appear;
And the Nation at length, will from Plotting be freed:
For when this Cloud's over, the Day will be Clear.
XII.
Old A nthon -- y now is made Fast in the Tower;
Though for his Enlargement, he is made a great stir,
But the Judges most Wisely say'ts not in their Power
To Grant him, what there he Importuned them for.
XIII.
Now H owar -- d with w ilmo -- re, and wh itac -- re too,
Must be careful they Taste not the Cup, which their Friends
By their wicked Designs to their own Ruins drew,
And has shamefully brought'em to Merited Ends.
XIV.
Then go not to Scotland till all is made clear,
But carry the News of our happy Estate;
And that Loyalty now does begin to appear;
For Cabals, and Caballers, are quite out of Date.
XV. Iockey's Prayer.
THen he that Preserved Us from every Ill,
Protect and Continue Our King in His Throne;
'Spight a Plots, and Sham-Plots, be His Guardian still;
And let Treacherous Designs in the, Bud be over thrown.
Amen.

FINIS.
London, Printed for P. M. and M. R. in the Year 1681.


