A New DIALOGUE between ALICE and BETRICE, As they met at the Market one
Morning Early.
To the Tune of Mopsaphil.
This may be Printed, R. P.



Alice. I.
GOod Neighbor whyd'ye look awry? you're grown a wondrous Stranger
You walk about, you Huff and Pout, as though you would burst with Anger;
If its for that your Fortune's great; or you so Wealthy are,
Or else so High, there is none so nigh, that with you can compare:
But the other day I heard one say, your Husband durst not show his Ears,
But like a Lout he walks about, so full of Sighs and Fears.

Betrice, Good Mistress Tart, I care not a Fa -- t for you nor all your Jeers.
II.
My Husband's known for to be one that is most Chaste and Pure,
And would be, continually, but for such Jades as you are:
You smack, you smick, you wash you lick, you smirk, you swear, you grin,
You nod, you wink, and in your Drink, you strive for to draw him in.

Alice, You Lie you Punk, you're almost Drunk, and now you Scold and m^ke a
Strife,
With running in the Score, and playing the Wh -- you lead him a weary Life,

Bet. Tell me so once again, you Dirty Queen, and I Will pull you by the Coif.
III.
Go dress your Rats, those nasty Brats, that are always Sleep and Drowsy
With Vermin spread, they are almost dead, they are kept so wondrous Lousie.

Al. Pray hold you there, and do not Swear, yours are not half fo sweet,
You feed them up with bit and sup, then give 'em a dirty Teat.

Bet. My Girls and Boys, my only Joys, they are better taught and fed than yours.

Al. Tell me so once more, you dirty Wh --, and I Will kick you out of doors

Bet. It Is a very good Jest, pray do your best, and Isaith I Will quit the Scores.
IV.
Go, go you are a silly Bear, your Husband cannot away with it,
A stinking Queen as ever was seen, your Neighbors all will say it:
A (...) Trot, and good for naught, unless it be for that
You (...) a Spoon out of the Room, the last Christering you were at.

Al. You lie you Wi --, you have got the Itch, the P^rish knows, you are not
(...):
(...)ws with ugly Paws, and I Will fell you to the Ground:
(...)my Hood, and shall make it good, if it cost me the ^orty Pound,
(...) your Course.

(...) I. Blace, at the Looking glass on London Bridge.


