A New BALLAD,
To the Tune of, Good People give ear, while a Story I tell,
Of Twenty black Tradesmen were brought up in Hell, etc.
Or, Packington's Pound.
TO our once Loyal Town, is lately come down,
Such an Hodge-podge of Benchers, as never wore Gown:
Saints, fit for the Legend of Romes Pseudo-Martyrs,
Who have Pawned the Old Religion, to Purchase New Charters;
To promote Public Faith, they are zealously bent,
And Bugger Geneva, to Fructify Trent.
When Satan was squeamish, and longed for a Dainty,
The Pope Fricasseed him this new Four and-twenty.
(2)
The first a State-Jocky, bred up of a Groom,
'Twixt a Colchester -- Mare, and a Stallion of Rome:
He Cants when at Hollet's, on Hopkins his Meter,
And drops Pater-Nosters with Lowick and Petre:
Thus he Banters Non-Cons with Profane Masque
And Quacks on the Gospel to force a lost Trade.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(3)
The next Cacafugo, once a Captain of Peace,
At the sight of cold Iron he melts in his grease;
Yet he looks Indignation, and huff^ (...)'' Hector;
He Whores like an Abbot, and Drinks like a Rector.
The third Nicodemus, St.
a Seeker by Night;
The fourth Father Whitebread, who H^ats for new Light.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(4)
The fifth and the sixth, B. and A.
two precise Renegades;
The one Jack of Diamonds, and the other of Spades:
For Orphans and Widows, they beautify Cloisters,
And swallow their Houses, as a Barnacle Oysters;
But no Dish so fit, when his Holiness treats,
As an A great Italian Dish.
Oleopodrido of Zealots and Cheats.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(5)
Next formal Sir Foplin, M.
who often has slunk,
With a Tester at Rose's to Purchase a Punk;
But if Porter or Carman be possessed of his Doxie,
He adopts his kind Hostess her Spiritual Proxy.
Thus a Puritan Lecher (though with a lewd Slut)
May solace the Spirit, while the Flesh goes to Rut.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(6)
Lo here Fat St. Lean Jeff.
Gog and Magog at once represent
The Profane Carnaval, and Idolatrous Lent;
Both Teckelites true, as were Oats and Comins in the Plot.
Titus and Eustace;
The Guts of good Manners, and Garbage of Justice:
But nothing more proper to vacuate Laws,
Than the Mouth of Rebellion, and Rump of the Cause.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(7)
Advance Ruffling Dick to supply the next place, C.

Who on a bad Matter often shams a worse Face:
When the Algerine Caper has boarded his Frigate,
He can fawn like a Floater, and cringe like a Bigot.
Well the Good-natured Wittal may wink at his Fate,
Since he that Cornutes him has Bugger'd the State.
When Satan was squeamish, etc.
(8)
We Will refer young Tertullus to a Bill of Review,
Left he should Repeal what he never yet knew:
His Worship we will leave to his new Breviaries,
'Till One Miserere's worth Ten Avemaries;
For a Janus-like Convert, who in Faith interlopes,
Like a Cordelier-Fryar, must be saved by his Ropes.
When Satan was squeamish, and longed for a Dainty,
The Pope Fricasseed him this new Four-and-twenty.

