A new Ballad intiuled, The stout Cripple of Cornwall, Wherein is showed his
dissolate life and deserved death.
The tune is, The blind Beggar.




OF a stout Cripple that kept tht highway,
And begged for his living all time of the day,
A Story I Will tell you that pleasant shall be,
The Cripple of Cornwall sir-named was he.
He crept on his hands and knees up and down,
In a torn Iacket, and a ragged patcht Gown,
For he had never a Leg to the Knee,
The Cripdle of Cornwall si^r-named was he,
He was of a stomach courageous and stout
For he had no cause to complain of the gout,
To go upon stilts most cunning was he,
With a staff on his neck most gallant to see,
Yea, no good fellowship would he forsake,
Were it in secret a Purse for to take.
His help was as good as any might be,
The Cripple of Cornwall surnamed was he.
When he upon any serv^ce did go
The crafty young Cripple provided if so
His Tools he kept close in an old hollow Tree,
That stood from the City a mile two or three,
Thus all the way long he begged for relief.
And all the night long he played the false Thief
And seven years together this custom kept he,
And no man knew him such a person to be.
There were few Grasier^ went on the way,
But unto the Cripple for passage did pay
And every brave Merchant that he did desry
He emptied their purses ere they passed by.
The noble Lord Courtney both gallant and bold
Rode forth with great plenty of silver and gold,
At Exeter there a purchase to pay
But that the false Cripple his journey did stay.
For why? the false Cripple beard tidings of late,
As he sat for alms at the Noble man's gate,
This is (quoth the Cripple) a booty for me
And I Will follow closely as closely may be.
Then to his compan^ons the matter he moved,
Which their like actions before time had proved,
They make themselves ready and deeply they swear
The moneys their own before they come there,
Upon his two stilts the Cripple did mount,
To have the best share it was his full account.
All clothed in Canvas down to the ground.
He took up his place his Mates with him round.
Then coms yt L Courtney with half a score men
Yet little suspecting these thieves in their den,
And they perceiving them come to their hand
In a dark Evening bid them to stand.
Deliver thy purse quoth the cripple with speed.
For we be good fellows and therefore have need,
Not so quoth Lord Courtney but this I Will tell ye,
Win it and wear it else get none of me.
With that the Lord Courtney stood in his defens
And so did his Servants but ere they w(...)knight thence
Two of the true men were slain in the fight
And four of the Thieves were put to the flight,
And while for their safeguard they ran thus away
The jolly bold Cripple did hold the rest play
And with his pike staff he wounded them so,
As they were unable to run or to go,
With fighting the L. Courtny was out of breath
And most of his Servants were wounded to death
Then came other horsemen riding so fast,
The Cripple was forced to fly at the last.
And over a River that ran there beside,
Which was very deep and eighteen foot wide,
With his long staff and his stilts leaped he,
And shifted himself in an old ha(...)law tree,
Then throughout the Country was hu and cry made
To have these Thieves apprehended and staid,
The Cripple he creeps on his hands and his knees
And in the high way great posting he sees,
And as they came riding he begging does say.
O give me one penny good Masters I pray,
And thus unto Exeter creeps he along,
No man suspecting he had done wrong.
Anon the Lord Courtney he spies in the street,
He comes unto him and he kisses his feet,
Saying God save your honor and keek you from il
And from the hands of your Enemies still,
Amen quoth, L. Courtney and therewith flung down
Unto the poor Cripple an English Crown.
Away went the Cripple and thus he did think,
Five hundred pound more will make me to drink
In vain that hue and cry it was made
They found none of them tho the country was laid
But thus grieved the Cripple night and day,
That he so unluckily mist of his prey
Nine hundred pound this Cripple had got,
By begging and theeving so good was his lot,
A thousand pound he would make it up he said,
And then he would giva over his Trade.
But as he strived his mind to fulfill,
In following his act ons so lewd and so ill,
At last he was taken the law to suffice,
Condemned and hanged at Exeter Size.
Which made all men amazed to see.
That such an impudent Cripple as he.
Should venture himself to such actions as they
To rob in such sort upon the highway.
Printed for F, Coals. T. Vere and W. Gilbertson,


