Nevvs from Hide-Parke:
OR, A very merry strange Passage which happened betwixt a North-Country
Gentleman, and a very Gaudy Gallant Lady of Pleasure, whom he took up in the
Park, and Conducted her (in her own Coach) home to her Lodgings, and what
chanced there, If you will venture Attention, the Song will declare.

To the Tune of, the Crossed Couple.
1
ONe Evening a little before it was dark,
Sing Tan tara rara Tan-tivvee,
I called for my Gelding, and ride to Hideparke
One Tan tara rara Tan-tivvee:
It was in the motley Month of May,
When Meadows and Fields were gaudy and Gay,
And Flowers were Apparelled as bright as the day,
I got upon my Tan-tiwee.
2
The Park shone brighter then the Skies,
Sing tan tara rara Tan-tivvee.
With Jewels, and Gold, and Ladies Eyes,
That sparkled, and cried, come see me:
Of all Parts in England, Hide-Parke has the name,
For Coaches and Horses, and Persons of Fame;
It looked (at first sight) like a Field full of Flame,
Which made me ride up Tan-tivvee.
3
There has not been seen such a sight since Adam's,
For Perriwigg Ribbon and Feather;
Hide-Parke may be termed the Market of Madams,
Or Lady-Faire, choose ye whether;
Their Gowns were a yeard too long for their Legs,
They showed like the Rainbow cut into Rags,
A Garden of Flowers, or a Navy of Flaggs,
When they did all mingle together.
4
Amongst all these Ladies, I singled out One,
To prattle of Love, and Folly:
I found her not coy, but jovial as Jone,
Or Bette, or Marget, or Molly;
With Honor, and Love, and Stories of Chances,
My Spirits did move, and my Blood she advances,
With twenty Quonundrums and fifty five Fancies;
J'de fain have been at her Tantivvee.
5
We talked away time, until it grew dark,
The Place did begin to grow privvee;
For Gallants began to draw out of the Park;
Their Horses did gallopp Tan-tivve:
But finding my Courage a little to come,
I sent my Bay-Gelding away by my Groom,
And proffered my service, to wait on her home:
In a Coach we want both Tan-tivvee.
6
I offered and proffered, but found her straight laced,
She cried, I shall never believe ye:
This Armfull of Satin, I bravely embraced,
And fain would have been at Tan-tivvee:
Her Lodgings were pleasant, for scent and for sight,
She seemed as an Angel by Candlelight,
And (like a bold Archer) I aimed at the White;
Tan-tivvee, tan-tivvee, tan-tivvee,
7
With many denyalls, she yielded at last,
(Her Chamber being wondrous privy)
That I all the night there might have my repast,
To run at the Ring Tan-tivvee,
I put off my Clothes, and I tumbled to bed,
She went in her Closset to dress up her head,
But I peeped in the key hole, to see what she did,
Which put me quite by Tan-tivvee.
8
She took of her head-tire and showed her bald-pate
Her Cunning did very much grieve me
Thought I to my self, if it were not so late.
I would home to my Lodging believe me:
Her hair being gone she seemed a Hagg,
Her bald-pate did look like an Estritches Egg,
This Lady thought I, is as right as my leg,
She has been too much at Tan-tivvee.
9
The more I did peep, the more I did spy,
Which did to a mazement drive me,
She put up her finger, and out dropped an eye;
I prayed that some Power would releeve me;
But now my Resolves were never to trouble her,
Or venture my Carkais, with such a blind Hobler,
She looked (with one eye) just like Hewson the Cobber,
When he us^d to ride Tan-tivve.
10
I peeped, and was still more perplexed therewith,
Thought I (though it be at Midnight) J'le leave thee,
She fetches a yawn, and out fell her Teeth;
This Queen had intents to deceive me:
She drew out her Handkercheif (as I suppose)
To wipe her high forehead, and down dropps her Nose;
Which made me run quickly, and pull on my Hose:
The Devil is my Tan-tivvee.
11.
She washed all the Paint from her visage, and then
She looked just (if you will believe me)
Like a Lancashier Witch, of four score and ten;
And I (as the Devil did drive me)
I put on my Clothes, and cried Witches and Whores,
I tumbled down stairs, and broak open the doors
And down in the Country again to my Boores,
Next morning I rid Tan-tivvee.
12.
You North Country Gallants, that live pleasant lives,
Let not curiosity drive ye.
To leave the fresh Air, and your own Tennant Wives,
For Satin will sadly deceive ye:
For my part, I will no more be such a Meacock,
To deal with the Plumes of a Hide-Parke Peacock,
But find out a Russet coat Wench, and a Hay-cock,
And there I will ride Tan-tivvee.
FINIS.
London, Printed for William Gilbertson dwelling at the Bible in Giltspur
street, without Newgate.


