The Norfolk Lass:
OR, The Maid that was Blown with-Child.
Of a North-Country Lass I mean for to tell,
Who received such a Blast made her Belly to Swell.
To the Tune of, The King and Northern man: Or, Tommy Pots.


IT chanced of late as I heard one tell,
From Wessen to Maxel a Maid came to dwell;
She thrived so well, and her body so great,
Made all the Wives in the Town wonder thereat.
It was at a Burial when it was done,
To talk with this Maiden the good women came;
Then said the good Women are we not beguiled,
We stand in great fear that thou art with-Child.
But then this Maid begun for to Swear,
As if in an anger her self she would tear;
It were a great wonder as ever was known,
If I be with-Child into me it is blown.
For never no man had with me to do,
Therefore good women it is nothing so;
She wished to the Lord, which you little think,
that the ground might open, and in she might sink.




Why good women, then she did name,
Think you good Women that I am the same;
If I should swear if that I did know,
That often to my body had got such a blow.
In the Church Porch, hard by the Church-door,
The Women examined this Maiden therefore;
She said 'twas a trouble that grieved her full sore,
She had gotten the same of her Mother before,
This passed on while Tuesday came on,
To be sick in Stomach this Maiden begun:
She calls to one Goodman to make her a fire,
For no other company she did desire.
Up into her Chamber she went alone,
The Women below did hear her to groan,
Up went a Woman, but I heard no more,
And there found a dainty Boy laid on the flore.
She took up the pretty Babe as it is a use,
Telling the Mother of this her abuse:
Then, said she, marry, I told thee before,
That thou were with-child though you it forswore
But then for more of the Neighbors she sent,
(...)id for to see this strange Accident;
(...)he strange accident to the Woman was shown,
(...)hat into the Body the Baby was blown.
The sight of the Infant made the Wives glad,
Asking the Mother who should be the Dad;
She viewed the pretty Babe which was her Son,
And said 'twas a dainty Boy like to a Bum.
Next Thursday after to Church it was brought,
For to have it Christened, as it did ought:
Godfathers, Godmothers, all that it had,
They all did agree to the name of the Dad.
All you fair Maids have better care,
And of your Maiden-heads stand more in fear:
If that your Bodies begin for to bown,
Never forswear't, for the truth will be known.
Maids go no more to Weston to dance,
But have a care of all such mischance:
for Weston young men such blasts they will blow
They Will blow Maids with-Child, and they shall it not know.
And thus to end my ditty so New,
You may report it, for certain it is true:
She would not believe it till that it was known,
But into her Body the Baby was blown.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksb^ near the Hospital-


