A Nest of Nuns Eggs, strangely Hatched, with the Description of a worthy
Feast for Joy of the Brood.


HEre Romes Religion (like a we^^am'd Arbor
Is showed, and how their Vermin breed and Harbor:
For as the Branches have no Top or Root,
So Romes Religion has nor Head or Foot.
And as those winding Spraies do twine about,
Here, there, and every where, both in and out,
So fair, so even, well framed, so order-like,
Which does Content to blinded senses strike,
Yet who so viewes it well, shall in Conclusion
Find no way in or out, but all Confusion
which unto us most plainly does Relate
That all their Doctrine is most intricate.
A Laborinth; a Turning winding Maze,
Religions Ape, and Follies only Gaze.
The Black Ground of the work resembles Night,
To which a 3. Crowned shape gives Lantern light.
Whilst on the other side old Bacon face,
(The Abbot of St. Idiots, or such place)
Pores which his 4. Eyes, and expects much good,
From two fair Nuns, that sweetly sit abrood,
Poor painful Creatures, with Posteriours bare,
They sit on Eggs, with Diligence and Care,
And for no help to them shall wanting be,
An ancient Friar does hold their backs you see.
The Abbot, and the Pope, on both sides watch
To see what these two goodly Creatures Hatch.
And with much Joy, the business is begun,
One Egg brings forth a Friar, and one a Nun
Which on both sides the (...), you may perceive
The Nuns with Joy, their brood aloft do heave.
Two Harpies, over their heads strange Gesture makes,
With heads like Men, and bodies, like to Snakes,
Shows their Religion, has a face divine,
And each where else most Snake-like Serpentine.
The Pope, and Abbots Rumpe two Squirrels bear,
That skip from Tree to Tree, now here, now there,
Which shows, that as those Beasts no where does tarry,
So does their Moone-like Doctrine change and varry.
Two gaping Fowls upon their Backs do stand,
Does show that they do prey on Sea and Land.
Then Bacchus on his Tun in state does sit,
Armed with a Roasted Goose, upon a Spit:
Drawn by two Clownes; and on the other side,
A hooded Carle does on a Wilchin Ride,
And in his hand does three broyl'd Gudgeons bear,
Makes haste to meet the Goose in his Carreere,
Drawn by an ancient Nun and Friar, with speed,
To feast, for Joy of this New hatched breed.
The Goose and Gudgeon, Emblems are I know
Of such as do the Pope obedience show,
Whilst all degrees, from Court unto the Clown,
Draws daily profit to the triple Crown.
FINIS.
Printed at London for J. T.


