A New Ballad; declaring the Excellent Parable of the Prodigal Child.
To the Tune of, The wanton Wife.


THere was a grave man, both wealthy and wise
Two Sons had both proper and tall,
The elder was very proper and very precise,
The other (...) wildness did wholly incline,
his Parents therefore,
was grieved full sore,
A^^ migh^y displeasure egainst him they bore,
(...)remember delights are but vain,
and after sweet pleasure comes sorrow and pain.
This lusty brave youngster that lived at ease,
And never had tasted the temper of care,
Quoth he if my doings your mind do displease,
Then give me my portion that falls to my share,
then ye shall not be,
long troubled with me,
Yet will I live gallant and pleasant, quoth he,
young men, etc.
Oh, quoth his Parents, you wicked lewd Lad,
What will become of thee where thou shall go;
Seeing thy government it is so bad,
But misery and beggary upon thee shall grow,
qouth he if I knew,
that this would be true,
Be sure I would never make moan unto you,
young men, etc.
His Parents that saw him put him to flight,
Paid him his portion without all delay:
Saying good Sir, I pray take your flight,
I mean not quoth he, in your presence to stay,
but now I will see
each foreign Country,
And view the world what fashions there be,
young men, etc.
Thus in his jollity he rides along,
And in his apparel most sumptuous and brave,
To view this brave gallant much people did throng,
Where he like ^ Prince himself did behave,
yea honored was he,
with cap and with Knee,
And at his command the proudest now be,
young men, etc.
With music each morning his ears they had fed,
Of gold and silver he makes no spare,
With flattering speeches away he was led,
His body is fed with delicate fare:
what he does require,
he has at his desire,
But such as want money may lie in the mire,
young men, etc.
Proper fine women of beauty most bright,
Do strive for his favor and friendship each day,
They call him their honey, their joy and delight,
They Kiss him, they cull him and wantonly play,
they swear till they dye,
though falsely they lie,
He shall be their sweetheart and pretty pigs-nye,
young men, etc,
Some gave him handkerchiefs, some gave him rings
Some strewed his windows with flowers so sweet,
Some to delight him both dances and sings,
Some with Rose Water does wash his feet,
and what shall I say,
they took him away,
They won him and do him what kindness they may,
young men, etc.
Thus with their allurements, their winks, and their wiles
They used to bewitch this prodigal boy:
He buys with gold angels their kisses and smiles,
And stores them with every new fangle and toy,
he buys them new Gowns,
and many fair pounds,
In white wind and sugar amongst them he drowns,
young men, etc.
When he had upon them thus wasted his wealth,
Consumed his substance, his treasure and store,
Yea, cracked all his credit with hazard of health,
That he could banquet these Minions no more,
with words of dispight,
they fly from his sight,
They call him base Rascal, forsaking him quite,
young men remember delights are but vain,
and after sweet pleasure comes sorrow and pain.
The second Part, showing the great misery he endured, being constrain^d
through hunger, to eat with the Hogs, and how his merciful Father received him
again.
To the same Tun^.


THen was he brought to misery great,
His garments all ragged and torn you might see
His body near starved for want of good meat
His clothes out at elbows, his hose broke at knee:
and in his distress,
he knew no redress,
His harlots spit at him in his heaviness.
Young men remember delights are but vain,
And after sweet pleasure comes sorrow and pain.
Then bitterly mourning he went up and down,
To get him a Master that might dine:
At length a rich Citizen dwelling in town,
Sends him to the Country to keep all his swine,
whose hunger was great,
for want of good meat,
He sat him down by the Hogs, husks for to eat:
Young men, etc.
And ^s by the Hogs he was feeding a pace,
With many a sigh and sob he did say,
Now I am brought to a pitiful case,
Alack that my Parents I did disobey,
their servants at home,
The very worst Groom,
Have meat and drink plenty and here I have none,
Young men, etc.
Wherefore to my father again I will go,
Asking him forgiveness for my lewd life,
Showing to him my grief and my woe.
Reputing my folly that it set at strife:
then straight the same day,
he takes his way,
And came to his fathers in raged array,
Youn^ men, etc.
With bitter mourning he falls on his knee,
Saying, dear father forgive what is done,
For I have offended Christ Jesus and thee,
Unworthy I am to be called thy son:
yet do not disdain,
to take me again,
As one of thy servants to take any pain;
Young men, etc.
With that the tears fell from his fathers eyes,
With joy and gladness they flow full fast,
He k^ssed his son, and bid him arise,
Saying I have found my child that was lost,
with garments full gay,
he did him array,
And killed a fat calf to honor that day,
young men etc.
And gently led him by the hand,
Great joy and melody there was made;
But when his eldest brother did understand
The truth of every thing that has been said,
full angry was he,
when this he did see,
His prodigal brother thus honored would be,
young men, etc.
And to his father thus he did speak,
Long have I served thee and many a day,
And thy commandments never did break,
But all my Life long I did thee obey;
yet never found I,
such great courtesy
As this wretched unthrift that let his wealth fly,
young men, etc.
O, quoth his Father, consider my Son,
All that I have one day shall be thine,
Then do not grudge at what I have done,
Nor at thy poor brother do thou repine;
for he was lost plain,
but is found again,
He was dead, but now is risen again,
young men, etc.
This worthy Parable Christ he did tell,
Unto the comforte^s of Christians each one,
Although by our wickedness we do rebel,
Yet by true repentance our Father of Heaven
does pity our ease
receiving us to grace,
In joys everlasting with him to take pain,
young men remember delights are but vain,
and after sweet pleasures come sorrow and pain.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


