A New BALLAD Of the Three Merry Butchers,
And Ten Highway Men, how three Butchers went to pay Five Hundred Pounds away,
and hearing a woman crying in the VVood, went to Relieve her and was there set
upon by these Ten Highway Men; and how only stout Johnson fought with them
all; who killed Eight of the Ten; and at last was killed by the woman he went
to save in the wood.

To an Excellent New Tune.
Licensed according to Order.





(...) tell you of a Story of lovely Butchers three,
There Is Wilson, Gibson, Johnson, mark well what I shall say,
For they took Five Hundred Pounds, Sir, to pay it all away,
For they took Five Hundred Pounds, Sir, to pay it all away.
As they rid on the Road Sir, and as soft as they could trig,
Strike up your hearts, says Johnson, we'll have a merry jigg,
With a high ding ding, with a ho ding ding, with a high ding
ding dee, and God bless on good people from evil Company.
As they rid on the Road Sir, as fast as they could hie,
Stri^e up your hearts, says Johnson for I hear a woman cry,
With that he steps into the wood and looks himself all round,
And there he spied a woman with her hair bound to the ground
O woman, O woman, quoth. Johnson, have thou no evil company?
O no, O no, says the woman, and alas how can that be,
For there came ten swaggering blades by, and thus abused me
For there came ten swaggering blades by, and thus abused me
Johnson being of a valient heart, and bore a valient mind,
He wrapped his Cloak abouu her for to keep her from the wind:
With a high ding ding, with a ho ding ding, with a high ding
ding dee, and God bless all good people from evil company.
Strike up your hearts says Johnson, for its dark all in the Sky,
She put her finger in her Ear and she gave a skreeking cry,
With that there came ten swaggering blades with their weapons ready drawn;
And they boldly came to Johnson, and bolder bid him stand.
I will not fight, says Wilson, for I had rather die;
Or I, to sight, says Gibson, for I had rathe fly,
Come on, come on, says Johnson, and fight a man so free,
Or stand you still behind my back and I Will win the Victory.
Then Johnsons pistols they flew off till five of them were slain
And then he drew his Hanger with all his might and main,
And played it about so manfully till three more he had slain,
And played it about so, etc.
Come on, come on (says the other two) and let us make away,
For if we do not hold him to it our lives he takes away.
O no O no (quoth the woman) and alas how can that be,
For if you do not hold him to it then hanged you shall be.
Johnson fighting these two Thieves before, the woman he did not mind,
And fighting these two Thieves before, she knocked him down behind,
O woman, O woman, quoth Johnson alas what have you done,
You have killed the bravest Butcher that ever England won.
Just as she had killed him there came one Riding by,
And saw the deed that she had done, and seized her presently,
She was Condemned for to be Hanged in Iron Chains so strong,
At the place where she did Johnson that great and mighty wrong.
Printed for I. Bissel at the Bible and Harp in West-Smithfield


