On the Arrival of His Royal Highness THE DUKE INTO ENGLAND A Congratulatory
POEM.
NOw Heaven Smiles; Our Clouded Orb looks bright:
The Sun's returned, and has dispelled our Night.
Rejoice all Loyal Souls: Let all this Isle,
Be Covered with an Universal Smile.
Great JAMES is come! Blessed be the Happy Day,
That did His wisht-for Person safe Convey.
Our Hearts, the Limits of our Breasts, overflow,
And often for passage to our Mouths do go,
Eager His Princely Person for to meet,
And to lie prostrate at His Royal Feet.
Let all His Foes (though Foes without a Cause)
Look back a while, and on His Actions pause:
Enumerate all His Virtues; Glories, Name,
Then say why they such Goodness did profane,
And strove with Slander to Eclipse His Fame.
May all that would His Glories so decrease,
Or cease to be, or to be Envious cease.
May they in Shame hang down their Hated Head;
And never raise 'um till their Rancour's dead.
Ungrateful Men! What Hazards did He Shun?
How often to Death and Danger did He Run?
To Save your Lives, and Liberties Secure,
What Hardships, and what Miseries Endure?
How often His Royal Person too Expose,
Amidst (except your Selves) His greatest Foes?
When He from HOLLAND fraught with Triumphs came,
And Fame had taught the World no other Name,
Then your Acknowledgments you did Express,
To His vast Conduct owed your Happiness.
Then Caps flew up, and Brimmers too were filled;
His Health went round, and not a Drop was spilled;
But in the Fullness of your Flowing Bowls,
You showed the Gladness of your well-pleased Souls.
Now Silent as the Night all hushed you lie,
(Unknown unto your Selves the Reason why)
And let (Oh! Shame to speak it!) Gratitude to dye.
Yet all Untainted Loyal Hearts do Sing,
Welcome, GREAT SIR, Dear Brother of our KING.
Welcome to us; such Hearty Welcome, SIR,
As Wealth t'th' Poor, or Rest t'th' Traveller,
Or to the Death-beleager'd his Deliverer.
Yet farther Welcome, which no Good Man controuls,
Welcome as Paradise is to our Souls:
May they who to Your Welcome don't agree,
There find no Welcome, but excluded be.
We Are so transported at Your Glorious Sight,
We Are lost in Ecstasy, and vast Delight:
Our Souls do Bless You wheresoe'er You go;
To You we all do Veneration owe.
To Grace Your Mind as Heaven took special Care,
So did it too to make Your Body Rare.
Joy of our Eyes, our Minds chief Darling too,
Let all that would be Truly Great, Copy You.
Oh that I were Inspired! that I might tell
How often our Mighty HERO did Excel
In Glorious Acts! How often His Warlike Arm
His Enemies did Defeat, and Country Charm!
But all His Godlike Acts no Tongue can tell,
For they are so great, they are Ineffable.
Our Dazl^td Sense cannot all His Glories see,
They are too strong for our Humanity:
It Is Heaven that bestowed 'um best can tell,
For they are to us Incomprehensible.
When from His Royal Brother came Command,
That He forthwith should Quit His Native Land,
And to some Foreign Shore Himself Convey,
Being all Obedience, straight withdrew away.
Scarce was it spoke, but He forthwith Obeyed;
Nor was there any Murmuring Question made;
But as the Meanest, Poorest Subject, He
His Duty showed, and Brother's Soveraigntie.
Immense Obedience! Never to be forgot,
Nor in Oblivion's Grave unthought of rot;
But to's Immortal Fame and Glory be
Recorded left to all Posterity.
Let LONDON Ring till't Echo on the THAMES,
Long Live the KING, and's Royal Brother JAMES.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for G. K. MDCLXXX.


