Dr. Oats's ANSWER To Count Teckleys LETTER intercepted at DOVER:
AN't please your Mightiness yours, I Received -- Anno Dom 1683. September the
25th new Style; I give your Mightiness ten thousand thanks, for all your
Favors formerly bestowed upon me, but most especially for these kind
Propositions now made me, both by the Grand Segniour, your Grace, and all the
Court and Council of that Empire, which I shall most gratefully accept of: and
had been with you long before this time, but that our English Turks here, have
had as great misfortunes in our Affairs at home: as the Vizier before Vienna;
for Sir, you must understand; that this Kingdom the chief of the three, of
which I am the Savor.

About ten years agone, this Kingdom I say, was got with Child, with a huge and
horrible Popish-plot, it had neither Head, nor Foot, but sixty thousand Rumps
and Tails, and what do you call'ems. Now Sir, about five years agone -- her Belly
began to Gripe -- she made foul Faces and looked very black in the Fundament;
and fell into Labor with this Plot; and was very ill indeed, she fathered the
Plot upon the Jesuits, and several other persons of Quality -- and several of
the Papists were hanged and cut in pieces and the rest Beggered and Ruined, and
all the able Men-Midwives in England were sent for, to help to deliver her of
this great Belly: First that great States Midwife: Shaftsbury -- who took his
turn for four years together, and at last with a full Resolution to fetch it
out, thrust his hand a little too far, and broke a Leg or an Arm, and was
forced to run away to save his Neck. Then was chose a Council of six o^ the
able States Midwives in the Kingdom, to try Experiments, amongst whom the Lord
Russel scorning to be outdone; fell to work Tooth and Nail; but being too hot
upon it happens to lay hold on the Arse gut and all be sh-this Fingers. Upon
this misfortune he fell into a desperate passion; and in Revenge resolved to
cut his Majesty's Throat, but just in the attempt, his own Head dropped off.

Next comes Midwise Gray, but having just left his two Wives behind the Cortain
which were really Sisters, and he not being able to satisfy one, his Horns, on
a sudden sprouted out, so much longer than his Arms, that they goard Britain
into the Belly, before he could reach it, which put her into such a Fit of
Torture and Kicking, as frighted him out of his sense and sight of the World,
that he was never seen since.

Then comes E -- x with serious reserved, deliberate gravity: And as soon as he
had felt how it was with her -- he pretended to wish that the K. did but know
half so much as he did, but feeling the second time -- she unmannerly slapt her
Tail in his Eye, and pist in his Face -- which caused some of the Deputy
Midwives to laugh at him; which put the Earl into such a passion, that he swore
the K. had a hand in it -- for which and other Crimes he was clapped up; and in
Revenge he played the fool and cut his own Throat.

Then comes thundering Tickle me Tom, and he was so foolish Rash, he would needs
father the Pug before it was Born; he was so in love with the Bastard that
attempted to cut off the Royal Line to make a King on it: which made Britain up
with her heel and hit him a dab of the Chops and farted in his Face -- Gad, what
dos he do for madness, but transforms himself into the Spawn of a Makrel and
was never heard of since.

Next comes Perking Teckeley -- though a Basterd he had as undoubted a Right to
the Imperial Crown of England as your Mightiness to that of Hungary -- he laid
both his Commissions, Life, and his expected Crown, that he would fetch it out the
first attempt without difficulty -- Then he falls to work, Sir, upon the Brat,
and got it by the back with both hands at once -- and pulled it with such an
undaunced Courage that five hundred Rumps and Tails come off in his hands --
and he lost his hold, which so inflamed his Grace, that he turned up her Tail,
and showed her Nackedness to forty thousand of the Rabble -- which made Britain
pull him by the Lugs -- and wrapped a Ladys shitten Smock about his Chops and
Eyes and sent his Adle-head, Reeling, Blindfold from the Land of Promise to
Wapping; where the other Sister wiped his Chops -- and he sputtered and
Hectored about and threatened Revenge for a while; but at last was lost in a
Mist; like Aenyas, for ingratitude and never was heard o since -- a great many
more made the like attempt, with such or worse success -- and some hanged, some
in holl'd, some turned Trimers, and the rest run away: for just in the interim
when the K. was to have been Murdered comes me in -- one Howard, Rumsey, West,
and Keeling -- and undertook to deiiver this great Belly -- and upon the word
of a Priest, they handled it with such Dexterity, that in a forthnights time,
they brought out this great Monster -- and what do you think it was that made
all this noise -- even honest Presbyter John -- a Delicte Babe -- but so stuffed
with 'Sociations, Noble Peer's Speech; Holy Leagues, and Covenants, etc. that
it was Farting full again: And being an Incubus it spoke as soon as it was
Born, and named above six-Hundred Fathers that were at the getting on it --
Shaftsbury, Tongue, and my seh, three of the Chief -- then drawing its Mouth on
one side; Cried, You must all turn Turks or be Damned -- and ever since I have
had a great Ambition to leave off my Hypocritical Jump, and' turn Muffty. But
how do you think this Brat served us at last; for all we have lick't it into
five hundred shapes and colors; nothing serves its turn but speaking truth with
a Pox to the Rascal: and has spoiled all our future proceedings; and we have
lost the Charter into the bargain. But as for Popish Commissions; Spanish
Pilgrims, Black Bills, French Armies, Pickerings Guns, Teuxbury Mustard-Balls,
Popish plots etc. I received ready money for them: both from Court and City at
once: but now, notwithstanding all my Guards, I was arrested three or four
times a week, and have neither plot nor Commission to make a penny on, to help
my self withal; and my Bums, like a company of Revenous Wolves, are ready to
tear my heart out. But for Wests Blunderbush, Wildmans Cannon, most of them are
visibly taken and Seized by the K -- Just now my sacred person was seized for
twenty pounds due for linne, which I took up to wipe clean my Bums. To conclude
Sir, unless our party can get to a head, before the K. calls a Parliament, all
our Gang must, of necessity, fly to your Mightiness for Refuge -- Therefore I
beseech you let the Sarraglio, be forthwith made ready for me, and my Retinue
-- for Bums I shall carry fourscore a long with me, for Whores, and Bauds, let
there be two thousand made ready: for I intend to outdo Sallomon in Letchery,
Mahomet in Blasphem^, and Judas in Perjury and Treachery --

your Mightiness's most humble Servant, and Mufti to the Grand Turk TITUS OATS.
POSTSCRIPT
AN't please your Mightiness, though you have not yet thought it convenient to
hazard your Sacred Person -- or Army in the Fight; yet the Turks are very much
'weak'ned -- and I was thinking to have sent a Detachment of fifty thousand
French Protestant Mahometans, which Shaftsbury sent for over to be ready upon
such occasions -- but they have such Damned Mohammedan Stomachs they will eat you
all up, both Horse and Man: for there is a certain Lord of our partys forced to
cut them out awhole Ox and Broth, three times a Week, to save his own Person
from the fury of their Teeth I am sadly hampered amongst the Christians here:
they have burned me in Effigy with as much Ignominy as Waller burnt their
Crucified-God in Effigy. Another of 'em sent me a Barrel of Oisters, in the
name of one of our Mahometans, I invited my Friends to the Colation, and
told'em I was not quite forgot yet. There were twenty of the top of delicate
ones, look you here quoth I, turn 'em out Boy, turn out; out they came, and
what do you think they were -- by Mahomet, nothing but Shells and a long Rope
Quoyled up in the middle, and frosted -- over with a T --



LONDON Printed for J. Dean.


