THE OLD NONCONFORMIST, Touching the Book of Common Prayer, AND CEREMONIES
Unto which is annexed the Reasons why Scotland refused the Book of
Common Prayer.

-- At vos
Dicite pontifices, in sacris quid facit aurum?
Quid juvat hos templis nostros immittere mores? Pers. Satyr. 11.
LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by H. C. in Popes. head- Alley, 1660.

Reader,
HAving by me an ancient piece, entitled, An abridgement of that book which
the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese delivered to his Majesty King James, the
first of December last, being the first part of an Apology for themselves and
their brethren that refuse the subscription and conformity which is required,
printed in the year 1605. -- now 55 years since: -- I had thoughts of giving
thee the whole piece, now long since out of print, and as worthy perusal as any
thing I ever read of that nature; But considering persons that need information
in this matter, are generally such whose many occasions admit not larger
dtscourses, I have taken some pains to abridge their abridgement: -- taking in
the sum as may best accommodate to the present season, hoping my pains will be
acceptable to the greatest lover of the Service Book, for it discovers a many
faults and those no small ones) which he that resolves to retain may do well to
amend -- The latter part, which they call a short Table, is word for word as
themselves leave it us, something also shortly we have added out of that
wel-known piece, Smectymnus, famous for the eminent, godly and learned Authors
of it, and especially for its own worth: -- Sure this light is too great to be
eclipsed by a few dark-Lanthorns, and the arguments never to be answered,
unless as not long since I heard Episcopacy asserted from a Pulpit thus, Jesus
had one Angel at his head, another at his feet, but, there is Prelacy in
Heaven, Ergo, Episcopacy must be in the Church: -- Risum teneatis amici: --

Farewell.
THE OLD Nonconformist Touching the Book of COMMON PRAYER.
MAster Stephen Marshal, Mr. Ed: Callamy, Tho. Young, Matthew Newcommen, and
William Spurstow, tell us in their Smectymnus, Page 5. that the first and purer
times knew no stinted Liturgy, as appears from Tertullian, Tertul. in his Apol.
c. 30.121. Epist.
who tells us the Christians of those times did pray Sive monitore quia de
pectore, without any prompter but their own hearts; Austin also tells us,
Liberum est, It is free for us to ask the same things in the Lords Prayer,
aliis atque aliis verbis: -- Sometimes one way, and sometimes another, and
Justin Martyr tells us, He who instructed the people prayed according to his
ability: (p. 7.) Yet have some Bishops blasphemed the spirit of prayer, and
many able learned, conscientious Preachers have been molested and suspended for
letting the constant flames of their fixed conceptions mount up from the Altar
of their zealous heart unto the Throne of grace: -- (p. 8.) Their tongues also
have raged against this way of prayer, have sealed up the mouths of Ministers
for praying thus in public, and imposed penances on private Christians, for
praying thus in their families, and compelled them to abjure this practice,
endeavoring with raging violence to banish this divine Ordinance from our
Churches and dwellings, professing in open Court, it was fitter for Amsterdam
then for our Churches: -- as did Dr. Corbet, Mr. Nevil, and all this in behalf
of that book of Common Prayer, the original whe^eof is published in that
Proclamation of King Edward the sixth, (p. 9.) which they so rigo^ously
p^es^^e, to the casting out of all that scruple it, or any thing in it, to the
(almost) justling out of the preaching of the Word, and conceived prayer
altogether, -- which yet was taken out of models from Rome, and has since the
first compiling of it suffered alteration to the worse, and so symbolizeth with
the Popish Mass, as that the Pope himself was willing to have it used, if he
might but confirm it: -- for the end of it was, on purpose to bring the Papists
to our Churches, but rather it has brought many of us to them, not any of them
to us: Because many things therein contained, are stumbling blocks, before the
feet of many: -- such as these: The clogging it with Ceremonies, the often, and
impertinent reiterating of the Lords Prayer, the ill translation of the Psalms,
and of the Scriptures, the many phrases in the prayer that are liable to just
exception, and whereas the Minister, by the Scripture, is the peoples mouth to
God; this book prescribes Responsaries to be said by the people, some of which
are unsuitable to what the Minister pronounces, some of them savor of
tautologyes, some are made to be so effectual; to the prayer, as that all which
the Minister says, is no prayer without them; as in the Lettany: -- (p. 10.)
Again it is so much idolized, as that it is accounted the only worship of God,
and is made the upholder of an unpreaching Ministry, and is cried up to the
hight, so that some are not ashamed to say, that the wit of men and Angels
cannot mend it, and that it is a sufficient discharge of the Ministers duty, to
read this book: -- The end of its first use was not to tie Godly men from
exercising their gifts in prayer, Abbots Church forsakers.
but the old Popish Priests, that by a seeming return to our religion did
through indulgence retain their places; from returning to the old Mass, which
yet di^ ^inder Ministers (that had the gift of prayer in an abundant measure
as well as of preaching) p. 10. In Bishop Wrens days, who forbid all use of
conceived prayer in the Church: -- So much they --

Out of the Lincolnshire Ministers Apology delivered to King James, for
themselves and their brethren, refusing subscription, and conformity to the
book of Common Prayer and Ceremonies, Printed in the year, 1605.
THe first Exception to the book of Common Prayer is from the order it
appoints, Except. 1.
for the reading the holy Scriptures.

First, Appointing the greatest part of Canonical Scripture Chron: almost the
whole book of the Reve: and above 100 Chapters more, are to be read at no time,
either for first or second Lessons, or for Epistles, or Gospels.

This is contrary to the word of God; for 1. It is one degree of taking ( Rev:
22.19.) from the words of Gods book, to order so much Scripture to be omitted
in the public reading; -- 2. The whole Scripture, and every part of it some
ways edifies the Church, as the second book of Chronicles, and those Chapters
of Exodus and Ezekiel which the book orders not any time to be read, then only
when the people are not present to hear them: -- 3. Sundry Scriptures omitted,
are fitter to edify Gods people in many points of faith, then any that are to
be read, as the Genealogies, mentioned Mat. 1. and Luke 3. demonstrate Christ
the promised seed, Solomon's song the mutual love betwixt Christ and his Church,
therefore called the most excellent song, what the state of the Church is to be
in this last age of the world, who is Antichrist, his rising and fall, and the
glory of the new Jerusalem, those Chapters of the Revelation, never read, much
more in 727 Chapters or thereabouts, either always omitted, or to be read
only upon working days when few can hear them; 4. This hinders many that will
not, and all such as cannot read, in the probablest way of searching the
Scriptures which testify of Christ; 5. It obstructs the peoples profiting, by
preaching their non-acquaintance with the Scriptures quoted, falling in such
Scripturers as ^hey may not hear publicly read; 6. The Church of the Jews
before Christ, the Primitive Church; next succeeding Christ and his Apostles,
and the best reformed Churches at this day, neither did nor do, command the
leaving any part of canonical Scripture to be unread; -- 7. The judgment of
the Godly learned is express against it. Irenaeus, Austin, Chrysostom, Jewel,
D. Fulk: Zepperus, and others, their testimonies at large, but here omitted.

Susanna to be read under the name of Daniel the 13.-Thirdly, It appoints them
to be read in so great a measure for their proportion, as the canonical
Scripture of the old Testament, for of the canonical Chapters in the old
Testament being in all 779. or there-abouts, are read only 592 or there-abouts:
and of the Apocriphal Chapters being in all 172 or thereabouts, are read 104.
or there-abouts: Fourthly, It commands them to be read on the greatest
Holy Days, when the Church assemblies usually were fullest: 5. when an Holy Day
on which one of the Apocripha is to be read falls on such a day on which the
calender appoints a canonical Scripture, it commands that the canonical shall
give place to the Apocriphal: Sixthly, It appoints many of the Apocriphal
Chapters to be read twice in one year, and some thrice, so it does not one of
the canonical Chapters of the old Testament; Seventhly, It appoints the
Apocriphal books to be read, as tending more to edification, and such as may
less be spared then those Chapters of the canonical that are omitted, as
Wisdom 3.6.9.12.19. Eccle^asticus 15.19.21. -- 23.25.29.39.44. This is
contrary to Gods word; For 1. not the Levites, nor Christ, or his Apostles,
read, or interpreted any other then the canonical Scriptures, for instruction
of the Church: -- 2. The holy Scriptures are given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. and are able to make perfect in doctrine and manne^s; 3. Christ
is the te^cher of the Church, and no writings may be appointed for its u^e, but
such as are indicted by his Spirit, Mat. 7.15. Fourthly, Neither the old Church
of the Jews, not the reformed Church at this day, use any but canonical. --
Fifthly, their error who account these canonical Scripture, is hereby
con^irmed, ^he council of Carthage, Bellarmine, and Gregory Mar^^ instanced in,
here omitted.

Sixthly, Sundry of the Apocryphal chapters that are thus appointed to be read,
do contain manifest errors and corruptions. In Tob. 7.31.
one of the chapters of Tobit Oct b. 2.
appointed to be read, an Angel is reported to have said that he was of the
tribe of Nephtalin, and of the captives that dwelt at Niniveh, Tob. ^.89. read
oct: ^.
sundry times, and answers to the name of Azarias Tobies brother or kinsman.
which name also he is said Tob. 5.^^.
in another place of the same bo k to have given unto himself, as if he had
been of the kindred of Ananias the great, and one of Tobias brethren o^
kinsmen. In Tob. 11.8.
another place of the same book which is October. 4.
appointed to be read, the Angel is said to have directed Tobit to cure his
fathers Kindness by anointing of his eyes with the gall of that fish, the
Liver where^f he had Tob. 6, 7. and 8.2, 3.
before prescribed for the driving away of Devils. In the Tob. 11, 1^. read
Octo. 4.
same chapter old Toby is said to have given thanks for restoring of his s ght
in this form; Bless d art thou O Lord, and blessed be thy name for ever, and
blessed be all thine holy Angels: In ^ob. 12. read octo. 4.
another the Angel is reparted to say that Verse 9.
Alms does del^ver from death, and does purge all sin and Verse 12.
that he did bring to memory their prayer before the Holy one, and that Verse.
15.
he was Raphael one of the seven Angels which presents the prayers of the
Saints.

These and sundry others are apparent corruptions in that book, and so taxed by
Junius, Lubbertus, D. Whitakers, D. Abbots, D. Willet, and others.

In the book of sudeth which is wholly appointed to be read the Jude 9.2.
fact of Simeon in murdering the Sichemits is commended and ^udeth (...) 9 10 3.
prays that God would bless and work with her lie. ^
She dressed and tricked her self that she might allure Hol^^^^nes u^t^
wantonness, (...). 9.3. (...).
and prayed God that he might be ^^en wi^h the ^^^res of his eyes in her, and
that God would ^nite him (...) the lips of her love. She ^ud. 10 ^. ^. 3. ^^.
15, 16.19.
uttered wittingly and willingly many lies, and in all this is commended by the
author of that book. All these and some others in that book are man^fest and
^^amefull errors and so have been observed to be by Ju^^n. L^bber us professor
of divinity in the University of Franckers in Fr^^a, o^r Divines that conferred
with Campion in the Tower, D. Abbots Dean of Winchester. D. Willet, and others.

In (...) d^^^
one ^f the chapters of the book of Wisdom appointed to be read twice every
year, it is said that Verse. 16.
the children of adulters shall not be partakers of the holy things, and the
seed of the wicked bed shall be rooted out, and Verse. 18.
that if they dye hastily they have no hope neither comfort in the day of
trial, for horrible is the end of the wicked generation, And in Wis. 4.3, 4.
read oct: 15.
another chapter of the same book, that the bastard plants shall take no deep
root, nor lay any fast foundation. For though they bud forth in the branches
for a time, yet they shall be shaken with the wind, for they stand not fast,
and through the vehemence of the wind they shall be rooted out.

All which is judged to be a bloody sentence and censure against all that are
born in bastardie, both by Zeppe^us and D. Abbots.

In Eccl: 2.15.
one of those chapters of Ecclesiasticus that are Octo: 24.
read, it is said that the fear of the Lord was made with the faithful in the
mothers womb. In Eccl: 12.5. read Oct. 31.
another we are forbidden to give alms to any ungodly man. In Eccl: 24.11, 12.
read Nov. 7
another wisdom (the Son of God) is said to have been made and created from the
beginning. In Eccl: 15.15, 16. read Nov. 2.
another it is said if thou will thou shall observe the Commandments and
testify thy good will; he has set water and fire before thee stretch out
thine hand to which ^^ou wilt. In Eccl. 48.13. read Nov. 18.
another it is said of Eliseus that his body did prophecy after his death. All
these and other corruptions are pro^entive in those chapters of Ecclesiasticus
(which are appointed (...) read by Calvin, Junius, D. Whitaker, Rainolds and
o^^ers.

In the first of Baruch it is said that the Caldeans burnt Jerusalem with fire
the same year and month and day that they to^^ it. Which is contrary to that
which the Holy Ghost has w^^tten in sundry places, as both Junius and
Lubbertus have ob^^^ved Other errors are also noted to be in this book (which
yet (...) wholly appointed to be read) by Junius, D. Whitaker, D. Willet and
others.

In the history of Susanna which is appointed to be read under the name of the
13. chap. of Daniel, there Jews in Babylon Verse. 5, 28.
are said to have had Judges of their own, and power to put offenders to death.
And Verse. 45.
Daniel is said to have been a young child when he executed judgment upon the
two false witnesses, which was Verse. 65.
in the days of Astynges, immediately before the reign of Cyrus, and Verse. 64.
this is said to have been the means whereby Daniel grew famous. All which do
evidently prove this story to be fabulous and untrue, as is also observed by
Junius, Lubbertus, D. Fulk, D. Whitakers, D. Willet and others.

Seventhly, The reading of Apocryphical books, are decryed by D. Whitaker,
Justin Martyr, the council of Hippo, B. Jewel, D. Humfry, D. Fulk, and many
others cited at large, omitted here.

For the profit of the Church.
as leaves out of the text sundry words and sentences of divine inspiration,
the title of the Psalms, these words, Higgaion Selah, the last words of the 72
Psalm, and these words, Pra^se ye the Lord, 17 times omitted; In the Lords
prayer, Th^ne is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, omitted, after the
example of the Popish Missal, in the first Commandment, these words, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house o^ bondage, omitted,
in the Epistles and Gospels words are lef^ ou^, to the changing or obscuring of
the sense of the holy Scriptures, as appears ^. 11. Sunday after Epiph: Epist.
Coloss: 3.12. The^e words holy and bel^ved, Epist. on Monday before Easter.
Isa. 63.15. this word from, Epist. on All Saint.
Revel. 7.9. these words, and k ndreds, with diverse others, expressly contrary
to the word of God, Mark 14.12. these words, and when he thought thereon.

Gospel on Monday before Easter.
as part of the text, and without any note of distinction from it, and that
sometimes to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost; -- as
in Psalm. 2.12. this word right, is added, Psalm. 13.6. these words, Yea I will
praise the name of the Lord most high; Psalm. 4.8. this word oil, is added,
Psalm. 14. three whole verses added, 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 22.1. these words added,
look upon me, Psalm. 22.31. this word, my, Psalm. 39.12. these words, fretting a
garment, Psalm. 132.1. these words, Neither the temples of my head to take any
rest. Psalm. 134.2. these words, even in the court of the house of our God;
Psalm. 136. the last verse is wholly added, Psalm. 147.8. these words, and herb
for the use of men, -- with diverse others in the Epistles and Gospels, which
might be added; as John 1.4. these words, that ye may rejoice, are added, in
the Epistle on St. John's day, Romans 12.7. these words, not only before God, but
also, in the Epistle on the 3. Sunday after Epiph: Jer. 23.5. these words,
which wisdom, in Epist. on the 25. Sunday after Trinity, 1 Timothy 4, 5. these
words, be sober, in Epist. on Lukes day; Matthew. 2 6. these words, unto me, in
Gospel on Epiph. Matthew. 9.25. these words, damsel arise, Gospel on the 24.
Sunday after Trinity, Mark 10.40. Mary Salam, this word Mary is added, Gospel
on Tuesday before Easter, Luke 16.2. these words, and no man gave unto him,
Gospel on the first Sunday after Trinity, Luke 19.42. these words, thou would
take heed, Gospel on tenth Sunday after Trinity; Luke 24.36. these words, it is
I fear not, Gospel on Tuesday in Easter week, all which is expressly
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev. 22.18. and disallowed by our best Divines, here
omitted.

Psalm. 58.8. Or ever our p^t^ce made hot with therns, so let indignation vex
him, ^e as a thing that is raw; Psalm. 68.30. When the company ^eare me^ and the
multitude of the mighty are scattered a^ amongst the beasts of the people, so
that they humbly bring (...), and when he has scattered the people that
delight (...): Psalm. 72.6. He shall come down like rain into a fleece dwe^^. --
with diverse other places; as Isa. 63.1. which is as (...), In the Epistle on
Monday before Easter, Romans 12.2. Be y^u changed in your shape; in the Epistle
on Sunday (...) Epiph: Ephesians. 3.15. Father of all that is called father in heaven
and in earth; In the Epistle on the 16 Sunday after T^^inity, Phil: 2.7. But
Christ was in the shape of God, and was ^^und in his apparel as a man: In
Epistle on last Sunday in L^n^; Ephesians: 5.13. Whatsoever is manifest that same is
light; In Epistle on 3 Sunday in Lent; Luke 1.36. This is the first mo^th which
is called barren, in the Gospel on the Anuntiati^^ Luke 11.17. And one house
does fall upon another, Gospel on the 3 Sunday in Lent: Whereas first, the word
ought to be read, so as it may be understood; secondly, such passages lessen
the peoples reverence to the word; -- thirdly, learned men upon this account
have blamed the Rhemish translation, as D. F^lk, D. Withers, D. B^^lkly, D.
Whitaker and others.

Because of men's words that are done against the words of my lips, for,
concerning the works of men by the words of thy lips; Psa. 18.26. this which
the Prophet spea^eth of God is applied to men, with the froward thou shall
(...) frowardness: Psalm. 30.12. Every good man for my glory or my tongue:
Psalm. 105.28. They were not obedient to his word, ^o^, they were not
disobedient; Psalm. 160.30. Fineus prayed, for, (...) executed judgment; Psalm.
107.40. Though he suffer them to (...) evil entreated through Tyrants, for, He
pours contempt upon Princes: Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the ungodly comes not
into the lot of the righteous, for, It rests not upon it: -- and in many
other places, as Isa. 63.11. Israel remembered, for; God remembered. In the
Epistle Monday before Easter, Matthew. 1.18 When his mother Mary was married to
Joseph, for, was betr thed to Joseph; In the Gospel on the first Monday of
Christmasse, Matthew. 27.9. Whom they bought of the children of Israel, for, wh^m
they of the children of Israel valued: In the Gospel, Sunday before Easter;
Luke 1.28. Hail full of Grace, for, Hail thou art freely beloved: In the
Gospel on the Annunciation, Luke 1.46. He has regarded the lowliness of h^s
handmaid, for, the low estate of his handmaid, in magnificat, Luke 2.43. and
his father knew not of it, for, and Joseph knew not of it: John 1.1. And God
was the word, for, and the word was God: In the Gospel on Christmas day, Romans
13.13. Not in eating and dri^king, for not in gluttening and drunkenness: In
Epistle on first Sunday in Adven^, 1 Cor. 9.27. Least I should be cast away,
for, least I should be blame worthy. In Epistle on Sep^uage lima Sunday, Gal.
4.25. Mount Sion now bordereth upon the City that is now called Jerusalem; for,
answers Jerusalem that now is: In Epist. the first Sunday in Lent: 1 Pet.
3.20. When once the long-suffering of God was looked for, for, when once the
long-suffering of God looked for: In Epist. on Easter Eve. Cont^a^y to the
Scri^ture to deal thus with the Oracles of God (...). 30 6. 1 Pet. 11. Our best
Divines have for as small corruptions as these, blamed the Vulgar Latin, and
Rhemish Translations, and condemned the counsel of Trent for binding to the
reading of the Vulgar Latin, as Calvin, Bukely, Whitaker, Rainolds, Willet,
and others.

Rev. 14.1.5. is applied to those children whom In Epist. on first day in Lent.
Herod murdered; In Epist. on Innocens day, so Joel 2. Gospel on first day in
Lent.
Matthew. 6. Epist. on first Sunday in Lent.
2 Cor. 1.6. Gospel on first Sunday in Lent. Except. 2.
Matthew. 4. are all applied to the Lenten Fasts. 1 Pet. 3.17.22. is applied to
the time of Christ's abode in the grave, in Epist: on Easter Eve: Rev: 17.12. is
applied to a created Angel; In Epist. on Michaelmas day.

Secondly, So it commands the use of such Ceremonies as are contrary to the
Word of God, as Surplices, Cross in (...) kneeling at Communion, and such like.

Argument. 1. Humane inventions abused to idolatry may (...) ^tained in the
services of Christ, because it is contra^^ (...) Gods word: -- which is the
first Argument against Cere^^^^: -- (...), by the second Commandment all
provocation (...) ^pi^itual fo nication, are fo^bidden; as the 7. does (...)
which is carnal.

^^^ly, By ^he commandment and direction God has (...) ^^s wo^d to Lev. 18.3,
4. and 19.27.28. Exodus 23.24. 2 Cor. 6.14.18.
separate our selves from Idolaters, (...) be as ^nlike to them as may be,
especially in their Religio^^ ^b^ervations and Ceremonies: Genesis 35.24. Numb.
30.52. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3. 1 King. 23.4.
to abolish not only all idols, but also the Ceremonies and instruments of
idolatry, and that ^o as we may best show Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. 1 Cor. ^4.12.
our utmost detestation to them, and Exodus 23.13. Deuteronomy. 13.3. Zach 13.2.
root out the very memory of them, to Levit. 26.1. 2 Kings 18.4.
cast away such things as had a good original and use (if they be not still
necessary or commanded of God) when once they are known to have been defiled by
idolatry, or abused ^^o it.

T^i^ely, By the equity and reasons of these Commandments which we find set
down in holy Scripture; -- First, The Exodus 20.5.
detestation which the Lord our God (being a jealous God) bears unto
idolatry, and all the instruments and tokens thereof, as un^o spiritual
whoredom: 2 Chro. 23.15. Isa. 1.29.
Secondly, That we cannot be said sincerely to have repented of the ^^olatry or
superstition, whereby we, our forefathers have provoked the Lord, Deuteronomy.
7.4.25.26. Jude 2.13. Gal. 2.5.
unl^sse we be ashamed of and cast away with detestation all the inst uments
and monuments of it: -- Thirdly, That we shall be in danger to be corrupted in
the substance of Religion and purity of doctrine, and even to fall back again
to idolatry, if we conform our selves to idolaters (...) their ceremonies, and
retain the monuments of their supe^stition, yea if we show not all detestatio^
unto them: Fourthly, that our Zech. 16.14. 2 Cor. 8.20.
holding of conformity to Idolaters in their ceremonie^ (wherein they repose
the greatest part of their Religi^^) will be a special means to harden them in
their supersti^^^^ -- Fifthly, That seeing the Pope is revealed to be t^^t
great (...) and (...) i^^olatry troubles the Church (...) day more than any
other, and our people conver^e (...) wi^^ Papists, then with any other
Idolaters, there is (...) danger in retaining the Ceremonies, and relics of
(...), then any other idolatry whatsoever.

^^urthly, By the judgment of the Godly learned of all Churches and Ages, who
have constantly taught and given testimony to this truth, That Christians are
bound to cast off the Ceremonies and religious customs of Pagans, Jews,
Idolaters, and Heretics, and carefully shun all conformity with them there^n.
-- Here are many pertinent and notable Quotations of Godly and learned Divines,
Ancient and Modern, Foreign and English which we omit all, centring upon these
four things.

First, That those laws we have alleged out of the old Testament against the
monuments of Idolatry, do bind us as much as they did the Jews, and from them
they conclude as we have done, that all relics of popish and heathenish
superstition are to be banished out of the Church of Christ.

Secondly, That Hezekiah, Josiah, and the rest of the Godly Kings of Judah,
which showed most zeal in abolishing those things which had been abused to
Idolatry, did no more then they were bound by the Law of God to do, and that
from their example, the argument holds strong against the monuments of Idolatry
now, because all Christians are bound to imitate their zeal therein.

That the retaining of Popish Ceremonies will certainly be a means to endanger
the doctrine that we profess, and to bring the people back again to Popery.

Fourthly, That the retaining of the Ceremonies of Idolaters, will cause them
to insult over our Religion, as if it could not stand without help from them,
and so harden them in the liking of their own Idolatry.

Fifthly, By the experience of the great hurt Ceremonies have done and do daily
in the Church, they may not be retained; first, some of the learnedest of our
English Papists, have by this Argument justified their Church and Religion,
that we have borrowed our Ceremonies from them, and the superstitious multitude
do usually defend the blessing of themselves with their crossing their breast
and forehead by our crossing of children in baptism; secondly, that in our
Church the purity of doctrine has been already dangerously corrupted by such
as have been the most hot maintainers of our conformity with Papists and
Ceremonies, instances in both these given but omitted.

Sixthly, The judgment and practice of the Papists themselves deny us to use
them they account it a shame for Christians to give to their children such
names as the Heathen were wont to give, they are very precise in shunning all
agreement with us in the least things that concern the profession of our
Religion, and we ought to learn of our adversaries in this case, and be ashamed
that they should show more zeal for error, then we for truth: -- thus much for
Ceremonies in general, let us consider the three in question.

First, The Surplice is notoriously known to be abused by the Papists to
superstition and idolatry, for in all hallowed vestments belonging to their
Priests, it is well known that the Papists do put great superstition, Durand:
Rational divi: lib: 3. cap. 1.
and calls them pieces of armor wherewith the Bishop or Priest must be
harnessed that will fight against the spiritual wickedness: and when the Bishop
uses to hallow any of them, prays thus; That the Priest wearing this holy
vesture may deserve to be shielded and defended from all the assaults and
temptations of the wicked spirits. Dr. Abbot calls all the Priests garments
whereby they are distinguished from the rest of the Church, Antighrdemonstr.
cap. 11. sect. 26.
a special part of the character of the beast, and the Surplice is one of their
Priests garments, without which no Priest may say service. -- It is one of the
vestiments without which neither the water, nor bells, nor ought else can be
hallowed, which made Mr. Latimer to say when the Surplice was plucked from him
in his deg^adation (as we find him cited D. Humphry in his antidiploma.
by D. Humphrey) now can I make no more holy water: Yea, it is evident by the
constant form of degradation used in the Church of Rome, that no one vestment
was so proper to their Priesthood as the Surplice, for it is enjoined to all
that are admitted to the very lowest degree of their Clergy, which they call,
primam tonsuram, and this was it which brought the custom of it into the
Universities, that every Student should at certain times wear the Surplice in
divine Service, because they did in their Matriculation, receive the primam
tonsuram, and first entrance into the Clergy, neither is the Surplice any badge
and ornament of their Priesthood, but the use of it is also enjoined in their
most abominable and idolatrous Mass. All Priests that are present at Mass
must needs have their Surplices on, and though it be not of the essence of the
Mass, that every Priest that says it have a Surplice on, yet some Priests
cannot say Mass without it, No Priest (says the Rhemist) may make his breaden
God, unless he have on his sacred solemn vestiment: yea, they glory in it as a
garment peculiar to their Religion, and therefore were wont to pluck it from
such as they did degrade, so have the most learned and judicious of our
Divines, judged the Surplice to be a Popish Massing garment, and by this reason
they have condemned the use of is in the Churches that profess the Gospel;
namely, Martyr, Bullenger, Brentius, Beza, B. Hooper, B. Farrar, and others.

The sign of the Cross is notoriously known to be abused to superstition and
idolatry by the Papists, they make it their special badge of their idolatrous
Religion, to it they ascribe sundry supernatural and divine effects, as that it
drives away devils, expels diseases, and all evils, sanctifies all things
that are marked with it, and it is well known that their breaden god could not
be made without it.

In Baptism they hold that the water has no spiritual virtue till it be
sanctified with it, they use it often in the administration of Baptism, as
that which gives life to all other their Ceremonies, they mark the child with
it as a means to drive away the Devil, and be a defense against him, and that
none can be rightly baptized, or have its perfect christendom without it; thus
is the Cross abused in both the Sacraments.

The kneeling at the Sacrament was and still is abused to Idolatry by the
Papists, from the persuasion of the real presence and transubstantiation of the
Elements, in worship of their breaden God, this gesture was never enjoined in
the Church till Antichrist grew to its full height, and there is no action in
all his service so idolatrous as this.

the Church, and if those Ceremonies which God ordained himself to teach his
Church by, may not now be used, much less may those which man has devised: --
Yea, this is one main difference which God has put between the state of the
Church under the Law, and this under the Gospel, that he thought good to teach
that by other mystical Ceremonies, besides the ordinary Sacraments, and not
this; -- all which Divines do teach, that to bring in significant Ceremonies
into the Church of Christ is ^lain Judaisme: -- Besides this is a special part
of that Christian liberty, which Christ has purchased for us by his death, and
which all Christians are bound to stand for, that the service we are now to do
God is not mystical, ceremonial and carnal, as it was then, but plain and
spiritual: -- 6. This will open a gap to Images, Oil, Lights, Spittle, and all
other Popish Ceremonies, especially if they should be judged fit to teach by
their signification as they which we retain, and indeed this is the chief
reason whereby both Papists and Lutherans, justify the use of Images, and
hereby Bellarmine commends all other their Ceremonies, that they are fit to
teach and put men in remembrance of good things, the Papists custom of the
Priests sprinkling men with holy water, and using with all these words,
remember thy baptism, as their manner was in some countries, can with no
reason be held unlawful; if such significant Ceremonies as ours are to be
defended, with such respect and relation, remembrances and apprehensions, satih
D. Fulk, All Idolatry and false worship may be defended: -- 7. We are farther
confirmed in this our second Argument by the judgment of the Godly Learned,
who (besides the testimony they have given to every several proof, we have
brought for it) do also speak directly with us in this general, that no
mystical and significant mystery devised by man and appropriated to Gods
service, may be retained in the Church of Christ; of this judgment is the
Church of Whittenberg, the Churches of France, and the low Countries in their
observations, upon the harmony of confessions, Mr. Calvin, Mr. Beza, Mr.
Perkins, and others.

Calvin, Melancthon, Martyr, Bullenger, Perkins, and others, our Divines
determine all Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies to be unlaw^ul, in these 4
Cases: 1. when opinion of necessity or holiness is annexed to them, either by
them that impose them, or by the people that use them, for in this case it is a
part of the confession which every Christian is bound to make of his Religion,
to reject them: -- Hezekiah for this cause did reject the brazen Serpent, and
our Savior the Jewish purifyings, and the Apostle circumcision, and other
ceremonies of the Law, the reason is, because our using of an indifferent thing
where others superstitiously put holiness and necessity, is an occasion of
confirming and hardening them in their superstition; Deuteronomy. 27.18. Lev. 19.14.
Mat. 18.7. 1 Cor. 10.32.
And we may not make the blind to go out of their way, nor put a stumbling
black before them, nor give scandals to any, be they never so wicked. In this
case the eating of meat that had been sacrificed to Idols, is condemned by the
Apostle: -- and that ceremonies are esteemed, imposed and observed as parts of
Gods worship, is too well known; -- 2. Then are they unlawful when the use of
them is urged; In this case its too notorious, the omission of ceremonies has
been more sharply punished then many great sins committed against the Law of
God: -- 3. When the omission of them is esteemed, and punished as a sin, even
out of the case of scandal: -- 4. When for the omission of them men (otherwise
agreeing in matters of faith and manners) are esteemed Schismatics and
Sectaries, this latter indifferently serves as touching imposition of things
good, or in themselves indifferent, experience has made good, that such as have
omitted things in that kind imposed (be they otherwise never so learned, Godly
and peaceable) have been accounted Schismatics and Puritans, yea, as men of
another Religion, and such as with whom no communion is to be held, nay, C^^^^
6.
by one of the Canons it is decreed, that whosoever shall declare his
difference in judgment from the Prelates in these things, shall be
excommunicated, ipso facto, these cases make ceremonies unlawful to all, of
which we have the assent at large, of Musculus, Jewel, Whitaker, Junius,
Pylkinton, Perkins, and many others here omitted.



First, The Lord has given to no creature absolute power in Ecclesiastical
matters, so as they may appoint or do therein whatsoever seems good unto
themselves, but he has set down in his word certain general rules, which
contain a perfect direction for all things as he will have his Church observe
for his worship: and although the Magistrates authority be very great, and the
King within his own Dominions be Supreme Governor over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as civil; (yet) may he not appoint to the Church, what rites and
orders he thinks good, but he is bound to observe therein those rules which God
in his word has prescribed to his Church for her direction in those matters,
and this is the judgment of Calvin, the writers of the Centuries, Bullenger,
Beza, Zanchius, J^^ius, Pollanus, Bucanus, Zepperus, Huninus, B. Horn, B.
B^lson, Mr. Deering, D. Fulke, D. Rainholds, and others: -- and the Scripture
in many places condemns, not only that which is done against the warrant, and
direction of the word, but that also which is done besides it, especially in
the matters of Gods service.

Secondly, The sum of all these rules which God has set down in his word, for
the direction of his Church, in rites and orders Ecclesiastical, is this, that
Acts 15.28. 1 Cor. 14.26. Romans 14.19.
none be ordained or used, but such as are needful and profitable for the
edification of his people, by the more comely and orderly performance of that
service which he has expressly prescribed in his word, and specially that
Romans 14.21. 1 Cor. 10.23.32.
none such be ordained or used as are known to cause offense or hindrance to
edification, when any rites and orders are prescribed or used in the Church
that swerved from these rules, they are judged by the Learned to be unlawful,
Divines conclude generally, they are absolutely unlawful.

First, If they be not expedient to be used in the Church, though in their own
nature indifferent. Or

Secondly, If they be ridicul^us toys unbeseeming the gravity and reverence of
Gods worship.

Thirdly, If once they become evident occasions of contention and division in
the Church.

Fourthly, If they cannot be used without superstition, or but appearance of
superstition.

Fifthly, If we cannot use them without some show of declining and going back
on Religion.

Sixthly, If they be needless, vain and unprofitable. But

Seventhly, Then specially does a Ceremony become in the use unlawful, when it
cannot be used without scandal and offense: For the Holy Ghost speaking of
indifferent things, straightly charge us to take heed, that we Romans
14.13.15.21. Ezekiel: 13.22.
neither put an occasion to fall, nor lay a stumbling block before a brother,
nor make him weak nor give him cause to speak evil or think hardly of us, nor
grieve him thereby; And the Apostle Rom: 15.1.3.
commands them that are strong to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please themselves with the neglect of their brethren: Yea, Romans 14.20.
He teaches plainly, that the use of an indifferent thing is hereby made evil
and wicked, when it proves an occasion of offense to the brethren, the reason
is evident, because the sin of neglecting the offense of the brethren Romans
14.3.10.9.
proceeds from a despising and light regard we have of them in our hearts, 1
Cor. 8.12.
and tends to destroying them: 1 Cor. 8.12.
And he that sins so against the brethren, sins against Christ.

Thirdly, The commandment which God has given for observing the foresaid
rules, does bind the conscience of every Christian (much more of every
Minister) for his own practice, so as no commandment of men can excuse him in
the transgression of it, and he that uses such ceremonies, as the Church or
any creature imposes, either contrary unto, or besides those rules God has
set down in his Word for their direction, sins against God and that liberty
which Christ has purchased for us by his blood, because he thereby
acknowledges some other to have absolute authority to command in Church
matters, besides the Lord alone, and that it is not only lawful but necessary,
to refuse the observation of such ceremonies (by what authority soever they may
be enjoined) is the judgment of the Churches of Saxony, Martyr, Brentzius,
Westhmerus, Lanater, Daneus, Lubertus, Bucanus, Virel, B. Jewel, D. Humphrey,
Mr. Perkins, and others, their quotations cited, but here omitted, so the
Ministers of Germany that refused the Surplice, when the use of it was
commanded, and straightly used by a lawful Magistrate, are justified and
commended for so doing by those great Divines, Calvin, Chemnitius, Hemingius,
Vogezius, and Zanchius, their quotations, here omitted: --

Touching Ceremonies therefore in the general, one or other thus, has ever
been the fruit, and ever will be: -- 1. Experience tells us, (as Mr. Bucer
observed in (...)) that there has been far less growth in knowledge (...) those
congregations where they have been obs^^^^^ ^^ough they have enjoyed a Minister
of greater lea^^^^^ (...) gifts then in those where they have been wholly (...)
-- Neither did Christ or his Apostles ever use any such ^oyes, nor can any
reason be given why they should be more dece^^ or expedient now, then they were
then.

2. They cannot be used without just cause (...) ^^^ef given to many of the
Godly, and scandal both to the weak brethren, and the wicked, the Godly will be
grieved to see those things brought into the service of Christ, that have been
defiled by Antichrist: -- Weak brethren some will (by the example of their
conforming Ministers) be drawn to yield unto things against the persuasion of
their hearts, -- or at least doub^^^^ly, (if they can yet doubt, having
received so much light in the case: -- Some will grow to a dislike of such
Ministers as shall yield unto them, to the scandal of their ministry, and
hindering the work of God in their hands, the superstitious Papist will be
hardened in the liking of his abominable Religion, from which he sees we borrow
our Ceremonies, and the profane will draw many arguments from hence to bless
himself in his contempt of all Religion.

But as there is danger in the use of ceremonies in all congregations, so
especially if they shall be brought back again into those where they have been
long out of use and received by such ministers as are known to have refused
them heretofore; for, whereas the minister is bound 2 Cor. 13.4. ^^r. 6.1.3.
to lead his people forward unto perfection, and Titus 2.15.
to provide that by all good means that his ministry be not despised, by this
means he shall draw them back again to the loving of superstition, or at least
not to dislike it so much as they have done, or give them evident occasion to
blame his ministry and call in question the truth of his Doctrine; and for this
cause great divines have judged, that the receiving them again into such
congregations, can with no color of reason be esteemed an indifferent thing,
but must needs be looked upon as absolutely wicked, unlawful and abominable,
which holds good also as to ceremonies, so to the Service Book the mother to
them all.

3. All the best reformed Churches of Christ (who only are competent Judges in
this case, and to whose Judgment and example we ought rather to conform our
selves to in ceremonies, then to the Synagogue of Antichrist) do esteem those
ceremonies needless, inexpedient and fit to be abolished, how the Churches of
other countries approve of them, may appear sufficiently by this that they have
banished the use of them out of their assemblies, and amongst our selves the
best instructed Christians throughout the Land abominate them, and most of the
learned, fruitful and best experienced Ministers in the Land, dead and alive,
have judged these things either so unlawful o in expedient, that they have
rather chosen to endure any outward trouble then to yield to the use of them,
and we doubt not to affirm that the greatest number of able and Godly Ministers
in the Land (yea even of them that were drawn to the use of them) did yet in
their consciences dislike them, as might appear by the number of preachers out
of several Shires, to the number of near 600. witnessing under their
handwriting the desire of the removal, the list of the several Counties
herein mentioned but omitted: -- Yea, many of the Bishops themselves, as
Whitguift Archbishop of Canterbury, Chaderton B. of Lincoln, and Vaughan B. of
London, and others who have been most hot in urging their observation, and
defending them, do yet protest that the Church might well be without them, and
could wish they were taken away: Several other things are added in particular,
touching the three in question before, the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, and
kneeling at the Sacrament: -- But I wittingly omit them though all of them
singularly worthy of consideration. --

Happy had it been (had God seen good) when our worthy Reformers came out from
Rome, had they left no remnants of Baal to have perplexed the Church, (as
experience has sadly made appear) since, but so God saw good, which will ever
be the fruit of parting stakes 'twixt Christ and Antichrist; -- if we will
betray Gods right, and part with our principles, warranted by the word, in
design for accommodation and the peace of the Church, we have no warrant to
expect other then a snare at the bottom: These learned men were in good
earnest; when these things were settled over them, who sure had more plea for
accommodation then any now can have after 20 years intermission, shall they be
raised again? God forbid, they have been so long in the grave, behold they
stink: -- They proceed as follows.

A Short Table of sundry other Exceptions which we purpose, if God give means
and opportunity to justify and confirm in the same manner, as we have done
those handled in the Abridgement.
THe Book of Common Prayer contains in it, sundry things (besides those
handled in the Abridgement) that are contrary to the word of God. For,

First, It appoints a Leiturgy which in the whole matter and form thereof, is
too like unto the Masse-book.

Secondly, It appoints a Leiturgy which by the length thereof, does in many
Congregations often times necessarily shut out preaching, viz. When Baptism, the
Communion, Marrying, Churching and Burial concur all together (as often times
they do) in great congregations.

Thirdly, It approves of a Ministry as lawful which wants ability to preach.

Fourthly, It contains in it sundry popish errors, or such things (at least)
as tend strongly to the maintenance of popish superstition. As,

1. The Minister of the Gospel is throughout the Book called Priest.

2. It commands the observation of many holy days, and requires the Minister
to bid them, and prefers them (in some sort) before the Lords day, for the
ordinary Lessons appointed in the Calender for the Lords day, must give place
to the proper Lessons of that holy day that falls on the Lords day, and
Athanasius Creed is appointed to be read only upon certain holy days.

3. It appoints Saints Eves to be kept as fasting days, and commands the
Minister to bid them so.

4. It appoints the time of Lent to be kept as a religious fast, and
perverteth both the example of Christ's fast, and sundry other places of
Scripture to the justifying thereof. It prescribes a special service for the
first day of Lent, and appoints the commination and other special prayers and
exhortations tending to repentance, to be read upon that day only, and it
affirms That it was a Godly discipline in the Primitive Church, (the
restoring whereof is much to be wished) that notorious sinners at the beginning
of Lent, were put to open Penance.

5. The week before Easter only of all the weeks in the year, has prescript
service appointed with Epistles and Gospels for every day, as solemn as the
holy days are wont to have.

6. The Friday before Easter is called Good Friday, and has three special
collects appointed for it, as has no one day of the year besides.

7. It commands every Parishoner shall receive the Communion at Easter.

8. It appoints the Congregation to pray that God would give them that, which
their prayers dare not presume to ask.

9. The Catechism (in delivering the number of the Sacraments says there are
two only as generally necessary to salvation.

10. The Minister (as if Baptism were of absolute necessity) is allowed not
only to baptize in private, but to use the words of institution, and the
element, though he have not so much time as to say the Lords prayer.

11. The Minister is allowed and directed to administer the Communion to one
sick of the plague, though there be not one more to communicate with him.

12. Interogatories in Baptism are ministered unto infants (as if repentance
and faith were requisite in them before they may be baptized) and it is said in
the Catechism, that infants perform faith and repentance by the Sureties who
promise and vow them in their names.

13. Every child baptized (as if outward Baptism did confer grace to all that
receive it) is said to be regenerate, and in the Catechism it is said, that we
are by Baptism made the children of grace, and (in the Rubric immediately
before ^hatechism) that it is certain by Gods word that children being baptized
have all things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

14. The Minister is appointed to command that children be brought to the
Bishop to be confirmed, yea none may be admitted to the Communion till he have
been confirmed. In confirmation children are said to be certified (by the sign
of the imposition of the Bishops hands) of Gods favor and gracious goodness
toward them. And confirmation is said to be ministered to them that are
baptized, that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and
defense against all tentations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the
Devil. Yea, confirmation is dignified above Christ's Sacraments in that none may
administer it but a Bishop. And it is said to be administered after the example
of the holy Apostles, and warrented thereby.

15. It says that Matrimony does signify unto us the mystical union betwixt
Christ and his Church, and that God did consecrate the state of matrimony to
such an excellent mystery, that in it signified and represented the spiritual
marriage and unity between Christ and his Church. And the Ring in matrimony is
appointed to be laid on the book, and the Priest to take it and deliver it to
the man, and to teach him to say thus, with this Ring I thee wed, etc. And the
Priest is appointed in his prayer unto God to say, that the ring is a token and
a pledge of the Covenant and vow made in marriage.

16. The Priest is appointed to absolve every sick person (that finds his
conscience troubled with any weighty sin, and makes special confession of it)
in this form, By Christ's authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy
sins in the name of the Father, etc. And in another place the people are
appointed to come to the Minister to receive the benefit of absolution.

17. Burial is made a Ministerial duty, and a prescript Leiturgy is appointed
for it to be said at the grave, and we are appointed to pray thus, that God
would hasten his kingdom, that we with this our brother and all other departed
in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation and
bliss, both in body and soul.

18. Churching of women is commanded and made a minesterial duty, and a
prescript Leiturgy appointed for it, and the woman is appointed to kneel near
to the place where the Table stands, and the Priest to stand by her, when he
Churcheth her, and that she must offer her accustomed offerings.

19. Both in that place and elsewhere, in the book, offering days and an
Offertory are allowed.

20. In the Catechism it is said, that the son of God has redeemed all
mankind, taking that phrase in a larger sense then for all the Elect, as is
evident by the words immediately going before and following after.

Fifthly, It appoints sundry things that tend directly to the profanation of
the holy Sacraments, either by prostituting them to unworthy persons, or
administering them unreverently. For

1. All Priests and Deacons in Collegiat Churches, are commanded to receive the
Communion every Sunday at least.

2. Every communicant may chose whether he will give notice of his purpose to
receive, till after the beginning of morning-prayer on the same day that he is
to communicate.

3. All new married persons must receive the communion the same day they are
married.

4. Private Baptism in some cases is allowed to be administered without any
prayer, doctrine or exhortation.

Sixthly, It avoucheth sundry, manifest, and apparent untruths.

As 1. That in the Calender (so much as may be) the reading of the Scripture is
so set forth, that all things might be done in o^der without breaking one piece
from another.

2. That nothing (by this book) is ordained to be read, but the very pure word
of God the holy Scripture, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same.

3. That this book is so plain and perfect, as that the Curates shall need no
other books for their public service, but this book and and the Bible, and yet
it injoyns him to read Homilyes.

4. That all our ceremonies pertain to edification, and are apt to stir up the
dull mind of man, to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and
special signification.

5. It calls certain chapters of Esaias, Jeremy, Joel and the Acts, Epistles.

6. It appoints us to say every day, from Christmas Day to New Years day in a
Collect, that Christ was born this day. And upon Whitsunday, Monday and
Tuesday, God which on this day have taught, etc.

7. It affirms that Michael (mentioned Rev. 12.) is a created Angel.

Seaventhly, It peremptorily affirms sundry things that (if they be not
manifestly false) are doubtful. As

1. That the infants whom Herod murdered were innocents, and Gods witnesses,
and that they confessed his praise by dying.

2. That there are Archangels.

3. That every one that is buried is a brother, that God has taken to himself
his soul, that we commit his body to the ground in sure and certain hope of
resurrection to eternal life.

Eighthly, It appoints sundry things that bring great disorder and confusion
unto the worship of God. As

1. That the people should say after the Minister whole sentences of prayer and
Scripture; yea the Minister one part of the prayer and the people another. And
in sundry parts of the Letany, the people make the prayer, and the Minister
only directs them what to pray for.

2. That the Minister is appointed to say some prayers kneeling, some standing,
some in one part of the Church, some in another.

3. That one of the people is allowed to make the general confession of sins at
the Communion in the name of the whole cong egation.

4. That at some one meeting of the assembly, the Lords prayer is to be
repeated eight several ^imes, and Gloria patri twelve times.

5. That the holy Scriptures are so mangled into shreds and pieces, in the
Epistles and Gospels.

6. That the words of the institution are to be pronounced and repeated to
every several communicant.

7. That the Churchwardens are appointed to go about on communion days to
gather the devotion of the people in the midst of divine service.

Ninthly, It contains sundry things that are ridiculous and absurd, and such as
no reasonable sense can be made of. For

1. It commands the reading of such homilyes as shall hereafter be set forth by
public authority.

2. It commands every Parishoner to communicate at Easter, and also to receive
the Sacraments and other rites.

3. It ministers interogatories to infants, which their Godfathers answer
unto, and says that infants perform faith and repentance by their Godfathers.

4. It appoints (in some cases) Baptism to be administered conditionally in
this form, If thou be not baptized already, I baptize thee in the name of the
father, etc.

5. It requires that every husband be taught by the Priest to say to his wife
(in the solemnization of wedlock) with my body I thee worship.

Tenthly, It contains in it sundry evident contradictions.

1. In the second Article of the Rubric after the Communion, the Minister is
forbidden to celebrate the Communion, except there be a great number to
communicate with him, and in the third Article of the same Rubric he is
allowed to celebrate it, if there be but three to communicate with him.

2. In one place it is said that, It is thought good to follow the custom of
the old Church (in ministering Baptism but twice a year) so near as
conveniently may be, and yet elsewhere, it allows Baptism to be administered
not only every day of the year in public, but also every hour, either of day
or night in private.

3. In the Catechism it is said, there are but two Sacraments, and in another
place the book gives to confirmation whatsoever (by the definition of a
Sacrament set down in the Catechism) belongs to the nature and essence of a
Sacrament.

4. In one place it is said, that children should be brought to the Bishop to
be confirmed, so soon as they can say the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten
Commandments; In another it says, that our custom is agreeable to the usage
of the Church in times past, whereby it was ordained, that confirmation should
be ministered to them that are of perfect age.

The thirty-fifth Article of Religion touching the two Tomes of Homilies, is
not to be allowed, nor acknowledged to be agreeable to the word of God. For

1. By it the reading of Homilies in the Congregation, is approved to be a
Ministerial duty, and so unpreaching Ministry allowed of.

2. The Books of Homilies contain sundry things that are evidently false and
untrue. As

1. That the Apocriphal books are every where called holy Scripture. And (two
only places being alleged, both which are taken out of Toby and
Ecclesiasticus, that tend dangerously to the justifying of the merit of
Alms-deeds) it is said, the holy Ghost speaks so in the Scriptures.

2. That the place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.5. is thus alleged, wherefore he
says, mark and behold, I was conceived in in sins, he says not sin, but in
the plural number sins.

3. That it is said, our Savior did swear so often as he said, Verily.

4. Where it is said, that plurality of wives was by a special prerogative
suffered to the Fathers of the old Testament, that they might have many
children, because every one of them hoped, and begged oftentimes of God in
their prayers, the blessed seed might come and be born of his stock and kindred.

3. In them are affirmed (and that as by way of Doctrine publicly taught in
the Church) sundry things that are doubtful and of dangerous construction. As

1. When it is said, that though manslaughter was committed before, yet was
not the world destroyed for that: but for whoredom all the world (few only
excepted) was overflowed with water.

2. When the fact of Ambrose in excommunicating Theodosius is justified.

3. When it is said, by keeping your Churches in good repair, ye shall not only
please God, and deserve his manifold blessings, but ^^^ly deserve the good
report of all Godly people.

4. When it is said, that all Adams posterity by his fall were become plain
reprobates and cast-awayes, being perpetually damned to the everlasting pains
of hell fire.

5. When it is said, that it is not to be born with, but a great shame, for an
honest man to beat his maidservant, though she be a bond servant.

The thirty-sixt Article of Religion. Touching the book of consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops, and of ordering Priests and Deacons, is not to be
allowed, nor acknowledged, to be agreeable to the word of God. For

1. Not one Minister of forty does know what that book contains, nor how to
come to the sight of it.

2. It does not (whereas that Article says it does) contain all things that
are necessary, but omitteth sundry things which (by the ordinance of God) ought
to be observed in the ordination of Ministers. For

1. The examination of the life and learning of the Deacon and Priest, is
committed only to the Archdeacon.

2. The voices and consent of the people over whom the Minister is to be set,
is not (by this book) required to his election and calling.

3. The ordination of the Deacon by imposition of hands is permitted to one
man, viz. the Bishop.

4. The Priest receives in his ordination no authority to govern the flock
and exercise the discipline of Christ, but only to preach the word, and
administer the Sacraments.

3. Some manifest untruths are avouched in it, (whereas the Article says, it
has in it nothing that is of it self ungodly. As

1. When it is said, that it is evident to all men diligently reading the holy
Scriptures, and ancient writers, that from the Apostles times, there have been
these orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, viz. Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

2. Where it is said, that this Realm has received the discipline ^f Christ as
the Lord has commanded, whereas God ha h commanded there should be governing
Elders, to exerci^e the discipline of Christ in each Congregation, which our
Realm has not as yet received.

3. Where it is said, that God did inspire the holy Apostles to chose St.
Stephen into the order of Deacons, which is mentioned in this book, and that
the Deacons then to be ordered, are called to the like office and
administration that Stephen was called unto.

4. Some places of holy Scripture are perverted in it. As

1. When Acts 6. and 17. is applied to warrant the ordination of our Deacons.

2. When the Bishop is a^pointed, in the ordering of a Priest, and the
Archbishop in the consecrating of a Bishop, to use these words, receive the
holy Ghost, as our Savior did at the sending forth of his Apostles.

5. It contains sundry Popish errors and superstitions, whereas the article
says, it has in it nothing, that of it self is superstitions. As

1. That it allows and establishes the offices of Archdeacons and
Archbishops.

2. That Deacons, Priests, Bishops, and Archbishops, are made several orders
and degrees of Ministry.

3. That the Minister of the Gospel is usually called Priest.

4. That it ordains an office of Deaconship with charge to read Homilies,
preach the word, and administer Baptism.

5. That the Lords Supper is dignified above Baptism, and confirmation above
both, when the Deacon is permitted to baptize and not to administer the Lords
Supper, the Priest to minister both Baptism and the Lords Supper, the Bishop
only to confirm.

6. That private and secret prayer is preferred before public, and that in a
public place and action. For the congregation is desired (even in the midst of
the solemn action in ordination of a Priest) secretly in their prayers to make
humble supplications to God for the foresaid things. For the which prayers
there shall be a certain space kept in silence, that done, the Bishop is
appointed to pray again.

6. Sundry things in it are absurdly spoken, and directly against that which is
done and practiced (and to speak so specially in so holy and solemn an action,
if a wicked thing.) As

1. When in the ordination of a Deacon it is said, take thou authority to
preach, if thou shall be called thereunto.

2. When both in the ordination of the Deacon and of the Priest, the Bishop
requires the congregation to deliver whither they can say ought against the
party to be ordained, whereas it is well known that the Bishop uses seldom or
never to give orders in a public congregation, and if he does at any time, it
is in such an one, where the people is altogether unacquainted with the
conversation of them that are to be ordained.

3. When the Priest is asked whether he will give his faithful diligence
allways to minister the doctrine and sacraments and discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, whereas it is well known that no Minister is allowed
to exercise the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded.

And these faults that are in that book of Ordination which is of the last
edition and most reformed. In the former edition (which seems by the words of
the 36 Article to be, that we are required to subscribe unto, and which it may
be some of the Bishops do still use) there are other corruptions. As

1. That the Cope, Albe, Surplice, Tunicle and Pastoral staff are appointed to
be used in ordination and consecration.

2. That the oath of Supremacy is thus concluded, So help me God, and all
Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

So much touching the Prayer Book and its appurtenances, the ceremonies against
which the Lincolnshire Ministers seem only to engage, touching forms of prayer
in general, enough has been said by diverse, and against this form, enough by
these, in a word, light has done its part once and again, if we abide by the
Garlic and Onions still, the wound is on our will, not on our understandings,
which must be the work of a divine hand to heal: The truth is, spiritual
worship is hard work, and this well accommodates to flesh and blood, no wonder
we are so loath to leave it; Two objections are (notwithstanding all that has or
may be said) in the mouths of many: -- 1. Let them that dislike this make a
better, to which this whole discourse seems to reply, first mend your old, and
that may prove as hard a work as to make a new: -- But 2. Others tell us the
business is not tanti, that we should be so violent for, or against, our
difference is not much, let us bate a little of our principles and we may soon
agree, this objection is well framed, and better answered in that convincing
piece Smectymnus. page 63.

And whereas they pretend, that they differ from us only in a Ceremony or an
Organ-pipe, (which however is no contemptible difference) yet it will appear
that our differences are in point of a Superior Alloy. Though this Remonstrant
braves it in his multiplied queries. What are the bounds of this Church? what
the distinction of the professors and Religion? what grounds of faith? what new
Creed do they hold different from their Neighbors? what Scriptures? what
Baptism? what means of Salvation other then the rest? yet if he pleased he
might have silenced his own Queries: but if he will needs put us to the answer,
we will resolve them one by one.

First, If he ask what are the bounds of this Church? we answer him out of the
sixth of their late founded Canons; where we find the limits of this Prelatical
Church extend as far as from the high and lofty P^omontory of Archbishops, to
the Terra incognita of an etc.

If what Distinction of professors and Religion, we answer, their worshipping
toward the East, and bowing toward the Altar, prostrating themselves in their
approaches into Churches, placing all Religion in outward formalities, are
visible differences of these Professors and their Religion.

If what new Creed they have, or what grounds of Faith differing from their
Neighbors? we answer, Episcopacy by divine right is the first Article of their
Creed, absolute and blind obedience to all the Commandments of the Church
(that is, the Bishop and his Emissaries) election upon faith foreseen, the
influence of works into Justification, falling from grace, etc.

If what Scripture? we answer, the Apocrypha and unwritten Traditions.

If what Baptism? a Baptism of absolute Necessity unto salvation, and yet
unsufficient unto salvation: as not sealing grace to the taking away of sin
after Baptism.

If what Eucharist? an Eucharist that must be administered upon an Altar or a
Table set Altar-wise, railed in an Eucharist, in which there is such a presence
of Christ, (though M^dam nesciunt) as makes the place of its administration the
throne of God, the place of the Residence of the Allmighty, and impresseth such
a holiness upon it as makes it not only capable, but worthy of adoration.

If what Christ? a Christ who has given the same power of absolution to a
Priest that himself has.

If what Heaven? a Heaven that has a broad way leading thither, and is
receptive of drunkards, swearers, adulterers, etc. such a heaven as we may say
of it, as the Indians said of the heaven of the Spaniards: Unto that heaven
which some of the Prelatical Church living and dying in their scandalous sins,
and hateful enormities go to, let our souls never enter.

If what means of Salvation? we answer, confession of sins to a Priest, as the
most absolute, undoubted, necessary, infallible means of Salvation.

Far be it from us to say with this Remonstrant, We do fully agree in all
these and all other Doctrinal, and practical points of Religion, and preach one
and the fame saving truths. Nay, we must rather say as that holy Martyr did, We
thank God we are none of you.

Nor do we because of this dissension fear the censure of uncharitableness from
any but uncharitable men. But it is no unusual thing with the Prelates and
their party, to charge such as protest against their corrupt opinions and ways,
with uncharitableness and Schism, as the Papists do the Protestants, and as
the Protestants do justly recriminate, and charge that Schi me upon the
Papists, which they object to us; So may we upon the Prelates: And if Austin
may be judge, the Prelates are more Schismatics then we. Whosoever envy those
that are good, and seek occasions to exclude and degrade them, and are so ready
to defend their faults, that rather then they will leave them, they will devise
how to raise up troubles in the Church, and drive men into conventicles and
corners, they are the Schismatics.

To all which for a close, we shall make bold to borrow one short Query of
theirs; Page 65. Whether that assertion, No Bishop, No King; and no Ceremony,
no Bishop, be not very prejudicial to Kingly Autho^ity? For it seems to imply,
that the Civil power depends upon the Spiritual, and is supported by Ceremonies
and Bishops.

But with Bishops we will not be too bold, for, for ought we know, they may
prove their function JURE DIVINO.

Reasons why the Service Book was refused of the Church of Scotland.
Reason I.
IT contains diverse Points and Directions, which would breed a change in some
Articles of that Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of the said Kingdom,
which is both warranted in Scripture, and approved by Parliament.

Reason II.
IN the pretended Communion, it has all the substance and essential parts of
the Mass, and so brings in the most abominable Idolatry that ever was in the
world, in worshipping of a breaden God, and makes way for the Antichrist of
Rome, to bring this Land under his bondage again, as may be seen at large by
the particular of that Communion: Wherein some things that were put out of the
Service Book of England for smelling so strong of the Mass, are restored, and
many other things that were in it, are brought in out of the Masse-book though
they labor to cover the matter, it has the commemoration of the dead; the
Table set Altar-wise; the oblation of the Bread and Wine to God before the
consecration; it has the Popish consecration; that the Lord would sanctify by
his Word, and by his holy Spirit those gifts and creatures of Bread and Wine,
that they may be unto us the body and blood of his Son: and then repeat the
words of Institution to God for that purpose; it has an oblation of it again,
after it is consecrate, the consummation by the Priest, kneeling before the
consecrate Bread and Wine, it takes away the eating and drinking by Faith,
mentioned in the English Liturgy; it has the pattine Challice, two
Paternosters in English before the Mass; and several other particulars that
would take a long time to rehearse and confute.

Reason III.
THough they would take away the Idolatrous Mass out of it, yet it has a
number of Popish superstitious and idolatrous Ceremonies, as twenty-nine holy
days, whereof twenty-two are dedicated to Saints, two of them to the virgin
Mary; the one whereof is called, The Annunciation of our Lady; So she is made a
Lady to Christians, not being on earth, she must be a Lady in Heaven is not
this to make her a goddess? It has fourteen fasting days, and some weeks, it
has also the humane Sacraments of Cross in Baptism, Laying on of the Bishops
hand in confirmation; a Ring for the outward Seal in Marriage, a sanctified
Funt, holy water, holiness of Churches and Chancels, private Baptism, private
Communions, Ceremonies for burial of the dead, and purification of women after
childbirth; the Priest standing, kneeling, turning to the people, and
consequen^ly from them, speaking with a loud voice, and sometimes with a low
voice; the peoples standing at Gospels, at Gloria patri, and Creeds; their
answering to the Minister, and many such like in number above fifty: besides
any religious Ornament that (...) King or his Successors shall prescribe, and
Ceremonies that Bishops shall determine, or that shall be contained in Books of
Homilies to be set forth hereafter.

Reason IV.
ANd though they would take out of the Book both the Mass, and all those
superstitious Ceremonies, yet it has a number of other material errors; as
leaving unread above a hundred and twenty Chapters of Gods Word, and putting
this reproach upon them, that they are least edifying, and might best be
spared, and reading sundry Chapters of the Apocrypha, under the style of holy
Scripture of the old Testament; it has a Lettany more like conjuring, than
like prayers; it has some places out of which P^pists may prove that
Sacraments are absolutely necessary to salvation, in appointing Baptism in
private, with such haste, that if necessity require, he that baptizes need not
so much as to say the Lords Prayer, and out of which they may prove, that
Sacraments give grace by their work wrought, in saying children that are
baptized have all things necessary to salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. It
ha^h other places out of which they may prove more S^c^aments than two, which
they say, every Parishioner who (...) already baptized shall communicate, and
shall al^o receive the Sacraments, and that two Sacraments are generally
necessary to prove salvation; as if there were others, either not so general,
or not so necessary. It has other places, out of which they may prove
universal grace, saying God the Father made me and all the world, and God the
Son redeemed me and all mankind: one Collect pretends to beg from God that
which they dare not presume to name; and a number of others of this sort.

Reason V.
THough likewise they amend all those errors, and that there were no material
error in it at all, though they read nothing but Scriptures, yea, and that all
their prayers and exhortations were nothing but words of Scripture; yet such a
Liturgy were not lawful to be made the only form of Gods worship in public:
for though a formed Liturgy may be to serve for rule to other Churches, and
monuments to posterity, what forms are used, or that it may lead the way, or be
a direction to those that are beginning in the Ministry; yet it is not by
reading of prayers and exhortations that the Lord appoints his servants of the
Ministry to worship him, or edify his people, but he has given gifts to them
to expound Scripture, exhort, pray, and preach, which they ought to stir up and
use, and though they may in their private studies take help of other men's
gifts, yet it is not lawful for a man to tie himself, or be tied by others, to
a prescript form of words in prayer and exhortations, for these Reasons.

Ten brief Reasons as follows. Reason I.
BEcause such a prescript form is against the glory of God, in stinting to him
such a daily measure of service, and so hindering the many spiritual petitions
and phrases that otherwise would be if Gods gifts were used.

Reason II.
BEcause it is against the dignity of Christ, in making his gifts needless;
for though he send down no gifts at all, they can serve themselves with the
book without them.

Reason III.
IT quenches the holy Spirit, because it gets no employment.

Reason IV.
IT hinders the edification of Gods people, they may as well stay at home and
be edified by reading the book themselves.

Reason V.
IT is against the Conversion of those that know not God; Will ever a rat^ime
of words said over without feeling or blessing, work upon an unrenewed heart.

Reason VI.
IT will never serve to convince an heretic, to check a profane person, or to
waken a secure soul; they may long go on ere such a service bite upon them;
yea, it fosters people in a presumptuous conceit, that they are well enough, if
they be present and say their part of Service.

Reason VII.
IT fosters a lazy Ministry, and makes way for putting down Preaching: they
need take no pains, and therefore needs no stipend, yea, they may come from the
Alehouse, or a worse place, and step and read their service, without either
check or pr a ation.

Reason VIII.
IT may well be done by a boy of seven years old, and so every private man that
can read, yea, a Turk if he can read, may be such a Minister.

Reason IX.
BEcause it cannot express the several needs of all people into God, or deal
with them according to their several estates, that will alter otherwise than
any Prescript form can be applied unto.

Reason X.
IF any one s^inted Liturgy had been good or needful, to doubt but Christ
would have set one down to us. But the P^^phets, Christ, nor his Apostles never
prayed by any form invol^ed by man, but (...) on all occasions by the powerful
operation of the Spirit, as the Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Again, Christ nor his Apostles
never intended a set form of worship, in that they differ in the expression of
all their prayers to God.

Obj: But you will say, Christ has given us a set form of prayer; Matthew: 6.9.
and therefore it is lawful to use that form.

Answ. To this may be answered, that therein is concluded the sum and matter of
all Prayers, but the use of it is destroyed by way of form, also if it be used
by way of form, the doctrine of Prayer is destroyed to which end Christ gave
that part of Scripture. Again, if you take it in the letter, then is denied the
use of other Scriptures, as Matthew. 7.7. Romans 8.26. There the Apostle says, We
know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request
for us with sighs which cannot be expressed. Likewise the Apostle Jude exhorts
the people of God To pray in the holy Ghost, the 20. verse of that Chapter.
That part of worship called Liturgy cannot be found in the Word of God, in the
use of which Liturgy many commit abomination before God in abusing his Word,
in showing more reverence by standing up at one place, and sitting down at
another place of Scripture.

FINIS.
An Expedient humbly presented to the King and Parliament for the happy
settlement of Ecclesiastical Affairs.
1. THat eleven neighbor Parishes be gathered into a Diocese or Classis,
whereof one of the Pastors to be ^^ose a Bishop or President; The Bishop not to
rule or ordain without five of the rest of the Pastors or Presbyters; but let
there be no Archbishops, Chapters, Prebens, who have nothing of solid pretense
for their standing, and the means belonging to them may go to the more
comfortable maintaining of the other Ministers.

2. Let there be every Sabbath in the morning, before preaching a general
Prayer devised, in very good style; where one thing may not be often repeated,
and the Minister may be alone the mouth of the people, concluding with the
Lords Prayer, which or after that manner let every Minister use, after which
the Creed and the some sum of Divinity may be read, and then the Commandments,
with an Explication of the Vices forbidden, Virtues commanded, and Promises
annexed to obedience, and misery of disobedience. In the afternoon, one Sabbath
reading a Chap. in the old and new Testament, another Sabbath Exposition of
some part of Scripture, a third Sabbath Catechizing, and so con^tantly.

3. Let there be a toleration in Religion, excepting to Blasphemy, Treason, or
gross errors.

4. As for unnecessary Ceremonies, Bowing, Organs, Cross, Surplice, Holy
place, Vestments, Time excepting the Lords day, let them never be imposed; For
besides the danger that is thereby of infringing Christian-liberty, there is
much hazard therein of will worship and superstition; for it is well known that
in all the ages and states of the Church, in the time of sacrifices and Moses
constitution, nothing was to be added or diminished, even to a Pin in the
worship of God, but was to be exact according to (...) prescribing; Every thing
having a signification as God had appointed; the very fringes appointed was,
that the people might remember the Commandments of the Lord to do them, and
now if those Ceremonies which was commanded by God are abrogated, how can we
think such Ceremonies only, that were of men's devising can be allowed; and does
not Christ and his Apostles reprehend the traditions and observations of men,
and by the same rule we may admit of a few humane Ceremonies; others may bring
in many, and doubtless the Papists have as much ground for Holy Water, as we
for bowing before an Altar; And do not Protestants accuse the Popish Ceremonies
for teaching at all, as well as teaching ill, accounting those Ceremonies as
Images, for are there not aerial as material ones, both alike making
representation to us? But was there not this manifest danger of Superstition in
the Ceremonies, yet seeing the Ordinances of God may be purely administered, and
decensie and order kept without them, and seeing it is readily granted that we
may lawfully lay them aside if we will, What pity would it be that some men's
pleasures should oppose other men's consciences? Certainly, it is clear from our
Saviors rule, that whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye to
them; That we should condescend to others as far as we can; Now though as
things stand among us, I see these four aforementioned Rules will be exceeding
necessary to keep out an idle Ministry, and preserve a painful and preaching
one, and the Ordinances in purity, yet I would have such an impartial inquiry
into the Congregational men's Principles, as that what is of truth (which is
every ones interest) may be entertained, and when the worship of God is pure,
there will not be reason for separation from us.

One thing more is heartily to be wished further, that some may be empowered to
hear complaints between Minister and people, that such as have not good lives
may be debarred the Sacrament, and such Ministers as degenerate into loosnesse,
idleness, drunkenness, or any wickedness and profaneness, may not continue
as men in their Lands and Trades, but may be put forth of their livings, that
others may come into the Vineyard that may be true laborers, and feed the
people with knowledge and understanding, it would be an encouragement to Virtue,
and a discouragement to Vice, if that the Communicants should in every Parish
line a hand in the choice of their Minister, how happily would these things
free us from jarrs and heats? which with these few things following, may settle
us in the favor of God and men, upon lasting foundations.

Let an effectual course be taken utterly to purge these Kingdoms of profane
swearing, cursing, whoring, drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, idle-living,
loose-gaming, and all such detestable Vices.

Let Workhouses be set up for the poor; the Fishing-Trade be carried on, that
those that can work may, and those that cannot, may be provided for.

Let none be licen'st from paying their debts.

Let none be Imprisoned but according to law; and let all come to speedy Trial.

Let the people be as much eased as may be, and no more exacted from them, then
very need and just reason does require, for what is otherwise laid upon us, I
cannot see but it is a great deal more lawful for us to obey and submit to,
then it is for you to require of us; But to study to do good, and to comfort
is certainly the best improvement of men's parts and power, and the best way to
confirm peace at home, and abroad.

Postscript.
THe equity of the first rule that the Bishop as well as other Pastors should
have a flock to take care of, and that there was in the Primitive times several
Bishops in one City, appears Phil: 1.1. 1 Thessalonians: 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7.17. Acts
20.28. 2 Cor: 1.4. James 5.24. As for the reasonableness of not having
Archbishops, or Prebens any more, then Friars in the Church, and of the other
rule there needs nothing but impartiality and moderation to judge.

FINIS.

