On the ANSWER to Dr. WILDS POEM; UPON Mr. CALAMY 's Imprisonment.
GLancing (as I passed) aside
Upon a Ballad-Stall, I spied
A Sheet, with Poem sprinkled over;
At Sight, it seemed like Lawyers Lore,
With Lines that stood so thin and wide,
As though they rated were by the side;
(And sure the Printer, that gave more
Then Clerks pay for them, will be poor;)
By this I thought, and by his Wit,
I had the Squint-eyed Author hit;
'Guest it the Pettyfoggers Rhyme:
But that it came forth in Term time;
When the Green Bag, his Pia Matter
Is better fraught; John Taylor's Water
Is now converted into Wine;
That Poet now, can drink and dine
On Dishes of more solid fare,
Then the Camelion Sisters are;
Or yet Cook Lorrells; no need steal
Ben Johnson's Sweapings for a Meal:
But I Am mistaken in the man,
There is another in the Van
Of Libellers, Heroic Leader,
And (to the Sense of Female Reader)
A Champion stout; his name let pass,
It Rhimes to Madam Baltinglasse,
Which whom he Cheek by Jole does walk,
And can do more with her than talk;
This is the Bishops trusty Roger,
That bites with Teethy Quill like Badger;
He that with help of Ha^tbert Blade,
Ned Bagshaw by the Heels has laid;
When all his Troops of Verse and Prose,
With all their dry and downright Blows
Upon his sides, could make no dint,
Nor more leave on them, then the print
Of his foul Pen; This, this is he
Tramples on Wild and Calamy
With saucy Feet of Ballad Meetre,
Than which, the stinking Souls are sweeter
Of Ballad Singers, or the Train
Of Match Girls out of Rosemary Lane:
Some write of Poets licking Spit
From Homers Lips the nasty wit
That from his squalid Nib does foam,
Speaks him of some such Sire to come;
Jack Pudding's Chaps with Custard smeared,
And mixed with Candle smutted Beard,
Not half so loathsome looks as thine;
There Is not one Muse of all the Nine
So sluttish, but abhors to be
Accounted Patroness to thee.
But oh! bold Bard with brazen Front,
That durst put Hudebras upon it!
And filch away that Authors Fame,
By counterfeiting of his Name;
Not as Bathillus did, who put
His Name to Virgill's Verses; but
With far more impudence and shame,
Thou have to thine put Virgill's Name;
Thus Vagabonds get Bread and Cheese
In Country Towns, by Shifts like these,
And by a counterfeited Pass
Often whipping escape; but Hudebras
Shall not secure thee from my Scourge;
For though thy Wit can little urge
A Poets Rage, yet who can see
The foame of base scurrility
On such men thrown by soul-mouth'd Muse,
And not a little Whipcord use?
Which to a Halter I could twist,
And make thy Wreath on it (if I list)
But such gross Lines for Muse to weave,
Is much beyond Poetic Leave;
A Satyrist may lash (no doubt)
But not beyond his Whip Lash out;
Thus to invade the Hangmans place
With Sledge and Halter; foul disgrace
Of Poets Pen to treat of these,
Which only Reader, Rout can please;
Nay, (which the Muses more detest)
To talk of Halters not in jest;
A Poets Wit though never so keen,
May be endured if without Spleen:
But when the Bard once angry grows,
His Wit outmatch'd, at best he shows.
Then take thy swing I Will give thee Rope;
Tangle thy self, I do not hope,
Nor shall my wish extend to see,
That Bishop lay his hands on thee,
Which thou for Calamy and Wild
Provided have, in Verse so vil'd;
That 'twere less Torture to be hung
Out right, then thus be Ballad Sung
By Sluttish Muse; let those that cry
Kitchin-Stuffe to thy next reply;
If more thou writest at this Rate,
May thou be matched at Billings gate;
Where with thy Hawkers on thy side,
Thy prowess will be better tried;
No Regiment of Red-Coats Stout,
But of Red-petty-Coats the Rout,
For thy Encounter fittest are;
So Farewell Woman's Man of War.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. B. 1663.


