ON THE Second Entertainment of the Batchelours BY THE RIGHT HONORABLE The
Lord Mayor of the City of London, SEPTEMBER viij. MDCLXIX.
NOW, Gallants, Much good do it ye. But d' you hear
The News abroad? I heard one just now swear
That all the unmarry'd Ladies, that were met
To see your Pomp, are fighting in the street.
The have pined away, e're since their former sight,
With the Green Sickness, all; but now they will sight.
While this Man's Face was praised, and that Man's Foot,
One Gallants Perruque, and another Suit,
A jealous humor took 'em all in the pate,
And the are by the ears, none knows for whom, or what.
It Is some of You; pray think upon their Cases:
Unless You part 'em, they will spoil all their Faces.
They rave (alas!) to think their destinies
Have Damned 'em Maids, till You Will be otherwise.
The are tantaliz'd; what would you have 'm do?
They neither can enjoy your Feast, nor You.
These Sabine Ladies came with longing Eyes
To view your more than Roman Gallantries:
And now they will prove the inverted Story true,
And will (I fear) commit a Rape on You. --
-- But I Will no longer 'fright you, ben't dejected:
'Twas but to try you, how you stood affected.
The Ladies thank you for their Noble View:
The Men, both for the sight of Them, and You.
You Have begged the young City Ladies this days Play:
But they must Fast upon their Holy Day.
They were both gallant Sights; but 'troth it is pity,
Maids may Adorn, but never can Make a City:
And Maids and Batchelours are a finer sight
For a Summers Day, than for a Winters Night.
'Pray, Gallants, think upon it; but for to day
Eat, drink, be jovial: -- let the Ladies stay.
If to their Healths you will drink a Glass or two,
I dare be bold they will do as much for You.
See all before you, you can wish; and here
You need no Horn, but that of Plenty, fear.
Such store of Ammunition is able
To 'fright one with the Artill'ry of the Table.
Tables fo nobly filled, as if last Fleet
Had brought home no Commodity, but Meat:
And Wines so rich and costly, as if there was
Cleopatra's Pearl dissolved in every glass.
Two more such Feasts were able to undo
A Land, and bankrupt all the World, but You.
This very Sight would make a Miser bold
To wish (like Midas) he could eat his Gold.
A Puritans eternal Lungs would waste
To say a Grace, of length for such a Feast:
He Would leave his Fasts, though never so great a Sinner,
And keep a long Thanksgiving, for the Dinner.
Those nauseous stomachs of the preciser Ones
Bark at those Tables, where they would pick the Bones.
But Envy, no not Theirs, can dare to call
What Is Noble by the name of Prodigal.
It Is free from all Excess, as full of State:
All Great Men's Actions, like Themselves, are Great.
He from whose only Pattern may be seen
What MAYORS must be, and what they should have been:
Whose early Vig'lance keeps the Rebellious in,
That they want Opportunity to sin:
Who stays not calmly till the Law is broke,
But keeps Men stom't, his Eye prevents his stroke:
Who rouzes Justice from her sleeping hole,
Is both the Body of the Law, and Soul:
Who weighs things with an equal steady hand,
And to whose Test Justice her self may stand:
He who does this, and more would you but know,
What ample boon Heaven does on him bestow?
H' has Adam's blessings in his single life,
His Wisdom, Inn'cence, Honor, and no Wife.
Let London lift up her recruited Head:
She Is Newborn, and her Father is a Maid.
May the Omen hold, and She forever be
Chaste as a Virgin, as a Virgin Free.
When She Is again with this days splendor blessed,
Make this brave Pattern the Epo'che to the rest.
But may no Poetaster of the Times
Send in Sedition crouch'd in Joking Rimes:
Still may all those that rail ad Bishopsgate
Feel an eternal Bedlam in their Pate.
For next to such a PRINCE, and such a Day,
London can only wish, She ever may
Have such a MAYOR, though She still want a Mayoress:
So may the City hope to be His Heiress.
LONDON, Printed M DC LXIX.


