AN ELEGY Upon the Never Satisfactorily deplored Death of that Rare Column of
PARNASSVS, MR. JOHN CLEEVELAND.
IS CLEEVELAND Dead? and not one weeping Pen
Vote him in Text The Miracle of Men?
Can the great Monarch of the Two-topt Hill
Visit the Shades? whose Star-encountring Quill
Had He but darted at insulting Death,
That pale-faced Tyrant had resigned his Breath,
Tribute to Lycambes Collar. Resist
His lightest Lash, Take him as Satyrist
No Mortal can. Snaky Medusa's Head
With one prick of his Neb he could strike dead;
His sublimated Style most justly mocks
A Muse that cannot let-Blood the craggy Rocks.
And can his Laurel wither? Alas! He
As his own Demesne has Eternity.
Great CLEEVELAND scorns the Grave, and cannot Die,
Before an Exhalation to the sky
Gives fire with his flaming Beard, and shall presage
Some viperous Curse to cauterize this Age:
How then presumes this abhorred Scrietch-Owle Fame
To intrude TH into CLEEVELAND's Name?
He to whom Poets must in Homage fall,
And beg from^s Verse their Senses Festival.
But ah! Fame's tipp'd with Truth, his soaring Soul,
That was both Arctick and Antarctick Pole
To Poesy; has filed off Her Clay,
And Eagle-wing'd dissects the Milky way;
And with undazled Eyes ascends as far
As the Eight Sphere, where She the Sixteenth Star
Makes of the first Magnitude. And conjoynt
With her Associates, lends this Terrene Point
A Loving Glance: whilst we with drowned Eyes
Deplore our Earth, Envy the now blessed skies.
Stupid Astronomers! whose senseless Brain
The Middle Region is of Snow, Hail, Rain;
Did ye not by consent avow, This Year,
No Black Eclipse should Mask our Hemisphere?
And yet with Despair see how Greys-Inne Sun
Twelve Digits is Eclipsed, Muffled, O'rerun.
Resume your Jacobs-Staffs, and with them take
The Altitude of Truth, your gross mistake
Cancel, with a Prediction far more True
Than Priam's chastest Daughter ever knew.
Till the vast Fabric of the World shall Burn
Without Repair, and become its own Urn,
Boldly assert, Men wisely may despair,
To see a Muse Merit the Curule Chair
So much as CLEEVELAND's. How? Nay, for to see
One that might make an Halting Simile.
Foretell the World that there shall shortly be
Of Elements but a Triplicitie.
The Muses swear by Styx, Their showring Eyes
Shall offer up the Earth a Sacrifice
To Neptune's Trident. This not spurs our Fears,
Who are all ready pickled up in Tears.
Apollo turns Close-Mourner, Burns his Bays;
And nothing fly, but Melancholy Brayes
From Pegasus Horse Throat. Fount Caballine
For Sand has Salt, the Water being Brine.
The Phoenix robs the Wardrobe of the East
(When extreme Age indigitates Her Nest,)
Of the most fragrant Spices: And dares Die,
Without a Cheer-up from a Stander by.
The Sun's Executor; and lets Her have,
As it is Her Will, a Cradle, and a Grave.
Her Daughter crawles out first: Then learns to fly,
Probatum est: the Way to live's, to Dye.
Could a much flattered Hope, create Belief,
Albions rare Phoenix should Revive; our Grief
Should end in Paeans: And thy Altars round
A Thousand Hecatombs with Garlands crowned,
(Great Jove) should Low, whilst Wits in greatfull Crowds,
With Acclamations shall unrip the Clouds.
Alas! we cannot Beg His Life, of Fate,
Were sweet Cyllenius our Advocate:
Not though in Thunder, Jove commands Reprieve,
To see the Light will Minos give Him leave;
And yet although it is frivolous to crave
An Habeas Corpus from the Hated Grave;
Yet shall the Pallas of Thy Laureat Head,
Of Carian Mausolaeum stand in stead.
Thy Brain has had Immortal Issue, which,
Till Earths Grand Calcination, shall Enrich
Thy Name with Radiant Glory. We no Muse
Will invocate but Thine. Thee we will choose
Our Patron, Our Apollo. He who Climbs,
Reason to Embroyder with high Vaulting Rhymes,
That scorns His Nurses Words; And counts it cheap
To o're-top Saturn at one fiery Leap;
Whose Pleasure makes Vulcans tried Anvile yield;
Can force Archilochus to run the Field;
Whom Cato calls, the Glory of His Age;
And has Men's Admiration as his Page:
Such, Such a Soul, may Vaunt Himself to be
A Dim Resemblance of Thy Muse and Thee.
Adieu Dear Sir! We Mortals will prove Just,
Always adoring Your most sacred Dust.
The Earth on You lay light: VVhilest heavy Hearts
In Sighs and Throbs shall act our Tragic Parts.
Ever sit Thou Enthroned in the Peoples Vogue,
Thy Fever being Named Wits Epilogue.
EPITAPHIUM.
IActare fas est, dives, O dives Marmor!
AErarium Magni cineris es CLEEVELANDI.
Sub te Sepultus, qui potis mori Non est.
Virgilius Hic est Anglicus: Tullius Hic est.
Ad alta semper cum sua tetendit Musa,
Altissimam ambit nunc Poesin: In Coelo,
Indesinenter cantitans Hallelujah.
Dum Naenias celebramus atras stillante
Oculo, Viator! sis Tui memor Busti:
Elugeas Catastrophen Hanc Parnassi.
T. P. Genesis Norfolciensis.

VIATOR ILICET.
London, Printed by W. Godbid, for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms at the Lower
end of Chancery Lane, near the Inner Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1658.


