Salvation Improved: IN A SERMON Upon the 16th of April, 1696. Being the Day of
SOLEMN THANKSGIVING For the Preservation of His Majesty's SACRED PERSON, from
Barbarous Assassination; and of this Kingdom, from French INVASION.

Preached at Oswestry, by J. O. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for I. Salusbury, at the Rising Sun in Cornhil, 1696.

SALVATION Improved: In a Sermon on the 16th of APRIL, 1696. Being the Day of
Solemn THANKSGIVING, etc.
Psalm 144.10. It is He that gives Salvation unto Kings, who Delivers David
his Servant from the hurtful Sword.


THESE Words Recommend unto us, Two Remarkable Instances of Divine Providence.

First, Toward Kings in general, It is He, i. e. The Lord, That gives
Salvation unto Kings.

Secondly, Toward David in particular, Who Delivers David his Servant from
the Hurtful Sword.

David the Man after God's own heart, had many Enemies; neither his Piety
toward God, nor his Successes against the Common Adversaries of Israel, could
secure him from the Plots and Conspiraces of Evil Men; among whom, his own
Father-in-Law, King Saul, made the first Figure: But God delivered him from the
hurtful Sword of Saul, and other Enemies: No Weapon formed against him
Prospered; He wore a Protection against all the Attempts of Ungodly Persons, by
virtue of his Relation to God, to whose Service he had Devoted himself, and
under whose Umbrage he found Shelter: He was a Servant of God, which
contributed more to his Safety, than his being King of Israel.

The Sense of the words may be summed up into this Proposition.

There is a Particular Providence, that concerns its self in the Preservation
of Kings and Princes, especially of such as are Good.

Royal Persons are Guarded and Attended by a Numerous Train of Armed Men; but
their Salvation consists not in these: an Arm of Flesh, is no Defense without
God: Strong Guards have been the Ruin as well as the Support of Princes; as
they are more exposed than other Men, so are they framed of the same mould with
others; they are as susceptible of Hostile Impressions as others, being Vessels
of the same Clay with other Mortals, and easily crushed and broken: The
Almighty King will make them acknowledge sooner or later, That it is he that
makes their Mountain Strong, Psalm. 30.7.
and if he hide his Face, they are Troubled.

There is a Providence to which all things owe their Conservation; the same
power which produced this Vast World, and its Innumerable Inhabitants, Neh.
9.6. Matt. 10.29.
Upholds and Preserves them all: A Sparrow falls not on the ground without our
Heavenly Father.

How much more does the Divine Providence concern it self about Man? The
Darling of Heaven; The Chief of God's Works: The Object of Redeeming Love; For
whose Salvation the Son of God Assumed Flesh: God styles himself, Job 7.20.
The Preserver of Mankind: It is his Prerogative, and our Privilege.

He is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10.
especially of those that Believe: They are his by Covenant, and he has
engaged all his Glorious Attributes, for their Defense and Salvation: He has
Promised to be with them in all Extreamities; and never to leave nor forsake
them: The Lord preserves the Faithful, Psalm. 31: 23.
says the Royal Prophet; and in another place, Psalm. 97.10.
He preserves the Souls of his Saints; he Delivers them out of the hand of
the Wicked: The same is acknowledged by Hannah in her Eucharistick Song; 1 Samuel
2.9.
He will keep the Feet of his Saints; that is, He will order their Steps, and
Establish their Ways; or as the Wise Man expresses it, He preserves the way of
his Saints. Prove. 2.8.


If there be such a Watchful Providence over Good Men, how much more over Good
Princes? They have an interest, not only in that Providence which respects Good
Men in Common, but in a more distinguishing one, which is proper to themseves:
It is Recorded as the peculiar favor of Heaven, to King David, That the Lord
preserved David whithersoever he went. Isa. 8.6


It Is True, If Princes forsake God, he also will forsake them, and leave them
destitute of desired help, when Distress and Anguish comes upon them: Thus
King Saul; having abandoned himself to Vile and Unmanly Passions, was first
given up to himself, and afterward into the hands of his Enemies; when the
Spirit of God had once left him, 1 Samuel 16.14.
it was not long until the Divine Protection also departed from him: 1 Samuel
28.15.
If Princes set themselves against God, he will set his Face against them; and
who can Deliver out of his hand? Who cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is
Terrible to the Kings of the Earth. Psalm. 76.12.


But Good Princes are the Special Care of Heaven; God is with them, his Eyes
are upon them for good, his Angels Encamp round about them; they are as a
signet upon his Right Hand, Isa. 22.23.
which none can pluck thence: He fastens them as a nail in a sure place, and
makes them a Glorious Throne to their Fathers House.

There is a particular Providence over them, First, In preventing Secret
Conspiraces. Secondly, In Covering them from Open and Public Dangers.

First, In Preventing Secret Conspiracies: Though the Plots of Cunning Enemies,
be laid as deep as Hell, and covered with Infernal Darkness; yet that
All-seeing Eye, before which, Hell is Naked, and Destruction has no Covering,
Penetrates into them, and exposes them to public View.

Little did Moses and his Israelites, suspect the Secret Intreagues of Balac
and the Princes of Moah, who were forming a Plot against them, under the
conduct of Balaam a false prophet; but the Vigilant Providence, which ever
espouses the cause of Innocence and Truth, rebukes the madness of the Prophet,
diverts his vile Inclinations, and converts his intended Imprecations, into
Real Blessings.

There was a more Dangerous Plot against our Great Deliverer and our Protestant
Israel; the Method was, To Assassinate his Royal Person, to destroy his
Friends, to Involve these Nations in Blood and Misery, to Overturn the
Foundations of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and enslave us to the worst
of Tyrants, the French King, and to a forward Instrument of his Cruelties, the
Abdicated King James, who was ready to Invade us with a French Power, and to
return like the Unclean Spirit in the Gospel, with seven other Spirits more
wicked than himself, to repossess his deserted Throne, whereby our last state
would have been seven times worse than our first.

All this was managed with the greatest Secrecy, until things were come to such
a ripeness, that there wanted nothing but the Execution of an infallible
design, as they called it; but blessed be God, it proved equally infallible
with the Romish Church, whose distinguishing Character is to extirpate the best
of Christians, under the odious name of Heretics.

Things were arrived to this perfection, and no visible hand at work to prevent
the Fatal Stroke; we were in a deep security, as Sheep devoted to the
slaughter, tied as it were to the Horns of the Altar, and ready to be
Sacrificed.

But the Great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, looked down from Heaven, troubled the Hosts of these Egyptians, and took
off their Chariot-Wheels as they were driving on with the greatest Fury, and
assurance of Success. Ps. 2.4.
He that sits in the Heavens did laugh, the Lord had them in derision. He
Divided their Tongues, Infatuated their Counsels, and made the sworn
Instruments of the Kings Destruction, the happy means of preventing it. He sent
a spirit of Jealousy among them, which occasioned the discovery of their
execrable Intentions. Ps. 110.2.
Thus Christ rules in the midst of his Enemies, and overrules their Hellish
Policies to his own Praise. Job. 5.12, 13 14, 15.
He disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so that their Hands cannot perform
their Enterprise: He takes the Wise in their own Craftiness, and the Counsel of
the Froward it carried headlong.

When Balak practiced against Israel, and took Balaam for his Counselor,
neither the one or the other thought of the French Method of hiring a company
of Desperadoes to Assassinate Moses, who was a King in Jeshurun, and so prepare
a way for an easy and inglorious Victory over Israel: No, that Heathen Prince
judged it the best policy to engage his Gods on his side, and to expose Israel
to a Prophetic Curse: The World then was too innocent to entertain such
devilish projects. Royal Minds scorn such mean Arts of subduing their
Adversaries. The Assassinating Invention owes its Original to latter, and more
Brutish Ages; the name and thing are derived from the barbarous Saracens, among
whom there is a Bloody Sect called Assassini, living under a Senior, or Ruler,
whom they honor as a Prophet, by whom they are sent forth to murder such
Princes as favor them not, promising themselves the reward of Immortality by
him in all things, though with the loss of their Lives. They are Mahometans by
profession, and one would be apt to think no other but a Mohammedan were capable
of such Villainy. Our Noble King Edward the first, when he was at Acon, was
dangerously wounded by an Assassine, and had undoubtedly died of the Wound
which the Saracen had given him with a poisoned Knife, had not Queen Eleanor,
of immortal memory, sucked out the poison with her Tongue, when no Medicine
could extract it. She licked his rankling Wounds, whereby they perfectly
closed, and yet her self received no harm.

The Spirit of this Barbarous Sect is since entered into the Jesuits, and other
Popish Orders, who have by their Writings, and Actions proved themselves the
genuine Offspring of the Mahom tan Assassines. Henry the 3d. of France, and
his Successor, Henry the 4th. a great Prince, both fell by base assassinating.
One would think the present French King, whose Grandfather was stabbed by
Ravaillac, should above all Men abhor Assassinations, especially toward a
Prince who exposes his Person to the utmost hazards of Battle; but we have have
strong Presamptions that the design upon King William's Life was carried on
with his Knowledge and Approbation, nor could the late King be ignorant of it,
or less innocent than his mighty Guardian: For the Success of the intended
Invasion depended upon the taking away of the Kings Life. The Army at Calais,
under the Conduct of Monsieur Bouflers, and K. J. waited only for the welcome
news of the King's Death, to give Life to all their motions: The discovery of
the Plot broke all their measures, and spoiled the infallible design. The
French King's Ambassadors at the Courts of Sweden and Portugal, and in some
other Courts of Europe, gave sufficient hints of their knowledge of it. Besides,

Grandval, who was Executed in August, 1692. in Flanders, for being in
Conspiracy to assassinate King William, confessed that he was put on by
Monsieur Barbesieux, the French King's Secretary, who promised he should be
made a Count, and by the late K. J. of whom he had Audience in Presence of his
Queen, and was assured by him he should never want, provided he did his work
effectually.

They who have been concerned in a design against the King's Life, may be
justly suspected to have a hand in the late Conspiracy, which was undertaken in
favor of them both, and who were like to be the Principal, if not only gainers
by it.

2. There is a particular Providence over Princes, in covering them from open
and public dangers. King David often recognizeth the divine Goodness in
delivering him from his strong Enemies, even when they were too strong for him.
They compassed him about like Bees, Ps. 18.17, and 118, 12.
and were quenched as the fire of Thorns. When he was surrounded with the
snares of Death, God made a way of escape for him. When good King Jehoshaphat
was enclosed by the Syrian Army, 2 Chro. 18.31.
he cried out unto God, and he helped him, and moved them to depart from him.

King Richard the first, who was hunting carelessly near Joppa, with a few of
his Nobles about him, was surprised by a company of Turks, who lay in
Ambushment for him, and had inevitably fallen into their Hands, had not one of
the Company, walsh. hypod. neustr. p. 454.
William de Pratellis, cried out in the Turkish Language, That he was the King,
which the Turks believing, carried him away in Triumph, and neglected the rest,
whereby King Richard had his opportunity of escaping their Hands, and returned
safe to his own.

All Histories are full of Instances of a particular vigilance of Providence
over Princes, but no Age has afforded more pregnant ones than those that
concern the Person of our Illustrious King William. A Narrative of all the
remarkable deliverances of his Life, would fill up a just Volumn.

None can be more conversant with dangers, none more secure in the midst of
them: He walks without fear in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, he passes
untouched through the midst of the Enemy's Fire, guarded by invisible Powers,
as the three young Men in the Fiery Furnace; he advances with an Heroic
Courage before the Mouths of roaring Canons, those Artificial Vulcano's, that
vomit out Fire and Smoke, and flying Globes, the irresistible Messengers of a
terrible and present death.

His trust is in the name of the Lord, which is a strong Tower, a Shield of
defense, and a sure Refuge, which no adverse Power is able to penetrate. He
believes that every Bullet has its Commission, 2 Kings 22.3^
and is directed by unerring Providence. This is not to ascribe events to a
Turkish Fate, as his Enemies have invidiously and basely traduced him, but an
entire dependence upon the Divine Will, to whose Conduct the most fortuitous
Events ought to be ascribed.

How wonderfully has God preserved him at the Boyn! A Canon-Ball gently salutes
him, to give him a sensible Impress of his mortal state, and of his immortal
Obligations to his Almighty Preserver. In Flanders another Canon-Bullet
discharges its Fury against a Tree, where the King had been a few Minutes
before. At the Siege of Namur, some fall at his Right Hand, some at his Left,
while himself stands as an impregnable Monument of Divine Power and Goodness.

The Lord has delivered him in six Troubles, Job 5.19.
yea in seven no evil has touched him. Eliphaz reckons it among the
Privileges of a good Man, Job. 5.23.
that he shall be in League with the stones of the field, that is, he shall be
preserved from every hurtful thing. Stones in those ancient times were used in
Wars, and did as much execution then as Bullets now. Judge. 20.16. and 9.53.
1 Samuel 17.49. Joseph. de bill Judaic. 111.9.
Josephus in his description of the Siege of Jotapata by Vespasian, says, that
the Stones that the Romans shot out of their Catapultae, and great Machines,
destroyed whole Ranks of Soldiers together; and that the Head of one of his Men
(for he was Governor of the place) was struck off with a great stone, and was
carried three Furlongs distance with the violence of it. He adds, that a
Big-bellied Woman was shot in the Belly, and the shattered Infant driven half a
Furlong with the force of another Stone.

Thou shall be in League with the stones of the Field, is as much as if he had
said, No Weapon sormed against thee shall prosper, one Species of Warlike
Instruments being put for all the rest.

King William may be said to be in League with Guns and Pistols, Ps. 91.12.
with Swords and Pikes; he dashes not his foot against a Stone, but walks
securely amidst the greatest, and seemingly insuperable dangers.

All this is owing to the Protection of Heaven, which attends all his Noble and
Hazardous Undertakings.

He is raised by a singular Providence to be a Deliverer of oppressed Nations,
and eminently shares in the Blessings he derives upon others by the
distinguishing Deliverances which the Divine Favor has wrought for him. The
King trusts in the Lord, Ps. 21.7.
and through the Mercy of the Most High, he shall not be moved.

I shall give two Reasons for the Confirmation of the Truth before us, to wit,
That there is a particular Providence which guards the Persons of Princes,
especially good Princes.

1. The first reason is taken from their near relation unto God. Princes are
Terrestrial Gods, they partake in some measure of the Divine perfections, are
illustrated with some Beams of the excellent Glory; their persons are Sacred,
and have visible Characters of Majesty upon them.

Dominion over Creatures of an inferior rank, Genesis 1.27.28.
is part of God's Image upon Man; Dominion over Men is a more excellent
resemblance of God, the supreme Rector of the World.

For this reason Princes are called Gods, Ps. 82.6. I said ye are Gods, by
office, not by nature. They are Men by Nature, as it is in the following words,
v. 7. Ye shall dye like Men: But by Office they are Gods. God puts his Name
upon them, Vox (...) ut notant Hebraei, sive de Deo sumatur, sive de hominibus
sive de Angelis, judiciariam potestatem sufficat. Grot. in Exodusvid Schinler
and invests them with power and Authority for the Administration of Justice,
the protection and encouragement of those that do well, and for the punishment
and terror of Evil Doers. They are honorable Ministers of the Eternal King,
deputed by him, and entrusted with the Government of this Lower World. Hence
Subjects are required to Honor them next unto God, to obey them in the Lord,
Fear God, Honor the King: And in another place, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor Curse the Ruler of thy People. Sometimes
we Translate the Word Elohim, Judges, as in Exodus 21.6. Then his Master shall
bring him unto the Judges, (...) unto the Gods, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
so called, because they judge not for Man, but for the Lord.

Earthly Princes think themselves obliged to support and defend their Officers
of State; Turg. (...) coram judices.
how much more does the King of Glory exert a particular Concern for his
Vicegerents upon Earth?

They are Gods, not absolute and independent Persons. It is the Prerogative of
the Eternal to be Absolute and Unlimited. Dan. 5.23.
Rulers over Men are Subjects to God, in whose Hand their Breath is, and whose
are are all their Ways. Ps. 18.
King David reckons it his highest Honor to be the Servant of the Lord.

God's Government in the World is Absolute, his Will is Sovereign, and the only
measure of all good and evil; and it must needs be so, for he is infinitely
Wise, essentially and immutably Good. His excellent Wisdom secures him from all
possibility of erring or mistaking; his transcendent Goodness from all
possibility of abusing his Power to the hurt of any. But this cannot be said of
any created Being, much less of Man, who is miserably degenerated from his
Original Purity and Perfection. The wisest of Men know but in part, the best of
Men are imperfectly good. It was Man's first Apostasy from God to covet to be
as Gods, supreme and absolute. By aspiring too high, and invading the
Prerogatives of his Maker, he fell below himself, and became like the Beasts
that perish. Ps. 49.20.
The most absolute of Princes are the most brutish of Men, they Tyrannize over
their emasculated Subjects, and with an Appetite worse than brutish, devour
those of their own kind.

None aspires more to Absoluteness than the Prince of the power of the Air, who
boldly usurps the Divine Properties, assumes the incommunicable Attributes of
the Infinite Being, and exercises a Tyrannical Dominion over a great part of
the sinful World, to the ruin and destruction of Mankind. He is therefore
called Apollyon, Rev. 9.11.
or the Destroyer.

They that assume the same Power, employ it for the same Ends, and entitle
themselves to the same Name; only they have this disadvantage of him, that they
are not Immortal as he is; these Infernal Gods shall dye like Men, and they
rarely dye the common Death of other Men. They forfeit the divine Protection,
and perish in their own Iniquity. Will thou yet say before him that slays
thee, I am God, Ezekiel. 8.2^.
but thou shall be a Man and no God in the Hand of him that slays thee.

But good Princes account it their greatest Happiness to resemble the Divine
Goodness, to make the Established Laws the Rule of Government, and to direct
all their Actions to the public Good. They have no Interest of their own,
distinct from their Subjects; they are Fathers of their Country, and naturally
care for it; they are Heads of the Political Body, and derive Life and Vigor
to all the Members of it, except it be some gangrened parts, which should be
cut off, lest the whole be infected, and endangered by them. While proud
Tyrants affect to be like the most High, it is the only Ambition of Pious
Princes to be like the most Holy. They know themselves to be but Men, and that
it is their Interest to be under the protection of Heaven, which is never
wanting to them. The Lord delivered me, says King David, Ps. 18.19, ^^
because he delighted in me; the Lord rewarded me according to my
Righteousness, according to the cleanness of my Hands has he recompensed me.

2. There is a particular providence which guards the persons of good Princes,
because they are public Blessings to the World. This World cannot subsist
without the Benefit of Government. The Life of all Societies is their Order and
Subordination to Lawful Rule. The best part of Mankind would soon be swallowed
up by the worser part, were it not for the restraint of Humane Laws, which have
a greater Influence upon them than the Laws of God; and the surviving part
would afterward destroy each other by mutual depredations, did not the Laws
set Bounds to the Brutal Appetites of unreasonable Men.

The enjoyment of Liberty and Property under the favorable Influences of good
Rulers, is one of the most valuable of Temporal Blessings. It is an
unaccountable Stupidity in a sort of People among us, to prefer the Garlic and
Onions of Egypt before the Showers of Manna that fall about our Tents; to
prefer French Slavery, which is worse than Turkish, before English Liberty; to
prefer the Common Enemy of Europe, before the Generous Assertor of it is just
Rights; Would you think it, that any Persons that wear the name of Protestants
should reckon themselves aggrieved under the best of Protestant Princes, and
seek their relief from the worst of Popish Princes? Good God! what a Spirit of
Infatuation has possessed these Men? They are to be pitied as Men besides
themselves, and prayed for, that God would open their Eyes, to see the things
of their peace, before they be hid from them. They are homines ad servitutem
nati, born to enslave themselves and Posterity. But thanks be to God, they are
but a small part of the English Nation, and generally the worser part of
English Protestants.

I hope we are sensible what Blessings we enjoy under the present Government,
and what duties we owe unto it in our several Stations.

Good Princes are as useful in their kind as the Sun in the Firmament. 2 Samuel
23.3, 4.
He that rules in the fear of God, is as the Light of the Morning, when the Sun
rises, even a morning without Clouds.

Princes are the pillars of the Earth, upon which it stands. 2 Samuel 2.8.
The Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set the World upon them.
When one of these Pillars falls, the whole frame of the Building is shaken, and
in danger of being overturned, the Earth, Ps. 75.3.
and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, as the Royal Prophet speaks.

Virtuous Princes are like the Pillars in Solomon's Temple, whereof the one was
called Jachin, i. e. he will establish; the other Boaz, that is, in him is
Strength; their strength is in God, and it is he that Establishes them.

In another place they are called the Shields of the Earth; The Shields of the
Earth belong unto God. Ps. 47.8.
Shields are for defense, all Princes ought to be so, good Princes are so. Now
these belong unto God, he has a Propriety in them, and they depend upon him. He
makes them Shields unto us, and he is a Shield unto them. He shields our very
Shields.

Our Lives are bound up in the Life of our King. Lam. 4.20.
He is the Breath of our Nostrils, and under his Shadow we shall live among the
Heathen.

Precious in the Sight of the Lord is the Life of all his Saints, Ps. 116.15.
how much more precious is that inestimable Life, in which are involved so many
Thousands of useful Lives! What was said of David, may be truly affirmed of our
renowned King William, Thou art worth ten thousand of us.

Let us improve this Truth.

1. For Thankfulness, God has wonderfully preserved the Person of our Gracious
King from the barbarous contrivances of ungodly Men. Ps. 21.11.
They imagined a mischievous device, Ps. 64.26.
whch they are not able to perform. God hid him from the secret Counsel of the
Wicked, from the Insurrection of the workers of Iniquity. They search out
Iniquities, Iuvestigarunt vias nobis nocendi. Grot. in loc.
that is, they set all their wits at work to find out the methods of
destruction: They accomplished a diligent search. Their Counsels were brought
to a great maturity and perfection; none but he in whose Hands are all the ways
of Men, could have prevented the execution of them. Prove. 19.21.
Many are the devices of Man's Heart, but the Counsel of the Lord that shall
stand. How weak and ineffectual are the endeavors of Politic Men to obstruct
it; they consider not, Prove. 21.30.
that there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. When
the Lord comes to save his People, he does it in such a manner, as that he
alone may be exalted in that day. The Work is done not by might, Zach. 4.6.
or by Power, but by his Spirit, that we may cry, Grace, Grace, unto it. The
Spirit of the Lord has the Hearts and Thoughts of all Men in his Power, and
turns them as Rivers of Water. He searches the deep things of Man, unlocks the
most retired apartments of the Soul, and brings to light the hidden things of
darkness.

None would engage in so barbarous a design against his his Majesty's Sacred
Person, but such as had cast off all fear of God, had extinguished all
principles of Virtue and Humanity, and were desperately resolved to accomplish
their Intentions: But behold an instance of the Dominion of God over the
Thoughts of Men, he unravels their hellish Counsels, inspires new Thoughts into
some of the Conspirators, and makes them the instruments of a happy Discovery,
in the very juncture of time, when all their Measures were concerted, and the
Hellish Assassines were ready to perform their Enterprise. We may say with
David, Ps. 20.6. and 21, 1.
Now know I that the Lord saves his Anointed. The King shall joy in thy
strength, O Lord, and in thy Salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!

O the depth of the Riches of Divine Wisdom, and Goodness, how unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! The Squadron intended last Winter
to join Sir George Rook at Cadiz could not sail for want of Wind. God foresaw
what need we should have of them at home to guard our Coasts against the
French, who might easily have landed upon us, and doubtless would have improved
their advantage, had that Squadron been out of the way.

Our Deliverance should the rather excite our Thankfulneses because,

1. It was unexpected. We were upon the brink of Ruin, and knew it not. An
invisible Cloud was ready to discharge it self upon us in Fire and Brimstone,
and an Horrible Tempest, when our Heavens seemed clear over our Heads. We might
have been surpised with Sicilian Vapors, or a Bartholomew Supper. This Island
might have been Swimming in a Deluge of Innocent Blood. and become the sad
Monument of French and Popish Cruelties. When those Monsters of Barbarity had
murdered our Renowned King, the next Attempt would have been to destroy his
numerous and well-affected Subjects; Head and Members must have undergone the
same Fate. Bless the Lord, Ps. 103.^.
O our Souls, and all that is within us bless his Holy Name. When he turned
back our Captivity, we were like them that dream, our Deliverance was so
surprising and astonishing, that we could scarce believe our own Senses. God
prevented us with the Blessings of Goodness, and his own Right-H and wrought
Salvation, when we neither foresaw our Danger, nor could provide against it.

2. It is an undeserved deliverance. We are a sinful Nation, a People laden
with Iniquity, and it is of the Lord's Mercies that we are are not Consumed. He
consulted the Honor of his great Name that is called upon us, and would not
give his glory to another, nor his Praise to graven Images.

All the great Deliverances of the Church are Effects of Sovereign Mercy,
rejoicing against Judgment. Ezekiel. 20.14.22.
When God delivered Israel out of Egypt, he found them in their Blood and
Filth, polluted with the Abominations of the Egyptians; yet in the fullness of
time, Exodus 12.4^.
the Decree brought forth, and the promise of Deliverance had an infallible
Accomplishment. God's Truth in keeping Covenant, runs parallel with his Mercy
in making Covenant.

The Deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity found the People unprepared, as
Daniel confesses. All this Evil is come upon us, yet made we not our Prayer
before the Lord our God, Dan. 9.13.
that we might turn from our Iniquities, and understand thy Truth. God deferred
his Anger for his Names sake, and chose them in the Furnance of Affliction,
Isa. 48.9.10
before they were refined from their Dross.

Our Eternal Salvation from the Wrath of God, our Temporal Salvation from the
Wrath of Men, flow from the same spring of undeserved Mercy and Grace.

3. It is a Deliverance scarce to be parallelled. One of the greatest
Deliverances upon English Records is that from the Gunpowder-Treason, of which
we retain as grateful Impression, being Annually revived in our solemn
Commemoration of it; but our present Deliverance may seem in some respects to
transcend that. That Plot was the Act of a few comparatively, this was carried
on by a vast Multitude: That was managed by professed Papists, this by Nominal
Protestants in Conjunction with Papists: That by a Faction of despicable
Priests and Jesuits, this by persons of Note and Figure: That was levelled
against the Reformed Religion as such, this both against our Religion, and
civil Liberties, by subjecting us to a French Power: Had that taken, effect it
might have hazarded the Protestant Interest in one Nation, had this prevailed,
it might have been the extirpation of the Protestant Churches throughout all
Europe. The French King had grown invincible, had in a little time overrun the
Empire, revenged himself upon Holland, made the two Northern Crowns submit to
his own Terms, and had gloried in more extensive Conversions than those in his
own Kingdom, effected by the irresistible Ministry of his Booted Apostles. He
would have acquired a personal Right to the Title of Most Christian King that
was conferred by the great Antichrist of Rome, Pope Julius the Second, upon his
Ancestor, Lewis the XII, to encourage him to persecute and destroy the poor
Waldenses. But blessed be God, who has not delivered us up as a Prey to his
Teeth: Ps. 124.6, 7.
Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is
broken, and we are escaped.

We may say of this Deliverance, compared with that of the Gunpowder-Treason,
what is said of the Deliverance from Babylon, compared with that from Egypt,
that the latter should obscure the Glory of the former. Jer. 16.14 15
It shall no more be said, the Lord lives that brought up the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egyt; but the Lord lives that brought up the
Children of Israel from the land of the North.

2. Let us improve this Deliverance as a motive to Obedience and Holiness.
Let Us Sin no more, lest a worse thing befall us. The design of God's Goodness is
to lead us to Repentance. If we turn not from our evil ways, God will set his
Face against us for Evil: If we improve not Mercies, we must feel the smart of
Judgments. They that will not learn Righteousness by the gentle Methods of
God's Patience and Kindness, must expect to be taught as the Men of Succoth,
Judge. 8.16.
with Thorns of the Wilderness, and with Briers.

Deceive not your selves with Carnal Confidences, say not, Jer. 7.4; 9, 10
the Temple of the Lord are these: Will ye Steal, Murder, and commit Adultery,
and swear falsely, -- and say, We are Delivered to do all these Abominations?
Trust not to Gospel privileges in the neglect of Gospel Holiness. Former
Deliverances will not secure us from future Ruin, if we harden our selves in a
sinful way. Gra. 14.17. and 19.24.
The Men of Sodom were rescued from Captivity by Abraham's Sword, not long
before they were utterly Consumed by Fire and Brimstone from Heaven.
Unbelieving, and Impenitent Israel perished in the Wilderness after their
miraculous deliverance from Pharoah's Oppressions. St. Jude urges this
Consideration upon the Christians as an Argument for perseverance in the Faith
of the Gospel. Ye once knew this, jud^ 4.
how that the Lord having saved the People out of the land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not.

God forbid that all our great Deliverances should be lost upon us, and be of
no other use unto us but to increase our guilt, and aggravate our punishment. O
be not like unthankful Israel, Ps. 106.12, 13.
who, after they had Sung the Praise of God their Savior, soon forgot his
Works.

God has promised that upon Mount Zion shall be Deliverance, Obad. 17.
and there shall be Holiness. He has given the former Blessing, and will not
withold the latter from them that seek him. Our Iniquities have retarded the
Progresses of our Deliverance, and have provoked God to turn us back to this
Wilderness, when we we were within Prospect of the desired rest. The Principles
of Christianity are by some neglected as useless, by others rejected as
inconsistent with the dictates of their depraved Reason. They consider not that
it is not only most reasonable, but most necessary, that our imperfect, and
erroneous Understandings should receive Laws of Truth from Infinite Wisdom, as
our Rebellious Wills do Laws of Holiness from the Divine Goodness.

The Practice of Heathenish Morality, which is all the Christianity that many
pretend to, is woefully lost among us. The Sobriety, Chastity, and Uprightness
of many Heathens, will rise up in Judgment with, and Condemn a Drunken,
Unclean, and Hypocritical Generation. Who can express the Abominations of our
Land? What Oaths, what Blasphemies, what Immoralities abound among us? How
boldly do guilty Wretches challenge the most Righteous Judge to damn them?
Alas, his Holy Law has Condemned you already, and art thou Impatient of a
short Reprieve? Some professed Protestants lead such Lives as if they were
listed under the Prince of Darkness, to fight against Heaven.

God expects that so signal a Mercy as we enjoy this day should melt our
Hearts, and effectually oblige us to a Reformed Course.

No sooner were the People come out of Egyptian Bondage, Exodus 15.^^.
but they were called to renew their Covenant with God. Let us say with Ezra,
Seeing that thou, our God have given us such Deliverance as this, Should we
again break thy Commandments? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had
Consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

Hapy are the People, whom God delivers at once from their Distresses, and from
their Sins, the procuring Causes of them. It is a poor Victory to subdue our
Enemies, and continue Slaves to our own Lusts. A Servant of Sin is the vilest
Slave in nature. The rational Powers which should command, are subject to
Brutish Passions, which entangle the Sinner in the snare of the Devil, who
leads him Captive at his Will. Look unto your Eternal Deliverer, the Lord Jesus
Christ, if he makes us free, we are free indeed.

Set upon the subduing of your Sins, and you have overcome your most dangerous
Enemies. The Lusts of the Flesh war against the Soul, they are dangerous
Enemies to its Purity, Peace, and Everlasting Happiness. Jam. 4.1.
Whence come Wars and Fightings among you, says the Apostle, come they not
hence, even of your Lusts that war in your Members.

Mortify these in your selves, and you shall have Peace within; Pray that God
would mortify them in others, that the blessing of Peace may be restored to
the oppressed Nations, who are made a Sacrifice to the boundless Ambition, and
bloody Rage of defigning Men.

Be importunate at the Throne of Grace for the Life of our Great and Good King
William, for a Blessing upon his Councils, and for the success of his Arms
against his, ours, and God's Enemies. Let us serve the Lord with a willing
Mind, that we be not made to serve our Enemies against our Wills. The Lord
threatens Israel, that they shall be Servants to the King of Egypt, that they
may know his Service, and the Service of the Kingdoms of the Countries. Such as
are weary of the easy Yoke of Christ, may have their Necks galled with the
Iron Yoke of Antichrist.

Is it the Lord that gives Salvation unto Kings? Let Us contribute our best
endeavors to support the present Government. God usually saves Kings and
Kingdoms by the Agency of Second Causes. Its rarely, if ever, he Saves a People
against their Wills. His Majesty never declines emergent Dangers, but exposes
his Sacred Person upon all occasions for our Defense, and shall we decline the
duty we owe him upon any Prospects of hazard?

Let Us cheerfully pay our Taxes, as heavy as they seem to be, they are
absolutely necessary for the carrying on a just War in defense of our Religion
and Liberties, which ought to be dearer to us than our Estates, than our Lives.

Let Us unanimously join with our Reprosentatives in Parliament in defense of
his Majesty's Person and Government: Let Us unanimously join with the rest of
our Fellow Subjects, who give fresh assurances of their Loyalty, and firm
adherence to the Government in this difficult time: Let Us join with the Great
Body of true-hearted Protestants through all his Majesty's Dominions. Our Union
is our Strength. Nothing can ruin us but our Divisions. The Experience of most
Ages has evidenced the Truth of that Maxim, A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand.

The divisions of the old Britains subjected them at first to the Roman Yoke.
Dum singul. pugnant, In Agr. co vit. 12.
omnes vincuntur, says Tacitus. While they were quarrelling among themselves,
Caesar comes and decides the Controversy, by a Conquest of all. The
Dissentions of Androgeus and Cassivellan rulned the Kingdom.

The discontents and Animosities of the Jews, rendered them an easy Prey to
Antiochus Epiphanes, who miserably persecuted them, caused the daily Sacrifice
to cease, set up the abomination of Desolation in the Holy Temple, Joseph. de
bell. Jud. lib. cap. 1. Antiq. XII. 6.
and ruined all the Country by an unparalled Cruelty. The Sons of Tobias to
be revenged of Onias the Priest, who had banished them out of the City, invite
over Antiochus, (as some do now the French King) who being glad of the
occasion, invaded the Country with a great Army, destroyed all before him,
interdicted the Profession of the true Religion, Jos. de bell. Jud. VI. 11.
and set up Heathenish Idolatry.

The discords of Aristobulus, and Hircanus brought Pompey to Jerusalem, by whom
they were made a Roman Province.

Palestine was lost to the Turks by the unhappy divisions of the Christians,
who had been possessed of it about an hundred Years, after they had recovered
it at a prodigious expense of Blood and Treasure.

Upon the Death of Baldwin the Fifth, whom his Mother poisoned to advance Guy,
her second Husband to the Throne, they fell at variance, and were ready to turn
their Swords upon each other; of which Saladin, the Egyptian Sultan, taking the
advantage, won many Cities, in a Bloody Battle overthrew the Christians, Turk.
Hist. cap. 2.
took Prisoners the King, most of his Nobles, and the great Master of the
Templars, which broke the Strength of the Christians in Syria, and after
fourteen days he took Jerusalem.

If we look into our own Histories, what woeful Tragedies have our own Divisions
been productive of? The discords of the English brought in the Normans, and
subjected this Nation to the Sword of a Foreign Conqueror.

Upon the Death of Edward the Confessor, the Nation was divided about his
Successor, some were for Edgar Atheling, the rightful Heir, others for Harold,
Earl Goodwin's Son, others for William Duke of Normandy, to whom King Edward
had promised the English Crown. At length Harold possessed himself of the
Crown, but enjoyed it not long. The Norman Duke invaded England, being attended
with the Pope's Benediction, and the good Wishes of the Clergy, who then
depended on him, and were disaffected to King Harold, for the Wrongs done unto
Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, by him and his Father. Harold was slain in a
Bloody Battle, in which above sixty Thousand English fell. The Conqueror
advances to London, was Crowned by the Archbishop of York, the Clergy and
People swear to him, and he to them: But he was no sooner established in the
Throne, but he enslaved the English, gave their Estates to his Normans,
extirpated the ancient Nobility, and so grievously oppressed the Commons, that
many of them forsook their Houses, and lived in the Woods by Theft and Robery,
preferring the naked name of Freedom before their Inheritances under the
miserable Tyranny of their Conquerors. vid. Matthew. West minst. ap. 433 ad sin.
lib. 1. and init. 2. lib
Others truckled under their new Masters, endured the heavy Yoke, and durst not
complain, lest it should be made yet heaver. He seized the chiefest Offices of
Honor and Profit into his own hands, and gave them to Strangers; he receiving
Hostages of those that were Potent, and sent them to Normandy, he dis-arm'd all
the Natives of the Land; he forbad all Night Meetings, and obliged the English
to cover their Fire at eight a Clock at Night, at the ringing of a Bell, which
is yet called Couvre lefeu; he sent the Nobility to his Wars beyond the Seas;
he obliged the Commonalty to turn Soldiers, and by them he fought his sharpest
Battles in Normandy, and France, he impoverished the Laity by oppressive Taxes,
and Forfeitures; he robbed the Clergy of their richest Plate and Ornaments; he
published his Laws in French, and took advantage of Peoples Ignorance of them;
he amassed into his own Exchequer the Treasures of this Realm, ruined whole
Villages and Towns, several Churches and Chapels to make a Forest of, seized
into his Hands all the Chases and Forests of this Kingdom.

Thus God brought low the English Nation by their own divisions, and fondness
of a French Prince. Can we expect better Treatment from the present French
King, than our Ancestors did from the Norman Bastard? Will not his little
Finger be heavier than the other's Loins?

King Lewis is a professed Enemy to our Holy Religion, and glories in the
unchristian, and barbarous Methods, by which he has perverted, or ruined near
two Millions of his Protestant Subjects; and can English Protestants promise
themselves Protection from such a Prince? Will he be more favorable to
Strangers and Enemies than to his Native Subjects, who were his fast friends,
and by whose Loyal Arms he was established in his Throne?

Is he like to assert the liberties of Englishmen, who has left none to his own
Frenchmen? It Is obvious to all Men of Common Sense, that the late King cannot
return but by a French Power, which will prove destructive to our Religion,
Laws, and Liherties, none therefore but an Enemy to all these, can wish his
Restoration.

FINIS.

