Triumphans.
A PANEGYRIC (...) the KING.
^Hrice mighty PRINCE, (...) by thy Birth,
Bellona's Glory: Splendour of the Earth.
(...)der of Brav'ry, and of charming Parts,
(...)t Conqueror of Kingdoms and of Hearts,
^he famed Hero's in our Age that be,
(...)e lose their Luster, when compared with Thee.
(...)ed Peacemaker in our Bloody Wars,
(...)e Reconciler of Intestine Jarrs.
(...) Martial THISTLE budds, and no more withers,
(...) fragrant ROSE it is Scent again recovers.
(...) HARP is tuned: And valiant SIR, to Thee,
(...) Conquering LILLIES bow and humbled be.
(...) Balance of all Europe SIR, is Yours,
(...) Help and Shelter of oppressed Powers.
(...) Mortal in his Veins bears nobler Blood,
(...)ng from a Race, both Ancient, Great and Good,
(...)nders of our faith, to Pop'ry Foes,
(...) Holland, Fla^ders, and all Europe knows.
(...) ^appy ORANGE-TREE, both Branch and Root,
(...) has blessed Brittan with such cordial Fruit,
(...) those that in the Northern World do dwell,
(...) much refreshed by the very Smell.
^^^ch perfumes all our European Costs,
^^^^ugh Boreas Blasts and Hyperborean Frosts.
(...) our own Thule, and the Orkney Isles,
(...)ound cold Russia many thousand Miles.
(...) rare Accomplishments that shine in You,
(...)s CALEDONIA thus her Case renew.
^ow if Great SIR, you list to lend an Ear,
(...) a far Country, joyful News we hear,
(...)rus gently blows, and Whistling, Sings,
(...) my sweet Gales, delicious Tidings brings.
(...) of November, that auspicious Day,
(...) valiant SCOTS their Colors did display,
^he Western world, where they did meet,
^^^^sands of Welcomes prostrat at their Feet.
(...) Sovereign Director was their Guide,
(...)ne them favored; Earth, Seas, Wind and Tide.
(...) Natives made their Joys ring to the Skies,
(...) them adored as Demi-deitys.
(...)harmless Heathens, whom through time we vow,
(...)ain good Subjects both to GOD and You.
ANDREW our first Tutelar was he,
UNICORN, must next Supporter be,
CALEDONIA does bring up the Rear,
(...)ht with brave hardy Ladds, and void of Fear;
^^lendedly equpit, and to the Three,
Endeavor and Dolphin Handmaids be,
(...) to these Praises, this Addition have,
^njuries they will give, nor yet receive.
Ships and Men commanded Sir, it is true,
^aptains both of Sense and Honor too.
(...) are these Youths the Scum of this our Land,
(...)n effect, a brave and generous Band.
(...)t'd with thirst of Fame, and sound to have,
(...)s upon the Marbles of their Grave.
though that hundreds in that Train do come,
^^^se Virtues are eclipst with want at Home.
(...) ^ere their Means but equal to their Mind,
(...) the World you should not braver find.
^o allay Youths rash unwary Deeds,
(...) have their orders sent from elder Heads.
(...) wise Senate, who Consult and Vote,
(...) is the Companys Interest, and what not.
(...)ding Fertile Fields and Golden Mountains,
(...)th(...) with clear (...)(...) ristal Fountains;
Rivers, safe Bays, variety of Plants*
And useful Trees which our old Britain wants.
Here grows the Nicaragua Manchionell,
Vannileos also, that perfumes so well.
Our sable night is gone, the day is won,
The SCOTS are followed with the RISING-SVN.
The Evening crowns the Day, and what remains?
Old ALBANY its ancient Fame regains.
FERGVS 1st. Your brave Ancestor gave the Scots of old
FERGVS 1st. A Lion rampant in a field of Gold.
When he our Coat-Armorial did dispense.
Which now is ours, in a true literal Sense.
And can our Breasts such swelling Joys contain,
WlLLIAM the Lion rules the SCOTS again:
A Nation who with hearts, with hands and head,
Will serve you, Sovereign Sir, in time of need.
Warlike Gaustavus, and Great Charl le maigne,
Did never employ our Martial swords in vain.
The Brittons, Romans, Saxons and the Danes,
Did all Invade Us, but with fruitless Pains.
The treacherous Picts did often attempt the same;
But for Reward, lost Country, Life and Name.
The noble Race of Douglass did excel
In Military Glory, all can tell
At Home, and Foreign Shoars, yea, ever still,
Of all the Surname, very few prove ill.
The ancient Grahams are brave, ^^d all confess,
True to their Sov'raigns, chiefly in distress.
The Danes who made our neighboring Nation Slaves;
Found here the Hays who beat them to their G^ave
Kind Mantua has never yet forgot
Rare Creighton, called the Admirable Scot,
Whose life shows him a Miracle of Men:
As it is drawn by an Italian Pen.
Wallace and Bruce, I shall not now rehearse
Lest I offend you, Sir, with tedious Verse.
And hundreds more of undenyed Fame,
For Arts and Arms, whom I forbear to name:
And as our Valor flew all Europe round,
So now our Trade scarce both the Poles shall bound.
If You but own us, Mighty Sir, and then
No Devils we fear, nor yet malicious Men.
What humane Counter-plot can mar the thing,
That is protected by Great-Brittains King.
Our Claim is just: and so we value not
The Brags of Spain, nor Thundrings of the Pope,
Who may well threaten; Yet Don dare not fight,
When he minds 'DARIEN, and old Eighty eight.
Their Cruelties were Catholic indeed,
Not Christian, to poor Indians and their Seed,
But those they call Heretics of our Nation,
We hope will show a meeker Reformation,
Nor shall insulting Neighbors henceforth taunt
The generous SCOTS, for Poverty and Want.
Our ships through all the World shall go and come,
Even from the Rising to the Setting Sun.
Then shall we from the genuine Spring command,
What now we truckle at a second hand.
And we shall flourish by your Royal Rays,
With Honor, Riches, and old Nestors days:
And ever bless our GOD, and praise our KING,
And CALEDONIA's Triumphs gladly sing.
No mercenary thoughts, or base design
Of servile Flattery, made th(...) Verse^

