ON THE Universally Lamented DEATH Of the Incomparable DR. SHORT.
A Pindarick Elegy.

Stanza I.
AH! What avails it to be Wise and Good!
Great Merit with it is own Weight falls:
Soon as Diffusive grown, and Understood,
It straight from Hell pale Envy calls.
Envy, whose squinting Eye
Sees Faults, when only' it self does look awry.
Yet it no Mortal was, nor could it be
Any on Earth, Best SHORT, could envy Thee.
Thou all the Attractives had, which use t'affect
With dearest Love, and win profound Respect;
And, Friend to All, no Enemy could suspect.
'Twas none but Death, and Mankind's Foe that envied Thee.
Death, from whose gaping Jaws thou had redeemed
Such Multitudes, that Thin his Empire seemed.
Enraged at this, the Lean-chapt Monster bent
His Course to Hell, whose gloomy Vales descent
Borders upon his Realm, the Grave;
Of the Black Tyrant Audience to crave.
Upon his Hairless Scalp a Wigg he wore
Of Worms, that gap't dead Bodies to devour.
A plaguey Vapor, grateful to the Stygian King,
(For Holy Day suit) about his Bones did cling;
And in his Hand a chosen Dart, as sharp as Adders Sting.
Arrived; his rattling Grinders silence broke,
And, from his grinning Mouth, thus chattering spoke.
II.
'Twas half in vain your witty Art did cheat
Adam, the Death-deriving Fruit to Eat;
Unless your Victory you maintain,
Sly Mankind will at length his points regain.
Near Thamesis's rich Banks are pack't The College of Physicians
a Crew,
Who strive your noble Spite with Art t'out do.
Our common Grievance, Health, they, at command,
Preserve, restore, with seldom-missing Hand.
Diseases, our best Servants, which we send
To bring cursed Mankind to his End,
They at their Pleasure, as their Game, do kill;
And Torture them with Hell-affronting Skill.
Among the rest, there is one; who, not content
With old Arts, strange new Methods does invent
To Save the dwindling Slaves: Often my wide Jaw
Has he left Tantaliz'd, Hungry my yearning Maw.
By such large Steps his Art does climb,
And mingles Natural Causes so,
That in short time
His Skill to Miracle may grow.
E're long He Will cancel, at this rate,
The Adamantine Book of Fate.
The very Sound of SHORT to Us
Is ominous.
So many of that Name,
By crossing Us, have won great Fame,
The Air that Echoes Him's Infectious.
Who knows but his contriving Mind,
Some Proxy to the Tree of Life may find?
Then Woe to Death, and Woe to Hell;
'Twere better Man had never fell.
Alone I dare not him attacque,
Unless Your self my oft-foil'd Courage back.
Then speak, Great Pluto, and your Counsel lend,
To bring our Master-Foe t'a sudden End.
III.
Highly concerned at this complaining Speech
Of Death, his eldest Son;
Whom, in Time's Nonage, he begot
Upon the first damned Hellish-Plot;
The Infernal Tyrant did his Phang out-reach,
To shake him by his Hand of Bone;
And thus, in Breath of Brimstone-Flame, begun:
It must, it must be done.
Dip thy keen Arrow in Cocytus Flood;
Dip't deep, and from the bottom stir the envenomed Mudd;
Then (see thou miss not) shoot just at his Heart
The trebly-poison'd Dart:
This will elude all Help of Art.
He dipped it, and the Iro'n straight Rusty grew;
Yet burnt with Fire that is Blew.
Then, from his Augur-holes, Death took unerring aim,
And struck his Heart with the Malignant Flame.
SHORT felt the Stroke; and straight foretold his Friend,
The Wound was Mortal, and would cause his End.
Ah! too-true Prophet! Thy Prognostic Skill
That seldom failed, in thy own Death was Undeceived still.
IV.
When of his dangerous Sickness the News spread,
Each Hearer looked like one half-Dead.
As, when a General's Mortal wound is told,
The Courage of the Army straight grows cold;
So the dampt Hearts of all his Patients fell:
(And who was not, or would not be
Related to his still-successful Skill?)
And thought themselves in Danger well as He.
Each one did know
How much to Him their Health and Life they owe.
His Brother-Sons-of-Art
In his Recovery strove to have some part.
Above the rest, Great BROWN (the double Heir
Of Norwich-Oracle; and Learned TERN)
No Watching, no Solicitude did spare,
To do his Utmost in this dear Concern.
Had Fate been willing too,
His Skill things half-impossible could do.
He could all Rubbs, but Destiny, controwl:
No wonder; SHORT and He had but one Soul.
But Art, by Friendship heightened, was too weak
Of Causes the Firm-linked Chain to break.
The deeply-coucht Malignant Ill
From its close Ambush mocked all Skill.
Valor it self did never know
How to Subdue an unseen Foe.
The venomous Taint soon Conquered every part,
By seizing first the vigorous Nerves, and, next, Life's Seat, the Heart.

