ON THE DEATH OF HER ILLUSTRIOUS GRACE ANNE Dutchess-Dowager of Albemarle, Who
Sickned with, and Dyed twenty days after the Duke Her Husband; He the Third of
January, and She the Twenty third of the same Month, 1669.
SCarce had I breathed the DUKES Elogium
In panting Prose, before a Second Doom
Invoked my Genius to appear in Verse,
And offer Incense to His DUCHESS Hearse;
Though Her Embalming needs here no more
Then Gold in Peru, or a Map on Shore.
A Dame of deep Endowments, and more true
Intrinsique value than the Dull Age knew.
Whose Zeal and Loyalty through the Realm did ring,
Fervent to GOD, and Cordial to the King.
Whose Oeconomique and Domestique Cares
Proclaimed her Prudence in her own Affairs,
Which with Her Frugal-Conduct, might engage
The Examples of most Madams of our Age,
Who wrack their wealth on Riots, and consume
Whole Seigniories in^^inting and Perfume.
But I Will not Satyrize, nor blast my Bays
With their Reproaches, which must Crown Her Praise;
Whose Unstained Name, Clear Innocence, and Truth
(The Green Ingredients of her Vernal youth)
Increasing with her, did corroborate
The Growing Graces of her Greatned State,
Which, like tall Trees did from low Roots produce
Fruits of more Substance, and of sweeter Juice:
Witness Her Secret Alms well seen and known
In our Horizon, though no Trump were blown,
Which shamed their Charity, and such Zealots chid,
Whose left hand reckons what their right hand did.
Nor did that Grandeur on Her Husbands side,
Or Her own Fullness swell her into Pride,
Who both the difference, and Decorum knew
'Twixt a great Duchess and good Christian too.
Compassionate she was, and humbly prone
To Condescension in her highest Zone:
Thus the Sun shines alike, and sheds his showrs
On Barren Heaths, as well as Beds of Flowrs.
Friendly to all, and affable to those,
If not the Churches, and great CHARLES his Foes:
Her Constant Soul disdeining to comply
When Hope lay low, and Anarchy pearch'd high,
And most Men's Bowls ran biased to the Times,
Crowns with their Scepters being counted Crimes;
Of such Transcendency as never would
Admit of expiation but by Blood.
Then like some Star in this Cymmerian night
Of Error, did Her Loyalty shine bright,
And with unwearied Industry, and pain,
Strive to bring home three Realms on Charles his Wain.
Scotland invelopt in a Mist, felt then
The Influence of Her Tongue, and Brothers Pen,
Which steeled the Sword, new-formed in the Forge
Of England's Champion truer than ST. GEORGE.
And as some weightier Horologe impow'rs
The Exterior Gnomen to direct his howrs,
Though that Automaton too, both heard and seen,
Is actuated by occult Powers within:
So in that Grand Affair, each Spring and Lock
Lent life and vigor to this Vocal Clock,
Which striking in such season, did confound
Our BABEL-STATE allarum'd at the Sound,
Whence waking Royalists rose to pay their due:
Thanks jointly (Madam) to blessed GEORGE and YOU.
And must You Two so tamely now retire
From the Worlds Theater, whose Souls gave Fire
Prometheus-like, to three inanimate
Cadaverous KINGDOMS, buried in a State?
Must You Both mixed, co-interred lie
In the same Monument, who Both did die
In the same Month? Thus Heaven and Earth thought just
You should not be divided in your Dust,
Whom neither Sickness, Life, nor Death could part,
Both Individual in each others Heart.
And though Illustrious Madam YOU cannot Rest
In a more glorious Shrine than in His Breast;
Yet 'twere great pity that a single Grave
Should Confine HIM, who well deserved to have
Three Kingdoms for his CLOISTER, and have been
Portrayed in, CHURCHES, as was that good Queen;
Were but brave Londons Patriots put in trust
To pay this Duty to their Champions Dust,
The voice of whose Loud Actions shall strike dumb
The Present, and amuse the Age to come.
Imprinted at LONDON, Anno Dom. 1669.


