A DISCOVERY, To the praise of God, and joy of all true hearted Protestants,
of a late intended Plot by the Papists, to subdue the Protestants.

Being a true Copy of a Discourse between William O Conner a Priest, and Anne
Hussy an Irish Gentlewoman: as it was brought and confirmed by oath in the
Parliament house.

St Peter holds a key and stands over a kneeling, praying woman, with an angel
kneeling behind her CHRE PRECORESTO PIV

SALVE DOMINE ANGELORVM



Printed, Anno 1641.

A Discourse betwixt William O Conner a Priest, and Servant to the Queenmother,
and Anne Hussy an Irish Gentlewoman of the House of Galtrum, usually working
at Mistress Pinoks House a Schoolemistris on the backside of Lions Inn in the
Strand, at several meetings of theirs since Easter 1640. in these words, or to
this effect.
I Anne Hussy coming to Goodwife Walker, a stocking mender in the Strand, who
said to me, I would your Countryman were as honest as you, that lies at my
house; then I asked her, who he was? Goodwife Walker answered me, and said
he is a Priest, and a servant to the Queenmother, and if any had wit to search
it out, they would find out a great deal of Treason in him: then I said to
Goodwife Walker, if you will be true to me, and not discover me to be a
Protestant, I will fetch it out of him if I can, and Goodwife Walker promised,
that she would not discover me, so the next day early in the morning, I went
up to his chamber at the said Goodwife Walkers house, and was directed to it by
her husband, and when the Priest had opened his door, and I in his chamber, he
asked me, if I knew him? I answered no, but I inquired for an Irishman, that
came with the Queenmother, and heareing that he was one, I was bold to come up
to him, to entreat him to enquire for an Uncle of mine, one Master Nicholas
Hussy (a Priest) at the Spanish Ambassadors, whether he was alive, or come
over into England. William O Conner answered me, why do you not go and enquire
your self? I answered, I being a woman, was loath to go amongst so many men.

Priest. Are you a Catholic?


Hussy. I was born, and bred one.


P. What house of Ireland are you of?


H. Of the house of Galtrum.


P. They are Royal Catholics, and worthy people; then he asked me what my
name was? I told him Anne Hussy, so he brought me to Mistress Pinocks house,
and so departed for that time.

At a second meeting on Saturday after, William O Conner the Priest came again
to Mistress Pincoks house to ask for me, and desired me go drink with him at a
Tavern, which I refused, but went with him to one Master Hills an Alehouse, and
there we fell into this following discourse.


H. I told him I was troubled in mind about one thing that I desired to know.


P. You must relate it to a Priest.


H. If I knew an Irish Priest, that would tell me faithfully, I would.


P. I am one my self, and immediately he crossed me over the forehead.


H. I asked him, whether the number of the Protestants, or the Papists of
England were the greatest?


P. He said the Papists were.


H. Then they will conquer our Country (meaning Ireland.)


P. First, we must began with England.


H. How, or in what manner will they begin with England? and when will it be?


P. When the King goes to Scotland.


H. There is no hope of the Kings going to Scotland.


P. I Will warrant you he does.


H. Can you not procure me letters from beyond Sea, to help me to be a Nun?


P. It is a hard task for you to perform, to be a Nun.


H. Why, I can live chaste, I never mean to marry.


P. Although you do not marry, you may ly with a man.


H. I but that is sin.


P. But the Priest can forgive it.


H. I know he can.


P. Yes you may ly with a man, steal, kill a man, or any man may kill a King,
for the advancement of the Church of Rome, and the Priest can forgive him.


H. I have heard there is a Protestant book called a Bible, and by their report
it says, that whosoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, and
we must fear God and honor the King, and pray for the King, that we may live
a peaceable, a quiet and a holy life.


P. For your life read not that book, for I will not read it for a thousand
worlds, and further said, whether do you go to Mass?


H. To a private house I do go.


P. I praise God there is many of them, and bid me come next day (being Sabbath
day) to St. Iameses, and I should hear him say Mass before the Queenemother.


H. I have business to morrow, that I cannot go thither to Mass, nor to any
other place, but will some other time.

So ended our discourse at that time.
At another meeting, etc.

H. At his request I went to his Chamber at Mistress Scarlotts house in Coven
Garden, in Blackmoore street, at the sign of the Sedan (about a fortnight
after) one day in the after noone, where I found him upon his Bed, and he gave
me three shirts of fine holland of about sixteen shillings an ell (as they
were judged) to mark for him upon the breast or bosom, in this manner
following. Jesus Maria.

William O Conner.



At which time he showed me his beads, and other knacks, and clothes made of
black plush, scarlet, and as I think a hairecolour satin; after this I left
him and carried away the shirts to be marked, but instead of marking them as
he directed, I marked them only with a Crucifix and his name, and the same
night about nine of the clock, he came to me for his Shirts, and brought an
Irish man with him in a long gray coat, with a sword girt close to his side,
under his arm, I asked the Priest who he was?


P. He is one of the number of the 7000. that is in private pay, and in
readiness to aid the Catholics, and to cut the Protestants throats that
should resist them.


H. What office has this man with them?


P. He is one that blows the Pipe, with the Drum.


H. Let me see it, and immediately he drew it out and would have played on it,
but I desired him to forbear, lest he was discovered, which advise they liked
well, and praised me highly, and offered me the lives of any, that I would
desire to be saved.


And so they departed. About the latter end of July 1640. he came to me at
Mistress Pinock's house aforesaid, and said he came upon great occasion, and in
great haste, and he must immediately return back.

I asked him the occasion.

P. I have three Letters from the Queen mother, to be delivered to three
Ambassadors, the Spanish, the Venetian, the French.


H. Wherefore?


P. To send to the Pope.


H. Can you do nothing without the Popes leave?


P. Either by himself, or his Legate, we must know when to begin.


H. To begin what?


P. The subduing of the Protestants.


H. I do not like their fury, if they once draw the sword they are like Lions.


P. What are they, if their King be cut off?


H. You can never overcome the King by the sword.


P. If we cannot that way, we can another.


H. How?


P. Do you think my Lady and Queen is a fool?


H. I do not think she is a fool.


P. If no hand will do it, this hand shall.


H. Do what?


P. Kill him.


H. Who?


P. The King.


H. What, you kill the King?


P. Ah! kill an heretic at any time for the advancement of the Mother Church
of Rome, and swore by Saint Francis, and Saint Dominick, that he would do it,
and promised to come again on Monday after to pay me for marking of his
shirts, and to bestow some bracelets upon me, but he never came to me
afterward.

This William O Conner the Priest, would not suffer me to speak a word in all
this discourse, but in Irish, and confessed he has been long employed by the
Queene-mother in her business with all the Princes in Christendom, and with
the great Turk, and he professed further to goodwife Walker, (as she told me
on Monday last) much of his care in the keeping of the Queens secrets, and that
he would be burnt in a fire before he would reveal them.


FINIS.

