THE Old MISER Slighted: OR, The Young Lasses Resolution to Marry the Young Man
that she Loves, and not be troubled with the Groans of Gouty Fornicator, for
the Benefit of his Riches.
To the Tune of I often for my Jenny strove.
Licensed according to Order.





MY Mother duns me every day,
to marry with a Miser then,
Whose blood is Cold, and locks are Gray
for Age, above Threescore and Ten:
He has Coffers crammed with Treasure,
Yet I Will not be bought or sold;
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better woth than Gold.
He proffered me a Diamond Ring,
a Watch with Ribbons, Gloves, and Fan;
To House and Home he would me bring,
but ah! he was an Aged Man:
Therefore I could never love him,
For he looked like Winter cold,
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better worth than Gold.




With all he had he would me endue,
which was both Lands and Cattle store;
As likewise Pigs, Geese, Turkies too,
all feeding at his own Barn Door:
Yet I valued not his Treasure,
His Arms never should me enfold;
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better worth than Gold.
The old Man gets me on his Knee,
and will sometimes soft Kisses take,
The which does much discomfort me,
to see his Aged Noddle shake,
And his Hands with Palsy tremble,
While he does my Waste enfold:
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better worth than Gold.
With Gout and Stone he lies in Bed,
to groan out the long tedious Night,
While my true Fancy should he fed,
with that which is my thief Delight:
What can he a greater Torment,
To be in Choice thus Controlled?
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better worth than Gold.
Pray what can be a greater Crime,
than such like Matches to contrive:
I will not loose my Teeming time,
for never a Doting Fool alive:
I am Buxome, Brisk and Aerie,
Therefore will not be Controlled;
A brisk young Gallant has a Talent,
Which is better worth than Gold.
We find the Aged Snowy Head,
is often filled with Jealousy,
Therefore with no such one I Will Wed,
although I might a Lady be:
The young Man that is Brisk and Aerie,
I in him can Charms behold;
The choicest Blessing still possessing,
True Love is better worth than Gold.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, I. Back.


