OXFORD in Mourning, For the Loss of the Parliament.
OR, London's loud Laughter at her late flattering her self with Excessive
Trading.
A Pleasant New SONG.
Now Tapsters, Vintners, Sales-men, Tailors, all
Open their Throats, and for their losses bawl:
The Parliament is gone, their hopes now fail,
Palled is the Wine, and Egar grow the Ale:
Now Rooms late let for twenty Crowns a Week,
Would let for twelve-pence, but may Lodgers seek;
London Rejoices who was sad before,
And in like Coin does pay off Oxfords score.
To the Tune of, Packington's Pound; Or, Digby's Farewell.
London






LOndon now smiles to see Oxford in Tears,
Who lately decided and scoffed at her fears;
Thinking their joys they would never be spent,
But that always they would last with the Parliament:
But O she is mistaken, for now they are gone,
And fairly have left her to grieve all alone.
Now Vintners and Tapsters that hoped for such gain,
By Cheating the people have cause to Complain;
The Cooks that were stored with Provision, now grieve
Whilst London to hear it does laugh in her sleeve:
And now each fat Hostis who lives by the Sins
Of those who brought many to whimper, begins,
So Dolefully Tool now the Bells that of late,
With loud sounds did a pleasure to hear them create;
The Innkeepers late that so Prodigal were,
Of Standings, have Horse-room enough, and to spare:
Whilst London rejoices to think of the time,
When Oxford Bells jangl'd, and scarcely could Chime
Now Salesmen and Sempstresses homeward do pack,
No more cries the Shoemaker, what do you lack;
The Tailor by Thimble and Bodkin does Curse,
And swears that his Trading could never be worse;
Yet home again barefoot poor Prick-louse must trudge,
Whilst Oxford he bans, and his Labor does grudge,
The Chair-men who thought to return with a Load
Of Silver to London, to store their abode;
Now homeward do foot it, though it is with much pain,
And creep in their Chairs to secure them from Rain:
When night does approach, there their lodging thy make
For a better to purchase, no moneys they take.
The Coffee-men wish they at London had stayed,
And not to have rambl'd in hopes of a Trade;
Their Shops of Sedition did fail of their end,
And back now their Puddle to London they send:
While she does deride them, and flout them to scorn,
To see their Ears hanging as if they were forlorn.
Oh the Scholars now curse the gay Crack of the town,
Who troop'd it to Oxford to trade for a Crown;
The youngsters put in and bid money for all,
But the jades were so scittich they gave them a fall:
And many in watering their Nags have been burned,
The Bath were so hot e're the Stream could be turned.
Whilst Surgeons of all the best trading will find,
For the Cracks being fled, they have left work behind;
That doubtless repentance unfeigned, will cause
The Goldsmiths and Drapers now stand at a pause:
How in their Journey the Padders to escape,
Whilst London for joy at their follies does leap.
She hears the sad sounding of Oxford great Bell,
Which the towns heaviness plainly do tell;
How their Laughter they lately against her did vent,
For enjoying the Court and the Parliament:
Is now turned to weeping, and each one sits sad,
To think what a loss by dissolving he is had.
Remember then Oxford how London you flout,
For she will be still even with you it is no doubt;
Englands chief City must still bear the Bell,
For near it the most part the King he will dwell:
And cheer her with favors, whilst Oxford sits sad,
And many lament the bad trade they have had.
FINIS.

