A PANEGYRIC UPON THE Blessed Virgin MARY.
WHat Eye dares search the Brightness of the Sun?
What Pencil draw it? What Conception
Is clean enough Thy Pureness to descry,
Or strong enough to speak Thy Dignity,
Blessed Mother of our Lord, whose Happy State
None but an Angels Tongue did first relate?
Thou were on Earth a Star most heavenly bright,
That did bring forth the Sun that lent Thee Light:
An Earthly Vessel full of heavenly Grace,
That broughtst forth Life to Adam's dying Race.
For God on Earth Thou were a Royal Throne,
The Quarry to cut out our Cornerstone,
The chosen Cloth to make his Mortal Weed,
Soil blessed with Fruit, yet free from Mortal Seed.
In Marriage-bands thou ledst a Virgin-life,
And, though untouched, becam'st a Fruitful Wife.
Though Thou to aged Joseph were assured,
No Carnal Love that Sacred League procured,
All vain Delights were far from your Assent,
For chaste by Vow you sealed you chaste Intent.
Thus God his Paradise to Joseph lent,
Wherein to plant the Tree of Life he meant,
To raise a Birth miraculous, and by
His sacred ways of Power disclose that high
And holy Mystery, which Angels (though
So full of Light) desired to look into.
When Thou thy Maker did bring forth, and he
Whose Age had been from all Eternity,
Was born an Infant from Thy Blessed Womb,
He lay enclosed in that narrow Room,
Whose Greatness Heaven and Earth could not contain.
Who made the World, and Nature did ordain,
Was made of Thy Flesh; he, whose opened Hand
Feeds all the Creatures both by Sea and Land;
That even to Thee thy Life and Being lent,
Did from Thy Breast receive his Nourishment.
His Birth no Human Tongues were fit to sing:
The Angelic Quire did greet their newborn King.
So bright a Consort, and so sweet a Lay,
Made Night more fair and cheerful than the Day,
And little Bethlem with more Glory filled
Than all the Roman Palaces could yield.
How wondrous great is then Thy Happiness,
That were his Mother? But who can express
So high a Bliss? When we desire to fame
Some other Maid or virtuous Woman's Name,
When we of other Ladies write the Lives,
Of chaste Maids, happy Mothers, constant Wives,
Such as best Writers have renowned of yore,
When we have told their Noble Virtues over,
We draw Examples, and besides their own
Fair Stories, praise them by Comparison.
But in Thy Life we cannot; Thou alone
Can not at all admit Comparison.
So far thy happy Name and Honor lives
Above all other Mothers, Maids, or Wives,
That 'twere a Sin, when we Thy Story tell,
So much as once to think of Parallel.
We'll let Thee in Thine own pure Titles live,
And speak no Praise of Thee but Positive;
As when we say, All Ages, Nations all
Shall Thee most Happy among Women call;
That of the greatest Blessing God e're sent
To sinful Man, Thou were the Instrument.
Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. 1686.


