THE PROPOSALS FOR Printing the English Atlas,
THAT whereas Moses Pit (of London, Bookseller) being Encouraged by His Most
Sacred Majesty, his Royal Highness the Duke of York, his Highness Prince
Rupert, both the Universities, the Royal Society, and diverse others, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Learned men of this Nation, to undertake the Printing of
an Accurate Description of the World; and resolving to proceed with all
convenient diligence, for the more effectual carrying on thereof, makes these
following Offers:

I. He the said Moses Pit having the advantage of making use of diverse Plates
already Engraved, but more especially of those of Janssons Atlas, does design by
renewing and regulating diverse of them, and by adding many new Plates, together
with new Descriptions throughout, to Print a complete Collection of Maps,
Tables, or Delineations of the Heavens, Earth, and Seas, with their several
parts, divisions, and names, ancient and modern, in such manner, that all the
Maps shall have the same situation of North and South; and all things shall be
as exactly and particularly described, as can be done by the help of all the
Maps and Delineations already extant in Print, and of as many others as can be
procured, of several things and places formerly but imperfectly described; as
also of diverse late and new discoveries of parts heretofore unknown, or not
taken notice of as yet in any Maps. II. To every Map shall be adjoined an
explanation of the most observable matters and histories of the places therein
contained; wherein is intended that this Work shall exceed all that have
preceded; as also an Alphabetical Index to be added at the end of each Volume,
with directions for the speedy finding them in their respective Maps. III. He
will Print the whole Work in as good Paper and Character as any of those
already Printed by Bleau, Jansson, Sanson, or any other. IV. Whereas the
Atlas's of Bleau and Jansson are usually comprehended in Eleven Volumes in
Folio, in all the Languages hitherto; It is intended that this Atlas in the
English Tongue, shall be printed in Eleven Volumes likewise, each Volume to be
sold to the Subscribers at the rate of Forty shillings in Quires. But if those
Gentlemen that are concerned in the management of it, shall think fit to
contrive it in fewer Volumes, it shall still be at the rate of Forty shillings
a Volume; and each Volume both in number of Maps and Descriptions, shall not
consist of less then fifty-five sheet Maps and fifty-five printed sheets of
Tables and Descriptions, one with the other according to the judgment of the
Directors. V. He does also promise to deliver to the Subscribers the several
Volumes as they shall be completed and finished, they paying their Forty
shillings at the time of their subscribing, which is to be before the four and
twentieth day of July, 1678; Forty shillings more at the delivery of the First
Volume, Forty shillings at the delivery of the Second Volume, and the same sum
to be paid upon delivery of each of the other Volumes successively, only the
two last to be delivered at twenty shillings a Volume; for which several sums
aforesaid, the said Moses Pit will give his Receipt under his own Hand and
Seal, with two Witnesses thereunto, with an engagement to deliver to the
Subscribers or their Assigns, at his Shop in St. Paul's Churchyard, they making
good their Subscriptions, the several Volumes as they shall be printed,
according to the plain meaning of these Proposals. VI. No Volume shall be sold
singly to any Gentleman whatever, except the Subscribers (by the Bookseller
Moses Pit) under Five and fifty shillings in Quires; neither shall any Volume
be delivered to any person whatsoever, before all the Subscribers have theirs,
provided they send for them within one month after notice given in the Gazette
of the finishing of every Volume. VII. The first Volume begins with the
North Pole, and the places and Countries next unto it, before which is to be
added an Introduction to Geography, such as shall be advised by the persons
after-named, together with a Map of the Terrestrial Globe, and Maps of the
greater Divisions or Parts of the Earth. This Volume is intended to be
completed before the four and twentieth day of the next ensuing March. The
next Volume designed, is that which contains the Low Countries and West part of
Germany, where has lately been, and still is the scene of the greatest actions
now on foot, intended to be completed within six months after the said four
and twentieth day of March. The said time proportionably allowed for the
completing of all the rest; unless it be judged necessary by the Directors,
that a longer time be allowed for some of the Volumes. VIII. Whosoever shall
subscribe for ten complete Books, shall for the same price have eleven complete
Books in Quires delivered to him. IX. Because several Gentlemen do complain
that they have been deceived by several Proposers in this nature, therefore for
the punctual performance of what is here undertaken, the Bookseller Moses Pit,
has already given sufficient Security to Sir Joseph Williamson, one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, and President of the Royal Society,
for performance of his Engagement and Proposals. X. It is requested, that every
Subscriber to this great Undertaking, would be pleased to set down the County
and place of his Habitation, together with directions how to send to him, to
the end that notice may be given him according as the Work goes forwaad.
WHereas his most Sacred Majesty has been Graciously pleased, for the promoting
of this Design, to permit that his Collections of Maps and Descriptions of
Countries may be perused, that such of them as have not yet been published, and
are thought proper for this work, may be taken into it; and whereas his Royal
Highness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, have been also pleased to promise the
same favor; and the like has been done by the Right Honorable Sir Joseph
Williamson, one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, and President
of the Royal Society; and also by the most learned Dr. Isaac Vossius, who is
pleased to communicate his most copious and exquisite Collections; and it is
hoped that the same will be done by several other persons of Honor and
Quality; therefore it is humbly desired, that all Gentlemen, who have any
particular Maps or Relations of new Discoveries, or any more perfect
descriptions of places already known, would be pleased to send the same to the
said Moses Pit, who will give sufficient security for the safe return of the
same unprejudiced, and if they shall be thought proper (by the persons
hereafter mentioned) to be inserted, he will take care that it shall be done,
and that the obligation shall be thankfully acknowledged in such manner as
shall be to their own best satisfaction.

May 3, 1678.
WE whose names are here subscribed, not doubting but that this Work will be of
great Use, and for the Honor of the Nation, and being desired by Moses Pit,
to give him our Assistance, that he may be the better enabled to perform it, do
promise that we will from time to time, at spare hours, both give our Advice
for the carrying on of the Work; and further, since he offers to refer himself
to us in diverse of his Proposals, we will observe how he makes them good, and
give an account thereof to Sir Joseph Williamson, President of the Royal
Society, or to the President of the said Society for the time being:

Chr. Wren Isaac Vossius. John Pell. W. Lloyd. Tho. Gale. Rob. Hook.


UPon perusing these preceding Proposals, we whose Names are underwritten, well
approving and highly commending this Design of the said Moses Pit, do for his
encouragement not only subscribe our selves for one or more Copies of the said
Book, but also do recommend so Noble and Useful a Design to the rest of the
Nobility and Gentry throughout his Majesty's Dominions.

The KING'S most Excellent Majesty. The QUEEN'S Majesty. His Royal Highness the
Duke of YORK. Her Royal Highness the Duchess of YORK. Her Highness the Lady
ANN. His Highness CHARLES-LEWIS Elector Palatine of the RHINE. His Highness
Prince RUPERT.
JAMES late Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews. ALEXANDER Ld. Archbishop of St.
Andrews. ARTHUR Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal. CHARLES Duke of Albemarle,
Captain of the King's Guards. HENRY Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of His
Majesty's Household. HENRY HOWARD Earl of Arundel. ROBERT Earl of Ailesbury.
ARCH. Earl of Argyll. HENRY Lord Arundel, Baron of Warder, Count of the Sacred
Empire. Robert Abbot. John Adams of the Inner Temple. Richard Adams M. A.
William Addams Esquire of Logdon in Shropsh. Henry Aldrich, Student of Chapter Chapter
Oxon. William Aldworth Esquire Will. Allen, of Much-Hadham in Hertfordsh. Richard
Allestree D. D. Provost of Eaton. William Allestree Esquire of Walton in Darbysh.
Jo. Alport Esquire Alexander Andersone Esquire Tho. Andrew Esquire of Harlestone in North.
Sir Peter Apsley. Thomas Archer Esquire Thomas Arundel, Merchant of London. Elias
Ashmole Esquire Sir Ralph Ashton Bar. of Middleton in Lanc. William Ashurst Esquire
London. Sir Jac. Astley Bar. of Melton Norfolk. John Aid Esquire Philip Airs Esquire
JOHN Earl of Bridgwater, High Steward of the University of Oxon. JOHN Earl of
Bath, Grome of the Stole to His Majesty. RICHARD Earl of Burlington. CHARLES
Beauclair Earl of Burford. GEORGE Earl of Berkley. COLIN Earl of Balcares.
WILLIAM Vicount Brouncker. PETER Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. JOHN Lord
Bellasyse, Baron of Worlaby. CHARLES Lord Berkley of Straton. JOHN Lord
Brackley. ROBERT Boil Esquire Francis Baber Esquire Edward Backwell Esquire of London.
Robert Baird Esquire Henry Baker Esquire Henry Bal^ Esquire William Ball Esquire of Gray's Inn.
Robert Band Esquire Caleb Banks Esquire of Aylesford in Kent. Thomas Barrow, Citizen of
London. Edward Bartlet Jun. of Oxford. Sir William Basset, of Somersetshire.
Ralph Bathurst M. D. Dean of Wells, and President of Trinity Coll. Oxon.
Benjamin Bathurst Esquire Deputy Governor of the African Company, under his R.
Highness. Edw. Bathurst, Fellow of Trinity Coll. Camb. Bartholomew Beal Esquire of
Buckinghamshire. Richard Beal, Merchant in Hamburg. John Bend Esquire John Bennet
Esquire George Benson D. D. Dean of Hereford. Francis Bernard, M. D. of London. Sir
Tho. Berney Bar. of Bark-Hall in Norf. Hen. Beeston L.L.D. Warden of New C.
Ox. Sir John Berry, Capt. of the Leopard. Thomas Beverly Esquire Stewart
Bickerstaff Esquire of Wilderness in Kent. Leon. Bilson Esquire of Mapledurham in
Hansh. Sir John Blande Bar. of Yorkshire. William Blathwait Esquire John Bleau of
Amsterdam, (whose Father published a Latin Atlas). Thomas Blofeld of Norfolk.
Thomas Blomer, D. D. Charles Blount Esquire Christopher Boon, Merchant. John Boon
Esquire of Mount Boon in Devonsh. Sir Will. Boreman, Clerk of the Green Cloth. Sir
Oliver Boteler Bar. of Kent. Tho. Boteler, Fellow of Trinity Col. Camb. Edward
Bounerie, Merchant in Durham. Will. Bows Esquire of Stratelam. Robert Brady M. D.
Master of Gonvil and Caius Coll. Cambridg. John Breedon Esquire of Pangbourn in
Barksh. William Bridgman Esquire Robert Briscoe, Citizen of London. Edward Brown
M. D. London. Peter Brown, of Langley Kent. Thomas Brown, Bookseller of
Edinborough, in Scotland. Rich. Bulkeley Esquire of Old Bawne in the County of
Dublin in Ireland. John Bullingham, of Ketton in Rutland. Gilb. Burnet P. D. of
the Rolls in London. William Burnet M. D. Nath. Burr, Merchant of Amsterdam.
Arthur Bury D. D. Rector of Exeter Coll. Oxon. WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. HENRY Earl of Clarendon. JOHN Earl of Caithness. ROGER Earl of
Castlemain. ROBERT Lord Vicount Cholmondely. JOHN Lord Bishop of Chester.
GEORGE Lord Coventry. CHARLES Lord Cornwallis. Sir GEORGE Carteret, late
Vice-Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household. Sir ROBERT Clayton Lord Mayor of
Land. Jacob Callaber, Merchant of Amsterdam. Sir Henry Calverley.
Colleges and Halls in Cambridg which have Subscribed, are
Christ. Coll. Dr. R. Cudworth Mr. Clare Hall Dr. Sam. Blithe Mr. Corpus Xti.
Coll. Dr. J. Spencer Mr. Emanuel Coll. Dr. Tho. Holbech Mr. Gonville and Caius
Coll. Dr. R. Brady Mr. Jesus Coll. Dr Saiwel Mr. St. John's Coll. Dr. Gower Mr.
Katherine Hall Dr. J. Eachard Mr. and Vice Chancellor. Kings Coll. Sr. Tho.
Page Provost. Magdalen Coll. Dr. Peachel Mr. Pembrok Hall Dr. Nath. Coga Mr.
St. Peter's Coll. Dr. Beaumont Mr. Queens Coll. Dr. Henry James Mr.
Sidney-Sussex Coll. Dr. Minshul Mr. Trinity Coll. Dr. North Mr. Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury. John Castillion D. D. Dean of Rochester. Sir John
Castleton Bar. Thomas Chalmers Esquire Thomas Chambers Esquire John Chase Esquire
Apothecary to His Majesty. Robert Chase. Thomas Cheek Esquire Lieutenant of the
Tower. Knightley Chetwodd, Fellow of Kings Coll. Cambridg. Walter Chetwynd Esquire
of Ingeste. Sir John Chichly, Commiss. of the Ordinance. Francis Cholmondeley
Esquire of Cheshire. Sir Hugh Cholmeley, alias Cholmondeley, Bar. Chaloner Chute
Esquire Sir Thomas Clargis. Samuel Clarke Esquire of Snaylwel in the County of
Cambridg. Lawrence Clayton Esquire Sir Thomas Clayton, Warden of Merton Coll. Oxon.
George Clifford Merchant in Amsterdam. Chr. Clitherow Esquire of Rislip in
Middlesex. Tho. Clitherow Esquire of Pinner in Middlesex. Sir Thomas Clutterbuck.
Duthlerus Cluverius Slesvicensis. Mark Cocky Merchant in Amsterdam. Rich.
Coffin Esquire of Portledge in Devonsh. Thomas Cole. Sir John Coell, Master of
Chancery. Richard Colinge Esquire Charles-Dutton Colt Esquire Harry-Dutton Colt Esquire
William-Dutton Colt Esquire Daniel Colwall Esquire of London. Ja. Compton Esquire John Cony
Esquire of Rochester. Tho. Cook Esquire of Hadly in Suffolk. Sir John Corbet Bar. of
Longnor in Shropsh. Sir Vincent Corbet Bar. of Acton-Reynold in Shropsh. John
Corrance Esquire of Suffolk Mark Cottle Esquire Register of the Prerogative Court. Sir
Chapter Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies. Sir Robert Cotton Knight. Bar. of Cheshire.
Sir John Covert Knight Bar. Joseph Cox, for the Library of Winton. Richard Cox Esquire
Edward Cranfeild Esquire Sir Caesar Cranmer. Henry Crispe Esquire Common Sergeant of
London. John Cudworth, Citizen of London. Sir Thomas Cullum, of Horsted-place
in Suffolk. HENEAGE Finch, Baron of Daventry, Lord High Chancellor of England.
CHARLES Earl of Dorset. WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire. THOMAS Osborne Earl of
Danby. GEORGE Earl of Dumbarton. NATHANAEL Lord Bishop of Durham. ROBERT
Deincourt, eldest Son of the Earl of Scarsdale. JOHN Drummond Esquire of Londy. Sir
EDWARD Dering Bar. of Surrenden-Dering in Kent, one of the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury. JAMES Dick of Priestfield, Provost of Edinburgh. Sir Henry
Dacres. Sr. Thomas Darcy Bar. of Essex. Robert Dashwood Esquire Fellow Commoner of
Trinity Coll. Oxon. Samuel Davall, Merchant of Amsterdam. James Davenant,
Fellow of Oriel Coll. Oxon. Isaak Davis Merchant of Rotterdam. Richard Davis
Bookseller in Oxon. To. Davies Esquire of Llannerch in Denbyshire. Thomas Deane,
Merchant of London. Um. Den Esquire of Den in Kent. Christopher Dering Esquire Sir
Edward Dering, of Sharsted in Kent. William Dickinson Esquire John Dod B. D. of
Hinton Northamptonsh. Sir William Dolben, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench.
Henry Dove D. D. of St. Brides London. Tho. Doughty D. D. Canon of Windsor. Sir
William Drake Bar. Jonathan Dreyden B. D. William Ducket Esquire Charles Duncomb
Esquire James Duport D. D. Dean of Peterborough. John Durell D. D. Dean of Windsor.
ARTHUR Earl of Essex. PETER Lord Bishop of Ely. THOMAS Lord Bishop of Exeter.
ALEXANDER Lord Bishop of Edenbourgh. Sir JOHN Ernle, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and one of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. Francis Eedes M.
D. of London. Sir John Egerton Bar. Sir Philip Egerton Bar. of Cheshire. John
Elliot M. D. Robert Elliot B. D. Minister of Fladburg in Worcestershire. Mr.
Ellis, of Gonville and Caius Coll. in Cambridg. John Ellis D. D. Chanter of St.
David's. Sir John Elwes, of Grove House. Thomas Eliott Esquire George Evelyn Esquire
John Evelyn Esquire Sr. Richard Everard Bar. of Essex. Lawrence Eusden A. M. Dean
and Chapter of Exeter. THOMAS Lord Vicount Fauconberg. ROBERT Lord Ferrers.
JOHN Lord Frescheville, Baron of Stavely. WILLIAM Lord Fitzwilliams. CHARLES
Fanshaw Esquire His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to Portugal. Sir STEPHEN Fox, one
of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. CHARLES Finch Esquire Fellow of
Allsouls Coll. Oxon. Sr. Palms Fairbourn, Governor of Tangier. Sir John
Falconer, Master of His Majesty's Mint in Scotland. Will. Far, of Bushel in
Middlesex. Charles Feltham, Citizen of London. Robert Fielding Esquire Sir Jo.
Fenwick, of Fenwick in Northumb. John Fisher M. D. London. John Fitz-Williams
D. D. Thomas Flatman Esquire London. Daniel Fleming Esquire of Rydal in Westmerland.
Edward Fleming Esquire of Hampshire. Eben Ezer Forenesse Minist. William Forester
Esquire of Dot-hill in Shropsh. Robert Fox Esquire London. Sir William Franklin. James
Frazer Esquire Sir John Frederick, President of Christ's Hospital for the use of the
Children of His Majesty's new Royal Foundation there. Thomas Frewen, of Northam
in Sussex. Sam. Fuller D. D. Chancellor of Lincoln. HENRY Duke of Grafton.
HENRY Lord Gray of Ruthin. JOHN Lord Bishop of Galloway. SYD. Godolphin Esquire one
of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury. Tho. Gale D. D. Master of St. Paul's
School in London. John Gantlet Esquire Edmond Gardener Esquire of Bedfordsh. Fran.
Gardener Alderman, of Norwich. James Gardener D. D. Subdean of Linc. Thomas
Gardener Esquire Controuler of the Post Office in London. Richard Garth Esquire Orlando
Gee Esquire Register of the High Court of Admiralty. William Genew Esquire Thomas Gill,
Citizen of London. Roger Gillingham Esquire William Gore Esquire Sir William Godolphin
Bar. of Godolphin in Cornwall. Hierom Gohory Esquire Charles Goodall M. D. Fellow
of the Kings Coll. of Physicians in London. G. Gooddall Fellow B. D. of Exeter
Coll. Ox. Richard Goodall, Citizen of London. Sir Robert Gordon of Gordonstone.
Robert Gordon Esquire of Clunne. William Leveson Gower Esquire John Graham Esquire John
Green Esquire Will. de Gray Esquire of Merbon in Norf. Francis Griffith Esquire of London.
Sr. Thomas Grosvenor Bar. of Cheshire. William Guise Fellow of Allsouls Coll.
Oxon. John Guise Fellow of C.C.C. Oxon. THEOPHILUS Earl of Huntingdon. WILLIAM
Lord Howard, Baron of Escrick. LAWR. Hyde Esquire First Lord Commissioner of the
Treasury. THOMAS Herbert Esquire Sir ROBERT Howard, Auditor to the Excheq. CHARLES
Hatton Esquire Theod. Haak Esquire of London. Henry Hall Esquire John Hall Esquire John Hall
Esquire Will. Hammond Esquire of St. Albons in Kent. Sir Will Halford, of Welham in
Leicestersh. Tho. Halsey Esquire of Great Gudsden in Herf. Tim. Halton D. D.
Provost of Queens Coll. Oxon. and Vice Chancellor. John Hampden Esquire of Hambden
in Bucks. Robert Hampson, Sergeant at Law, of the Inner Temple. Sr. Tho. Hare
Bar. of Stow-Hall Norf. Edward Harris. John Hartcliffe, Fellow of Kings Coll.
Camb. George Hascard D. D. Rector of St. Clements Danes in London. John Harvey
Esquire Sir Will. Haslewood, of Maidwell in North. Henry Hawley Esquire of Branford.
Middles. Israel Hayes, Merchant in Amsterdam. Jo. Hawtrey, Fellow of Kings
Coll. Camb. Robert Hawtrey Esquire of Rislip in Middlesex. Peter de la Hay, of
Westminster. Tho. Hayes, of Crattfield in Suffolk. Edward Haynes Esquire Nicholas
Hayward, Pub. Notary of London. Charles Hear^. Tho. Henshaw Esquire of Kensington
Middlesex. John Herbert Esquire Sir John Hewly, of Yorkshire Charles Hickman, M.A.
of Chapter Chapter Oxon. Samuel Hieron, M. A. of Huniton in Devon. Thomas Hillersden
Esquire of Elstow in Bedf. Abraham Hill Esquire of London. Rich. Hill, Canon Resid. of
Sarum. Thomas Hill Esquire of Silton in Shropsh. Samuel Hoadley, of
Tottenham-Highcross. Tho. Holbech D. D. Mr. of Emanuel Coll. Cambridg. Tho.
Holdsworth, Dean of Midleham in Yor. Patrick Home Esquire Barth. van Homrigh,
Merchant in Amsterd. Robert Hook Esquire of Gresham Coll. Land. Walter Hooper Esquire
of Stokebury in Kent. Anthony Horneck, B. D. of the Savoy. George Horsnell,
Citizen of London. Sr. Richard How Bar. of Compton in Glouc. Ferd. Hudleston
Esquire of Millon-Castle Cumb. Mr. Humphries, Rector of Barton in the Clay. Sr.
Tho. Hussy Bar. of Lincolnshire. Will. Hussy, Merchant of London. John Huxley
Esquire of Broseley in Shropshire. Tho. Huxley, Fellow of Jesus Coll. Oxon. Harry
Hyrne, of Kensington in Middlesex. Sir LEOLINE Jenkins, Principal Secretary of
State. Will. Jackson M. D. of Nantwich. Ja. Jacobson Esquire Mr. of the Steel-Yard
Tho. James D. D. Warden of All Souls Coll. Oxon. Will. Jane D. D. Reg. Prof. in
Oxon. Nich. Johnson Esquire Edward Johnson of Oxford Peter Joy Merchant of London.
Sr. Tho. Isham Bar. of Lamport Northampt. ANTHONY Earl of Kent Thomas Kerby
Merchant of Amsterdam Charles Killigrew Esquire Abraham Kick Merchant of Amsterdam
Will. Kinsmill of Sydmonton Esquire in Hampsh. Sir N. Knatchbull Knight Bar. of Marsham
in Kent. JOHN Duke of Lauderdale. GEORGE Earl of Linlithgow General of his
Majesty's Forces in Scotland FRED. Alefeild Count of Langland and Rixingen,
Great Chancellor to the King of Denmark HENRY Ld. Bp. of London THOMAS Ld. Bp.
of Lincoln. CHRISTIAN Lindenaw, Chamberlain to the King of Denmark and Envoy
Extraordinary to the King of England Edward Lake D. D. Sr. James Langham, Bar.
of Cottesbrook Northamptonshire Sr. William Langham of Walgrave Henry Langly
Esquire of Shrewsbury John Langley Esquire of Amias Shrop. Thomas Langly Esquire Henry
Lavor Esquire John Lawson M. D. London. Eldred Lancelot Lee Esquire of Cotton in the
County of Salopp Esquire Dan. Leblon Merchant of Amsterdam Sr. Nicholas Lestrange
Bar. of Norfolk Roger Lestrange Esquire Sr. Peter Lely of London VV. Levinz M.D.
President of St. John's C.Ox. Thomas Lewis Esquire Thomas Lewis Merchant of London
John Lewknor Esquire of West Dean Sussex Edm. Long Esquire of Linehams Court Wiltsh.
Sr. James Long of Wiltshire. Mr. Lovell Citizen of London John LLoyd, D. D.
Principal of Jesus Coll. Oxon. Will. LLoyd, D. D. Dean of Bangor Robert Lovet
Esquire Richard Lucas Minister in Coleman-Street London Narcisss Lutterel Esquire
Edward Lutwych Esquire JAMES Duke of Monmouth Chancellor of the University of
Cambridg JAMES Marquess of Montross ROBERT Earl of Manchester CHARLES Ld.
Vicount Mordaunt WILLIAM Ld. Maynard GEORGE Ld. Dela Mere Sr. JOHN Skiffiington
of Fishenwick Bar. Ld. Vicount Massereene LORENG Muller Envoy from the Duke of
Brunswick RICHARD Maiteland Esquire Sr. GEORGE Mackenzie Ld. Advocate of Scotland
Sr. GEORGE Mackenzie Ld. of Torbet Ralph Macro, M. D. London Robert Maddox Esquire
Sr. Thomas Mainwaring Bar. of Pever in Cheshire Rawlin Mallack Esquire of
Cockington Devon. Will. Man Esquire Sword Bearer to the Ld. Mayor of London Thomas
Manning of London Gerhardus Martens M. A. and Minister of the German-Church
London Narcissus Marsh S. T. P. Provost of Trinity College in Dublin John
Marsham Esquire of Cuxton Kent. Thomas Master Esquire of Ciciter Sr. John Matthews
Robert Maylin Esquire of Binnie John Morris Esquire of London Henry Maurice Fellow of
Jesus Coll. Ox. Isaac May Merchant of Amsterdam Clement Mayo Esquire Edmond Meadow
Esquire To. Meine Esquire Postmaster of Scotland. Sr. Richard Meredith Bar. of
Denbishire Jonas More Esquire of the Tower of London John Meriton D. D. Rector of
St Michael Cornhill London Roger Meredith Esquire Secretary of the Kings Embassy in
Holland. Sr. Tho. Midleton Bar. of Denbishire John Millington Esquire of Newich
Edward Mills of the Temple Walter Mills M. D. Adiell Mill Citizen of London.
William Molyneux of Dublin Owen Morgan Esquire Will Morton D. D. Dean of Xt. Church
Dublin. Will. Moses Esquire of London Luke Mott Fellow of Caius Coll. Camb. JAMES
Earl of Northampton GEORGE Earl of Northumberland. JAMES Ld. Norreys FRANCIS
Vicount Newport and Baron of High Archoll CHARLES Ld. North and Gray Baron of
Kirtling and Rollston ANDREW Newport Esquire Sr. John Napper Bar. of Luton
Bedfordshire Georg Neale, M. D. of Leeds Yorkshire Jasper Needham M. D. London
Walter Needham Honorary Fellow of the Kings Coll. of Physicians. Sr. Paul Neile
of Codnor in Derbyshire Goddard Nelthrop Esquire of Charter-House-yard London
Edward Nicholas Esquire of Hitcham Edward Nicholas Esquire John Nicholl Esquire Secretary
to the Ld. Chancellor John Nicholls Esquire of Trewane in Cornw Will. Nicolson
Fellow of Queens Coll. Oxon Will. Not Bookbinder to the Queens Majesty Tho.
Novell M. D. London JAMES Duke of Ormond Ld. Lieutenant of Ireland and
Chancellor of the University of Oxon. THOMAS Earl of Ossory AWBREY Earl of
Oxford JOHN Ld. Bp. of Oxon Sr. Thomas Ogle of Lincolnshire Will. Oliver
Bookseller in Norwich Rich. Owen D. D. Rector of St. Swithin and of St. Mary
Bothaw London. Sr. Henry Oxenden Bar. of Dean in Kent
Colleges in Oxford which have Subscribed, are
All Souls Coll. Tho. James D. D. Warden Brazen-Nose Tho. Yate. D. D.
Principal Bailioll John Venn Mr. Christ Church John Ld. Bp. of Oxon Dean Corpus
Christi Dr. Newlin President Edmund Hall Stephen Penton Principal Exeter,
Arthur Berry D. D. Rector Jesus, John LLoyd D. D. Principal St. John's Will.
Levinz M.D. President Lincoln Tho. Marshal D. D. Rector Magdalen Henry Clark M.
D. President Merton Sr. Thomas Clayton Warden New Coll. Dr. Beeston Warden
Oriel Robert Say D. D. Provost Pembroke John Hall D. D. Master Queens Tim.
Halton D. D. Provost and Vice Chancellor Trinity Ralph Bathurst M. D. President
University Obadiah Walker Master Wadham Gil. Ironside D. D. Warden. WILLIAM
Ld. Herbert Earl of Powis CHARLES Earl of Plymouth JAMES Earl of Perth. WILLIAM
Ld. Bp. of Peterborough WILLIAM Ld. Paget Sr. Tho. Page Provost of Kings Coll.
Cambr. Justinian Pagit. Esquire Allington Painter Esquire Will. Palliser D.D. Reg.
Prof. in Dublin Thomas Papilion Merchant in London Richard Parr D. D. of
Camberwell George Pain Fell. Com. of Clare Hall Camb. Robert Pain Esquire Will.
Peachey Esquire of New-Grove Sussex Robert Pease Merchant in Amsterdam Will.
Peisley Esquire of the Temple John Pell D. D. Mr. Pelling of St. Martins Ludgate
Land. Sam. Pepys Esquire Sr. Philip Percival Bar. of Ireland Ralph Petley Esquire High
Sheriff of Kent William Pett Citizen of London Alexander Pitfeild of Hoxdon
Middlesex Esquire Robert Pleydall Esquire Robert Plott L.L.D. of University Coll. Oxon.
Sr. Walter Plunkett of Rathfeale Knight. in the County of Dublin in Ireland Tho.
Plume D.D. Archdeacon of Roch. Charles Porter Esquire Sr. Roger Potts Bar. Will.
Powel Esquire of Sulham Barkshire Henry Powel Esquire William Price Esquire Hum. Prideaux
Student of Chapter Chapter Coll. Oxon Richard Prince Esquire of Abcott Shropshire Robert
Pringell Esquire of Stichell Aaron Atkins Merchant of Amsterdam John Pulleyn
Minister of the English Church at Hamburgh Sr. Will. Pulteney of St. Martins in
the Fields London. Sr. Robt. Pie of Farindon Barksh. CHARLES Duke of Richmond
and Lynox JOHN Duke of Rothes Ld. High Chancellor of Scotland. JOHN Earl of
Rochester JOHN Ld. Bp. of Rochester GEORGE Ld. Rosse of Scotland Sr. Will. Rant
of Norfolk Sr. Jonathan Raymond Sheriff of Land. Ambrose Rea Minister in Essex
Sr. Charles-Crofts Read of Bradwell in Suffolk Nich. Reppes D. D. John Rhodes
Register to the Bp. of Roch. Peter Rich Esquire of Lambeth Godf. Richards, Citizen
of Land. John Richards Esquire John Richardson Esquire Edward Rigby Citizen of London
Sr. Thomas Roberts Bar. of Glassonbury John Robinson Esquire Agent for his Majesty
to the King of Sweden Thomas Robinson Esquire Sr. Richard Rooth James Rothwell Esquire
John Rowland Johnson of Amsterdam Henry Rumball Esquire Benjamin Rudyard Esquire
Barkshire Sr. William Russel of Langhorn in the County of Carmarthen Barronett
Michael Rutter Esquire of Baton on the Hill Gloucestershire CHARLES Duke of
Somerset CHARLES Duke of Southampton JAMES Earl of Sailsbury ROBERT Earl of
Sunderland Principal Secretary of State EDWARD Earl of Sandwich ANTHONY Earl
of Shaftsbury KENNETH Earl of Seafort ELIZABETH Shannon Vice-Countess of
Shannon SETH Ld. Bp. of Salisbury OTHO Baron Swerin Envoy Extraordinary from
his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, to his Majesty of Great Britain EZEKIEL.
Spanheim, Envoy Extraordinary from the P. Elector of Brandenburg to the King of
France. PAOLO Sarotti Resident from the Republic of Venice at the Court of
Great Britain ALEXANDER Stanhope Esquire Sr. ROBERT Southwell Envoy Extraordinary
from his Majesty of great Britain to the P. Elect. of Brandenburg Sam.
Sainthill Esquire of Devonshire Samuel Sandors Esquire of Darbyshire Dr. Robert Say
Provost of Oriel Coll Oxon John Saumures D. D. Dean of Garnsey Sr. Edward
Seymour Bar. of Bury-Pomeroy in Devonshire and High Sheriff of the said County
Dean and Chapter of Salisbury Charles Sankey D. D. Charles Shaw of Trinity
Coll. Cambridge John Slade Rector Burg-clere Hampshire Edward Smith Citizen of
London Sr. Carr Scroop of Land. Baronett Dr. Scott L.L.D. of Camberwell Can. of
Wind. Sr. John Sherard of Lopthorp Bar. Lincolnsh. Tho. Sheridan Esquire of the
County of Cavan Ireland Henry St. John's Esquire Stephen Swart Bookseller of
Amsterdam Francis St. John's Esquire of Thorp Nor-thamptonshire Sr. Charles
Scarburgh, Chief Physician to his Royal Highness Sr. Francis Scott of
Thirleston Robert Scott B. D. Sen. Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cambridge Henry
Seymour Esquire Charles Shaw of Trinity Coll. Cambridge Daniel Sheldon Merchant of
London Sr. Joseph Sheldon Alderman of London Ed. Sherburn Esquire Clark of his
Majesty's Ordnance and Armory within the Kingdom of England Will. Shipman
Merchant of London Ed. Shires Esquire of Hadam Hartfordsh. Thomas Short M. D. Will.
Shortgrave Fellow of Wadham Coll. Oxon William Sill Archdeacon of Colchester
George Sittwell Esquire John Skeleton Archdeacon of Bedford George Smith M. D. of
Thistleworth Middlesex Barthol. Soame Citizen of London. James Sotheby Esquire of
Grays Inn Lon. Fredrick Spanheim D. D. Professor of Divinity at Leyden John
Speak Esquire of Somersetshire William Spencer Esquire Henry Stafford Esquire Will.
Stanly Fellow of Corpus Christi Coll. Cambridge James Stevens Esquire of Stowell
Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of St. Paul's London HORATIO Ld. Townsend Baron
of Lyn Regis or Kings Linn Sr. Gil. Talbot Mr. of the Jewel-House Sr. Robert
Talbor John Tailor M. D. of his Majesty's Commissioners of the Wine License of
Office Nathaniel Tench Esquire London Thomas Tenison D. D. Tho. Tipping of
Wheatfield Esquire in Oxfordsh. Sr. John Thompson Bar. of Bucks. John Thornton Esquire
of Brock-Hall Northamptonshire George Thorp D. D. John Tillison Controllour of
my Ld. of Canterburys Household Hugh Todd, Fell. of University Coll. Ox. Sam.
Tomson Esquire Richard Topham Esquire Sr. Jonathan Trelawny Bar. of Trelawny Cornwall
Will. Trevill Esquire of Cornwall Charles Trumbull L. L. D. Will. Trumbull L. L.
D. of Doctors Commons London Ralph Trumbull of VVhitney Oxfordshire Francis
Turner D. D. Thomas Turner B. D. Fellow of Corp. Christ. Coll. Oxon. Will.
Turner B. D. Dr. Will. Turner of Aberdene. Cornelius Vermuyden Esquire of
Derbyshire Edmond Vintener M. D. Fellow of Kings Coll. Cambridge Sr. Tho.
Vernon Bar. of Hodnett Shropsh. Henry Ulenbrook Jun. Merchant in Amsterd. Isaac
Vossius D. D. Canon of Windsor Stephen Upman Fellow of Eaton. Coll. Robert.
Uvedale of Enfeild Middlesex HENRY Ld. Marq of Worcester CHARLES Ferdinand
Earl of VValstein, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor to his Majesty of Great
Britain. GEORGE Ld. Bp. of Winchester EDWARD Ld. Ward of Dudley Castle
Staffordshire SIDNEY Wortley alias Montague Esquire Will. Wake Student of Chapter Chapter
Oxon. Edward Wake of London Obad. Walker Mr. of University Coll. Oxon Sr.
Will. Waller John Wallis D. D. Geometry Professor Oxon Hen. Wallop Esquire of
Farly-Clop Hamsh. Sr. William Walter of Saresden Oxfordsh. James Ward Esquire
Sr. Patience Ward Alderman of Land. John Warner Arch Deacon of Rochest.
Thomas Watkins Esquire Thomas Watson Mr. of the Charter House School London
Will. Watson D. D. Dean of Battle Robert Waith Esquire of Camberwell Surry.
Edmond Waring Esquire of Oldbury Shropshire Sr. Phillip Warwick John Johnsonius a
Wasberg Booksellor of Amsterdam and Son in Law to Johnsonius that set forth the
former Atlas. Sr. Christopher Wandesford Bar. of Kirklington Yorkshire William
Walsh of Abberly Park Esquire Worcestershire Thomas Watson D.D. Fellow of St John's
Coll. Cambridge Thomas Weaver of Morvil Shropshire John VVedderburn Esquire of
Golford Dean and Chapter of Wells John VVelthdale Esquire Paul Wentworth Esquire of
Lillingston Buckinghamshire Herbert VVestfaling Esquire Sr. George Wharton Bar. of
Kirkby Kendall Westmorland Treasurer to the Office of his Majesty's Ordinance
Philip Wharton Esquire Sr. John VVhatton of Leeicestershire Coll. Roger VVhitley
Thomas VVhitley Esquire Ralph VVilbraham Esquire Sr. Joseph Williamson, President of
the Royal Society Thomas Willis Esquire Student of Chapter Chapter Oxon Edward Wilson Esquire
of Dallam Tower, Westmorland Sr. Hump. VVinch, Bar. of Hannes in Bedfordshire
William Wind Esquire Paul Wicks of London Esquire Sr. Will. Whitmore Bar. of Apley
Shropsh. Sr. Paul Whichcot Knight. and Bar. of Hendon Middlesex Sr. Francis
VVithens of Westminster. Sir John VVittewronge Knight. Bar. of Stantonbury in
Buckinghamshire: Francis VVolferston Esquire of Statfold, in Staffordshire John
VVolryche Esquire of Dudmaston John VVostenholme Esquire of Enfield in Mid. Rich. VVroe
B. D. of VVigan, Lancash. Sr. Christopher VVren Surveior General to his Majesty
Sr. Henry Wright Bar. of Dogenham Essex Lawr. Womock D.D. Archdeacon of
Suffolk Sr. Cyril VVyche of Hockwold and Wilton Shropshire John Win Esquire Owen
Win Esquire Benjamin Woodroff D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter Oxon Sr. Peter VVyche Lady
VVymondesold, of Putney Tho. VVyndham Esquire Grome of the Bedchamber John VVyvell
Minister by Rochester RICHARD Ld. Arch Bp. of York ROBERT Earl of Yarmouth
Robert Yard Esquire John Yardley M.D. Col. Med. Land. S. Hon. Tho. Yate D. D.
Principal of Brazen-Nose Coll. Oxon James Young Esquire Robert Young Canon of
Windsor


THE INTRODUCTION.
The Intention of the whole Work.
COSMOGRAPHY is a general description of the whole World, consisting of Heaven
and Earth: of both which an account is intended to be given in this Atlas; that
of the Heavens is reserved to a peculiar Volume. It being (as we conceive) of
greater necessity, that we begin with that of the Earth. And first of this
great Globe in general; the description whereof belongs to Geography; as that
of particular Regions and Countries is called Chorography, which is contained
in their peculiar Maps. Nor shall we omit, such Topographical descriptions, or
the knowledge of lesser places, as Cities, Rivers, Mountains, etc. where
advantage may be to the Reader. Now this Globe, which we call of the Earth,
consists of Land and Water, or Seas; the description of those is properly
named Hydrography, which sets forth the superficies of the Seas, and mouths of
greater Rivers, the Havens, Rocks, Shallows, Creeks, and such other
considerations as concern Navigation; to this also an entire Volume in this
Edition of an Atlas, is designed. And because that of ancient times, the
divisions and boundaries of Kingdoms and Countries were very much diverse from
those at present; to avoid confusion, which must needs happen by treating in
the same place of things so different, it is thought necessary to reserve the
ancient Geography to a particular Tome, to be put forth, with the rest, in its
due time. Thus you have an account of what is intended in the Edition of this
Great Work.

But it is first necessary to explain such terms, and lay such general grounds
as are of use through all the Volumes; which is the subject of this Preface, or
Introduction.

Of the Globe of the Earth.
First then it is to be noted, that the Earth and Water make but one body, the
figure whereof is round, and therefore is best and most naturally represented
by those we call Globes; tho Maps also, or plain Figures, if carefully drawn,
are sufficiently exact. This proposition, tho it might be supposed rationally
enough, as now granted by all learned men; yet may it be evidently proved, both
from Celestial and Terrestrial appearances; whereof an account and reason may
easily be given by this figure, and not by any other. The Sun and the Stars
rise sooner to them who live Eastwardly, then they do to us; which could not be
if the whole face of the Earth were plain. 2. To those who live more or less
Northward, the Pole is more or less elevated; for those inhabitants of Iseland,
Lapland, etc. who live about a thousand miles more Northward then we do, see
the Pole Star fifteen degrees higher then we can. And those, who travel hence
toward those Countries, do find that this variation is made gradually,
altering about a degree and a half at the end of every hundred miles; which
could not be, except the body on which they moved were Spherical. 3. The Shadow
which the Earth casts upon the Moon, when she is partially eclipsed, is seen
to be circular; and therefore the body which causes it must be so too. To these
we may add, that many Propositions in Astronomy, Geography, and Navigation are
founded on this supposition, and when they are applied to use they prove true,
and succeed according to expectation; which certainly they would not always do,
if the very foundation upon which they are built, were unsound. The same also
is proved by plain sense and experiment, as well as by reason and consequence;
for we perceive, that Ships which loose from their Harbors in calm weather,
disappear gradually, first their Hulks, then their Sails, and after a few miles
their highest Masts; the natural convexity of the water interposing betwixt
them and our sight. Several also of our Countrymen and Neighbors have sailed
round about this Globe, loosing hence Westwardly, and returning again fromwards
the East. From which, and other Navigations, we may conclude, not only that
naturally no part of the Ocean is higher then another; but also that we may
sail from any part to any part of the superficies of the Ocean; and that every
Continent has Sea about it, and is indeed but a greater Island.

Of the situation of the Earth.
The controversy about the situation of this Globe, whether it stand still in
the midst, and as it were center, of the world, as the ancients generally
opined; or whether it move upon its own axis, and about the Sun as the center;
besides that it is not so much to our purpose in this as in the Volume of the
Heavens, the Maps and Descriptions being the same in both ways, and that the
learned are not come to any issue in it, nor have we any thing to add to the
common and vulgar probable arguments only, we shall omit.

The parts of this Globe are naturally separated one from another by Seas,
ledges of Mountains, Rivers, Deserts, and the like. Which are very opportune
for the distinction of Nations, Kingdoms, and Governments.

Of the Waters in this Globe.
In the beginning of the Creation, the Waters being lighter then the Earth
accordingly overspread and compassed it to some considerable height; (...)


