THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Henry Powle, Esquire, SPEAKER OF THE House
of Commons: Delivered to the KING and QUEEN'S Majesty's, at the
Banqueting House in White Hall, Friday April 12. 1689.
WITH His MAJESTYS Answer thereto.
YOur most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons of England Assembled in this
present Parliament, having to their unspeakable Joy seen Your Majesty's placed
upon the Imperial Throne of this Kingdom, they have desired Access at this time
to Your Royal Presence, humbly to Congratulate Your Majesty's upon this
Occasion, and to wish Your Majesty's a long and prosperous Reign, with all the
Blessings that ever did attend a Crown.

We are all Sensible, that Your Majesty's Greatness is the Security of Your
Subjects. It is from Your Power, that we derive to our selves an Aslurance of
being Defended from our Enemies; And from Your Justice, that we expect a full
enjoyment of our Laws and Liberties: But that which compleats our Happiness, is
the Experience we have of Your Majesty's continual Care to maintain the
Protestant Religion; So that we can no longer apprehend any danger of being
deprived of that inestimable Blessing, either by secret Practices, or open
Violence.

To the KING. May the same Divine Providence which has hitherto preserved Your
Majesty in the greatest Dangers, and so often given You Victory over Your
Enemies, still Crown Your Undertakings with Success.

To the QUEEN. And may these Vnparallelled Virtues, which Adorn Your Majesty's
Royal Person be the Admiration of the Present Age, and an Example to the
Future.

And may the Luster of both Your Names so far outshine the Glory of Your
Predecessors, that the Memory of their greatest Actions may be forgotten, and
Your People no longer Date the Establishment of their Laws and Liberties from
St. Edward's Days, but from the most Auspicious Reign of King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY.

His Majesty's Answer.
Gentlemen,
We return you Our hearty Thanks for the Kindness and Respects that you have
upon all Occasions showed to both of Us; We shall take care to the best of Our
Power of all things that conduce to the good of the Kingdom; and I do not
doubt, but by Gods Assistance and yours, We shall be able in a short time to
make you a Flourishing People.

FINIS.

