A POEM OCCASIONED BY His Majesty's most Gracious Resolution Declared in His
Most Honorable Privy Council, March 18. 1686/7.
For Liberty of Conscience,
WHat Heavn'ly Beam thus Antidates the Spring,
And Summers Warmth with Autumns Fruits does bring?
That spreads New Life throughout Great Britains Isle,
And making the most Sullen Tempers smile,
Does all the Jarring Factions Reconcile?
It Is an Indulgence from the Royal Breast,
More Fragrant than the Spices of the East;
More Welcome, than to greedy Misers, Wealth;
To Rebels, Pardon; or to Sick Men, Health.
Sudden, yet Calm as the Blessed Angels fly,
His Resolution comes for Liberty:
Liberty in Things Sacred, that Each tread
That Path which Safest him to Bliss may lead;
That Elephants may swim, that Lambs may wade,
And none each other worry or invade.
In Heaven are many Mansions: And why then
Not several Tracts (though but One Road) for Men?
Keep the Foundations sure, join Holy Life,
And what need Circumstantials cause such strife?
So a kind Father does with equal Care
Cherish his Children, though perhaps, they wear
Each, diverse Features; each, a different Hair.
Religion is GOD's Work upon the Soul,
Which Penal Laws may startle, not Control.
Even Truth's-Profession, when enjoined by Force,
Does rarely make Men Better; often, Worse.
For once compelled unto Hypocrisies,
The Sense of Virtue and Religion dies;
And then, on next fair Opportunity,
With greater Heats they to wild Furies fly.
For True Religion never Faction breeds,
Nor the Support of Impions Weapons needs.
Let Mahomet prescribe his Alchoran
To be advanced by Arms, fast as it can:
Christ's Gospel is a Law of Peace and Love,
And by Conviction on the Heart does move.
When Solomon of Old, God's Temple Reared,
No noise of Axes was, nor Hammers heard:
Hard upon Hard no lasting Work will make,
Nor can one Flint another kindly break;
But Moderation is a Cement sure,
It Is that which makes the Universe endure:
It Is that which makes these Realms a Temperate Zone,
Betwixt the Torrid, and the Frozen One.
More than One hundred years the State had Tried
To Uniform those Sects that would Divide,
But still the Teeming Hydra Multiplied
Whilst one Resolve of Mighty JAMES, allays
The Tempests of the Past and Following Days;
Unites his Subjects, makes 'em Friends, and so
All Seeds of Faction wholly does o'erthrow.
Holland no longer shall Our People drain;
No more our Wealthy Manufactures gain:
Henceforth Rebellion can have no Pretense,
To Arm the Rabble for their Faiths Defense.
Since Each Mode of Religion now is Free,
They Will All, I hope, conspire in Loyalty.
Let no Bold Peevish Man (prone to Excess)
Abuse this Favor to Licentiousness;
Refine too much on Sovereign Decrees
Of's God, or's King; but with true humbled knees
Thank Both, for all the Freedom they enjoy,
And Cheerfully Each follow his Employ:
No Rivalship be found in any Sect,
But who most Souls to Heaven shall Direct.
This may be Printed,

March 22. 1686. R. P.
LONDON, Printed by George Larkin, at the Coach and Horses without Bishopsgate.
1687.


