The Poets Dream: OR, The Great Outcry and Lamentable Complaint of the LAND
against BAILIFFS and their DOGS.
Wherein is Expressed their Villainous Outrages to poor Men. With a True
Description of their Knavery and their Debuac'h Actions; Prescribed and
Presented to the view of all People.

To the tune of, Sawny, etc.


AS I lay Slumbering in a Dream,
methought the world most strangely went;
The Bailiffs on High Seats was seen,
which caused the Poor's great Discontent.
They plucked true Justice from the Throne,
Erecting Laws was made of their own,
And burdened the Poor till they made them groan,
And that is the cause that the Land Complains.
Their Meeting House was an Ale-wives Bench,
fixed in a Street that is termed Old;
Their Speaker was an a Play-house-Wench,
both Whore and Thief, and a Devilish Scold.
She Would Guzzel Brandy, Wine, or Ale,
And then she would at her Neighbors Rail,
And send for the Bailiffs to have them to Iayl,
And that is the cause that the Land Complains.
Methoughts a mighty Hunting-match,
was made by Bailiffs and their Currs:
Poor men was the Deer they strove to catch,
the Houses placed in the Room of Furrs:
The Suburbs-Round it was their Park:
The Bailiffs Yell, the Dogs did Bark,
The Poor kept as close as Noah in the Ark;
And that is the cause that the Land Complains,
Then Shephard and his Dog wheeled up toth' right,
and thundered by a Cursed Lane,
And there the Villains wrought their Spite,
for by them once was a Poor Man slain:
They Swear before they will ever lack,
They Will go to Hell a Pick-a-Pack,
And thus poor Debtors they go to rack,
And that is the cause that the Land complains.
There Is Cursing Will and Damme- Jack,
and Robbin Turner's alive again;
And Paunchgut- Tom, (a Hellish Pack,)
with perjured- Dick and Bawdy Ben:
Which formerly on Earth did Dwell,
And now they are returned from Hell,
And does against our Laws Rebel,
And that is the cause that the Land complains.
When I awaked from my Dream,
Methoughts the World turned upside down,
And in great haste* I Writ this Theme,
for the Bailiffs Dogs of our Town:
Who for their prey each hour do wait,
Like death at every poor Man's Gate,
And brings the Realm to a Dismal fate,
And that is the cause that the Land complains.
When Poor men are out of Employ,
and have not a Farthing in the World;
The while there Wives and Children Cry,
there is many are in a Prison hurled.
Men are Enticed by the Bumms,
Who swear they never will pay their Sums,
Thus Poor in Flocks to the Iaylor comes;
And that is the cause that the Land complains.
The Tally-man, Curmudgeon keeps
a Baylif and his Dog to Bite;
If in their Books men ever Creeps,
they quickly swear they will have their Right;
So soon as e're they do Back-slide,
The Torturing Iale they must abide,
Then Toby and Dog's Employed;
And that is the cause that the Land complains.
When Rogues are at the Old-Bayly Burned,
and that their Pilfering Trades do fail;
From Thieves to Bayliffs-Dogs have turned,
to plague and hurry the Poor to Iayl:
How like Kid-Nappers all the Day,
In every Corner they Survey,
And quaff whole Bowls when they get the (...)
And that is the cause that the Land comp(...).
Ten Groat's the Fees, and a Crown the (...)
and three Round 000's for a Writ besid(...)
Thus Laws are broken, and poor men O(...)
such Racking Torments they must abid(...)
And while the Prisoner sends for Bail,
They Tope the Brandy, Beer, and Ale,
And makes him pay, or they have him to I(...)
And that is the cause that the Land comp(...)
For Twenty Shillings, Ten, or Five,
they will put a man to a Cursed Charge;
Or run him to Iayl they will soon contrive,
where other Bills are expressed at Large:
The Iayl-Fees many are bound to Rue,
The Garnish, Bed and Turn-Key too,
Expects an unexpected Due;
And that is the cause that the Land compl(...)
Your Moore-field Mobbs, and Whetstone-W(...)
has Bailiffs and their Dogs for Friends;
When Lustful Youth pays Venus Scores,
those Spunging Pimps the House attends
If Cullies fight in a Drunken fit,
Away goes Toby's Dog for a Writ,
Thus many falls in the Bailiffs pit;
And that is the cause that the Land compla(...)
It Is seldom a Bailiff or his Dog,
is ever known for to go to Church;
As soon as they here the Word of god,
they leave the Parson in the lurch:
They swear they will come to church no more,
They lay their Sins to Adams Score,
And jaunts to Moorfields to a Whore:
And that is the cause that the Land complain(...)
Thus I conclude and end my Song,
desiring that you would be content:
There Is Christian-Peers that may right our wr(...)
when Heaven yields up a Parliament:
I hope true Reason will plead our cause,
While they are erecting wholesome Laws,
They Will keep us from the Crocodils paws;
And cease the Poor of the Lands complaints.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball near the Bear Tavern.


