THE PLOWMAN'S COMPLAINT, The Free-Houlders PROPOSITION, And The High-shoes
RESOLUTION.
SHALL We stand tamely mute, and see our England sunk,
By Papist-blood-hounds, Rogue and Whore, debauched and drunk?
No, no such Salvage-Bruits we'll bear no longer,
Tho Impudence be bold, TRUE English-Hearts are stronger.
And all our Rights we'll certainly demand er'e long,
For the Nation's OURS. The KING is Bound to do No Wrong.
Then who durst Hurt or Harm's, except Our selves Consent?
Or what can do us Right? but An'all-Sov'reign Parliament.
AND you New-Parliament, that shortly are to Meet,
First Inspect, then Augment, and Settle well Our Fleet;
By Turning out the Papist, and each Scabby-Sheep;
Then may we say we have, or hope to have a Fleet.
Look to the Forts, and all the Ports, quite round our Land,
Let not a Trust remain in a suspected Hand.
In short, put such Commanders in our Ports and Fleet,
That we may safely Trust, when in our Beds we Sleep.
The Militia Form and Raise, in every Shire,
Commanded by the BEST Free-Houlders dwelling there:
And maugre Tricks, and Cheats, and French, and Popish Charms,
Once more Disband those Rebel-Forces now in Arms.
Forthwith to Justice bring the Traitors in the Tower,
Pursue the rest o'th Plotters, and the Plot each Hour.
To France and Pope, let us not be Sold by Fools and Knaves,
Oh! rather go like Englishmen unto your Graves.
To Protestant Dissenters be Kind, and do 'em Right,
Repeal those Laws that now in Force against them Fight.
Against which there is none will be, but the Ignorant-Clergie-Mite,
Or he who is, or is to be a Romanite.
Be sure Reward the Mal-purloiners of our Tax,
With Banishments, with Halters, Gibets and with Axe;
For it is but Just, before you give a farther Aid,
That we have something done, for what is already Paid,
Within these Eighteen Years, last past, which is, much More
Than all our Kings have had, Six hundred Years before.
Therefore,
An Act of Resumption Pass, before you Rise,
Take from the Undeserving Knaves their Ill-got Prize;
Let none retain one penny Gain, for Mischief done;
Oh! Let such Villains know, their Day of Judgment's come.
IF these things be Denied, Delayed, or You sent Home,
Then English-Free-Men, Sound your Trumpet, Beat your Drum,
Stand on your Guard, keep House and Yard, and each Towns-end,
In The Protestant Defense, Our GOD will us Defend.
Even so be it.

Amen.
From the HEART of ENGLAND, The first of March, commonly called St.
TAFFIES-Day, 1678.

