A POEM as it was PRESENTED TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY On the Discovery of the PLOTT,
Written by a Lady of Quality.
HAIL Mighty Prince! whom Heaven has desig'nd
To be the chief delight of human kind:
So many Virtues c^oud your Breast that we
Do always question your Mortality:
Sure all the Planets that over Virtue raigns,
Shed their best Influence in your Royal Veins:
You are the Glory of Monarchial Powers,
In Bounties free as are descending showr's;
Fierce as a Tempest when engaged in War,
In Peace more mild than tender Virgins are;
In pitying Mercy, you not imitate
The Heavenly Powers, but rather emulate.
None but your self, your sufferings could have born
With so much Greatness, such Heroic scorn,
When Hated Traitors do your Life pursue,
And all the World is filled with Cares for you;
When every Loyal Heart is sunk with fear,
Your self alone does unconcerned appear;
Your Soul within, still keeps it is lawful state,
Contemns and dares the worst effects of Fate,
As the bright Majesty shot from your Eye,
Awed your tame Fate, and ruled your destiny.
Though your Undaunted soul bare you thus high,
Your sollid Judgment sees there is danger nigh;
^Vhich with such care and Prudence you prevent
^s if you feared not but it would cross the event.
Your Care so nobly looks, it does Appear
It Is for your Subjects, not your Self you fear:
Heaven! make this Princes Life your nearest care,
That does so many of your Best Virtues share:
If Monarchs in their Actions copy you,
This is the nearest Piece you ever drew:
Blast every hand that dares to be so bold,
An Impious VVeapon against his Life to hold:
Burst every Heart that dares but Think him ill;
Their Guilty souls with so much Terror fill,
That of themselves they may their Plott unfold,
And Live no longer then the Tale is told.
Safe in your Care, all else will needless prove
Yet keep him safe too in his Subjects Love.
Your Subjects View You with such Loyal Eyes
They know not how they may their Treasure prize.
Were You defenseless, they would round you fall,
And Pile their bodies to build up a wall.
Were you distre'st, 'twould prove a generous strife,
Who first should lose his Own, to save Your Life.
But since kind Heaven these Dangers does remove,
We Will find out other ways to express our Love.
We Will force the Traitors all, their souls resign,
To herd with him that taught them their design.
FINIS.
Printed in the year 1679.


