depiction of House 1915 LAURISTON ^ CASTLE
William Robert Reid

THE True Principles OF THE CHRISTIAN EDUCATION OF CHILDREN Briefly and Plainly
Declared and Recommended to PARENTS and all Others Concerned in the Institution
of YOUTH Very profitable for all Sorts of Persons, as containing the Great and
Fundamental Truths and Duties of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Translated from the second Edition of the Original French.

For I know him (Abraham) that he will Command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the Way of the LORD, to do Justice and
Judgment, that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him, Gen: 18.19. Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, in the Year, M.DC.XCV.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them,
Eccles: 12.1.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Christian Reader.
THAT the Education of Children is of vast Moment and Consequence, will (I
doubt not) be readily acknowledged by all; The truth is, the Injunctions given
to Parents on this score, in Holy Scripture are so frequent, and so solemn, and
the Advantages of a good Education, are so many and so Valuable, that no
thinking Persons can be insensible of the Importance of it. But in the mean
time it is sad to observe that this great Concern is as universally, either
wholly neglected, or but superficially and trifflingly managed, as the
Importance of it seems to be universally acknowledged. Some Parents indulge
themselves in a wretched and unnatural carelessness, as to the Education of
their Children; Some are ignorant of the true Measures of accomplishing it; And
others do adopt and steer their course by either false or imperfect Maxims.

It is certain that Christians ought to madnage the Education of their
Children, according to the Prescripts of the Christian Religion: This is the
Blessed Magazin or Storehouse, out of which they must take Tools and Materials,
for rendering their Souls agreeable to GOD, and preparing them for the Glories
of Eternity. This is the Doctrine, to use the Apostles Phrase, Into which they
must be delivered: This is the Mould on which they must be Formed: And hence
must the Salt be fetched, that ought to season these tender Hearts. Young Ones
must be timeously taught, To determine to know nothing but JESUS CHRIST, and
Him Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.
The Example of His Holy Life, His Cross, His Sufferings, and Death, and
conformity to Him in these, and all other things, are very seriously to be
recommended to them. They must be trained up in the Love of self-denial,
contempt of the World, and resignation to the will of GOD. The Excellency,
delightfulness, and and necessity of these practices, are to be carefully
represented to them: They must be early acquainted with the strait and narrow
way, the way of the Cross, of Sufferings, and of Mortification, as a way that is
Lovely, pleasant, and full of peace and comfort, and leading unto Life Eternal.
They are further to be made sensible of the great Corruption of human nature,
and of the necessity of the Spirit, and Grace of Jesus Christ, in order to
Enlighten, purify, and heal the dark, unclean, and diseased Souls of Men: The
Spirit, courses and practices of the wicked World; as also the Motions and
Inclinations, the Lusts and Passions of depraved nature must be defamed, and
disparaged to them: For these prompt to the pursuit of Carnal Ease and
pleasure, of self-satisfaction and vanity, of Riches and Plenty, of Honor and
Greatness; Which desires are unsuitable to a state of trial, such as is our
condition in this World, and in which we are oblidged to persevering and
patient labor, and watching, fighting, and wrestling, running, and striving.
In a word, to educate Children Christianly, is, to Disciple them to the Holy
JESUS, and to oblidge them to trace the footsteps of their dear Redeemer, to
conform to so Divine a Pattern in every thing; to learn of him to be Meek and
lowly in heart, and to take his easy and pleasant Yoke upon them, and so they
shall find rest to their Souls. These are great and Noble things, and such as
are very proper to be instiled into young Hearts, as soon as possible, that so
from their Infancy, they may learn to know CHRIST, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his Death. Phil: 3.10.
These are things, that Books which pretend to give an account of the Measures
of a Chrishian Education, should especially point at, and direct unto: And I
cannot but look on it as an essential defect in Treatises of this nature, when
such matters as these are either not at all touched, or but little and slightly
insisted on in them.

The little tract that follows, having accidentally, or rather by a happy
providence fallen into my hands I was after a serious and deliberate perusal,
soon convinced; That it did not fall short of its Title, that is, that in my
opinion it solidly, and judiciously lays down the great and foundamental
Principles of a Pious, and Christian Education; And this conviction prompted
me, for the common Good of Mankind, to attempt a Translation of it, being
assured, that in doing this, I would do a considerable service and kindness to
all serious and well disposed hearts. I have endeavored to put the Translation
in as plain and simple a dress of Language, and to keep as near the Original,
as possibly I could, and without making any additions, save only, that for the
benefit of the Reader I have presented him on the Margent, With a brief and
summary view of the Contents of each Section.

I persuade my self, that all conscientious Parents, and Instructers of Youth,
all that are tender of their own, and their Childrens Spiritual concerns, and
Eternal Salvation, will look on it as a very Fortunate rencountre, that a Book
is put in their hands which furnishes them with Excellent Advices, for
mannaging this Great Trust, and that in a way that is Easy, Familiar and
Compendious, and suited to the Capacities of all that are of Honest, Candid,
and Serious Dispositions: It is true, none are here to expect to be taught the
Rules of Civility; Or to be instructed in the method of attaining Languages,
and Humane Learning, No, this was not in the Authors View; Neither could he
design it, it being indeed wholly Foreign to the Concerns of a Christian
Education. All that is pretended to be done in this Performance, is to afford
the best Directions, for Fashioning and Dressing the Souls of Young Ones, in
order to partake in the Glories of Eternity, This is the Butt, and Mark, at
which a Christian Education should especially Level, and all the directions
that are offered, should be suited and accomodated to this great end* the
measures here prescribed have visibly this Character, being indeed the great
essentials, the Marrow and Substance of the Gospel, which are here recommended;
first, to the serious consideration, and practice of the Parents; that so by
means of their Holy examples, and diligent instructions, and by the Blessing of
GOD upon their Pious Endeavors, these great Truths may be savingly imparted
to, and inculcated on their Children.

The Pious Author having been importuned by a Great and Worthy Friend of his,
to give directions how to manage aright the Education of Children, though for
some time he declined to comply to this request; Yet in end, he was prevailed
with to impart his Thoughts, but still without any design of making them
public, till at last it was concluded, that it would greatly serve the
interests of all Conscientious Instructers of Youth to have such an excellent
Help put in their hands. The Author addressed these Directions to his Friend,
in the Form, and confined himself to the Bounds of a Letter, whereby he was
obliged not to draw out his Thoughts to any great length, and so gives but the
Elements, or first principles of a Christian Education; However the principles
which he has laid down, as they are True and Genuine, so they are Fertile and
Comprehensive, and capable to suggest to all attentive and penetrating Minds,
whatever is necessary to be known on this head: But since few will be at the
pains to make such Improvements of them; and because some do stand in need of
more dilated and ample Accounts: Therefore the Reader may e're long, by the
Divine Blessing and Assistance, expect a full and Copious System of Directions,
on the Subject of a Christian Education; Which, however, are but Deductions
from, and Enlargements on, the Principles here laid down; In this larger
Account, the faults and miscarriages committed in the Education of Youth are
declared, particular Directions are given how to manage this great Concern in
all the instances of it to the best Advantage, Powerful Motives are adduced to
persuade Parents and all others concerned in the Religious Education of Youth,
to put what is recommended to them on this head in practice: And in fine, a
great many excellent, necessary, and yet little observed Truths, are through
the whole insisted on.

Mean while, Christian Reader, Converse with these Principles, read and digest
them; They deserve some of thy most recollected Thoughts, and thou shall never,
I hope, have cause to repent of employing a few of thy moments in turning over
the following pages, and that thy Reading may profit and edify thee; I shall
beg pardon before I close, to entreat a few things of thee; One is, That thou
Read with closs Attention, and not content thy self with a superficial glance:
Next, that thou do not reject, what thou do not at first understand, but
vouchsafe it a review: And in fine, and especially, that thy Perusal be
attended with a serious Disposition, for otherwise, all will be to little
purpose; nay I must plainly tell thee, that if thou art not resolved to deny
thy self, to take up the Cross, and follow Christ, some things here will choke
thee; For corrupt Nature will fly in the Face of what grates hard upon it, and
pinches it; And the old Man cannot endure to be roughly treated. But on the
other hand, if thou designs to be a votary of the Spirit and Cross of the Holy
Jesus, if thou art one that worships God in Spirit, and places Religion, not in
outward Forms and Circumstances, but in Righteousness, Peace and Purity, in
Life, and Power; Then what is here offered to thee, will prove savory and
relishing, and the more the Truths here presented to thee, will choke and
contradict thy corrupt self; Still the more agreeable they will be; And thou will find such solid pleasure and Tranquillity in the practice of them thy
self, that thou will be prompted to propagate and recommend them to all others,
on whom thou can hope to have any influence.

And, O may the Good GOD turn the Hearts of the Fathers unto the Children, and
the Hearts of the Children to their Fathers, and the Disobedient to the Wisdom
of the Just, Mal: 4.6. Luke. 1.17.
And Second with his effectual Blessing and Grace, whatever is sincerly
designed to serve the Interest of Souls,

AMEN.
THE Authors Advertisement TO THE READER.
FAthers and Mothers, and all you to whom the Education of Children is
entrusted, if you understood well the Importance of that Charge, you would
easily, discern, that all your other Affairs, your Employments, your
Businesses, your Concerns, your Goods, and your Care to get them, and to keep
them, are but nothings, or but mere triffles in comparison of it. The least of
these Souls, whereof you are oblidged to take care, is of such a Value, that
the Son of GOD has esteemed it more than his own Life. Your work is to educate
them for Heaven or for hell, and accordingly if you educate them well, you
shall together with them, as a Recompense of your Labors, enjoy a happy
Eternity, or endless miseries, if you neglect them, even though otherwise you
may have lived unblameably as to your own Persons, without mentioning any thing
of the curses of this Life, which fall on such as do not fairly acquit
themselves of this duty. The holy Scripture lets us see, that the high Priest
Eli, though otherwise a Good Man, yet not having effectually enough resisted,
and curbed the wicked inclinations of his Sons, was punished for it with Death,
both he and his Children, the whole people routed, the Ark taken; and all his
priestly Family exterminated. It is to be feared, that the Callamities which
overwhelm Christendom owe their Original also to this: For Men do not take
care to educate their Children by any other principle, but that by which they
have begotten them, I mean, by the impulse of a purely carnal Concupiscence,
whereas they ought to be acted in the whole, from a Principle of Divine Love,
which prompts and influences us, to desire that there may be yet other
Creatures with us, which might join and unite with us, in Eternally Loving and
Honoring the Majesty of GOD. But alace, this is it of which Men take but very
little thought, and there are but few who seriously design to form Creatures,
who professing and living agreeably unto the great Name of Christian in this
World, should be worthy of GOD and his Eternity here after.

Since the following Letter Aims only at this design, it was believed, that to
render it public, would be a beneficial Performance, and greatly tend to the
Advantage of whosoever will incline to make the designed Use and Improvement of
it, whether with respect to Children, or also with respect to themselves, how
aged soever they may be; Because in effect the Truths that are contained in it,
are of so comprehensive and extended an Use, that at the bottom, they do no
less agree to the adult and aged, for all their Life throughout, than to
Children for their first years. And since, according to the Words of JESUS
CHRIST, We must become little Children in order to inherit the Kingdom of GOD;
Since the Perfection which the Gospel requires of us is so great, that it will
be hard to find any, for as advanced as he may think himself to be, who has
not just ground to consider himself still as a Child; Since the Wisdom of GOD,
and the Christian and saving Doctrine is so simple, that it is proportioned to
the Capacity of the meanest, even of Children themselves, and in fine, Since
GOD does very often in Holy Scripture, vouchsafe these whom he will, save the
designation of Children, and of his Children, I do not believe that any ought
to think himself harshly treated; when one shall tell him as I do, that when
Principles are laid down for the Christian Education of Children, he may well
believe that excepting only a few things, which do not regard but some
Circumstances of Age, the Particulars insisted on do no less suit and agree to
him in substance, how advanced soever in years he may otherwise be then they do
to those who are yet but beginning to live: Would to GOD that Men would be
persuaded to make a Trial of this, by a serious and continual practice of the
following Truths. And as I heartily wish that all Parents had been themselves
oducated from their Infancy according to these Measures, so I earnestly desire,
that, to repair what might have been amiss as to this, they may begin the
practice of them in their own persons, and betimes oblidge their Young Ones to
observe them, whiles their Souls continue flexible and complying.

FAREWELL
The Contents. Giving the READER a Summary View of the Whole.
THE most Effectual method of conveying the following Instructions into Young
Ones, briefly laid down. SECT. 1. Page. 2. The chief mistake in the Education
of Children condescended on. SECT. 2. ibid A necessary qualification of the
Instructers of Young Ones, namely they must in some measure know GOD and
themselves. SECT. 3. Page. 3 What they ought to know of GOD. SECT. 4. Page. 4
The knowledge they are to have of themselves. SECT. 6. Page. 7. The principal
Faculties of the Soul. SECT. 7. Page. 8.
I. The Faculty of Desire.
The necessity of improving the Faculty* of Desire in Children betimes. SECT. 8
Page. 10. The use and importance of the Faculty of Desiring, briefly declared
by a familiar comparison. SECT. 9. Page. 11. GOD and his Will the True and the
only Object of the Desire. SECT. 10. Page. 12
Consequences from this.
I. To deny our own will and desires. SECT. 11 Ibid II To entertain low and
mean thoughts of our selves, never desiring the praises and commendations of
men. SECT. 12. Page. 14. III. To be content with the least and worst of things.
SECT. 13 Page. 15 How to kindle pious and devout inclinations toward GOD in
the hearts of Young Ones. SECT. 14: Page. 17. I. From the Consideration of the
Divine Perfections. SECT. 15. Ibid: II. From the consideration of the benefits
of GOD, both past and present. SECT. 16. Page. 18 III. From the expectation of
future Blessings, especially of Spiritual Ones. SECT. 17. Page. 19 That our
desires may be successful, great care must be taken to do the will of GOD.
SECT. 18. Page. 20. IV. From the consideration of past sins. SECT. 19. Page. 21
The nature and indispensible ingredients of prayer. SECT. 20 Ibid What praying
in the Name of CHRIST imports. SECT. 21 Ibid To beget in Young Ones an habit of
lifting up their Hearts to GOD, frequently and sincerely, is of vast importance
to their pious Education. SECT. 22 Page. 23 Young ones must be taught vocal
Prayers, a Caution about these. SECT. 23 Page. 25 A needful Caution about the
imprecations that are in the Psalms. Ibid: Page. 26 The obligations of Parents,
during the Infancy of their Children declared. SECT. 24 Page 27 The sad
consequences of not beginning the Education of Young Ones from the improvement
of their desire SECT. 25. Page. 28.
II. The Faculty of Understanding.
Truth the object of Understanding. SECT. 26. Page. 29.
Consequences of this.
1. A lie depraves the Understanding, and must not be endured in Children.
SECT. 28 Page. 30. 2. Not to stuff our minds with the knowledge of useless
things. SECT. 29. ibid: How the Faculty of knowing is exercised in man. SECT.
30. Page. 31. 1. The Understanding since the fall is blind as to Divine Things.
SECT. 31. ibid: We must believe what we do not yet Divinely see. SECT. 32.
Page. 32. The Principle and Light of Faith. SECT. 33 Page. 33. 2. Young Ones
are to be guarded against the abuse and delusions of corrupted Reason. SECT. 34
Page. 34. How this may be best done, is declared by a Comparison. SECT. 35.
ibid: Of what nature the discoveries are, that corrupted Reason makes of Divine
Things. SECT. 36. Page. 35. The great Principle which with respect to human
Reason must be betimes engraven in all hearts. SECT. 37. Page. 36 What to do in
order to be divinely enlightened. SECT. 38. Page. 37. The right method of
exercising the reason of Young Ones. SECT. 39. Page. 38. The happy Advantages
of this method. SECT. 40. Page. 40. That the imagination of Young Ones must be
early improven. SECT. 41. Page. 41. A necessary caution with respect to it.
SECT. 42. Page. 42.
Three ways of exercising it.
1. By Reading. SECT. 43. Page. 43. 2. By acquainting them with the importance
and meaning of the Belief. SECT. 44. ibid:
Where three things are to be recommended to their notice.
1. GOD's Gracious Designs and Conduct with respect to man, both in his
Creation and Redemption. SECT. 45. Page. 44. 2. The Conversation of JESUS
CHRIST in our Humanity as designed for our imitation. SECT. 46. Page. 45. 3.
That the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost mentioned in the Belief are but One GOD.
SECT. 47. Page. 46. What it is to know the Holy Trinity in a Divine and Saving
manner. SECT. 48. Page. 48. 3. Another way of improving the imagination and
memory of Young Ones: SECT. 49. Page. 50
III. The Faculty of Rejoiceing.
An Account of this faculty, the ground of it very early mistaken, SECT. 50:
Page. 51. GOD only the ground of Rejoicing, SECT. 51: ibid
Certain grounds of Rejoicing to be inculcate on Young Ones
The first ground, is GOD, his Divine Excellencies and Benefits. SECT. 52.
Page. 53. II. When any thing is piously done, whither by themselves or by
others. SECT. 53. Page. 54 III. When they suffer and are reproached and
disgraced. Ibid: Page. 56 The use of the faculty of rejoicing, with respect to
the particular, immediately preceding, illustrated by a comparison. SECT. 54
Page. 57
Innocent Divertisement must be allowed young ones but with some Cautions
I. That they be taught ever to acknowledge God to be the Author of whatever
they receive, and to thank him for it. SECT. 56 Page. 58 II. That no objects
which may gratify their corrupt inclinations, be made the ground of their joy.
SECT. 57 Page. 59 III. Particularly the love of money is to be suppressed in
them. SECT. 58 Page. 60 The Faculty of Rejoicing given to the Soul, that it
might be fixed on God. SECT. 59 Page. 61 The Abuse of our Joy, with respect to
Divine things to be prevented, and how! SECT. 60 Page. 62
IV. The Executive Faculty.
The Divine faculties of the Soul, being well ordered, action easily and
naturally follows. SECT. 61 Page. 6^ The general Rule of action laid down,
recommended and illustrated. SECT. 62 Ibid* The Commands must he taught Young
Ones first in the Literal, and then in the more Sublime and Spiritual import of
them. SECT. 63 Page. 71 Though what the Law Commands be impossible to corrupt
Nature; Yet the Spirit of Jesus makes it easy. SECT. 64 Page. 74 Portions of
Scripture particularized, which contain the Gospel Law. SECT. 65 Page. 75 An
abridgement or short sum of the Divine Laws. SECT. 66 Page 76 Children must be
put in mind of the Baptismal Covenant. SECT. 67 Page. 78
What Young Ones must practice.
I. With respect to God. SECT. 69 Page. 79 II. With respect to Parents and
Superiors. SECT. 70 Page. 80 III. With respect to their Neighbors SECT. 71 Ib:
IV. With respect to themselves. SECT. 72 Page. 81 How to manage the reproofs
and chastisements of Children. SECT. 73 Page. 82 They must be taught to praise
God when they do well. SECT. 74 Page. 84 Parents ought conscientiously to
practice themselves what they recommend to their Children. SECT. 75 Page. 85
The fancied impossibility or ridiculousness of the foregoing directions
refuted. SECT. 76 Page. 86 The great misery of negligent Parents Ib: Page. 87
The happiness of such as shall train up their Children according to the maxims
of Christianity. SECT. 77 Page. 88
Some Passages of Scripture, declaring the Obligations that ly on Parents,
carefully to endeavor the Religious Education of Childrcn.
ANd ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath: But bring them up in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians: 6.4.

Train up a Child in the way he should go: And when he is old, he shall not
depart from it, Prove: 22.6.

He that spares his Rod hates his son: But he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes, Pro: 13.24.

Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his
crying, Prove: 19.18

Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall
drive it far from him, Prove: 22.15.

Withhold not correction from the child: For if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not die, Prove: 23.13.

The rod and reproof give Wisdom: But a child left to himself, brings his
^other to shame, Prove: 29.15.

Correct thy Son and he shall give the rest: Yea he shall give delight unto thy
Soul, Ibid: 17. verse.

The Obligations of Children to listen to the Instructions of their parents,
likewayes represented from some few passages of Scripture.
CHildren Obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right, Ephesians: 6.1.

My son hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother, for they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy head, and chains about
thy neck. Prove: 1.8, 9.

Hear O my son and receive my sayings: And the Years of thy life shall be many.
I have taught thee in the way of Wisdom: I have led thee in the right paths.
When thou go, thy steeps shall not he straightened, and when thou runest, thou
shall not stumble. Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go, keep her, for
she is thy life. Prove: 4. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Hearken unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she
is old. Buy the Truth and sell it not, also Wisdom and Instruction and
Understanding. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that
begets a Wise child, shall have Joy of him. Thy Father and thy Mother shall
be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. My Son give me thine heart, and
let thine Eyes observe my ways. Prove: 23.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

My Son keep thy Fathers Commandment, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother.
Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy (...) When thou
go, it shall lead thee; When thou slee^est, it shall keep thee; And when
thou awakest, it she talk with thee. For the Commandment is a lam^ and the Law
is light; And reproofs of Instruction a^ the way of Life, Prove: 6.20, 21, 22,
23.

Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye Children For blessed are they that keep my
ways. Hear I^struction, and be wise, and refuse it not. Blessed the Man that
hears me: Watching daily at my gate waiting at the posts of my doors. For
whosoever finde^ Me, finds Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord. But he that
sins against Me, wrongeth hi^ own Soul: All they that hate Me, love death,
Prove. 8.32, 33, 34, 35, 36.

Come ye Children, heaken unto Me: I will tea^^ you the fear of the Lord, Psalm:
34.11.

The Reader is entreated to correct the following mistakes.
Page. Line Mistakes Ammendments 1 27 as to the mind As to the mind 4 16
Willingly Willing 5 8 on the Margent, allow them allow 6 19 Whatsoever
Whosoever 7 15 all other all the other 10 2 case cause 10 10 on the Margent,
82. 81. 12 14 and what and of what 13 11 if the if this 13 18 their own its own
14 26 desire desires 15 5 deprived depraved 17 6 14. 3. 14. 20 10 and heart an
heart 26 4 end of end end 27 25 as turning in turning 30 10 to unpunished to
pass unpunished 32 1 we able we be able 32 28 see see; 35 16 them them, 36 24
principal principle 40 27 a young young 41 7 their causes the causes 56 17 or
it is for it is Ibid: 21 injuried injured 60 27 something somethings 61 7
accustoming accustoming them 62 22 this thus 67 3 on the Margent, are being 70
8 for the glory to the glpry 75 7 walks walk 76 14 say I say 77 1 unto into
Ibid 2 unto into Ibid: 6 Psalms Psalm

ADVERTISEMENT.
1. That Part, 1. Essay, 2. which the Reader will see in the running Title of
some of the Coppies, was insert by a mistake.

2. That what is Printed between such Paratheses as these [ ] contains the
additions made to the second Edition.

The JUST MEASURES Of the Pious Institution of YOUTH.
Containing the True Principles of a CHRISTIAN Education.
SIR,
YOU have so often importuned me to write something, which might be a Directory
to Men in the Christian Education of Children, that I cannot any longer
forbear, declaring to you in a few words, that which in my opinion ought to be
observed on this head, by all such as intend to bring them up Christianly.

. 1. The most effectual Method of conveying the following Instructions into
Young Ones, briefly laid down, Viz. Parents and other Governors must know,
digest and practice these things themselves in order to impart them savingly to
their Children.
. 1. And that I may the more happily accomplish this design, I shall imitate
these, who, that they may with more precaution and wariness give Physic and
cure to such as are yet on the Breasts, prescribe that the Nurse do take it
first, to the end, that having incorporated it in her self, she may afterward
communicate it to the Sucklings in a Nutritive manner, seasonably and in what
measure she shall judge convenient.

sect;. 2. The chief mistake in the Education of Children condescended on,
namely too great regard had to the Improvement of the Mind, without taking care
of the heart and Affections.
. 2. -- I am of Opinion that the Capital and Chief Error which is committed in
the Education of Children is, that Men greatly endeavor to improve their Mind,
without taking care of their heart, unless perhaps in furnishing it with some
Rules of Agreeableness and Civilities, with respect to the conduct of the World
As to the Mind, which they would have awakened and stirred up in them before
the heart, they content themselves with giving it some Knowledges and notices
after a manner, which, as it is ordinarily managed, makes Children much more
like Parrats, than intelligent Creatures, they only load their memory with a
quantity of Questions and Answers, which it is sufficient that they rehearse
word for word, without comprehending any thing of them, after which they are
commended for this Recital, as if thereby they had sufficiently discharged
themselves of that which they owe unto GOD: And thus it is that we learn from
our Infancy, to draw near unto GOD with our Lips, while the Heart and the Soul
is far from Him, As GOD complains of his people by his Prophet. Isa: 29.

. 3.. 3. A necessary qualification of the Instructers of Young Ones, they must
in some measure know God and themselves.
It were to be wished, that such as have Children to be educated, had some
fundamental Knowledge both of GOD and of themselves, and especially of their
Souls, and of what concerns them, to the end they may know from thence that
which is principally to be inculcated on Children; and to be cultivated and
improven in them.

. 4 What they ought to know of GOD.
. 4. Now in my Opinion here are presented to them some Instances of those
principal Notices, which it is necessary for them to have.

1. Concerning GOD.
THey ought to consider GOD as an Eternal Being, or Spirit without Beginning
and without end, Incomprehensible and Invisible Good and the Cause of all Good,
Powerful to do whatsoeve^ He pleases; Wise knowing and doing every thing well,
Happy and full of Divine Joys, a Lover of all that which He has made, and
especially of Men; most willingl^ to make these Eternally happy and Joyful who
do His Will, and leaving the rest (the Disobedient and Incorrigible) miserable
and destitute of all Good: Just, to render to every man according to His Works,
True in His Promises and in his Threatenings, and Merciful in pardoning the evil
to such who cease to do evil, and seek from Him the pardon of it with Love and
Humility of heart.

. 5.. 5. Passages of Scripture are to be taught and explained to Young Ones
with respect to the Divine Attributes and as their Capacities will allow.
It would be proper to make a Child learn some passages of Scripture, with
respect to each of these Articles, and to let him see the Application of them
according to his Capacity.

For instance, with respect to that which says, that GOD is an Invisible and
Incomprehensible Spirit. St. John tells us, chap: 1. verse 18. No man has seen
(or comprehended) GOD at any time, the Only Begotten Son, which is in the Bosom
of the FATHER, He has declared Him. To the same purpose is that of JESUS
CHRIST. Matt. 11 verse 27. No man knows the SON but the FATHER, neither
knows any Man the FATHER save the SON, and He to whom the SON will reveal
him. Whereupon, Endeavors must be used to inculcate on them from thence
betimes, that all our Readings, all these things which we hear at Church or
else where, all our Studies, our Meditations and our reasonings, are not
capable to derive unto us by themselves, the least spark of the True and Living
Knowledge of GOD and of his Secrets, but that it is GOD alone who can
communicate it, in putting his Good Spirit, and Divine Grace, and Light into the
heart of such as shall uncessantly pray unto Him for them, with a deep Humility
and an entire Resignation and shall endeavor to do His Will, as far as He has
made it known to them.

With respect to the Goodness of GOD, JESUS CHRIST has said, There is none
Good but GOD alone, From this you are to inculcate on them, that all Good comes
from GOD only, both in Heaven and in Earth, within Man and without Man, and
that He only ought to have the Glory of it, that all which we do without him,
without his Grace and Assistance is evil, and that whosoever does not possess
GOD has no Good, but is infinitely miserable.

With respect to the Power of GOD, I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day, says St. Paul; 2 Timothy: 1.12. Oblige them to think on this head, that
since we are all corrupted and wholly undone by sin, none can restore us to our
first and perfect state but the Almighty GOD, and that if we confide in him,
and resign our Soul, our Life, and our Conduct unto Him, to the end that he may
do with them what shall please Him, He can keep us by his Power against
whatsoever shall oppose our Felicity; He can deliver us from all danger, and
re-establish at the last day in an estate of Perfection, of Salvation and
Glory, our Bodies, our Souls; and that which we have recommended to his
Direction and Conduct.

This same may be done with respect to all other Attributes of GOD, which have
been touched; I leave it to the care of these who educate Children to make the
like improvements of them by some passages of Scripture, and by some little
reflections of the same nature with these.]

. 6. 11. As to our Souls, there follow here some of the most important notions
that respect them, 6. 11. The knowledge of themselves. The view that men are to
have of the Soul.
and such as are most accommodate to our design. We have a Soul which is
immortal and invisible, the which GOD has Created with design to inhabit and
take up his residence in it, and so by himself, who is the source of all good,
to make it good, able to do well, wise, Virtuous, Just, True, full of Love and
Charity, Happy and Joyous; Tha^ being Adorned with such Divine qualities as
these, he might Eternally, and Holily delight, and entertain himself with it.
It is for this that we were Created.

7. The Principal Faculties or Capacities of the Soul.
. 7. It is also for this that GOD has given to our Soul three or four
Principal Capacities, or Faculties and powers; Over which we must very
carefully watch, that we may becommingly improve and manage them: For on this
depends the Eternal welfare and misery of Souls.

I. The first of these Capacities is, the Power of Desiring or Willing.

II. The Second is that of Knowing.

III. The third is, that of Rejoicing.

IV. And the fourth is, that of Executing and putting in practice outwardly,
that which seems good to it.

[These Faculties or Properties are so inter-woven with our Soul, and so
unseparable from it, that one may justly look on them as constituting its
nature. And therefore we need not scruple to determine, that the Soul is a
being that desires to know the true good, and to enjoy it, to the end that it
may regulate thereby its life, and its practice to the Glory of GOD, and its
own eternal welfare

When a Soul desires the true good, and when it knows it, Enjoyes it, and puts
it in practice, it is happy; Or at lest it is in the assured way of Salvation
and Happyness. If ye know these things, says JESUS CHRIST, Happy are ye if ye
do them. John 13.17.

But when a Soul is without all desires after the true good, without the
knowledge of it, and without the Enjoyment and practice of it; It is Infinitely
unhappy, and in the way to Eternal perdition,

Thus we see that all depends on the good or evil conduct of these four
Faculties. Our great business in this World, is to manage them well. Let us
think seriously on this; for the consequences of it are Eternal.]

Since we are corrupted by sin, and since GOD alone is the cause of all good,
we must seriously endeavor that he come and take Possession of our Soul, and
there he may Assist and Govern our Desire, our Mind, our Understanding, our J^^
and our Practice, otherwise without him we shall never do any thing to purpose.

8. 2. The necessity of improving the faculties of Desire in Children betimes.
. 8. 1. The gate by which GOD comes unto us with his most Holy grace, is the
desire of the Soul, which we otherwise call the Heart or the Will; and this is
it which we must excite, cherish and improve in Children betimes, and that
without intermission. When this part shall go well, all the rest will easily
follow it of their own accord; But as long as a Soul capable to use this
faculty is without a good will, and a good Heart, that is to say, as long as
it has not in it sincere and serious desires after GOD, it is really without
life before him, and shall never live with him, if it shall come to depart this
life in that state. Without this Divine desire, all sorts of knowledge and
practices, and even the greatest advantages of nature, of birth, and of
Education shall serve for no other purpose but to make it so much the more like
the Devil, and as wicked, acursed and unhappy before GOD, as he is.

[. 9. The use of the desire, 9. The use and importance of the desire briefly
declared by a familiar comparison.
and its importance with respect to the Soul, may be very pertinently made
manifest to a Child, by a comparison suited to his capacity; Namely by telling
him, that the desire is to the Soul what the mouth and stomach are to the body.
It is by the mouth and by the stomach that the Body receives its food, which
when good does nourish it; but if unwholesome and poisonous, indsposes and kills
it; Just so it is by the desire that the Soul is either Nourished, or
indisposed and killed Spiritually, according to the nature of the things, after
which the desire is carried. As then we must take good heed that we put not
into the mouth, or let down into the stomach but wholesome things; So we must
take very great care that we do not receive into our desire, but good things,
if we would happily live the life of the Soul. For this life shall of necessity
be of such a constitution and temper as are our desires, and the objects which
which we admit unto them. And so it is the duty of each one to consider
seriously how he Nourishes his Soul, or leaves it languishing, and what nature
the things are to which he gives access unto his desires.]

10. GOD and his Will the true and the only object of the Desire. The
consequences of this.
. 10. The power of desiring has been made for that which is Good, that is to
say, for GOD, who is the only good, and for his Will, which only is the sourse
of all good.

Therefore it is that we ought not to desire any thing but GOD, and that which
is agreeable to His Holy desire, and to his Divine will, and we must disingadge
and turn away our desire from every other thing, for every other thing but GOD
and his will is evil. And consequently,

11. 1. Consequence: to deny our own will and desires, to do which Young Ones
must be airely in.
. 11. 1. None ought to desire his own will, nor cherish his own desires, which
are all evil, corrupted and the sourse of all sin; On the other hand, the sole
desire and sole will of GOD is the sourse of all good.

This is it to which Young Ones must be habituated as soon as is possible with
the greatest care, breaking and crossing their desire in every thing, before
they have contracted the fatal habit of following their own will; But men must
act here with discretion, though they must never fail most vigorously to oppose
and check this unhappy impression, when once it has taken root. O how easy
would the practice of Virtue become, if this wicked habit did make no
resistance to it! And if while the Spirit is most flexible, I mean, if from
their Infancy upwards, men were formed to this great point, the which is so
necessary, that no Soul shall ever be saved without having renounced their own
desires. The passages of the Gospel are express as to this particular: And they
ought to be rendered familiar to Children, and so ought that Prayer of JESUS
CHRIST, My Father, Luke 22.42.
not my will but Thine be done; And that other protestation of his, I am not
come into the World to do mine own will, but the will of my Father. John 6.38.


[When this unhappy bias, or inclination of following our own desires, and our
own will, is already become habitual, as it is in those that are adult, we must
not give over resolving to make assaults on it, and to eraze it with the Divine
assistance, which we must not fail to implore with much ardour and
perseverance, and having obtained it, to employ it with force and courage
against the perverse tendencies of our desires, this to be sure we must do if
we would not perish Eternally. It is on this account that JESUS CHRIST lays,
that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and that the violent take it by
force. Matt: 11.12. However we must even here use discretion; Yet not such as
is carnal or humane, but a discretion that is Spiritual and Divine, and comes
from above, and which therefore we ought ardently to demand of GOD, on whose
direction the conduct of renouncing our own will, ought also to depend.]

12. 2. Consequence to entertain low and mean thoughts of our selves, never
desiring the praises and commendations of men which young ones must be taught
to slight and despise.
. 12. 2. Since that none can do any good of himself and without GOD, and that
all our own desires are corrupt, therefore we must not desire to be Esteemed,
Honored, and Praised by any person, neither must we be conceited of our
selves, but desire that men take us for what we really are; that is to say, for
poor nothings, and for sinful and depraved creatures.

This is that Humility, which is a door by which the Grace of GOD enters into
the Soul, according to the Scripture, which says, that God gives Grace to the
Humble: 1 Pet: 5.5.

O would to God, that Young Ones were trained up to this betimes, and without
interruption, instead of being educated after that Antichristian and diabolical
manner, in which Men commonly bring them up, as well in private, as public
Schools, and even every where else, in breathing and pouring into their hearts
on all occasions, the mortal poison of praises and Commendations, which serve
for no other use, but to plant in them a fatal pride, which makes them the
enemies of God, according to that word of St. Peter I chap, 5. verse 5. God
resists the proud, and that other of Solomon, The proud in heart are an
Abomination to the Lord.

. 13. 3.. 13. 3. Consequence to be content with the lest and worst of things a
lesson which Young Ones must be carefully instructed in.
A Creature which of it self is but nothing and sin, and therefore is obliged
to believe that it merits nothing, ought to be content even when it has
nothing, or but very little, and ought not to desire more then that which it
has, but to take for its use, of all things the left and less worthy.
Believing that these are still but too good for a nothing, and for a Sinner.

This is it which it were better to make Young Ones understand and practice,
then unhappily to study, as commonly people do, to stir up and awaken in their
hearts, by a thousand pernicious inventions, all sorts of covetousnesses, to
attire them pompously, and flatter all their Senses the most agreeably that is
possible, never refusing them any thing that may contribute to make them the
slaves of the flesh, of vanity and of corruption, and so to render them very
early as Antichristian as the devil could desire.

[The neglect of this Rule, and o^ the two foregoing, as well as the practice
of the contrary; are the foundations of Antichristianism; as the Observance of
them is the same thing with the practical Foundations of true Christianity:
Therefore it is that Jesus Christ says, that whosoever will not deny himself,
cannot be his Disciple. Luke 9.23. and 14, 26.]

. 14. 3.. 14. 3. How to kindle Pious and Divine Inclinations toward God in the
hearts of Young Ones.
When the desire is thus turned from evil, it is with the greater ease turned
toward God, to whom alone we ought to address and Devote these tender hearts,
in endeavoring to make good desires and inclinations toward their Creator,
to spring up in them, at the occasion and by the consideration of all sorts of
things.

. 15. 1. From the consideration of God as He is in himself Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, Beauty and Felicity it self, they must be excited and prompted to the
desire of esteeming Him, of praising Him, of honoring Him as He deserves, and
of pleasing Him in every thing. They must be made to understand that it is
principally for this that we are sent into the World, namely, that we may
esteem, honor and praise God without end, by the desires and continual
Elevations of our hearts to Him; and that since this is the Employment of
Angels, by being exercised in it we become their companions in this World, and
even fellow Citizens of Heaven with them, in imitating so holily these Divine
Spirits, who sing eve^ before GOD, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts, the
whole Earth is full of Thy Glory, Isa: 6.

16, 2. From the consideration of the Benefits of GOD both past and present.
. 16. 2. With respect to the Benefits of God, when w^ shall represent unto them
tha^ all comes from Him, ou^ Soul, our Body, our Life our Parents, our Friends,
the Good Angels which he sends to defend us, the Earth on which we walk the Air
which we breath, the Sun which enlightens us, the meats which Nourish us, the
clothes which cover us, the fi^ which warms us; We must awaken i^ them on all
these occasions and every day the desire of being Grateful toward God, and
thanking Him for all and every one of these things, as often as they shall have
occasion to serve themselves of them. If one ought to make Grateful returns to
a mortal Man when he does us good, much more ought we to make them unto God;
who both has made that Man, and does us good by him. Thus it is that the
Blessed Ones above pay their Acknowledgements to Him, Thou art worthy, O Lord
our God, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: For Thou have created all
things, and for Thy pleasure they are, and were created. Rev. 4.11.

GOD has not only bestowed on us good things throughout what is past of our
life, but he still pursues us with a continual reiteration of his blessings;
For without his goodness, both we and all the World, would fall every moment
into confusion and ruin, just as a brittle Vessal, if it were not ever, and
without intermission supported by something, would fall and be broken in
pieces; And therefore, our desire and our heart ought always to be disposed,
to thank and pay continual homages unto GOD for his continual blessings,
according to that exhortation of St. Paul, Giving thanks always for all things
unto GOD, and the Father, in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Ephesians: 5.20.

. 17. 3. And because we have need of his good things for the time to come, 17.
3. From the expectation of future blessings, especially of Spiriual ones.
especially of Spiritual Blessings if we would be happy, and since he will give
them to such a^ shall desire them truly in their hearts, we must above all
things most diligently labor to dispose young ones to lift up their desires to
GOD, t^ seek from him his Grace, his good Spirit, the Knowledge of Himself,
true Virtue; An Heart that is sincere, humble obedient, sweet, content in every
state tender and grateful toward GOD If any man lake Wisdom, says St. James
1.5. Let him ask it of GOD, w^^ gives it to all liberally, and it shall be
give^ him.

. 18. That we may o^tain these and the like grace we desire from this Soveraig^
Benefactor, 18. that our desires may be succesful, great care must be taken to
do the will of GOD.
we must remember to be solicitously careful, n^ to offend him from whom ^
expect such great favors; an^ to be always ready to do h^^ will; For GOD
hears not sinners, but any man be a worshipper of GOD, and do his will, him
he hears, says the Gospel Jo: 9: 21.

. 19. 4. But since we have often offended in the time past of our life, 19. 4.
From the consideration of past sins.
and so are unworthy of his grace and of his favors, we must with an ardent
desire entreat him for the pardon of our past offenses, as also beseech him to
preserve us from them in time to come.

. 20. These four sorts of desires; I, To praise GOD, 20. The nature, and
indispensible ingredients of Prayer.
and his infinite perfections; 2, To be thankful to him for his favors; 3, To
seek his Divine grace in order to please him; And 4, to implore his mercies,
for the pardon of our sins, do make up that which we call Prayer. We never in
effect Pray unto GOD, but when we have truly and sincerely such desires as
these in our hearts, without which although we teach young ones all the vocal
Prayers in the World, we do make but Parats of them, and such whereof GOD
says, This people draws nigh to me with the mouth, but their hearts (or
desires) are far from Me. Isa. a0.9.

[. 21. We must not on this occasion be unmindful to make young ones
understand, 21. What praying in the Name of Jesus Christ imports.
that when they are taught according to the injunction of Holy Sc^^pture, to
address all their Prayers to GOD in the Name of JESUS CHRIST, in order to be
heard of their Heavenly Father, the meaning is not that they must simply
pronounce the sound and the syllables of the Name of JESUS CHRIST; If this were
so the most part of the Prayers recorded in Scripture it self, should not be
made in the Name of Jesus Christ; But the import of the injunction is, that we
must desire by the Grace, and by the Virtue of JESUS CHRIST, and have desires
wholly conform and like unto his, to the end that Jesus Christ acknowledging
them as having sprung from himself, may unite them unto his own and offer them
as his own desires unto GOD his Father, and that the Father who cannot refuse
any thing to the desires, and to the merits of his well beloved Son; and who
grants him always his desires, may also grant us ours, as being included in
his; Yea, and even making a part of them: So that when one says to GOD, hear
us O LORD! In the name of JESUS CHRIST, or I beseech thee in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST, it is as much as if one did say unto him, "I offer unto thee O LORD,
these same desires which the grace of Jesus Christ does inspire me withal, and
which I will not mingle with the desires of my corruption, but conform them,
and unite them unto the desires of thy Son, to the end that thou may have
respect unto them in him, and that by this means thou may accomplish them
for his sake, to thy Glory and my Salvation.]

. 22. It appears now from all these important Truths, 22. A serious Endeavor
to beget in Young Ones an habit of lifting up their hearts to GOD frequently
and sincerly, is the first and greatest concern of their Education.
that the first and capital work of the Education we are treating of is, to
teach Young Ones to lift up their Desires toward GOD on all Occasions by
little sighs and breathings, conform to the Will of GOD, and so simple, as that
with the Divine Grace they may fitly come from themselves: As for Instance, to
train them to say according to the different Occasions,

My GOD, who art all Good, all Wise, and Almighty, be Thou blessed for ever.

Grant me the Grace to love Thee, and to obey Thee.

I give Thee thanks, because thou have created and redeemed me.

My GOD I praise Thee, that Thou have created the World and all that is in it,
because Thou gives me food and raiment, because Thou will give me Eternal Good
Things, and because Thou will come to dwell in my Soul, and take Thy delights
with me Eternally.

My GOD deliver me from my sins, give me Thy good Spirit.

Give me the Grace that I may never love to do mine own will, but only Thy
Will.

My LORD, grant that I may have an humble heart, that I may not esteem my self
better then others, but that rather I may despise my self, and account my self
to be below all the Creatures.

Make me to hate and to eschew the praises and flatteries of men; Thou only
ought to be praised, for Thou only art the cause of all the Good which we can
ever do.

Give me to be always content with every thing that befalls me. I do not
deserve but hell, and the least of all Thy Mercies, as indeed the meanest of
all things, are still much more then I deserve.

By these kinds of Elevations, when Young Ones are daily accustomed to them,
the solid Principles of true Christianity, and the living Seed of Life Eternal
are planted in their Souls.

. 23. We may do well also to make them learn by Heart some Holy Vocal Prayers,
and above all, 23. That it is necessary to teach Young Ones Vocal Prayers, but
withal they must be told that these are not prayers, unless the Heart act its
part in them.
The LORDS Prayer, which our Savior Himself has prescribed us. But withal, we
must carefully inculcate on them, that it is not a Prayer, and that it is not
agreeable unto GOD, but when the Heart has truly in it, the Desire that GOD
should be 1. Esteemed and Loved; 2. Honored and Praised; 3. Obeyed; 4. That he
would nourish our Souls with His Grace and with His Love. 5. That He would
deliver us from our past sins. And 6. That He would preserve us from them for
the future, as well as from the innumerable and hidden snares, by which the
Devil endeavors to make us fall into them, which are the six or seven
Petitions of this Prayer, to which we may join that which is at the end (...)
^^d It is to be found at the end of this Letter.
of the Works of Rusbrochius; As also some of the Psalms of David; But in the
mean time, we must let them understand that when we pray there against our
Enemies, and when we desire that GOD would exterminate them, A needful Caution
about the Imprecations that are in the Psalms.
this must be understood in a Spiritual Manner, That is to say, of the
Spiritual and true enemies of our Souls, which are our sins, and our vices, our
self-will, our self love, our pride, our vanity, in one word, our old man, of
which we ought to demand from the LORD the ruin and extermination, otherwise,
we should change the Psalms into pernicious poison, in applying the
Imprecations that are in them to our Neighbor, whom we ought to love.

[We may also very profitably employ the Imprecations of the Psalms, and the
ardent Prayer that are there made, that GOD would confound, destroy and root
out our enemies, against the evil spirits, our mortal and invisible enemies,
who, as St. Peter says, Go round about us like roaring Lions, seeking to
devour us, 1 Pet. 5: 8. And who by their fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. That is to
say, by their villainous inspirations, endeavor to kindle in us all sorts of
wicked desires, and sinful inclinations, that they may make us perish
eternally. When we find our selves tempted to evil, especially when it is
against our will, these sorts of Psalms and Prayers against the tempter and
enemy of our Souls, come in very seasonably, and are the true weapons of our
defense.]

. 24. 24. Parents must make up the defects and weaknesses of Infancy by their
own serious Piety and Devotions, for which GOD will be sure to reward them, and
bless their Offspring.
In fine because that Young Ones have as yet their Faculties almost all asleep,
and but very little Active, it will be necessary here, that their Parents come
to their Assistance, and supply their Impotency and all these duties, as well
in turning from evil their own desires, as in offering always to GOD, in
behalf of their Children, these same Holy desires, and these true and genuine
Prayers, whereof we have spoken. For GOD accepting then the desires of Fathers
and Mothers in Name and behalf of, and as coming from their Children, and being
willing to recompense the Piety of the Parents, He will not fail to answer
them, by the saving Operations of his Good Spirit on the hearts of all their
posterity, and so Showing Mercy unto thousand Generations of those that love
Him, Exodus: 20:6.

25. The sad Consequences of not beginning the Education of young Ones from the
Improvement of their desire.
. 25. The Improvement of the Desire or of the heart of Young Ones, is a point
so fundamental, and so essential to their Good Education, that if we either
absolutely neglect this, or if we do not begin their Instruction by it, but by
things which only concern their Understanding, we cannot choose but miserably
ruin their Souls, in leaving in them, and even planting in them by this
negligence, the fatal seeds of Irreligion, of Spiritual carelessness, of
forgetfulness, and disrespect of GOD, of vanity, of pride, in a word, of death
Eternal. Notwithstanding this is it whereof Men do but little think: The whole
World, says St. John, lies in wickedness, and that we may not be conform to
the miserable World in this point, it can be never enough recommended to those
who would educat their Children Christianly, not so much to cultivat their
mind, as to make their heart. 1. Pious toward GOD. 2. Humble in themselves. 3
Meek and Charitable toward their Neighbor. And 4. Content, with regard to all
that which may happen them, and which may be done unto them: On such a
Foundation as this GOD builds great things, and even takes in his Hand the
whole conduct of the Soul.

. 26. 11. 26. 11. Truth that is God his word and works the object of our
Understanding.
The second and the principal of the Faculties of our Souls, is the power of
Knowing, or our Understanding.

It has been made for the Truth, that is to say for God himself who is the
Truth, and for his Word and his Works; which are the streams of this Sovereign
and Original Truth.

. 27. 27. The consequences of this.
And so we ought not to desire to know any thing but God, and that which he
has said and done for His Glory.

28. 1. Consequence a lie and whatever is contrary to Truth, depraves the
Understanding, and must not be induced in Children
. 28. 1. And therefore falsehood, or a lie, which is opposite to Truth, is the
most abominable of all things, because it corrupts and perverts the most noble
of the Faculties of our Soul? we ought not to tolerat it in the least in young
ones, nor suffer them to unpunished, when they bewray in any measure this
diabolical enormity, the devil being (which is the first and chief of all his
qualities) a liar, and the father of lies; says the Scripture.

29. 2. We must not stuff our minds with the knowledge of useless things, but
seasonably check our vain curiosity.
. 29. 2. For the same reason we ought not to apply our selves to the knowledge
of the unprofitable discourses, vanities, inventions, cnimeras and fictions,
and the deeds of vain and corrupted Men, we must betimes resist curiosity and
distraction which fill the mind with obscurity and darkness, and render it
insensible and unsuitable to solid Truth and to the Light of God, how great a
loss it is to fill with dirt and impurities a precious vessel, which was made
for no other end, but to lodge and contain God and his most pure Lights, which
are incompatible with the impure fictions of the depraved minds of corrupted
and worldly men.

. 30. 30. How the faculty of knowing is exercised in Man.
The faculty of knowing is exercised in Man, 1. By the Understanding or the
Pure Mind, 2. By reason. 3. By the Imagination assisted by the Senses,
especially these of Seeing and Hearing.

. 31. 1. 31. 1. The Understanding since the Fall is blind as to Divine things,
GOD only can cure this blindness, of both which Young Ones must be early made
sensible.
The Understanding or the Pure Mind, which is designed for Divine Things, is
entirely shut up in all men since the entrance of sin.

We are, and are born all blind as to Divine Things, and it is God only that is
able to heal, to open and to enlighten the eye of our Soul, so as to capacitat
us to know Spiritual Things.

As we could not see nor know the Sun, the Earth, the Trees, nor the other
things of this World, if GOD had not given us bodily eyes; So neither can we
able ever to know the things of GOD, if he do not restore to our Soul its
Spiritual Eves which it has broken, and which GOD does not reim part no^ open,
but to those only whose Heart i^ withdrawn from sin, and inclined and carried
to good.

This ought to be inculcate on al^ from their Infancy, to the end that the mind
may tend betimes toward GOD, and that by the Goodness of its Desires and
Purity of Heart, it may be disposed for his Divine Light; For GOD does not
discover his Secrets, but to such as fear to do evil, and he gives not his
Light, but to those who will make a good use of it, as David, who said to him,
Give me, O LORD, the understanding of thy Law, and I shall keep it, yea, I
shall observe it with my whole Heart, Psalm: 119.34

32. We must believe what we do not yet Divinely see.
. 32. As long as GOD has not yet opened the Eye of our Soul, to see by his
Divine and supernatural Light the Things above, the great Mysteries and Truths
of our Religion, it is necessary that we believe, though we do not yet see all
that GOD has said to us of them, or all that which the Saints who have the
Spirit of GOD have told us of them; But we must not believe what the Men of the
World talk of them, for they are blind and liars. In this every man (who has
not the Spirit of GOD) is a liar, said David, Psalm: 116.11.

. 33. This is the Principle, or ground work of Faith, 33. The Principle and
Light of Faith.
Namely, to believe and rely on that which GOD has revealed to us of Divine
Things, which we do not as yet see, and which we do not understand, in the mean
time waiting patiently, and desiring that he would open unto us the Eyes of the
Mind, and give us his Light, that by it we may see clearly when it shall please
him.

This Light being come into the Soul is called The clear Light of Faith.

[But when we have not as yet obtained particular and clear discovery of
Divine Things, and that nevertheless we believe them, in confideing to the
Testimony and to the Conduct of GOD blindly, and without comprehending any
thing in them, this is called the Obscurity or the dark light of Faith, which
oftentimes is the most sure and most saving for us, as being less subject to
presumption and to pride: To this may be applied that Word of the Son is of
GOD, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Joh: 20.29]

. 34. 11. Although Young Ones be incapable to make use of Reason, 34. 11. Young
Ones are to be guarded against the abuse and delusions of corrupted Reason.
much less of Reasoning, we must nevertheless endeavor, as soon as if
possible, to inculcate on them a Principle which will secure them from the
Impostures, and the Idolatry of humane reason, which is the grand evil, the
capital and common Idol, And the almost universal Atheism of this Age,
especially among those who make profession of Learning and Science.

35. How this may be best done, is declared by a significant comparison.
. 35. This Principle may be rendered intelligible unto them by this comparison.
That as a blind man, though he may think and discourse, and reason the best in
the World, yet can he not by that mean either know or see either the Sun or
other Creatures, for at this rate he could not have but dark thoughts, gross
and wholly false apprehensions of them; Just so, though all the men of the
World should think, discourse, and reason of Divine Things, by all the force of
their Spirit, yet notwithstanding they could not know by that mean, either GOD,
or the Things of GOD; But only have wholly dark, and even wholly impertinent
thoughts of them. It will be necessary that GOD, to the end he may be well
known, give other Eyes to the Mind, as also another Light then that which comes
to us from our own activity; and as long as he does not give them Humane
Reason, with respect to Spiritual Things, is nothing but a very shop of
ridiculous Chimera's, and the pure Fictions of blind Men.

. 36. But further (that we may continue our comparison) as when we have made a
Sun or fruits in Effigy, 36. The discoveries that corrupted reason makes of
Divine things are languid, faint, and in effectual
these pictures of the Sun and of the fruits cannot enlighten us, nor warm us,
nor nourish us, nor give us any strength or vigor, so as the true Sun and the
real Fruits do; Just so, though by our reason we represent unto our selves God,
and Virtue, and Divine things, yet these Ideas, these representations, and
these discourses of our Reasons touching God, and the things of GOD, cannot at
all give us true Lights, nor true Virtue, nor administer nourishment and
strength to our Souls to live according to God, and to practice his Divine
Will. These are but cold, empty, lifeless and wholly barren and unfruitful
images, on which we cannot raise any other superstructure, but wind and vanity,
which serve to no other purpose, but to puff up the minds of Men, and which put
them in commotions, the one against the other, by dissentions, by disputes, and
by continual combats, until such time as they burst of themselves, or split one
against another.

37. That the spirit of Man without the illuminations of GOD cannot discern
Divine things is a truth that betimes must be settled and ever cherished in all
hearts.
. 37. To prevent these inconveniences, behold the principal which we ought to
ingrave betimes, and preserve tenderly in all hearts.

The Spirit or reason of Man, without the grace or supernatural light of GOD,
is but a blind man which makes vain and fantastic images of things which it
has not seen, and which it can never see. The natural man, says St. Paul,
cannot know the things of GOD; He holds them for foolishness, and he cannot
comprehend them, beeause they are known by a Spiritual light. No man knows the
things of GOD, but the Spirit of GOD, and he who has received this Spirit. 1
Cor: 2.11, 12, 14.

. 38. We must not then so much, 38. And therefore renouncing the dark and
glimmering notions of our own reason, we must in ardent Prayers offer up our
ingenuous and evacuated souls to GOD to be Enlightened by him.
and with such solicitous care, endeavor to cultivate and dress our mind, by
our own force and by our own industry, as to turn it away from the fictions of
our reasonings, and from vanity, and offer it up to GOD in simplicity, and
wholly emptied and naked, with a vehement desire to do his will alone, and with
sincere Prayers, beseeching him to give unto us his light, and to open our
eyes; For says the Scripture, It is GOD that gives eyes to the blind, that
opens them to see the wonders of his Law and of his will, and enlightens the
eyes of our understanding. Psalm: 146. and 119. Ephesians: 1.

. 39. If we would nevertheless exercise in some sort the reason of young Ones,
39. The right method of exercising the reason of Young Ones, recommended and
illustrated by some instances.
as in effect this we may, and ought to do, and if we incline to make them
understand things by reasons, or oblidge them to give a reason of any thing
that we would, we must accustom them to give on every particular Divine
reasons; My meaning is, reasons drawn from the Power of GOD, from his Wisdom,
from his Goodness, from his Justice, from his Will, from his Felicity, from his
Glory, as also from our own nothingness, from our weakness, from our own
injustice, wickedness, ignorance, and such like.

For example, wherefore did GOD Creat the World? To manifest his Power, his
Wisdom, and his Goodness. Wherefore did he make Man? For that very same end,
and withal to show him, and give him his Felicity, and his Glory. Wherefore
does man die? By the Justice of GOD; It being Just, that since man did abuse
his life, it should be taken from him. Wherefore are the good afflicted by
sickness, or any other way? Because since they have been formerly guilty of
some sins, the Justice of GOD so orders it, that they should be rather
corrected for them in this temporal life, then in the other which is Eternal.
Wherefore on the other hand does good oftentimes befall the wicked here below?
By the goodness of GOD, who sweetly invites them to his love, or also by his
Justice, who will give them in this life the recompense of any little good they
may have done in it; Whereas in the other life they shall be Eternally punished
for the sins in which they have lived without forsaking them; And so as to all
other things, even the most material and visible. We must make them understand,
for example, that wars fall out, because that GOD is Just, and that men and
their wickedness deserve to be punished; We must tell them that the fire is
warm, by the reason that GOD is good, and that knowing that man has need of
heat, that he may live, he has by his goodness given him the fire with such a
quality, that the fire burns and causes pain, by the Justice of GOD, who makes
use of this creature, as a Rod for the chastising of men who have sinned; And
as to moral things we ought to do the same, and tell them for instance, that we
must obey our Parents and Superiors in this and in that, because it is the will
of GOD: That we must not value our selves, nor desire that others should esteem
us, because GOD only deserves that, as being only Wise, and only good and that
we are but Weakness, but ignorance, but folly and wickedness of our selves,
that we must not wish nor render evil to those who do evil to us, because GOD
wills that we should do as he does who always does us good, and even then when
we offend him, that we must not disesteem, Judge nor dishonor our Neighbor,
because GOD alone will be his judge, and that it is his Will that we should
love others as our selves, that we are too ignorant to know the hearts of
others, and too perverse to Judge favorably of them, or without passion, and
so of the rest.

40. The happy advantages of this Method.
. 40 If we did employ every day some moments, to exercise, after this manner,
the reason of young Ones, we would very soon accustom them to see GOD in every
thing, to have him always before their eyes, and to walk continually as in his
presence. There is nothing in this World, whether Divine, Humane, Natural or
Political, Histories, whether Sacred or profane, whereof we might not very
easily make them reduce all the causes, and all the particular events with
their reasons to these admirable Principles of the Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
truth, Justice, Felicity, Glory, Holiness, and Will of GOD, and to the
weakness, ignorance, inconstancy, and malignitie of Man.

This, besides that, it would render GOD always present to us, would moreover
wonderfully serve to rectify reason after a most solid and saving manner,
providing that we did it, imploring with sincerity and humility, the Grace and
Blessing of GOD.

We might begin to make some Essay of it on an History of the Scripture; For
instance, on the History of the selling of Joseph, which is in the Book of
Genesis, or on some Historical Chapter of the Gospel.

. 41. III. Since the Imagiination, 41. III. The imaginatione of Young Ones must
be early improven.
as well as the Memory, is that which has most strength, and most activitie
in Young Ones, we shall do well to improve them very soon; that by this way
also, we may communicate unto them as much of the knowledge of the things of
their Salvation as is possible, and as they are then capable of.

42. A necessary caution. All the notices of Divine things, which we receive
by the imagination are but very dark and imperfect images.
. 42. But it is good to let them understand before hand, that all the knowledge
they shall acquire after this manner, is but very gross and very obscure
Pictures of Divine things, whereof they do not know by that the hundred
thousandth part, not even the least part as realie it is in it self, because
that the things of GOD have by millions of times more perfections then we are
able to comprehend of them, until that in process of time, and after that we
have constantly prayed unto GOD, and done his will, he dispel and chase away
our gross and dull way of knowing, and then make us see the pure beauty of his
truth.

This shall hinder these little Spirits from curuing their first thoughts unto
obstinate prejudices; and it will dispose them to teachableness, and to the
expectation of the Light of GOD.

. 43. 43. This may be exercised in Young Ones three ways. 1 By reading, and
leting them see the resemblances of Sacred histories.
We may exercise their minds in this respect. 1. By reading, and even by the
sight of some representations of the Histories of the Holy Scripture, to the
end that so their memory, and their imagination may be filled, with Holy
Images.

And we must at the same time accustom them to reduce that which they shall
read or see, at least the principal heads, to the Divine principles which we
have already recommended.

. 44. 2. By the explication of the Creed, 44. 2. By acquainting them with the
importance and meaning of the Belief.
which they ought to learn by heart, and on which we ought to discourse with
them according to their capacity. 1. Of GOD the Father and the Creator, of
his Perfections, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and the rest, of his Works, as well
Spiritual as Corporal, as well these that are dureable and Eternal, as these
that are Temporal and transient. 2. Of GOD Incarnat, or of the Son of GOD,
JESUS CHRIST, of his works which concern our redemption, And 3. of the Holy
Spirit, whose works regard the restitution of man to his first Estate.

45. Where three things must be recommended to their notices.
. 45. And on this head it will be profitable to oblige them to remarke two or
three things of great importance.

1. GODS Gracious designs and conduct with respect to man both in his Creation
and Redemption, which is the substance of the whole.
One is, that all that is in the Creed does issue and result in this principle,
Viz. that GOD the Almighty, and the Creator of all things did make man, to the
end that man turning all his desires, and his will toward his GOD, GOD should
fill his mind with his Divine knowledge, and his Soul with His Joy and with His
Felicity and Eternal Glory, but man having turned away his desire and his will
from GOD, and so having rendered his mind ignorant, and his Soul unhappy and
miserable for Eternity, GOD did assume our humane nature, and live and die
amongst us, not only to merit for us the pardon of our wickedness, and the
Divine Grace, but also to demonstrate unto us by his Doctrine, and by the
examples of his Life, of his Death, and of his Resurrection, how we ought to
renounce our evil desires, to forsake and make to cease and die our own will,
and to resume new and Divine desires, a will Holy and living unto GOD, the
which the Holy Spirit imparts unto the soul, together with an illuminated
Understanding, and a Divine Peace and Joy, whereby we are reunited with all
that which is Holy, as well on Earth as in Heaven, enjoying in this Holy
Society and Communion, the Spiritual Grace and benefits of JESUS CHRIST here
in time, to the end, that after the death of the body, and then after its
Resurrection, we may live together Eternalie and Gloriously with GOD.

. 46. 2. A second thing which we ought to oblige them particularly to remember,
46. 2. Another thing they must be made seriously to observe, is the
conversation of Jesus Christ in our humanity as designed for our imitation.
is how JESUS CHRIST in His Birth, in His Actions, in His Life, and His Death,
has managed and conducted the faculties of his Soul, and particularly his
desires and his Will, as well in turning them from evil, from the natural
inclinations of our mortal humanity, from the esteem of himself from the
search of pleasures, of the commodities and good things of this World, by self
denial, by disgrace, by lowness, by poverty, by sufferings and an unrepining
acquiescence in all, as in turning and yielding unto GOD these same Desires and
will of his, not desiring any thing but GOD, doing nothing but his Divine will
in every thing, and adhering always to him by praises, and continual Prayer,
by which his Understanding obtained all the Divine Lights which he demanded of
his Father, in whose good pleasure he also placed all his Joy.

47. They must be taught that the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost mentioned
in the Belief are but one GOD, and that this Glorious mystry is
incomprehensible.
. 47. We may in the third place, on the subject of the Holy Trinity, tell them
in a few words, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, whereof mention
is made in the Belief, and in the Scripture, are not but One only and the same
GOD, as in us (to give some resemblance of this great Mystrie) the desire, the
understanding, and the Joy or pleasure of the Soul, are but one only Soul and
not three. That the difference that is among them, does not hinder the Unity of
the Divine Nature, which is the same, and one in all, but that this difference
is such in GOD, that no reason nor humane light neither can, nor ought to
endeavor to comprehend it; That we must believe it with reverence on the
Testimony of the word of GOD, without knowing it otherwise waiting until it
please GOD to make us see something of it that will be more clear, whether in
this life or the other, and in the mean time, contenting our selves to
represent unto us according to our weak capacity, GOD the Father as the Author
of all good things, the Father and Just Judge of our Souls; GOD the Son as the
Redeemer of the World, and the inlightener of our Souls, that are ignorant and
fallen into darkness, and the Holy Spirit as GOD the Sanctifier of hearts and
filling with the love of GOD the Souls which had been corrupted by selflove,
and by sin: Or yet moreover, GOD the Father as good, and the principle of
goodness, who has Created all things by the communication of his goodness: GOD
the Son as Just, and the principle of Justice, who was incarnat to render us
Just, who were made unjust by sin. GOD the Holy Ghost as the principle of
Truth, who opens, and who illuminates the mind, that it may comprehend the
truth of Spiritual and Divine things.

48. What it is to know the Holy Trinity in a Divine and saving maneer.
[. 48. In fine, they ought to be made remember on this occasion, that the true
knowledge of Divine things depends on the living operations of the Holy Spirit
in the inward man, as has been already asserted, and consequently, that the
knowledge of the Holy Trinity, to the end that it may be Divine and saving,
must be produced by him in us after the same manner; And such it shall
certainly be, if this knowledge issues in a living representation of the most
Holy Trinity (after the image of which we were likewise Created) as also if
the same knowledge terminates and results in the love and imitation of GOD, so
vigorously recommended by St. Paul, Be ye followers of GOD, as being his dear
Children, and walk in love even as CHRIST has loved us. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. For every
one that loves, says St. John, is born of GOD, and knows GOD; But he that
loves not, knows not GOD, (nor consequently the Holy Trinity) for GOD is
love, 1 John: 4.7, 8. So that, whosoever says that he knows JESUS CHRIST, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, says the
same Apostle, Chap 2. V. 4.

So then, an infallible mark that we truly know the Holy Trinity, and that we
confess savingly the Father, the Creator, the good and the powerful, is, when
we love him with fear, obedience and respect, when we confidently resign our
selves to his Power and divine providence, and when we represent, and follow
his Goodness toward all, and in every thing.

We know and confess savingly the Son the Redeemer, and the Just one, when we
live as being delivered by him from this present evil world. Gal: 1.4. And when
we give up our selves to the practice of Righteousness. 1 John: 2.29.

And we know and confess savingly, the Holy Spirit, the Sanctifier, and the
Spirit of Truth, when we give up our selves to Holiness, without which none
shall see (nor consequently ever know livingly) the LORD. Heb. 12.14. And when
we follow the truth in Love. Ephesians. 4.15.

Such a knowledge of the Holy Trinity as this is, is not an ideal operation of
our Humane Reason; but a true and real production of the Holy Spirit, since the
fruits of the Spirit, says St. Paul, are goodness, Righteousness and Truth.
Ephesians. 5.9.

But when we reject either all these things, or even some of them, we do then
in effect deny GOD and his Divine Trinity, which we do not confess, but with
the mouth only, or by some vain and dead acts of barren reason, so as the Devil
himself does; such says St. Paul, profess to know GOD (and the Holy Trinity)
but nevertheless they do effectually deny him by their works, Tit. 1.16.]

49. III. The imagination of Young Ones may be entertained with Emblems, and
their memory ought to be filled with the most necessary and Instructive places
of Scripture.
. 49. III. We must moreover reckon amongst the means of exercising the minds of
Young Ones with pleasure, the presenting them with Books of Spiritual Emblems,
such as these of Francis Querels. And for the memory, we cannot fill it with a
more precious Treasure then with selected portions of the Holy Scriptures,
particularly out of the Psalms of David, and the Proverbs of Solomon, the
Parables, and discourses of our Savior, and some obvious and remarkable
parcels out of the Epistles, and even out of the book of Ecclesiasticus, which
though it be Apocryphal, yet we would do well to make them not only often read
it, but also to learn it by heart, as being full of Divine, and very excellent
Morality.

. 50. III. Young Ones are so naturally carried and inclined to Joy, 50. Young
ones very inclinable to Joy. An account of the faculty of Rejoicing. The
ground of it very early and deplorably mistaken.
that one may say, that it is as it were the design and end of those little
Creatures; And if we narrowly mark it, we shall find that even all other men do
not propose to themselves any other aim but this in all their enterprises, and
in all their travels, Joy or the faculty of Rejoicing, is, if we may so call
it; the final and perfective faculty of our Souls, which in effect were made
for nothing else but to solace themselves in joy, in pleasure and contentment,
without which it is not possible for them to have any rest or ease.

But it is the misfortune and unhappiness of men, that placing at first their
Joy in that which is not solid, they do thereby commit from their very infancy
an error, which being continued shall make them infallibly lose Eternal Joy
and Blessedness.

51. 1. GOD only the true ground of rejoyceing and not our selves and any
perishable and worldly things. This Young Ones must timously be made sensible
of.
. 51. 1. It is most necessary to inculcat on Young Ones, as soon as ever it can
be done, that since men are miserable sinners, ignorant, weak, and such as
shall rot in the earth, and since all that which is in the world, is likewise
momentany, vain, and shall end by the fire, we must not place our Joy in any of
those things.

We must not then rejoice in pleasing men, or in being esteemed or praised by
them, in being well done to, well clothed, well provided for, and well
accommodat in all things; for all these things shall perish for ever, and all
the Joys of this World shall terminat and end in a sadness which shall be so
much the more sensibly afflicting, as these Joys have been more sensibly
relished, and as we have set our hearts more passionatly on them.

But since that GOD alone is Great, Eternal Good, and the Author of all Good,
we must not rejoice in any thing but in him only, in his only Will, and in
doing of that only Wise, only Good, and only Eternal and Durable Will.

. 52. 52. Certain grounds of rejoiceing to be inculcated on Young Ones.
We must therefore betimes excite Young Ones to rejoice in God, and in His Holy
Will, For instance;

1. With respect to God, let them rejoice in this namely, that they have an
Eternal and Almighty God to be their Father, who did make them with design to
fill them with a Divine and Eternal Joy, if they will do his Holy Will, if they
will love Him and obey Him, and not love the honor, the goods, nor the
pleasures of this World, which shall last but a little time.

Let them rejoice in this, that this GOD is without beginning and without end,
incomprehensible, and more glorious then we are able to think; that he can do
all things, that he does all things, that he is only Wise to teach us well, and
to govern us well, that he is Just, that he is Good, and a continual Spring of
all good things, that he is Faithful in his promises of Eternal Life, that he
is happy and glorious in himself.

Let them rejoice moreover in this, that God only deserves to be desired,
Known, Esteemed, Loved, Praised, and Glorified for ever.

Let them rejoice in this, that GOD has assumed our Nature, that he is become
our Brother; and that he will take us for ever with himself unto his holy
Fellowship in Heaven, and that even in this World he will come and dwell in our
hearts, if we desire him and do His Will.

Let them praise him and thank him for His Goodness, as well as for the
knowledge which they have of it, and the Joy which they have in it.

53. 2. They must be taught to rejeice when any thing is piously done, whither
by themselve or by others, as also when they suffer and are reproached and
disgraced.
. 53. 2. By the same mean and from the principles we shall make them easily
understand that when any thing is done according to the Will of GOD, whither by
our selves or by others, we ought to rejoice at it, as when our desires, and
our minds are formed and managed after the manner I have alalready declared,
and whereof it will be profitable to let them see an Application in particular
instances. And that on the contrar, when any thing is done by Man's own will,
and according to it, instead of rejoicing at it, we should be sad and grieved
at it.

For this reason it is that we ought to be sensibly afflicted for; and very
deeply bewail the sins committed against God, whether by our selves or by
others, since when we sin, we follow our own wills in a disregard and rejection
of the Will of God.

Further when Men do esteem us, and when they praise us; if we were Wise, we
would be troubled at it, and we would say to God, LORD, who art only good, and
the cause of all good, it is Thou alone who ought to be praised; and it is a
shameful robbery in the miserable creature, to desire to take to it self that
Esteem, and that praise which do appertain but to Thee alone.

On the other hand, when we are despised and undervalued, or when any does us
any injury, or when we have not to our full content the things which we
desire, we ought to rejoice at all these in our hearts, taking them as being so
dispensed to us by the hand of our Heavenly Father, and be content with them,
and say unto GOD LORD, I deserve nothing but reproaches, sorrows and
destitution, when I have these I have that which in justice belongs to me,
and therefore I rejoice that thy Divine Justice is thus manifested in me. Even
I give thee thanks, and I desire no less to rejoice in this, that thy holy will
is accomplished in me after this manner, for it is thy will that we should be
like to JESUS CHRIST; Now JESUS CHRIST has been despised in this World, he
has been ill treated in it, rejected, callumniated, injuried, hated, and
persecuted, he had not his ease nor his pleasure in it, but he lived in it in
great want, in shame and in pain. Give me the grace and the strength to follow
him with Joy and courage, and by little and little as occasion shall offer it
self, since that St. Paul says, If we suffer with him, we shall also Reign
with him. 1 Timothy 2.12.

[. 54. 54. The use of the faculty of Joy with respect to the particulars
immediately preceding illustrated by a comparison.
This use of the faculty of Rejocing may be very palpably made evident to
Children by this similitude; That as a sick person does very wisely when he
takes with joy an approved cure, although very bitter, because that being
prescribed by askilful and wise Physician, it certainly procures the health of
the body; Just so do we very wisely, and as we ought, when we receive with joy
all the treatments which GOD dispenses unto us, how bitter so ever they may
appear; Because they are ordered us by the most wise and charitable Physician
of our Souls, which by the use of these excellent prescripts do recover
assuredly, not only their health, but a Life Eternally Happy; And as on the
other hand a sick person would act very foolishly, if he pleased himself in
making use of whatever is agreeable to his gust and relish, since by so doing
he would not only increase his distemper, but also procure death; Even so it is
unaccountable folly in sinners, to make use of these things with joy, which
please their corrupted will, and their sensuality, since at the close and
upshot they can gather no other fruits of them, but their perdition and eternal
death, according to that word of St. Paul, that the inclination and will, or
gust of the flesh is the Death of the Soul. Romans 8.6.]

55. III. Innocent divertisement must be allowed Young Ones, but with two
cautions.
. 55. III. But since it is impossible to suppress in Young Ones a thousand and
a thousand acts of joy; which they bring forth at every turn on the account of
natural things, which do agreeably flatter our senses, and since it is even
sometimes necessary to allow them something which may divert and recreate them,
it will be profitable here to observe two things.

56. 1. That they must be made to acknowledge GOD to be the principal Author
and Bestower of whatever they receive, and to thank him for it.
. 56. 1. One is, that when Young Ones do rejoice whether on the account of some
gift which has been bestowed on them, and which regards their meat or their
clothes, or on the account of some other thing that is acceptable, unto them,
we must be sure to make them sensible, that all this is created by GOD, and
that it comes from him, to the end that they may thank Him for it, that they
may thank that GOD has a thousand and a thousand times more and more excellent
things to give such as love him, and obey him, and are ready for the love of
him to quite all these little things, when they shall know that it is his will
so to do.

. 57. 2. The other thing is, 57. 2. To be infinitely tonder of making these
objects, or whtaever may gratify their corrupt inclinations to be the ground
of their joy.
that we ought to be ware as we would be of death, to awaken the Joy of Young
Ones, and the motions of pleasure in their tender heart by objects of this
nature, in promising and presenting these unto them, in praising and valuing
them, and in exciting them to take, relish, and rejoice in these things, so as
people commonly do by means of sweet meats and fine clothes, of some pieces of
Gold or Silver, or some pleasing thing which we let them see, and even by a
certain allowance which we give them sometimes, when they are fashions, to
discharge some strokes of vengeance even on inanimat things, to the end that
their anger or their hatred may flee over, and that so they may become well
pleased. In which people do that spiritually, for which God reproaches the Jews
in the Psalms, That they offered in Sacrifice th^^ Sons and their Daughters to
devils. Psalm 106.

58. 3. Particularly the love of money is to be suppressed in them, of which
they must be taught not to desire more then serves their necessities, and
employ what is over in pious and charitable uses.
. 58. 3. We must in particular, take special care to hinder the love of money
from springing up, and growing in Children; this is at present the God of the
World, the getting and possession of which, all make the principal design and
end they level at, and in which they make their happiness, welfare and joy to
consist: Which is an Idolatry as damnable, and as pernicious as that of the
Heathens. We must make them understand, that Money (which would be but of
little or no value in the World if Charity did live in it, whereas no^ it is
banished from it) is but a low and poor mean to procure from the people of the
World, somethings necessary to our life, that we must not desire any more of
it, then what serves our necessities. That GOD to whom it appertains, as all
other things do, and to whom we must make an account of it, giving us leave to
serve our selves of it for our necessity, wills that the rest should be for the
poor and for his Glory. And in stead of accustoming to heap up little
treasures, we must Incline and prompt them, now and then, to give alms unto the
poor themselves, out of any thing they have, as also to buy some useful thing,
or some book of piety for their instruction, and to rejoice in this good use
they make of what they have since it has for its end the Glory of God; Out of
which it is not reasonable that any should rejoice.

. 59. 59. GOD endued the Soul with the faculty of rejoicing, that it might be
fixed on Himself.
The faculty of Joy and of pleasure has been made for GOD, Rejoice in the
LORD evermore, says St. Paul, Phil. 4.4. And to that same purpose very often
the Holy Psalmist, particularly, Psalm: 37.4. Delight thy self in the LORD, and
He will give thee the desire of thine heart.

60. The abuse of our Joy, with respect to Divine and Spiritual Things to be
prevented, and how
[. 60. In fine, Since it is very possible for us to make an ill use of our Joy,
in Divine and Spiritual Things, and since it is not meet to suffer the Seeds
of Security to be sown, and spring up in the Hearts of Young Ones from their
tender years, let us endeavor to discover in a manner suited to their
Capacity, That is, by an easy and significant Comparison, how they ought to
carry in this Affair.

We must consider GOD and His Grace, under the notion of a vast Treasure, and
remark how a Man would do with a Treasure in different Circumstances and
Rencounters.

When one possesses an immense Treasure fully, and without danger of losing it
any more, his Joy is then wholly pure and perfect. This it is, that the Joys of
the Blessed are, since they possess GOD after this manner, that is without any
fear or danger of ever losing Him.

But when one does possess such a^ Treasure but imperfectly, and that every
moment he may lose it, as well by the malice of an infinity of most cunning
and perpetually restless enemies, as by his own Actions, by his negligence, and
by his presumption, it is evident that the Joy which one has in these
Circumstances, ought to be tempered with a most serious Fear. This is it, which
even the best must do during this Life, with respect to the Treasure of Divine
Grace. Hence St. Paul exhorting the Saints of Philippi to rejoice in the LORD,
does with the same breath enjoin them, To work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling, Phil: 2.12. And St. Peter having commended in those who had a
firm and steadie Faith in Jesus Christ, That they rejoiced in Him with Joy
unspeakable, represents unto them, that since he whom they invock as their
Father, shall also be their Judge, and will tender unto them, even as to all
others, according to their works, and without having respect to the difference
of persons, they ought therefore to live in fear, during the time that they
sojourn on earth, 1 Pet: 1.17. And the Holy Ghost says on the same head, That,
Blessed is he who fears always, Prove: 25.14.

But if we, after having lost this great Treasure by our own fault, do see and
possess nothing in its room, but poverty and miseries, but that nevertheless a
promise should be made to us of having it again restored, providing that we be
sensibly touched with its loss, and that afterward we do manage our selves
well in every thing that shall be entrusted to us, there is then indeed very
good Reason to rejoice in this Hope, though in the mean time we ought not to be
less afflicted with the fault, and with the loss of the time past, and with the
present misery and desolation: Neither ought we to be without a Holy Fear,
with respect to the time to come, from the consideration of our own weakness
and skillessless to govern our selves well; This is it, that we must still do
with respect to GOD and His Divine Graces. David says, that when he thought on
his sins and that he had lost his GOD, he did nothing but lament and weep both
day and night, Psalm: 6.32.38.42. etc. And GOD protests that He will not
communicate himself to any, but to those who shall have an Afflicted Heart for
having lost him, a contrite Spirit for having offended Him, and who tremble at
His Words, fearing least they should not continue faithful to them. To this man
(says he) will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and
trembles at my Word, Isa: 66.2. And Jesus Christ says very expressly that
Consolation shall be given to those that Weep, (namely for their own sins, and
for the sins of others) and he pronounces them Blessed, Math: 5.5.

But when without these wholesome Precautions we would have nothing but
feelings of Joy and Gladness, this Joy becomes then easily the Nest of
Self-love, the ground of Self-satisfaction, and the intertainment of a
Blindness, which hiding from us the greatness of our corruption, hinders us
from making inquiry after its cure, and which, makes us carnally presume, that
we possess the Divine Riches, because that we persuade our selves that we have
them, though notwithstanding we are far removed from them, as may be seen in
the Church of Loadicea, who being wholly content, with it self, and with its
own state, did say so presumptuously, I am rich and increased in goods, and
have lake of nothing; Whereas, alas! Jesus Christ in the mean time replies to
her, But thou know not that thou art wretched, miserable, poor, naked, and
blind, Rev: 3.17. And in his Gospel, Luke. 6.24. Denounces Woe, and Famine,
mourning, and tears against the Rich and the full (that is, who fancy
themselves to be such without any just ground) and against those inconsiderate
wretches, whom St. James calls upon to feel their miseries, to weep and to
lament, to change their Laughter into tears, and their Joys into sadness,
James 4.9 Without which the Wise Man says, That the hard and insensible heart
shall fall into mischief, Prove: 28.14.

And therefore it is an Effect of a Divine Wisdom, to know well how to temper
our Joy with fear, and our sadness with Joy. The Fear of the LORD is the
beginning of Wisdom, says David, and elsewhere, Happy is the man that fears
the LORD, and that delights greatly in His Commandments, Psalm: 111. and 112.
The same Prophet advises those, who would have either the Grace or the Glory of
Jesus Christ exhibited unto them, to set about it with a submission mingled
with Fear and with Joy, Serve the LORD with Fear and rejoice with Trembling,
Psalm: ^.11. Whereas the false Prophets do nothing else but speak indistinctly
and solely of Joy, Peace and Assurance, Ezekiel: 13.16, etc. 1 These: 5.3.

. 16. IV. 61. IV. the Divine Faculties of the Soul, are well ordered, action
easily and naturally follows, but it must not be suspended till that be done
since outward exercises have a good influence on the inward man.
When the Faculties of Understanding, Joy, and Desire are set Right, and well
fashioned, all the rest follows of its own accord. But since it is necessary
that we be active and doing, even before that the inward man be yet well
disposed, and that moreover the inward man is ordinarily aided by the Outward,
it is needful to have at hand some particular Rules for Action, and for the
Conduct and Mannagement of the Outward Conversation.

. 62. Our bodies and our life belonging of Right to GOD, 62. The General rule
of action laid down, seriously recommended and illustrated by some particular
instances.
we must dispose of them, not according to our own will, but according to his.

[Since our will is naturalie turned toward our selves, toward our
advantages, toward our Honor, and toward our pleasure, and therefore does
beget in us the mortal vices of avarice, Pride, and sensuality, (which obstruct
in us the operations of GOD, and Rob us of the Salvation of our Souls) we must
in order to root them up, practice self-denial in every thing, and we must be
at pains to accustom Children betimes, and as much as possibly we can, with the
Divine aid; to do every thing by a Spirit of Charity, and for the good of
others, by a Spirit of Humility, without design or desire that men should
esteem or Honor us, and by a Spirit of Penitence, without regarding our own
satisfaction whither of Soul or of Body, but aspiring after a conformity to
the Crucified JESUS, and dying in our own account on the Cross without any
consolation.

This is the true Spirit of the Christian Life and practice, and of true
Christianity, a Spirit wholly opposite to that of corrupted nature, by which
alas! Men suffer themselves to be drawn sweetly, and as it were laughing unto
Eternal perdition, without ever thinking on it.

The will of GOD is, that we should do nothing but in order to please him, His
pleasure is to be glorified by our Salvation. His Glory ought to be our
Sovereign, absolute and Universal end, and we ought to look on our Salvation as
a mean to advance this end of Blessing Praising and Glorifying for ever his
Divine Majesty.

The Glory of GOD is advanced in this life when we give place in our hearts to
the force and virtue of JESUS CHRIST, and when we suffer his Power and his
Energie to beget by us a great many Holy actions, for which we have Just ground
to Honor, Bless and Praise the Divine cause, (that is, the Power and the
Efficacy of GOD) whence such excellent things do issue, and which contains in
it self infinitely more of them. He who abides in me, says JESUS CHRIST, and in
whom I abide, brings forth much Fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. And
herein is my Father Glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, Jo. 15.5, 8. And
elsewhere, Let men see your good works, that they may Glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. Matt. 5 16.

This may and ought to be extended to all sorts of actions and things, because
whatever we do, ought to be done for the Glory of GOD, and because nothing can
be well done but in the Name, that is, by the Power, by the Blessing, and by
the Direction of JESUS CHRIST. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the Glory of GOD. 1. Cor. 10.31. And whatsover ye do, in word or in
deed, do all in the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Col. 3.17.

Thus, for instance, we eat and drink for the Glory of GOD, and in the Name of
JESUS CHRIST, when we do it from a Principle, and in a way communicate and
taught us by him, and which prompts us to say from our very "heart Suffer me
not, O LORD! To eat and drink only as do the Beasts, by a mere brutal appetite,
and for a life only natural; And much less, in following the disorders of our
corrupted natures: But grant that by the Power, and by the direction of the
Holy Spirit of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, I may eat and drink according to thine
appointment, so much as is necessary for the maintaining of a life which I will
employ in loving thee, in blessing thee, and in obeying thee, in following by
thy grace the life of our Redeemer.

Just so we speak to the Glory of GOD, and in the Name of JESUS CHRIST, when we
seek from him, and receive from him, the force and grace, to say nothing but
what is regulated by him, but what is necessary, and what is proper to suggest
good thoughts to men, and to turn them from evil and vain things.

In a word, we do all in the Name of Jesus Christ, and to the Glory of GOD,
when having sought before all things, the Divine Grace and Virtue of Jesus
Christ, we do by it, and according to the Will of GOD, from a Divine Motive,
and to a Divine End, whatsoever we have to do, following that admirable lesson
of St. Peter. Let every one of you according as he has received the Grace and
Gift of GOD, make use of it for the Good of others, as being faithful
dispensers of the manifold Grace of GOD. If any man speak, let him do it as
delivering words flowing from the Virtue of GOD, if any one does service to
others, let him do it as acting by the Power which GOD gives: To the end that
in every thing we do, God may be glorified by Jesus Christ, to whom be Praise,
and Dominion for ever and ever. 1 Pet. 4.10.11.]

. 63. The Will of GOD is marked in his Commandments, 63. The Will of GOD, which
is the Rule of our Obedience, is made known to us on his Precepts, which must
be taught Young Ones first in the literal and then in the more Sublime and
Spiritual Import of them.
which we must cause Young Ones learn, and which we must explain unto them at
first according to the Letters and as their Capacities will allow; And
afterward, when they are capable of it, we must make them understand, that the
Law being Spiritual, God by his Commands, enjoins us.

1. That we love nothing but Himself alone, and for His sake only.

2. That we do not think that GOD is like to the thoughts and the imaginations,
that our dark reason and judgment make us apprehend of him: Nor that the way
of serving and pleasing of him, is the work of our own will, and of our own
fancy.

3. That we do not make use of his Name, of his Covenant, of his Knowledge, of
his Grace, of being the Children of GOD, in vain, and without profiting by
them, and bringing foth Fruits agreeable to them, and that we take head that we
do not cloak our self will our passions, our designs, our carnal ways, and even
our wickedness and crimes under the sacred prete^ts of the Name of GOD, of His
Truth, of His Justice, of His Glory, and of his Interest.

4. That we must cease laboring, acting and living by our own will, to the End
that GOD may Labor, and Work, and Live in us and by us.

5. That we ought to Honor the Word, the Will, and the good Inspirations of
GOD, by which He would beget us Spiritually and make us new Creatures, who may
live long on the Land which He shall give us, that is, enjoy Life Eternal.

6. That we ought not to Kill in us the Image of GOD, take away the spiritual
Life from our Souls by our sins, nor kill the Soul of our neighbors by the
examples of an Heathenish, worldly and wicked life.

7. That we ought not to serve our selves of any creature for mere pleasure
without necessity, and without having allowance from the will of GOD: This is
that which constitutes the Whooredom of of the heart. Jam: 4.3, 4.

8. That we ought not to steal from GOD (to whom every thing does appertain)
either our affections, or our life, or our time, or goods, or labor, in
employing them any other way then for him.

9. That of our selves, and without the Light of GOD we ought not to Judge of
any person: For otherwise being as we are in darkness, we will Judge falsely,
and sin grivously against GOD.

10. That being content with what we have, we ought not to desire any more; for
every desire of having more is that covetousness which is forbidden.

64. Though what the Law commands be impossible to corrupted nature, yet the
Spirit of Jesus makes in an easy yoke.
. 64. And in fine, although that which the Law requires, be impossible to the
flesh, because of sin, which has weakened it, nevertheless when GOD gives the
Good Spirit of Jesus Christ to a Soul, it does then by his assistance, or
rather the Spirit of Jesus Christ does then in that soul, all that the Law
requires; Without doing which, none can as yet pretend to the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, neither does any as yet belong to him as his Child, nor as justified by
him. Rom: 8.3, 4, 9. Nor as having true faith, which does not make void the
Law, but establish it, Rom: 3.30. By which also we keep the Commandments of GOD
in overcoming the World. Joh: 5.3, 4. And which in fine, admits us into a
communion with GOD in the Light, and into a state, out of which we cannot
partake in the merits of Jesus Christ, and of his Death: Since, If we say than
we have fellowship with GOD, and yet walk in darkness we lie, and do not the
truth: But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship
one with another, and then the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from
all sin, says St. John. 1 John. 1.6, 7.

. 65. The Will of GOD, as to that we must practice, 65. Portions of Scripture
particularized, which contain the Gospel Law, the perusal whereof must be
specially recommended to young ones.
is also set down very particularly, and in brief in the 5, 6, and 7 Chap: of
St. Mat: And in the 13, 14, 15, and 16 of St. John, and in the first Epistle of
St. John, and St. Peter. All which must be made very familiar to young ones,
together with the great Psalm of David, by the reading one Section, whereof, we
may always shut up the reading of the mentioned portions of Holy Scripture. To
these we may also join Thomas a Kempis.

[. 66. All the Laws of GOD which are so wholesome, 66. An Abridgment, or short
sum of the Divine Laws, which must be very carefully imprinted on the hearts
of Young Ones.
and so admirable, whereof David speaks so often with so much love and
admiration, which all the Scripture recommends as the source of life, as the
light of the heart, as the Treasure of Souls, which Jesus Christ calls Eternal
Life Joh: 12.50. And which, in fine, the Holy Spirit promised, Writes in the
heart where he dwells, say all the Laws of GOD may be reduced to these four.

1. To Love GOD.

2. To Love Jesus Christ Crucified, (that is, not only himself, but also his
Cross and his Tribulations, the fellowship of his Afflictions, conformity to
his Death, and the fulfilling of what is behind of his Sufferings in our flesh.
1 Cor: 2.2. Phil: 3.10. Col: 1.24.)

3. To love our neighbor.

4. And to hate our selves.

The whole of our duty is truly comprehended under these few heads; Therefore
it is that we must take pains to inspire the Veneration, and love of them into
the hearts of Children, and so to say into the Marrow of their bones from their
tender years, and to animate them thereto by Prayer, by meditation, and by the
daily reading of that incompareable Psalms of David, which has been already
mentioned; as also by the application of those excellent words of his in the 19
Psalm; The Law of the Lord (the Law of the love of God, and of the Cross of
Jesus Christ, the love of our Neighbor, and the hatred of self:) This
admirable Law when it is imprinted on the Heart by the Holy Ghost, Is a Law
that is entire and perfect, and converts the Soul. The Testimony of the Lord is
sure, and makes the simple, even little Children wise. The Commandments of God
are right, rejoicing the Heart. The Statutes of the Lord are pure, and they
enlighten the eyes of our soul. The fear of the Lord is the source of Holiness,
it is the only good that shall endure for ever. The Judgment of the LORD are
true and Righteous altogether, more are they to be desired than Gold, yea then
much fine Gold, sweeter also then Honey, and the Honeycomb, By them is thy
servant enlightened, and in keeping of them is a great reward.]

[. 67. It will be also very profitable, 67. Children must be put in mind of
the Baptismal Covenant, as also of the advantages and duties of it.
and even necessary to represent unto Children, that at their Baptism they
entered into a Covenant with GOD, who on His part has promised to be their
GOD, that is to say, to give himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost unto them,
with all his good things, and with all his graces, whereof then they have
received the first fruits, which they should take care not to loose by their
sins; and by an Antichristian conversation, especially considering that they
also on their part have reciprocally promised unto GOD to be entirely his, and
to give and consecrate unto him for ever their Souls and their bodies, their
desires, and their understandings, their pleasures, and their Joys, their
actions, and their whole life, together with a filial obedience to all the
expressions of his most Holy will, and an absolute and full renounciation of
self, and sin of the Devil and the World, thus ratifieing in substance all
those things which we have hitherto insisted on, and which none can neglect
without renouncing his Baptism and Christianity.]

. 68. I suppose that all the World knows well enough the most common rules
concerning what Young Ones ought to practice with respect to God, 68. What
Young Ones must practice
their Parents, their Neighbors and themselves, things which ought to be
inculcat very carefully on them, by reason that such is the Will of God; As,

. 69. 1. With regard to God. 69. 1. With respect to God.


[To live and to act as being always in the presence of God, who together with
all his Holy Angels, still looks on us, and who will make to come into his
Judgment whatsoever we have done, spoke or thought, whether Good or evil, in
order to be rewarded or punished for it for ever.]

To pray unto God orderly Evening and Morning, and before Meals.

To make them often lift up their heart to God, particularly before any labor
or employment in order to obtain his Assistance and Blessing; and after they
have finished their work, to return Thanks to God for it; and offer it up to
Him, and to His Glory.

To hear with respect and Attention the Divine Truths, whether in private, or
at Church, without thinking that they have sufficiently discharged their Duty
to God, for having simply heard them, or retained them in their Memories, and
that therefore they ought to pray unto God that he would give the true
Understanding of them, and by the Operations of his Good Spirit quicken them,
so as to bring forth Fruit in an Humble, submissive, Obedient and simple heart.

70. 2. With respect to Parents and Superiors.
. 70, 2. With respect to Fathers and Mothers, and Superiors.

To pray unto God for them.

To love them with fear and reverence.

To obey them without murmuring, even in those things which do not please us,
and which are not evidently sins against God and his Commandments.

And to do nothing without their Knowledge and allowance.

71 1. With respect to their Neighbors
. 71. 3. With regard to their Neighbors, and Play-fellows.

To pray also unto GOD for them;

To love them, and to wish Good to them as to themselves, and not to do unto
them but as they would that others should do unto them.

To believe them to be better then themselves, and not to prefer themselves to
any.

To live in peace with them, to forbear them, and never to revenge themselves,
either by desire or by injuries, or any other way, of the evil which they may
have met with from them; but heartily to pardon them, 72 4. with respect to
themselves
and even to pray unto GOD very particularly for them.

. 72. 4. With regard to themselves,

To have always a very mean opinion of themselves.

To eat only at appointed hours soberly, and of whatsoever is given them,
whither it be agreeable or disagreeable to them.

Not to desire either Pomp, or Plenty, and to be content with little.

To employ their time according to the Rules prescribed them, never being
without some work, idleness being the devils pillow.

To do whatever is recommended to them the best way they can.

Not to lie, nor disput, nor contradict, nor speak unprofitably, not to seek
for excuses when they have failed, but to be ready to confess ingenuously their
faults, and to beg pardon from GOD, from their Superiors, and from their
neighbors, to the end they may obtain the favor of God, who will never pardon
sins as long as they are excused.

73. How to manage the Reproves and Chastisements of Children, so as they may
tend to their Benefit and Instruction.
[. 73. Touching the reproofs and chastisements of Children, I suppose that
Parents, and others concerned are not ignorant that with respect to such as are
of a Docile, Peaceable, and Modest Temper, they must evidence more of Lenity
and Sweetness than of Severitie; And that on the contrary, they ought to
testify more of severity to those that are of a Fierce, Obstinate, and
mutinous Nature, setting them however understand, that it is only their wicked
qualities, and Dispositions which hinder, that they are not so much loved, as
otherwise they would be.

It is Equitable and Just to pardon Children faults which they have done,
without design by ignorance and without thinking to do evil; though in the mean
time, they should take occasion from these miscarriages, thus ignorantly and
undesignedly committed, to instruct them in, and to exhort them to their Duty:
But great care must be taken to punish such faults as they commit wilfully, and
knowing well that they do evil; as the faults of lying, of disobedience, of
stricking some body, and the like.

We must never chastise Children without letting them understand before hand,
as much as may be that they are to be blamed, that they have done that which
they knew ought not to be done, and that it is Just that they should be
punished for it, for their Good, and by the Love which we carry to them.

These Principles are well enough suited to their Capacity, namely. that evil
displeases GOD and Men, that it deserves punishment before GOD and before Men,
that if it were not punished, it would grow, and could not be curbed any more,
and it would be attended with Eternal Chastisements: That in order to hinder
this misery, and to rescue them from it by the Love which we bear to their
Souls, it is good to let them a little taste a chastisement, which is a hundred
thousand Millions of times less then that of the other Life: And having thus
represented these things unto them, to chastise them moderatly, without fearing
to make them weep, and to renew the Chastisement, when they reiterat the Crime,
Reasonable Chastisements are the effect of True Love, and two or three of these
given to a Child, who begins to contract ill habits, are capable to craze them;
Whereas if we spare them by a foolish and fond love, which is indeed rather a
cruel hatred, we shall weep with them for it Eternally.

But on the other hand, we must beware of Brutish, Passionat, and indiscreet
Chastisements, which are no less hurtful then too much Indulgence, and which
have no other effect but to render their Spirits froward and untractable, and
inspire them with horror, as well at the good to which we would constrain them
so cruelly, as at the persons, which they cannot hinder themselves from looking
on as their enemies

74. Children must be taught to praise GOD, when they do well, and not to take
the commendation of it to themselves.
. 74. When Children do well, and we give evidence of our being well pleased
thereat, it were far better to teach them to praise GOD for it, and to say to
Him, I thank Thee, O LORD, for vouchsafing me the grace to do well, without
Thee I cannot do any thing that is worth; then to praise themselves directly
for it, and that because of the danger there is by so doing, of inspiring them
with, and fortifying in them, self-love, self satisfaction, and pride.]

ss. 75. There are yet many other things both to be practiced toward them, 75.
Parents ought conscientiously to practice themselves what they recommend to
their Children.
and to be taught them, which they who lay to heart as they ought their
Education, may well observe and inculcate on them of themselves, or which they
may deduce from the Principles hitherto laid down, which Fathers and Mothers
ought themselves first of all to practice, as well for their own Salvation, as
for the Salvation of their Children, which ought to be as dear to them as their
own, and this consideration should incline them to seek from GOD without
ceasing, the Grace how to manage and govern becomingly, both themselves and
these that belong to them, and not to destroy by their Actions and by their
examples, that which they do no otherways recommend to their Children then by
words baffled and discredited by their own practices.

76. 45. The supposed impossibility or ridiculousness of the foregoing
directions refuted, and the misery of these Parents, who shall neglect them
briefly declared.
. 76. Perhaps these Precepts shall seem to the most part either imposible, or
ridiculous to be inculcated on and practiced by Children. They do not appear to
us impossible on any other account, but because we have not been from our
infancy trained up to them; if there had been no defect here, these Precepts
would appear unto us easiness it self. As for the imagined ridiculousness of
them, if there be any such thing in them, it is in that same sense, that the
Cross of Jesus Christ is foolishness, with respect to the Maxims of this world
which is the enemy of GOD, the wisdom whereof is foolishness before GOD; and
of which the Scripture says, Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses know ye not that
the friendship of the World is emnity with GOD? Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the World, is the enemy of GOD. Jam: 4.4. And pray consider of what
nature the Precepts are, which this Divine Word gives us on this head; Be not
conformed to this world. Rom: 12.2. Love not the world nor the things of the
World, if any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, For all
that which is in the World, the Lust of the eyes, the Lust of the flesh, and
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the World; And the World
passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of GOD abides
for ever. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. How unhappy then are they who educat their
Children according to the Rules of the world, and for the world, that they may
be mighty, Rich, well accomodate, and esteemed in the World, and that so they
may in end perish with the enemies of GOD, and with the World: These Parents
who thus train up their Children shall be accursed by them through all Eternity
in Hell, whither they have brought them, and which shall be common to them with
their Children, for having done as these miserable Israelits did of Old, who
sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters to Devils* and shed innocent blood,
even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they Sacrificed to
the Idols of Canaan.

77. The great happyness of such as shall train up their Children, according to
the maxims of Christianity.
. 77. But thrice happy are they, who despising the conduct and measures of the
Antichristian, and Diabolical World, shall make it their daily care to educate
and dress the precious Souls of their Children for Eternity, according to the
measures of the Holy Gospel, and Rules of the Cross of JESUS CHRIST: Such
Parents shall certainly be Blessed Eternally by their Children in Heaven, and
all together shall Bless the LORD for ever, who also shall Bless them all,
World without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Psalm 103.15, 16, 17, 18. As for Man his days are as Grass as a Flower of the
field, so he flourishes: For the wind passes over it, and it is gone and the
place thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto
Childrens Children to such as keep his Covenants; And to those that remember
his commandments to do them.
THE PRAYER OF RUSBROCHIUS, Translated from the LATIN.
O My GOD! O Sovereign Goodness, I beseech Thee by Thy Infinite Mercy, to
vouchsafe me the Grace to Love Thee with all my Heart, and above all things,
and also to love all Men of whatsoever State and Condition, whither Friends or
Enemies as my self. Give me a charitable and respectful Esteem for them, and do
not suffer me ever to judge nor to despise any Person, but that rather I may
desire to be despised and rejected my self by all the World.

Grant that I may never study to please Men, but to please Thee only; That I
may not fear to displease them, but to displease Thee: And O let it be my chief
and only Desire, to promove always Thy Honor, and to fulfill in all things Thy
most agreeable Will.

O most Amiable, and most Merciful Savior, hinder me from trusting to my self,
and from leaning to my own actions, and to my own conduct: And grant that I may
not trust in any thing but in Thee alone, and in Thy most Holy Merits; So as,
that placing all my Hope, and all my Confidence in these, I may notwithstanding
never neglect to do that which Thy Grace has enabled me to do.

Wound, O wound my Heart with the Darts of Thy Love, and deliver me from all
the inclinations of impure and deceitful Self-love: Enlighten my eyes, and
touch my Soul, in Order to give me the true Knowledge and Sense of Thy Love, of
Thy Mercy, of Thy Wisdom, and of Thy Power; As also of my own nothingness, of
my unbelief, of my darkness, of my folly, of my wickedness, of my misery, and
of my weakness.

O dearest Redeemer, do not suffer me ever to lose the memory of Thy Death and
Passion; But that I may make my recourse to it, as unto an assured Refuge, and
a Blessed Mean of approaching Thy Divine Majesty; And that I may look on Thy
Wounds as a Furnace of Love, where I may plunge and consume all the powers of
my Life, and of my Soul.

O Prince of Love, fill me so with Thy Love, that for the sake of this Divine
Love, I may be always ready to do, and to forsake all things: That for the
sake of Thy Love, all toil, and travel may be sweet and easy unto me, that in
fine, for the sake of this Holy Love, all the Creatures, all their Comforts,
all their Joys, and all their Recreations, may become as bitter and as
disagreeable to me, as they have been hitherto pleasing and acceptable; And
that hereafter I may as cheerfully submit to the want of them, as I do yet feel
a natural reluctance to deprive my self of them. Extinguish also, O my GOD, in
the Hearts of all Men, the Thoughts and Natural Inclinations which they may
have for me, and root out of my Heart the images both of them, and of all other
outward things.

Do not turn away from me, O Heavenly Father, any of these afflictions, crosses
and sufferings, which Thou pleases I should endure, and which Thy Wisdom shall
judge fit and useful to advance me toward Thee; But grant me the Grace, that
by every tribulation and by every adversity which may befall me, whither
directly from Thy Hand, or from Men as Thy Instruments, I may learn to
acknowledge and confess my self guilty, and that I may despise and condemn my
self.

But especially, O my dear Redeemer, I entreat that by the Merits of Thy Sacred
Wounds, and of Thy Death, by Thy Self, and by all that is in Thee, it may
please Thee to satisfy Thy Divine Father, for all the sins which I have ever
committed, and to supply all my past negligences and defects. And for the time
to come, grant me the Grace to have always before my eyes, and with a Holy
Fear, the hour of my Death, which is so uncertain; The rigor of Thy Judgment,
which is so terrible; The shortness of my Life, whereof alas I have already so
unprofitably, and for triffles, lost the far better part; And the infinite and
Eternal Punishments, which shall be inflicted on the wicked and sinners.

And grant in fine, O Infinite Bounty, that I may never, either seek, or find
peace or pleasure in any thing, but in Thy Self; And that Thou only may be
Eternally the Cause, and the Reason, and the Rule of my Conduct, and of all my
Actions, Amen.

FINIS.

