THE PRESBYTERY. A SATYR.
Turba gravis paci placidoque inimico quieti.
AS Alexanders hastened death did bring
Each of his Captains to be made a King,
Even so our Bishops ruins did prefer
Unto a Bishopric each Presbyter;
But the same dangers from their league arise,
As ever did from the others enmities;
Yet here they differ, the other did advance
By their own worth, these by their ignorance;
The Other were great before, these till their reign
Did first begin, were scarcely known for men;
The Other were fit to govern, so are these,
As fit as Milk-Maids to wear Harnesses:
Fine souls indeed! curdled of stench and dust,
Borne for to break poor Chambermaids that rust
For want of use, fine motly Prester-Johns,
Old Pharisees in new Editions;
Young Blew-cap Jesuits, Religions Dawes,
A Junto of Reformed Loyola's;
Good Pulpit-Mountebankes, who with one breath
Can either Quack a Spiritual Cure, or Death;
Antipodes of Rome, who though their feet
Seem contrary, yet in one Center meet;
Spruce Christian Muftyes, but that Muftyes be
Continued, these a severed quantity,
Who out of many Beads one Bracelet rise,
And (if they be not hanged up) make a noise;
Most holy Gegawes, which make Elders dance,
But you are struck by Scotch Musicians;
Rattles of th'Gospel, which so active be,
That deafen all the better Harmony:
Dodona's Grove, or whatsoever Knockes
Will say, yo'are nothing else but vocal blocks,
And yet from every trunck we almost see,
Arise an Evangelicke Mercury;
Things, which in nothing but their lies come near
The nature of the name they see me to bear;
Serious Jack-Puddings of Religion,
The Antimasque of Reformation;
The Phosphors of new light, those spots that run
(To stop, not clear the light) amidst the Sun;
Genera Friars, they (with submission) lie,
That say we'ave rooted out all Popery;
Their Capes preserve it, only that their hopes,
Aspire unto plurality of Popes:
That which poor Canterbury nere professed,
Is now made good by every Parish Priest,
Brave times indeed! alas whither are we hurled?
What universal madness shakes the world?
What is all space so empty, earth must come,
And mount aloft to fill a Vacuum?
Are our ears charmed, that now all sounds displease,
But a Scotch Bag-pipe? alas what days are these!
Wolsey might be a Deacon, and here con
A farther lesson of Ambition:
Nay, Machiavel, if he were now alive,
Would he but change Religion, might thrive;
Religion! alas it is a crazie frame,
And somewhat like the Synod, only name,
Which like the great Mogores renowned sway,
The most are pleased to mention, none obey,
Which like some glorious City ruined long,
Does only live in Paper and the Tongue.
Religion, which a blind man well might call
Immense, but one that is deaf, not find at all,
That which the world does generally disguise,
That stamp by which all knavery current is;
Art thou thy self, great Nymph? or else do some
Deflowre thee, nay force thee away from home,
And make thee do their drudgery? O spleen,
Could thou but rise as some lungs stretched ha been,
Thou might boil out more hot, then ere one brother
Could to pronounce damnation on another.
Erected snakes, could but my anger now
So far degenerate as stoop to you,
How could I thrash you and abuse you worse,
Then you your selves can a rich Poet curse,
Worse then you censure Usurers, when you look
On the lanke reckonings of an Easter Book:
Alas, how could I daube you, worse then ere
Hicks did his English Concordance besmeare;
Or a hot Monk could with mouth-engines work
Strange executions against the Turk?
But I Will be still, a County Mayor can soon
Quaffe all these vapors of Religion;
What? quaffe them say you; yes, they cannot be
Surcharged with too much Schoole-Divinitie;
They do not feed on Fathers, them they hate,
Both as a hard an undigested meat;
Nay, those that know them, intimately say,
They cannot Conjure by the Kabbala;
Nay, most oth' Patriarchs would be to seek,
To tell their new confession in Greek;
But they who want all weapons, will not strike,
But each prove a Rhetorical Vandike,
Worse then the running o'th'raines, which sense
Tells only evil in the consequence;
But this will be when The King their Sermons hears,
When Lesly reads, and Pryn regains his ears,
When Edwards, that destroying Amurath,
His Inquisitionary Swords shall sheath
That puny Hercules, who fiercely sweats,
To slay the Monsters he himself begets;
The English Cadmus, whose most conquering pen
Sowes Dragons teeth to raise up armed men,
Who like the Maid to the great Victor sent,
Makes poison now become his nourishment,
Who lest the growing Sectaries should not live,
Beats them like Walnut Trees to make them thrive,
That Church Lycurgus, who to stop the sins
Of waste and drunkenness, cut down the Vines,
That venerable son of fury, that
Makes modesty quite excommunicate,
Which in the Classick Ordinance must come in,
As numbered for the six and thirtieth sin,
By him you know the Brotherhood, this one
In time may make a Brotherhood alone:
But they are Planets that at distance run,
And Vines looks like the picture of the Sun.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year, 16^^


