A PILLAR ERECTED To the Memory of that Holy, Humble, and Faithful Servant of
Jesus Christ, Mr. Henry Iesse, who rested from his Labors upon the fourth day
of the seventh Month, 1663. In the Sixty Third Year of his Age.
IS Jesse Dead? How can this be resolved?
We grant you, the Compositum ^hat's dissolved.
But for his Soul, it lives among the blessed.
His Bodi's but asleep, and gone to rest.
If neither Soul, nor yet his Body dye,
Then Grave stand forth, and show thy Victory.
What though his eyes be closed, he dwells in Light,
And Death has only turned, his Faith, to Sight.
Death has but broke the Glass, that Refract rays
May be no more, the Vision of his Days,
But direct Beams, in that Caelestial Place,
Where Sa^^^^ ^^hold their Father, Face to Face
What though his Body, in the dust did drop,
It Is but to Raise it up, a Spirit'al Crop,
To make it fitter, for to Tune those Psalms,
Which Saints do Sing, that bear Triumphant Palms.
But if you will call this Sleep, a death, then say,
Jesse is gone to bed, till it be day,
Till Christ shall wake him, that he may put on,
Like Glorious robes to those, which clothes the Son.
And with him on his Throne, a Seat obtain,
When Crowned Saints, over the Earth shall Reign.
But what was Jesse? that so great a Throng,
Of Saints should Crowd, to Usher him Along
Unto his Bed; could no less serve the Turn,
To draw the Curtains, round about his Urne,
But such a Number, which did seem to be
About his Hearse, like to a Prodigy.
Why Jesse he was one, that loved them all,
And had this Love repaid, at's Funeral.
As in his Heart, he had a General Love,
For every one, whose birth was from above,
So with a General Love, he is compast round,
When he like Seed, is cast into the Ground.
His short Afflictions, which on Earth have bin,
Such weighty Glory, have wrought out for him,
That though in largeness, could our hearts arise,
Unto the sand, which on the Seashore lies,
Yet could we not conceive, much less Declare
^
His Fight of Faith is fought, ev(...)
And he has laid hold, on Eternal Life.
The Conflict's over, and the Race is Run,
The Gole is Touched, and the Prize is Won.
His Course is finished, he the Faith did keep,
And having done his Work, is fallen asleep.
Then be ye Jesse's Follow'rs, as ye see,
Jesse did follow Christ, so follow ye,
That when with Jesse, you shall end your Days,
You may have naught to do, but sing forth Praise,
And look on Death, which is the King of Fears,
But as a Bridge, over this Vale of Tears,
To Land you on those Banks, along whose side,
Rivers of Pleasure, evermore do Glide.
And at the Last Day, may be found to stand,
With Henry Jesse at our Lords Right Hand.
HIS EPITAPH.
Hare Lies One, whom if thou knew'st, can tell,
He Lived in Heaven whilst he on Earth did dwell.
And though to Heaven he now Translated be,
Yet still (...) Liv^ on Earth, and Speaks to Thee.
London* Printed in the Year 16^^*


