A PANEGYRIC, on His Grace the Duke of ALBEMARLE, Installed CHANCELLOR of the
UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE, May the 11th. 1682. 11. May. 1682.
I.
A Midst the Noisy Crowds of Jealous Fears,
Which trouble less our Eyes than Ears,
And with much Labor would in us advance
The only Art of Easy Ignorance;
Amidst the dark Designs of Factions Pride,
Ceasing with wonted Bravery to Ride
In Popularity's now-ebbing Tide;
What Blessed Omen this?
What Glorious Hero Strikes our sight,
Causing at once in us a Dazzling Bliss,
And opening our Eyes with Heavenly light,
(For surely such from Heaven derived is.)
To see and know our Happiness,
To see, Old Time repair his Force,
And make the Learned years renew their Course:
While Pens snatched from his VVings do try,
To change him to Eternity;
By Praising ALBEMARLES Great name,
And Damning all Rebellion to Suffer Fame.
II.
No more shall the Phanatique Python Stain
Parnassus with his Venom over again,
By Thee, the great Apollo, Slain.
No more the Athenian Statutes shall be Writ,
In Baleful Characters of Humane Blond:
Nor shall Dull Rebels prove their only Wit,
Which is to Destroy It.
Now the Town's safe, not by a Wall of VVood;
But through Trin. Coll.
Thy Bounty Arts Securly sit
On wise Seth's Columns to Resist the Flood.
Thou come a Patron and a Founder too,
And make those Stately Structures show;
Learning is no such Clownish Thing,
But may be sit, the Polit Court of the most Serene King.
III.
Arts, which for many Ages have been Lost,
And Buried in the Grave of Destiny,
Shall now Revived be
Out of their Dead Obscurity,
And Fate shall find her Jurisdiction Crossed.
Under Thy Influence, and to our Surprise
More Fruitful Vaticans shall Arise:
And we shall view in Sciences large Sphere
Many a new Star, not before seen there:
No End in that vast Circle shall appear.
And, tho in these Benighted times
Knowledge and Wit may only lead to Crimes,
A more Illustrious day now flows from Thee,
Wherein Restored is true Learned Loyalty,
Marching in Goodly Pride and Goodly Company.
IV.
See, see the God-like Son of Restoration,
Two greatest Blessings, which Man ever sought,
Or a Forgiving God ever brought
To a Distressed and yet repining Nation.
See him of Heavenly Form, Mild and Severe,
Raising at once Sweet Love, and awful Fear:
The Lion and the Rose of CHARLES's Arms are there;
Ready at home to Council with his Word,
And Act abroad those Councils with His Sword:
Ready on all Results to bear a Part
In Troubles for to ease his Prince's Heart:
Counting flat Treason Then the Middle way,
And, to sit Unconcerned, is, to Betray;
When Faction under show of Public Good
Thirst after private wicked ends and Sacred Blood.
V.
While the Great Soul of ALBEMARLE, the Sire,
Triumphant to it is Heaven did Retire,
He stood, like the Attick Hero, at His Death,
And his own Statue did to Future Fame Bequeath.
He stood, and Tearing from his Breast his Son,
(Summing up all past Glories in That one,)
Delivered him to CHARLES with the same Hand,
Which Empires used to Give, and Armies to Command:
'Take this my only Comsort, SIR, (said he,)
'Take this my Richest Legacy,
'That of due Right, is Forfeited to Thee.
'The Land is Thine: Do Thou Refine the Ore;
'And wearing Thy own Stamp 'twill be worth more;
'Be Thou his Guardian, and may be Defend,
'His and the Faith's Defender --.
VI.
He said: The Heavenly Powers all Listening Sat,
And Heard, what they already had made Fate.
Raised they had Thy Soul to such a thought,
As that thy Father's Services were naught;
Another's Merits are not by Thee Sought.
They had with Warlike Virtue endu'd Thee,
Virtue, which might be termed Ecstasy,
And only Feared, not to Die:
Yet Acting solidly the Soldiers part
And Thy Paternal Military Art:
Making the meanest Labor still Thy Own,
Encouragement Thou Scatterst and Renown;
And rendering Thy self equal unto All,
'Bove 'em Thou Risest in Thy Fall.
Others with their Large Pay do less,
Than Thou can do with mere Address,
Advancing Valor to an Higher Place,
Thou make it Greater by Thy GRACE;
As Clearer to Receive the Complements
Of Thy Exalted Soul, both Clear and Sound,
Like the Fair Attoms of a Diamond,
Which takes the Eye, and Light to it Presents.
VII.
Such were those Conquerours, whose Praise of old
In Mars's and Fame's TRVMP was told;
And we may call 'em Prophecies of Thee,
Since Thou live over their History,
And vouchest Times new Palingenesy.
With Thee They changed Their Armor to a Gown
And wholly made the Common Meed their own,
Learning and War's great Lawrel-Crown.
The Pen did whet the Noble Victor's Sword,
While this to that Protection and Guidance did afford
And such art thou, who gladsom Peace do give,
That knowledge, Peace's Eldest Child, may Thrive;
And all the Muses may in Sober Safety live.
A Blessed hour, wherein we see
Immortal Honors Honored by Thee:
We make the Chancellor, and Thou the University.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by N. Thompson, next the Cross. in Fetter-Lane, MDCLXXXII.


