A SHORT BROTHERLY EXAMINATION OF A SERMON.

At first Preached by Mr SOLOMON SAFFERY, And after published in Print;
ENTITLED, Part of a DISCOURSE, Tending only to invite those that believe in
CHRIST, to be conformable to him by Baptism. But intending to dissuade from
Infant Baptism.

Text ISAIAH 43.22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have
been weary of me, O Israel.

By ROBERT PITTILLOK, a Scottish man.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, Anno Dom. 1652.

Christian Reader,
SEeing these are days wherein Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim, I
purpose to make no more Apology for my under-taking in the following
animadversions; but knowing of none either abler or weaker setting to work for
discovering such rocks in the Treatise to which they relate (as we conceive)
might prove stumbling blocks to the weak; we conceived, our duty was, it coming
to the hands of many of those, among whom at present, the Lord has honored us
to labor in the Gospel, to set a hand upon the margin, for discovery of such
dangers, as either might affect those that are not able to discern, or through
manifold employments, have not such leisure to ponder: Wherein our purpose is
not either to speak against the person of the Author, or exasperate the spirits
of any of our contrary-minded Brethren (some whereof known to us, we look upon
as eminent Saints of the most High) but in modesty and sobriety, to contend for
the says once given unto the Saints, and act in our station for the truth,
with a heart willing to take with our guilt, and lay our hand upon our mouth,
when by the golden rule of the Sanctuary, we are convinced to have gone astray.
If thou find hereby any spiritual advantage, he has his reward, who is

Leith, from my Quarters May 5. 1652. Thine as thou art a follower of CHRIST,
TO. PITTILLOK.

1. Cor. 14.32. The spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.


A short Brotherly Examination of a SERMON, At first Preached by Mr Solomon
Saffery, And after published in Print, Entitled, Part of a DISCOURSE* tending
only to invite those that believe in CHRIST, to be conformable to him by
Baptism. But intending to dissuade from Infant Baptism.
Text ISAIAH 43.22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have
been weary of me, O Israel.


SECT. I.
NOt being desirous to multiply words unnecessarily, on strive about words
wherein there is no profit, 2. Tim. 2.14. we take up all about which we purpose
to speak, in reference to this Treatise, in these three; The scope, or that
which is intended to be proven; The Proofs brought to this purpose, as they
stand in relation to proving; And lastly, some particulars we shall glance at
here and there, in Preface, Proofs, or Conclusion, as we find reason.

As touching the first, we conceive, there is one thing pretended, and another
intended: That which is pretended, is, to prove that Baptism is an Ordinance
of God, and the first Ordinance by Believers commanded to be observed, and he
that is weary of it, is weary of God, p. 4. line 17. and p. 5. line 2. that
which is intended, is, that he who neglects to be baptized, after he has
attained to practick holiness, and is become able to make confession of his
Faith by mouth, is weary of God, and resists him, though in Infancy he has
been formerly baptized, page 10. line 1. and 16. It seems to me a strange way
of bearing in Truths, to propound and enlarge a doctrine in such amoiguous
terms, that a judicious and sanctified hearer, not acquaint with the speakers
temper, cannot know his meaning, till near the two part of the Discourse and
Arguments be spent, and then to clear it; but by some falling expressions, from
which it must be gathered by consequence, a Logic which our Brethren of the
Authors judgment much shun, though the antecedent be express Scripture.
Whether is it for catching the more easily the minds of the simple, by making
them first afraid of great hazard, by neglect of Baptism, and then to take it
up, though in a way contrary to their conscience, choosing rather to hazard
upon this rock, than neglect the other, suspected to be a duty, whose neglect
is attended with so dreadful consequents? Or is it by taking that for granted,
which is in controversy, to make hearers the more easily conceive it is no
controversy? Or is it to keep the minds of hearers in the smoother frame,
that with patience they might hear unto the close? Or the better to shun the
dint of adverse arguments? Whatsoever it be, it looks not like the simplicity
of Christ, 1. Cor. 2.4. Its emblem (if weakness make us not mistake) may
fitly be the shellfish, which looks one way, and goes another. We remember
this in the first place, for that much hurt often redounds to the weak and
unlearned, by fair appearances, when in the mean time there is an hook under
the bait, which hurts, if not timely adverted.

SECT. II.
AS for the second, the proofs as they stand in order to proving, are of two
sorts: The first are four Scriptures brought to prove that Baptism is not
only an Ordinance of God, but the first commanded to be observed by Believers,
Math. 28. v. 19. John 4.2. Heb. 6.1. and 2. Acts 10.46, 47, 48. That it is an
Ordinance of God, we judge out of all question, as also, the first commanded to
be observed by Believers, in so far as the Scriptures cited prove, to wit, such
Disciples or Believers (which by the Author, page 6. line 11. are granted to be
reciprocal) as were never formerly visible Disciples of the New Testament, and
in this estate baptized, we say, visible, because some may be visible
Disciples, who after appear not to have had real union and communion with
Christ: And we believe our dissenting Brethren, do not themselves rebaptize
those whom they have formerly baptized upon their appearing Disciples, though
they themselves should afterward (God working effectually upon their hearts)
confess they were but hypocrites at first receiving of Baptism in their
fellowship, and more to this purpose these Scriptures do not hold forth. As
also, while we grant it the first, we understand a fit administrator, element,
and other circumstances necessary concurring; or, in a word, after conversion,
with the first conveniencie: but all this speaks nothing to prove what is
intended, as the main scope, that such as were soomtime formerly baptized,
should be rebaptized, when they become actual Believers, if they were not so
at first.

The Proofs, as the words of the doctrine import, are brought to clear, that he
who neglects Baptism, is weary of God: With which truth (as the words import)
we so fully close, that if there were nothing more intended, we should rejoice
to hear this, and every Ordinance of Christ* powerfully pressed upon the
conscience; only whileas we speak of neglect, it would be understood as it
imports, an act of the mind contemning, and not a simple omission: For, the
case may fall out, that some part of the Gospel fall in the hands of an
unbeliever in India, which by the working of the Spirit, may become effectual
for his conversion, wherein there is no mention of Baptism; or mention being
made, he may not understand what it means. Such an omitter is no more weary of
God, then the Disciples spoken of, Acts 19.1, 2. were, in not seeking for the
Holy Ghost, as the Apostle there speaks, having never heard whether there were
any Holy Ghost, or not: So, though it were a duty for Believers to be baptized
when they become sensible of practick holiness, and able to confess with
their mouth, and should not have been administrate to them sooner; (which we
dare not yet believe) it is not in them a weariness of God, till it be
discovered to them to be their duty; but should be in them a weariness of him
to take it up: being a sin against conscience, and whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin, Romans 14, 23.

And as for proving the conclusion intended, to wit, that notwithstanding
persons have been baptized in their Infancy (so we speak because we reckon it
Baptism, though we conceive the Author will say, Dipping of Infants in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is no Baptism at all) when they become able
to give a confession of their faith, and sensible of practick Holiness, they
are then to be baptized. None of the Scriptures cited in the 5. Page prove the
point, not the first, Acts 11.17. compared with 10.46, 47, 48. For neither
Cornelius (though a devout man) nor any of his house were ever formerly
Disciples of the New Testament, and baptized. Neither the second, Luke 7.30.
Nor the third, Math. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Because both relate to persons which
formerly were never baptized. Neither the universality of it, spoken of in the
6. and 7. pages, which we grant in a larger sense then our dissenting Brethren
will admit: to wit, to Infants of Believers in Church Fellowship, who are
visible Disciples, and Believers to Charities up-taking, though not acting
their Faith more then their reason, and yet are reasonable creatures when they
come from the womb. But it follows not from any thing there spoken, that either
Children should not be baptized, or are not Disciples, or being baptized, they
should again take up that Ordinance, when they become sensible of Practick
Holiness, and able to confess with their mouth. Neither the Spirituality of
it (to keep the Authors own words) except it be what is said anent the
Spirituality of the Subject, to wit, that confession of the month is essential
to Baptism, and actual Repentance, from dead Works, and bringing forth of
fruit, wherein his purpose is discovered, and if as well proven as asserted, we
should lay our hands upon our mouths, and take up that Ordinance with the first
conveniencie. But he must give me leave to say in sobriety and Truth, what
Galen profanely said of a worthy Penman of sacred Scripture, Multa asserit,
sed nihil probat.

The strength of all the Arguments in that Section, which treats of the
Spirituality of the Subject, as they relate to proving the intended conclusion
foresaid, may be reduced to this, whatsoever is necessarily required of Persons
said to be baptized, in the places cited, is necessarily in like manner, to be
required of all persons who are to be baptized: But Confession, actual
holiness, actual repentance, good fruits, etc. is required in all those;
Therefore it is required in all that are to be baptized.

Ans. 1. All the places cited, do not necessarily prove the second Proposition,
as John 4.2. Because some may be made, and are Disciples, who cannot actually
believe and confess, Acts 15.10. compared with 1. and 5. shows Infants may be
Disciples. Neither does the other Text Heb. 6.1. brought to fortify, prove
that none can be Disciples but such as have actual repentance, etc. It will
appear to the meanest impartial Logician, to be a bad consequence, because the
foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God, are the
first principles of the Doctrine of Christ; therefore there is nothing of them
known, till they turn in actual and elicite acts. Take the like for clearing
in natural things; Preservation of natural being, is the first principle
whereinto men naturally incline, and whereupon all other natural actions
follow: Therefore, there is nothing of it taught, before there be an actual
explicit knowledge, and a faculty to confess wherein it does consist, or love
to father and mother natural, is the first principle of the fifth Command,
whereupon others as branches follow; therefore while they are children, they
have no love to them. We hope none will deny, but God is as free in the School
of Grace as Nature.

But especially we answer unto the first Proposition, That none of the Texts
cited prove whatsoever is mentioned in them, is required of all to be baptized;
And if the reasons of our denial clear thus, all the places cited are either
instances, or Scriptures alleged to speak generally; And neither prove the
point; not the first, because the persons spoken of Math. 3.8, etc. and John
4.2. were all in the Authors judgment, persons come to age, and the Eunuch,
Acts 1.37. was without all controversy of the same condition; and instances of
all particulars bygone, being able to afforde but a proportional argument;
for the time to come can prove only concerning persons of that same condition.
It is as if we should argue thus, All men come to age must give their promise
to be faithful to the Liberty of a City, before they can be admitted Freemen:
Therefore Children cannot be admitted Freemen. I believe many of the Citizens
of London and Edinburgh would much murmr, if the Parliament should take such
Logic for demonstrations.

The strength of the proof of the general Scriptures, consists (to take up all
together) in the universal Particles in the 10. to the To. 9. If thou shall
confess with thy mouth, v. 10. With the heart man believes, v. 11. Whosoever
believes, Math. 10.32. Whosoever shall confess, v. 33. Whosoever shall deny
me, etc. (where by the way, we cannot but admire, a man of such Learning, and
Piety, as the Author is said to be, should make denial, and not confessing to
be the same thing, or equivalent, seeing Paul, Acts 23.6. though accused and
before a judge, keeps up many particulars in christianity, though for this, he
was accused in Christian Prudence, mentioning but one the hope, and
resurrection of the dead, common to him and the Pharisees, his Adversaties,
because he found neither calling, nor the glory of God at that time, did
require a further publishing. We hope the Author, after second thoughts, will
acknowledge, it is never lawful to deny Christ; but many times lawful not to
confess, lest casting Holy things to dogs, they turn again all torent us) The
third universal particle is, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness, no man, etc. the
last brought to clear the third, is, Jam. 2.17. Faith if it have no works is
dead alone.

To which we answer shortly, All the passages alleged are universal in regard
of the Subject they relate to: None of them are simple universal without
restriction. This shall appear to impartial viewes of all the particular
Texts: The first, Romans 10. relates to those to whom the word of Faith was
preached, and consequently such as were come to age, v. 8. In the second Math.
10. Christ is speaking to guarde his D sciples, and such as were actual
Believers against fear, and had the faculty of confessing, and denying, and so
persons come to age. In the third, Heb. 12. the Apostle is speaking to persons
that had need of Patience, Chapter 9.36. and confirmation, as is evident from the
whole 11. Chapter, to which we shall add, as not of little weight. It had been
a very imprudent and discouraging argument for so prudent a Penman, as the
Author of that Epistle held by a great many of the Learned, to have been Paul
concealing his name, for shunning prejudice, because a countryman to have
written unto them as a motive to make straight steps for their feet, and go on
in Holiness. Without holiness no man shall see God. Desiring them to take it
in this sense, though sometimes the children of you Hebrews were holy, and
received the Seal of the Covenant. Now if they d^e before they come to age,
none of them shall see God: In the midst of his many wise, and powerful
A^guments taken from the weakness, and transitorinesse of the Leviticall
Priesthood, and the compleatnesse, and perpetuity of Christ's.

The last, James 2.17. speaks to those who were in hazard of being partial in
themselves, and judges of evil thoughts, v. 4. and whose duty it was to give
unto a brother, naked and destitute of daily food, those things which are
needful to the body. The Argument then stands thus, Confession and actual
holiness, are necessary to all persons come to age, and in a faculty of
confessing before Baptism: therefore they are necessary to all who are to be
baptized, which to such as have saluted the rudiments of Sophistry, will appear
a nonconcluding caption a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. To which
a Philosoph speaking to another, would answer in two words (...) and (...), in
some sense they are all universal simply, it will never be proven. And if it
be replied, though the persons to whom these places speak immediately, be
persons adult and come to age, yet upon that occasion, general rules are laid
down. It is as easily denied as asserted; some things spoken formerly, make it
improbable, and some things to be spoken, will make it appear impossible. And
that this is the Scrip manner of speaking, appears from Luke 9.5. Whosoever
will not receive you, etc. we conceive the Author will not deny, it is
understood but of such, as to whom they offered themselves. From Math. 10.22.
Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake. We besieve, the Author will not aver,
that every individual person did hate them, seeing many had tender bowels of
love to them; but of all ranks, such as were godless and wicked, and to whom
they became known. From Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his
father and mother, and wife and children, he cannot be my disciple. We hope,
the Author will not teach, all who want those relations, are in an incapacity
of becoming Christ's Disciples. That it is spiritual in its intent, washing
away sins in a sacramental way, with all conveniencie to be put in execution,
with the limitations aforesaid, we grant; and studying brevitie, come to speak
of some particulars.

SECT. III.
THe first particular which we conceive carries along with it hazard of
stumbling to the weak, is that in the Epistle to the Reader, wherein it is
called, A bloody Preaching, to sound all truth in the ears of those who know
not the God of truth, (we pass the reproaching description given to such
Preachers, because the grounds being everted, it will appear but a calumny) if
the Authors meaning had been, that the pressing the practice of duties of
worship, acceptable only from persons knowing God, upon persons in a natural
condition, had been unlawful, and not a dealing in a Gospel Order, we could
have subscribed unto it; and we know no Preachers that are worthy of such a
name, who use to press duties consequentiall to Regeneration, to be performed
before it: Or if his meaning had bin, that it is not the Gospel Order, where
Preachers preach to a multitude, all unbelievers to begin with superstructures,
before they lay the foundation, and teach the principles of Christ.

Likeas we grant, Preachers as faithful workmen, that needs not be ashamed,
should in all Christian prudence, shun to sound all truth in the ears of all
persons, at some times, as the terriblenesse of judgment and wrath, in the ears
of those who are under the terrors of God, deeply wounded in conscience
already (whether knowing the God of truth, or but preparing by the spirit of
bondage, as a forerunner to the saving knowledge of him) except a greater
necessity require it, should not be kept up. Or doubtful disputations, before
weak and unconfirmed fouls, Romans 14. v. 1. As also, that Preachers should
labor in their pressing of duties, or holding forth of comforts, so to clear
their bounds, that no person, not knowing God, may have reason to think he has
done God good service, when he has but offered the lame sacrifice, nor
conceive he may eat of the childrens bread, so long as he continues a stranger.

But both the Authors words, and his practice clears, he understands it is a
bloody preaching to sound all truths serving for building up persons, knowing
God in the ears of persons, in a natural condition, or which is equivolent,
to admit all persons to be hearers of Truths Preached Intentionally, as their
native end, to edify persons already regenerate. They are such, we conceive,
of whose sometime-communion, now he is ashamed: And from communion with whom,
we know at present he does abstain. We are confident, he had never ordinary
Spiritual communion with any Preachers who would not in their declared
purpose, observe the limitations foresaid, and failings through infirmity are
no ground for persons to be ashamed of communion one with another.

And because the constant practice of so many godly servants of Christ by this,
is so highly reproached, if it were not that Assertio nihil ponit in re, taking
in the restrictions foresaid, we shall oppose unto it this contradictory
conclusion: It is no bloody preaching but a Preaching according to the mind of
Christ, to sound all Truths in the ears of those who know not the God of
Truth, admitting all persons desiring to hear, without disturbance to the
Preaching of the Gospel.

The first Argument for clearing this, shall be Gods leaving the whole
Scriptures to be perused by every man (wherein all Truth is contained (and
Christ's injoyning natural men to learch the Scriptures, John 5.39. For knowing
what sort of persons they were, let the preceding verses be consulted, and in
particular, the 37, and 38. where Christ testifies of them, they had neither
seen the Fathers shape at any time, nor heard his voice, they had not his word
abiding in them, neither believed they him whom the Father had sent. If it be
laid upon them to search the Scriptures, and no limitation laid upon their
inquiry; was it not as lawful for such as knew all the Scripture (if any such
there had been to explain all the Scriptures unto them? We hope none will aver,
that Christ injoyns them to search what they might not labor to know. And if
it shall be said, Christ refers them to such places, as testify of himself: We
Answer, 1. The Law comprehending all Moral Duties, was publicly taught, the
Prophets did publish their Prophecies to all sorts of persons; The Words of our
Savior have no restriction: Therefore there is no reason to make it narrower
then the Author does. Ans. 2. Though it were but only to such as testified of
Christ, how much might offer it self to their view, before they came to
Passages testifying of him? Ans. 3. How many places in the Prophets and Psalms
do speak of Duties to be performed to him? Which persons not knowing God, are
not able to perform, and Comforts flowing out from him, whereof persons not
knowing God, are not the Subject, and yet testifying of him. But we judge it
needless further to insist in this. We hope, the Author will acknowledge, it
is a Popish principle he ownes, not to restrain the vulgar people Converted, or
unconverted, to peruse Scriptures in their native Language. Secondly, Christ
himself did sound Truths in the cares of such as knew not the God of Truth,
which could not be made use of, as to obedience, before Regeneration, Math. 19.
from the 17. to the 22. Math. 23. Jesus spoke to the multitude, and his
Disciples, of humility, rectifying of Oaths, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, where
(we conceive) faith 23. is not taken for Justifying Faith, but for fidelity,
and uprightness in dealing. In the 6. of Lukes Gospel from the 20. to the
close of the Chapter, our Savior teaches many Duties, which could not be
performed, but by such as knew the God of Truth, and many comforts, which none
other had right to enjoy, and that it was in the presence of many who knew not
the God of Truth; Beside that it is added immediately after, it is said in the
19. The whole multitude sought to touch him, in the 20. immediately thereafter,
He lift up his eyes on his disciples, and said, without mentioning any change
of place. The Woes denounced in the 24. -- 25. show there were present persons
rich, full, and laughing, VVo unto you, says Christ, that are rich, etc. With
which, consider what he teaches, Luke 11. from the 38.12. Chapter from the
beginning to the 13. the whole 16. Chapter, and the 18. from the beginning to
the 35.

Lastly, Paul did reason before Felix, and Drusilla, of righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment, Acts 24.25. and in his first Epistle to the Cor. c.
14.23, 24. He puts it beyond all controversy, it was the enstome of the Church,
to admit unbelievers to hear the members Prophecy, and that this was by Paul
himself approven. We believe none will deny, who delight not in a spirit of
contradiction, but it may be asked what advantage can redound to such as know
not the God of Truth, by hearing such Truths: seeing the things that are of God
are foolishness to the natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. Ans. We know no truth
serving for building up converted Christians, but the Lord may make it
isntrumental in Converting natures children, who is free in his Working, John
3.8. As for example, in the hearing of a natural man, the Duty of Prayer is
opened up in its nature, Excellency, way of Performance, and Fruits, the
Spirit working on his soul, he is convinced of his coming short of such a way
of performance, of his folly, in slighting so precious a Jewel, and the hazard
he may run, if he continue in such a course, whereupon his spirit is set on
edge, to search after the way how he may so perform it, as it may be
advantageous unto him. The like may be said of Praise, Righteousness, Prace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. We believe, if the Author will ask all of his
own society (if there be as much of God among them as is said to be) and they
begin to show him how beneficial the Lord has been unto their souls, it
shall be found, it was not always Preaching of principles was the first mean
making them look in to their own hearts, and we shall wish all persons to take
heed of limiting the holy One of Israel, whose foolishness is wiser then the
wisdom of men. If it be Objected, Christ spoke unto the multitude in Parables,
etc. Ans. It was a judicial act of Christ's Prerogative Royal, which we are no
more to imitate, then his sending for the Asses Colt to ride upon. If Paul's
practice mentioned, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. be Objected, it is answered in the
limitations premitted.

SUBSECTION I.
THe second particular we shall shortly glance at, is; It seems an aim in the
discourse, to magnify Baptism too much; though it be an Ordinance of Christ,
a Precious Love* token, and a Seal of the Lords Covenant, yet external
Ordinances may be too much magnified, when too much is attribute to them, or
they are too much heeded, with neglect of the more precious inward Work as the
Jews did the Temple, Jer. 7.4. The Ack, 1 Samuel 4.3. Now Moons, and appointed
Feasts, Isaiah 1.14. And solemn fasting, Isaiah 58.3. And though we shall not
say it is the Authors purpose so to do (we hope better things of him (yet
several passages in the Discourse seem to carry along hazard of stumbling to
the vveak, in reference to this; and therefore we shall desire the perusers to
consider, first, vvhileas it is called the first Ordinance commanded to be
observed by Believers page 4. line 18. it is but the first in time with the
limitations foresaid, and not in dignity, because without it, salvation may
be, and has been, and without some other, at no time any have been saved.

Secondly, while-as it is said, He that neglects it, is weary of God, page 5.
line 25. it is according to truth, but as it is formerly explained. Thirdly,
while-as it is said page 7. line 3. those that draw near to God in a way of
worship, are to have it as a preparation thereto, confirmed by that Text, Heb.
10.22. it holds not according to truth exclusively; that is, that none
unbaptized, may draw near to God in a way of worship, acceptable to him. It
holds not with the rules of good Logic: Let us draw near to God with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Therefore all those that
draw near to God, etc. must be washed with pure water. We hope the Authors own
expressions, page 4. lines 10, 11, and 12. etc. wherein he grants the
conversion of some, may have been some five or ten years, before taking up that
Ordinance, in which time there might have been many duties put in practice, and
some enjoyment vvil evince: That those duties accompanied with some enjoyment,
had among them a drawing near to God in a way of worship, acceptable to him
without this preparation, being confident he will not aver, a converted
Believer in the state of grace, for ten years, never drew near to God in a way
of worship acceptable to him: Though we acknowledge, contemners cannot have
access with boldness unto the Throne of grace.

Fourthly, in viewing the spirituality of it, though it be spiritual, (as all
Ordinances of the New Testament) and more spiritual then Circumcision, as
sealing the remission of sins by the blond of Christ, already come in the
flesh, and a more plentiful effusion of the spirit, for sprinkling the
conscience from dead works; yet let it be remembered, Circumcision an Ordinance
administrate to Infants under the Law, did require a spiritual subject, being
administrate to none but the seed of Abraham, and such as were Proselites of
the Covenant; it had a spiritual intent, signifying the uncleanness which men
bring unto the world with them, and the removal thereof by Christ, the Seed of
the Woman, sealing the Covenant betwixt God, and Abraham and his seed, calling
to mind the fulfilling their part of the Covenant all their lifetime,
importing their profession of faith, and avowed interest in the Messiah to
come, distinguishing them as a divine badge from the uncircumcised Gentiles,
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and the most eminent in holiness,
even Christ Jesus himself was circumcised: And it was accompanied with
spiritual fruits, as all divine ordinances, accompanied with special grace.
Deus and natura nihil faciunt frustra. As for the Administrator, we conceive,
the Author makes him of too large extent, and desire to see proof in the next
turn, that it is lavvfull for every spiritually gifted man, able to edify the
Church, to baptize. And whereas it is said, it vvashes away sin, we shall
desire it may be remembered, it is true but in a figurative and sacramental
sense: And properly neither Baptism, nor any other Ordinance, has so high a
virtue, neither will the distinction of mediatly and immediately serve the
business, whether mediatly or immediately making it properly a vvasher away
of sin, a justifier or remover of guilt, it derogates much from the merits of
the immaculate Lamb, by whose stripes Saints are healed, the blood of Christ
may be not the immediate means of bringing a sinner on his way in coming to lay
hold upon him; but Preaching, Prayer, or Baptism may have their influence
herein, but the blood of Jesus Christ, or his obedience, signified in this
synecdochicall expression, is the only immediate cause in its order of washing
from sin; take it in a similitude thus; One cold in the Winter season, stands
trembling without doors, not knowing of house or fire; and to him comes
another, knowing of a warm house, well furnished with fire, having a commission
from the Master of the house, and in his Masters name invites him to come in
and warm himself; whereupon he approaching, entreats the Master of the house to
suffer him to enter in; and it being granted, he comes to the fire, and finds
the refreshment of warmness: The servants declaration and invitation, his
belief and supplication, were causes in their order of his in-coming; but only
the fire, with its heating faculty, was the immediate cause of his warmness.
We should be glad to know (not being able to reach it at present) how Baptism
can wash away sin more then by signification and confirmation, seeing
justification consists in indiviauo, and is not capable of more and less; and
it is necessarily required in the Authors judgment, that al^^ ^e actually
converted (at least to charities judgment) before Baptism, which without all
controversy, is always accompanted with washing from sin.

SUBSECT. II.
THe third particular we take notice of, is a twofold Assertion, p. 10. line 1,
and 16. that confession with the month, is essential to salvation, and without
practick holiness, no man shall see God. It were no great matter to prove,
confession of the mouth not to be essential to salvation, either to children,
or persons having a faculty to confess, if we should scan the words according
to the acceptance of Philosophers, from whom they had their first rise; as
also to prove, that holiness which we maintain is in Infants, is practick, as
practick habits are opposed to contemplative; for grace is ever a practick
habit; but as we said at first, not desiring to contest about words, and
conceiving it clear the Authors meaning is in the one, that without confession
of the mouth, salvation cannot be attained; and in the other, without
holiness, exercising or going actually about duties, no man shall see God; to
which purpose that Text of the Apostle James 2.17. is cited. We shall shortly
out of the many strong arguments of many learned men writing to this purpose,
propound to the Authors view, but two at present, to which if we shall find
satisfaction, in the next turn, we shall be a degree nearer conviction, then at
present we are. The first stands thus; Those of whom the Kingdom of God is
without confession and practick holiness, may see God, and attain salvation,
without confession with the mouth, and practick holiness; but of little
children, who neither can confess with the mouth, nor have practick holiness
in the Authors sense, the Kingdom of God is: Therefore without confession with
the mouth, or practick holiness, some may attain salvation, and see God. We
believe none will deny the connection of the first part of the Argument. The
second Proposition is in Math. 19. at the 14. of such is the Kingdom of heaven:
Luke 18. at the 16. of such is the kingdom of God. We know by some it will be
answered, Little children is taken figuratively: to which we say for reply, Let
all sober and impartial spirits but consider, first, how the Disciples knew
them to be of such a frame of spirit, to wit, that they were little children in
humility, seeing God only is searcher of the hearts. 2ly, knowing, why did they
rebuke them which brought them upon this account? Were they men of such a
profane temper, that they could endure none of humble spirits to come to
Christ? 3ly, or if there were nothing to be seen in them, but what was
ordinarily seen in others; why did they not as well rebuke the great multitudes
which followed him, and were healed of him, and the Pharisees which came unto
him, tempting him, Mat. 19.2. and 9 and the Ruler who asked him, what he should
do to inherire eternal life? Luke 14.18. Fourthly, what weight, and what to
purpose in answer to the Disciples, laboring to keep them back, has it
otherwise, while Christ says, Suffer them* of such is the kingdom of heaven?
Lastly, we shall desire the Author to remember his own words, p. 11. l. 19, 20,
21, etc. it is very improbable, that the Holy Ghost should put in one mystical
thing among so many others that are literal, which is never found to be his
course, except when he tells us so; for he delights not in our stumblings; and
it will yet appear more then improbable, considering it is expressed by two
Evangelists in the same way, and the expression which by Luke is used (...), is
properly translated Infants; to which may be adued the expression of their
being brought, compared with the multitudes said to follow him, and the
Pharisees came unto him, these being expressions, signifying their own act,
and the other the act of others, as in other places, persons sick and unable to
come themselves, are said to be brought.

The second argument is this, Those who sometime received Circumcision, the
seal of the Covenant of grace made with Abraham and his seed, and never lost
that which by it was signified, may see God, and attain salvation: but some
not able to confess, nor having practick holiness sometime received, etc. who
lived in the days of the New Test. (so we conceive the Author understands,
and therefore desire not to extend it beyond his meaning) and never lost what
by it was signified, therefore some who confess not with their mouth, and
have not practick holiness, may attain salvation. For the first Proposition, we
hope none vvil deny but it was the seal of the Covenant of grace, or that such
as received it, and never lost what was signified by it, etc. may see God;
except they will say, God gave such a seal to seal nothing, and as a mock to
Abraham's seed, which we should look upon as blasphemy, though reserving to
the Lord his own latitude in his secret acting, as seems good in his eyes, who
is debtor to no no man. The 2. Proposit. we prove thus: All the Infants of
Believers in Christ, who believed at the hearing his Word when he was upon
earth; and all those who were the Infants of such Believers as believed
suddenly after Christ's Ascension, (whereof there were not a few, Acts 2.41.)
which were eight days old before Christ's death and resurrection, received
Circumcision, the seal of the Covenant of grace, and never lost what was
signified by it, remission of sins, and saving grace; therefore, some not
having practick holiness, or able to confess with their mouths, sometime had
the seal, and never lost what by it was signified.

That the children of such Believers, as laid hold upon Christ suddenly after
his Ascension unto glory, were circumcised; we hope none will deny, the
Ceremonial Law not being before Christ's death abolished, so far as that it
was indifferent to practice it, or not practice it, Christ himself being
circumcised, and keeping the Passover immediately before his suffering, Math.
26.19, and 20. and if it be said, they lost what by it was signified, We ask,
for what? Not for any thing they had done themselves, for the children had
neither done good nor evil; neither for any thing their parents had done, for
they believed, and became Disciples of the New Testament. Without
controversy, formerly they were in sanctified reason, looked upon as within
the Covenant of grace, and fit materials for the Kingdom of Heaven, being
Members of a visible Church, to which Christ joined though very corrupt: And
we desire to know, if any man who is not demented, will say, because their
parents laid hold upon Christ, therefore they became not members, and in an
uncapacity of seeing God? To clear this in an instance, Suppone Peter had a son
ten days old, before he was baptized of John the Baptist, circumcised the
eight day, and he was baptized the eleventh of his sons age, sure he looked
upon his child the tenth day of his age, as one who had something of what was
sealed by Circumcision, and consequently as one who might see God, if this day
he had died; and shall we think the next day, he was to change his judgment,
because he was baptized. The like may be said of one whose child was
circumcised the 8. or 10. day before Christ's death, and who believed, and was
baptized 8. days before his Ascension: And withal to close this point, we
shall entreat the Author, and all of such a judgment, but impartially to
consider, how much it militates against the freeness of Gods grace, that it
should be said, not to be of as large extent to ages under the Gospel, as in
the time of the Law? against the riches of his grace? which is more
abundantly, even in extent, communicate in the days of the Gospel, which are
times wherein God will have all men to come to Repentance, and not a handful
of Judea only? against the end of Christ's coming, which was to comfort all
that mourn in Sion, and give them a song of gladness for a song of heavines, to
teach, after his appearance and working out the work of man's Salvation. No
child dying before it come to the ability of confession, and practick Holiness
shall see God. No friends who are dumb can be looked upon as in a possibility of
glory, because unable to confess; No souls can be wrought upon by the Spirit,
in the decaying condition of their earthly Tabernacle, except it be in the
estate wherein they are able to confess, believing mothers of such a
judgment, cannot look upon their dying Infants (who often in their esteem, are
to them moreprecious then their own lives) but with deeply sorrowful hearts;
Rachell wept for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not. Math. 2. at the 18. But such mothers may mourn for them, because they
neither are, nor shall be, but in a being which is worse then a thousand not
beings. Such judgment seems very incroaching upon the freedom of the Spirits
working, with the discomfort it carries along with it, and we shall close this
part with the rehearsing of two Stories we have heard to this purpose (as we
conceive) from honest Witnesses: The first is, concerning a person dying of
whom the report said, having been long in a deep wound of Conscience, still in
despair, without gripping any Comfort, after the failing of speech, he was
desired by lifting up of his hand, to show if he found any Assurance of Mercy,
which he did with such cheerfulness of countenance, and calmness of spirit,
a-little before the close of his eyes, that all beholders rested assured he had
the intimation of Divine favor upon his soul. The second, concerning a dumb
man, that being in a place where the Lords Supper was to be Celebrate, he
approached with others to partake, and the Minister scrupling to admit him, he
did demonstrate to him, The Essence, Unity, and Trinity of Persons so lively,
by folding acloth in three folds, and afterward drawing all out, and making
all one; and Christ's death and Resurrection, that he was convinced it was his
duty to admit the born Dumb and Deaf. How unsearchable is Gods Wisdom, and his
ways past finding out.

The last thing whereupon we pitch (having already drawn out this Examination
to a length, beyond our intention) is, the pressing of its up-taking with
expedition, though it is with the first conveniencie, to be taken up by those
who becoming actual Believers, were never formerly baptized (which is all the
Scriptures cited prove, yet the Arguments used to press the expedition of it,
compared wi^^ what has gone before, from clearly to press, without delay, it
is to (...) taken up immediately after persons conceive it to be a duty, though
th^^ have so been baptized formerly, as those are whom we think baptized
^^deed: wherein there is not a little policy, in beating: he iron while it
hot, and disciplizing those, who to morrow may possibly think th^^ have been
too rash. And therefore we shall shortly represent to the consideration of all
those upon whom it is thus urged: First, to take noti^^ how great a difference
there is betwixt the sudden taking it up by tho^^ who never were formerly
baptized, which is no controversy, a^^ taking it up again, by those who
conceiving they were formerly baptized, have long lived in this judgment,
under many comfortab^^ Spiritual, enjoyments.

Secondly, what trouble of Conscience, and disturbance of spirit it man work in
the soul, if after it is thus taken up, the person who has so take (...) it,
shall find he did it not upon solid grounds, fear and shame, on th^^ one
hand, persuading him to continue in allowing it, and guilt callin^ on him to
repent, on the other. Thirdly, how easily Arguments power (...) fully pressed
(I had almost said subtly) by those who are well versed i^ the controversy,
may put a present conviction upon the spirits of those wh^^ for the present are
unable to answer them, though after second thought they may find it was not
upon solid grounds. He is not only a strange^ to others, but also to himself,
who knows not himself to differ from himself, sometimes in judgment. Lastly,
whether it be not a great rashness on a sudden, to take it up in a way, upon
whose grounds so many weighty consequences follow, of hard judgment toward
others, and disowned by so many worthy Learned, and pious Christians as it is,
who have mad^ it their Work, to study the mind of Christ: and many whereof
have Sealed the Truth of their doctrine with their blood, not loving their
lives unto the death; Whether or not upon such considerations any who at prese^
are under conviction, that it is their duty to take it up again: O^ hereafter
shall be have not great reason to suspend their practice of takin^ it up, till
they shall have well weighed reasons for both parts of the controversy, and
seriously implored with watching thereto Divine Light, and influence of the
Spirit of truth, to lead them in all truth. If it be commended in the noble
Bereans, that they searched the Scriptures, whether the Apostles doctrine was
according to them or not: We have much more reason to think it praise worthy,
in these days wherein our lots are sallen, wherein so many are saying, lo here
is Christ, and lo there is Christ: to try with great delib^ration, before we
trust: The fool believes every thing, but the prudent looks well to his
goings.

FINIS.

