A POEM On the burning of LONDON.
WE own no Muses now; what now inspires
Is a more gross, then are Poetic fires.
Who studies Elegance when he proclames
The near approaches of devouring Flames?
If then officious have our Verses spoil
This Subject, know, wants Water more then Oil.
Is It still unknown from whence our ruin came,
Whether from Hell, France, Rome, or Amsterdam?
Must the Salique Law in England too prevail?
Must not Great Cities be Imperial
'Cause Mothers called? Or does this lightning from
The Roman Altar, or dark Lanthornes come?
Or from the Infernal Netherlands is this?
Or by reflected rays from Brandaris?
Thus is our Phoenix in her spices burned,
And Troy-Novant is into Ashes turned.
Must eminence of safety still despair?
Must Fire as well as Smoke pursue the fair?
Honor's now ominous; and Purple dye
Soon'st catches Flames: Badges of Sovereignty
Do not protect us, but our fall conspire,
Our very Faces first receive the fire.
What once preserved the Israelitish band,
Even Fiery Pillars now destroy our Land.
Our London Frigatts burnt so often of late,
Do seem to threaten Shipwreck to our State.
Our Isle before obscure, now is famous grown
By Flames, from Ashes now called Albion;
Both Fire and Sword cause us still to remember,
The One the Second, the other the Third day of September
This Protean Fire in power prevailing so,
Now in it is cruelty does wanton grow.
First seems Religious, and does put on
The Face of Zeal, and hot Devotion,
And Whips the Buyers and the Sellers out
Of the profaned Temples, seeks about
For hidden Wares; and then does Sacrifice
Their vainly Sanctuary'd Merchandise.
And with such Swords at the Churches doors does stand,
As once did the Gate of Paradise command.
Then, Zelot-like, destroys promiscuously
What it pretended first to purify:
Here Images of Saints, and Prophets Tombs
In Flames do suffer second Martyrdomes.
The buried Bodies from their silent Urnes
Begin to rise, thinking their wished returns
From the Grave are now at hand, whilst through the world
Such universal Flames as these are hurld.
Saint Paul is now again ascended on
The Wings of Fire, to The Heavens third Region;
Yet's Altar, and what thereto appertains,
A sacred Portion to his Sonns remains.
Thus at his Fiery Ascension is it said,
Elijah's Mantle on Elisha stayed:
Saint Peter's shade that once did Fevers Cure,
It selfe's enough to cause a Calenture.
The Baptist again into his desert's gonn,
What Waters then can we rely upon?
We only now in too just fears do stand,
Lest Floods of Barbarism ore-flow our Land.
Since Paul's Churchyard had the Vaticans sad doom,
Learning's now shrivelled to a little room;
Our Bays are withered, and now only shall
Serve to attend upon this Funeral.
His Buildings fall, yet Gresham stands entire,
As once that sacred Bush in midst of Fire:
Those Regal Statues, struck with such a ray,
Become like Memnons, vocal; seem to say
Thus to the Fire, Let not your rage come nigh
This Royal Place, affront not Majesty:
But all in vain, the Flames do still draw nigher,
Kings may command the Earth, but Gods the Fire,
Which now triumphantly as the Wind guides,
In Fiery Chariots through the City rides;
Breaks open the Prison Doors, sets Captives free,
In greater honor of it is Jubilee.
Then to the Skies it is Victory Proclames,
In Monumentall Pyramids of Flames.
The Cellars too are burnt, this Stygian Flame
Goes downwards too, as thither whence it came.
Here lies that City far too big to have,
Or Mausoleum, or an Epitaph,
Since nothing but it is ruins can present,
For so much greatness, a fit Monument.
Yet part remains, if therefore we inquire
How Flames so strong, so strangely should expire,
We may observe, their power did still decay,
Since the Temple they so rudely did assay.
Thus Pompey less successful still did grow,
Since the Inner Temple he profaned so.
Let others fear bad Omens, yet we may
From this Red Evening hope thy clearer day,
Now may we hope th'appeased Deities,
Since Fire devours th'accepted Sacrifice.
Thus th'amorous God descended from above
In Golden Showers dissolved in Flames of Love:
We Will hope to see those days, when Peace again
Shall Ride Triumphantly in CHARLES his Waine;
Then shall it is Harmony our Thebes advance,
And make rude Stones into a City Dance.
Imprimatur, Hen: Bagshaw, Reverendissime in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom.
Richardo Archiepis. Eboracensi a Sacris Domest.

Datum Episcopo. Thorpae, Maii 21. 1667.
YORK, Printed by S. B. for F. M. 1667.


