A POEM DEDICATED TO THE Lasting Honor of the Pious and Reverend Divine Mr.
RICHARD BAXTER.
RICHARD BAXTER HAS GOD MADE A GLORIOUS LIGHT
TO GUIDE OUR STEPS IN THIS APOSTATE NIGHT
WITH GRACE, WITH GIFTS, WITH COURAGE HAS GOD BLESSED
HIM TO CONDUCT THE CHURCH TO CANAAN 's REST.

REgardless Age! could England's pur-blind Sense
Imagine that Eternal Providence
Creates wonders still, as formerly
He wrought for Israel's sake, we All should Spy
An ANGEL Brandishing a Gospel-Word,
Resolving (by That only Powerful Sword,)
Deliverance to the Churches to aford.
Brought out we have been from Egyptian Yoke
Although not freed from fear of Amalek's Stroke
Xerxes(that Eastern Terror) did not fright
The Grecians, as the Tall' Zanzummims Sight
Enlarged our fear, had not Almighty Power
Raised up A JOSHUA in This needful Hour.
How Many tedious Year have We abode
And wearied Steps in pathless Desert trod,
Trav'lling from Stage to Stage, and Round About
Hemmed in between the Mounts of Fear and Doubt?
Great has Our longing Expectation been
Of keeping Jubilees, not Wandering (in
Distrust,) so long, in Wilderness of Sin;
Murmuring although Our Waters have been sweet
And Loathing Manna, as not fit to eat.
Drawn up we have been into Numerous Forms,
Endless Contentions, whilst approaching Storms
(Armed with the face of Vengeance) raise our fears
Gather round Our Tents, and hallow in our ears.
Loud Ecchoing Sounds (alas!) do scarce Awake
Our Charmed Minds, or prompts us (yet) to make
Religion our great Work: we only Crowd
In New Opinions, under which we shroud
Our Hearts; Remaining still as Vain: as Proud:
Vnchar^^able: Whisperers of Lies
Selfish, and Covetous; under This Disguise,
Lord! What a mighty Puther has been raised
In Babylon? The Church has stood Amazed!
Greedy in Expectation of some Bright
Holy, (most Humble) Soul-Reviving Light,
To chase Away these Shades of Winter Night.
THese many Years, we all have gone a Round
Over Hills and Dales, (Led by uncertain Sound;)
Giddy with knowledge we have long been made
Unstable, since the Pulpit grew a Trade;
Into the Dith, (like Lost-Sheep) have we Strayed;
Defiled filthily has our Fleece been,
Each Broad-Sleeve of Our (Starched) Profession, in
Opprobrious pickle! yet we Buffet all
(Unchristian-like,) who but Lament our Fall
Revile (yea Persecute) and Nicknames call.
Such are but Bashan's Rams-Horns Batt'ring down
The Church, (not Jericho, or Triple-Crown.)
Each conscientious Shepherd passing by
Points at Our Engine of Divinity!
Sighs much to see Our great Apostasy.
In This Degenerate Age Religion stands
Neglected [like Old Monuments] with hands
Though Listed Up, yet broke: with batt'red face
Half gone: (An Object rather of Disgrace;)
Just like King David' Men, with Beards half-shorn
Stands True-Religion, made a Public Scorn,
Apostate Age! how are We swerved from
Pure Christianity? Upbraid not Rome
Or think That only, the Apostate See,
Since Many Antichrists with Us there be;
They (Spiritual) Babel founded deep in blood,
And We, Those Ruins; plaster up with Mud.
[(...) Notions: Schism: and a blind Mill-horse Track:]
E're since a Crape-Profession clothed our back.
Narrow but Plain, i^ Canaan's blessed Rode
In which the Primitive Christians safely trod;
Great talks of New-Light spread; And since our hope
Hung down its head, We yearly Burn the Pope;
[That Flame Lights well to See, how much we Grope.]
Whilst Crowding in a sad confused Rout
(In which true Piety is justled Out.)
The Lord of Hosts (his Kingdom to increase)
Has sent us His Ambassador of Peace.
Grace into him is poured, to Instruct
Rash Zeal, and mired Steps for to Conduct
A right, in Paths of Truth, Peace, Amity,
Compassion: (Christian-like Conformity.)
Erecting A HOLY TEMPLE, 1 Kin. 6.7.
[Wherein dwells
Wisdom, with Pure Religion which excells
In Meekness] Paved with Love: [A shame to Those
That Hammer forth, with loud ( Canonical) Blows
Hideous Shapes, which Harden (but not Molifie)
Gazers on Their ( Gorgon-like) Divinity!]
Imbroydered all Throughout with Saving Grace
Flourishing the Banner of Triumphant Peace
This Famous WORTHY stands, whose Gifts and Parts,
(Shining in Lowliness,) steals all our Hearts.
Wisdom, Experience, Conduct, Courage too
Is found in Him, to Lead us safely through
This Howling Desert, where the Wolvish sound
Hurries the Flock, and their soft ear does wound;
Confirming Faith and Patience; strengthening Love
Opposing Errors, and Debates, which move
Unruly Passions, and engender Strise,
Rending Divisions, whilst Religious Life
Abateth, and its hidden (Vital part)
Gives up the Ghost, as Stabbed at the Heart.
England's Commissioner for Peace, is He
Heavens Blessed Harbinger: Ordained to be
A Sanctuary to the Church of God,
That has been Scourged with Plague, and Flaming Rod*
Has been Benighted, and in Wilderness,
Groveling a long time (as all must confess:)
O're-cast with Egypt's Darkness, and in Wiles
Devised by Satan (who mankind beguiles)
Beleagur'd Round; In such a Lab'rynth, where
Leviathan's hoarse Sounds, Awake our fear.
Eternal GOD! When Thy Church was Dejected
Singl'd out for Slaughter, Thou did then Protect it:
Sending us such a Light as few expected;
Dear God: Thy Praise shall never be neglected.
HArk! (hark again) methinks we hear the sweet
Inamouring Sound of His so glorious Feet,
(Moving over Mountains) who Glad Tidings brings
To Every Sinner, from the King of Kings.
Of Universal Grace for All Mankind:
(Conveyed To All, who are Resolved in mind;)
Obliging to some Law, the Heathen World
[Nigh lost, through wilful Unbelief, and hurled
Down headlong into such a dismal Vale
Un'wares) where Darkness did so much prevail,
( Confusion also) [till This Glorious Light
Thrust forth Its Conquering Rays, and scattered Night.]
The Militant Church is Happy in This Guide
Her footsteps to Direct that none may slide
Establishing Her Knowledge: and Her Love;
( Consormity so like to GOD above.)
His Vital Substance few aright Descry
Unseen It must be, [when Our Dazzled Eye
Repells That Sunshine of Divinity!
Comfort our selves we do (for all) to think
His Beams make Day, though Glittering through the Chink.
It Is very strange that in a Crazed Shell
Of bone and skin, such Sanctity does dwell!
Crowning Religion with such Conversation
As makes Him a Great Blessing to Our Nation
(Not'thstanding many Proud men's Emulation.
All after Ages shall, of Him, Relate
And Praises to JEHOVAH Consecrate,
Nation shall unto Nation, This Great Act
Sound forth, in hearts of Harmony, Compact;
Recording evermore THY worthy Fame
Eternizing the Glory of the same;
Saints All, with Angels also, shall Proclaim
THY GREAT SALVATION! when we BAXTER name.
21. Dec. 1680
FINIS.

