POOR ROBINS Observations upon Whitsun-Holidays.
Concerning the fair and foul weather happening thereon.
TOGETHER With the Manly exercise of the Cornish-men of Hurling the Ball in
Hide-Park on Whitsun-Tuesday last.
Islington.
What ails ye O ye clouds why do you frown
With angry influence upon our Town?
Spoiling the Harvest hopes of all our gains,
And makes us lower when we see it rains,
Was not our loss enough the first of May
When as the rain got all our gains away?
When company we wanted who consumes
Our Cheese-cakes, Bottle-Ale, and our Stew'd-Prunes.
All which hung on our hands (the more's the pity)
And sent with loss afterward to the City.
What would have yielded us a pound sold dear
Scarcely an Angel does for them appear.
How can we pay our Rent at such a rate,
When Rain does make our Trading out of date?
Whitsun Monday.
The Heavens weeps tears, which makes us too to weep,
Wee'r at a loss for those things which we keep.
For when the Sky with showers does on us frown
It brings the price of Cakes, and Cheese-cakes down:
The weather did our hopes so foully cozen
Eel-pics must go now eighteen to the dozen.
Now Dick the Prentice with his Neighbor William
Who meant to walk abroad with Nell and Jilian.
Feasting their guts with Flawns and Fools and Custard,
And drinking Bottle-Ale till they are fluster'd.
When merry catches they do sit and sing,
And love each other like to anything;
The Rain which on the earth the Clouds did spil
Made them good Husbands sore against their will.
Citizens wives who did new clothes provide
To show themselves abroad at this same tide,
And would be generous now in spending chink
Though they three days before scarce eat or drink;
Besides their Husbands who abroad do walk
To hear the Cuckovv his svveet Tune to talk.
When after they have taken the pleasant air
Unto our houses use to make repair,
But this foul vveather will not let them rome
The Cuckovv they may stay to hear at home.
We Servants did provide against this day
To vvait on them which do at Nine-pins play,
Besides the others which vvait in the house,
But all our Tradings now not vvorth a louse;
Our Rooms are empty and to tell you truly,
No Red-noses being seen; makes us look blewly.
Had Sol shined on us with a glorious ray
And been so kind to give us a fair day,
Our houses had been thronged, and every Arbor
To young men and to maids had been a harbor,
Our profits would come in as sweet as honey,
We scarcely could have time to change their money.
But being wet weather our Trading fails,
Maids would not budge out to have dagled tails.
Whitsun Tuesday.
But Whitsun-Tuesday was more kind unto us,
Had that been wet such weather would undo us,
The sun shined on the earth with Radiant face
Which sent unto us customers apace;
The Rooms now thronged with Guests, Arbors not empty
Of young men and of maids we then had plenty,
Our Sider, Mum, Chees-cakes, Cakes and stewed Prunes,
This numerous company them all consumes.
The Cornish Hurling of the Silver Ball.
But yet Hide-Park a man might truly say
Had in it much the glory of that day.
Stout Cornwall, always Loyal to their King.
A hundred brave resolved persons bring
Of their own County to the Park that day
One of their Countries exercise to play.
Where being come themselves they do devide
To East and West, their manhood to decide;
In The midst oath park's thrown up a Silver Ball,
Which being done, stoutly to it they fall:
Heels were tript up, and bodies come to ground.
The Cornish Hug always good play was found.
Long time it lasted, and now East then VVeft
At several times had each of them the best.
Thousand spectators stood with greedy Eyes
To see them Act this Manly Exercise:
His Highness Yorks great Duke beheld the same
With other persons of renowned fame.
Brave Cornish men you are to be commended
And will be so until the world is ended.
London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap.


