POEM On the most Ancient, Ho^ourable, and Necessary THE HAMMERMEN -- TRADE
THIS TRADE all other Trades does far Outvey;
For it surpaslech in Antiquity,
All we can name, The Sacred Page is clear
That lubal Cain was an Artifiicer.
In Brass, and Iron, and that his Skill was such
That way, that Others he the same did Teach;
And it Tradition we may but believe,
Which Authors to the several Trades does give,
And them for their Invention highly Praise,
And in due Order does them Canonize;
We find that the first Author of this Trade
Was before (...)
For (...)
Does Vulcan aptly sound, whose Trade it was
To be a SMITH to Jupiter, and He
Was the first worshipped for a Deity.
Amongst all the Authors of the Trades, which show's
That as he was Anteriour to those
In time, likewise his Trade in Dignity
Was so in Judgment of Antiquity,
And justly: for no Trade's more necessar;
Whether it be in Time of Peace of War;
The Scripture does Remark when Israel
Was most distressed in the Reign of Saul,
That there was no SMITH found throughout the Land,
That neither Sword nor Spear was in the Hand
Of any of the People, to mantain
Their Liberty against the Philistine.
No wonder then that they were in a strait
For want of SMITHS, they wanted Arms to Fight;
And if we view the Numerous Arts that are
For Ornament, or Highly necessar.
We find that Tools for These cannot be had,
Without the Assistance of this Noble Trade.
The Gardener can never use for his Life,
His Trade without a Spade, and Prunning Knife
The Husband Man to whom so much we Owe,
Needs a Coulter and Share to his Plow.
The Tailors need a Knife, a Goose, and Sheers,
The Mason Irons and a Mattock bears
The Wright his Cousin, needs an Ax and Saw,
The Flesher needs a Knife, to cut the Maw,
The Weaver needs for Stenting Temple Heads,
For cutting Thrumbs, and Ends, a Knife he needs,
Baxters the Scraper and the Rake, Furryers,
Wakers, and Glovers cannot want such sheers,
Skinners a Woodie, and Round Scraper have
For Leather, Tanners have a Knife to shave,
(...) and a Mortar, and does ^^ay
The Gardener with a Knife Pates away
The Leather* And the Litster cannot Dress
The Cloth, without a Cauldron and a Press
His Brother needs VVires (its understood)
To make the Ancient Covering for the Head.
Thus every One of all the Trades I mind,
Beholding to the Hammer-Men I find.
It adds to the Honor of this Trade,
That the most Precious Things that Nature made,
It has for Objects, Silver, Gemms, and Gold,
Than which what weighs more, and less bulk does hold?
What Is of more General Use? with them we buy
The Things that are of greatest Dignity,
And Usefulness, for Meat and Drink; and All
That necessar for Humane kind we call.
We buy for Gold and Silver; which is more,
Some sell Themselves for These, and them Adore;
I like the Object of the Art so well,
That I account them Happy who it Feel,
And Handle often, and have the Liberty
It to Engrave upon, or Liquify:
In Fine, it adds to the Trades Renown,
They wear for Ensigns Hammer and the CROWN,
FINIS.
EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID, in the Year School.


