Flora's Farewell: Or, The Shepherds Love Passion Song.
Wherein he does greatly Complain
Because his Love was spent in vain.
To a Delicate Tune; Or, A thous^nd t^mes my love commend.




FLora farewell, I needs must go,
for if with thee I longer stay,
Thine eyes prevail over me so,
I shall grow blind and loose my way.
Fame of thy beauty and thy Fame,
to seek for love me hither brought,
But when in thee I found no truth,
it was no boot for me to stay.
Now i^m engaged by word and Oath,
a servant to another will,
Yet for thy sake would forgo both,
would thou be sure to love me still.
But what assurance can I have,
of thee who seeing my abuse,
In that which Love desires to crave,
may leave me with a just excuse.
For thou must say, 'twas not thy fault,
that thou did so unconstant prove,
Thou were by mine example caught,
to break thy Oath and leave thy Love.
No Flora, no, I will recall
the former words which I have spoke,
And thou shall have no cause at all,
to hamper me in Cupids Yoke.
But since thy Honor is to range,
and that thou bear a wavering mind,
Like to the Moon with thee i will change.
and turn I can with every wind.
Hence forth blind fancy i will remove,
and cast all sorrow from my heart,
Young men to dye for doting love,
I hold it but a foolish part.

The second part
to the same Tune.
Why should I to one love be bound,
and fix my thoughts on none but thee
When as a thousand may be found,
that is far more fair and fit for me.
Though I am but a Shepherd swain,
my mind to me does comfort bring,
Feeding my flock upon a plain,
I triumph like a petty King.
No Female Rat shall me deceive,
nor catch me by a crafty wild,
Though I do love, yet I can leave,
and will no longer be beguiled.
Flora, once more, farewell adieu,
I so conclude my Passion song:
To thy next love see that thou prove true,
for thou have done me double wrong.

Fair Flora's Answer to the Shepherds Song,
Wherein she shows that he has done the wrong
FIE Shepherd, fie thou are to blame,
to rail against me in this sort,
Thou do di^grace a Sweet-hearts name,
to give thy Love and false report.
There was a Proverb used of old,
and now I find it is no lie,
One tale is good till another's told,
she that loves most is least set by.
A brief Description I will tell,
of thy favor, love and flattery;
And how at first thou did excel,
with cunning tricks and policy.
But O that flattering tongue of thine,
and tempting eye fought to entice,
And to ensnare the heart of mine,
and bring me in fools Paradise.
When thou at first began to VVooe,
and with thy skill my patience tried;
You thought there was no more to do,
but presently to up and ride.
Thou said that I was fair and bright,
and fitting for thy Marriage Bed;
Thou fed'st my fancy with delight,
thinking to have my Maidenhead:
But when thou saw thou could not get
the jem that thou distressed to have,
By company thou did refrain,
like to a false dissembling Knave.
Where by I answered thus and said,
to shun the cause of further strife;
I would contain my self a Maid,
until such time I was made a wife.
And since you my mind have crossed,
you may bestow you as you will,
Shepherd farewell, there is nothing lost,
I am resolved to say so still.
Blind Cupid with his wounding Dart,
could never make me sorrow feel,
I Will not lay that unto my heart.
as others shake off with their heel.

Printed for A. Milbourn, W. Onley, and T. Thackeray, at the Angel in Duck-Lane


