HONI SOIT MAL Y PENSE
Royal blazon of the United Kingdom

THE PROPOSITIONS PRESENTED To His Majesty at Newcastle, the 24 day of July
1646.

By the Earls of Pembroke and Suffolk, Sir Walter Earl and Sir John Hipisley
Knights, and M. Goodwin and M. Robison Commissioners from the Lords and Commons
assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name, and in the behalf of the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

And by the Earl of Lowdon Chancellor of Scotland, and the Marquess of Argyle
Commissioner of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and in the behalf of
the Kingdom of Scotland.

WITH HIS Majesty's GRACIOUS ANSWER thereunto: At Newcastle the first day of
August 1646.

Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1646.

May it please your Majesty;
WE the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name,
and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of the Kingdom of
Scotland, Do humbly present unto your Majesty, the humble desires and
Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms respectively: Unto which we do pray your Ma^esties Assent: And
that they, and all such Bills as shall be ^endred to your Majesty in pursuance
of them, or any of them, may be Established and Enacted for Statutes and Acts
of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent in the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms respectively.

I. WHereas both Houses of the Parliament of England, have been necessitated to
undertake a War in their just and lawful defense: And afterward both Kingdoms
of England and Scotland joined in solemn League and Covenant, were engaged to
prosecute the same.

That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had, or hereafter to be had against
both or either of the Houses of Parliament of England, the Parliament of the
kingdom of Scotland, and the late Convention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and proceedings; or against any for adhering unto them; or for doing
or executing any Office, Place, or Charge, by any Authority derived from them.
And all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainders, and Inquifitions, in
any the said Causes; And all graunts thereupon made or had, or to be made or
had, be declared Null, suppressed and forbidden. And that this be publicly
intimated in all Parish Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and all other
places needful.

II. That His Majesty according to the laudable example of His Royal Father
of happy memory may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for enjoining the taking thereof by all the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms; And the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both
Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such
penalties, as by mutual advice of both Kingdoms shall be agreed upon.

III. That a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deanes and
Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and Prebendaries; And all
Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Succentors, and Sacrists;
and all Vicars Chorill, and Choresters, old Vicars, and new Vicars of any
Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their under Officers, out of the
Church of England, and Dominion of Wales; And out of the Church of Ireland,
with such alterations concerning the Estates of Prelates, as shall agree with
the Articles of the late Treaty of the Date at Edinburgh, 29 November 1643. and
joint Declaration of both Kingdoms.

IIII. That the Ordinances concerning the Calling and sitting of the Assembly
of Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

V. That Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, be settled by Act
of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon,
after Consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

VI. For as much as both Kingdoms are mutually obliged by the same Covenant, to
endeavor the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in matters of Religion, That
such Unity and Uniformity in Religion according to the Covenant, as after
Consultation had with the Divines of both Kingdoms now Assembled, is or shall
be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament of England, and by the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament of both
Kingdoms respectively.

VII. That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and
Popish Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the
better discovering, and speedy Conviction of Recusants, an Oath be established
by Act of Parliament to be Administered to them, wherein they shall abjure and
renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, and Images, and all other
Popish Superstitions and Errors: and refusing the said Oath, being tendered in
such manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient
conviction of Recusancy.

VIII. An Act of Parliament for Education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

IX. An Act for the true Leavie of the Penalties against them; which Penalties
to be Leavied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on,
wherein to be provided that His Majesty shall have no loss.

X. That an Act be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed,
and a stricter course taken to prevent the Saying, or Hearing of Mass in the
Court, or any other part of this Kingdom.

XI. The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the four last preceding
Propositions, in such manner as the Estates of the Parliament there shall think
fit.

XII. That the King do give his Royal assent to an Act for the due observation
of the Lords Day.

And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches and Chapels,
in and about the Worship of God, etc.

And for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts
of this Kingdom.

And to the Bill against the enjoying of Pluralities of ^enefices by Spiritual
Persons and Non-Residency.

And to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by ^^th Houses of Parliament, for
the reforming and re^^lating of both Universities, of the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton.

And to such Act or Acts for raising of Moneys for the payment and satisfying
of the Public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other Public uses, as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament: and that if the King
do not give his Assent thereunto, then it being done by both Houses of
Parliament, (...) same shall be as valid to all Intents and Purposes, as i^ ^he
Royal Assent had been given thereunto.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland.

And that his Majesty give assurance of his consent^^^ in the Parliament of
Scotland, to an Act, acknowledging and ratifying the Acts of the Convention of
Estates of Scotland, called by the Counsel and Conservers of the Peace, and
the Commissioners for the Common Burdens, and Assembled the two and twentieth
day of June 1643. And several times continued since: and of the Parliament of
that Kingdom since Conveened.

XIII. That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England assembled, shall
during the space of twenty years, from the first of July 1646. Arm, Train, and
Discipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained, and Disciplined, all the Forees of
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, already raised both
for Sea and Land Service; and shall from time to time during the said space of
twenty years, Raise, Leavie, Arm, Train, and Discipline, or cause to be raised,
Leavied, Armed, Trained, and Disciplined, any other Forces for Land and Sea
service, in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid, as in their
judgments they shall from time to time during the said space of twenty years
think fit and appoint: And that neither the King, his Heirs, or Successors, nor
any other but such as shall act by the Authority or approbation of the said
Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty years, exercise any of
the Powers aforesaid.

And the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament
there shall think fit.

That Moneys be raised and leavied for the maintenance and use of the said
Forces for Land service, and of the Navy and Forces for Sea service, in such
sort, and by such ways and means as the said Lords and Commons shall from time
to time during the said space of twenty years think fit and appoint, and not
otherwise. That all the said Forces both for Land and Sea service, so raised or
leavied, or to be raised or leavied, and also the Admiralty and Navy, shall
from time to time during the said space of twenty years, be employed, managed,
ordered, and disposed by the said Lords and Commons, in such sort, and by such
ways and means as they shall think fit and appoint, and not otherwise. And the
said Lords and Commons, during the said space of twenty years, shall have power;

1. To suppress all Forces raised, or to be raised, without authority and
consent of the said Lords and ^ommons, to the disturbance of the public Peace
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion (...) Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town (...) Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

2. To suppress any Foreign Forces who shall in^de, or endeavor to invade
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey
and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

3. To conjoyn such Forces of the Kingdom of England with the Forces of the
Kingdom of Scotland, ^s the said Lords and Commons shall from time to ^^me
during the said space of twenty years, judge fit and necessary; To resist all
Foreign Invasions, and to suppress any Forces, raised or to be raised
against, or within either of the said Kingdoms, To the disturbance of the
public Peace of the said Kingdoms, or any of them, by any authority under the
great Seal, or other warrant whatsoever, without consent of the said Lords and
Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament or the Estates of the
Parliament of Scotland respectively: And that no Forces of either Kingdom,
shall go into or continue in the other Kingdom, without the advice and desire
of the said Lords and Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament
of the Kingdom of Scotland, or such as shall be by them appointed for that
purpose: And that after the expiration of the said twenty years, neither the
King, his Heirs or Successors, or any person or persons, by color or pretense
of any Commission, Power, Deputation, or authority to be derived from the King,
his Heirs or Successors, or any of them, shall Raise, Arm, Train, Discipline,
Employ, Order, Manage, Disband, or dispose any of the Forces by Sea or Land,
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the Dominion of Wales, Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed; Nor exercise any of
the said powers or authorities in the precedent Articles mentioned and
expressed to be, during the said space of twenty years, in the said Lords and
Commons; Nor do any act or thing concerning the execution of the said powers or
authorities, or any of them, without the consent of the said Lords and Commons
first had and obtained. That after the expiration of the said twenty years, in
all cases wherein the Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of the Kingdom
to be concerned, and shall thereupon pass any Bill or Bills for the Raising,
Arming, Training, Disciplining, Employing, Managing, Ordering, or Disposing of
the Forces by Sea or Land, of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the Dominion
of Wales, Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or
of any part of the said Forces, or concerning the Admiralty and Navy, or
concerning the Leavying of Moneys for the Raising, Maintenance, or use of the
said Forces for Land service, or of the Navy and Forces for Sea service, or of
any part of them; And if that the Royal Assent to such Bill or Bills shall not
be given in the House of Peers within such time after the passing thereof by
both Houses of Parliament, as the said Houses shall judge fit and convenient;
That then such Bill or Bills so passed by the said Lords and Commons as
aforesaid, and to which the Royal Assent shall not be given, as is herein
before expressed, shall nevertheless after declaration of the said Lords and
Commons ^ade in that behalf, have the force and strength of an Act or Acts of
Parliament; And shall be as valid to all ^tents and purposes, as if the Royal
Assent had been ^iven thereunto.

Provided, that nothing herein before contained shall extend to the taking away
of the ordinary legal ^ower of Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Coroners, Constables, Headboroughs, or other Officers of Justice not being
millitary Officers, con^erning the administration of Justice, so as neither the
said Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Constables,
Headboroughs and other Officers, nor any of them, do leavy, conduct, employ,
or command any forces whatsoever, by color or pretense of any Commission of
Array, or extraordinary command from his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
without the consent of the said Lords and Commons.

And if any person shall be gathered and assembled together in warlike manner,
or otherwise, to the number of thirty persons, and shall not forthwith disband
themselves being required thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or command
from them, or any by them, especially authorized for that purpose, then such
person and persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guilty, and incur
the pains of high Treason, being first declared guilty of such offense by the
said Lords and Commons; Any Commission under the great Seal or other warrant to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And he, or they that shall offend herein, to be incapable of any pardon from
his Majesty, his Heirs o^ Successors, and their Estates shall be disposed as
the said Lords and Commons shall think fit, and not otherwise*

Provided that the City of London, shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties and Franchises, Customs and usages, in the raising and employing the
Forces of that City, for the defense thereof, in as full and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as they have or might have used or enjoyed the same
at any time before the making of the said Act or Proposition; To the end that
City may be fully assured, it is not the intention of the Parliament to take
from them any privileges or immunities, in raising or disposing of their
Forces, which they have or might have used or enjoyed heretofore.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament there
shall think fit.

XIV. That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since the day that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal deserted the Parliament; And
that the said Great Seal was serruptitiously conveyed away from the Parliament;
being the one and twentieth day of May, 1642. And who shall be hereafter made
shall not sit of Vote in the Parliament of England, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament: And that all honor, and Title conferred on any without
consent of both Houses of Parliament, since the twentieth of May, 1642. being
the day that both Houses declared, That the King seduced by evil Counsel,
intended to raise war against the Parliament, be declared Null and Void.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, those being excepted, whose Patents
were passed the Great Seal before the 4. of June, 1644.

XV. That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of ^oth Kingdoms respectively,
for confirmation of the Treaties passed betwixt the two Kingdoms (viz.) ^he
large Treaty, the late Treaty for the coming of the ^cots Army into England,
and the settling of the Gar^son of Barwick of the 29. of November 1643. and the
Treaty concerning Ireland, of the 6. of August 1642. or the bringing of ten
thousand Scots into the Pro^ince of Ulster in Ireland, with all other
Ordinances and proceedings passed betwixt the two Kingdoms, and whereunto they
are obliged by the aforesaid Trea^ies.

And that Algernon Earl of Northumberland, John Earl of Rutland, Philip Earl
of Pembroke and Montgomery, Robert Earl of Essex, Thcophilus Earl of
Lin^olne, James Earl of Suffolk, Robert Earl of Warwick, Edward Earl of
Manchester, Henry Earl of Stanford, Francis Lord Dacres, Philip Lord Wharton,
Francis Lord Willoughby, Dudly Lord North, John Lord Hunsdon, William Lord
Gray, Edward Lord Howard of Estrick, Thomas Lord Bruce, Ferdinando Lord
Fairefax, M. Nathaniel Fines, Sir William Armine, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
Henry Vane senior, M. William Pierpoint, Sir Edward Aiscough, Sir William
Strickland, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William Brereton, Sir
Thomas Widdrington, M. John Toll, M. Gilbert Mellington, Sir William Constable,
Sir John Wray, Sir Henry Vane junior, M. Henry Darley, Oliver Saint John
Esquire, His Majesty's Solicitor General, M. Denzill Hollis, M. Alex. Rigby,
M. Cornelius Holland, M. Samuel Vassell, M. Peregrine Pelham, John Glyn
Esquire, Recorder of London, M. Henry Martin, Master Alderman Hoyle, M. John
Blakiston, M. Sergeant Wild, M. Richard Barwis, Sir Anthony Irby, M. Ashurst,
M. Bellingham, and M. Talson, Members of both Houses of the Parliament of
Ergland, shall be the Commissioners for the Kingdom of England, for
conservation of the Peace between the two Kingdoms, to act according to the
Powers in that behalf expressed in the Articles of the large Treaty, and not
otherwise.

That His Majesty give his assent to what the two Kingdoms shall agree upon in
prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet finished.

XVI. That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively,
for establishing the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms, bearing date the 30
day of January 1643 in England, and 1644 in Scotland, with the Qualifications
ensuing.

1. Qualification.
THat the Persons who shall expect no pardon be only these following.

Rupert and Maurice Count Palatines of Rhine, James Earl of Darby, John Earl
of Bristoll, William Earl of Newcastle, Francis Lord Cottington, George Lord
Digby, Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, Sir Robert Heath Knight, Doctor Bramhall
Bishop of Derry, Sir William Widdrington, Colonel George Goringe, Henry Jermin
Esquire, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Biron, Sir Francis Doddington, Sir John
Strangwayes, M. Endymion Porter, Sir George Radcliffe, Sir Marmaduke Langdale,
^^nry Vaughan Esquire, now called Sir Henry Vaughan, (...) Francis Windebank,
Sir Richard Greenvill, M. Edward ^^de now called Sir Edward Hide, Sir John
Marlcy, Sir ^holas Cole, Sir Thomas Riddell junior, Sir John C^lper, M. Richard
Lloyd now called Sir Richard Lloyd, (...) David Jenkins, Sir George Strode,
George Carteret ^uire, now called Sir George Carteret, Sir Charles Dal^^^n
Knight, Richard Lane Esquire, now called Sir Ri^^rd Lane, Sir Edward Nicholas,
John Ashburnham ^^^quire, Sir Edward Harbert Knight, His Majesty's At^^^ey
General. Earl of Traquaire, Lord Harris, Lord Rae, George Gordoun sometime
Marquess of Hunt^^, James Grahame sometime Earl of Montrose, Robe^, Maxwell
late Earl of Niddesdale, Robert Dalyell ^^^etime Earl of Carnewath, James
Gordoun somet^^es Viscount of Aboyne, Lodowick Lindsey some^^e Earl of
Crawfurd, James Ogley sometime Earl (...) Airby, James Ogley sometime Lord
Ogley, Patrick R^hven sometime Earl of Forth, James King someti^e Lord Itham,
Alaster Macdonald, Irwing younger o^ Prunim, Gordon younger of Gight, Lesly of
Auchen^^e, Colonel John Cockram, Grahame of Gorthie, M^ John Maxwell, sometime
pretended Bishop of Rosse: And all such others as being Processed by the
Estates for Treason, shall be condemned before the Act of Ob^^on be passed.

2. Qualification.
ALl Papists and Popish Recusants, who have been, (...) now are, or shall be
actually in Arms, or volun^^y assisting against the Parliament, or Estates of
ei^^r Kingdom:

And by name, The Marquess of Winton, Earl of Worcester, Edward Lord Harbert
of Ragland son to the Earl of Worcester, Lord Brudnell, Carell Mollineux
Esquire, Lord Arundell of Warder, Sir Francis Howard, Sir John Winter, Sir
Charles Smith, Sir John Preston, Sir Bazill Brook, Lord Audley Earl of
Castelhaven in the Kingdom of Ireland, William Sheldon of Beely Esquire, Sir
Henry Beddingfield.

3. Qualification.
ALl persons who have had any hand in the plotting, designing, or assisting the
Rebellion of Ireland, except such persons who having only assisted the said
Rebellion, have rendered themselves, or come in to the Parliament of England.

4. Qualification.
THat Humfrey Bennet Esquire, Sir Edward Ford Sir John Penruddock, Sir George
Vaughan, Si^ John Weld, Sir Robert Lee, Sir John Pate, John Ackland Edmund
Windham Esquire, Sir John Fitzharbert, Si^ Edward Lawrence, Sir Ralph Dutton,
Henry Lingen Esquire Sir William Russell of Worcestershire, Thomas Lee o^ Adlington
Esquire, Sir John Girlington, Sir Paul Neale Sir William Thorald, Sir Edward
Hussy, Sir Thomas Liddell senior, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir John Digby o^
Nottinghamshire, Sir Henry Fletcher, Sir Richard Mi^shall, Laurence Halstead,
John Denham Esquire, Sir E^mund Fortescue, Peter Sainthill Esquire, Sir Thom^
Tildesley, Sir Henry Griffith, Michael Wharton Esquire Sir Henry Spiller, M.
George Benyon now called Sir George ^nyon, Sir Edward Walgrave, Sir Edward
Bishop, Sir ^bert Owselcy, Sir John Many, Lord Cholmley, Sir Tho^as Aston, Sir
Lewis Dives, Sir Peter Orbourne, Samuel ^ornton Esquire, Sir John Lucas, John
Blancy Esquire, ^^r Thomas Chedle, Sir Nicholas Kemish, Hugh Lloyd ^quire, Sir
Nicholas Crispe, Sir Peter Ricant.

And all such of the Scottish Nation as have concur^^^ in the Votes at Oxford,
against the Kingdom of ^^otland and their proceedings, or have sworn or
sub^^ibed the Declaration against the convention and Co^nant; And all such as
have assisted the Rebellion in the ^orth, or the Invasion in the South of the
said King^me of Scotland, or the late Invasion made there by (...) Irish and
their adherents, be removed from his Maje^es Counsels, and be restrained from
coming with^^ the Vorge of the Court, and that they may not without the advice
and consent of both Houses of the ^arliament of England, or the Estates in the
Parlia^ent of Scotland respectively, bear any Office, or have any employment
concerning the State or Commonwealth; And in case any of them shall offend
therein, (...) be guilty of high Treason, and incapable of any ^^rdon from His
Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as both Houses of the Parliament of
England, or the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland respectively shall think
fit: And that one full third part upon full ^alue of the estates of the persons
aforesaid, made incapable of employment as aforesaid, be employed for ^he
payment of the Public Debts, and Damages, according to the Declaration.

1. Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves late Members of either
House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but have also
sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxford, called, or pretended by some to be a
Parliament, and Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not voluntarily rendered
themselves before the last of October 1644. be removed from His Majesty's
Councels, and restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court, And that
they may not without the advice and consent of both Kingdoms bear any Office,
or have any employment concerning the State or Common wealth: And in case any
of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of high Treason, and incapable of
any pardon by His Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as both Houses of
Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland
respectively, shall think fit.

2. Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of either House
of Parliament, who have sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxford, called or
pretended by some to be a Parliament, and have not voluntarily rendered
themselves before the last of October 1644. be removed from His Majesty's
Councels, and restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court; And that
they may not without the advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament bear
any Office, or have any employment concerning the State or Common wealth: And
in case any of them shall offend ^herein, to be guilty of high Treason, and
incapable of any pardon from His Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as
both Houses of the Parliament of England ^all think fit.

3. Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of either House
of Parliament, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the Ene^ies
thereof, and have not rendered themselves before the last of October 1644. be
removed from His Maje^^ies Councels, and be restrained from coming within the
Verge of the Court; And that they may not without the advice and consent of
both Houses of Parliament bear any Office, or have any employment concer^ing
the State or Common wealth: And in case any of them shall offend therein, to be
guilty of high Treason, and incapable of any pardon from His Majesty, and
their estates to be disposed as both Houses of Parliament in England shall
think fit.

5. Qualification.
THat all Judges, and Officers toward the Law, Common or Civil, who have
deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, be incapable of
any place of Judicature or Office toward the Law, Common or Civil: And that
all Sergeants, Councellers, and Atturneys, Doctors, Advocates, and Proctors of
the Law, Common or Civil, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the
Enemies thereof, be incapable of any practice in the Law, Common or Civil,
either in public or private, and shall not be capable of any preferment or
employment in the Common wealth, without the advice and consent of both Houses
of Parliament; And that no Bishop or Clergyman, no Master or Fellow of any
College or Hall, in either of the Universities, or elsewhere, or any Master of
School or Hospital, or any Ecclesiastical person, who has deserted the
Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, shall hold or enjoy, or be
capable of any preferment or employment in Church or Common wealth; But all
their said several preferments, places, and promotions, shall be utterly void,
as if they were naturally dead; Nor shall they otherwise use their Function of
the Ministry without advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament:
Provided, that no Laps shall incur by such vacancie until six months past,
after notice thereof.

6. Qualification.
THat all persons who have been actually in Arms against the Parliament, or
have counseled, or voluntarily assisted the Enemies thereof, are disabled to
be Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Majors, or other head Officers of any City
or Corporation, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or to sit or serve as
Members or assistants in either of the Houses of Parliament, or to have any
Military employment in this Kingdom without the consent of both Houses of
Parliament.

7. Qualification.
THe persons of all others to be free of all personal censure, notwithstanding
any act or thing ^one, in, or concerning this War, they taking the ^ovenant.

8. Qualification.
THe estates of those persons excepted in the first three precedent
Qualifications; and the estates of Edward Lord Littleton, and of William Laud
late Archbishop of Canterbury, to pay public debts and damages.

9. Qualification.
1. Branch.
That two full parts in three, to be divided of all the estates of the Members
of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but
have also Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not ren^^ed themselves before
the first of December 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
public debts and damages of the Kingdom.

2. Branch.
That two full parts in three, to be divided of the estates of such late
Members of either House of Parli^ment, as sat in the unlawful Assembly at
Oxford, and shall not have rendered themselves before the first of December
1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the public debts and
damages of the Kingdom.

3. Branch.
That one full Moitie of the Estates of such Persons late Members of either of
the Houses of Parliament, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the
Enemies thereof, and shall not have rendered themselves before the first of
December 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the public debts
and damages of the Kingdom.

10. Qualification.
THat a full third part on the value of the Estates of all Judges and Officers
toward the Law, Common or Civil, and of all Sergeants, Counselors, and
Aturneyes, Doctors, Advocates, and Proctors of the Law, Common or Civil; And
of all Bishops, Clergymen, Masters and Fellows of any College or Hall in
either of the Universities, or elsewhere; And of all Masters of Schools, or
Hospitalls, and of Ecclesiastical Persons who have deserted the Parliament,
and adhered to the enemies thereof, and have not rendered themselves before the
first of December 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
Public debts and damages of the Kingdom.

That a full sixth part on the full Value of the Estates of the persons
excepted in the fixth Qualification concerning such as have been actually in
Arms against the Parliament, or have Councelled or voluntarily assisted the
Enemies thereof, and are disabled according to the said Qualification, to be
taken and employed for the payment of the public debts and damages of the
Kingdom.

11. Qualification.
THat the Persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers, and others of the
Kingdom of England who in Lands or Goods be not worth two hundred pounds
Sterling: And the Persons and Estates of (...) Common Soldiers and others of
the Kingdom of ^^^land, who in Lands or Goods be not worth one hundred pounds
Sterling, be at liberty and discharged.

1. Branch.
This Proposition to stand as to the English, and as to the Scots likewise; If
the Parliament of Scotland or their Commissioners shall so think fit.

2. Branch.
That the first of May last, is now the day limited (...) the persons to come
in that are comprised within the former Qualification.

That an Act be passed, whereby the Debts of the Kingdom, and the Persons of
Delinquents, and the value of their Estates may be known: And which Act shall
appoint in what manner the Confiscations and Proportions before mentioned may
be leavyed, and applied to the discharge of the said Engagments.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of Parliament, or such
as shall have power from them shall think fit.

XVII. That an Act of Parliament be passed, to de^^re and make void the
Cessation of Ireland, and all Treaties and Conclusions of Peace, or any
Articles thereupon with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. And to settle the Prosecution of the War of Ireland in both
Houses of the Parliament of England, to be managed by them: And the King to
assist, and to do no act to discountenance or molest them therein.

That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled in the
Kingdom of Ireland by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses of the
Parliament of England have agreed, or shall agree upon, after Consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines here.

That the Deputy, or chief Governor, or other Governors of Ireland, and the
Presidents of the several Provinces of that Kingdom be nominated by both the
Houses of the Parliament of England, or in the Intervalls of Parliament, by
such Committees of both Houses of Parliament, as both Houses of the Parliament
of England shall nominate and appoint for that purpose. And that the
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the great Seal or
Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellor of Exchequer and Duchy;
Secretaries of State, Master of the Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and Barons
of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Vice
Treasurer, and Treasurers at Wars of the Kingdom of Ireland be nominated by
both Houses of the Parliament of England, to continue Quam diu se been
gesserint, and in the Intervalls of Parliament by the aforementioned
Committees; to be approved, or disallowed by both Houses at their next fitting.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning ^he nomination of the Lords
of the Privy Council, Lords of Session and Exchequer, Officers of State and
justice General, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there shall think
fit.

XVIII. That the Militia of the City of London, and ^^berties thereof, may be
in the ordering and government of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons (...)
Common Council assembled, or such as they shall ^^om time to time appoint,
(whereof the Lord Major ^^d Sheriffs for the time being to be three:) To be
^^ployed and directed from time to time in such man^er as shall be agreed on,
and appointed by both Houses (...) Parliament.

That no Citizen of the City of London, nor any of ^e Forces of the said City,
shall be drawn forth or compelled to go out of the said City or Liberties
^ereof for Military service, without their own free ^onsent.

That an Act be passed for the granting and con^^rming of the Charters,
Customs, Liberties, and ^^anchises of the City of London, notwithstanding any
^onuser, Misuser, or Abuser.

That the Tower of LONDON may be in the Government of the City of LONDON. And
the ^hief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time be nominated and
remooveable by the Common Counsel: and for prevention of inconveniences which
may happen by the long intermission of Common-Councells, it is desired, That
there may be an Act, that all by Laws and Ordinances already made, or
hereafter to be made, by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, in
Common Counsel assembled, touching the Calling, continuing, directing, and
regulating the same Common-Councells, shall be as effectual in Law to all
Intents and Purposes as if the same were particularly Enacted by the Authority
of Parliament: And that the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common
Council, may add to, or Repeal the said Ordinances from time to time as they
shall see cause.

That such other Propositions as shall be made for the City, for their further
safety, welfare, and Government, and shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, may be granted and confirmed by Act of Parliament.

XIX. That all grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs, Process, proceedings,
and other things passed under the Great Seal of England in the custody of the
Lords and others Commissioners appointed by both Houses of Parliament for the
Custody thereof, be, and by Act of Parliament with the Royal assent, shall be
declared and Enacted to be of like full force, and effect to all Intents and
purposes, as the same or like grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs,
process, procedings, and other things under any great Seal of England, in any
time heretofore were, or have been; And that for time to come the said great
Seal now remaining in custody of the said Commissioners, continue, and be
used for the great Seal of England: And that all Grants, Commissions,
presentations, Writs, Process, proceedings, and other things whatsoever,
passed under or by authority of any other great Seal, since the 22. day of
May, Anno Dom. 1642. or hereafter to be passed, be Invalid, and of no effect,
to all Intents and purposes: Except such Writs, process, and Commissions, as
being passed under any other great Seal, then the said great Seal in the
Custody of the Commissioners aforesaid, on or after the said 22. day of May,
and before the 28 day of November, Anno Dom. 1643. were afterward proceeded
upon, returned into, or put in ure in any the Kings Courts at Westminster: And
except the Grant to Mr. Justice Bacon, to be one of the Justices of the Kings
Bench. And except all Acts and proceedings by virtue of any such Commissions of
Goal Delivery, Assize, and Nisi prius, or Oyer and ^erminer, passed under any
other great Seal then the Seal aforesaid in custody of the said Commissioners
before the first of October, 1642.

And that all Grants of Offices, Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments, made, or
passed under the great Seal of Ireland unto any person or persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, since the Cessation made in Ireland, the fifteenth day
of September, 1643. shall be Null, and void. And that all Honors and Titles
conferred upon any person or persons in the said Kingdom ^f Ireland, since the
said Cessation, shall be Null, and void.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

His Majesty's Answer to the Propositions presented to Him at Newcastle the 24
day of July 1646.
By the Earls of Pembroke and Suffolk, Sir Walter Earl, and Sir John
Hippesley Knights, and M. Goodwin and M. Robinson, Commissioners from the Lords
and Commons, assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name, and in the
behalf of the Kingdom of England and Ireland: And by the Earl of Loudoun
Chancellor of Scotland, and the Marquess of Argyle, Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and in the behalf of the Kingdom of
Scotland.
Charles R.

THe Propositions tendered to His Majesty by the Commissioners from the Lords
and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland (to which the Houses of Parliament
have taken twice so any months for deliberation, as they have ^gned days for
His Majesty's Answer) (...) import so great alteration in Government, (...) in
the Church and Kingdom, as it is very ^^^icult to return a particular and
positive Answer, before a full debate, wherein these Proposions and the
necessary Explanations, true (...), and reasons thereof be rightly weighed and
understood, and that his Majesty (upon a full (...) of the whole Propositions)
may know what (...), as well as what is taken away and chang^d: In all which
His Majesty finds (upon discourse with the said Commissioners) that they (...)
so bound up from any capacity, either to give Pleasons for the Demands they
bring, or to give (...) to such desires as His Majesty is to propone, (...) is
impossible for him to give such a present judgment of, and Answer to these
Propositions, whereby he can answer to God, that a safe and well-grounded Peace
will ensue (which is evident to all the world, can never be, unless the just
power of the Crown, as well as the freedom and propriety of the Subject, with
the just Liberty and Privileges of Parliament be likewise settled.) To which
end His Majesty desires and proposes to come to London, or any of Hi^ houses
thereabouts, upon the Public Faith, and security of the two Houses of His
Parliament, and the Scots Commissioners; that he shall be there with freedom,
honor, and safety, where^ by his personal presence, he may not only raise a
mutual confidence betwixt him and his people, but also have these doubts
cleared, and these difficulties explained unto him, which he now conceives to
be destructive to his just Regal power, if he should give a full consent to
these Propositions as they now stand: As likewise that he might make known to
them such his reasonable Demands, as he is most assured will be very much
conducible to that happy Peace which all good men desire and pray for, by
settling of Religion, the just privileges of Parliament, with the freedom and
propriety of the Subject: And His ^ajesty assures them, that as he can never
con^^end unto what is absolutely destructive to ^t just Power, which by the
Laws of God and (...) Land he is born unto, so he will cheerfully ^^nt and give
his assent unto all such Bills (at (...) desire of his two Houses) or
reasonable De^^nds for Scotland, which shall be really for the ^^d and peace of
his people, not having a regard ^his own particular (much less of any bodies
(...)) in respect to the happiness of these King^^s: Wherefore his Majesty
conjures them, as ^^ristians, as Subjects, and as men who desires to ^^ve a
good name behind them, that they will (...) receive and make use of this
Answer, that all ^^es of blood may be stopped, and these unhap^e distractions
peaceably settled.

At New Castle the first day of August 1646. Charles R.
Upon assurance of a happy agreement His Majesty will immediately send for the
Prince His Son, absolutely answering for his perfect obedience



FINIS.

