Public CREDIT, Under Consideration, how to be RETREIV'D.
THE Loss of a Public Credit is certainly one of the greatest Misfortunes that
can befall a Trading Nation, which, to our great Unhappiness, seems to bare too
near a resemblance of our very Case; and such have been the Improvements made
thereupon by the Enemies of the Government, and some Self-Interested Persons,
in Order to render themselves Extraordinary Gain, that it must be owned has
chiefly Occasioned the great Difficulties we have hitherto met withal, and what
we now actually Labor under.

BUT considering, that Merchants, and Traders, in General, from abroad seem to
be more and more Reconciled to our Public Faith, from the Observations they
have made of the Resolutions and Proceedings of our late Session of Parliament;
and are now become fully persuaded, that they are earnestly concerned to Defend
and Support the same.

It Is Highly our Interest Unanimously to Join with them, in our Inclinations
and Endeavors toward the promoting such a Disposition amongst our selves, and
carrying on so good an Opinion of our Credit to Perfection: By which means we
shall Break the Designs of our Enemies, and perfectly Extirpate those
Exorbitant Practices, which have hitherto tended only to the Fomenting, and
Keeping up Strange Jealousies of our Credit, to the great Interruption in Trade.

WHich if not Effectually Remedied, (and at this present Juncture) the
Consequence must prove Fatal and Destructive to this Nation, as being a People
that Depend so much upon Credit; and there needs no other Argument to prove,
how Desperate and Miserable our Circumstances are like to be, for time to come,
than to reflect, and look back, and judge by Experience how unhappy we have
been for some time past, for want of a due care in preserving the Credit of the
Nation; which ought always to be deemed as Sacred.

NOW that we may be Restored to our former Character, in Relation to a General
Credit, which most certainly would render us the Happiest of People.

IT is considered, and humbly conceived, That a National Credit, when once
lost, is never to be Retreived, but by one of these two ways, viz.

THE First, By procuring such a quantity of Specie, as should be sufficient to
Discharge the Debts of a Nation; (which for us to do at present) is Morally
imposible.

THE Second, by laying before the people such Natural Inducements, as shall
Engage them, both by Reason and Interest, (as one Man) to the supporting
Public Credit; which is the Honor and Glory of a Kingdom.

BY this only can our Credit be Recovered, being of so Tender a Nature, that
nothing but what is Indulging, persuasive, and Convincing, can ever take place
to have a good effect.

IN Order to Reduce so good a Design into Practice, It Is Proposed from the
Considerations aforementioned, that this City of London, the great Metropolis,
the very Center of Trade, and so consequently the Spring and Fountain of
Credit, do forthwith Enter into an Association or General Agreement, to Support
and Defend the Credit of the Nation against all it is Opposers.

THE Nature of this Association makes it absolutely necessary, First to declare
an Abhorrence, and Detestation against the evil Practices that have been made
upon our Credit; Then to demonstrate what a good Opinion the People have of the
Public Faith, by a Voluntary and Unanimous Subscription to the following
Preliminaries, viz.

THAT in all Payments in matter of Trade and Commerce (Bills of Exchange
excepted) they will readily Receive for Payment, the one Moity in Specie, the
other in Bank Bills and Notes at Parr, provided the Debt be over and above the
Sum of Twenty Pounds.

BUT all Debts of that Sum, and under, to be paid (if desired) in Specie, to
preserve a Circulation, to answer all Inferior Trades; and to Accomodate
Families in Respect of Provisions, etc.

BY these Means, the Credit and Specie of the Nation will go hand in hand
toward the Supporting and enlarging each other; the Discount of Notes (in all
probability) soon put to an end, and public Credit Naturally follow.

BANK Notes falling under a Discount, was the Real Occasion of bringing a
Disparagement upon all Public Credit: But when once the Cause is removed, the
effect will cease.

THis Association, or General Agreement, can hardly fail of it is Intention,
upon making good these three Propositions.
FIrst, In making it appear to be greatly the Advantage of such as are
concerned in the Government.

SEcond, By manifesting from Natural Consequences, that it will be likewise the
Intrest of those Persons that are not engaged in the Public.

THird, In laying down a Plain and Easy Method in bringing such an
Association, or Agreement, to become feazable.

As to the First Proposition.
First. It Is presumed, that Four parts in Five of Bank Bills and Notes, are in
and about this City; therefore more natural for them to Associate, to give a
Credit, by reason of the influence the City bears over the Kingdom, as well as
abroad.

Second. ALL such persons that are possessed of Bank Bills and Notes, most
readily will comply herein, by reason of the Discount that is now upon those
Notes, which will Immediately [after the Association] be at a Parr.

Third. THose that are Concerned in the Capital stock of the Bank of England,
or any other Public Funds (viz.) Tallys, Lotteries, Annuities, etc. most
Infallibly will join in this undertaking, it Appearing so plain to be an
Immediate advance on their respective Interest, proportionable to the Rise of
Bank Notes.

Fourth. THE Exchequer Bills that are Issued out, pursuant to a late Act of
Parliament, might reasonably have expected to have had a Currency till
Oppertunity offered, to sink them in the Kings Public Receipts; as Customs
and Excise; but it is too plain, that the Practice of Discount is likewise upon
them, etc. But when once (by this Association) Bank Bills and Notes shall
arrive to such a Credit, Exchequer Bills will be so much in esteem, and become
so much more Valuable than Money, for the sake of the High Interest they Carry:
That the KING, instead of Receiving his Revenue in such Bills, will find the
greater part in Specie, and every Man reserve the said Bills for his last
Payment. Exchequer Bills may be included in this Association, if thought
necessary.


As to the Second.
First. THose that have no manner of interest in Public Funds, yet as Traders,
cannot avoid receiving of Bank Notes in Payment; and the Difficulties that they
have met with in respect thereof, has so much harrased and fatiegued them, by
obstructing all their affairs, that even such would be glad to take up any
Expedient, that might Tend to a Settlement of their Payments, and Encourage
Trade.

Second. THE number of such Persons that are actually Engaged, and have
Considerable Interests in the Public Credit, cannot be thought less than Three
parts in Four of the Valuable Men in the City; possibly Not a Man of good
repute, and Considerable dealing, can be Exempted: This must go a great way,
even in their very Numbers; besides the influence they have to carry through
such an Association.

Third. NO Man (it may be averd) refuses Bank Notes, at this time, in Payment,
from a real ill Opinion of their Credit, but on the Contrary; for it plainly
appears, when such men press for Specie, and seem to undervalue the Credit of
the Bank, that immediately after they convert the very same Specie into the very
same Credit, and nothing but the advantage of the Discount is the thing aimed
at.

Fourth. IF any Person not well disposed to the Government, or some others,
that may be unwilling such an Association or Agreement should take Effect, for
fear of Destroying those Pernicious Practices of Excessive Usury, which they
make, by joining with such as are Industrious to debase, and run down the
Credit of the Nation; yet when they shall find this Association, or Agreement
become General, both sorts will be very shye how they Expose themselves in not
complying, for fear of being accounted Enemies to the Public good.

Fifth. BUT if some few should prove refractory, and stand out, they will soon
find it their Interest to come in; for most certainly those that do Associate,
will Trade with no other, but what shall Associate with them; which in a short
time must prove highly prejudicial, the Numbers of the one being so vastly
disproportionable to the other. A List of the Names of the Persons that
Subscribe, with the places of their abodes and their several and respective
Trades Alphabetically may be Printed, if thought convenient.


The Third Proposition, to make this Association Easy and Natural.

THE Method of setting forward such an Association (with Submission) is by a
Generous Undertaking of each Member of the Common Council, and others that are
entirely in the Intrest of the Nation, heartily to Espouse this Design, so much
intended for a Public Good; which receiving encouragement from them, will
Naturally have its influence to a great Degree.

WHen once the People become truly Sensible of the Advantage that will arise
hereby, and how far it must tend to the Honor and Greatness of this City, to
Promote a free Circulation in our Trade; It Is not to be questioned, but of
themselves they will desire a Common Council to be called, and there to agree,
to have Subscriptions taken in the several Wards, Pursuant to the Association
that shall be Drawn for that Purpose. It is referred to the Common Council, to
prepare an instrument to be subscribed to, pursuant to this Association. A
certain time to be limited for taking the said Subscription; and every
subscriber to have liberty to withdraw the same, unless it becomes general.




THese Graduall Methods being first taken, and laying a good Foundation for the
Superstructure; It Is not to be doubted, but upon Application, the Lord Mayor,
and Court of Aldermen, will readily give their Sanction, and Assistance, toward
Completing so Great a Work; which must Center in a Happy Correspondence
amongst our Selves, and give a Universal Satisfaction to all our Neighboring
Parts.

THE Exemplary Zeal taken from this City, throughout the Kingdom, by their late
Association, gives a sufficient prospect of the Good Effect that may reasonably
be expected from this intended Association. And it cannot be immagined when the
Credit of the Nation (which is the life of the King as well as the Nation)
shall lie at stake, that we should be so stupid, or unnatural, as not to
Associate to Support and Defend the same.

In a Word, let our Laws be made never so paenal; let our Funds be made never
so secure; nay, let all the Lands of England be tied for the making them good:
Yet under the Circumstances we stand, if a Credit should be issued thereupon,
it would fall under a discount; unless the Nation shows their Resolution not to
be imposed upon.

Many things may seem Difficult, but Mountains have been removed. Cum multis
manibus grande levatur onus.
FINIS.

