A PARALLEL BETWIXT POPERY and PHANATICISM, IN A LETTER to T. S.
SIR,
I AM informed, your Royal Jurat
In 'lection was to be your Curate:
I Am likewise told you are disappointed,
By Mandate from the Lord's Anointed.
Your Congregation sure is Righteous
That Is worth the care of Charles and Titus.
Titus and Charles had had more fitness,
For Charles is second with a Witness.
But since he failed, let fancy help it,
And we'll suppose him in your Pulpit,
Which would have looked, when he was got in it,
Like an Dat-Meal Tub, with a PLOT in it:
(To say who made the Plot, would rub,
But sure some Cooper made the Tub)
There might you hear him talk at once Sir,
Geneva, London, Rome, and Munster;
For all Religions in the Town
Are cloak'd in his Camelion Gown.
For as the Ancients used to scan
Nine Tailors to one single Man;
And others learnedly have writ,
That thrice three Spinsters make one Wit:
So he, though h' lest them all in lurches,
Is Product of as many Churches.
Tho some affirm, when there is but Nine,
That neither's due to this Divine:
However, he is esteemed by some
The mighty Bulwark against Rome;
Yet others say with cause enough,
His Girdle only's Cannon-Proof:
Yet that is Defense enough for us,
For he is all over Blunderbus.
But Sir, since Arbitrary Power
Has useless made your Glass of hour,
And laid Embargo upon O --
By luck we have retrieved his Notes;
Which since he was denied to preach,
Took pet, and dwindled to a Speech.
"Behold the double Savior of your Nation,
"Who daily preach and swear for your Salvation!
"Behold the wicked Priest, and Jesuit-taker!
"Behold the King's most excellent Oath-maker,
"Who now comes down out of his endless Bounty,
"To raise new Vicegerents for your County!
"I have tried all Religions once, some twice,
"Dived like an Indian for the Pearl of Price;
"Walked like a Glowworm by my Light within,
"Have learnt to eat my God, and stab my King:
"Only I never loved the Quakers bauling,
"For fear indeed they should have spoiled my Calling.
"I with my stay at Omers had been shorter,
"For they e'ne used me like a very Porter,
"To drink, and carry Letters; yet their steering
"Mended my hand a little in my swearing.
"At length in England's Church I cast my Anchor,
"And there discovered all the Jesuit Rancor,
"Ripped up the Plot, prevented the King's fall,
"Saved the ungrateful Lawn-sleeves (Rascals all);
"Sprung up some dozen of Ignatius Race,
"Sent Stafford to his own uncertain place:
"And when as one man they departed hence
"With all the Oaths and Vows of Innocence,
"I showed the World their Mental Reservations,
"The Juggles of their Oaths and Protestations:
"In short, I pent men's Faith to that degree,
"They hardly would believe or them or me.
"That Church has bin so trained with sense and reason,
"They hate implicit Faith as bad as Treason:
"Not that they doubt the Plot (for all their jeering,)
"But it is for better Reasons than my swearing.
"This mads my Soul; and I shall find a time
"To make them fall, unless they help me climb:
"With Oxford too I Am at no less defiance,
"Who dirtily refused me her Alliance,
"'Till I could prove that Swearing was a Science;
"Whereas the very posture of the Actor
"Shows it is no Science, but a Manufacture.
"There Is never a Gown-man but my self, I tell ye,
"Without a Legion of Popes in's Belly:
"Nay, in your godly Country're some Betrayers,
"For there l'd like to have been trapan'd to Prayers,
"As if I Would naught to do but sing or say;
"'It Was but upon last Commination day,
"The silly Rat had baited Hooks with Hooks,
"Thinking to decoy me into Prayers with Books.
"Besides, amongst all People but the Blades,
"Swearing and Cursing are two several Trades.
"But such an Infect in Divinity
"Cannot deserve an angry Thought from me,
"Who dare to grapple the whole Hierarchy.
"Mind they their Trade, and canvas Paul and Luke,
"I am above their Censure and Rebuke,
"Nor do I fear their friend your Loyal Duke.
"One single godly Speech of mine defied
"Your Princes Favorite, and your Country's Pride.
"When I came rattling with a Coach and six,
"King Coel's supreme Burgesses to fix,
"I stum'd the Mobile, and changed their Choices,
"And stalking with their Ears obtained their Voices:
"By which he sees (if Heaven do not forbid)
"That I can undo all his Father did.
But after all my most industrious searches,
Sir Francis Draking, as it were the Churches,
I find my subtle Masters told me true,
They have no toppers of a Plot like you.
At that, enraged, up starts a Loyal Youth,
Quoth he, Sans swearing, thou have once spoke truth:
The Religion (if thou have it) is profound,
And thou art turned from Rome exactly round;
Rome and Geneva are a sort of Twins,
Sworn Sisters, and sworn Enemies to Kings:
And for all you look so Protestantly big,
You're still a Papist Masquerade in Whig.
Phanaticism is Popery improved.
Their bold Ignatius strikes to your Buchanan,
Their Irish to your English Forty and One;
Their Plots are bubbles to your late Intrigue,
Your Covenant has out-kill'd their holy League.
A strange harmonious Discord there appears,
Betwixt your darling Shibboleth, and theirs;
Touch but their Strings, and all your Octaves shake,
And tho some ceremonious Jars you make,
The Tybur disembogues into your Lake.
So two false Gamesters quarrel when they meet
A true, to blind and reinforce the Cheat.
Ye both agree your Monarch to betray,
Depose and Murder, tho a different way:
Both level your Church Censures at the Crown,
Ye both pursue the King; but this I Will own,
They pitch your Game, you fairly hunt it down.
So have I seen a Royal Stag e'rewhile
Fall by your Hounds that has escaped their toil;
Nor must your Subjects fairer Quarter hope,
Or from your single or the clustered Pope;
They must be Slaves to which soever prevails,
And either roast, or stink to death in Gaols.
No Age nor Sex but must his Censures share;
They dart Anathema's, yet more severe,
From their accumulative Porphry Chair:
He, modest Man, but censures for your Faults;
They damn for Cloths and Gestures, yea even Thoughts;
And all the Choice ye have, unless ye turn,
Must be a Halter to avoid an Urn,
As if 'twere better to hang than burn.
Not only the Ague, but all other Ills
Are cured by the Jesuit's Powder, and your Pills,
By which ye purged the Church, and scoured the Nation,
In order to a thorough Reformation.
Ye both assert with Apostolic Buff,
Convince with Back-sword, and with Pistol-proof,
And ominous Sulphur make your Reasons tough:
Their Faith in Absolution makes them sin,
Yours in Election has as fruitsul been.
For where is the difference, bating the Priests Fee,
That God forgives, or that he will not see;
Not that your Friends will Damn for six Pence less,
Ye spend in Capons what ye save in Cash:
Your Basins, Tankards, Caudle-Cups, and Spoons,
Turn to as good account as Duckatoons.
The service of their Church, and of your Cause,
Blanches the breach of all the sacred Laws:
Ye deal with Oaths as Potters with their Clay,
Ye take them by the lump, and then essay
To mould them for your turn; if that will not do,
Ye break'm strait, and fall to work with new.
The only two that ever seemed to sham ye,
Were theirs of Secrecy, and your Solemn Dam-me;
Ye abhor Repentance both, even when ye dye,
And your last Breath is spent in Perjury:
For who with more Astonishment can look
On their St. Coleman, than on your St. Cook?
The Saints are much alike for all their din,
For theirs forswear the Fact, and yours the Sin.
You Are like a bad half Crown with one fair side,
Whose loyal Stamp does the base Metal hide,
The other will own the Brass, and justisie't,
But by your edges ye may both be tried.
Hence Tories say, whether you rule the Isle,
Or the Jesuits, is only Cross and Pile;
But CHARLES they say has bin too wisely bred,
To venture them with his Cross, or you with his Head.

Printed for E. Poole.


