PROPOSALS CONCERNING RELIGION
THere being many things fit to be considered in Parliament, for the good of
the Nation, and since Matters are oftimes past over with too much have, or
neglected, where lesser things are supported by Clamor. To the effect that
what has been humbly proposed, may be considered by any who pleases to Reflect
on them in calm Blood; And, e're they be Overtured by the Proposer (or any
other who pleases so to do) in the House. These things are motioned by one,
Unbyassed in, or by Contention, or Humor.

That our Duty, the nature of the thing and his Majesty's Letter, requiring
the matters of Religion, to be considered in the first place, and our Confession
of Faith being already recognized in statute, our Kirk Government and
Ecclesiastik Policy established by Law, with Moderation to Peaceable though
dissenting Protestants, and censures appointed for Profanity and Immoralities;
There yet remains a great Evil, and a cause of many others viz. the
unadverted, at least the unremedied evil of Vacant Churches; This Remedy, (but
prejudice of others) is proposed. That whenever a Kirk is Vacant by Death or
Deprivation of the Incumbent, if the Heretors do not call a Minister thereto
within (...) Months after the vacancy occurs, that the Sheriff of the Shire be
obliged to uplift the Vacant stipend; for the said half Year (it not falling in
Ann) and thereafter during the Vacancy, monthly in Proportion, and to secure
the same as a stock on Land Security within the Shire, for the use of the
Begging Poor within the Vacant Parish, viz. the Yearly Annual-Rent thereof, and
the stock to continue always as Mortified for that use, and that the Heretors,
who do not concur in calling some Minister in the legal methods within the
said (...) Months, shall pay Monthly Cess according to their valued Rent,
during their not calling a Minister; to be uplifted and applied for the Poors
use, in manner foresaid; and in case of different Calls given in to
Presbytries, the samen to be Judicialy discust before the Judges Competent,
according to the present standing Laws; and that the Heritors, who after legal
calling of a Minister, shall not insist within the space (...) after the said
Call, in prosecution of that call, and if it come to an Appeal, who shall not
insist with diligence to have such an Appeal discust in legal manner, and such
Heritors as shall not after their Call is legally rejected, of new call another
Minister in manner foresaid, shall be liable to the Pains, and in manner
foresaid.

PROPOSALS CONCERNING THE POOR.
THat all Burghs be obliged to take up all the Young Beggars within their Burgh
and Parish, of either Sex, above four Years old, and under ten; and to employ
them in some Labor, whither of Trade, Husbandry Fishing or Hearding of Cattle:
and that according to the former Laws, the Burgh may have the service of all
these so assumed till they be forty five Years of Age, or rather dureing Life,
but prejudice to any Heretor or other respo^al Person to seize any such Young
Persons, for their Private use, if they be the first Seazers: And the Persons so
to be assumed, to be Recorded in the Kirk Sess^on-Books, signed by the
Minister, Clerk, and Elders as full Proof of their assumption with Prohibitons
etc. of Re^etting such Servants.

PROPOSALS CONCERNING The African and Indian Company.
FOR a new Encouragment to the African, and Indian Company; It Is proposed that
his Majesty and Parliament may extend their Immunity from all Taxes to any
Portion of their stock Employed in Fishing on that Companies account, As to the
Import of Materials for use of their Fisherie, their Fish exported, and to the
return of all goods, purchased with effects of their exported Fish: o^
sufficient Evidence that it is so.

And farther, that in general, the Privileges of the former Royal Company for
Fishing be extended to all the Leidges, who shall stock, (...) lib. Scots or
upwards, on Fishing Trade; they allways having a Seal, in every Company, for
marking of their Fish, and that they be liable to answer for the Loyal cureing
of all exported Fish; under pain of Forfaulture of the Value of what shall be
found and proved to be unloyalie cured; to any who shall discover, and prove
the Faultiness, before any Judge Competent; and Particularly, that all Foraigne
Salt employed on Fishing be absolutely declared free of all duty, and the
useless or rather hurtful drawback, be cast off. That Exportation of Wool be
more strictly forbid, and the Farmer or Collectors and Surveyers of Customs be
liable for the value of Wool Exported within their Districts, and this Action
to be declared Popular, and the fine to belong to the Pursuer.

That all French Wine be strictly Prohibited, till France take off all Imposts
of our Fishes Imported to France; and till they restore us to our former
Immunities, as the 50 Sous per Tun etc.

That the Farming of Customs renders all Laws in Favors of Native
Manufactory, and Prohibitory of hurtful Import, illusory and of no effect. And
therefore an Act forbidding Farming of Customs, seems necessary.

PROPOSALS AGAINST ROBBERIES, SORNING and THEFT.
FOr the Peace of the Nation, especialy for curbing of Robberies, Sorning and
Theft; It is Proposed, That the Justiciary be re-established, but their
Authority, and Exercise thereof, to be extended only to Robbery, Theft, and
Sorning; and a prohibition of Intermedling with all other Commissarior Actions,
And that the next adjacent of the Garrisons or Guards be obliged to assist the
Legal Execution of their Decreets, gratis; and the Commanding Officer in the
place, be obliged to this concurrencie without waiting for Superior order.

Item, That all Footmen be forbid to travel with Arms, under pain of
Imprisonment, loss of their Weapons, and ten pounds of fine toties quoties.

Item that no Cowes, Horse, Sheep, or Goats, be bought from Highlanders without
Erugh and Ha^^er, or a written Testificat from their Land Lords of their being
responsal for the value of the Goods sold and exprin^ed in the Attestation.

Amongst other true Grievances, it is Proposed that the Parliament may take
present Cognizance of thy That Gifts are procured and oftimes by obreption,
from his Majesty, which affecting undetermined Subjects, are abused to
excessive damnage on multitudes of his Majesty's good Subjects to their enorm
lesion; as particularly, the Actions Pursued by Hary Douglas, in a manner
against the Whole Nation, without regaird to liable or not liable, And but
Prejudice of farther Censure for so illegal an abuse, It is Proposed that all
Persons who shall be Assoilied from his Persute, or who shall not be found
liable to any Sum on his Gift, shall without rebate pay the Parties Expense
and damnage, at the Parties Oath, and that the Judge be ordained to determine
accordingly in the defender's Favors.

FINIS.

