The True-Lovers Holidaies:
OR, The Wooing, Winning, and Wedding of a fair Damosel; performed by a lusty
Soldier, being one of the Auxiliaries.
The Soldier Wooed the Maid with words most kind,
She Answered him according to his mind.
To the Tune of, Nobody else shall plunder but I.




MY sweetest, my fairest,
My rarest, my dearest,
Come sit thee down by me and let us chat a while,
It does my heart good, when
I see thee most nearest,
That we with pleasant talk ye sad times may beguile
If thou wilt have the patience to stay in this Bower,
That I may discourse with thee just half an hour,
I Will show thee a Ticket from Cupids Commision,
Which Venus set hand to, upon this condition,
that no body else shall enjoy thee but I.
the Summer is come,
and the time is in season,
That each pretty bird have made choice of his Mate,
now I being a young man
of judgment and reason,
Have cause to be doing e're time's out of date,
Hark, hark how I hear the sweet Nightinga^s verses
Whose echoes records-what true-lovers rehearses;
The true-hearted Turtle-Doves now are a billing,
And so will I do my Love, if thou are willing
that no body else shall enjoy thee but I.
I pray thee Love leave me not,
though I am a Soldier,
And want skill in wooing to deal with a Maid;
yet if thou will kiss me,
and make me the bolder,
Mark well and consider what here shall be said,
My hand and my sword shall from danger defend thee,
My purse and my person shall stoutly attend thee;
I Will buy thee a new kirtle, wrought wastcoat and beaver
A dainty silk Apron, my mind shall not waver,
So no body else shall enjoy thee but I.
if thou will consent, that
things shall be so carried,
Before this day fortnight I Will make thee my wife,
and we in the Church will
be lawfully married,
So shall thou live bravely all days of thy life;
Thou shall have thy servants to wait on thy leisure,
thy purse shall be crammed with gold crowns, and rich tresure
Nothing shall be wanting yt I can procure thee,
So thou will be constant and thus much assure me,
that no body else shall enjoy thee but I.
make answer sweet honey.
to what I have spoken
That I may the better know whereon to trust,
receive this Gold Ring
as an eminent token,
My love shall be permanent, loyal and just;
One lovely look from thee, for aye will revive me,
But a frown of thine will of life straight deprive me,
Then answer me kindly at this time dear sweeting
That I may find comfort by this happy meeting,
and no body else shall enjoy thee but I.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.
Being the Maids Loving Answer to the Soldier.

I Will leave all my kindred
both father and mother,
My Uncle, my Aunt, and my Grandam also,
my nearest acquaintance,
my Sister and Brother,
For it is my desire with a Soldier to go,
In weal and in woe I will with my Love travel,
Whilst some at my service and toil do much marvel
So long as my life lasts, if fortune will guide me
I Will march with thee bravely, what ever betide me.
And I Will be thy true-Love until I dye.
^ is not the great Ordance
when they do rattle*
Shall make me fly from thee, (...) mind is so stout,
for when I perceive thee
preparing for battle,
I Will clos^^^ stick to thee of that make no doubt,
and when thou have drawn thy brave blade to befriend me
For courage and valor and skill I Will commend thee
In peace and in wars if thou please to prove me,
By day and by night thou shall find how I love thee,
I Will still take thy part till the day that I dye.
moreover sweet Soldier
thus much I must tell thee,
When I understood you took me for your choice,
It made the very heart of me
Leap in my belly,
And all the merry veins in my body rejoice;
You also requested of me certain kisses,
The which you accounted as true-Lovers blisses,
In stead of one kiss, now I Will give thee full twenty,
So thou will repay me again with like plenty.
and I Will be thy true love until I do dye,
this Ring which thou gave me,
shall serve for a token,
I Will keep it for thy sake whiles heaven lends me life,
the promise betwixt us
shall never be broken,
Be thou my sweet Husband, I Will be thy kind Wife:
Then serve Cupids warrant upon me and spare not,
For what thou can do with thy Ticket I fear not:
Let Vulcan and Venus with Cupid conspire,
To kindle Loves fuel, or quench Lovers fire,
yet I Will love my Soldier until that I dye.
you said in a fortnight
that we should be married,
But I am unwilling to stay for it so long:
besides in my mind I have
over much tarried;
Delays amongst Lovers does oftentimes wrong.
Pray make all things ready 'twixt this and Sunday,
That we may be married on the next Monday,
So we in the Holy Days may make us merry,
With Banquets and Pastimes until we be weary.
and I Will be thy true-Love until that I dye.
L. P.

FINIS.

