Pyramus and Thisbe: Or, Love's Masterpiece.
Behold the downfall of two Lovers D^ar,
And to their Memorys, let fall a Tear,
A sad mistake their Ruin did procure,
When as they thought their FriendshiP should endure;
Oh Cruel Fate! That Cut them off in Pr^me,
And for Enjoyment, would afford no time.
To the Tune of, Digby's Farewell.


WHen all hearts did yield unto Cupid as King,
And dying for Mistresses was no strange thing,
When Maids without coyness did heartily deal,
And men loved with constancy, faith, and true Zeal:
There live,d a fair pare of true Lovers in Greece
Who have still bin accounted as Lov's masterpiece.
The Youth was called Pyramus, Thisbe the Maid:
Their Love was immortal, and never decayed.
But alas! their affections were crossed by sad Fate:
To wit, by the fewd and immortal debate.
That had bin fomented for many years space,
Between both their Families, and their whole Race.
Which made the fair Cuple, tho scorcht with loves fire,
Still smother their Flames and conceal their desire:
They sighed still in private, and wept all alone;
And dared not discover a Tear or a Groan.
They sighed all the Night, and they gazed all the Day:
Thus weeping and gazing, and sighing away
Their langushing Lives, which they spent all in Tears,
In sighs, and in groans, and in amorous fears.
And when the whole world was composd in a sleep,
Their grief kept them waking to sigh and to weep.
Thus wandering all night, to the stars they complain,
Of hardship, of fate, of their torments, and pain.
But when they no longer those pains could endure
Their Love did begin for to seek out some Cure.
And so they appointed one Night for to meet
In some neighboring Valley, and there for to greet:
And thence fly away to some far distant Cave,
To love at their leisure: contented to have
The joys of each other; and there let loves flame
Burn quietly out without danger of blame.




And so when that P^e^^s had run out his Race,
Fair Thisbe came first into the meeting place.
Impatient she stood and expected her Dear;
She thought that each moment he staid, was a year.
Then under a Mulbery-tree down she lies,
But scarce was lay down when she presently spies
A grim and fierce Lion besmea'd all with Blood,
Came wandering down from she neighbou^ing wood
'Away run the Nymph to a Cave in a Fright.
She fly's, and her Mantle is lost in the flight:
Which the bloody Lion takes up in his Paws
He tears it, and then with the Rags wipes his jaws.
Soon after p^oor Pyramus came for to find.
His long wished for Thisbe: but fate proved unkind.
For when divine joys he did hope for to have
He found but a vvinding sheet, death, and cold Grave.
For when that he saw his loves Mantle all tore.
Bedewed all with blood, and besmeared all with Goar:
And then saw the Lion trot over the plain,
He falsely concluded his Thisby was slain.
O who can express the vast torment and smart,
The pangs and the anguish and grief of his heart?
He made the Woods ring with his pitiful moanes
The Rocks and the Mountains dis Echo his Groans.
Alas: (said Pyramus) could she then find
No help from the Gods! are they so unkind?
Or else have they stole her away from our sight,
And so Rob d the Earth to make Heaven more bright?
O tell me kind Sta^s! come and tell me but where
My Th^sbe is gone, and I Will follow my dear.
Two death-vvounds already I bear in my breast.
Once vvounded by Love and by grief now oppress.
I Will vveep out my life, and I Will sigh out my Soul:
I Will groan for my Love till my Carcass grows cold.
Her Mantle I Will take for my sad Winding Sheet,
In that mournful posture my Thisbe I Will meet.
But a languishing death comes with too much delay:
Great grief is impatient of so long a stay.
I Will make greater have to my Love: at which word
The Youth stabbed himself to the heart with his Sword.
By this time fair Thisbe was came from he Cave
So pale that sher ris like a Ghost from its Grave,
For when she her Pyramu^ dying did see,
She looked much more like to a Carcass than he.
You Would have thought that the Nymph would before him have die d
She fell on his body ^hen mournfully c^y'd
O ^hy my dear Pyramus ^hy so unkind;
Why ^un you away and leave Thisbe behind?
At Thisbie^ svveet Name they Youth lifts up his eyes:
He looks, and he sighs, and then shuts them and dies:
He gazed till he died then content with the sight.
Away to Eliziu^ his Soul took its flight.
And (...) did after it presently fly:
She struggled, and strove, and made have for to dye.
And such have she made in ^^retaking her dear
She ne ^e stayed ^o complain nor sca^ce drop a Tear.
Her tender, and gentle heart soon burst ^ith grief!
And Death stole away her fa^r Soul like a Thief.
Then ^^w^ ^er cold body she lay by her Love.
Both pitty'd by all the kind Gods of the G^ove.
The amorous ^ur^les and Nigh^ingalls ^ung
Their Obs^qu^es: and n^a^ ^^^^s their Knell rung.
And each loving beast of ^he wood left his Cave,
And came so: to make the dead Lovers a Grave,
London Printed for W. Thack^ray, T. Passinger, and W. Whitwood.


