A proper new Ballad, Entitled The Gallant GRAHAMES.
To its own proper Tune; I will away, and I will not stay, etc.
BEtrayed me, how can this be;
even by day light upon a day,
I met Prince Charles our Royal King,
and all the Grahames in their array;
They were well d^est in Armor keen
upon the pleasant Banks of Tay
Before a King they might been seen
those gallant Grahames in their array.
I have no Gold, I have no Land,
nor have I pearl nor precious stone,
But I will sell my silken sneed
to see the Grhames but welcome home.
To speak of those Grahames I think it best
they are men amongst good Company,
Into the Lands where we did walk
they are Lords into the South Country,
They wan the praise in Wallace days,
for the Summer Flower d^d never spring
As the gallant Grahames in Armor clear
did then appear before their King.
At the Gouk-head we set our Camps,
our Leagure down there for to stay,
Upon a dainty Summers day,
we rode our white H^rse and our Gray
For they were then in Armor sheen,
as Gold shines on a Summers day
The gallant Grahames were assembled there
before King Charles his Majesty.
I Will crown them night, I Will crown them day,
and above great Lords of high degree:
For all the Lo^ds that I have seen,
the Grahames are the bravest Company.
As I came by the Bunches Pa^k,
I heard my true L^ves Si^^er's Son,
We ^ous'd our Cannons on every side,
even for the h^nour of our King.
Our false Commanders has betrayed our Prince
and sold him to his Enemy,
By a Nobleman to Cromwell then,
so I care not what they do to me.
For he strives to subdue the Land,
and over England to be King:
Fair Scotland by him to be governed,
and over the Nations for to reign.
They have ^etray'd our noble Prince,
and banished him from his Royal Crown,
But the gallant Grahames have taken in hand
for to command that Tra^tor Lown.
Now Dalgatie was stout and bold,
co^ragious in high degree:
But for the Cavileers they were all sold,
And young Harthill a Cavileer too,
Nathaniel Gordon, both stout and keen,
Newtoun Gordon, Burd alone;
Upon the Green he might been seen,
for a braver Face was never born,
A braver man was never born
neither in Kent nor Christendom:
To fight now for his Royal King,
Lord give his Enemies their doom.
At Coble heugh where we did advance,
our Parliament there for to stay:
But our N^bles then were banished off
at Glen-Yla then where we took the way,
Glen prosen, where we Rendezvoused,
to Glen shie we marched, both night and day,
And of Bredalbine we took the Town,
and met the Campbells in array.
Ten thousand men in Armor strong
did meet the gallant Grahames to play,
At Inverlochie where they began,
and about two Thousand men were they.
And tho their number did far exceed
the gallant Grahames upon that day:
Yet their hearts were true, they did not fear
to meet the Campbells in their deray:
For the Gordons then did give a wheel
to face the Campbells door that day,
Who from their friends fled faraback,
unto their E^emies for ever and ay.
Gallant Montrose then that Chiftain bold,
courageous in high degree;
Did for his King fight valiantly,
the Lord preserve his Majesty.
Now fare you well you Innerda^e,
Lord Keith and kindred I bid adieu,
And I shall away, and I will not stay
to some uncouth Land that I never knew.
To wear the Blew I think it best,
by any color that I see.
Cheer up your hearts brave Cavileers,
for the Grahames are gone to Germany.
To France and Flanders where they did advance
and Germany who gave them fame:
For my Lord Abayn is to the Sea,
young Huntly is his noble name.
He went to France for his Royal King
King Charles then and above degree;
We'll give the honor to the noble Grahames,
for they are a brave Company.
Montrose then our Chiftain bold,
to Scotland free is come again:
For to redeem fair Scotlands Land,
the pleasant, gallant, worthy Grahame.
At the water of Eusdale they did begin
and fought a Battle to an end;
Where there was killed for our noble King
two thousand of our Danish men.
Sir Gilbert Menzies, and of high degree,
the Kings Barron bold was born:
For a brave Cavileer was he,
but now into the glore he is gone:
The Kings Banner in his hand he bare,
for he was a brave val^ant man:
Betrayed he was upon a night
by Colon^l Hacket and Strachan then,
Woe to thee Colonel Hacket now,
and Strachan ill death may thou die:
For ye have betrayed ou^ valiant Grahame
who was true to his Majesty,
The Lord of Ashen has caught Montrose,
and had him on to Edinburgh Town:
And from his Body has taken his Head
and quartered him upon a Tron.
Now Huntley's gone that samen way,
Prince Charles also, our Royal King,
Has suffered death for our poor Nation,
our mourning tears can never be done.
Out gallant young King is now come home
Prince Charles the second and above degree
The Lord send peace into his time
and God preserve his Majesty.
Now fare you well you Innerdale,
Keith and kin that you may well ken,
For I would sell my silken sneed.
to see the gallant Grahams come hame:
Since Wallace days that we began,
Sir John the Grahame did bear the gree,
For the honor of our Royal King,
the Lord preserve his Majesty
For all the Lords in fair Scotland,
from the highest to the lowest degree:
The Noble Grahame is to be praised,
so God preserve Charles's Majesty.
FINIS.

