A Proposition for the Making of Farthings, by the Royal Authority for Public
use.
THere have formerly been several Grants. 1. To the Lord Harrington; 2. To the
Duchess Dowager of Lenox; the last, to the Lord Maltravers, and Sir Francis
Crane, for the making of Farthings of Brass and Copper to pass His Majesty's
Kingdoms and Dominions of England, Wales, Ireland, and Plantations, with
command (by Proclamation) that none other should be suffered to pass; And this
For these Reasons, viz.
1. For preventing of abuses by such as made and used their own Farthings
without Authority. 2. The saving of Bullion. 3. The Benefit of Commerce. 4. The
Relief of the Poor.


But those Farthings being made of ordinary Metals, and easy to be imitated by
the Counterfeiters of Holland, and others at home, and thereby found no less
prejudicial to the Patentees, then the Nation; the Metal was changed, and those
Farthings by Marks of Distinction, and His late Majesty's Letters Pattents, and
Orders to the Lord Maltravers, and Sir Francis Crane, 11 of His Reign, were
regulated.

But this Patent also during the late Rebellion expiring, one Ra^adge
(sometimes an Underworker in the Mint) whilst he lived, did, and diverse others
since in London, and within the Lines of Communication, without Authority, now
do take upon them to make several sorts of Farthings, of several ordinary
Metals, for hundreds of Traders and Retailers in and about London, as also in
several other Incorporate Towns; who (as they pretend) cause the same to be
made for their particular uses only, under color or promise of taking them
again, at the same value they passed them for, (whenever returned;) which
certainly if they did really so, were yet unlawful for any Society or
Corporation, much less for any person to practice at his own will and pleasure.

Against which abuse, the Objections following (amongst others) are justly to
be made and insisted on, viz.
1. That this Irregularity is a Limb of Anarchy, and a Relic of that specious
popular pretense to Liberty, connived at by the late Usurpers, and a direct
Incroachment upon the Royal Prerogative, to which only the licensing of all
sorts of Coin (National or Foreign) belongs, with an absolute Power for the
advance, abatement and allay of the Species of all sorts of Coyns current, or
to be prohibited within its Dominions.

2. It Is a direct cheat upon, and injury to the Subject and Public Weal, for
the mere lucre and advantage of certain private and particular persons only;
many of which (under pretense of advantage to Commerce) make great advantage by
this liberty to themselves, some 10, 15, 20 l. per Man in the year (and some
more. And though by promise, and under the color at least of an Assurance to
take them again at the rates they pass them for, yet they are seldom found
willing to receive them (when returned) especially in quantities.

3. If any of these Retailers come to remove their habitations, or break (which
many of them often do) all the Farthings are lost to those that have any of
them on their hands; and though they do remain, or not turn Bankrupts, yet by
this device they oblige, and in a manner necessitate all who have of their
Farthings on their hands, to trade therewith with themselves only, because they
are not elsewhere Current with others; which (as they manage it, these
Farthings seldom coming back to them without other better money) makes much
for such Retailers advantage, and consequently by that bondage, proves to be
the greater Inconveniency to all dealers with them; which Farthings allowed by
public Authority would remedy.

4. This liberty of late taken up, is found no less prejudicial to the Poor,
who for want of authorized small moneys, especially Farthings, miss many an
Alms, and that which is therein given them of little use, for those Farthings
now used (not being passable as before, except with those persons only that
make and give them out) are of little benefit to the poor or any other at a
distance; besides, since those that make them, will hardly sell any thing for
Farthings only, but at double the rate, the poor as well as others suffer by
it, which proves the Cheat to be the greater.

5. Lastly, many of those that bespeak and utter these unauthorized Farthings,
often come to lose by them themselves, especially such as are honest, value
their Reputation and stand upon their Credits, when ever they call in their
Farthings (as some of them use to do once a year, and change their Tokens) many
times find double the quantities they ordered to be made under their stamps,
obtruded on them by those they entrusted to make them, or put upon them by
others that counterfeit them, which is also become an ordinary practice, and
thereby some of the honestest have lost 10, or 20 l. per Man in a year, for
their portion^^r shares, besides what the poor and common sort of Subjects
suffer by it.

For Remedy against which unsufferable Abuse, since the allowing of Farthings,
well regulated, might be so general a Commodity, and that without them the Poor
will want much of their Relief, and every petty Retailer, of all sorts, would
suffer so much in his Trade (as is obvious to all) if none were suffered.
It is humbly proposed,

1. THat such a Metal (if possible) might be found out and fixed on, as in all
probability at least might prevent all importation by the Hollanders, and from
other Foreign parts, as well as the usual abuse by Counterfeiters at home.

2. That in Case such a Metal as proposed could be found out, certainly it
would be more fit then Farthings of such Metal only were suffered to pass in
such form and manner, as by the Royal Authority might be approved, then that
every one as now should be left at liberty, or other Farthings suffered to
pass then such as might be allowed and directed by His Majesty.

The usual Objections to which, by such as now take Liberty in the Contrary,
are suitable to each Man's Genius or Interest, viz.
1. Some say that it will be a dishonor to His Majesty, and the Nation, to
allow or tolerate any base Coin.

2. Others that it will be impossible to find out such a Metal as may not be
Counterfeit.

3. That if they be made of any base Metal equivalent to their denomination,
they will be of such a Magnitude and Weight, as will be cumbersome and
untrassiqueable.

4. And supposing they could be made of any Metal that could not be
counterfeit, and such as might answer the full intrinsique value (excepting the
Manufactures only, which is as reasonable to be allowed in this, as at the Mint
for Standard money) yet whatever shall be allowed to the Office for the fashion
and Manufacture of such Farthings, in the Exchange, will be so much loss as
the fashion comes to, to every Subject that takes them either for Commodity or
in Exchange for other money.

5. Others say that all Farthings now used (if recalled) will be so much loss
to those that have made any under their own stamps for their private use.

6. And the Retailer by this means may come to have sometime 10 or 20 pounds
worth of such Farthings at a time upon his hands, which if he cannot pay out
and vent again, as well as take for Commodities, having quantities on his
hands, they will lie as so much dead stock upon him, and consequently be so
much loss.

7. Then if at the Office any of them shall be refused money in Exchange for
such as he brings back thither, he can have no remedy but by a Suit at Law,
which would be a tedious Inconveniency and Grievance.

8. And lastly, if the Office it self or Undertakers (whoever) should fail by
Death or Breaking, or desisting of the Office, which after it have made and
vented 10 or 20000 pounds worth in Farthings or more) possibly may be, (besides
the Dishonor thereby to His Majesty) there will be so much loss to the poorer
Subjects.

In Answer to which Objections it may be Replied.
1. And to the first thereof, that neither Spain or France, not any other
Kingdom or Republique of Christendom, (better enabled with Silver and
Bullion, or both, then England is) finding it a necessity rather then a
Convenience, that think it any Dishonor to give an Allay (at least) to all
their small moneys passable within their own Dominions, their reason for this
being, as well for saving the charge of the Mint, as for preventing the loss
of Silver, and as well for the ease of Commerce, as their Poors relief; so not
disagreeable with the Customs and Policy of all other Christian Nations, nor
certainly can any thing be rightly called dishonorable to any Prince or State,
which in it self is not unjust or unequal, burdensome or destructive to its
Subjects, which upon a due Examination of the Propositions following, it is
humbly conceived the making and authorizing of public Farthings of such a
Metal, and so qualified as is found out and proposed, will not appear to be, at
least not to be so great an Inconveniency, as the permission of every one to
make (which is not only an Incroachment upon, and dishonor to the Royal
Authority, but an apparent actual Burden and injury to the Subject, as before
declared, in likelihood will be.

2. In Answer to the second Objection, and to make it appear that there may be
such a Metal found out, for the making of Farthings, as if not impossible, will
be more difficult to be counterfeit then Gold or Silver.

Observe but the Reasons following.
1. The Metal proposed for this use, is not hitherto known to be had in any
part of the World but in His Majesty's own Dominions (and for that the more
proper) nor in any part thereof, yet discovered, but in one place, and that in
His Majesty's Power and Command. 2. It has this quality and hidden secret in
it, that it will hardly intermix with any other but of its own nature and
species, Male and Female. 3. Though it be tough enough of it self for this use,
yet there is not any way yet discovered to reduce it to be fully Malleable, and
thereby the fitter also for this use, the harder to be Counterfeit, and easier
to be discovered if any one should attempt it; since no compound Metal can be
made like it. 4. In its Nature it is as wholesome and as sweet as silver,
neither Smells, Rusts, or Cankers, something harder, and so sullies less (if
any thing) and next unto Silver (of which it has nothing in it) endures fire
the best, and in the fire, rather improving then abating ought of its Color,
which is distinct from all other Metals, and for that reason also the less
Counterfeitable. 5. For a final Answer, and to free His Majesty from the least
of indignity by it, and the most suspicious from the danger of any damage by
Counterfeiting it, there may be such marks given to it, and such signs denoted
with it, that every common eye may easily discern it from any other Metal that
can be Counterfeited; so that if His Majesty and His Council shall be pleased
to allow of Farthings to be made of this Metal to pass universally by public
Authority and none other, the Proposers knowing this Metal to be so different
and distinct in its nature from all other, and impossible almost to Counterfeit
it (having such powers and privileges granted as formerly for their Inabling)
offer, within six months warning to furnish all His Majesty's Dominions with a
sufficient quantity of Farthings of this Metal, and to give in sufficient
Security before they enter upon it, at all times to return the value they pass
for in sterling money when returned to the Office broken or whole, abating
only one in twenty for the fashion as formerly, which (if the Security be
good, and performance answerable) will make Farthings so allowed to be made and
past within His Majesty's Dominions equal with any other Coin His Majesty makes
and allows to pass for Standard.
3. The last Answer may also serve for the third Objection, for if (as is
before offered) such Farthings be received back, with the rebate only of one
in twenty for the fashion, it will not be much material to the User whether
their intrinsique value be answerable to their denomination or no? and then if
the Makers cause them not to be made of such convenient size for weight and
magnitude as may be grateful to the User, they will show themselves the more
imprudent, and be the greatest Losers by it; but in this certainly they ought
to be obliged to such a pattern as His Majesty and Council may be pleased to
appoint, and shall think fit to agree to be most commodious for use.

4. What Is said before (if performed) will answer the fourth Objection also in
all but the charge for Fashion, for which he that brings any Farthings to
change for Money is to pay only as formerly in Brass (one in Twenty) which is
also to be allowed to any that takes them out, and so will be as broad as long;
whereas those that now make and vent Farthings without Authority, sell and make
the Buyers pay five times the price that the Metal of which they are made, is
worth; all which is lost to the Dealer if broken under his hands or melted, or
the party under whose stamp they pass, break or but remove his habitation;
whereas in the other way the Proposers offer, by taking the Metal back melted
broken or whole at one in twenty loss, and proportionably will be a far less
loss if any.

5. To the fifth it may be answered, that he that breaks my hedges to make
himself a way through my Lands, may as well complain of being put back into the
road; or he that makes him clothes of my cloth without my consent, cry out that
by Law he is forced to pay me for it; as he that has made Farthings without
the Royal Assent, Stamp and Authority, to be forbidden their further use; he
may pretend a damage in some sort possibly by it, but no wrong, or (if any)
nothing but what is done by and to himself, contrary to the Law, and the King no
party to it.

6. In answer to the sixth Objection, there is more offered for remedy then
ever was formerly provided against the like Doubts by any Grant from the Crown,
viz. That no man be bound to take Farthings in any gross payments, or for any
Commodity, or for Debt, contrary to his liking; nor any Servant or Labourer for
his Wages, bur at his own Election; nor otherwise, but either as a Gift in
charity, or in order to the exchange of small Money; or for Diet, Drink or
edible things; or for the ease of commerce and petty Sums, where such exchange
is needful, and both parties are willing and agree unto it for their own
convenience: And if at any time any such Retailer shall find himself
overcharged with greater quantities then may be for his convenience to keep at
one time by him for his use, for one in twenty he may have Money paid him for
them in London at the Office to be appointed for that use; and so in every City
or Town corporate through England, etc. wherever any such Farthings shall be
vented or allowed to pass, and men of ability in all such places furnished for
that service; so no Trader need to have above 20 s. in his hands at once, nor
any of the Poor (that had rather have their little stocks in money) want a
shilling or sixpence at any time.

7. If the Office shall refuse to return Money for Farthings to any in exchange
(allowing the allowed rebate) as is objected, but is hardly imaginable, it
being for their advantage, it is but reason the next Justice without Fee or
other allowance, should have power to do the aggreived party right by distress
or otherwise, and see his loss or time (whoever damnified) satisfied; which
will soon put an end to any difference of that kind without charge, if any such
should be, or delay be used.

8. The last objection seems to savor more of willingness to find Objections
and a fault then to hearken to a remedy for it, it not being likely but that if
His Majesty and His Council shall think fit to allow the Undertaking, that they
would be so unwary in a business of so public and general a concernment, as
not to be careful to choose responsible persons for its execution and
oversight, and if six good men can be found capable to secure 400000 l. per
ann. of His Majesty's Revenue to Him, there is no great doubt to be made but
such men may be left also for this as the strictest Usurer in London could not
object against, if that were the only question, and such great Security
needful; which (to say truth) in this business will not be, for put but honest
and prudent persons to officiate it, the business will secure it self; which
when required and time serves, may easily and fully be demonstrated in every
particular.

And whereas His Majesty now has nothing, he may have some addition to His
Revenue by it.
FINIS.

