THE Christians Calamities: OR, The Protestants Complaint, Collected out of
many several Letters, that were sent from beyond the Seas into England, and
presented to his Highness the Lord Protector, of England, Scotland and Ireland.

The very truth of the matter is plainly set down in this little Book, to the
end that whosoever either reads or hears it, may take good notice of what is
here set down.

And withal, to pray unto the Lord, that the like miseries may never befall us
here in England.

Faithfully collected, drawn up and written, By Laurence Price. 1655.

From famine, blodshed, plagues and sudden death,
Good Lord deliver us whilst we are on earth.
London, printed for Thomas Vere at the Angel without Newgate. 1655,

AN INTRODUCTION, or Epistle to the Reader.
BEloved Friends and Countrymen, the reason why I drew up the copy of this
little Book, is, because the world should know the truth of the matter, how
crueIly and how barbarously our Christian brethren are dealt withal beyond the
Seas by their bloodthirsty enemies. It is a picture not drawn to the life, but
of the death of many thousands of true and Faithful hearted Protestants; and
so hoping that example of them may be a means to make us turn from our wicked
ways, and seek the Lord whilst he may be found in mercy, I remain your loving
Friend and well-wisher.

L. P.

A brief Description of the Bloody Usage and cruel Persecutions done upon
Protestants in the valleys of Piedmont and other places, as you shall hear
immediately.
IN the famous and fruitful Country, which is called, The Valleys of Piedmont,
and Lucern, under the command of the Duke of Savoy, there lately inhabited a
people called Waldenses, famous for their constant profession of the Protestant
Religion in all ages for about 500 years together; to whom the blood-thirsty
Papists have always born a most venomous spite, and have often consulted
amongst themselves how to get these Protestants quite rooted out and so to make
themselves masters of all that they enjoyed. In the pursuance whereof about the
later end of January last, the Duke of Savoy by the persuasion of the Romish
Priests and Jesuits, put forth a Proclamation that in case all of the reformed
Religion, both inhabitants and strangers, should not in three days turn
Papists they must for ever bid farewell to their native country, houses, lands
and possessions, and that it should be death without mercy for any to disobey
the same,

Hereupon no sooner was the time limited, overpast, but immediately Priest and
Monks sent in upon them a world of cutthroats and villains, who in the depth
of Winter, not sparing even women with child near delivery, nor those that had
Infants hanging on their breast, they were all without distinction both men,
women, and children, driven out to wander through frost and snow in a most
bitter season to seek for shelter in hollow caves and rocks, and other
desolate places.

The like cruelties have never been acted since the worlds creation: for why?
The Papists having gotten the upper hand of the Protestants, they stole and
took away their horses and cattle from off their ground, they fired and
burned the Rickes and Barnes of Corn, they ravished and deflowred both Women
and Virgins, in such a most horrible and beastly manner, which may be a shame
to be spoken of: and yet that was not the worst, for when the distressed
Protestants had been by their Papisticall enemies at first so falfly and
beastly betrayed, and afterward so terribly assaulted, as many of them that
could make, any shift at all to escape away, fled into the mountains with their
wives and children, but by the way were met withal by a great party of Irish
Soldiers, which were under the Dukes command, who, fell upon them with such
violence, that they murdered all both men, women and children, insomuch that
they left not one of them alive that they could take or lay hands on, saying,
that they would be revenged on them for the Romish Catholic blood that was
spilt by the Protestants in Ireland.

Yet here follows more sad and sorrowful news, which is worse then that
which has been already spoken of, the people which did yet remain in the
valleys, that had no time to shift for themselves, ran some of them into Creeks
and corners and hide themselves in caves and hollow places, where many of them
died miserable deaths for want of Food to sustain their hunger; and them that
remained in Towns and Cities were so cruelly murdered that the very Channels in
the streets were filld with blood: four hundred men at one time were burned to
death in a Church; fifteen hundred of women and small children on that same day
slain at a Fort called Milbour, the women had their throats cut and their
childrens brains were dashed against the rocks, and afterward their Carcasses
burnt to powder. At the Town of Bricherus all the men put to the sword, and
sixteen great bellied women had their infants ripped out of their wombs; in a
great Forest that was very near unto that place, were two hundred men that
fled for their lives, overtaken, and afterward nayl'd to the trees alive, some
of them with their heels upward, and their heads downwards toward she ground.
At the City of Turin was the Protestants Temple set on fire, and burned to the
very ground by Friars and Romish Priests.

The Ministers belonging to the same, Mr. Gros and Mr Aghit, with all the
chiefest Gentlemen and officers were carried to prison, and stifled to death in
their beds. Four Elders, amongst which Paul de Rossan, a man that was of very
great note and esteem, with many others more hanged at la Tour. Some had their
bowels pulled out of their Bellies, and thrown about the streets for Dogs to
gnaw upon. The houses of Angrogue in which were three thousand Protestants got
in for shelter, was fired, and never a man came out alive; the Soldiers and
Romish Priests, Friars and Jesuits, in companies running up and down from one
house to another, and never left off murdering whilst the day gave light, Some
Children by the Soldiers torn limb from limb, and thrown at out another
heads: and some were tossed upon the points of their pikes, to and fro. Many that
were brought up high and mighty mountains, were tied neck and heels together,
and tumbled down the steep Rocks.

At a gallant Town called Tollareta, they destroyed all the women and children
that they could light upon, and cut off the childrens heads, and boiled them,
and eat the brains for sauce: and all the men that they could take they stripped
them naked, and cut and slasht their bodies with Swords and Fanlchins and stopped
up their wounds with Salt and Gunpowder. They overtooke some in their running.
and staked them fast to the ground. They hanged many up by the feet till they
dyed, and some they breched through with spits and roasted alive.

And thus were the poor Protestants put to most cruel and inhumane deaths,
both in the valleys and in the mountains, and in every Town and City where
the Romish Priests and Papists Soldiers came.

Some women had their breasts cut off, some men had their members cut off, some
ware starved to death with cold, and some were forced to eat their own
excrement, all which miseries was inflected upon them, because they would not
turn from their Religion, and from the true worship of the living God, to
worship and honor Idolatry.

A Religious man at Angrogue, named Peter Simon, being a hundred years of age,
and his wife almost as much, with many other aged people having gathered
themselves in a house together into one place, intending there to spend the
remainder of the wretched time that they had to live in Divine Prayer and
Supplycations to the Lord, were set upon by the bloody Tyrants, and most basely
murdered because they would not go to Mass.

In another house they took M. Thomas Margher almost an hundred years old, and
because he refused to go to Mass, they first cut off his Nose, then one of
his Ears, and after the other, and last of all they cut him joint from joint
till they had cut all his Limbs in pieces, who spoke these words in the midst
of his extremity to the Tyrants that did it. Torment my body how and which way
you will or can, but I am sure that you have no power to hurt my soul, and
therefore I fear you not, I will never turn from my Christian Faith to worship
Idols, for had I ten thousand lives I could be well content to loose them all
for the Truth and for the Gospel of Christ; these were the latest of his dying
words, a great number more such horrible bloody Murders have bin committed
upon the Protestants, which if every several particular were set down, a
bigger Book were not able to hold them: But here is a sad precedent in what is
already set down, I would to God that it had bin better, for it is too well
approved on, that above thirty thousand Christians that were Protestants
perished and were brought to untimely ends in two days and nights, which was
done April the sixth and seventh this present Year, 1655,

Here follows a brief Description of the Cituation of the Country, where
these Cruel, Bloody, and unhuman Massacries was committed and done.
THe People of the Nation are called the Walldences, most of them are of a
gallant resolve, which had rather dye then to change and to turn from what
their Ancestors were, and it is well to be known that the faithful Waldences
have stood up for the true Protestant Religion at least five hundred years:
Not-withstanding they have had many troublesome Mutinies and Persecutions
raised against them by the blood-thirstie Papists, but never none like to this
before: the countries wherein the Waldences did inhabit is called the valeys of
Piedmont, and the valeys of Lucerne, adjoining close with Italy and France on
the other side, Savoy is also near unto it; the Country in the valeys is very
fruitful baring and bringing forth Corn, Oil and Wine in a plentiful manner,
and by the report of many knowing men which have bin Travilers and past through
that Country, there is never a place in all Urope so like unto England as that
Country is, but the Lord in mercy grant that England may never be so cruelly
abused, as the people of that Country have bin: and now let us turn back and
reflect upon our selves; are not we almost in the same condition as they were
in? suppose a foreign Nation should come as they have threatened to do and
invade our Countries and over-comens, who knows but their cruelty might be as
much to us as the Papists cruelty was to the Waldences; I am certainly
persuaded that our sins are as great and numberless as theirs, and for ought
we know our punishment may be as great as theirs unless we speedily repent:
wherefore I desire every man and every woman, old and young, rich and poor, to
betake themselves to true repentance by unfeigned prayers and amendment of
life, and to prostrate our selves both Souls and Bodies before the wrath of
our merciful God comes upon us, for if our Enemies should resist and make
war against us, it is not the arm of flesh that could defend us, except the
Lord of Hoasts be on our side, although we were ten for one against them, but
if the Lord God be on our side we need not fear our proudest Enemies though a
thousand to one should magnify themselves against us: and now will and put you
in mind of some sad miseries which have fallen and happened to many people in
England since these last domestic wars began, which is known by woeful
experience to be too true; all which calamities, we as it were pulled down upon
our own hea^a for want of serding of God aright.

Here follows a true Relation of many cruel acts which have been done since
these unhappy and unnatural wars began in England, which is a thing very
necessary to be looked upon, and to kept in memory.
THe Prophet Hosea, Chap. 4. crying out against the wickedness of the people
of those times, says, The Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the
land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land,
by swearing and lying, and killing and stealing, and whoring, they break out,
and blood has touched blood. The very same occasion has been in England: For
all manner of stnnes have so much abounded here, that the like was never
before: here is envy, spite and hate amongst neighbors, here is covetonsnesse
pride and ambitien amongst rich men; here is lying, swearing and dissembling
among Tradesmen, here is false doctrine and blasphemy taught among seditious
men, and there is a general distemper amongst all men; insomuth that there are
few men contented with their present estate; and this was the cause of our
homebred wars at first, and that blood has touched blood, we all know to be
true: for stnee those wars began, there is no place in England but has deeply
tasted of this bloody cup of civil wars, whereby some have lost their goods,
some their lives, and many thousands both goods and lives; so that the conntrey
people in many places knew not whither to flys to hide themselves from the
terrible stroke of death. At night when men should have gone to their rest, the
Drums beat up their martial Alarms; and by day when men should go to their
labors, their horses and rattel were taken up for Service and the two great
Armies were in the howels of our nation, continually preparing themselves for
flaughter: and this was the cause of our sorrows and troubles; had if not bin
for this, there had not been so many news of taking of towns, firing of houses
plandering of Cities, ravishing of women, and deflowring of maids: had it not
been for the wars, there had not been so many Lords, Knights, Colonels and
Captains imprisoned, nor so many Gentlemen and others lost their Uves: those
unnatural civil wars have cansed many a woeful mother to bewail the death of
her flain son, and many a sister to mingle tears with her brothers blood, many
fatherless children to perish for want of nourishment, and many a mournful
widow to fit weeping a lone for want of the company of her late deceased
husband.

And thus have you heard of the miseriss that we have brought upon our selves
long of our st^s and taking up arms to fight one with another here in our own
Countries.

And now to conclude, if our Friends and Neighbors were so violent and cruel
amongst us, who knows but if an Army of strangers would come and invade our
Land, but that they would be far worse, which I hope shall never be:
Therefore I desire of all men that they may love one another, and then will the
Lord send Love and Peace amongst all: and for the distressed Waldences that are
yet alive let every man and woman send up their Prayers to Almighty God for
their deliverance, and happy are we if we can take warning by their harms.

FINIS.

