No Power but of God And yet a Power in every Creature.

OR, A word in season, to all Men not void of Grace, or deprived of Reason.

Where in is beld forth, That the Almighty God is not wanting to us, in
impowering of us; but we are wanting to him, in not improving our talent for
him. The Almighty gives to every man some talent or talents, viz. To some
Natural, to others Spiritual talents or gifts: But there is no man that
improves his talent so well as he might, in point of obedience to him. Which
appears, In our not doing so much good, and refraining so much evil, as by the
power he has given us we ought and might have done.

And, That the Ordinances, Institutions, and appointments of Christ held forth
in the Gospel, are still in force: so that to slight them, is to slight our own
privileges; and to forsake them, is to forsake our own mercies. The abuse of
Gospel Ordinances by some, does not take away the lawful use of them to others.

By ROBERT PURNEL.

Isa. 28. 7. The Priests and Prophets, they err in vision, and stumble in
judgment.

Psalm. 140. 11. Therefore let not an evil speaker be established in the earth.

Isa. 28. 11. But wi^h a stammering lip, and another tongue speak to thy
people.

London, Printed for Samuel Newton, dwelling in Wine-street in Bristol. 1651.

THE EPISTLE to the Impartial READER.
Courteous Reader,
TIme is one of the most precious Herbs in the Garden of the World; so that
there is nothing more precious; and yet by most men, there is no one thing more
slighted: Wherefore, if I shall here give thee the fruits of a little redeemed
time, think not hardly of me, but let it have acceptance with thee; I must
confess, that I am the most unmeet of many, which this Age does afford, to
write or speak of things of so great concernment: Yet I suppose this will be
granted by all men rational, that he which has but a little strength, and
improveth that to the uttermost, to do good withal, is more acceptable in the
sight of God and sincere-hearted men, then he which has ten times the strength
and uses it not. And although in me there is the least Candle that ever God
enlightened, yet I shall not put it under a Bushel; and although I have but one
Talent, I will not hide it in a Napkin; it is true, the Candle of the Lord
cannot burn with a more dim light then in my self. (Though a little truth
lives in me, yet clouds and darkness are round about me.) So that I have but
a little of the Spirit, in abundance of weakness; Wherefore if any of the
glory of Christ break forth, in the ensuing discourse, let him have the glory,
who has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the wisdom of the
wise; and although these things be not broug^ forth in the painted Dish of
Human Learning, varnished and colored over with the wisdom of man; yet if the
fruit be good in the taste, though the Tree be not so beautiful in the eye,
reject no the fruit for the Trees sake, but rather consider that which is most
unpleasant in the eyes of men, is for the most part most pleasant in the sight
of God; for man is apt to love that which God abhors, and to abhor that which
the Almighty loves.

For this Treatise, as much as in me lies, I have avoided the crying up of any
party or opinion, and endeavored to own truth, and deny untruth wheresoever it
is found, either in noble or ignoble, old or young, weak or strong, learned or
unlearned; wishing with my whole heart that there were but only these two names
under Heaven to know the sons and daughters by, viz. Saints and Sinners; for
there is but light and darkness, heaven and hell, truth and error, sheep and
wolves. But the muddy waters of Babylon have run so long in the channels of our
understanding, that it has blinded our judgments and disordered our
affections.

Understanding Reader! the things that I have written of are many, the method
which I have observed is familiar and plain, the rule which I have endeavored
to walk by is the word of truth, the end I have aimed at is the glory of God,
in the good of his people; and wherein I have come short of my end, attribute
that to my weakness, and not the truths asserted. The fore named
considerations have enflamed my desires, and winged my endeavors to cast in
this mite also into the Cabinet of thy soul. And although I have met with some
discouragements already, and do suppose I shall have many more when this comes
to public view: Yet if any man do reap any spiritual benefit by it, though I
may suffer reproaches for it, I have not lost my end in it: I have endeavored
according to the measure of light and strength that is in me, to speak the
words of truth and soberness unto thee. But that I might not spin out my
Epistle beyond the staple; I will endeavor to give thee a brief sum of what I
have written, and leave the farther enlargement of these things to every one
that shall read this book: I have written these things, not as so many
Infallibilities, but under correction, with submission to beter judgments I
have given mine, and that, I hope, without a preingaged affection, honoring
the things of God, as well in those under one form, as those under another. And
as in every place, and amongst all sorts of people, he that fears God and
works righteousness is accepted of him; so I would endeavor to love any, in
whom I see the least appearance of Christ, let them go under what name or
notion the Prince of darkness and his children please. The sum of what I have
hereafter written, in brief is this; First, I have laid before thee the several
Temptations that do surround thee on every side; next I have exhorted thee to
put on all the armor of God to defend thy self, and offend thy enemies, and
that thou might so do, abide in the Doctrine of Christ, which is a City of
Refug^, and then love in the will of God, which is the strong Castle of
content; Improve thy power whether natural or spiritual for him who gave it
thee, ^n whom are all our springs, from whom are all our supplies; yet let our
omissions and commissions be charged upon our selves, that God may be true and
every man a liar. There is darkness in the Prophets, and gross darkness in
their Flock^; and but a little light in any of the Saints. A few words to the
preiended Ministry, with a brief Epistle to the World, whom they have
deceived, with a discovery of them, and how thou may easily know them; Of
our fall in the first- Adam, and of our recovery by the second- Adam: The
glorious state of those restored; the deliverances they have already had are
great, and greater then these be at hand; only, the Saints be too sudden in
their expecting these deliverances. These with many other particulars are laid
before thee, and commended unto thee: Now although these things are not brought
forth in the golden dish of humane Learning, painted and varnished over with
arts, parts, and wisdom of man, but in an earthen vessel; yet despise not the
meat for the dishes sake. Remember that Christ called those men Scribes,
Pharisees and Hipocrites, because they looked so much upon the outside, and so
little on the inside; even so now, in these days most of the s^ns and
daughters of men, do look more upon gifts then upon Grace, upon Law then upon
Gospel, upon the form more then upon the power of godliness; viz. If a man
come and speak with the tongue of men and angels, the people are presently
saying as once was said of learned, eloquent, yet wicked Herod; it is the voice
of a God, and not of man: but if another come unto your Assemblies, though well
grown in grace, yet if he does not equal you in natural gifts, you say he is an
illiterate Mechanic, etc. But if I might be thought worthy to advise you, I
should beseech you to call no man ignorant, whom God has taught; nor no man
learned, that has not been taught at the School of Christ.

Grace is more excellent then Gifts, yet both in their places are good: Gifts
do adorn the outward man, and Grace does beautify the inward: The outward man
may be adorned, and the inward man be left naked: And I think experience in
these days does abundantly prove it; and for my own part, if I am censured for
it, I doubt not but I shall consider I am not better then my Master, for his
doctrine was despised, and that of the learned, and well may mine: but I hope
thou will try me before thou judge me, lest I should say to thee, as it is said
to some in the same case, Pro. 18. 13. He that judges a matter before he
hears it, etc. But I hope better things of thee, though I thus speak. So I
wi^^ hold thee no longer in the porch, but invite thee into the house, and such
as I have I will set before thee, desiring thee to taste of every dish, before
thou do spend thy judgment of the feast: For what is wanting in the first
Course, may be made up in the second; and if there be not such varieties as was
expected, yet let it have acceptance with thee, seeing it is according to my
ability. 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man has received the gift, so let him
administer the same. Thus do, and thou will engage him, Who is,

Thy Friend and Servant, R. P.

The Contents of the most principal things handled in the ensuing Treatise.
THere are three things for a Christian to do, which are of great concernment,
as to the well being of a Christian, viz.

1. To put on the Armor of Christ. 2. To abide in the Doctrine of Christ. 3.
To live in the will of God; For there is no power but of God.
The several temptations that lie before Christians.

The way to withstand them, is not only to put on this armor, but to keep it
on also.

And so to abide in the Doctrine of Christ, as in a Castle of Ref^ge against
all storms.

And wait upon God in the use of Ordinances.

Nine arguments to prove that Gospel Ordinances are still in force.

What the Doctrine of Christ is.

What it is to abide in the Doctrine of Christ.

That there is no power but of God, and yet a power in every Creature.

Of our fall in the first Adam, and of the subtlety of Satan therein.

Of our Restoration by the second Adam, in whom we have gotten more then we
lost b^ the first Adam.

A Dialogue between the Law and the Gospel.

Of what we are delivered from by Christ, and what he has restored his Elect
unto.

Wherein many men and women do deceive themselves, thinking they are
something, when they are nothing.

A few words of Faith.

A word to the pretended Ministers, or a few words to some of those that have
taken to themselves the name of the Ministers of England.

A brief Epistle to the World.

Ten Characters of a false pretended Minister by which he may be known.

Fourteen Characters of a faithful Minister of the Gospel, whom we shall do
well to honor.

A brief Epistle to all the Lambs, that through a providence have not been
devoured by the Wolves.

A brief Prophecy of the glorious state of the Church Militant that will be
shortly.

There be glorious deliverances coming for the Saints, but the Saints be for
the most part too sudden in their expecting these deliverrances.

There be many other things held forth in this Treatise, very seasonable and
useful, and worthy our serious consideration. The heads of which, for some
reason I forbear to mention in this Table.

The several Temptations that lie before us.
THere are three things that be of absolute necessity for a Christian to do at
all times, but more especially in these dividing times: I say, of absolute
necessity, if not in point of being, yet in point of well-being as to
Christians.

First, To put on the Armor of Christ. Secondly, To abide in the Doctrine of
Christ. Thirdly, To live in the will of God.
First, Put on the whole armor of Christ. Before come particularly to speak of
this point, I shall endeavor to lay before you the necessity that we have to
arm our selves with this Armor at this time. For now Satan in more then an
ordinary measure has transformed himself into an Angel of light, and comes to
us by his ministers in sheepstloathing, though inwardly we find him to be a
ravening wolf. He is subtle, and knows that those former ordinary snares, gins,
and baits will not take with many men: wherefore now, though he can deceive but
few with the history, yet he endeavors to deceive many with the mystery of
iniquity. You will and may easily see him with those that call themselves our
Joshua's, in the Pulpit, not only at their elbow, but sometimes in their
Explications, and most frequently in their Applications: Nay, there is scarce
one Ordinance of the Gospel, but he will cloth himself withal. If he cannot
keep people from the practice or use of Ordinances, he will as much as in him
lies cause them to rest upon Ordinances: in a word, he will vail himself under
any form or forms, under any order, or ordinance Again, he has his gins, pits
and snares for all sorts of men, in all administrations The Parliament is not
free, but they do o^^ may see Satan among them, and sometimes in them,
improving all opportunities (...) deceive them: Our Armies both in Englan^
Ireland and Scotland call one upon another to stand upon their guard, to make
ready present, and to give fire not only upon their bodily enemies, but upon
their spiritua^^ enemies. Methinks I hear many of the Soldiers speaking one to
the other in the language of Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 13.

First, Watch what comes in.

Secondly, Watch what goes out.

1. Watch what comes in: You shall find thoughts arising one after another in
your hearts; call them all to ^n account, saying, Who art thou? for if thou art
for Christ, give me the word, thou shall freely pass; if thou art not for
Christ, and have not his word, Stand, ^f thou come up one step further, I Will
fire at thee.

2. Watch what goes out: Take heed to thy words, let them be such as may
administer grace to the hearers; remember what S. James says, Jam. 3. 5. 6.
The tongue ^^s a little member, and boasts great things; be^old how great a
matter a little fire kindles! and ^he Tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity,
it defiles ^he whole body, and sets on fire the whole course ^f nature,
etc. Wherefore watch what goes ^ut; remember, the Lord thy God has ^et a
double pale to rule that little mem^er.

Again, as he tempts Parliament and Army, ^o he tempts Magistrates and
Ministry; high and low, rich and poor, old and young; ^e has his temptations
suitable to all con^itions: He will tempt you when you ar^ praying, hearing,
reading, meditating, eating, drinking, waking and sleeping; he improves all
opportunities, he takes all advantages, for he lies in wait to deceive, and
winnow you, as Christ told Peter; He is a great traveller, he roves up and down
the earth, as he told the Lord in the book of Job; He is a great Philosopher,
he is acquainted with all natures; he has his Logic and his Rhetoric as
perfect as the Heathen Philosophers, or the National Ministers, nay he
outstrips them, for he often deceives them: You know he was too subtle for the
first Adam, he engaged him and overcame him, and gave Adam and all us in him
the fall: Again, he imployes all his policy, improves all his subtilty, to
foil the second Adam as he did the first, Mat. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. Note these
two things:


1. The Devil suits his temptation to our Lord Christ's present condition:
Christ had been fasting forty days, why, says the Devil, Command that these
stones be made bread The Lord answers him from Scripture, and tells him, Deuteronomy.
8. 3. it is written, Man shall (...) live by bread alone, but by every word
that p^^ceedeth out of the mouth of God. The Devil seeing there is no dealing
with Christ, unle^^ he could bring Scripture, he hastens and prepares his next
temptation, as you may see Mat. 4. 5, 6. he entreats Christ to cast himself
down from the pinnacle of the Temple, and endeavors to ground his temptation
upon Scripture, and cites Psalm. 91. 11. For he shall give his Angels charge
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. The Devil cites this Psalm and this
verse to Christ: but mark his policy, he leaves out somewhat most considerable
in that 11. verse, and adds somewhat that was not in that verse, as you may
see, if you compare Mat. 4. 6. with Psalm. 91. 11. Again, this subtle Serpent
will bring pride into our hearts under the name of decency and neatness, and
covetousness under the name of good husbandry; nay he will clothe drunkenness
with the garment of goodfellowship, and gluttony with the robe of hospitality,
nay he will hide frowardness under the name of zeal; he will promise you
peace, and bring you into trouble; he ^^ll promise you honor, and bring you
into dishonor both with God and man; he will promise us liberty, and bring us
into bondage; In a word, (to add no more) he will promise us life, as he did
our first parents, and bring us to death, The wage^ of sin is death.

2. O Christians, consider, that we have a deceitful heart within us, a map of
misery which is more destructive to us then all the wiles of Satan; it is
desperately wicked, says Jeremy in his 17. chap. v. 9. The heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wick^^ who can know it? There is a magazine
of filthiness within us, in thine and mine heart; we have seen much of it, and
there is a thousand times more then we have seen, Who can know it? There is
nothing called sin in the Word of God, but thou and I may find in more or
less, taking up its lodging in our hearts; it does mischief us more then Satan
for he can but tempt, but our deceitful hearts do yield; it will make us
believe that it is plodding for our good, when it is contriving our ruin; it
will cheat us in our obediences to God, it will tell us we have done well when
we have done ill; in a word, the Heart is the sole troubler of the times, see
Eccles. 9. 3. The hearts of the sonn^ of men are full of madness, for evil and
madne^^ are in their hearts. Now there are three thing by which a mad man may
be known.

1. Mischievousnesse to himself and others. 2. Unsensiblenesse, they feel not
the smart. 3. Wilfulness; there is no persuading of them.
First now, O Christian, deal impartially; do not thou find that thou have
mischiefed thy self and others many a time? and yet thou would be ready to
spet in the face of him that should say thou art mad.

Again in the next place, have not thou been insensible at the present what
misery thou have brought upon thy self? And then

Thirdly, for wilfulness: There are characters of wilfulness to be seen in
those that do look on themselves as the chiefest Saints, and yet they would
take it as a rash expression, if one tell them that there is madness in their
hearts.

3. Consider, O Christians, there is not only a Devil without thee, and a
deceitful heart within thee, but also there be all thy carnal Acquaintance
before thee, which do claim an interest in thee, wherefore they will not
forsake thee, but lie persuading of thee to run with them to the same excess of
riot; and if thou begin to refuse to comply with them, they will say, You begin
too soon to be precise: What, a young Saint! lose the best of your time, the
flower of your age! what, wither your body with grief for a few petty sins!
what, spoil your self with studying and poring upon books! what run into
corners to weep and pray, when thou might be singing and dancing, eating and
drinking with the rest of thy friends what, must you be so precise? shall no
body be saved but you, and a few such as you b^^ what is become of our
forefathers, think you, which made no such ado? I hope you will not say but
they be saved, etc.

Will thou see now, O man, what is the cause that the sons and daughters of
men are multiplying their iniquities, committing sinne^ with greediness: why,
herein lies the cause; there is a devil without thee, and a deceitful heart
within thee, and there be all thy carnal acquaintance before thee, all
pretending love unto thee, and they all bending together and improving all
opportunities to cheat, delude, and deceive thee. Hence it comes to pass
that the whole world lies in wickedness: hence it is, that when thou come
into the City, thou shall see it swim^ with pride before thee, and abound with
covetousness behind thee: on thy right hand, as thou go^st along the streets,
thou shall hear them swearing, and on thy left hand in their shops lying; go
out of the streets into any by-place, thou shall heard some cursing, and others
backbiting, and all almost (unless here and there one) in the City, bond their
forces together against the Lord Christ's Kingly power.

Me thinks I see now and then a sincerehearted Country-Christian come walking
along the streets of the City; and when he sees these abominations before him,
behind him, on his right hand, and on his left, he begi^^ to say, Lord, what is
the cause of this great wic^^dnesse in the City? And if he receive no answer
from the Lord, he enquires for the Lords people, and through Gods goodness he
finds here and there a Christian following of Christ, and a pretty considerable
party enquiring after Christ; well, he comes to one and asks him, why does
sin so abound in this City? it is true, sin reigns much in the Country, but it
exceeds in the City. Why (says the Citizen to him) we have more Temptations
living in the City, then you in the Country. Well but the Countryman is not
fully satisfied, he goes to another, and demands a reason, Why does sin reign
in this City? have you not godly Magistrates, and godly Ministers, and other
godly Officers in your City? Me thinks I hear the Citizen answering him and
saying, Why through the Lords goodness it is much better with us in that
respect then it has been here to fore.

Q. What then is the cause of the abounding of sin?

A. Sir, I think one or both of these following reasons may be given for it;
either first we have slighted the means of gra^^ more then others, or else (as
I have said before) we are under greater temptations in the City, then you in
the Country.

But shall we see a little farther, and enquire into the cause why both City
and Country, not only in this Nation, but all the World-over is so overspread
with all manner of abominations both in Principles and Practice; which is the
reason so many thousands that would be looked upon as Saints and servants of
Christ, are fallen off, one to this error, and another to that faction. Some
deny Ordinances, others deny the Scriptures, and some deny both: Some will
acknowledge God, but deny the Son; others acknowledge both the Father and the
Son, but despise the Spirit; others will acknowledge Father, Son and Spirit, in
word and in tongue, but deny all in their practice And here I am sure is the
state of the greatest part of the English Nation, but the Lord (blessed be his
name) is beginning to destroy this darkness by his own light. But is not this
the cause why the whole world lies in wickedness, as John says? There is a
Devil tempting, and a deceitful heart yielding, and carnal friends persuading;
the one comes and takes thee by one arm, the other by the other arm, the third
ties as it were a string about thy middle, and all three saying, Come along
with us.

Thus much of the cause of our divisions, backslidings, deadness, dullness,
formality and infidelity. Now I shall in the next place lay before you the
Cure, and therein speak of two things.

The first is concerning the being, The second is concerning the well-being of
a Christian.
First then, if thou would be preserved in these perilous times, Put on the
armor of Christ, and abide in the doctrine of Christ.

Secondly, for thy well-being; learn this lesson, There is no power but of God,
who will turn all these things to his glory and thy good: Or, Abide in the will
of God.

First of the first, Put on the whole armor of Christ, and abide in the
doctrine of Christ. The one is laid down by way of command in Ephesians. 6. 11. the
other by way of trial and prevention, in the 2. Epist. of John, v. 9. To each
of these Scriptures, as far as I have light witnessed with experience, I shall
hold forth briefly and plainly.

Ephesians. 6. 11. Put on the whole armor of God that you may be able to stand
against the wiles (...) the Devil. The armor here spoken unto (...) not a
temporal, but a spiritual armor and what this spiritual armor is, you ha^ it
laid down distinctly in this Epistle o^^ Paul to the Ephesians, viz.

1. To gird them with the girdle of truth* Ephesians. 6. 14.

2. To put on the breast plate of righteousness, ver. 14.

3. To be shod with the shoes of the Gospel o^ peace, v. 15.

4 To take the shield of faith, which is a most victorious weapon, v. 16.

5. To put on the helmet of salvation, v. 17.

6. To take into thy hand of faith the sword of the Spirit, v. 17.

Beloved, I dare boldly say, that man o^ woman that puts on this armor, man
march forth into the field, and challenge al^ the Devils in hell, and all the
wicked men in^ the world, and rout them all. What mad^ David go out against
Goliath? Why, he saw himself armed, not with Saul's armor, but with this
Spiritual armor. What was that that made him so confident, Ps. 27. 3. Though
an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear, though war should
rise against me^ ^n this will I be confident. What made him ^reak forth in such
words, Psalm. 3. 6. I will ^ot (said he) be afraid of ten thousand of people
that have set themselves against me round about. ^ov. 28. 1. The wicked flees
when no man pur^eth, but the righteous is as bold as a lion.

Q. Why be the righteous so bold as a Lion?

A. They be armed with the armor of God.

Q. What is meant or understood by the girdle of truth?

A. To be rightly principled, and through^y doctrinated in the doctrine of
Christ. Again,

Q. What is meant by the breast plate of righteousness?

A. A good conscience, or innocence of life etc. and so for the shield of
faith, what is it but the righteousness to Christ, able like a brazen shield
to protect and cover us from the darts of the world, the flesh and the devil?
Nay I suppose it to be not only a desensive, but an offensive weapon, I Joh. 5.
4. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith. Heb. 11. 33,
34. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness* obtained
promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight
the armies of the Aliens, etc. If we should see an Army of men marching into
the field, where their Enemies had placed themselves in Battalia (...) I say,
if we should see them march toward their enemy unarmed, why, we would presently
conclude that these men will be put to the worst, they will receive the rout,
they will be either taken, or else return hacked and hewed and terribly wounded.

What is the cause that we be so easily and so often routed by Satan? why, he
comes and finds us unarmed; hence it is that we have so many cuts and sores in
our inward man, we do not consider the strength and subtilty of our enemies;
and hence it is that we do not put on the whole armor of God. Nay, how many
thousands of men and women be there, nay of those that would be accounted pious
Christians, that are so far from putting on the whole armor of God, that they
never put on a piece of it; Nay, it is a rare thing to find a Professor that
can tell one what this armor is, and the right place of every piece: hence it
is that some do put the piece behind, that should be before, and that upon the
foot which should be on the head; and so though it be the armor of Christ, you
cannot fight in it, it will be to thee as Saul's armor was to David, unfit for
service. Surely Christians, ^f I see any thing of God, this (I do know) ^s one
of the greatest evils that now reigns amongst Professors, their disordering
what God has ordered. Take a thing that is ^ood, it is good but in its place;
put it a ^ittle above, or something beneath its place, ^he thing that is good
in it self becomes evil ^o you, etc.

Again, let us examine what necessity there ^s for the sons of Sion thus to
arm themselves. Oh consider, consider these ensuing ^criptures. Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
Put on the whole ^rmour of God, (there is the precept:) For we ^restle not
against flesh and blood, but against ^rincipalities and powers, against the
rulers of ^arknesse, against spiritual wickedness in high ^laces, (there is
the reason.) Take heed that no ^an deceive you, says our Lord Christ, Mat. ^4.
4. For we be living in those days spoken ^0, v. 24. There shall arise false
Christ's and false Prophets, showing great signs and wonders. These are the
days spoken to, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
^ater days some shall depart from the faith, giving ^eed to seducing spirits
and doctrines of devils, etc.

Oh what troops of men and women is Satan driving before him! Look up a
little, entreat the Lord to take the vail off thy spiritual eye, and thou shall
see a great rode-way exceeding broad, and very populous, and drove after drove
passing on, not softly, but swiftly, they all ride post. Mark diligently, and
thou shall see Satan that great Prince af the air, bravely mounted, and
richly clothed, as their General marching before them, and his Angels bringing
up the rear: Take a view of the Droves as they pass by thee, and thou shall
see some of all ranks of men amongst them. Me thinks I hear thee saying, look,
look, methinks I see a Parliament Man there, me thinks I see here and there one
of the Army, and abundance of the Clergy there; but they march more honorably
then the rest, for Satan their Prince has made them File-leaders. Look, look,
what an innumerable company of men and women, old and young, high and low, rich
and poor, are posting away to hel^ Now I see the words of Christ be true, Mat.
7. 13. For wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction,
and many there be which go in thereat. Now I see what is the meaning of that
text, Mat. 7. 22. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy
name have cast out devils, and in thy name have done many wonderful works!
Depart from me ^aith Christ, I never knew you. How! not know us, and we have
taught in thy streets, and eat and drank in thy presence! Depart, says Christ
to them. How! depart! Do thou speak to us that have done so many wonderful
things in thy name? Lord, let the word depart be given to the Ign rant, and not
to us that are Scholars! Why, says Christ, many of those whom you call
Ignorant, are the greatest Scholars in my school, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28. Not
many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are ^alled; but
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God
has chosen the weak things of the world to confound ^he mighty, and base
things of the world and things which are despised has God chosen, yea and
things which are not, to bring to naught things that ^^re, that no flesh should
glory in his presence. Oh how does flesh glory in his presence! if a man can
speak scholastically, though ^he be not authentic, how is he admired of men!
if he can speak eloquently, and lay down things methodically, (which be but the
gifts of nature) how does this flesh glory in his presence! Methinks I hear a
voice from heaven saying, Come down thou proud self-seeking Flesh! Thou have
set thy self in my Spirits place, and have caused the people to admire thee,
saying of thee as once it was said of Herod It is the v^ice of God, and not of
man. I will smit^ thee, and the worms shall destroy thee, says the Lord. In a
word, we may clearly see that Satan has his pits, gins and snares for al^
degrees and degrees and ranks of men, under all administrations, form or forms:
He endeavors to cheat us in all things, at all times, and in^ all places. But
me thinks I see him lay the closest siege, and raise the strongest batteries,
and plant his greatest pieces against these two things:

FIrst, against the Doctrine of Christ. Secondly, against the Discipline of
Christ
1. Against the Doctrine of Christ, which tells thou art freely justified by
grace, Romans 3. 24. in comes Antichrist, and tells thee it i^ partly by grace,
and partly by works: And so though thou do not seek to be justified by the
Law, yet it is as it were by the works (...) the Law, Romans 9. 3. 2. Wherefore?
because the sought it not by faith, but as it were by the work^^ of the law,
for they stumbled at that stumbling stone Consider these ensuing Scriptures,
which speak of justification by grace; and if thi^ point were well understood,
men would not so easily be led away with the error of the wi^ked. Ephesians. 2. 5.
By grace are you saved, a^^ freely quickened when you were dead in your sin^^
and v. 8. For by grace are you saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. Romans 11. 6. And if it be by grace, then it is no
more of works, etc. And in Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ. In a word: Creation, Election,
Redemption, Justification, and Sanctification are all of Free Grace, to which
both Old and New Testament speaks abundantly: And for want of understanding
this point, the Papists err in seeking salvation by works; For want of
understanding this point, the Arminians err, saying, Election and Salvation in
effect depend upon Qualification; yea, for want of the true knowledge of this
point, does that error of Free Will and General Redemption so abound at this
day: In a word, for want of the knowledge of this point, do so many at this
time in this Commonwealth make a hotch-potch in mingling and interweaving Law
and Gospel, in joining their obedience with the obedience of Christ, to patch
up a salvation. 2. Here is another cheat of Satan, wherein he endeavors to
cheat thee and me in the Doctrine of Christ. The doctrine of Christ tells thee,
that Christ came to reconcile thee to God, 2 Cor. 5. 23. When this point is
held forth a little, in creeps Antichrist, and declares that Christ came also
to reconcile God to thee; and so endeavors to make the immutable God mutable,
or the unchangeable God changeable. You might trace him in every branch of the
Doctrine of Christ, and find him either endeavoring to make thee to deny it,
or if he cannot prevail in that, then he endeavors to make thee add something
to it, or take something from it. Wherefore put on the whole armor of God,
stand upon thy guard and watch: Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God.

2. Again, as first he endeavors to cheat us in the doctrine of Christ, so
secondly he endeavors to cheat us in the discipline of Christ. Now Discipline,
though it be not of absolute necessity as to the being of a Church of Christ,
yet it is absolutely necessary to the well-being of a Church: for as a City
without walls, a Sea without banks, a Vineyard without hedges, so is a Church
without discipline: For a Church without government is as a ship without a
Pilot, or a Commonwealth without a Magistrate, or a World without a Sun. Hence
it is that you shall find the Apostles so frequently exhorting, persuading, and
entreating the Church of Jesus Christ to walk by rule, to observe order: The
Pastor is commanded to walk as a Pastor and Teacher, that both by his doctrine
and conversation he might win others to Christ: the Teachers, Elders, Deacons
have all their rules laid before them, how they ought to build up one another
in their most holy faith, and to watch over the flock, etc. And so every member
in the Church in his place is to observe order, in endeavoring to be useful
to the whole body. Nay hence it is, that one quarter part of the New Testament
is spent about treating of the several gifts of the Spirit to several men, to
several ends, viz. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the ministry, etc.

Now that Ordinances were the appointments of Christ, I suppose that all
rational men will easily grant; And that they be now in being, and ought to be
in use, will be easily proved.

The first is granted by all hands, viz. That there were Ordinances,
appointments and institutions given forth by Christ unto the Churches in the
Apostles days, accompanied with Gods presence, and confirmed ^y miracles, and
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. But the question is, whether these are still
to continue? are they now in being as to us? Prove that. For answer hereunto
consider these things.

1 ORdinances are not of humane, but of divine institution, 1 Cor. 1^. 28.

2. Consider, the Saints both in Old and New Testament, under the greatest
discoveries, living in the greatest enjoyments, even these waited upon God in
the use of Ordinances; and Paul says, Phil. 3. 17. Ye ought to walk so as you
have us for an example: and in another place he says, Be ye followers of me as
I am of Christ, etc.

3. We have not only commands of God and the examples of the Apostles, but w^
have experience that God has done u^ good by them: it is our Fathers walks, i^
which our souls do often meet with ou^ Beloved.

4. Consider, the Lord of glory does blame those that neglect making use of
Ordinances. Mal. 3. 7. Ye have gone away from mine ordinances, and have not
kept them. Is no^ this the state of this Nation? Luke 19. 27 Those mine enemies
that would not that I should reign over them, bring them before me. Compare
this 27 verse with the 13. and 14. an^ you shall see that there were a people
who^ Christ threatened to punish for not submit^ing to his appointments, nor
improving their talents. Not to wait upon God in the use of Ordinances, is to
be careless to ^hearken to his voice; and so the Lord may justly complain of
thee and me, as once he did, Psalm. 81. 11. But my people would not heark^en to
my voice, etc.

5. Consider, while we are in a body we be in a form, and therefore cannot
altogether live without forms, unless we will be monst^rs, and neglect our own
mercies. God has given us an external body, as well as an internal soul, and
will be waited upon, worshipped and glorified by both, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify
God in your bodies and in your souls, which are the Lords.

6. Consider, that these appointments, institutions and ordinances, when they
were appointed and instituted, were to continue in the Church till the Saints
were perfected. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ. In which there be four things considerable: I will
but name them.

1. Here is the giver, and that is the Lord Christ, the Fountain in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, from whom we receiv^ grace for grace.

2. Here is the gift, and that is his Spirit in its measures, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ.

3. Here is the end why God gave such gifts, v. 12. For the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, etc.

4. Here is the time, how long these institutions, offices and ordinances are
to continue, and that is in v. 13. Till we all come i^ the unity of the faith
into the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure^ of
the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Now if there be any Church of Christ o^ Congregation o^ Saints that be
completely come up to this state spoken unto in that verse, why then all that I
would say to them is, Cast not a stumbling block in thy brothers way, speak not
so disdainfully of those paths which thou^ thy self have gone through; must not
thy brother that is weak eat milk, because thou do eat strong meat? must not
he speak as a child, because tho^ do speak as a man? must he see by thy eyes,
o^ else will thou say he does not see at all? Tho^ that do think thou
stand, take heed lest thou do fall. Think not of thy self above what thou
art, To. 12. 3. Remember thy sister-Church, Rev. 3. 17. Because thou say, I
am rich and increased with heavenly enjoyments, gracious discoveries, and
unspeakable manifestations, and art perfect and complete, and come to the
fullness of Christ, and have need of nothing, neither Ordinance or
Administration, helps nor governments. Do thou think thus of thy self? why,
so did that Church of Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. which was the most barren and
unfruitful of all the seven Churches of Asia. Reason thus with thy self: Was
that Church so exceedingly deceived? then why not I?

7. Consider, that in the last age of the Church, and in the most glorious
times of that age, when both Jews and Gentiles shall have one Shepherd, and
one sheepfold, when knowledge shall cover the earth as the waters the sea, when
the Law shall be written in our hearts, and Babylon fallen, and the mountain of
the Lords house established upon the top of the mountains; Even in these most
glorious days of light and knowledge, freedom and liberty, shall the Saints
wait upon God in the use of Ordinances, and call one upon another so to do,
Isa. 2. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 1, 2. Again, if there shall be Ordinances in the most
glorious times that are to come, when there shall be a full pouring out of the
Spirit of God upon the children of men; the^ certainly they are to remain now:
And you look upon the last of Isa. Jer 3. Zac. 1^ or upon other Scriptures
where mention is made of the most glorious times that an^ yet to come, ye shall
find that there is mention also made of Ordinances in tho^ times. Let us look
into Rev. 11. 15. T^^ seventh Angel sounded, and there were gre^^ voices in
Heaven saying, The kingdoms of the world are become the kingdoms of our Lord
an^ of his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and eve^ Here are plainly the
glorious times spoken of that are yet to come. Well, shall there b^ any
Ordinances then? Yes: for, v. 19. An^ the temple of the Lord was opened in
heaven, an^ there was seen in his ^emple the Ark of his Test^ment. What is this
but Ordinances? The Ark, the visible sign of the presence of Go^ in way of
Ordinances, and the Temple opened, though it was shut before.

8. Consider, if the ministration of the Gospel be still to continue, then
surel^ the Ordinances of Christ are still to abid^ 2 Cor. 3. 11. For if that
which is done away w^ glorious, much more that which remains is gloriou^ The
Apostle here makes this difference be(...) ^he ministration of the Gospel, and
(...) ^he Law; that the one is to be done (...)d the other to remain. Now if
the (...) were not to continue, what (...)rence would there be as concerning
^his matter, between the ministration of Moses, and the ministration of the
Gospel? ^ut the Apo(...) here plainly speaks that ^his is the ^^erence; The
ministration of ^he one is to be done away, the ministration ^f the other does
still continue. Therefore ^he Ordinances of the Gospel do still re^naine.

9. Consider, if that the word of the new ^estament, as commanding to believe,
and ^romising to give the Spirit; I say, if this Word do continue, then the
Ordinances of Christ are still to continue; if the Ordinances of Christ be not
still to continue, ^hen the Word of the New Testament, as ^he commandment of
believing, and the promise of giving the Spirit, do not continue: There is the
same reason for the one ^s for the other. You say you are bound to believe:
(How prove you that?) Why, Christ has commanded me, say you. But (...) answer
you with your own answer, You ^ue to wait upon God in the use of Ordinances.
(How prove you that?) I answ^^ Christ has commanded you. If Satan (...) get
us to lay down but one Ordinance (...) the Gospel, he will never leave tugging
an pulling till he has brought us out of lo^^ with all Ordinances; and then he
w^^ teach us to deny the Scriptures, and then (...) deny God, and last of all
we shall be denie^ of God, and so fitted for destruction.

The Commonwealth of England does (...) bound of two sorts of men and women and
both in extremes:

The first will have no Ordinances at al^

The second do rest upon Ordinance^ or idolize them.

The first will have no Ordinances at al^ call the Ordinances of Christ dead
form beggarly -- and those that wait upon God in them, Legalists,
Heaven-drivers Formalists, and Duty-mongers: And for themselves, they are
taught of God, we have n^ need of the teachings of men, we be rich and f^ and
want nothing; not knowing they be poo^ blind, miserable and naked.

Secondly, there be another party that d^ rest upon Ordinances, and they be not
a few^ you shall know them by their fruits: D^ not you hear them crying and
pleading i^ City and Country, Give us Ordinances, or e^^ (...) die! And this
they plead for unto and ^ongst a Congregation of people, which (...) not
capable of it, but for one Ordinance, ^^d that is to stand under the droppings
of the ^^spel, and the powerful preachings thereof, the ^^eanes appointed by
Christ to work faith (...) their souls, Romans 10. 17. For until this lord does
come to them in power, they (...) not fitted for Fellowships and Commu^ons:
they must see their union with God, ^^fore they can have true communion with
^^s people. The Ordinances, or at least ^any of them be Childrens bread, and
must ^^t be given to Swine. Those Ordinances ^^at be ordained for Conversion
and Re^^neration are to be held forth to all, to the ^^d as many as be ordained
to eternal life may ^^lieve. All other Ordinances belong to ^hildren, and they
have right to them as ^^ible members of that body whereof Christ ^^the head. He
who was the Son of God, came the Son of man, that we who be the these things
were well considered, me^^inks it should abate the practice both of ^^inister
and People in City and Country, ^^ho (for many of them) yet being in the ^^d
man, and having spent their days in the ^^vice of Satan, yet forsooth they
would known by the name of Christians, or least Apostle-imitators; though they
cann^^ bu know they want the power, yet th^^ will cry up the form of
godliness. Now when the Ministers of our times, or at least so^ of them, have
gathered a parcel of the Rabble-rout together, (I do not style the so because
they be the poorest; no, no, s^ they be such a people as David speaks (...)
they flourish as the green bay tree, their eyes st^^ out with fatness, they go
clothed in the choice array, and be the most honorable men in the Parish: and
they want but two things which are, the knowledge of God, and obed^^ to his
will.) When the Minister has gather^ a parcel of these together into
fellowshi^ up he springs into the Pulpit to feed (...) Flock: and truly so he
does; for he giv^^ them such food as is both pleasant to the palate, and easy
for digestion, for he kno^ well the state of their bodies: And if (...) chance
to see any poor Dove come in (...) among these fat Turkies, he will no^ leave
throwing of stones till he has gall^^ her forth. (Had I not seen this with my
(...) I had not written it with my pen.) An^ when this poor Dove is frighted
forth, (...) flies up and down from one Congregati^^ to another, and it may be
finds no rest (...) ^he sole of her foot: then she retires into ^ome private
Assemb^y, and there refreshes ^er self. Well, the public Teachers hear ^f a
company of Doves gathered together (...) such a place, and their carriage to be
such that it is like to draw away some of their Congregations; they lift up
their voices, and tell their hearers, that these be not Doves, but Wolves,
Sabbath Breakers, Blas^hemers, factious Sectaries, creeping into cor^ers, and
leading silly women captive: Often ^aying of them as once the enemies of Christ
^id, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? ^o, none but this ignorant people
that know ^ot the Law.

Are there Private Meetings, and does that ^ffend you? Let me ask you, Are not
you ^he cause of their meeting in private? Have ^ot you deprived them of their
expectati^ns in public? They came to be instruct^d in the Gospel, and you
preach the Law: They came to be refreshed, and you sent them way sorrowful:
They came to hear of christ, and you told them of Moses: They ^ame to know
their freedom, and you brought them into bondage: They came to be in^^ructed
in their Union with their Father, and you told them of Communion: They ^ame to
be instructed in the Doctrinal part of Divinity, and you told them of the
Pracctical part of Divinity: they came to hear of Grace, and you told them of
Gifts: in (...) word, we and you have looked more upon Gifts then upon Grace,
upon Law then upon Gospel, upon the form more then the power of godliness.
Alas, what is the shadow without the substance? what is the Letter without the
Spirit? what is an Ordinance without the presence of God in it^^ Oh then make
use of all Ordinances, bu^ rest upon none: Look upon them as the path to walk
in, but not the pillar to re^^ upon; look upon them as the way, but no (...)
the cause of your acceptance with God account not thy self the better when
tho^ have made use of them, unless thou have m^ God in them. Labor to be well
informe^ in these four things, and then thou will establish Ordinances in their
right place viz.

1. Consider what is the ground of a^^ these Ordinances. 2. Consider what is
the end of all Go^ spel Ordinances. 3. Consider the time of them, how lo^^ they
be to continue. Ephesians. 4. 13. 4. Consider the proper use of them, th^^ so thou
and I may not abuse them in (...) use of them.
(...) much concerning idolizing or resting upon Ordinances.

Now then the way to defend and pre^^rve our selves from these or other like
ex^^emes, is, to abide in the doctrine of Christ: ^^d without this, let no man
boast of his ^^terest in the Father, or of his relation to ^^e Son, or of his
evidence by the Spirit. ^^t us then a little consider the mind of ^od in that
Scripture written for our lear^^ng, 2. Epist. of John, latter part of verse. 9.
^hosoever abides in the doctrine of Christ, has not the Father and the Son.
The whole verse ^^ns thus: Whosoever transgresses and abi^^h not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God; (...) whosoever abides in the doctrine of
Christ, ^^th both the Father and the Son. From the ^^tter part of this verse,
let us consider of ^^d enquire into these two things.

What this Doctrine of Christ here meant, is. What it is to abide in this
Doctrine.
First, what this Doctrine of Christ here ^^ant, is. Surely if ever it were
needful for ^^ristians to enquire into this, now much ^^ore: For in these
latter days there be ^^ny Doctrines that are presented before ^^u, and all in
the name of the Doctrine of Christ, saying, Lo here is Christ! lo here (...)
Christ! And if we look upon their habi^^ they be clothed in sheeps-cloathing;
ca^^ your eyes upon their heads, and they ha^^ horns like a Lan^b, only they
speak as (...) Dragon: as in Rev. 13. 11. And I beheld a^^ other beast coming
up out of the earth, he (...) two horns like a Lamb, and he speaks as a Drag^^
Surely these Lambs horns, and Dragon^ tongues are not always in Monarchy, bu^
sometimes in Ministry. Let us then enquir^^ what this Doctrine of Christ is:
for the^^ be many Doctrines with which people h^^ taken, that have no relation
to Christ.

1. We read of a Doctrine of vanity, Je^^ 10. 8. Their stock is a doctrine of
vanity. The^^ be many taken with this doctrine in the day^s, but this is not
the doctrine of Christ

2. There is the Doctrine of the Scribe and Pharisees, Mat. 15. 9. But in vain
do th^^ worship me, teaching for doctrine the comman^ments of men. Mat. 16. 12.
Christ bid the beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees.

3. We read in Scripture of another doctrine, called the doctrine of Balaam.
Re^^ 2. 14. Who taught Balack to cast a stumbling bl^^ before the children of
Israel, to eat things sa^^ ficed to idols, and to commit fornication.

4. We read in Scripture of another doctrine, called the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 15. So have thou them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. And their doctrine was this, To uphold the
common use of women, that is, that women might be common; much like to those
new upstart wantons of our times.

5. There is another Doctrine, which includes all the former, spoken of 1 Timothy
4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving ^^heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
Devils. But none of these is the Doctrine of Christ ^^here spoken to.

6. Lastly, we find another Doctrine frequently mentioned in Scripture, which
if we abide not in, sad is our case, miserable ^is our condition, 2 Ep. John 9.
He that transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, (mark that
man, mark that woman) they have not God. Let them talk of God, and make their
boast of God, as it may be they do, they be without God in the world.

These things being well consider d, we cannot but see the necessity we have to
be well acquainted with the Doctrine of Christ. Which leads us to the first
thing here to be enquired into, What this Doctrine of Christ here spoken unto
is.

A It is a doctrine of Grace, and a doctrine of Free Grace. I know what be the
judgments of many knowing men concerning this thing: If you ask them what the
doctrine of Christ is, they will tell you it is a doctrine of Faith and
Obedience: but this is the effects of the doctrine, rather then the doctrine it
self: For the doctrine of Freegrace being preached to a soul, and having
gotten entrance to lodge in the inward man, then it works faith and obedience as
the effects or fruits of that Spirit of grace. Hence it is that when Christ
sent forth his Disciples to preach this doctrine of Grace, he commands them
saying, Into whatsoever house you enter, say, Peace unto this house. Lo, peace
is the first word, which word is full of grace: Christ does not bid them fire
the people out of their nests by preaching the Law, and then heal them with the
balm of the Gospel; no, they must first preach peace, for God is in the still
voice, that so the love of Christ held forth in the doctrine of Free Grace,
Tit. 2. 11, 12. might teach them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
constrain them out of a principle of love to live godly and soberly in this
present world. Now that the doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace, it will
appear by these and the like Scriptures which I shall but name. Act. 13. v. 39
and 43 compared together. Act. 20. 24. Romans 3. 24. Romans 11. 6. Ephesians. 2. 5. and
8 compared together. In a word, (as was said before) Creation, Election,
Redemption, and Sanctification, ^it is all of Free Grace.

Now me thinks I see most men in a sense give their assent and consent to the
truth of this, that the doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace; and they
will tell you further, that they do abide in this doctrine. Now then let us
examine our selves a little by the effects of this doctrine: for as a tree is
known by his fruit, so is this doctrine by its effects.

First then, it is a doctrine of grace enlightening the soul.

Secondly, it is a doctrine of grace working faith in the soul.

Thirdly, it is a doctrine of grace workin love in the soul.

Fourthly, it is a doctrine of grace working upon the will and affections to
will and affect the things of God.

1. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace enlightening the soul. Luke
2. 3 2. A light to lighten the Gentiles. This is spoken of Christ and his
doctrine. Luke 1. 79. To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death; to guide our feet in a way of peace. Joh. 1. 9. That was tha^
true light that lighteneth every man, etc. Now if thou do abide in the
doctrine of Christ, thy soul is enlightened by Christ: hence it is that the
children of God are called the children of light, E^^. 5. 8 hence it is that
they be exhorted to walk^s children of the day. Are you enlightened? You will
say, I am. What mean these works of darkness then?

2. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace working faith in the soul.
Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Joh. 6. 29. This is the work
of God, that you believe. Joh. 14. 11. If you will not believe me for my words,
yet believe in me for the very works sake that you have seen me do. 1 John 3.
23. And this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jes^s
Christ. No obedience like unto the obedience of faith; no disobedience like
unto that of unbelief, for it makes the God of truth a liar. 1 John 5. 10. ^e
that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself; He that
believes not God has made him a lia^^, because be believed not the record
that God gave of his Son. But most men and women will say they do believe: but
there be but few that can show their faith by their wor^s; for faith without
works is dead, Jam. 17, 18, etc.

3. The doctrine of Christ is a doctrine of grace working love in the soul.

First to God. Mat. 22. 37. Christ told the Lawyer that came to him to know (at
least ^^s he pretended) what was his doctrine, and what was the most principal
part of it: why, says Christ, Mat. 22. 37. Thou shall love ^^he Lord thy God
wi^h all thy heart, with ^ll thy ^^treng^h, and with all thy soul.

Secondly, it works love to the people of God. Joh. 13. 34. A new commandment
give I ^^nto you, that you love one another as I have loved ^^o^. I loved you
when you were in your blood and filthiness; my love was free, let yours be so:
I loved all mine, do you love all the Saints: I laid down my life for the
^rethren; you ought to lay down your lives for the brethren: I loved you with a
constant love, having loved my own, I loved them to the end; so do you: My love
carried me forth to become servant to all, even to wash your feet; you, if you
will be followers of me, and be known to be my disciples, ought to do so too.

Thirdly, as the doctrine of Christ is a do^trine of grace working love in the
soul, first to God, secondly to his people, so thirdly to our enemies. See and
well consider that place. Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, do
good to those that ha^ you, pray for those that despitefully use you a^^
persecute you. Never think that you contin^^ in my doctrine, unless you observe
my commands: My commands are, that you should not only love God, but also your
brother and it must not be limited only there, bu^ you must love your enemies,
or else yo^ will not be like unto me and my Father Mat. 5. 45. That you may
appear to all the world to be the children of your Father which is in heaven;
for he makes his sun to arise (...) the evil and on the good, and sends rain
on the just and on the unjust: For if you love only th^^ that love you, the
vilest man in the world goes so far, this is no character or badge o^^ my
servants, the Publicans and Harlots did (...) much as this.

Fourthly, it is a doctrine of grace working upon the will and affections, to
will and affect the things of God. First it works upon the will, it resigns it
up unto the will of God, nay it makes him live in the will of God. 1. By doing
his will. 2. By suffering his will to be done, though it cross thy will.
Again, it works mightily upon thin^^ affections: thy affections are taken off
the creatures, and fixed upon the Creator: thou see more and more beauty in
God, and and less and less beauty in the creature. ^he things of the world
would satisfy thee ^^eretofore: Now thou cryest out, None but christ, none but
Christ! Nothing will satisfy ^ut his presence, nothing will make thee ^d but
his absence.

THe second Quaerie is, What is it to abide in the Doctrine of Christ. For the
Scriture says, 2 ep. Joh. 9. He that abides in the ^ctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the ^onne. Now there be several discoveries or ^haracters
of one that abides in the do^rine of Christ.

First, there be some inward evidences.

Secondly, there be some outward evi^ences.

For the inward evidence, Call a counsel (...) thy own heart, silence thy own
thoughts, ^^ll all the faculties of thy soul and mem^ers of thy body to the
bar, examine thy ^^ill, thy affections, thy judgment, and me^ory, Who are you
for? what are you doing? ^ow are you employed all day long? Search for that
White-stone that has a Name in it that ^ne can read but he that has it. See
whether ^e Spirit of God does witness with thy spirit ^at thou belongest to
God. Does the presence ^f Christ rejoice thee? does his absence grieve thee?
See whether thou art like un^^ Christ in thy desires, and in thy endeavou^^
whose work it was to do the will of his F^^ther, etc.

Secondly, there be some outward e^^dences: I shall name a few.

1. He that abides in the doctrine (...) Christ, is one that is not easily
withdraw^ from the truth that he first received. 1 J^^ 2. 24. Let that
therefore abide in you which y^^ have heard from the beginning: If that which
you have heard from the beginning shall remain (...) you, you shall continue in
the Son and in th^^ Father. 1. Tim. 4. 16. Take heed to thy self (...) unto
the doctrine; continue in them; for in (...)ing this thou shall both save thy
self and such hear thee. Be not carried about with every wi^^ of doctrine,
says Paul, Ephesians. 4. 14. Beware (...) you fall from your steadfastnesse, says
Peter, 2 P^^ 3. 17. If you continue in my words, then are y^^ my Disciples,
says Christ, Joh. 8. 31. Oh the continue in the faith to be grounded an^
settled, rooted and established: Be ye stedfo^^ and unmovable, always
abounding in the wo^^ of the Lord.

2. He that abides in the doctrine (...) Christ, may be known by this; He is a
ver^ fruitful Christian. What is the reason ther^ is so much barrenness,
coldness, deadness^^ ^^lity, lukewarmnesse, evil furnishings and ^^liperings?
Why, behold the reason, ^^y abide not in the doctrine of Christ: that abide in
that doctrine do bear ^^ns, there is none barren among them; ^^y be planted
in his house, they abide it; doctrine, therefore they flourish in his ^^urts.
Joh. 15. 4. The branch cannot bear ^^t except it abide in the vine; no more
can you, ^^ept you abide in me.

3. He that abides in the doctrine of ^^st may be known by this also; He
stands (...)nd contends for the faith and obedience (...)he Gospel against all
opposers; he envours by sound doctrine to convince all ^nsayers; He does not so
much plead for ^^mane learning, as he does for the mind God in the Spirit; he
knows the spiri^^l learning can easily foil the humane ^^rning that wants the
spiritual. See that ^^ce Jude 3, 4. That you should earnestly contend (...) the
faith that was once delivered to the Saints; ^^n he brings the reason of this
con^enti^^, v. 4. For there are certain men crept in un^^ares, turning the
grace of God into lascivious^^se. And surely this is one of Englands sins this
day: There be many men and wo^^n puffed up with a high conceit of their ^^n
knowledge; and when their principles and practices are a little examin^^ they
be but as clouds without rain, and (...) without water, as here Jude speaks.

4. He that abides in the doctrine Christ, continues steadfast in the doctr^^
of the Apostles. Act. 2. 42. And they contin^^ steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine and fellows^ and in breaking of bread and prayer. Not the the Apostles
doctrine was one thing, a^^ the doctrine of Christ another thing; (...)
whosoever abides in the one, could n^^ but abide in the other: And they abode
fr^^ fast in the Apostles doctrine, that is, they continued steadfastly in the
doctrine of Christ for they delivered that unto us which the received from
Christ. They continued in (...) Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in break^
of bread and prayer. Let us examine a litt^^ how many men and women, that be
god^^ (for I do not speak of others) I say, ho^ many have we, that do walk
together Fellowship? 2. How many are there, that enjoy that Ordinance of the
Lords Supp^^ here called Breaking of Bread? 3. How ma^^ have the Spirit of
Prayer? Are they not fe^^ yea very few? And yet all be ready to sa^ that they
do abide in the doctrine of Chr^^ Go from one man to another through^ a whole
Shire, and ask them one after (...) ^^er, Do you abide in the doctrine of
Christ? ^^ou do not, you have not God. Yea, says the (...), I do abide in the
doctrine of Christ.

Q. How prove you that?

A. I do, says he, for I have reformed ^^y things that were amiss in me. So
did ^^od, that enemy of truth, Mark 6. 20. For ^^od heard John, knowing he was
a just man: (...) when he heard him, he did many things.

Q. Come to a second and ask him, Do (...) abide in the doctrine of Christ?

A. I do, says he; and I know it by this, (...) free from many gross sins
that others ^^my neighbors are guilty of. So was ^^t Pharisee, Luke 18. 11,
12. O God I thank ^^e that I am not as other men are, I fast twice ^eek, and
give tithe of all I do possess.

Q. Come to a third and ask him, Do you ^^de in the doctrine of Christ?

A. I do, says he, and I prove it thus: ^^ontinue waiting upon God in the use
of Ordinances, which others neglect. So (...) those hypocrites, Isa. 58. 2, 3.
Yet you seek daily, says the Lord, and delight to know my ^^es, as a Nation
that did righteousness, and ^^ook not the ordinances of God. And yet for this
the Lord rejected them and their ^^ices.

Q. Come to a fourth, Do you abide in the doctrine of Christ? If you do not,
have not God.

A. I do, and I prove it thus: I know will of God, that many others be ignor^^
of, and I approve of his ways. Rep. So those cast-awayes, Romans 2. 18. And
knowes^^ will, and approvest the things that be more ex^^^lent, etc. Yet we see
the Lord rejects the upon this ground, They did not prac^^ themselves that
which they knew and taug^^ to others.

Q. Come to a fifth, Do you abide in (...) doctrine of Christ?

A. I do, and I can make it good, says (...) by this: I have humbled my self
for all^^ sins before the Lord. R. So did wi^^ Ahab, 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29.

Q. Come to a sixth, Do you abide in (...) doctrine of Christ?

A. I do abide in it, and I think there but few that do outstrip me: for I am
(...) so cold and lukewarm as most be, doing^^ Lords work by halfs; I am
zealous for (...) Lord, I have had my hand in pulling do^^ the Images and
Crucifixes and Altars t^^ the Idolaters had set up, nay I have b^^ chief in
this great Reformation. R. So^^ Jehu, whom the Lord rejected, 2 King. (...) 27,
28, 29.

Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of christ, says a seventh: If none of the
for^^er, yet I am sure I do outstrip them all; ^^r I do keep the commands of
God, and ^^at from my youth.

A. So did that young man, Mat. 19. 20. ^^ll these things have I kept from my
youth up. ^^hou art not fully in my doctrine, says christ; thou must go sell
all that thou have; ^^ou have abundance of self-righteousnesse, ^^at must be
sold.

Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of christ, says an eighth; for I do
confess ^^y sins both unto God and to his people, ^^d I do pray for pardon,
and desire them (...) pray for pardon also.

A. So did Pharaoh, whom the Lord was ^leased to get him honor upon, in
over^^rowing him and all his host in the midst ^f the sea, Exodus 10. 16, 17.

Q. But I do abide in the doctrine of christ, says a ninth: for I am merciful
and pitiful to those in want, yea I have ^elieved the Lords Prophets.

A. The heathen did as much as this to ^aul, Act. 28. 2. and Ananias and
Sapphira did ^^ore then this, and yet perished, as you may ^^e Act. 5. 1, 2, 3,
4.

Q. But I go beyond all that you have mentioned before, says a tenth man. Wh^^
what have thou done? I have (says he) n^^ only heard the Lords word, but I
ha^^ heard it with delight, and it takes root (...) my heart, and grows within
me both (...) knowledge and obedience.

A. So did those mentioned by Christ (...) those parables, and yet were
cast-awayes Mat. 13. 22. Mark 4. 16.

Q. But (says another) I abide in th^^ doctrine of Christ here, and shall
dwell in (...) holy hill hereafter; And that I am assured (...) by the
testimony of Scripture, for I have kep^^ mine oaths and promises, yea
sometime^^ although it has been to my hurt: and I fin^^ my name registered in
the book of life. An^^ if that fail me, then farewell all. I say, I hav^^ kept
my vows, oaths and promises, thoug^^ sometimes to my loss; and David tells
(...) this is a sure mark of a son of Sion: see el^^ Psalm. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. The
Psalm begins thus Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who sh^^ dwell in
thy holy hill? There is the question Then for answer, v. 2. He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks th^^ truth in his heart, he
that backbiteth not with (...) tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
taket^^ up a reproach against him; in whose eyes a vi^^ person is contemned,
but he honors them th^^ ^^re the Lord; he that swears to his own hurt ^^d
changes not, etc.

See what a Catalogue of Evidences here for Heaven: and if I have not more, I
am ^^re I have the last; I have kept my promises ^^d vows, though to mine own
hurt. Now if ^^u can find in Scripture any man left upon record that has gone
so far as I have ^^ne, and yet a Castaway at last, then speak, otherwise with
silence give your consent this mine Evidence for Heaven.

A. I could even say to thee, O man, as ^^ce our Lord Christ said to that
learned ^^derate Scribe, Mark 12. 34. Thou art not from the Kingdom of God.

But for keeping oaths and promises, ^^ough it be an excellent ornament for a
^^ristian, yet let me tell thee it is no in^^lible mark of a true Saint: and
that will ^^pear, if thou a little consider that in Dan. 29. and 16. compared
together: the sum that Chapter is this. Belshazar had seen handwriting on
the wall, and it troubled ^^m: He sends for the Astrologers and ^^uthsayers to
give the interpretation to ^^e King: They could not do it: He hears Daniel by
the Queens information, he ^^ds for him, Daniel comes to the King; ^^e King
desires two things of Daniel, first to read the writing, secondly to ma^^ known
the interpretation: which if Da^^ could or would do, the King promises (...)
three things: First, that he should be cl^thed with Scarlet; secondly, that he
shou^^ have a Chain of gold about his neck; thi^ly, that he should be made the
third ruler his Kingdom. Well, Daniel read the w^^ting, and gave the
interpretation, and to^^ the King plainly and boldly, it tended his ruin, and
the ruin of all his hou^^ Yet this heathen King kept his oath, vow^^ promise
in every tittle of it, as you may^^ Dan. 5. 29. Then commanded Belshazzar,
(...) they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a (...) of gold about his
neck, and made a proclamation (...)cerning him that he should be the third
ruler in^^ kingdom. In that night was the King slain, v. 3 Oh how may this
condemn many a ma^^ Shall a Heathen keep promise, and a Ch^^stian break his
promise? What, shall we^^ outstript by Heathens? Does not the S^^^ptures say,
Mat. 5. 20. For I say unto you, th^^ except your righteousness shall exceed
the righ^eousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, you s^^ in no case enter into
the kingdom of God. Is not a great shame for a Christian profess^^ godliness,
to be outstript by Heathens Truly I have been at a stand many time when I read
of Conversations of heathens, etc. The Gentiles had a law to themselves, and
^^t of God.

First, for Temperance. Secondly, for Obedience. Thirdly, for Mercy. Fourthly,
for Justice and upright deal^ng.
1. For Temperance: King Ahasuerus a ^^eathen King made a law, Hest. 1. 8. And
^^e drinking was according to the Law; none did ^^mpell, for the King had
appointed to all the ^^fficers of his house, that they should do accord^g to
every man's pleasure.

2. For Obedience: when King Abimelech ^^ok Abraham's wife, although he was a
^^eathen King, he obeyed the voice of the lord; for no sooner did the Lord
com^and him to deliver Abraham his wife again ^^t he did it: Jonah preached at
Niniveh a^ong the Heathen, and no sooner did they ^^ar him, but the Text says
of them, they ^^d believe and repent.

3. For Mercy: The barbarous heathen^^ people were very merciful to Paul and
^^e rest of the company, Act. 28. 22. And the ^^rbarous people showed us no
little kindness; (...) they kindled a fire, and received us every one, ^^ause
of the present rain and because of the cold.

4. For Justice and upright dealing: Th^^ King of Sodom a heathen King, when
Abraham had overcome the four Kings, and brought home the Sodomites, the King
o^^ Sodom said unto him, Give me the men, and take the goods for thy pains,
Genesis 14. 21.

Oh then were Heathens taught by th^^ law of Nature the sweet principles and
pr^ctice of Temperance, Mercy, Obedience an^ Justice; and shall we who do think
of ou^selves far beyond them in matters natur^^ and spiritual, shall we (I say)
be outstrippe by them and come short of them? Shall (...) thus requite the Lord
for all his love? shall shall we dishonor him, that has so high^^ honored us
as to call us his fervants, h^^ brethren, his members, his Bride, his Body his
Temple! Oh let not Heathens outstr^^ us in obedience! let us outstrip them, y^^
let us endeavor to outstrip the most for ward Saints in the world; Labor to
exc^^ all the Saints in love, in patience, in mee^^nesse, sobriety and
temperance: impro^^ all thy spiritual strength for him who ga^^ it to thee;
Thou have enjoyments of hi^ improve it for him, yea let all thy know ledge of
him bring thee nearer to him, an^ make thee more like him: Let thy longing
desires and endeavors be more to grow grace then gifts. 1. Cor. 12. 31. But
covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet I show ^n^o you a more excellent way.
This more excellent ^way here spoken of, is the grace of Love, as you may see 1
Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now it will be useful a little to enquire how many
sorts of gifts there be, seeing the Apostle says, Covet earnestly the best.

For answer hereunto in general, There be but two sorts of gifts:

First, there are gifts of Nature, or gifts Natural; and they are many.

Secondly, there are gifts Spiritual, or gifts given by the Spirit; and they be
several.

1. There are gifts of Nature, or gifts Natural: And by these a man may do
many excellent things, and yet not have one grain of grace. If a man should
preach as never man preached, and though he should pray as never man prayed,
and though he confer and discourse of all things as never man did; may if he
should speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have gifts of Prophecy,
and understand all mysteries: yea, though he be so pitiful as to give all his
goods to the poor, and his body to be burned; nay though he has all the gifts,
arts and parts that ever were in man, only grace excepted, all this avails him
nothing. It is true, such a man is a little honored of men, they cry him up
for a brave Churchman: if he be given to covetousness, of drunkenness, or any
other vice, Oh (say the people) he is a brave Scholar, there is not a man more
deeper learned in all the City! And such is the gross ignorance of this
Commonweal, (to your shame be it spoken) that most of you do think and say,
That he that is a Scholar cannot but be acquainted with Religion; and when you
hear him preach, he is so scholastic, and so eloquent, and so pleasing, that
you are apt to say of him as once the people did of Herod when he made his
oration, It is the voice of God, and not of a man. Act. 12. 21, 22.

What excellent wisdom had graceless Achitophel? 2 Samuel 16. 23. And the
counsels of Achitophel which he gave in those days, was, as if a man had
enquired at the oracles of God; so was all the counsel of Achitophel both with
David and Absalom. Here were gifts in the highest nature, but for want of grace
he perished: and it is apparent that he was cried up in those days, as our
Achitophels be now adays.

What wise and discreet answer did that Scribe give unto our Lord Christ, Mar.
12. 33, 34. And when Jesus heard his answer, he told him, he was not far from
the kingdom of ^od. There were but three things required, and this Scribe had
gotten two of them, ^nly he wanted grace: he had gifts in aundance, the least
dram or grain of grace ^ad made him happy for ever.

Oh then, (in a word, and so to close up ^is) would you live and abide in the
doctrine ^f Christ? Oh then live out of your selves, (...) the Spirit, upon
Christ! let him be high^^t in thy thoughts, dearest in thine affecti^ns,
constant in thy purposes! See him once (...) be the chiefest of ten thousand,
and then ^^ou wilt have no need of any man to bid ^ee enquire after him. Read
and well ^on^der this Scripture, Cant. 5. 9, 10, etc.

This is all at present that I have to say of ^e Armor of Christ, and of the
Doctrine of christ. The next thing to be considered, which nearly concerns all
Christians, is this, ^iz.

3. To live in the will of God. For, There is no ^wer, but of God.

In this third particular, here are two ^^ings to be enquired into.

Q. 1. What is it to live in the will of ^od?

A. 1. To be doing the will of God.

2. By suffering the will of our Father.

Q. 2. How are we to understandth is, tha^ there is no power but of God?

A. 1. We are to consider, there is n^ power but of and in God, essentially or
originally, habitually or virtually etc.

2. And yet there is a power in ever^ Creature, distributively and by
participation.

Now then to live in the will of God, it is t^ be doing his will, and suffering
his will. But o^ this I shall speak or write afterward, and s^ enter upon the
second Quaere.

1. There is no power but of God originally and essentially; He has his being
in himself, and he alone gives being to al^ creatures: Of him, from him, and to
him are al^ things. There was no motion, vigor or action, life or growth,
until he created and enlivened the creatures: so that all things center in
him, as having their being from him, who has his being in himself, and gives
being to them: He made all things for his own glory, who alone is worthy of al^
glory, honor and praise, and he will be glorified by every living thing in the
whole creation, either by their salvation or destruction; He will magnify the
attribute of his mercy on the one, and the attribute of his justice on the
other: yea, the whol^ Creation is a book wherein we may read God, every thing
does utter its voice, the ^e^vens, the Stars, the Sun and the Moon, ^o all in
their kind declare the handy work ^f God; nay every thing above us, beneath ^s,
on our right hand, and on our left, do ^ll speak saying, Behold the wonderful
^orks of the Lord God Almighty, from whom I had my being, in whom I center, ^y
whose life I live, by whose strength I love: his power may be seen in creation,
^edemption, vocation, justification, and ^anctification. Yea, by him all things
con^^st, 1 Col. 17. The Fish cannot swim in the ^ater, but by his power; the
Bird cannot ^y in the air, but by his power; the Spar^ow cannot fall to the
ground, says the ^criptures, without his providence. Mat. ^2. 29.

The attribute of his Wisdom is seen in ^he variety of Creatures that he has
made, and the sweet harmony that there is among them, each of them doing after
his kind, ^nely M^n excepted, which in his creation ^as made the most blessed
of all creatures, ^ut by his fall in the first Adam, and not im^racing the
second Adam, is become the most ^^rsed creature of all: so that we may say ^f
all men and women fallen in the first Adam, and not restored by the second, as
on^ our Lord Christ said concerning Judas, Man 14. 2. Good were it for that
man, if he had never been borne.

So the attribute of his Power may be see^ in the upholding the whole Creation;
an^ the attribute of his Mercy, in the preserv^tion of his Creatures.

All that we are, have, or do enjoy, ar^ gifts of God; and if we act and move
b^ the power of God, then it is impossibly tha^ we should perform any spiritual
duty o^ our selves without his assistance. Christ tel^ leth Pilate, that he
could have no power at a^ against him, unless it was given him. A man can
receive nothing (says the Baptist) excep^ it be given him from heaven, Joh. 3.
27. It i^ God (says Paul) that works in us both to wi^^ and to do: what
have we therefore which w^ did not receive?

So then all things be from him, but al^ things are not him, (as some
ignorantl^ imagine) I say again, all things are from hi^ but all things are not
him: He is the Creator, we be the creatures; He has his being in himself, we
have our being from him* He was from everlasting before time, we ha^ our being
from him in time; He is immutable, we are all mutable; He is Alpha an^ Omega,
the beginning and the ending, which (...) and which was, and which is to come.
The (...) mighty, he can bring good out of evil, (...)ht out of darkness,
strength out of weak^^sse, hobour out of dishonor. If the first ^am be
deceived by the Serpent, he will ^^rn it to his glory; if the second Adam be
^trayed by a Judas, he will turn it to (...) Glory: If the first fall by
unbelief, he (...) raise us in a second by faith: in a word, (...) is the head
of all principality and power, 2 Col. (...). All power is in him habitually,
vertu^^y, primitively, originally, essentially.

The Scriptures are so full in setting forth ^s, that there is no power but of
God, almost every book from the beginning of Genesis (...) the end of the
Revelation, that I suppose ^ere is no man, if he be endued but with ^^mmon
reason, will or can deny it: where^e excuse me if I am silent and speak no
^ther to it.

2. The next thing to be considered is, (...)e power that is in every Creature.
If there be (...) power but in God, (as has in some ^asure been proved in the
former expres(...)ns) Tell me then, without any evasions, ^^w there is a power
in every Creature?

A. There is no power but of God, ori(...)ally and essentially, habitually,
primitively, or virtually: But there is a power (...) every Creature
distributively. The pow^^ is in God as in a fountain, it is in us^ streams
flowing from that fountain, but n^ essentially, habitually or virtually.

There is a twofold power that is dist^^buted or given forth to the Creature;
t^ first is common to all, the second is prop^ only to some.

First there is a natural power, as one tale^ which we ought not to hide in a
napki^ given forth to all men and women, wi^ several commands from the Giver
to i^prove that.

Secondly, there is his blessed Spirit giv^ forth with a spiritual power only
to some by virtue of which they can pray in the Spirit, rejoice in the Spirit,
worship God wh^ is a Spirit in spirit and truth; they can re^ and understand
the L^^^er in the Spirit, the can discourse of spiritual things unde^standingly
and feelingly: further, by the power they can bring down strong holds, the can
cast down imaginations and every high thin^ they can bring more or less their
though^ into captivity unto the obedience of Christ. Re^^ and well consider 2
Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6.

1. First of the first: There is a natu^^ power given forth from God to the
Creature, (...) Talent; which the Creature is not to hide in ^^apkin, but to
improve. Now though this ^^wer was not ours, but Gods, in whom (...) power
dwells: yet (he having given this (...) us) it becomes ours; for a man may as
^^operly call that his own which was given ^^m, as that which he bought with his
^ony. Christ tells Pilate, that he could have (...) power either to release him
or to condemn him, ^les it were given him, Jo. 19. 10, 11. But there ^as a
power given to Pilate, even a natural ^ower; and Pilate judged him and
con^emned him.

If there be no power given forth from ^od to the Creature, then there is no
pow^^ in the Creature; and then all those ex^ortations, persuasions,
intreatings and ^eseechings are in vain. But that there is a ^ower in the
Creature, I say a received power, a derivative power, it will appear, if you
^ill answer seriously to what follows, ^iz. Tell me, O man, whosoever thou
art, that do read or hear these lines, Have thou ^er done so much good, or
refrained so ^uch evil, as thou might have done? Consider of it, and see:
what knowledge, that wisdom, what comfort, what full ^ssurance might thou
and I by this time ^ave risen unto? What means that Scripture, Heb. 5. 12.
Where as by this time you mi(...) have been teachers of others, you have need
to taught your selves what be the first principles religion. You might have
been teachers (...) others, if you had improved your talen^ Did Paul speak
truly or falsely, O man when he brake forth into these words, 1 C^^ 9. 4, 5, 6.
in v. 4. Have we not power to e(...) and to drink? and have we not power to
lead (...)bout a sister or wife as well as others? v. 6. Again have we not
power to forbear working, etc. There is a place worth our noting, Jer. 3^ 6.
and 18. 19. compared together. In v. (...) there is mention made of one Jonadah
which commanded his sons that they should drink no wine: and in v. 18. and
19. we fin^ that they in obedience to the command (...) their father did
forbear to drink any during lif^ Insomuch that the Almighty took noti^^ of this
their obedience to their father, i^ improving their natural power in a wa^ of
temperance. Just as Paul: I have power t^ eat and to drink (says he) and as
often as (...) pleased he could forbear eating and drinking for a season. Oh how
much is God blamed, an^ man excused by denying this! Solomon says Wherefore is
there a price put into the hands of (...) fool to get wisdom? Mind, first here
is a pric^ or talent given; 2. Where it is put, into the hands of a fool; 3.
For what end it is put in^o his hands, to get wisdom, etc. 4. The reason why
he has not wisdom, he has no ^eart to mind it, no desire to it. Some would
^ave God not only to give them ability, ^ut to perform the action; and then
indeed ^^ey might say it was the will of God it ^^uld be so, when they did
evil; for then ^^ey would be carried on as the Sun, Moon and Stars are without
resistance. But God ^aving made man a rational creature, and ^iven him power to
act, he requires him to ^^t by virtue of that power given him, and (...)
commends him for acting well, and blames ^im for acting ill. And though our
ability ^e but small at first, yet if we improve that according to the strength
we have, God has ^romised to increase it, and we shall grow ^^om strength to
strength: But if we be un^^ithful in that which is least, he will not ^ust us
with more. It is good therefore to ^o what we can, and ask and seek for what ^e
cannot do. It was possible for the sons ^f Jonadab to obey their fathers
command, (...) not drinking wine: and it was as pos^^ble for Israel to obey
their Lords com^and; for God reproves them by that ^xample, Jer. 35. 14. I
suppose that the ^^ghteous God never commands impossible things. The word is
nigh thee, in thy mouth a^ in thy heart, says Moses, that thou may do(...)
Deuteronomy. 30. 13, 14. Therefore (in the book) (...) bids them choose life. Choose
(says Joshu^^ whom you will serve; as for me and my house, (...) will improve
our selves to the utterm(...) to serve the Lord, Jos. 24. 15. And therefo^^ the
Lord complains, because they did n^^ choose the fear of the Lord, Pro. 12. 9.
The^ want of ability is not once mentioned as a^ excuse.

Again, let me ask thee O man whosoev^^ thou art that read these lines, Do
tho^ not think and believe that God has give^ everyman power and ability to do
so much as he requires of him? For the proof har^ of read understandingly Romans
1. 19, 20, and^ For the Lord is so just, and his ways (...) equal, that he
never requires impossib^^ things of his creatures: He deals wit^ man
according to what he has, and commands what he knows he may perfor^ He is not
like Pharaoh, to command Brick (...) be made without Straw. He gives forth h^
Talents, and commands the Receiver (...) improve that: and when he comes to ca^
them to an account, he does not dema^^ five talents where he gave but one; only
(...) blames that servant for not improvi^^ that one; he that was not able to
bring ^old or Silver, Silk or fine Linen to the ^ilding of the Temple, if he
brought ^asse, or Goats hair, or such as he could, ^tha willing heart, it was
accepted; Again, (...) find that he that was not able to bring ^amb or a Kid
for his sin Offering, must ^ing two Turtle Doves or young Pigeons; ^he could
not bring those, then the tenth ^rt of an Ephah of fine flower should serve.
(...) where the Lord gives much, he requires ^^ch; and where he gives little,
he re^ires but little.

Now is the Lord so tender of the people, ^^t he would not have them to stretch
^^emselves beyond their abilities in point (...) Sacrifices; and is not he as
tender of ^^ir weakness in other points of obedi^^ce; Does he command
impossibilities? ^^n the Creature may have a just execuse at (...) last day;
when every man shall be judged ^^^ording to his works, saying; If thou (...)st
given me power to do that which (...)u gave me a command to do, then I
(...) done it; and so his disobedience is cast ^on his Judge, for not giving
strength to ^e that he required: If this be true, then ^^me not those that say,
that God is the au(...)r of sin.

But shall I ask thee again, O vain man have thou done so much good, and
refrai^ed so much evil that thou might ha^ done? Put this question to thy
Conscienc^ saying, Conscience, I do charge thee in t^^ presence of the Lord to
deal truly with me^ Have I done so much good, and refrained (...) much evil as
I might have done? me thin^ I hear thy Conscience saying to thee, a^ mine has
often to me; No, no, thou ha^ been a sloathful servant in the Lords Vin^ yard:
O poor filly man! art thou like t^^ Bruites, that do not know their ow^
strength? Why, do thou not know, (...) vain man! that God that made thee,
ha^^ endued thee with power and abilit^ suitable to thy state and quality? Hat^
thy wise Creator given forth a power t^ the Fishes of all sorts to swim, and
to t^^ Fowls of the Air to fly, and the Beasts (...) the Earth to go from
place to place; ye^ has he given wisdom and power to t^^ meanest of
Creatures, the Ant and Pismi^ Crane and Swallow, etc. and thou O man whom the
Lord of Lords has made Lo^^ over al these things, have thou no ability, a^
thou a mere dead lump, does God call, a^^ can thou not hear nor answer? wilt
tho^ tell him when he shall judge thee, that (...) d^d not empower thee? Will thou charge ^^y Omissions and Commission upon him? ^ilt thou make him worse
then wicked ^haroah, which made the Children of Is^^el make Brick without
Straw? let me tell ^ee O man! thou art able by the power that is given thee
according to Gods com^on Providence, I say, thou art able by ^ertue of that
power received, to speak or (...) hold thy peace, to go or to sit still; and
^hen thou and I shall both appear before ^^e Tribunal Seat of God at the day of
judgment, thou and I shall not be charged ^ith what we could not do, but for
lea^^ng undone that which we ought and might ^ave done. Now that I might not be
mista^en, I shall make or propose these few excep^^ons, or limitations to what
has been said.

1. There is a power in God incommu^^cable, I do not say, there is any such
^ower in us; there is a power also in him ^ommunicable, which dwells in us,
accord^^g to the measure thereof communica^^d, etc.

2 We are to consider that this power in ^^e Creature, as it was given forth
from ^im, so it is limited by him.

3 I do not say or affirm, that natural ^^wer can act in supernatural things;
for I know the contrary, that it cannot, bu^ only in natural.

4. Although I do affirm that all me^ have a natural power; yet I do not sa^
that every man natural has it in the sam^ measure; for I see men transcending
o^ another in gifts natural; as men excee^ and go beyond one another in gifts
Spiritual.

Truly friends, it is worth our consideration a little to study or enquire into
our natural abilities, that so we might improv^ them to the b^st advantage; for
natural improvements shall have natural rewards, a^ spiritual improvements shall
have spiritua^^ rewards. If Ahab repent with a natural r^pentance, Ahab shall
receive a natural reward, as you may see, 1 King. 21. 27. It wi^^ further
appear, that a natural man has (...) natural power by this also; look upon the
whole Nation of men and w^men natural and you shall see great differences in
their improvements; the one will avoid sin for sear of punishment; another
will avoi^ sin for fear of shame; another will run o^ in sin, fearing neither
punishment no^ ^^ame; some men merely natural they wi^^ speak soberly, and
answer to things i^ their clem^^t difinctly and wisely.

Some men natural are so punctual in ^^eeping their promises, and so faithful
in ^he trust reposed in them; that they endea^our to do as they would be done
unto* and truly these things are to be commended (...) men natural and in men
spiritual.

And that a natural man may do more ^hen he does by his natural power, will
^asily appear by these four things:

First, Because I have seen, and so have ^any others, that man merely natural
has ^mitted evil, and set himself about the do^ng of that which in it self is
good, when ^he eye of the Magistrate has been over ^im.

Secondly, I have seen men, and that not (...) few, refrain from sin, as
Drunkenesse, ^wearing, and Sabbath-breaking, because ^he Law of the Nation
constrains them ^hereunto. A man could not for these ^any years walk along the
Key of this City, but he should hear the Porters and ^alliers cursing and
swearing, as men that ^ad never learned to speak any other language; and so
with the Butchers, you ^ould not walk along the Shambles, but ^our heart would
even tremble to hear the ^ame of God so often, and fearfully taken ^n vain;
Now, through the wisdom of our Parliament to Enact, and the diligence (...) our
Mayor to Execute (for the life of the Law lies in the due execution thereof)
yo^ may now walk the Key and Shambles, in the midst of the Porters, Hallie^s,
and Bu^chers, and hear them speak with ne^ tongues: Yea, you shall through the
good nesse of the Lord in the care of the Mag^strate scarce hear one man,
woman, o^ child from the beginning of the week t^ the end thereof, either
swear or curse. No^ from what power is it that these men a^ able to forbear
swearing, being so accust^med unto it, some twenty, some forty, some fi^ty
years? is there not a natural power i^ them which they did before abuse? or
els^ will you say with our new Novelists or up^ start wantons, that it was God
that di^ swear, and so swearing is no sin?

I shall close up this point giving you m^ judgment therein, which is, that as
the lo^ of Christ does constrain some, so the fear o^ punishment does compel
others; the o^^ to improve his spiritual parts, the other his natural parts.

Thirdly, That there is a natural power in a natural man, which he may and
ough^ to improve in all natural things, as will appear in this; if you take
notice what change there will be in a man's actions when ^e fear of death
possesses him; his wick(...) company, and his wicked practices, ^e begins to
complain of them both; and ^^en he begins to acknowledge there was a ^ower in
him, and promises the Lord in ^^e presence of all his friends, if the Lord
^ill spare him a little longer time, he will ^ever be drunk, and swear, and lie
and blas^heme as he has done; he will now read and ^^arn to pray, and come
amongst the Lords people, whom he hated; and wait at the ^oole of Bethesda
till the Angel move the wa^ers.

Fourthly, Come to a Natural man, that ^s sitting still, and if thou will know
whether there be any power in him; tell him ^f he will travel to such a City,
and do ^uch and such business for thee, thou will give him so many pounds for
his labor and pains; see now how he will improve ^ll his natural parts to
effect this business; ^e will employ his tongue to enquire the way, and his
feet to carry him on in the way, and he will employ his memory to keep account
of the miles; yea, every part ^n the whole man shall be employed in his ^^ace
to accomplish this business; and the ^^st wheel that sets all the rest on
going is (...)hope of gain.

Oh, what pains and care do men tak^ for the hope of gain; they will rise
early, a^ lie down late, and eat the bread of carfulness they will observe
time and tide, and a^^ things conducing thereunto, to accomplish their desires,
they will improve all opportunities, make use of all means, depri^ themselves
of sleep, and sometimes of the^ food, to get a little gain; they scrape an^
pull, and rake to make their Dunghi^^ higher then their Neighbors; and the^
they get upon the top of their Dunghi^^ and stand with their arms a Kimbo, an^
look so big and so lofty, that if any of hi^ neighbors whose Dunghill is not so
high as his, ^hance to come to speak with him he must bend his Knee and take
off his Ha^^ and stand bare before him, or else he shall have but few words
with him; and if thi^ man whose Dunghill is so high come once to be enlightened
by the Spirit of God, h^ presently with Solomon, Eccles. 2. 11. writ^ unity
upon all his treasure, or else break^ forth with Zacheus, Luke 19. 8. Beho^d,
the h^lf of my goods I give to the poor; and if (...) have wronged any man, I
will restore him fourefold.

See the wisdom and policy of the un^^st Steward, and his improvement of both
^o the best advantage, as to himself, Lu^. 16. (...) 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and for his
policy the Lord ^ommends him, Luke 16. 8. but for his un^^ithfulness as to his
master the Lord blames ^^m, Luke 16. 10. and in the 11 v. the Lord ^^aweth this
conclusion from the former ^^position, If therefore you have not been
faith(...) in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit your trust the true
riches? As if he had said, (...) you have abused your natural power, which is
the lesser, who will give you spi^^tual power, which is the greater? Read ^^d
well consider these Scriptures, viz. Cor. 11. 14. Does not even nature it self
teach (...) other things? Romans 1. 26, 27. There you all find that both men and
women are ^arged by the Spirit of God for not im^^oving nature, and for doing
things con^ary to nature So again, Romans 1. 19, etc. ^^d Romans 7. 14. and 1 Cor.
11, 15, 16. (...) loved, if these things be well considered, (...) will appear
that there is given forth by ^e Creator to the creature a power natu^^l; and
our abuse of this power must be ^^d upon ourselves, and not upon God. ^^m. 1.
v. 13, 14. Let no man say when he is ^^pted, he is tempted of God, for God
tempts no man: But he is drawn aside of his own l(...) and enticed.

2. There is a Spiritual power; a^^ and that is not given forth universally
(...) all, but those, and those only to whom (...) has given, and in whom he
has plant^ his Spirit, by virtue of which these men a^ women can pray in the
Spirit, rejoice (...) the Spirit, and in some measure worsh^^ God who is a
Spirit, in spirit and in trut^ These can read and understand the letter (...)
the spirit, they can discourse of spiritu^^ things understandingly and
feelingly; b^ this power they can pull down strong hol^ cast down imaginations.
Read for the proof (...) this, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. By this power the can
keep down their natural or corrupt^ble body, as Paul, 2 Cor. 9. 27. But I ke^^
under my body and bring it unto subjection, left should be found to preach that
to others that should not practice my self.

Now this spiritual power, as it was r^ceived from God, so it is to be improv^
for God: which if we be faithful and di^^gent so to do, then

First, the Lord will have the glory, M^^ 5. 16.

Secondly, it will redound to our gre^^est good, Mat. 21. 22, 23.

And that there is a spiritual power, it ^^ll further appear from the several
com^ands from the Lord to his people to be ^ing in spiritual things; which were
all (...) vain, if there be no ability given forth to ^e Creature to do that
which is required. ^ight instance in as many places as there (...) Chapters in
the Bible, to prove it: but ^r brevities sake I shall mention but a few. ^^t.
11. 23. Barnabas exhorted them all, that ^^th purpose of heart they would
cleave unto the ^^rd. They did not answer him and say ^at they had no power,
they could not do it. ^il. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with ^re and
trembling. These people did not ^y, there was Free Will in the Text. As King
^AMES once said upon the like occasion, ^ere was Treason in the Text: when a
^inister that preached before him had taken Text of Scripture that did treat of
the a^se of Kingly power, the King burst forth (...) a passion and said, There
was Treason in the ^^xt. But if Kings will not cast down their ^rowns at the
feet of Christ, Christ will ^uck them off and lay them at the feet of ^en.

If there be no power in man Natural, nor (...) man Spiritual; then away with
all the ^dmonitions, Instructions, Informations, and so with the whole Bible!
cease to tea^^ Man! As good go teach the Sun, Moon an^ Stars which way they
shall go, the Wind (...) blow or the Sea to ebb and flow; go tea^^ the Fish to
swim, and the Bird to fly; f^^ they have power, but man has none.

And indeed, if man regenerated, if man spiritualized have no power to act; go
an^ race out these ensuing Scriptures, as requ^ring that of man which man has
no abili^^ to do. Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at t^^ strait gate. Many
shall seek to enter, and^ Romans 15. 30. Now I beseech you brethren f^^ the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love (...) the Spirit, that you strive together
with me yo^ prayers to God for me. H^b. 12. 4. You have n^^ yet resisted unto
blood, striving against si^^ Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every weight, and t^^
sin that does so easily beset us; and let us (...) with patience the race
that is set before us. 2 Pe^ 1. 5, 6, 7. And besides this give all diligence,
ad^ to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, a^^ to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance pa^^ence, and to patience godliness, and to godline^^
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindne^^ charity, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give
all diligence (...) make your calling and election sure. 2 Phil. 1^ Work out
your own salvation with fear and tre^bling. Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem wash thine
he^^ (...)m wickedness, that thou may be saved. ^^r. 18. 11. Return from
your evil ways, and ^ake your ways and doings good, says the Lord. ^at. 11.
28. Come unto me all ye that labor and ^e heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. J^r. 3. 13. ^^ly acknowledge thine iniquity, and I will pardon it. Now as
many as have received this spiri^^al power, are able according to its mea^^re
to do the thing required. As to in^^nce: The Lord said to David, Seek my face.
^avid's heart being enlightened and im^^wered by God, makes this answer to the
^^rds command, Lord, thy face will I seek. ^^d sometimes God conveyes the power
^^gether with the precept, to enable them (...) do what he commands them to do.
And ^^en if a man do it not, or do the contrary, ^e Scripture tells thee, thou
art slothful, ^^d do not use thy power; or covetous, ^^d so abusest thy
power. 1 C or. 9. 18.

Now let me ask thee (O thou enlighten(...) Christian) have thou since thou
wast en^^ghtened by Christ, done as much for Christ thou might have done?
Does not thy ^nscience tell thee thou have been negligent ^^d slothful, and
left undone those things which thou ought to have done, and done ^ose things
which thou might have left ^done? In a word, have thou avoided so much evil,
and done so much good as th^^ might have done? What thou will (...) now, I
know not: but when thou an^ shall appear before the Searcher of all hea^^ at^
the last day, we shall not tell the Lo^^ we wanted power to obey him in his
commands.

Surely if there be no life, vigor and pow^^ in men and women regenerate, then
in va^^ are all those stirrings, perswafions and i^ treaties in Scripture: as
to instance in a fe^^ 2 Timothy 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembra^^ that thou
stir up the gift of God which is in the 2 Pet. 1. 13. Yea I think it meet as
long as I (...) in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you remembrance,
etc. 2 Pet. 3. 1. This epistle ((...) loved) I now write unto you, in which I
sti^^ up your pure minds by way of remembrance, and^ Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one
another daily while is called to day, lest any of you be hardened thro^ the
deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 10. 24. Let us (...)sider one another to provoke
one another to l^^ and good works. 1 Cor. 4. 16. Wherefore I seech you be ye
followers of me. 1 Pet. 1. 15. (...) as he which called you is holy, so be ye
holy in manner of conversation. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let e^^^ one that names the name
of the Lord depart fr^^ iniquity. Ephesians. 4. 22. That you put off the (...) man
which is corrupt. Mat. 5. 16. Let your l(...) ^shine before men, that they may
see your good (...)s, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Tim. 4. 13.
Till I come, give attendance to ^^ding, to exhortation, to doctrine, etc.

Now if there be no power in a man re^^wed to do what is commanded, then raze
^^t all the Commands, for they be all in ^in; they be worse then Pharaoh, they
re^ire heavenly bricks to be made of earthly ^aw.

Away with all exhortations, perswasi^^s, intreatings, and heavenly strivings,
if ^ere be no ability in the creature to whom ^^u speak. Has the Lord indeed
made ^n an empty creature and void of reason? ^^th not man many members in his
body ^^d faculties in his soul? cannot the Eye see, ^^nnot the Ear hear? cannot
the Legs go? ^^nnot the hands work, etc. And for the ^ule, is there not an
understanding to un^^^stand? is there not a mind or memory to ^^nde or
remember? is there not a judge^^nt to judge and determine of things? is ^ere
not a will to will the thing, that the ^^dgment does judge as good? Are there
^t Affections to affect that, which the ^^dgment presents as good? Or else does
^^d speak to man as a stock or a stone? ^^th the most righteous God require
impossibilities of his creatures? does he ca^ and cannot man answer? or will he
not answer? or does he call, and we hear him, r^quiring many things to be done
by us, a^^ threatens us if we do it not, and gives (...) no power to do it?
No, no, this is not t^^ administration of the Gospel: for either (...) does
impowre them before he command them; or else, with the command the^ goes forth
a power and a promise to enab^^ his creature to the performance of what (...)
requires; only thou and I do many tim^ resist that Spirit and power as much
as w^ can; we are not faithful to the Spirit, w^ grieve it, and sometimes in a
sense quen^ it: yea, the Lord calls once, yea twice, an^ we do not not, nor
will not hear him; an^ if we cannot but hear him, instead of goi^^ to him, we
run to Elie, See 1 Samuel 3. 5, 6.

Surely Joshua had a power as well as a r^solution, when he spoke these words,
Jos^ 24. 15. I and my house will serve the Lord: an^ those whom he there spoke
to in tha^ chap. Jos. 24. 14, 15. I say, those people ha^ also a power to do
what he command them to do, or else his commands are i^ vain: He exhorts them
to fear the Lord, a^^ to serve him in truth and sincerity: and in the 31.
verse, we read, that they did as Josh^^ ^^d commanded them; for the Text says,
^at Israel served the Lord all the days of Io(...)t, and all the days of the
Elders that overlived ^^shua, etc. So also in the twelsth of the ^^mans, we
have in that Chapter at least six ^^d twenty particular duties that we are
^horted unto. Now if there is no ability (...) a Christian to perform or
practice that ^^ich there is recorded, then all those ex^^tations are in vain,
and Paul had been good have spoken to the men and wo^^n that were laid in the
graves, as unto ^^se he then spoke unto.

If there be no power given forth from ^^d unto his people, lay aside as
needless useless all those precious directions, in^^ctions, persuasions,
exhortations, and ^^cepts mentioned in Scripture, and so ^^u wilt at once lay
aside half the Old and ^^w Testament, as many deluded souls do ^his day; and
then thou lie open, as ^ing no guard to further temptations: ^en in comes
Satan, and begins to reason (...) case with thee: Why (says he) if half Bible
be useless to us, why not all? And ^^e will undertake to teach thee, and
in(...) so he will, for he is one of the most la^^ious Schoolmasters in the
world; he ^^l improve all opportunities, and take all advantages to fasten his
doctrine upon thee: he will wait on thee continuall^ when thou lie down, and
when thou ri^^ up he will be at thy elbow: he will prom^ thee great things, and
give thee little; (...) will promise thee honor, and bring thee disgrace; he
will promise thee pleasure, a^^ bring thee to pain; he will promise th^^
riches, and bring thee to poverty; he w^^ promise thee life, and bring thee to
d^a^ Oh then, remember that blessed wor^^ Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and he
shall flee (...) thee.

Ob. But thou will object and say, I h^^ not faith to resist him: And it is not
in (...) power of man by nature to believe, as y^^ may see I Cor. 1. 23. and 2.
14. Romans 8. 7* John 40. and 44. Mat. 23. 37.

An. It is true; I have affirmed bef(...) that a man merely natural cannot
ac(...) supernatural things: but I am not sp(...)ing to a man natural, but to
the recei(...) power of a man spiritual, and the impro^^ment of that.

Obj. But before you proceed further (...) desire satisfaction to this one
question:

Q. Why does God promise eternal (...) only to those that believe, and
threatene (...)nal death to those that do not, seeing (...) (...)ot in their
own power by nature to be^ieve.

A. First, that he might by his promises and threatenings work us unto that
which ^y nature we are averse to 2 Cor. 5. 11. and 20.

Secondly, that we might appear more ^^excusable, when neither promises, nor
^^reats will move us to embrace free mercy. ^ct. 13. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed ^ld and said, it was necessary the word of God ^ould first have been
spoken unto you: but seeing (...) put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy (...) everlasting life, lo we we turn to the Gentiles. ^^d in the 51.
verse. And they shook off the dust (...) their feet against them, and came to
Jerusalem. ^^r the further proof of this see Act. 18. (...) 7.

Thirdly, that the grace of God might as ^^ll appear in giving power to
believe, as giving Christ, and in him forgiveness of ^^nes to be believed.
Romans 9. 16. So then it ^ot of him that wills nor of him that runs, (...)
of God shows mercy. Romans 11. 6, 7. ^^d if by grace, then it is no more of
works.

Fourthly, that we might apply our selves to God in the use of those means that
^hath appointed for the working of faith ^^s. Joh. 6. 27. Labor not for the
meat that ^sheth, but for that which endures to everlasting life, etc. Isa.
55. 3. Incline your ear an^ come unto me, hear and your soul shall live, ^c*
Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

Fifthly, that we might wholly deny ou^ selves, and search, and by seeking find
in the Covenant of grace matter of free conveyance of power to believe
whatsoever is required to be believed. Romans 4. 16. Romans 3. 24* and Psalm. 119.
104, 105. Joh. 5. 39.

Again, when we look into the Old o^ New Testament, and there find a comman^
wherein thou art required to be acting an^ doing something for God.

1. Consider, thou have a power alread^ given forth to thee, by which thou art
(...) ble to do the thing required.

2. Or else with the command the Lord conveyes a power to enable thee to do the
thing commanded.

3. When thou look upon the Command on thy left hand, then look upon t^^
Promise on thy right hand, wherein t^^ Lord God has promised to assist thee,
a^^ not to fail thee nor forsake thee. For I d^ know no precept but has its
promis^ though not always in the same chapter (...) verse.

4. For our more careful practicing, (...) ^^g and observing all the commands
of our God, consider these three things.

1. As he has promised to enable thee,

2. So he has promised to reward thee ^or doing thy duty: so that to every
pre^^pt there is two promises, the one to en^^le thee, the other to reward
thee, and ^oth to encourage thee.

3. And in case of slothfulness and neg^gence in leaving undone what we ought
and might have done,

1. The Lord complains on us.

2. He exhorts us, Be not slothful in business, ^^t servent in spirit serving
the Lord.

3. He threatens us, saying, Because I have ^^lled and you have refused, you
shall call, and I ^ill not answer.

4. He tells us that we have forsaken our own ^ercy; He put a price into our
hands, but ^e as fools had no heart to it; and so our ^^struction is of our
selves: O Israel, thou ^ast destroyed thy self.

Oh then, that all the Lords inheritance, ^aints by calling, Sons of Sion,
would take ^^e Lords advice in these and the like com^ands, yea in all the will
of God! Phil. 2. ^2. Wherefore my beloved, as you have always ^eyed not only
in my presence, but now much more (...) my absence, work out your own salvation
witle ^^ar and trembling.

Q. How shall I do that? (thou will say.) A. Peter, being filled with the Holy
Ghost, shows thee and me how we man do it. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, etc. And besides
this, giv^^ all diligence; add to your faith virtue, and (...) virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and t^ brotherly
kindness charity: For if these things b^ in you and abound, they make you that
you sha^^ neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowled^^ of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but he that lacks the^^ things is blind and cannot see afar off.
Wherefor^ give all diligence to make your calling and elect^^ sure, for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto yo^ abundantly into the everlasting kingdom
of (...) Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Wherefore I will employ my power says Peter, verse. 12. I will not be
negligen(...) put you always in remembrance of these thing yea I think it meet
aslong as I am in this tabern^^le to stir you up by putting you in remembranc^
Now if Peter had no spiritual strength, ho^ could he stir them up to spiritual
things and if the people to whom he spoke had n^ power, how could they be doing
the thing commanded?

Now thou, O most excellent piece of a^ Gods workmanship, Man and Woman
whosoever thou art that read these lines, ^^deavour to know thy own
strength, that ^ou may employ and improve it for him ^at gave it. Study thy
self; examine, what (...) I able to do by virtue of that power which I have
received from God? Surely I ^ave left many things undone for this very ^^ason,
I was unable to do it. It is true, I saw ^n the one hand, that I could of my
self do nothing; but I did not see on the other and, that I could do all things
through christ enabling me.

It is a blessed thing to improve the power ^^ceived, in making use of the
present op^ortunity; and it is a dangerous case to ^eglect it.

1. Because it may be thou may not ^ave another opportunity. Prove. 1. 24.
26. ^at. 23. 37, 38.

2. Because if he give another opportu^ity, thou art not sure to live to see it.

3. Because, if he does give another op^ortunity, and thou live to see it, yet
thou ^aving slighted the Spirit at first, thou art most like to do so still,
Heb. 3. 13. Act. 7. 51. (...) Tim. 3. 8.

4. Because if the Lord does give thee another opportunity, and thou live to
see it and embrace it, yet thou have hindered thy self exceedingly, and have
lost thy sight o^ Christ for many days. Joh. 20. 24, 25* A man that knows not
his own strength is like unto a man that has a great summ^ of money that lies
in a corner, and he dot^ not improve it, and so gets nothing by it for he knows
not of it; he has a Talen^ but it is hid in a napkin and buried in the earth.

1. I do but ask thee (O man) whosoeve^ thou art that read these lines, do
tho^^ not think in thine own conscience, tha^ there is many a man and woman
belongin^ to the Election of grace, that do die in d^spair (as it were) and
without assurance i^ point of manifestation, that might have r^signed up their
souls to God in full assurance, if they had obeyed God in giving (...)
diligence to make their calling and election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10.

2. Again let me ask thee, whether tho^ do not think in thy conscience that
mo^^ men and women, with Martha, are trouble about many things, whereas they
might wit^ Mary, choose the better part. Luke 10. 41, 42.

3. Again, I do but ask thee whether tho^ do not deprive thy self of thy
comfortabl^ well-being here in this life, by thy not looking more narrowly to
thy conversation 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Many things more might be here recited (...) the confirmation of this truth,
That ^^re is a power natural, and a power spiritual; ^^d the neglect of the
improvement of each is sin^^ll. But at present I shall be silent to make ^y
further progress therein, only I shall ^^deavour to answer some objections
that ^^ply may arise against it; and then I shall ^e you a few reasons why I
have written ^is, and show you the necessity that we have (...) knowing this
power, by the danger of ^^t knowing it.

First I shall endeavor to answer a few ^bjections that happily may arise in the
^oughts of some against it; and so much ^e rather, because I know that we live
in (...) age wherein some men make it the great(...) peace of their Religion to
lie at catch, ^^d to esteem very highly of themselves and ^^eir own judgments,
and undervalue o^ers, as the proud Pharisee, Luke 18. 11, 12. ^^d quite
contrary to the command of ^od, Phil. 2. Let each esteem others better then
^^emselves. But to proceed.

Ob. 1. If there be a natural power in all, ^^d a spiritual power in some, by
virtue ^hereof they can act and do act: then I ^umbly conceive, that you must
either by ^olding this dostr^y Free Grace, or else hold ^ree-will.

A. I answer: In all that I have said (...) done concerning the natural or
spiritu^^ power, I have endeavored to fail b^twe^^ these two rocks, that I
might not deny t^^ one, nor hold the other: for if my (...) should sail against
either of these two roc^^ all hopes of coming safe to land would (...) taken
from mine eyes.

First, I have not destroyed Free-gra^^ neither undervalued it in any measure;
(...) I have said before, that all our springs a^^ in him, and all our supplies
are from hi^ and that all power centers in him as t^^ Fountain from whence all
small streams (...) power do flow. I have affirmed furthe^ that as this power
was given freely to (...) from him, so it is limited in us by him; a^^ when the
creature has improved his po^er to the highest, he has done but his dut^ Luke
17. 10.

Our salvation is of Free Grace notwit^standing: I have not said that our
impr^ving, or not improving our power, c^^ save us, or damn us: But this I have
affir^ed and do affirm, that by our non-improv^ment it will exceedingly harm
us; for (...) shall lose much of our outward, and pe^haps inward joy and
comfort both in (...) and death; I do not say, our eternal we^^ being does
depend upon it. All our sal(...)ion is of Free Grace from God through (...)
redemption of the Son, and evidence of Spirit.

1. So that our obedience is not the cause (...) our salvation; for Gods love
was the (...)fe. Joh. 3. For God so loved the world, etc.

2. Our obedience and good works is (...)t the way; for Christ is the way, the
truth (...) the life.

3. Our improvement of our power in (...)y of good works, is not the evidence
as (...)our selves, for that is the work of the (...)irit of God in us.

4. But our good works do glorify God (...)d inform and edify our neighbors.

First they glorify God, Mat. 5. 16.

Secondly it does inform our neighbor; (...) he cannot judge of us but by our
fruits, (...) shall know a tree by its fruits, says Christ.

Thirdly, it does edify our neighbor, ^^en every step of our conversation is
an ^^^truction to him: and the Apostle says, ^^t some are won to God by the
good ^nversation of others.

2. And as for Free Will in man, I know ^ne, unless it be such a Free Will as
was (...) Paul, Romans 7. 18. For to will is present with (...). and ver. 13.
When I would do good, evil is present with me. I know no Free Will th^^ unless
it be a free will to sin. A man na^^rally cannot act in things supernatur^ as
to instance, a man cannot believe, unl^^ the Spirit of God work faith in the
sou^ and yet a man according to common p^^vidence may bring his body to the
O^^nance of Hearing, which is the means or^^narily by which the Lord does work
fai^ Romans 10. 17. But he, the Lord God (...) mighty, is the Author and finisher
of Heb. 12. 2. And he makes us willing a^ desirous to have it wrought in us: so
t^^ he does not work it whether we will no. So the Holy Ghost, that works fai^^
is not said to believe; Man is said to ^^lieve.

Now though man cannot believe of hi^ self, without the power of the Lord;
(...) man is to attend upon all means, as heari^^ reading, meditation,
conference: for the be his appointments, and he has promi^^ his presence in,
and blessing upon the us^^ these means to make them effectual. H^^^ it is that
the Lord commands us to wait him in the use of means. Prove. 20. 22. (...) wait
on the Lord, and he shall save thee. Isa. (...) Blessed be all they that wait
for him. Isa (...) 31. (...)y that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
(...)gth. Isa. 49. 23. For they shall not be asha(...) that wait for me. Lam. 3
25. The Lord is (...) unto them that wait for him, to the soul (...) seeks
him. Isa 64. 4. Eye has not seen, (...) has not heard what the Lord has
prepared those that wait for him.

Now a man cannot be said to wait upon ^^d, unless he wait upon him in the use
of ^^ans, to which he has promised his pre^^ce, which are his appointments and
^^lks, wherein he has been, now is, and (...)eafter will be found.

Next I shall come unto the Reasons why ^ave written of the Natural and
Spiritual ^^wer, viz.

First, I have heard many say, They ought (...) to pray, read, meditate,
confer, or assemble ^^^mselves together, to the practice of any known (...)y,
until the Spirit by its fresh gales and move^s put them upon it; And I am
mightily mi^^^ken, if some have not staid so long for (...)se fresh gales and
movings of the Spirit, ^till they have quite forgotten to pray, or ^ar, or
conferr of any spiritual thing, un^^^se it be in a carnal way: Now it is true,
^^at is the principal time in which a Soul ^^ght to act, but not the only
time; I say ^^ain, It is the principal time, but not the only time. First,
that it is the princ(...) time, I have no need to prove; for all (...)tional
men will and do grant that: (...) then, secondly, It is not the only ti(...)
for we find that the command lies up(...) us as well at one time as another;
ne(...) there is no time, in which we are not (...) want, and therefore need
still to seek. ^gain, we find in Scripture, written for (...) learning, that
the Saints acted sometimes (...) their greatest deadness and coldness, as
D^vid and others; When they found themselves dead and dull, cold and slothful,
(...) we find they stir up them selves as men, s^^sible of their state: to
instance in one (...) all, Psalm. 119. 25. Quicken thou me after (...) loving
kindness, so shall I keep the testimony thy mouth, etc. Again, Psalm. 119.
170. I (...) afflicted very much, quicken me O Lord, accordi^^ to thy word: So
verse. 159, etc. so in Psal^ 153. verse 11. Quicken me, O Lord, for t^^ name
sake: so in another place, he praye^^ Renew a right Spirit within me; and again
Restore again to me the joy of thy salvation. In word, let me ask thee O man,
who is it tha^ does let us see our unfitness, luke warmne^ and coldness? Does
not God discover thi^ by his Spirit? and does not the same Spirit that does
enable us to see our want^ move us to seek for supplies from the foun^^in; as
it is said in Job, The Lord speaks ^^ce, yea twice, and man perceives it not.
So I ^^ow by experience in my self and others, ^^at we have many movings and
stirrings (...) the Spirit of God within us; and either ^^e take no notice of
it, or if we do, we que^^ion in our selves, whether it be the stir^^ngs of the
good Spirit, or proceeds not ^om the evil Spirit? And so we cease to ^^t,
because we be unsatisfied. But in some ^^ses the Spirit that does move us to
it, ^ill undoubtedly carry us forth to the do^^g of what it moves us to; What
are we, ^^ith the Scriptures, that we could withstand ^^e Spirit?

But in other cases we are said (as in the ^cts) to resist the Holy Ghost; and
in another ^cripture, Quench not the Spirit, and be not un^^itfull to the
Spirit of God; and grieve not the spirit of God, whereby you are sealed to the
day (...) Redemption. It will be of singular use ^hen to Christians, to
endeavor to dis^ern between the motions of the Spirit of God from the motions
of our own spirits; that when we find a motion begin to arise ^n us, before it
come to action, we may ^ither suppress it, or cherish it: if it come from our
own spirits, then to quench it, and bring it into captivity to the obedien^^ of
Christ; If from the Spirit of God, th^^ let the motion arise, let thy will will
t^^ thing, let thine affections affect it, that (...) that motion may end in
action.

Object. But how shall I know, when t^^ motion does arise from the Spirit of
Go^ and not from mine own spirit?

Answ. 1. The motions of the Lords Spirit does move thee to that, and only
tha^ which is agreeable to the spiritual sense (...) the Scriptures.

2. The true Spirit does move us to tha^ which does tend to the denying of
o^^selves, and the exalting of God alone in the person of Jesus Christ; See
Joh. 16. 13, 14.

3. The motions of Gods Spirit are no^ carried on, but with abundance of
oppos^tion; opposition within you and without you, on the right hand and on the
left.

4. When two motions arise within yo^^ together, as it were, and both seem to
be a^cording to the Scripture, and both seem t^^ exalt God, and to deny self;
then before thou prosecute either, consider as in the presence of God, whose
servant thou ar^ which of these things that I am moved unt^ will be most for
the honor of God? the^ that do: If the Mistress command the Se^vant to clean
such a room immediately, and (...) to touch any thing till that be done;
(...)isles the Maid is in the midst of her (...)rk, the child falls in the
fire; the servant (...)ves the work, and runs and takes up the (...)lde, and is
commended of her Mistress (...) so doing: So that which does make (...)st for
the glory of God, and for our spi(...)ual advantage, is first to to be done,
and (...)th undoubtedly proceed from the Spirit (...) God. I might instance in
many other (...)ticulars, as to examine the rise of the (...)tion, next the
prosecution, and thirdly (...) ends, but I forbear: So then the first (...)son
why I have endeavored to prove (...)re is a power natural, and a power
spi(...)ual, is, that we might so know it, as to (...)ploy it to the best
advantage.

A second reason is, to prevent as much (...)n me lies, the further spreading
of (...)se gross and dangerous errors that (...)l follow, if there be not a
power in the (...)ature which he has received from the (...)eator, either in
his Creation or Rege(...)ation to prevent those evils.

First, if there be not a power in men (...)there natural or spiritual, but
only (...)d in them; then all the creatures abuse (...) nature, laid to the
creatures charge in the first and second Chapters of the Rom(...) must be taken
off the creature, and laid (...) on God.

Secondly, if there be no spiritual po(...) in a man spiritualized; then it is
no sin (...) him to neglect all spiritual duties, and he may charge all his
omissions, and all (...) commissions upon his Maker. For he wo^^^ have done
whatsoever he had been c^^manded, if he had received any power: Y(...) might
have been teachers of others by (...) time, if you had improved your pow^^
says Paul, Heb. 5. 12.

This people did not answer the Lo^ and say they had no powere: and so for the
commissions they did not charge them (...) on God, as our Ranters do at this
day; a^^ that they be liars, St. James will testi^^ 1 James 13. 14, 15, 16. in
the 13. verse. (...) no man say when he is tempted, he is tempte^ God, for God
cannot be tempted with evil, nei(...) tempts he any man; v. 14. But every man
tempted when he is drawn away of his own (...) and enticed. v. 15. Then when
lust has concei^^ it brings forth sin, and sin when it is fini^^ brings
forth death. v. v. 16. Do not err my (...) ved b ethren. Whosoever then does
cha(...) the most ighteous God with our unri^^teous actions, does err in the
highest (...)ture.

I have admired at the subtilty of Satan, and the simpleness of men, to say,
That ^od is the author of sin; these be liars, ^^ke their father the Devil who
was a liar ^^om the beginning. Let me tell thee, O ^^in man, let me tell thee,
That the Al^ighty God cannot commit sin if he should: for if thou did know
what God is, ^^d what man is; if thou did know what is ^^e nature of God, and
what is the nature (...) sin, thou would know that they can^^t dwell
together.

Now sin is a transgression of a Law, but ^od is under no Law, and therefore
cannot ^^nsgresse; there is none above God to give ^ule to him by which he
should walk; ^^erefore his own will in his rule; he is ^odnesse it self, and
therefore cannot do ^^y thing but what is good.

So that which is justly called sin in us, ^^nnot be called sin in him, if he
should do (...) same thing, viz. If thou kill a man ^^ou have sinned against
the Law of God, ^^d the Law of Nature, and against the ^^ws of men: if God
overthrow Pharaoh ^^d all his host in the Red Sea, he has done ^evil, he has
broken no Law; if he send the ^tilence and slay every man in the City, has not
sinned; if he drown all the world at once, he has committed (...) evil.

If thou or I should take any thing that another man's, from a thread to a shoo^
latchet, we have sinned by thest:

But if the Lord command the Isra^li^^ to borrow Jewels of silver, and of gol^
and raiment of the Egyptians: the Lo^^ has not sinned in bidding them do it,
n^^ they in taking it, Wherefore let God be true, (...) every man a liar. Can
not thou be content^^ to father thy sin upon thy brother or siste^ or
neighbor, as thou do many times; b^ must thou father it upon the most ho^^
Lord? do thou know what thou do (...) in this thing? will he not be
avenged (...) such a wretch as thee? Oh remember fr^^ whence thou art fallen
and repent.

And now to wind up all that I shall at pr^sent say to the Power of the Creator
given fo^^ to the creature. Let me tell thee, if thou find^ any thing required
of thee to be done, and h^^ no ability to do it; consider there was ab^lity
once given thee in the first Adam, whi^^ thou have lost by thy fall in him, and
it^ just with God to require that now of the which once he gave thee: then
consider t^^ as thou have lost by the first Adam, so the have gotten by the
second Adam; so the (...) enabling thee, thou can (with Paul) (...) all
things.

(...)nd that will be the next thing that I shall (...)deavour to lay before
thee; Thy fall in (...)e first, and the manner there of; and thy
(...)stauration by the second Adam, and the (...)ory there of. And do desire,
that some (...)e or other that has a greater discovery (...) the mind of God
in these things, con^^rning The power of God, and the power of the ^eature;
concerning the power Natural, and ^^e power Spiritual: I should entreat them to
^^ld it forth to public view; for I am ^re there is great necessity of it,
that man ^ight know his own strength.

For I am consident, that I my self and ^any others have left undone many
things ^at we ought and might have done, for ^ot knowing our own strength where
with ^od, even the God of power had strength^^ed us. Wherefore I do in the
presence of (...)y Maker declare unto the whole world, that I was not
straightened in him, but in ^ine own bowels; That he has not been ^anting to
me, first not only to give me ^^ength, but secondly to supply me in re^^wing
that strength day by day. Where^^re let God be true, and I and all neglecters,
if (...)e charge God with not enabling us, liars. Romans 3. 4. Let God be true
and every man a lya^^ Oh then, let not the righteous God (...) charged with
your unrighteousness! an^ let not the most holy God be charged wi^^ your
unholinesse! But stir up the talent the is in thee, as in 2 Pet. 1. 13.

Do as Jacob did, wrestle with God, l^^ him not go till he bless thee; give
him n^^ rest till he make Jerusalem the praise of t^^ whole earth. Isa. 52. 1.
Awake, put on t^^ strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful garment^ O Jerusalem,
thou holy City, open to hi^ for he now knocks; fly to this City of r^fuge, and
thou shall be safe: For the name (...) the Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous run to (...) and are safe. If thou did but see him, tho^ would
admire him, and count all things vanity in comparison of him: if thou did^ but
know him, thou would be so ravishe^ with the love of him, that many waters
co(...) not quench it: If thou did but taste hi^ thou would hunger and
thirst after hi^ more then does the Heart after the water^ brooks. Oh taste and
see that God is gracious It Is life to know him, it is heaven to behol^ him, it is
melody to hear him, it is endless^ happiness to enjoy him. Let it be our ca^ to
obey him, and improve all our strengt^ for him: let us not spend our money for
th^^ which is not bread, and our pains for that which ^^l not profit. Let us
run the ways of his com^^ndments, for he has enlarged our heart, and ^^d,
that he that does these things shall never ^^moved. Improve thy power for him,
part ^^th thine estate for him; give, and it shall be ^^en thee again, Luke 6.
38. Good measure pressed ^^n and shaken together and running over.

Me thinks I hear the voice of thy Savior (...)ing to thee: O thou obedient
son, come, ^^e, thou have been faithful in a little, I will ^e thee more;
come, enter into thy Masters joy; (...) thine obedience to me did arise from
thine in^est in me, manifested to thee by me.

NOw I shall speak to our Fall in the first Adam, and of the subtlety of Satan
^erein.

There be two things of absolute necessity ^^r a Christian to be well
acquainted with, ^^z.

1. Our fall in the first Adam. 2. Our restoration by the second A^am.
Upon these two points do the two ^estaments frequently treat; insomuch that
thou can hardly read one Chapter, ^ut (more or less) thou shall find the
Pro^het, or Apostle speaking to one or both states, or something conducing
thereunt^ and some Chapters speaking and treati^^ wholly of that two fold
state, as Romans 5. and^ Nay, I have observed, that when I ha^^ heard a
Gospel-Sermon, wherein were many particulars; or when J have heard go^^ ly men
in a long debate about the prin^^ples of religion; I have (J say) observ^^ that
the sum and substance of their d^^ course or teaching has for the most pa^^
been to show what men were in the first (...)dam, and the misery of all in that
state; (...) else what they be in the second Adam, a^^ the glory of that state.
And when my m^mory has been too weak to comprehe^ the abundance of particulars
that J ha^ heard, J refer all that J have heard (...) these two particulars,
and found singul^^ benefit thereby, viz. What do J know mo^^ now by all that J
have heard this day, the J did before, of the state J was in, a^^ of the state
J am now in?

First then of the first Adam, the Scriptu^^ speak of him in a two fold state.

1. The first is the state of innocence before he fell. 2. And secondly of his
state of mise^^ after he was fallen.
Of the first of these states J shall say n^ thing, it being well known to most
men; ^^d of the second of these states, I shall speak ^^r write but a very few
words.

Adam and Eve being in Paradise, and ^^oking upon themselves as indeed they
^ere the most excellent pieces of all the ^reation, bearing the Image of their
Crea^or; the Lord left them a Law, and left them ^o the freedom of their own
will; if they ^id obey, to live; if they did disobey, to dye. ^ut through the
temptation of Satan, ^hey both soon cast off their Makers pre^epts, and
through the temptation of Sa^han they transgressed the commandment ^f God in
eating the forbidden fruit, and ^hereby fell from the state of innocence
^herein they were created, and so brought upon them and all their seed, the
loss of ^ommunion with God, and his displeasure, and obtained a curse, so as
we are by nature ^he children of wrath, bondslaves to Sa^han, and justly liable
to all punishments ^n this world, and that which is to ^ome.

O thou Adam, what have thou done? for though it was thou that sinned, thou art
^ot fallen alone, but we all that came of ^hee! O the infectiousnesse of Sin,
ten ^housand times more infections then the Plague and Pestilence; for many
have live^ in the City when the noisome Pestilen^ has been, and yet have been
free: but b^ hold this original transgression has sprea^ it self into all the
corners of the earth; (...) that no man, woman, or child, that eve^ was, now
is, or hereafter shall be, is fr^^ from that infection; and that original sin^^
as the root, brings forth actual transgre^sion as the branches; sins of
omission, o^ commission, as the fruit.

Oh thou Adam, what have thou done? (...) though it was thou that have sinned,
tho^ art not fallen alone; but we all that came (...) thee, as being then in
thee, are infected b^ thee: O miserable men that we are, who shall (...) liver
us from this body of death!

Thus much of the nature of the Fall: no^ of the manner of the Fall, and of the
subtil^^ of the Devil, that old Serpent therei^ He himself being fallen, comes
to the Ga^den in the form of a Serpent, out of env^ to man's happiness, he
boards the woman thus: Has God said, Ye shall not eat thereof as if he should
have said, It is a likely ma^ter that the Lord cares what you eat; wha^ do you
think that he stands upon an apple^ has he created all things for you? then d^
ye use them. This is the first assault, which (...) woman weakly resists,
beginning at (...) first to yield: whereas God had said, ^^ou shall dye; she
answers doubtfully and ^^th, Lest I dye: Then the Devil perceiving ^^e woman
to stagger, and the ground of (...) faith to shake, plants all his pieces, and
^^epares his Army for a storm; for his name ^^egion, and he had beleagured the
wo^^n before. So the word was no sooner ^^t of her mouth, Lest ye dye: but he
re^^es, Ye shall not dye at all. What? dye, with ^^ing so fair an Apple? Can
there be any ^^rt in it, O filly woman! Ye shall not dye ^^all.

God he affirms, Ye shall dye certainly.

The woman says, Lest ye dye.

The Devil that old Liar, says, Ye shall (...) dye.

Then not giving the woman any respite (...) be think her self, or to reply: Oh
says he, ^^od knows that your eyes shall be ope^^d, and you shall be as
gods: as if he should (...)e said, God envies your happiness, and love you so
well, that I cannot but tell ^^u of it; for he knows very well, that if ^^u
should but eat of that Tree, you should ^^e that which you never faw before,
and ^^at you shall be as gods. Oh impudent ^^ar* for by cating, both Adam, and
all we his posterity became more like unto Sath^ then like unto God: Behold, O
filly w^ man, says he, what a goodly Tree this how pleasant to the eye,
d^licate to t^ taste, divine for use; can it do you a^ hurt? would any but
fools abstain? go (...) eat, and fear not, I will warrant you (...) harm. Then
the woman seeing it was go^ for meat, pleasant to the eyes, and a T(...) to be
desired after to get knowledge; (...) took of it and did eat, and by these or
(...) like reasons, persuaded her husband, a^ gave him, and he did eat. O all
ye sonn^ and daughters of Adam, put on all the A^^mour of God; If it be
possible, stand upon your guard; Set forth your Sentinels; Man ready for an
Enemy which has slain yo^ Father, deceived your Mother, cheated a^^ almost
undone all your Brethren, defil^ your Sisters, wounded your Children and
plundered all your Kindred to the sk^^ and left them all as poor as Job; never
be peace with him, maintain a continual w^ against him; acquaint all the men
a^^ women in the world of his base deceit^^ cheating tricks, that his ill
savor m^^ stink in the nostrils of all men and women under the Sun, that they
may loath hi^ and stand upon their guard to oppose hi^ though his name be
Legion, fear him not, ^^is a conquered Enemy: If he meet but ^^e poor Saint in
the field clothed with ^^t a little faith as a grain of mustard seed, ^^s poor
Saint will challenge all the devils ^hell to give him a meeting; and if they
^^rst to appear, he will but resist them with ^ittle faith, James 4. 7. Resist
the devil, and will fly from you.

For he is a base cowardly beggarly Ene^y; he is subtle, but there is one that
takes ^re of thee, is wiser then he; he is ancient ^^d experiences, but thy
friend is more an^^^nt then he; he is a Prince, but thy friend (...) King of
Kings; he is swift of motion, (...) can fly in the air, but thy friend has the
^avens for his Throne, and the earth for his ^otstool, filling heaven and earth
with his ^^essed presence; though his presence is not ^anifested to all, yet he
is present in all pla^^s at all times, beholding all actions. Oh ^^en keep the
word of his patience, that he ^ay keep thee in the hour of temptation; ^^ld
fast the word of God, for with that christ put Satan to the worst, Matthew. 4,
1, 2, (...), 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Next stand upon thy guard at all times, (...) all places, in all companies, in
all duties, ^^eep up faith (for thou and I fell in the first Adam through
unbelief, and we be rai^ again in the ^econd by faith;) so the D^^ is foiled,
he thought to conquer us who^^ by unbelief, but we shall overcome him faith;
Wherefore above all things take the shi^^ of faith, whereby ye shall be able to
quench all (...) fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. and Jam. 4*

NOW I shall speak to our Restaurati^^ by the second Adam, and of the glo^^ous
state of all those that are appointed the Father to be restored by the Son, a^
sanctified by the Spirit.

If I had the tongue of men and Angels, a^ understood all mysteries, I could
not give th^^ a full and complete description in each pa^ticular of the happy
and blessed state of t^^ Elect by the Father, that are redeemed (...) the Son,
and are or shall be sanctified by t^^ Spirit.

They were servants, but now they (...) Sons and Heirs, they shall be shortly
inh(...)ritors and enjoyers; they once knew no^ thing, they do now know in
part, they shall shor^^ know as they are known.

They were dead in sin, they now a^^ quickened from sin; they are or shall
b^^ quite freed from sin.

They were naked, they be now cloathe with the robe of Innocence, and they
shall (...) clothed with Immortality.

They were enemies, they be now recon^led, and shall be saved.

They once with Adam hid from the pre^^nce of God; they now take delight in his
^^refence, and shortly they shall abide in it ^^r ever.

They were Satan's slaves; they now are ^^e Lords Freemen, and shall dwell in
Sion: ^^ey were like a beast, they be now like a ^rince, they shall shortly be
like the An^els.

They did glory in their shame; they now ^^e ashamed of their sin, they shall
shortly ^^e with out and shame.

They were like the dirt and mire most ^^thy; they be now like the Moon in her
^eauty, and shall shortly be like the Sun in ^is glory. Oh the depths of the
riches boath of ^^e wisdom and knowledge of God! Oh how un^archable are his
judgments, and ways past ^^^ding out!

What is man that thou art mindful of him, or ^^e son of man that thou
should regard him!

As in the first Adam we dyed; so in the second ^^e are made alive.

In the first we lost an earthly Paradise; ^y the second we have gotten a
heavenly Paradise. This is that seed of the woman spoken of by the Father to
our first Parent^ that should bruise the Serpents head.

This is he that is called, The repairer (...) the breach, and the restorer of
paths to dwell in.

So that what we lost in the first, we have made good to us by the second Adam,
wi^^ many additions, as in Romans 5. Much more Much more, Much more; five times
in th^^ Chapter is that word, viz. in the 9, 10, 1^ 17, 20 verses, which is
there laid down (...) declare that our gains by Christ is mo^^ then our losses
by our first Father, thoug^^ that was very great.

The first Adam brought us under t^^ breach of the Law, and the curse due ther^
unto; the second Adam, being the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory and King
(...) Saints, has delivered us from the La^ viz.

First, from the curse of the Law.

Secondly, from the condemning pow^^ of the Law.

First, from the curse of the Law, For (...) was made a curse for us, as you
may see (...) large, Gal. 3. 10. and 13. v. compared togethe^ So also upon him
was laid the iniquities of us a^ Isa. 53. 6. and not only our sins, but a^
the punishments due to us for them, of wh^ nature, kind, and quality soever, as
you (...)y read at large in that fifty third Chapter (...) Isaiah, from the
first verse to the last: (...) that whole Chapter, Romans 6. speaks of (...)
sufferings for us, and our freedom by (...). It would make a larger Volume
then ^^ntend to make of this whole Book, if I ^^uld but only name the Chapters
and (...)ses in the Old and New Testament that (...) speak to this thing. So I
shall end this (...) point with the words of Pa^^ He was (...)de sin for us,
that knew no sin(...), that we (...)ht be made the righteousness of God in
(...).

Secondly, he has freed us from the con^^ning power of the Law, to which the
^^iptures speak abundantly; I will men^^^n but one or two for all, Romans 8. 34.
Who ^^e that condemns it is Christ that dyed, etc. (...)o shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods ^ct? it is God that justifies. Romans 8. 1. There is
condemnation to them that are in Christ; (and you desire to know who they are)
they (...) those that walk not after the flesh, but after (...) Spirit. Nay in
a sense, being warily under^^od, we are delivered from the moral Law Christ
Jesus the second Adam.

There is the Ceremonial Law, and the ^^itical Law; the Judicial Law, and the
Moral Law: that we are delivered from (...) two former, most of us do know;
a(...) that in a sense being warily understood, (...) are delivered from the
two latter, very (...) do know.

If the Scriptures do say we be not un^^^ the Law, why is it thought such an i^
proper word for a Christian to say too?

A Dialogue between the Law and the Gospel: Or between a Believer, and the Law.
Law. THe Law says, If thou will (...) these things, thou shall live (...)
them, Lev. 18. 5.


Gospel. Not he that does this, but (...) that believes in me shall live, Joh.
11. 26.


Law. A man is justified by works, a^ that I will prove, Jam. 2. 21. and 24.


Gospel. A man is justified by faith, wi^^ out the works of the Law, Gal. 2.
19. Romans 4. 5.


Law. If thou will not do these things require of thee, I will curse thee, and
there ^ave thee, Gal. 3. 10.


Believer. But Christ was made a curse for ^^e, and so freed me from thee, Gal.
3. 13.


Law. Thou have committed such and ^^ch sins, but not brought a sacrifice for
^^em.


Believ. Oh, but take notice of that Scrip^^re, Matthew. 9. 13. I will have
mercy, and not ^crifice.


Law. But thou have gone beyond the ^^unds of mercy, for thou have committed
^^ch sins, which God will not accept sa^^ifice for.


Believ. But what sins are those that ^^ere is no sacrifice to be accepted
for?


Law. First, there is no sacrifice that will (...) accepted for
presumptuousnesse, Number. (...). 30.

2. No sacrifice to be accepted for negle^^ng Circumcision, Genesis 17. 14.

3. No sacrifice for breach of the Sabbath ^^y, Exodus 31. 15.


Believ. Oh but my faith lays hold on ^^e that promised to cleanse me from all
^^y sins, says the believing soul, 1 John (...). So, O Law, I have nothing
to do with ^^e in all these things.


Law. But thou shall know that I will have to do with thee; for I am thy Schoo^
master, Gal. 3. 24. And Christ himself sait^ Matthew. 5. 17. He came not to
destroy me; a^^ Paul says, He does not make void, b^ establish me, Romans 3.
last verse.


Belieu. It Is true, thou wast a Schoo^ master, and in some sense thou art so
stil^ but he that is come to Christ, Is not und^^ a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 25.
And the Lo^^ Christ came to fulfill thee, Matthew. 5. 17. a^^ if fulfilled by
him, what do thou requi^^ of me? and whereas Paul says, He do^^ establish
thee, that i^, in thy place and roo^ and so the Law is good if a man use it la^
fully, 1 Timothy 1. 8.


Law. But says the Law, Do thou ma^^ no account of me? Do thou not know i^
deed that tho^ act under me?


Believ. I am not under thee; the Lo^^ tells me so by the mouth of Paul, Romans
10. Christ is the end of the Law to all that believ^ Again, Paul tells me from
the Lord, Ro^ 7. 6. Thou art dead: and I find it writt^^ in 2 Cor. 3. from the
11. verse. to the (...) four times in that one Chapter, Thou a^ done away.


Law. Do thou think, says the Law, I were at an end, or dead, that Ministers
a^^ Preachers would preach me up in almo^^ every Pulpit as they do, and set me
up as a ^^le to the people? yea and most of the ^^ople of this Nation do stand
for me, ^^ough they do not obey me.


Believ. O Law, see the Lord speaking by ^^l, and answering this question for
me, Tim. 1. 7. There be many that do teach the ^^w, understanding neither what
they say, nor ^^at they affirm. And further I find in ^^ripture these things
of thee, viz.

Thou art weak, Romans 8. 3. Thou art un^^ofitable, Heb. 7. 18, and 19. compared
toge^^er. Thou art dead, Romans 7. 6. Thou art ^^ne away, 2 Cor. 3. 11.


Law. I pray answer to these ensuing ^ueries, says the Law: if not, let me
^^ll thee, Thou shall know that thou art under me.

First, what shall convince thee of sin, if I ^^all not?

Secondly, what shall work sorrow for ^^n, if not my Threats and Judgments?

Thirdly, what shall cause thee to forsake ^^n, if I shall not?


Believ. First, the Spirit shall convince ^^e of sin, Joh. 16. 8.

Secondly, the looking upon Christ whom. I have pierced; or if you will, Christ
^ooking upon me after my sin, as he did upon Peter, will cause me to weep and
r^pent, Romans 2. 4. The goodness of Go^ leads to repentance.

Thirdly, the sweet love of God is no^ become my Schoolmaster to lead me into
the paths of all righteousness, Tit. (...) 11. 12.


Law. Christ was made under me, an^ did observe me, so as to obey me, and h^
commanded thee to learn of him, Matt^ 11. 28. and to walk as he walked, 1 Jo^
2. 6.


Believ. If Christ was made under the Law, and did yield obedience to the Law
why, it was for me, that he might set m^ free, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore
in the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free, and b^ not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage O Law, will thou turn Extortioner, to take thy due in
my Surety, and impriso^ me too; when Christ has paid the deb^ that I owed thee
to a penny, and has taken up the bond and can celled it? Col. 2. 14.


Law. But says the Law, I would have thee to know that the dearest servants o^
Christ, as well as Christ himself have been under me: what fayest thou of
David? Psalm. 38. ^ I having showed him his sin, and pronounced his terrors; he
cries out, My sin^ are too heavy for me to bear. And Jeremiah (...) Prophet
lay a long time under me, (...) the whole book of the Lamentations does
^^undantly testify. I could instance in al^ost all the Saints in the Old and
New Te^^^ments, that lay under me: And do thou ^^ink thy self wiser then
they, and so make ^^e also of none account?


Believ. The Lord for bid, that I should ^ake my self wiser then they, or
compare ^y self with them! David and Jeremiah, they ^ere both glorious
instruments to set forth ^^e praise, power, and wisdom of God: ^^t, O Law,
this let me tell thee, I have now ^eat cause to praise, magnify, and admire
^od in his wonderful love to me, in that he ^ave me a being in this latter day,
wherein ^^ere is greater light, and a clearer mani^^station of his free
justification by says, without the works of the Law, Romans 3. 28. and that he
has freed me from thee, O ^aw, and spirit of bondage, that I and others have a
long time lain under, Romans ^0. 4. and Gal. 4. 4, 5. and Romans 6. 14. and Romans
(...). 6.


Law. But will thou not own me so as ^o take me for thy rule of life?


Believ. No, by no means, and that ^or these reasons:

First, thou art dead to me, Romans 7. 6. an^ I am dead to thee, Romans 7. 4.

Secondly, because thou would be u^ profitable to me if I should observe the
for save me thou can not, for that is (...) grace, Ephesians. 2. 5. 8.

Thirdly, I will not serve thee, because am not under thee, Gal. 3. 25. but
after the faith is come, I am no longer under Schoolmaster.


Law. Well, for all this, mind what ho^^ and heavenly David said of me, Psalm.
119. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have resp^^^ to all thy commandments.


Believ. He that believes on him, as t^^ Scripture says, shall not be
ashamed, Romans 1^ 11. 28. Isa. 16.


Law. Though thou and others do (...) little esteem of me, because you do not
(...) the excellency that is in me; yet let me t^^ thee, that I am glorious,
so that the chi^dren of Israel could not behold the face (...) Moses when he
received me, 2 Cor. 3. 7.


Believ. If that which was done away w^^ glorious; much more that which remai^
is glorious, even the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 11.


Law. But says the Law, If thou ca^^ clearly prove by Scripture that the Lo^^
that gave me to Moses, did limit me a tim^ and that I was not to continue to
the end (...) the world in my full power, force and ^^rtue, I will be silent.


Believ. That I will presently prove, Gal. (...) 19. Wherefore then serves the
Law, faith ^^ul? why, it was added because of transgres^^on till the seed
should come, etc. Now this ^^ed is Christ, and this Christ is come: where^^re,
O Law, give place.


Law. Have I been so strictly observed in ^ll ages, ever since I was given
forth, and that by those men that were accounted the ^ost religious men upon
the face of the ^^rth: and do thou, O sally m^n, and a few ^uch as thou, that
art ignorant, and do ^ot know the Law; do thou, I say, think ^o make me
void?


Believ. I do not make thee void, but rather establish thee in thy place and
room, ^om. 3. 31. and so in 1 Timothy 1. 8. But we ^now that the Law is good if a
man use it law^ully.

Again, if I had lived in those days in which thou wast in force, I had been
under ^hee as well as those you name before; and (...) do conceive that thou, O
Law, wast in full ^orce, power, and virtue from the time that Moses received
thee upon the Mount, until Christ came in the flesh.

Nay, and after he came in the flesh, tho^ wast in force, until the Lord Jesus
had su^mitted unto thee in all thy demonstration^ and obeyed thee in all thy
precepts; so th^^ there was not one thing that thou require^ to be done, but he
did do it, till at lengh^ there was no more required; so Christ d^clares it was
finished, Joh. 17. 4. I have finis^ed the work that thou gave me to do, etc.

Nay, O Law, he did not only yield ob^dience to thy commands, and so fulfill^^
thee, but he did suffer all thy torments an^ judgments, as if he had broken
thee. Tho^ could but require a complete and inti^^ obedience both in
principles and practi^^ and in case of disobedience, to suffer t^^ punishment
due to such a sin or sin this was all* thou had to say. Now t^^ Lord
Christ took man's nature, and wa^ made under thee, and in all things obse^ved
thee in point of action, and submitt^^ to thee in point of suffering: And if
tho^ ask me how this obedience of Christ the second Adam, is become mine? Let
me as thee, O Law, how was the transgression (...) the first Adam imputed to
me? was I not (...) his loins, and so partaker of his sin (...) natural
generation? and am I not also (...) the second Adam by spiritual regeneration
and so partaker of all his obedience and ^^^hteousnesse by communication? Read
^^derstandingly, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. and 2 Cor. ^1.


Law. If thou, and a few such as thou art, (...) wind and twist your selves
out of my ^^wer, as not to hearken to me in my pre(...)s, nor fear me in my
threatenings; yet let (...) tell thee, O man, That the greater part ^en and
women that ever have heard of (...), are yet under me, and shall be judged
(...) Christ according as they keep me, or ^^ak me.


Believ. That the greater part of men ^^d women that ever heard of thee are
still ^^der thee, I have granted before in what I ^^^e said in answer unto
thee. And where^hou say, they shall be judged by thee, (...) by Christ,
according as they keep or ^^ak thee; there is something in it, though ^^nnot
fully grant it. First, there is some^^^ng in it: for our Lord Jesus Christ
^^aching to the Jews which were under (...) Law, Joh. 5. from the 17. verse to
the (...) of that Chapter, you may read many ^^^ngs to be considered; and in
the 40. verse ^^rist tells them, You will not come to me that might have life.
And when Christ takes (...) leave of the unbelieving Jews in the 45 verse, he
tells them, that seeing they wou^^ not be brought off the Law to the Gosp^^ he
speaks to them saying, Do not think t^^ I will accuse you to the Father for not
imbrati^^ me in the Gospel; no, no, there is no need of the there is another
that is sufficient to condem^ you, even the Law of Moses in which you t^^ As if
Christ had said to them, the needs not mine accusation to comple^ your
condemnation; that very Law the you seem to stick to, will condemn yo^ but had
you understood that Law in t^^ Spirit as you did in the Letter, you wou^^ not
have rejected me, for Moses writ of (...) verse 46.

For ought I know, those that do live a^^ dye under the Law of Nature, shall
(...) judged by the Law of Nature. Romans 1. Romans 2. both those Chapters do spe^^
much this thing.

And so for those that do live under t^^ Law of Moses, they shall, for ought I
kno^ be judged by that Law, as in Joh. 5. 45. A^^ whereas I said, I could not
fully grant (...) these be my reasons or Scriptures; Thi^ condemnation, says
Christ, that light is co^^ into the world, and men love darkness rat^^^ then
light: And again, they be condemn^ for unbelief, He that believes not, is
conde^^^ ^^d already, Joh. 3. And again, in the He^^ws, They were shut out
because of unbelief^^t I have not said, that the Law in the ^^irit did not lead
them to faith.


Law. I must indeed confess, that there is greater and clearer light held
forth in the ^ospel then in the Law, and a better Co^^nant established upon
better promises, ^eb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

But if I may not go before, does it there^^re follow that I may not come
after? If ^ay not sit in Mases Chair at the upper ^^d of the table, must I not
therefore sit at (...)? Pray, if thou can, tell me where is my ^^ace?


Believ. Thon must not have any Taber^^cle built for thee, for a greater then
thou art (...) here, Mar. 9. 7. When Peter saw Moses in ^^s glory, he would
have made a Taber^^cle for him; but the Lord took away ^oses, and answered
Peter to his foregoing ^^quest to Christ, touching a Tabernacle (...) Moses,
saying, This is my beloved Son, ^ar him, Mar. 9. 7.

But the Law in the spiritual substance of (...) I suppose is still in force;
for the Law in ^^e Spirit, is the Gospel; for the Gospel ^oth hold forth those
things in substance, (...) the Law did in types and shadows: as we do receive
light from the same Sun w^^^ he is under a cloud, as we do when (...) cloud
is over, and he shine in his brig^^^nesse; the light is the same for quality
a^^ nature, but not for quantity or measure. F^^ the Gospel does not teach any
other Re^^gion then the Law did; but there is a m^^ glorious administration,
and a more cl^^^rer dispensation of the love of God in t^^ face of Jesus Christ
under the Gospel, the was under the Law, I Cor. 12. 5. Now the are differences
of administrations, but the fa^^ Lord, and there are diversaties of operations,
(...) it is the same God which marketh all in all: (...) that for the substance
we have no oth^^ Gospel now then that was preached to o^ first parents in
Paradise after their fall, (...) you may see Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the wom^^
shall break the Serpents head. Here is the s(...)stance of all Law and Gospel
included a^^ contained in these words. But this Gosp^^ was preached something
darkly, and y^^ not so darkly, but that many believed a^^ were saved. Well, in
process of time, the Lord gave forth the Law, wherein we^^ orders and
ordinances, types and shadow held forth in several administrations; (...) that
now there was a far clearer preachin^ that Gospel, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the
w^ man shall break the Serpents head. Then shall ^ou find all the Prophets
rising up one ^^ter another speaking of Christ, and the ^^ory of his Kingdom;
and as one did ^^cceed after another in process of time, so ^^e latter did
exceed the former in their ^^owledge of this mystery; and at length (...) the
fullness of time, Christ, whom all ^^ese had spoken of, and many be lieved in,
^^me into the world; then sprang up a ^^eater light then ever was before, for
here ^as come the substance of all the former ^^pes, so that never man spoke as
this man, ^ither were there ever such miracles done (...) any as were done by
him: well, Christ ^^s the people, That those that did believe in ^^n, should do
the same works, and greater then ^^se: And after his ascension, what won^^rful
things were done by the Apostles, ^^ry day? the love of God in the face of
(...) Jesus Christ, was more and more held ^^rth; and so through the goodness
of ^od unto this day, and at this present me, is the Lord displaying the banner
of ^s love in destroying our darkness by the ^^ghtnesse of his appearing. Now
then, O ^^w, thou in thy time and place were glo^^ous, but the Gospel is much
more glori^s; the spiritual substance of thee does remain, but all thy
rudiments and beggerl^ elements must tumble down.

And for my part, I am commanded b^ my Father, Col. 2. 21. 22. saying of the^
Touch not, taste not, handle not, for all are (...) perish that use them. v.
23. Which things ha^ indeed a show of wisdom in will worship. Sha^^ I run to
the ^ight of a star, when I may ha^ the light of the Moon? Shall I run to the
light of a candle, when I may enjoy the light of the Sun? Shall I cry up
shadow^ when I may enjoy the substance? Shall abide under the Law, when I may
be und^^ the Gospel? No, Law, no; I have not so lea^ned Christ. I desire now,
with Paul, to kn^^ nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Co^ 2. 2.


Law. Well, says the Law, as thou ha^ dealt plainly with me, so shall I do
wit^ thee; give me leave then, and I will tell the that the fault li^s not in
me, that I am (...) much cried up, and held forth at this da^ the Clergy and
the Laity will not go (...) Christ, till (as they say, not I) I say they wi^^
not go to Christ until I have prepar^ them for Christ: they preach me in the
le^ter, and understand me in the letter; whe^^ as if they understood me in the
spirit, should lead them to Christ, if Christ did n^^ ^^^d them to me: yet
these men in their ^^rds, will many of them deny me, as to ^^e any hand in
their justification or ac^^tation; but though they deny me in ^^rds in these or
the like things, yet they ^nowledge me in their deeds, just as those ^^rds of
Paul, Romans 9. 32. Wherefore? because (...) sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the ^^^ks of the Law, for they stumbled at that (...)bling stone. Now
this word (as it were) ^^t were unfolded, as now it lies sealed; (...) should
find most men seeking righte^^snesse, if not absolutely by the Law, (...) as
it were by the works of the Law, (...).


Believ. In this that thou have said, O ^^w, I have nothing to except against,
for ^^e we both agree, though there was a ^^s-understanding between us at
first; yet it true, the fault is not in thee, O Law, that ^^n put thee in the
room of Christ, no ^ore then the brazen Serpent was in fault ^^om the people
did Idolize; the fault ^^s in the people, and not in the Serpent: at this day,
men's seeking righteousness (...) thee, becomes their own evil, not thine; ^^d
as thou have said, though men will not knowledge that they seek righteousness
(...) the Law, yet they do seek it as it were by the works of the Law.

Now here lies one of the greatest (...)ferences between the Law and the
Gosp^^ both speak of working, and both speak resting; only herein lies the
difference, ^^der the Law before Christ was come, (...) people were to work
first, and rest aft^^wards; that is, they were to work six day^ and rest the
seventh; when they had d^^ their work, then enter into rest: n^^ under the
Gospel, we are to rest first, (...) work afterward; for as the Sabbath of
(...) was the last day of the week, so our Lo^^ day of rest is the first day of
the week: (...) are first to receive a Kingdom that cannot moved, Heb. 12. 28.
and then next to se^^ God acceptably with reverence and godly f^^ We are first
to believe, and then in then^ place, to show our faith by i^^ works; (...) are
first to see our interest in the promis^ and then to cleanse our selves from
all filthi^^ of flesh, and spirit. Into what soever house (...) enter, we are
to say, peace be to this house, first, fore we are to shake the dust off our
feet as a w^ nesse against them. So much concerning fr^^dome from the Law by
Christ that fulfill the Law, etc.


What Christ has delivered us from, and restored us unto.
Shall only speak of two things more (...) briefly, viz.

First, what we are delivered from by christ.

Secondly, what we are restored unto.

First, what are delivered from, and here(...) I might instance in many things;
I shall ^^ely make mention of two.

First, we are delivered from sin.

Secondly, from death the wages of sin.

First, we are delivered from sin, Isa. (...). 6. it was all laid upon him,
and so we came free. Romans 6. 18. and 22. verses com^^red together. 1 Pet. 2.
24. 2 Cor. 5. 21. ^atth. 8. 17. Romans 6. 11. Col. 1. 22. 1 Thessalonians. (...) 13.

Secondly, those, and only those that ^^e in Christ are delivered from death
the ^^ges of sin; O death, says Christ, I will ^^thy death, Isa. 25. 8. He
has swallowed up ^^th in victory. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O death ^^ere is thy
sting, O grave where is thy victory? ^^e sting of death is sin, and the
strength of ^^e is the Law. But thanks be unto God who ^^eth us the victory
through our Lord Jesus ^rist, etc. So then by Christ a believer is ^^ed from
the Law: First, from the curse. Secondly, from the condemning power Thirdly,
from sin; and Fourthly, from death.

Secondly, let us a little consider, as wh^^ we be delivered from, so what we
are r^stored unto. I shall not undertake to (...) forth this in the height and
breadth, dep^^ and length, but only give a hint to it, (...) I have ability
and time, knowing that I a^^ straightened in both:

Ye were servants, you be now friends (...) Christ's, Joh. 15. 15.

And if that be too little, ye are Sonn^ and Daughters.

If that be too little, are calls you his B^^thren, and Sisters, Heb. 2. 11.

If that be too little, he calls you h^^ Chosen, Spouse, and Wife, Rev. 21. 9.

If that be too little, he tells you that yo^ be members of his own body, 1
Cor. 12. 12*

If that be too little, he tells you that yo^ be heirs with him, Romans 8. 17.

If that be too little to express the abu^dantnesse of his love to you, he
tells yo^ That the glory which the Father gave to him, (...) has given to you,
that you may be one, as (...) Father and he is one.

If that be too little, he tells you, Tha^ you be joined to the Lord, you are
one spirit, 1 Co^ 6. 17.

If this be too little, he tells you indeed, that all these things
abovementioned, are ^^t a taste of what you shall shortly be, Joh. 3. 12.

Oh thou most noble overcomming Saint, ^^rvant of the most High God, heir of
pro^ises, and Son of Sion! Consider what ^^ou art come from, and now by Christ
^^me to, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. But ye are come ^^to Mount Sion, and to the City
of the living ^od, the heavenly Jerusalem, and unto an innu^erable company of
Angels, to the general assem^^y and Church of the first born, which are writ^^n
in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to ^^e spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus ^^e Mediator of the new covenant, and to the ^ood of
sprinkling that speaks better things then ^^at of Abel.

Now manifestly and truly may thou ^ay, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is
mine. ^^e that touches me, touches the apple of his ^^ye. My Father is so
tender of me, that he ^akes all the wrongs done to me, as done ^o himself; he
that persecutes me, perse^utes him, Act. 9. 4. And he that has pity and
compassion on me, the Lord takes it as ^one to himself, Matthew. 25. 40.

David said, Who am I, that I should be son in ^aw to King Saul! but I may say,
Who am I that I should be Son and heir, yea cohei^^ to the King of Kings. I
was a dry a^^ barren tree fit for nothing but burning, b^^ I shall flourish
like a tree planted by t^^ rivers of water.

O how often did he call, how earnest^^ did he knock, how powerfully did (...)
strive, how long did he wait upon me before my stubborn heart would yield! If
(...) had never loved me, I had never loved hi^ If he had never drawn me, I had
never r^^ after him: If he had never sought me, (...) had been straying in the
wilderness of in^quity, and feeding in the fields of vanity, (...) most are:
but now he has avouched himself to be mine, and I have avouched m^ self to be
his, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee (...) me; So I became the Bride, the Lamb^
wife.

First, Christ comes and woes me, 2 Co^ 5. 20.

Secondly, he gets my good will, and became his, 1 John 12.

Thirdly, he makes my soul fruitful Joh. 15. 5.

Again, as he is a husband to all hi^ people, in that he performs all offices
o^ love as a husband, he comes not short i^ one thing, but transcends and goes
beyond a husband in every thing: as to in^^^ce, Death or poverty, imprisonment,
^^ke a separation in part or in whole be^een a man and his wi^e; but none of
^^ese can make a separation between Christ ^^d my soul. Again, in other
marriages a ^^n seeks to marry one that is rich, but ^^rist seeks for no
riches, but takes the ^^or to make them rich.

In other marriages a man looks for ^^auty, but Christ marries those that are
(...) their blood, that he may beautify them ^^ith his own beauty. Again, in
other ^arriages, infirmities in a wife do many ^^mes abate the love of the
husband to the ^ife; it is not so with Christ to his Spouse. ^gain, if the wife
play the harlot, the man ^ill put her away, it is not so with Christ, (...) you
may see, Jer. 3. 1. But thou have played ^^e harlot with many lovers, yet
return unto me, ^^ith the Lord.

Well then, says the soul, let friends for^ake me, let enemies deride me, let
all ^orldly comforts leave me; If I can but ^njoy Christ for my husband, it is
enough. ^any more glorious things might be spo^en of the blessed st^te of a
Christian resto^ed by Christ: but I leave it to those that ^ave greater
enjoymen^s of it, and shall wind up all with this word of consol^tion,
Blessed, yea thrice blessed is the man, sai^^ David, whose sin is covered: If
Satan se^^ for thy sin, and wicked men seek for the sin to lay it to thy
charge, Who shall lay (...) thing to thy charge, says Paul. Thy fin^ shall be
sought for, and shall not be fou^^ says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, J^^
50. 22.

Sin may break thy communion, b^^ not thy union with God.

Those that have the enjoyment of their Restoration, may be known by their
Conversation.
THere be many men and women the will give their assent and consent (...) the
foregoing truth, That the Lord Chr^^^ has done many and wonderful thing yea
such things, that eye has not seen, e(...) has not heard, neither, say they,
has it ent^^ into the heart of men to conceive or understand, (...) comprehend
them. Nay, they can tell you^ large story of the blessed state of the Saint
after death, how they shall be for ever in t^^ presence of the Lord their God;
In wh^ presence there is fullness of joy, and pleasu^^ at his right hand for
evermore; then sorrow a^^ sighing shall fly away, and then the Lord ^o^ ^^pe
away all tears from their eyes; and there ^ill be no more death, neither
sorrow, or ^rying ^ither shall there be any pain.

But, O man, whosoever thou art that ^^th thus speak of the joys of heaven,
do ^ou see thy own interest in these mercies? ^^st thou see thy self to be a
child of this ^^ther of mercies? can thou say, My spirit ^^th rejoice in God
my Savior? can thou ^^y with Thomas, My Lord, and my God? or ^ost thou
suppose it to be so, as the Church ^ev. 3. 17.

O consider, most do deceive themselves, ^^inking they be something when they
are nothing: nay let me tell thee, most of the ^ith, hope and assurance, that
men have ^^ken up, is not the faith, hope, and assu^ance of the Gospel of
Christ: It will not and thee in stead in the time of need. There ^e many will
come to Christ at the last day, ^^ying, Lord, Lord, open to us, for we have eat
and ^unk in thy presence, Luke 13. 25, 26, 27. but ^e shall say, I tell you I
know ye not whence you ^re. Why call you me Lord, Lord, and do not the ^^ings
that I say?

O if thou art a servant of Christ indeed, ^hen it is thy meat and drink to do
his ^ill.

Does the Lord love thee? what evidence have thou of his love in thy soul?
does h^^ Spirit witness with thy spirit that tho^ art his? or have thou that
white stone wit^ in thee, that has a name that none can re^^ but thy self?
how shall I and others kno^ that the Lord loves thee, and that tho^ have this
evidence of his love in thee, unle^^ I see thee walk as one of those? Gal. 5.
25. (...) thou do live in the Spirit, then walk (...) the Spirit; if thou
say thatthou do wa^^ in the Spirit, then thou do not fulfill the lust of
the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. How shall I kno^ that thou art one of the disciples of
Chr^^^ but by thy love to Christ and his peop^^ Joh. 13. 35.

Now, O man, wherein does thy love (...) Christ appear? what do thou do for
him^ Again, wherein does thy love to his peop^^ appear? 1 John 5. 1. Every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of hi^ if thou
say that thou do love them, ask thee whether that love of thine be su^^ a
love as Christ requires, Joh. 13. 34. Do^ thou love them as Christ does love
the^ with a free and an universal and consta^^ love? Again, do thou know
God? if tho^ do not, then he will come in flaming fi^^ taking vengeance
against thee, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

If thou say that thou do know him; (...) thee, how does it appear? 1 John
2. 4. He (...)t says he does know him, and keeps not his ^^^mandements, is a
liar.

If thou say, But I look upon my self as a ^^dly man, and others do account me
very ^^lous and religious! But I say again, why ^^en do so many unsavory
speeches pro^^d out of thy mouth? Jam. 1. 26 If any man ^ong you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not (...) tongue; mark that man, his religion is ^^ne.

If thou object again, Oh but I am ac^^unted a very wise man, and a knowing
^^n! But I say again, as in Jam. 3. 13. Who (...) wise man among you, and
endued with know^^^ge, let him show out of a good conversation his ^^rks with
meekness of wisdom. Does thy ^^^versation evidence to me thy regenera^^on?
Thou art a tree; how shall I know thee ^^t by thy fruit, Matthew. 12. 33.

If thou art grafted in the true Vine, why ^est thou bring forth wild grapes?
Isa. ^4.

It is true, thou do say that thou art ^^e of Christ's: but then I say thou
ought (...) walk as he walked, 1 John 2. 6. If Christ (...) thy King, where
is thy subjection to his ^^ll? If Christ be thy Prophet to teach ^ee, why art
thou so ignorant? If he be thy Priest to offer sacrifices for thee, wh^ is thy
faith to evidence thy trust in hi^ if thou say that thou have faith, (...)
does it not appear by thy works? J^^ 2. 20.

But will thou know, O vain man, T^^ faith without works is dead? thou
beleevest (...) there is one God, thou do well; but the de^ go thus far,
Jam. 2. 19.

But I am the Lords servant, for I en^^vour to forsake sin.

But let me ask thee, O vain man, fr^^ what principle do thou endeavor leave
sin? do thou refrain from si^ for fear of punishment or shame, or beca^^
thou would avoid hell, or obtain heav^^ let me tell thee, the veriest
hypocrite in (...) world may do as much.

When thou art tempted to sin, d^^ thou with Joseph say, How shall I do this
the and sin against my God? Genesis 39. 9. Or (...) do thou not rather in thy
heart refra^^ sin upon that account as once Tamar d^^ 2 Samuel 13. 13. If I
should do this thing, sa^ Tamar, whither shall I cause my shame to g^^ Joseph
he refraines the evil, because (...) might bring dishonor to his God: Tam^^
she endeavors to refrain the evil, becau^^ it might bring shame to her
self. O man ^hou wilt not deceive thy self, Examine ^m what principle does
thy refraining ^m sin arise; from nature, or from ^^ce? if from nature, then
thou do no ^^re then any wicked man may do by the ^^provement of nature: but
thou should (...) Christ says, Matthew. 5. 44, 45, 46, 47. Love ^^^e enemies,
overcome evil with good, in do^^g good for evil as Christ did; examine ^^ne
inward man, is sin in thee as the ^^ne in the bladder, or as the wind in the
^^ly; thou had rather, ten thousand times ^^her it were out then in. Now when
a ^^n is troubled with the stone in the blad^^r with the in the blad^r, or
overmuch oppressed with wind in the ^^lly, he will seek to the Physician, s
troubled and ^^rt with that that is as dear to him as his ^wne heart, to wit,
gold and silver, to have ^^cured: Do thou deal thus with the sin (...) thy
soul? d^est thou go to the spiri^^al Physician the Lord Jesus Christ? and
^^ilt thou indeed part with that that is as ^^ar as thine own heart, to wit,
thy belo^^d sin? do thou wait upon him in the ^^e of all Ordinances,
without preferring ^^e before another? Do thou seek the ^ingdome of heaven,
and the righteousness ^^ereof, in the first place? Shall, or is all ^^y
worldly employments brought into subordination to that? does thy calli^^ as a
Christian take up its time in the (...) place? does thy particular Calling w^^
upon thy general Calling as it ough^ do thou indeed live out of thy self
upon God in the Spirit above the world? If (...) then the enjoyment of thy
restoration evidenced by thy holy conversation.

But there be many that do boast of the deliverance by Christ, and of their
interest (...) Christ, and yet are ignorant of him, and ha^^ no part in him.
See the Church of t^^ Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. Because thou say am rich, and
increased with goods, and have n^^ of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretch and poor, and blind and naked. I dare boldly s^^ that this Text does
reach a quarter, if n^^ half of the professors of religion at this da^ Nay
where is there one assembly free, th^^ can say they have never such a man amo^^
them? can our Parliament in general f^^ they be free? can our Armies say the^
be free? can Presbytery, Independenci^^ Anabaptisme say they be free? Nay is
an^ City or Town free from men and women that are making their boast of God,
and ye^ they be like those that are spoken of i^ Rev. 3. 17. or at least like
those Romans 2. 17* Behold thou art a few and restest in the Law, and ^akest thy
boast of God; and yet in the 23. verse ^^d the 24. you may read at large what
^retches they were.

How do many boast of their gifts, arts, and parts, and enjoyments, calling
others that wait upon God in the use of Or^inances, Duty-mongers,
Heaven-drivers, For^alists, and Legalists? these be the men that ^ould come
forth in the last days, as the ^criptures speak, 2 Timothy 3. 2. Covetous,
boasters, ^oud, blasphemers; but let them expect the ^me doom as their elder
brother received, ^ct. 5. 36. For before those days rose up one ^heudas,
boasting himself to be some body, to whom about four hundred men joined, who
^e s^ain, and all as many as were deluded by him ^ere scattered and brought to
naught.

They have but a little member, it is true, ^ut it boasts great things, Jam.
3. 5.

In a word, read the the second of Peter, ^^e second Chapter, from the first
verse to ^^e last, and there thou shall have a whole ^^talogue of these new
upstart Wantons: ^^at Chapter does speak of

First, their rise.

Secondly, of their prosecution, and

Thirdly, of their miserable end.

and all to forewarn us, upon whom the end of the world is almost come to be
wear of their dangerous and desperate princ^ples and practices; and yet these
men will boast of their deliverance by Christ, and (...) their interest in
Christ, and yet are ignorant of him, and have no part in him; an^ to speak
after the manner of men, as (...) was the design of Christ to take away sinn^
in the sight of God, and as it was his desig^ to take it out of the conscience,
that the^ might be no more conscience of sin, as (...) Heb. 10. so also it
was the design of Christ (...) take away sin in the conversation, 1 Pe^ 1. 15.

Now there be many men that will bo^^ of the former, that their finnes be done
(...) way in their consciences, when their co^versation gives them the lie, for
Christ has undertaken the latter as well as t^^ former, see 1 John 3. 6. and
9. verses.

Now he that names the name of Christ ought to depart from sin, 2 Timothy 2. 9.
And (...) that says, he abides in him, ought so to walk Christ walked, 1 John
2. 6. He that says he know him and keeps not his sayings, is a liar, 1 Jo^
2. 4. Those that are Christ's, have crucified (...) flesh with the affections
and lusts, Gal. 5. 2. What profit is it unto a man if there be pr^mised an
immortal time, whereas he ha^ ^^ne the works that bring death? and that ^ere is
promised us an everlasting hope, ^hereas our selves being most wicked are ^^ade
vain? And that there are laid up for ^dwellings of health and safety, whereas
(...) have lived wickedly? And that the glory the most High is kept to defend
them at have led a holy life, whereas we have ^^lked in the most wicked ways
of all? ^^d that there should be showed a Paradise ^ose fruit endures for
ever, fith we shall ^^t enter into it.

Oh friends, what are all the sweet promi^^ in Scripture to thee and I, unless
we do (...) faith see our names in the promises? that are the general
declarations, without ^^rticular applications? what will it avail to hear that
God is gracious, and long^^ffering, pardoning iniquity, transgression ^^d
finne, unless by faith thou and I see ^n to be so also to us?

What will it profit us to hear and read, ^^at sorrow and sighing shall fly
away, and that tears shall be wiped from the eyes of his, and (...) there shall
be no more sorrow nor pain; ^^ereas thou and I have (it may be) neither
^^tience to wait, nor faith to believe our (...) interest in these things?

There be four characters of a servant of Christ, that I lately received from
a frien^^

1. What is highest in thy judgment. 2. What is dearest in thy affections. 3.
What is strongest in thy will. 4. What is the most constant thing thy
resolution.
So much shall serve at present to written of the temptations of the wor^^
flesh, and the devil; and of the Armor Christ, wherewith a Christian may
defe^^ himself, and conquer his enemies; and (...) of the power natural, and
of the po(...) spiritual, which is our duty to impro^^ and all our remissness
to be charged up our selves, and not upon God; and how serious consideration of
this, would be (...) bar to stop that blasphemous princi^^^ saying, God is the
author of sin: Of our in the first Adam, and of our recovery by second Adam,
and how we may know th^^ that are restored; of Ordinances, how t^^ they be
still in force. Next I shall spe^^ of Faith; and then a few words to the
^^nisters. An Epistle to the world. Anot^^^ to those chosen out of the world.
Of (...) deliverances of the Saints, and of their (...)ing too sudden in
expecting deliverances

A few words of Faith.
FAith is as it were the wings of the soul, whereby the soul does fly to
heaven, and bring down it is evi^^nce under hand and seal, Heb. 11. 1. (...).

Now this grace of Faith is of singular (...) to Christians; it is that first
and princi^^ wheel that makes all the other wheels ^^move: But most men be
mightily (as I ^^ppose) mistaken in the true definition of ^^th. Seeing then it
is that whereby we live grace, and it is that whereby we are ^^ried on to
glory; that we might not be ^^staken in that that is of such rare use to Give
me leave to tell thee, there is a Faith the History, and a Faith of the
Mystery, ^^re is a Legal Faith, and a Faith of ^^racles, dead Faith, and a
temporary ^^ith, etc. There is an Evangelical Faith, ^^ing the Faith of the
Gospel. Now men (...) various in their thoughts of the true na^^re of this
Gospel Faith. I know one man, (...). Mr. H. D. that says, that this is the
faith the Gospel, to believe that Jesus Christ is (...) Son of God; and another
says that this the true faith of the Gospel, viz. Faith is a holy and humble
persuasion ground upon the word of God, and witnessed his holy Spirit. In a
word, most men (...) give too general a definition of Faith. (...) general
definition of the history, with^^ a particular application of the myst^^^ will
stand the soul in little or no stead the time of necessity. Therefore I humb^^
conceive, that the faith of the Gospel th^^ we are commanded to contend for,
Jude is such a Faith, viz.

Faith is a gift of God, begotten in (...) creature by the powerful preaching
of (...) word, whereby the understanding is (...) lightened, whereby he
believes to be (...) whatsoever is revealed in the word; (...) cepting,
receiving, and resting upon Chr^^ alone for justification, sanctification; wi^^
a particular application of Christ, and a^^ his benefits unto his own soul.

I say, Faith is a gift of God begott^^ in the creature by the powerful
preachin^ of the word, whereby the understanding enlightened, so that he
believes to be tr^^ whatsoever is revealed in the word; (...) cepting,
receiving, and resting upon Christ alone for justification, sanctifieation,
wi^^ a particular application of Christ, and (...) his benefits unto his own
soul, etc.

Now the life of all lies in the particu^^r application, Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord
is my (...) and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, strength in whom I will
trust, my Buckler, and (...) horn of my salvation, and my high ^ower, ^^al.
118. 28. Thou art my God, and I will praise ^^e: Thou art my God, I will exalt
thee. Luke 46, 47. And Mary said, My soul does magnify (...) Lord, and my
spirit has rejoiced in God my ^^viour. Joh. 20. 28. Thomas answered and ^^d
unto him, My Lord, and my God! In the ^^xt verse Christ pronounces him to be a
^^iever. Gal. 2. 20. The life that I now live, ^^ive by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me ^^d gave himself for me. Phil. 3. 8. For the excel^^cie of
the knowledge of Christ my Lord, etc. general declaration, without a particu^^r
application, will not assure the soul of ^^lvation. Is not faith the first
stone in the ^^iritual building, and the first step in a ^hristian race, the
first link in our golden ^^aine of Christianity, the first act of our ^ew
life, that first degree of our holy con^ersation, the first round in our Jacobs
lad^^r, whereby we ascend up into the presence ^f our Lord?

First, there is in a true believer an assu^ance of understanding.

Secondly, there is an assurance of rejoy^ing, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Thirdly, there is an assurance whi^^ carries forth a soul to powerful a^^
ings.

A Christian believes that he who ma^^ man, was made man himself; he believe
that no man has seen God at any time, an^ yet he believes that Moses talked
with his face to face; he believes him to be borne (...) time who was from
everlasting, and him be shut up in a narrow room whom heave^^ and earth could
not contain.

Religion is a mystery in every part of (...) Faith believes strange things,
Hope w(...) for the accomplishment of that which reason cannot comprehend; and
so for lo^^ and patience, and all other graces, there (...) a great mystery in
the actings of each (...) these; as to instance in one for all, a little look
upon faith, and see what it believe concerning the Trinity, and Election,
Justification, and Sanctification, and Repentance.

First, concerning the Trinity.
He believes that the Father is not th^^ Son, and the Son is not the Spirit
and yet the Father, Son and Spirit are a^^ but one.

He believes that God is Alpha and Omeg^ the beginning and the end, and yet he
be^^ ^^ves that God had never a beginning, and all never have an end.

He believes that the Father sent forth the ^^nne, and that the Son sent
forth the ^^pirit, and yet he believes they were never ^^parated the one from
the other.

And concerning Election,
He believes that God is no respecter of ^^ersons, and yet he believes that God
elected ^^me, and left others, when he found no ^^fference.

And concerning Justification,
He believes that his qualifications does ^ot cause Gods love; yet he would
question ^hether God loved him, if he were not ^ualified.

H^ works not for wages, yet has an eye ^o the recompense of reward.

He believes that the most just God, has ^unished the most innocent person;
and to ^ave justified himself, though a sinner: he is often in prison, yet
always at liberty, and a freeman though a servant.

And concerning Sanctification,
He believes that he goes not to heaven for holiness, and yet he believes that
he cannot go thither without it; he lives on earth, but his conversation is in
heavenly things; he is careful for nothing, and yet none so careful as he. He
esteems his nam^^ as a precious ointment, yet he cares no^ who reviles him.

Concerning Repentance.
He often weeps for sorrow, and yet h^^ does rejoice when he weeps.

He is of all men most humble, and yet n^^ man has a heart so lifted up as he,
2 Cor. 7. (...).

He is one who lives to dye, and dies t^^ live; yet he is dead whiles he
lives, and live when he dies.

He believes himself to be precious i^^ Gods sight, and yet he does loath
himself (...) his own fight.

And concerning the Scriptures.
He believes that the Scriptures wer^^ written by men subject to error, and
yet he believes there is no error in them.

Nay he believes there is no error in Scripture; and yet he finds that
which is commanded, Genesis 17. 12. to be forbidden Gal. 5. 22.

Now there is a great controversy among men, whether it be Christ's work or
th^^ creatures work to act faith. But I shall say nothing to that here, having
spoken o^^ laid down my judgment concerning it be^fore. But a word or two of
these things.

First, how Faith is wrought, or by what ^^eans usually.

Secondly, some lets to be removed.

Thirdly, some motives or considerations move us to believe.

First, how faith is wrought, or by what ^^eans ordinarily; and that is by the
mystery of the Word. Romans 10. 17.

1. The soul is enlightened to see it self ^^ful, miserable, and naked,
polluted in its ^^ood.

2. Then the soul searches to find, if it ^^ere possible, a promise should be
made to ^^ch a sinner as he is: well, at length he ^^deth it.

3. Then the soul begins to enquire ^hether with out presumption he may lay
^^old on the promise: Well, he finds it is ^^o presumption to believe, but
rebellion ^ot to believe.

4. The soul begins to consider what he that has made these promises: Well,
he ^^nds him to be God, that cannot be worse ^hen his word, as man will.

5. He enquires further, and finds that his God is a most faithful God; so
faith^ul, that not one ^ot or tittle of his word ^^all pass, till all be
fulfilled. Then when ^^he soul sees his sin, and a promise of pardon, and that
it is his duty to believe, an^ that it is God that has made these pr^mises,
and that to the worst of sinners, an^ that this God is a faithful and a true
God then the soul roots it self upon Christ, an^ says, There will I venture my
soul; if perish, I perish: But I shall not perish; (...) I never did read of
any man that went the far, and miscarried. And this is the fai^^ of adherence,
which soon grows up to (...) faith of evidence.

Now the soul says, It may be I shall be (...) in the day of the Lords wrath.
But shortly will say, The Lord has saved me, he does s^^ me, and he will save
me; I will not be afraid ten thousands of people that have set themselv^^
against me round about.

Q. Why will thou not be afraid, Christian?

A. Because I know God, (says he) an^ I know him to be able, and not only so,
b^ I know him to be willing to help me: (...) my name in Scripture, and God
speakin^ to me by name.

Oh then (ye sons and daughters of me^^ consider, that he that was the Son of
Go^^ became the Son of man; that we who we the sons of men, might become the
sons God.

Would thou believe thine own interest this?

First, gather up and establish thy thoughts ^^on the object of faith, the
Free Grace (...) God, in the righteousness of Jesus christ.

Secondly, claim thy common interest in (...) the promises which be made to
sinners: (...) the promises be made to sinners, and as sinner thou have an
interest in them.

Thirdly, consider the terms on which christ is given; he is not given upon
terms ^f qualifications, but upon terms of accep^^tion and believing; which
believing is ^^s gift also.

Secondly, there are some lets to be re^oved as hindrances of faith.

1. The first let is, Ignorance of thine ^wn misery, and Gods mercy.

2. The second let is; If thou do know ^hine own misery, to despair of mercy.

3. A third let is, Carnal reasoning to ^onsult with flesh and blood, which
will ^ell us either that it is well enough with us ^lready, or else it is
impossible to have it ^etter.

4. A fourth let is, our hearkening to ^he motions of Satan; and you shall
know them by these three things.

First, they drive a soul from God, as (...) dam hid himself after he had
sinned, he we^^ as far as he could from God.

Secondly, the motions of Satan may (...) known by this; they tend to the
weakenin^^ of that little that thou had before.

Thirdly, the motions of Satan m^^ be known by this also, they tend to bre^^
and destroy the soul, that is bruised (...) ready.

5. The fifth let of faith may be thi^ when the Lord by his word begins to
di^cover our sins, then we begin to cove^ them; and hence it is that we do
not pro^sper in our souls, Pro. 28. 13.

Now as I lately heard from a servant (...) Christ, a man may be said to cover
his sinn^ three ways.

1. When we do not draw it forth to the hand of justice, when we let alone that
tra^tor that does lurk in our souls: the Lon^ comes and calls for our pride,
and covetousness, and frowardness, saying, Brin^ it forth to justice! Then we
concea^e o^ hide it.

2. When we do something to cover i^ by lessening it: we should rather
aggravat^^ then extenuate our sins.

3. We hide our sins, when we preserv^ ^ur sins. Now a man may be said to
pre^^rve his sin three ways.

(1. When we nourish it and feed it, as it ^ere.)

2. When we do defend it: it may be we (...) a great blow coming to wound,
striking (...) the head of our beloved sin; and we ^efend the blow with all
our strength and ^olicie.

3. When we take no notice of it: perdventure a man will take notice of gross
^^ns, but not of secret sins: we say, This is ^^t a little one; The Lord be
merciful to me in ^is thing. This is all I shall say at present ^oncerning the
lets of Faith. Next of those Considerations, as so many motives to love us to
believe.

Thirdly, let us a little consider what en^ouragements have we to move or
prevail with us to set about the beginning, or go^ng on and growing up in this
grace of ^aith.

1. Consider, that to believe in God, is ^he greatest obedience that we can
give un^o God; for in so doing, we are said to set ^o our seals that God is
true. This is the most acceptable work with God. See Joh. (...). 29. and the
first Epistle of John, chap. 3. ^er. 23.

2. This is the way to become fruitful our conversation. What is the reason the
is such barrenness among men and wom^^ professing godliness? why, the reason
(...) there is little fruit, because there is so litt^^ says. Joh. 15. 5. Ye
are not planted in (...) house by faith, therefore ye do not flour^^ in his
courts. You want faith; hence it (...) that you have no works. Thou have a
(...) body, but a lean soul: Thy soul without faith, is like a Dove without
wings; (...) cannot fly to the storehouse for meat, the^^fore must needs be
lean.

3. By this thou shall be able to over come all the fiery darts of the World,
Flesh and Devil.

First, it overcomes the world, Joh. ep. (...) 5, 4.

Secondly, it overcomes all the Devil, 1 Pe^^ 5. 8, 9. and Jam. 4. 7.

Thirdly, it overcomes all the fiery dart of the wicked, Ephesians. 6. 16.

4. Again, this is the way to be established, Isa. 7. 9.

What is the reason that men are carried about with every wind of doctrine? Why
they do not believe, and so they are no^ established. Oh then, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, rooted and grounded upon the rock christ, and so sicklenesse and
instability will (...) done away.

5. Faith will reach forth her arm as far heaven, and fetch in to thy soul
things ^^at are absent, and make them present, ^eh. 11. 1. and 13.

6. This is the way, by believing, to ^^tain that joy, that unspeakable joy,
(...) Pet. 1. 8.

What is the matter that Christians do (...) hang down their heads under a
spirit of ^ondage? Why, they have but little or no ^ith; the more faith, the
more joy, 1 Pet. (...). 8.

7. This is the way to have our hearts ^^urified from that map of misery or
store^ouse of filthiness, Act. 15. 9.

8. This is the way, namely to believe, (...) overcome that unprofitablenesse
that is (...) thee and me. How many a Chapter have ^hou read, and learned
nothing from it? ^ow many a Sermon have thou heard, and ^earned nothing? What
is the reason? why, ^hou have no faith. Heb. 4. 2.

9. And again, this is the way to obtain that spiritual strength, to do the
will of God, although it be against our own wills. Faith will endeavor to
please God, al^hough we displease our selves and others. See what a piece of
self-denial Faith ha^ wrought in Abraham, who followed (...) command of God in
whatsoever he r^quired, as in his departing out of his o^^^ country, and there
trusted upon Gods ba^^ word, notwithstanding all improbabiliti^^ in nature: he
was willing to depart wit^^ the most dear thing for God, as in offerin^ up his
only son; and gave God his ow^ time for the accomplishment of his ow^ promises.
To add no more.

1. Consider, that whatsoever you (...) without it, it is sin, Romans 14. 23.
2. We cannot please God in any thing without it, Heb. 11. 6. 3. We cannot pray
without it, as (...) ought, Mar. 11. 24. Iam. 1. 6. 4. We cannot be saved
without it, M^^ 16. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8.
When a soul begins to consider the grea^^ necessity he has of it, and the
willingnes^^ of Christ to work it, these two wings wi^^ carry thee to the
treasury of faith. Wha^ nccessity thou have of it, is laid before; an^ as
concerning the willingness of Christ (...) have thee believe, I might instance
in all th^^ it more (almost) speaking something (...) it more or less. Let me
instance in one fo^^ all. Joh. 14. 1. and 11. 12, 13 verses. In the (...)
verse, Believe in me: and in the 11. verse, ^^ieve in me for the very works
sake. Then, that ^^s precept might not be slieghted, he ^^mes in with both his
hands full of pro^ses, verse 12. He that believes in me, the ^^ks that I do
shall he do, and greater: and then ^he 13. verse, Whatsoever you shall ask in
name, that will I do for you. As if he had ^^d, O ye sons of men, I do but
require (...) thing of you, and that is for your ^n good too, That you would
believe in me; (...) is the one thing that I desire of you, (...) if you will
do but this one thing for (...) I will do two things for you:

(...). You shall do the works that I do, and grea(...) Joh. 14. 12.

(...). You shall but ask, and have what in ^^on you desire, Joh. 14. 13.

(...) had thought to have written many ^^gs more concerning Faith: But for ^^e
reasons I forbear.

A word to the Ministry, or a few words to th^^ that have taken to themselves
the name of the Ministry of England.
BEloved, it may be thought strange you, that a man so mean as my (...) should
so presume as to speak a word you, or to think that you should vouch^^ to
spend so much time as to hear or (...) what my thoughts are of you. But (O y^^
learned Clergy) I will cast my self dow^ at your feet, and earnestly beseech
you give me audience for one quarter of hour, for my heart does burn within
(...) and though I have been silent this man months, yet now the words will
burst o^ and let me indeed prevail with you (...) your attention a little; for
I will ass^^ you, I have rode on horseback, and run^^ foot many miles, yea and
many times hear a few words from you; yea many storm and shower, heat and
cold, have gone through to learn something of (...) from you, and I do not
repent of it, (...) should do it if it were to be done again wherefore let me
entreat your patience little, if it be but to give you a brief count of what I
have heard and learn^^ ^^m you: And although mine eyes have (...) been
enlightened at the two fountains, (...) trust that they have been anointed ^^th
a little clay, for I see men like trees ^^king If I do faulter a little in my
speech, ^re with me, for I do want the Hebrew (...) Greek tongue, which is so
excellent, ^^t a man would part with any thing (...) it unless grace, but I
would not give the ^^st grain of grace, if I had any to spare, ^^not the third
part of a grain for all (...) tongues, arts, and parts under the ^^mne.

The first would that I would whisper in ^^ur ear is this, by way of Query
con^ning these times. My brethren, if I may ^^so bold to call you so, let me
ask you ^^tly, Have you not seen nor heard of ^ose great and wonderful
deliverances ^^th in England, Scotland, and Ireland? or if ^^^u have heard of
it, do you not believe (...) that you be so silent in your thanks to mighty
God the Father of these mercies? ^^t it may be you have heard of it, and do
^^leeve it, and yet you cannot give the ^^ory to God; why? because, these
mercies ^^d deliverances came in, as I have heard ^^me of you say, by a
blasphemous Secta^^n Army.

Oh what pride and selfishnesse is this mon! that when the Almighty does se^^
in deliverance after deliverance, one tu^ling in after another; yet if these
mer^^ come not in by such instruments as (...) please, we will not take it as a
mercy: (...) mercies no mercies, if they come not to by our own means, in our
own time, ^a^ in our own way? why, shall not that G^^ that gave them freely,
reach them forth us by what hand he pleases? has t^^ Lord appeared in his
Almighty power, (...) companied with his blessed presence in (...) head of our
Armies? And yet are they blasphemous and Sectarian Army!

When they and we have been in (...) greatest straits, and at the farthest
distan^ from all humane helps, has not the Lo^^ appeared for our deliverance?
And yet blasphemous Sectarian Army!

Has not our Army asked counsel (...) God, and advised with his people, before
they have entered upon the work? And yet blasphemous Sectarian Army!

Has not our Army had many days (...) fasting and praying? and have they not
sen^^ their letters to the well-affected both i^^ England and Wales, to entreat
them to see unto the Lord to clear the way before ^^em? and yet a blasphemous
Sectarian Army! Are not the greatest part of the Officers (...) the Army, men
so well doctrinated in (...) doctrine of Christ, that they can and are ^^dy to
render a reason of their hope in (...)? and yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army!
Do they not endeavor to punish Swear(...), Stealing, Sabbath-breaking, and all
^^er things punishable by the Law of God (...) man, to the utmost of their
power? (...) yet a blasphemous Sectarian Army!

Do they not look upon the Scriptures as (...) rule, and the Holy Spirit as
their ^^de? and if any Presbyierian, Independent, (...) Anabaptist come and
bring not this do^trine, they bid him not God speed? (...) yet a blasphemous
Sectarian Army!

Do they not in all their deliverances ^^re and endeavor to give the glory to
^^d, and lay themselves at his feet, as poor ^^ruments in his hand? And yet are
they ^^asphemous and Sectarian Army!

Do they not grow and thrive daily more (...) more in the knowledge of God,
teach(...) one another in psalms and hymns and ^^ritual songs? And yet a
blasphemous ^^arian Army!

^^h not the Lord God Almighty crowned ^^r endeavors with blessed successes,
and unheard of deliverances? and yet a b^^^phemous Sectarian Army!

O my brethren, my brethren! Is the (...) indeed dark to you, that you cannot
(...) Is that fallen upon you, that was threat^^ upon your Tribe, Mic. 3. 6.
Therefore (...) shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vi^^ and it shall
be dark unto you, that ye shall not vine; and the sun shall go down over the
Proph^^ and the day shall be dark over them, etc. Is (...) this your state at
this day? Examine a li^^ are you not guilty of those sins mention in this
chapter, for which these plague^ darkness were sent. Examine your se^^ by the
Spirit of God, in the 5. verse. of (...) third of Micah. Thus says the Lord to
Prophets, that make my people erne; that with their teeth, and cry peace; and
he that (...) teth not into their mouths, they even prepare (...) against him.
Now I do but ask you, whe^^ you have not caused the people to (...) Again, I do
but ask you, whether you (...) not bitten sorely with your teeth, of la^^
Again, I do but ask you, whether you (...) not war in your hearts against him
(...) puts not into your mouths, or pa^ not his dues, as you call it? Now I
do (...) ask you whether these things be so, or (...) You do not as yet hear me
charge you (...)

Now if it be so with you, lo then here the ground why you do not behold nor
^^nnot see the Lord in all these mercies. ^^hy, it may be you have caused the
people (...) err, and bit at the Saints with your ^eth: there is your sin (it
may be) and the day dark unto you, and the sun is gone down; there the
punishment.

Many other things I might say to this: ^^t I call to mind to whom I speak; A
^^ord to the wise is or should be enough. ^^t indeed bear with me a little, for
I am ^^our weak brother, and you have offended ^^e, contrary to the command of
Christ, ^ho says, Thou shall not offend thy weak ^^other. If you ask me
wherein you have ^ffended me? I tell you, in many things; will instance but in
a few.

First, you have caused me to stumble and ^lmost to fall, To see you fasting,
and pray^^ng, when you should be rejoicing and ^raising; and again sometimes to
see you ^ejoicing, when others are weeping. Oh why do you call these days of
deliverances and glorious appearances, suffering days, ^uffering times!

What, is Sions King on coming; and ^et fad and suffering times!

What, is the Sun rising with healing in his wings; and yet sad and suffering
times

What, has the Enemy ceased to spoil^^ and now is he spoiled? and yet sad an^
suffering times!

Has the Lord God brought back th^^ outcast of his people, and caused them
(...) sit under their own vine? and yet sad an^ suffering times!

What, has the Lord made his people praise and a fame amongst and in the mid^^
of those that had them in scorn and reproach? and yet sad and suffering times!

What, is the Lord reducing Magistraci^^ and Ministry to their primitive
institution and yet sad and suffering times!

Does not the sword of Justice, without respect of persons or partiality, begin
to be drawn out of that old scabberd, wherein it has lain and rusted for many
years? and yet sad and suffering times!

Do we not live in an age, wherein men and women may be as good as they can,
but not so wicked as they would? and yet sad and suffering times!

Did we not lately live in such times, wherein it were safer to commit sin
then to reprove sin; and now it is safer for a man to reprove sin then to
commit it? and yet sad times!

Indeed I have admired, when I have con^^ered of this, that you that should
have ^^en calling upon the people to take no^e of the wonderful incomparable
good^^sse of God to this English Nation of late, ^^at so they might give the
glory to God: ^^u have endeavored either not to suffer ^^e people to take
notice of it, or if you ^^uld not prevail in that, then you would ^^telling
the people, that this which they (...) Mercy is no mercy, if (say you) that you
(...) consider by whom these things come

But when I have turned over the leaves the Bible, and there taken notice that
in ages, under all dispensations, there were innumerable company of that Tribe,
^^mmonly known by the name of Priests, ^^ophets, or Watchmen, or Seers: yet
^^ese men above all others have had their ^^ese hand in all the bloody and
barba^^us plots, insurrections and rebellions: ^^d to carry on these designs,
have you not ^^de use of the power and strength of Em^^ours and Kings to war
one with ano^^^r? and by this means have not you been (...) cause of the loss
of thousands of Chri^^ns lives, their blood spilt? and all this ^^th been under
the pious pretenses of Reformation, Church Order, punishing (...) Heretics,
and Schismatics, and so p^^tending to reform the Church of its Here^^ and
Schism; on the contrary, you ha^^ deformed it into Formality, Superstitio^^
and Idolatry. I say, when I did a little consider this, then I did not wonder
that (...) same generation of men in our days ha^^trod in their predecessors
steps. The^^fore now, O all ye Ministers of Engla^ that have sought your selves
more then (...) glory of God! for to you I do speak: (...) ear a little unto
me, and I will speak (...) you the words of truth and soberness; for (...)
that I have written already, is but the co^^ text or coherence. Now next will
follo^ in order the division, and the doctrine, wi^^ some reasons to prove the
truth there^^ and so I shall have done with the expli^^tion, and I will leave
you to make the a^^plication, for you are wise, etc. Let me th^^ begin at the
beginning. As soon as ever (...) Church of God came to be a corporat^^ people,
and had a Temple with Ordinan^^ and Offices, then immediately it was peste^^
with false Prophets, wicked and Idolatro^^ Priests; so all the Prophets all
along gi^^ large testimony to this. I should want bo^^ time and strength to lay
down the clo^^ ^f witnesses to this truth; and I have gotten ^our patience but
for a little time, where^^ore I will be brief, and in as few words (...) I
can, I shall trace this Tribe from the ^rophet Isaiahs days until this day,
Isa. (...) 8. 7. The Priests and the Prophets have erred. Hos. 6. 9. As troops
of robbers wait for a man, so ^he company of Priests murder in the way. Ezekiel.
22. 26. The Priests have violated the Law. ^o in Hos. 6. 9. and Jer. 26. 7. And
thus we ^inde the four hundred false Prophets against one poor Micaiah.

Thus also was the condition of the Church of God in Eliahs time, 1 King. 18.
19. ^o the 23. when there were four hundred and fifty Prophets in Israel, and
yet says Elijah to the people, v. 22. I even I only remain a Prophet to the
Lord.

So in the Prophet Jeremiahs days, Jer. 50. that whole Chapter speaks of their
sins and punishment.

So in Ezekiel his days, what unheard of wickedness did the Lord complain of
to be in them; as in Ezekiel. 34. from the first verse to the end of the tenth
verse, as you may read at large? And then the Prophet Daniel and Hosea, do not
they hint at the wickedness of these men? etc.

And then after all this, see what the Prophet Micah says of them, Mic. 3.
from th(...) 5. verse to the end of that Chapter; and (...) from the time that
the Church of Go(...) had a Temple with Ordinances and officer^^ until the
very time that Christ came in th(...) flesh. You shall find that there was
har^ly ever any wicked plot discovered against Church or State, but these men
have had hand in it, if not the chief contriver(...) of it.

And so if you please to observe the Ol(...) Testament, when ever you find the
Church before Christ came in the flesh, in Apostasy or declining from the true
worship of God to Idolatry and Superstition, the origina^^ or instrumental
cause of it arose from the lying spirits in the mouths of the Prophets But to
say no more of that, and to come (...) little nearer home, and search the New
Testament, and we shall find that when the Lord Jesus Christ came in the
flesh, who were then the greatest opposers of him? were they not the learned
Clergymen? yea surely: if the Scriptures be true, these were the people that
were the most cruel pesecuters that Christ met with in the flesh: it is
needless to give you a relation of their carriage toward Christ, the four
Evangelists being but a brief history of it, there you may (...)ad of their
mockings and scourgings, (...)aling him before Magistrates as an evil
(...)oer, as a sower of sedition, as a destroyer (...)f their Temple and Law,
and as a blasphe(...)er; and who were the chiefest instruments (...) this but
the Priests, yea the high Priests, (...)he most knowing men in the Law? these
(...)en called the word of Reconciliation ^^dition, and the pure doctrine of
Christ (...)eresie and Blaspemy: these leaders of the ^^ople followed Christ
from place to place (...) their own persons, or in their Spies to (...)snare
him in his words, and to stir up (...)e people against him, Luke 5. 21. and
6. 7. ^^atth. 26. 3. and 15. 1. and 16. 21. Mar. 8. 11. 31. (...) 14. 1.

And as they dealt with Christ, so after they (...)d put him to death, they
mete the same ^^easure to his Apostles, almost, if not alto^^ther: And it has
been since them the (...)d condition of the Church of Christ, for most sixteen
hundred years last past, espe^^ally since the falling away, spoken of These. 2.
3. to suffer by her enemies as an (...)il doer: Truth has been persecuted for
(...)ror, light for darkness, Christ for Belial; (...)d that by these men who
pretended most (...) God: They will be wolves still, but ^^ey will be in sheeps
clothing, Mat. 7. 15. They will still kill you, but they will pr^^tend they do
God service by it, Joh. 16. (...)

Obj. But me thinks I hear the Learn^^ Clergy of our times, saying: Why,
(...) grant all this, and more; we do not no^^ cannot deny but the Priests, yea
the Hig^^ Priests and the great learned men in tho^^ days were enemies, nay
the greatest en^mies that ever Christ and his Apostles (...) upon the earth:
But what is that to (...) we have had a learned pious zealous Cleg^^ in England
for many years.

A. But let me under correction in th(...) you to consider what pious men they
ha(...) been: And if you grant me liberty, (...) hope you will, where shall I
begin? in He(...) the eighths time, or in Queen Mary's daye^ for all those
days they were most as R(...)mish as some are now. We will begin th^^ in Henry
the eighth's days, when th^^ Kingdom was under the height of Poper the Clergy
and Laity were all cruel Papist And when the King denied the Popes S(...)
premacie, and went about to demolish t^^ Abbeys, which they knew was not out
(...) any pious zeal he had for Reformation but out of wrath, pride, and
covetousnes^^ yet how did all the Clergy side with hi^ except a few poor Friars
and Monks, th^^ were all undone by it?

Then again, in the days of Edward the ^^xt, by reason of the Kings pious
disposi^^on, though but young, the Clergy feared ^^urne, and presently a great
part of them ^ll on preaching against some particular ^^ints of Popery; and in
the mean time (...)e Lord Protector, with several others, ^ere resolved to
reform the Church, and ^^esently began to abolish the Masse-book, ^^ith most
of the Popish-Service, and caused ^^e Common Prayer Book to be read in ^^glish,
and presently all the Clergy were ^^alous Protestants, except some four or
(...)e of them, as Gardener, Bonner, Day, etc. and then about three or four
years after at (...)e most, Queen Mary was made Queen of ^^gland, and then the
Clergy bethought ^^emselves, and presently turned about ^gaine, except a few,
as Latimer and Hooper, (...)d Cranmer, and Rodgers, and Ridley, (...)c.

Then these men began to be more cruel against the poor Saints then ever they
^ere before, Bonner then being Bishop of ^ondon, if the histories be true; and
truly I ^ould not bring history to prove any thing ^^write, had I not learned
it from you: but (...) return to our matter in hand. I have ^^eard you often
say, Keep close to the text in hand, and I hope I shall as near as can.

Well then, after Queen Mary was dead and Queen Elizabeth had the room, within
six months, the whole Tribe of them, except somefew, turned quite about again
and all turned Protestants again; in which shape, and under which visage, they
ha^ continued until the beginning of th^^ Parliament: they had gotten a trick
to ca^^ all their Antichristian Services and Popi^^ Ceremonies, the Rights and
Ceremoni^^ of the Church of England; then all the ancient proud Prelates, with
the rest of their superstitious dumb Priests, must be called the Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, and Ministers of Jesus Christ: and then for the Tapers and
Candles, Tables and Altar^ Bowings and Cringings, Tippets, Hood^ and
Surplesses, Bell, Book, and Candle and what would not then go down? An^ if any
should refrain to come to their A^semblies, to worship their God in their
decent order, Excommunicate him, agrie^^ him, and at last banish him to
New England or some other remote Island, that he might not disturb the peace of
this most famou^^ flourishing Church of England.

Well, the Parliament of England had not ^^te long, but the Wolf covered with
sheeps ^^oathing was discovered; and after a little ^^nsideration, it was put
to the Vote, then ^^ddenly after tumbled down the Prelati^^l Discipline root
and branch, there must ^^t be any more Archbishops, Bishops, ^^eans and
Chancellours, and Prebends: ^^ell, what followed? why, presently the ^^eatest
part of our Clergy were become ^^alous Presbyterians: and why so? is ^^at the
true discipline of Christ? why, ^hether it be or no, it is established by a
^^w, and confirmed by a Covenant.

Well, how do they carry themselves ^^der this Discipline? why, the change is
^^eat both for our honor and means, says ^^e Clergy.

First, for our honor; they will not let (...) sit in the Lords house, nor
scarce in the ^^ssemblies Synod.

And secondly, for our means, that did ^^long to our Tribe by inheritance; to
wit, ^^e Bishops, Deans, and Chapters lands; ^^e Parliament have sold it, and
gave ^^e money to their Soldiers: and to tell ^^e truth, this is the cause
that many of (...) cannot speak well of the Parliament, ^or of the Soldiery
neither, though some of our Coat have better grounds to co^plain on them both,
then this.

Obj. But indeed deal plainly with m^ what grounds have they for their
dissenti^^ from, and complaining of the Parliamen^ and Army, as they do at this
day?

Minister. What grounds, do thou sa^ why, art thou a stranger in Israel? an^
do thou not know, that this prese^ Parliament and Army (I put them both
t^gether, for they act as one) do thou n^^ know that this present pretended
Parli^ment, for so we call them, has deni^ that to us, which was never denied
to an^ of our forefathers since King Henry the eighth's time until now? for
though the Religion, both in Doctrine and Disciplin^ were often changed, as
thou have well sai^ before; yet shall thou never find in an^ history that does
speak of these things, the ever there was any liberty granted to any for all
men and women in the Kingdom were under the present government, were (...) good
or bad, they were to stoop to it, (...) pay for it, by which means we had all
the people in subjection to us in a sweet wa^ of uniformity; but now although
Presby tery be established by a Law, and confirmed by a Covenant; yet
notwithstanding this pretended Parliament does suffer a blashemous factious
Sectarian generation of ^^en and women, commonly called and ^^owne by the names
of Independent and Anabaptist, to Preach Publicly and pri^^tely, by which
means they have drawn way many of our most hopeful hearers, ^^nd loving
Parishioners, and if we should ^^t them alone, we fear that all men will ^unne
after them; and by this means our ^inistery is slighted, and our persons
de^^ised, and our dues lessened; and do ^ou think that we can hold our
peace? ^ake it thine own case, and thou will not ^lame us. But to deal
plainly, we have ^reater grounds (some of us) then all this, ^ut I forbear to
name them.

Answ. I must confess, that these things that you have named have something in
them; so that unless a man has more then nature, he cannot bear it; but I
hope beter things of some of you, although I thus ^peak: it is true, if your
tongues were your ^wne, you ought to speak, and plead for ^our honor, credit
and profit. But after ^ll these things do the Gentiles seek, Matthew. (...). 32.

There is but one thing more in what ^ou have said to be answered, and that is
that Uniformity; it is true, it were to be (...)sired, and it would be sweet to
see it (...) but we may not expect to have it in the fu^^nesse thereof until
that Scripture is f^^filled, Isa. 11. 9. See the 6, 7. and 8. verses.

As long as a people agree in things su^stantial, things circumstantial are to
(...) borne with, for we cannot see all by o^^ man's eyes; there are babes, and
they m^^ have milk, and there be young men th^^ can eat strong meat, and there
be old me^ that are going on to perfection, which a^^ in a higher form then
the two forme^ And the Apostle says, As every one has r^ceived Christ, so let
him walk in him. But le^ all men be sure that they have a warran^ for what
they do; there is a rule for the Master, and another for the servant; a rul^
for the Husband, another for the wife; then is a rule for the Father, and
another for the child, and yet all from one and the sam^ God: so there is a
rule for the ^abe that i^ in Christ, and another for the young man that is in
Christ, and another for the ol^ men that are in Christ; yet all from on^ God by
one Spirit made good to us in on^ Lord Jesus Christ. But I have heard some of
you render other reasons of your dissenting from the Parliament and Army. shall
but only name one of them, and that this. You say, both the Parliament and
^rmy, in their principles and practice, do ^^derstand the Covenant in a way
wherein ^^ey do take to themselves a greater latitude ^^en ever the Covenant
intended, if not ^int-blank break it. To which I answer, they do so, it is more
then I know: I say, they do understand the Covenant in a ^^y wherein they do
give it too large a la^ude, that I cannot clearly see: But this do clearly see
and know, That you, or ^ost of you do draw or spin it out beyond ^^e staple, I,
into so small a thread, that it ^ll not hold the weaving. My meaning is, ^^u go
about to make the Covenant speak ^^d tie men, wherein it does not. But I
^^bear; for if I should go to particulars ^^rein, it would rise to a greater
Volume ^^en all this little Book.

But it may be you have not been kindly ^^alt with by this Parliament, and
there^^re you complain of them. If so, let me ^^ll you, this is but to render
evil for evil. Pet. 3. 9. Let no man render evil for evil.

But if you reply and say, that I do re^^ire that of others that I do not
practice ^^y self: Then let me answer for my self ^^d speak plainly, and I must
confess, that if any man have occasion to speak again the Parliament, I more:
for if I should yield to nature, I should speak more again them then most of
you do; for they ha^^ not dealt kindly with me, as I suppose^ could instance in
many things, I will mention but a few; as first, I have ever from th^^ first
been on their side, and serviceable un^^ them either in body or purse: besides,
whe^^ I have heard any treachery against them, have discovered it, I have
endeavored a^wayes from the first until now, and ho^^ I shall, to vindicate
them when I have hear^ them spoken against, as I have often according to my
ability to the uttermost; and (...) the reward I have received from them (...)
temporals, is soon reckoned, just nothing yet all I expected from them. I have
le^^ money upon the Public faith, which ha^^ been often promised, but never a
farthin^^ paid. Again, I lost mine estate by sidin^ with them, and standing for
them: I wa^^ in a banished condition, one hundred an^ forty miles from home,
for the space o^ two full years; in which time it had bee^ no less then
present death to me once t^ appear in my native Country amongst (...) own
Kindred, and all for siding with them and since I have returned home again,
(th^^ ^^mighty God making the way open, those name I desire for ever to praise)
I ^ve not meddled with any of the Parlia^ents profitable places as Excise or
Custom (...) recruit my losses; yet ever since I have ^^en still under hard
Taskmasters in point (...) payment, as Contribution, Excise, and ^^e like,
according to their necessity, and ^^ine ability. And yet I dare not speak a
^^ord against them, nor have a hard thought (...) them: For the Lord is with
them, and ^ath told me that deliverance is coming, ^ut I am too sudden in mine
expecting de^^verances. And as long as I behold the ^^ord with them, I shall
not think any thing ^oo dear for them.

And now (if you will know) this is the ^eason that you grieve me, when you
^reach and pray against them, as I have ^ften heard you. And therefore bear a
^ittle with me, if I do a little blame ^ou.

Again, I would fain be satisfied of these ^^nsuing particulars: they be not
Charges, ^ut Queries, wherein I am a little unsatisfied, viz.

1. From whom did you receive your Commission? Who made you Ministers? God, or
man?

2. By what power do you stand in th^^ Ministry? you despise the Magisteri^
power, and also the Military power, as^ humbly conceive, by your disowning
(...) your selves, and teaching others so (...) do.

3. Whose work do you do, Gods (...) man's? if you have received your
Commi^sion from him, it will appear by you^ practice in doing his work.

First, from whom did you receive you^ Commission? who made you Ministers (...)
God, or men? I propound this to you, the rather because many men of
understanding I hear say, That your calling to, an^ standing in the Ministry,
is from Anti^ christ: Others say that you be called o^ men, but not of God; and
both these have very strong arguments to prove what the say, and I (being weak)
cannot answe^ them, wherefore I propound it to you^ They say further, that you
were fitted for (...) the Ministry at Oxford or Cambridge, and ordained to it
by the Anti-Bishops.

Now if this be true, I am very much unsatisfied in your calling to the
Ministry, because Oxford and Cambridge be but humane and literal Schools, and
cannot give knowledge in spiritual things; and if so, the^ other man may be as
spiritual as you ^t never was there; and if as spiritual as ^^u, why is not he
fit to speak of spiritual ^^ngs publikly and privately as well as you. Again,
they say, that you were ordained the Ministry by the late Popish Bishops ^^ich
are now voted down both root and ^^nch, as Antichristian; and if those that
^^d ordain were Antichristian, what are ^^ose that he ordained? (you are wise,
I will ^^ve you to judge) and if I might be ^ought worthy to give you advice,
declare your several Congregations, your dis^^ning that fleshly carnal
ordination, as ^lessed be God) some few of your Coat ^^ve already done; and if
you do it, do it ^eedily, for many of you will be laid aside ^eedily; the day
begins to be dark over the ^rophets, as in Mic. 3. 6. And the Lord will ^eake
to his people by a stammering lip, and ano^er tongue, as in Isa. 28. 11.

Secondly, by what power do you stand ^n the Ministry? you despise the
present ^agisterial power, and also you disowne ^he Military power, and these
were the two ^aine pillars that have borne up your ^ribe ever since King, Henry
the eighth's ^aies, as has been largely proved before; and I am confident,
that u^l^sse you do improve all your policy and wisdom, a^^ that speedily
too, (for the business w^ not admit of delays) you will be laid a(...) for
the most part. If I were by you, that might whisper a word or two in your ea^^
I would tell you of other things which am confident will come to pass speedily
but I hope the Seers do see.

3. The third Quaerie is, Whose work (...) you do? If you be made able
Ministers (...) the Gospel, then you are faithful labour^^ in your Masters
vineyard: If you have r^ceived your commission from Christ, it will be known to
us by your doing his wor^ Now the people of this Nation, or many (...) them at
least, are muttering and saying, th^^ you be not like to your master Christ.
(...) ask them wherein it does appear that yo^ are unlike to him? They will
produ^ many particulars; I will mention but few, viz.

1. You (say they) be unlike to Christ i^^ this: Christ did reprove and blame
thos^ and only those that were reproveable an^ blameworthy; and that to their
face^ never behind their backs, as has been observed by you. The Scripture
says, Spea^ evil of no man! and he that does, the Scripture calls him
Back-biter. Now it has bee^ served, that you have cried out exceed^gly against
a people, that have been some^es an hundred miles from you; Not ^^ce, but
often; and that not in the spirit ^meeknesse, but in passion. Now the Pro^ets
before Christ, that were good, did ^ver do so; neither did the Apostles after
^rist ever do so; as I can find. Those that (...) the true Prophets of Christ,
will with ^icaiah speak the truth to Ahab, although ^^th him they be beheaded
for it, 1 King. (...). 8. They will with Nathan tell David ^hou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. They that be ^e Lords true and faithful Prophets, will ^ith
Nehemiah tell the Princes and Rulers (...) their faces, that they oppress the
people with ^xes, Nehem. 5. 7. Also the Lord commanded ^eremiah, that he should
speak the mind of the lord to the faces of the people, 1 Jer. 17. The ^ue and
faithful Prophets of the Lord must ^ith Amos preach the death of Jeroboam and
captivity of Israel, not behind their ^acks, but at Bethel in the Kings
chapel, ^lthough with Amos they be beheaded for (...), Amos 7. 12, 13. Yea,
they ought with the ^rophet Zechariah to tell the Rulers and people of Israel
to their faces, That because ^hey had forsaken the Lord, the Lord had forsaken
them; Although by the command of the King, with Zechariah they be stoned for 2 Chronicles. 24. 20, 21. In a word, (to add n^ more) they will with John Baptist t^
Herod to his face, that it is not lawful for him to have his Brothers wife,
althoug^ with him they be beheaded for is, Mar. (...) 18, 19.

Now whether the Prophets of our daye^ be like unto these Prophets, I will
appeal^ to all England to judge.

2. The people are saying, that there is vast difference between Christ and his
Apo^stles, and you: For Christ and his Apostle did feed the people with true
bread; and you make the people believe, you feed them with bread in their
Fathers house, and you feed them with husks, and that among swine. Whereas you
should feed his lambs, and give every one his meat in due season; it is
observed that most of you (for I speak not of all) do tie your selves to one
Text and one Method, one rode and way; so that for the most part you do not
reach every man's condition. You be like unto Christ, when you are carried forth
with a sweet temper of love to all men, as Christ was. Now there be two sorts
of men.

First, Saints. Secondly, Sinners.
To begin with the last.

1. There are sinners, and they are of two ^rts.

1. Ignorant. 2. Profane.
First, Ignorant: to these you should hold ^rth those means that Christ has
ap^^inted to enlighten them.

Secondly, Profane: deal with these as ^rist and his Apostles d^alt with such
men the spirit of meekness, instructing those at oppose themselves.

Secondly, then there are also in your ^^ongregations some few godly men and
^omen, sons and daughters, and these (...) of two sorts.

1. Weak. 2. Strong.
First, weak bruised reeds, and smo^^ng flax; these must have have milk,
these ^ust not be received to doubtful disputa^ons. These be Lambs, do as
Christ, carry ^em in your bosoms: O let these have ^eir meat in due season;
you may not ^spise these weak ones, nor grieve them.

Secondly, those that be more strong, ^ercome them with love, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.
Feed ^ese with food convenient for them. Build ^emup in their most holy says.
We find Paul in 14. Romans give two directions to t^ weak Saints, and two
directions to t^ strong Saints.

1. To the weak, that they should n^ envy the strong Saints in the use of the
liberty. 2. That they being weak, should n^ do those things that the strong
did, wi^ a galled conscience.
Then he gave two directions to t^^ strong Saints.

First, that they should not despise t^^ weak.

Secondly, that they should not grie^ the weak.

Now my brethren, you have all the sorts of people (I suppose) in your (...)
Congregations: do you give every one (...) meat in due season? are you indeed
li^^ Christ in this? whether you are or no, will appeal to all impartial
hearers (...) judge.

Thirdly, again I hear the people saying of you; That if you were the faith
full Ministers of Christ, you would spen^ more time to seek his honor, and
les^ time in seeking your own honor: Man of you are often praying to God to
kee^ up the honor of the Ministry; but we ha^ (...) more need be praying to
Almighty God establish a true Ministry, and then the ^^rd will undoubtedly
keep up their ho^^ur. Why, my brethren, it is your work, it was Paul's, to have
Christ alone exalted. ^^t may it not be said of many of you, That ^^u seek your
own things in the first ^^ace, and the things of Christ in the ^^ond place?
Do you give the glory of all (...) good you do to God, as Paul did? Cor. 15.
10. But I labored more then ^^^y all, yet not I, but the grace of God in ^^e.

Do you so exalt Christ, as to be nothing your selves, as he did? I am not
worthy to called an Apostle, says he: Again he says himself, he was the
greatest of sinners: ^^d then again in another place, I am less ^^n the least
of all Saints: And then again, desire to know nothing among you but Jesus
^^rist and him crucified. Now I appeal to ^ur own consciences, whether this be
your ^^actice.

Fourthly, again I hear the people ^eaking of you, and saying, That you be
(...) like to Christ in this also, you put too ^^gh a price upon gifts, and too
low a ^^ice upon grace. Hence it is, that you cry (...) one so frequently, and
speak of the other so co^dly: They say, and I do almost ^^ lieve it, that you
carry up into the pulpi^ whole glass full of humane learning an^ wisdom, so
varnished and colored ove^ that the world has taken it for spiritu^ things,
and so millions of poor souls ha^^ been deluded by it for the space of man^
years. Now if I might be thought worth^^ let me ask you, Did ever Christ and
h^ Apostles cry it up so exceedingly? nay ^^ there did not they lay it by in the
things ^^ God? view well the first book of the Cor^tians, and the two first
Chapters. Now w^ set up humane wisdom in competitio^ with Christ, when we make
it absolute^ necessary for the dispensation of the Go^ spel, yea such an
essential qualification, as without it none could be enabled for the holding
forth the word of life. Now th^^ does detract from the All-sufficiencie ^^
Christ, as if he could not furnish his Saint with the tongue of the learned, to
speak word in season to those that are wear^ without those humane arts and
parts. I d^ not speak against learning, for it is excellen^ in its place; A
good servant, but an ill M^ster: and indeed it is no new thing to hea^ the
learned Clergy cry out so much again^ these poor illiterate mechanic fellows,
for ^h were Christ and the Apostles esteemed their forefather s^^ (...) this
the Carpenters ^ne? Matthew. 13. 55. Mar. 4. 5.

So in Act. 4. when Peter and John were ^ought before the high Priests, when
they ^v the boldness of them, and perceived ^t they were unlearned and
ignorant ^n, they marvelled, and they took know^ge of them that they had been
with ^us. These Priests do outstrip many of ^r Priests, for they will scarce
take notice ^any, whom they call unlearned, to have ^en with Jesus. O all ye
Nations in the ^^rld, beware of the Wolf that comes in ^eps clothing, Matthew.
7. 15. and of that ^st that has a horn like a Lamb, Rev. ^. 11.

I had many more things to enquire of ^u, I will but name them now, and ex^aine
them hereafter, viz.

First, I would ask you, if the truth of God ^eak forth in the face of Jesus
Christ in ^n destitute of learning, whether there ^th not appear the more of
God, and less man?

Secondly, I would ask you, whether all ^e grand errors, now in Rome, France,
^d Little England, were not brought in ^ first by great learned men in humanity?

Thirdly, I would ask you, whether ^^ greatest persecutors that ever Christ and
Apostles met with all, were not the great learned men, the chief Priests and
Rabbi^^

Fourthly, I would ask you, whet^^^ when the Lord Christ was upon Earth, (...)
prophesied of the Persecution of his Chu^^ in all ages, especially toward the
la^^ days; whether Christ has not fore(...) us that it shall be persecuted by
the (...) learned Clergy, coming to us in Sh(...) clothing, Matthew. 7. 15.
and having ho(...) like a Lamb, Revel. 13. 11.

Fifthly, I would ask you, whether (...) not so at this day? and whether
amongst (...) Ministry there be not many great Sch^lars in humanity, mere
ignorants in D^^nity?

Sixthly, I would ask you, whether (...) mane learning in an erroneous man do
not prove the greatest enemy to truth?

Seventhly, I would ask you, whether (...) do not think in your conscience,
that (...) men and women in this Nation at this (...) be not deceived? and if
so, then let me (...) you who deceived them? See Matt. 24.

Eighthly, Let me ask you whether the L(...) Christ is not now beginning to
advance Kingly glory, in reducing Magistracy (...) ^^nistery to its primitive
institution? and ^^o, then most of you must become new (...)n, or else you will
be laid aside. I had (...)ny more things to propound, but I call (...)mind
your patience which is not great, (...) mine own promise, which was that I
(...)uld be brief; and so I leave you as I ^^nd you, so far your friend as you
are ^^ists and his Churches, etc.

A brief Epistle to the World.
MY friends, I find it written Joh. 3. (...) That God so loved the world, that
he (...) his only begotten Son, that whosoever believe him should not perish,
but have everlasting (...) Again, the Lord does express his love and w^^lingnes
to save them, with an oath too, greatest that ever he took, Ezekiel 33. 10, As
I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasur^ the death of the wicked, but that
he turn from way and live. Turn ye, turn ye, why will die O house of Israel?
Again, this loving G^^ has laid his command upon me, Matt^ 44, etc. But I say
unto you, love your enem^^ bless them that curse you, do good to them (...)
hate you, and pray for those that despitefully you and persecute you, that you
may be the (...)dren of your Father which is in heaven; for makes the Sun to
rise upon the just and un(...) and sends rain upon the good and upon the
(...) Now I cannot tell wherein I might exp(...) my love to you, more then in
these th(...) things, viz. To show you your misery, the causes thereof, and
then the remedy. these three things as the grounds, I (...) ^^iefly and plainly
speak, not distinctly or ^^rticularly, being straightned in my time ^^ore then
in my love.

My friends, It is commonly reported ^^t the Lawyer and the Physician do live
the two ill humors of man; the one of (...) Body, the other of the Mind: and
may not as truly say, that the Covetous ^^wyer and the pretended Minister do
cheat (...) people, the one in Temporals, the other Spirituals? Hence it is,
that the Lord de^^unceth a Woe against the one, as Luke 11. (...). 52. compared
together; and a Woe, woe, (...) against the other, as you may see at (...)ge,
Matt. 23. 13, 15. Oh poor souls! should even weep to consider, what a sad
^^ndition you are in; First, in your bodies ^^d estates; one while, in comes
the Lawyer (...) his Bribes, next the Collectors for Con^^^bution, and anon or
the next day the ^^nister or his Clerk for his Dues or (...)these; and when
these be gone, the ^^uldiers are on their March, and must ^^ve quarter for a
while, and so what the (...)rmer have left, these take. I know these (...)e
your complaints, and I cannot altoge^^er blame yon; for as long as your
treasure (...) upon the earth, it is almost as easy to part ^ith ones blood as
with ones goods.

But my friends, these are but the least your Cheats, for there be ravening
Wol(...) that do bite closer, and yet never bar(...) these before mentioned
do but deprive y^^ of temporals, but these Wolves do ch^^^ you in spirituals;
the former do but (...) the door of your earthly comforts up(...) you, but
these that I now speak of do (...) the door of Heaven against you: See
Ma(...) 23. 13, 15, 16. O these Teachers of yo^^ that you have so long cried up
for bra(...) Churchmen and great Scholars, these ha(...) brought in all their
humane learning varnished and painted over, that you poo(...) souls have taken
it to be spiritual things and so millions of poor souls are deceiv^^ by them:
these Wolves came to you sheeps clothing, and after a little whi^^ made you
believe that you were Christian^ and so gave you the Sacrament of the Lor^^
Supper, and Baptized your Children, an^ perhaps made you members of their
Co^gregations, and called you brethren; b(...) these men have cheated you, they
have ma^^ you believe that they have fed you wi^^ Bread and that in your
Fathers house, b(...) they have fed you with Husks, and that (...) mong Swine:
Let me tell you, that you Faith, your Hope, your Patience and Sel^ denial is
not the Faith, Hope, Patience and ^elf-denial of the Gospel; your assurance
(...)r Heaven is unfound; you have been daw(...)d with untempered mortar: the
day is al^ost come that thou must die, and after death (...)me to judgment, and
then be judged ac^rding to thy works: Then if thou do ^^ant Oil in thy
Lamp, which is Grace in (...)e heart, thou will be shut out; it will be (...)
vain then with Balaam to fall a praying, (...)ord let me die the death of the
righteous, and let (...) latter end be like his: No, no, He that will (...) the
death of the righteous, must live the life of (...) righteous. Those that he
appointed for ^^ory hereafter, shall have the beginning of ^^ace here, for they
be chosen to salvation ^rough sanctification of the Spirit and be(...)of of the
truth; and without holiness no man ^^all see the Lord. Your Leaders have
caused (...)ou to err; the blind has led the blind, and (...)th will fall
into the ditch, unless you be^are in time.

O poor Souls! I cannot blame you to ^omplain of bad suffering times, to be
thus ^heated on every side; you have but a Body and a Soul; and to be deceived
and depri^ed of the comfortable being of the one ^here, and to have no
assurance of rest for ^he other hereafter, is a sad condition indeed. Oh how be
the people destroyed for want of knowledge! Like Priest, like People, as in
Hos. 4. 6, 9. The Prophets there of do teach for hire, and the Priests divine
for money, and you poor simple ones love to have it so: O you simple ones, how
long will ye lov^ simplicity, and you scorners delight in scorning (...) you
are deceived, and by those that you least mistrusted, namely the Prophets,
Mich. 3. 5. Do(...) but spend a little time, and tracethis Trib^^ from the
Prophet Isaiah's days until now(...) First, Isaiah complains of them in his
days, Isai. 28. 7. Jeremy complains of them in hi^ days, J^^. ^0. 6. and
Ezekiel the Prophe^^ complain of them in his days, Ezekiel. 22. 26. So the
Prophets, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, and Amos; these also complains of the badnesse
of this generation. Then the Prophet Micah he complains of their sins, and
prophesies of their judgments, Mich. 3. from v. 5. to the end of the Chapter.

Then when Christ came in the flesh, h^ was opposed by them, and complains
o(...) them, Matt. 23. 13, 15, 16. then the Apostles themselves were
continually persecuted and afflicted from time to time by them, as you may read
in the Acts of the Apostles.

And if there be any truth in Histories, see what a sort of Ministry there were
in Henry (...) eighth's days: when the King denied Popes Supremacy, how soon
did this (...)be face about and side with the King? (...)en again, in the days
of Edward the sixth, ^^reason of his pious resolution, though (...) young, the
Clergy feared a turn, and ^^esently fell a preaching against the Mass(...)ok,
and it was soon abolished, and the ^^mmon-Prayer-book set up in its place; ^^d
these men zealous Common-Prayer^^ok men. And then about three or four ^ars
after that Queen Mary was made ^ueen, the Clergy bethought themselves, ^^d
presently the greatest part of them tur^^d about again, from Common-Prayer^^ok
to Masse-Book; for say they, the diffe^^nce is not great.

Then after Queen Mary was dead, and Queen Elizabeth had the Crown^, pre^ently
the whole tribe of them, except some ^^w, turned Protestants again; under which
shape, and in which visage they have ^ontinued until the beginning of this
pre^ent Parliament: Well, the Parliament had not sat long, but the Wolf
covered with Sheeps clothing was discovered; and after a little consideration
it was put to the Vote, and suddenly after tumbled down the Prelatical
discipline root and branch: Well, what follows? why, our Clergy for (...) most
part threw aside their Surplisse Hoods and Tippets, Organs, and Altar^^ Bowings
and Cringings, Tapers and Ca^dles, and perk up into the Pulpit, an^ lifts up
their voices, and preach again those things; and so became the reveren^^
laborious, zealous Ministers of England. thou desire a fuller discovery of
this look into what I have written before, called A word to the pretended
Minister, and neither of these will (...) satisfy thee, if thou will see the
Wolf stripped of his Sheeps clothing indeed, then look into the Chronicles
(...) England, Scotland, and Ireland; Mr. Fox hi^ book of Acts and Monuments of
the Church and his History of Martyrs, etc.

O then, take heed how you hear! Luke 8. 18^ take heed whom you hear, Jer. 27.
9. take hee^ what you hear, Mark 4. 24. Beloved, I have not written these
things to take off your affections from the true Ministers of the Gospel, but
to disengage your hearts and affections from the ravening Wolves, that the Lord
Christ has commanded me and you to beware of, Matt. 7. 15, and Acts 20. 29.
and Joh. 10. 12. Again, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they be of God, 1 John 4. 1. For many deceivers are entered into the ^orld, 2 John 7. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you; 1 John (...). 26. Now that you might take heed whom you hear, how you hear, and
what ^ou hear, and that you might not believe ^very spirit, but try the
spirits, whether ^hey be of God: I shall (under correction) and with submission
to better judgments ^ive my thought of the one and of the other, and endeavor
to put a difference between (...) Prelate and a Pilate, a Feeder and a Flee^er,
a Blinde-beetle and a Seer, a Butcher and a Shepherd, a Destroyer and an
Instru^ter, a Tyrant and a Father, a Thief and a Keeper, a Seducer and a
Leader, a ravening Wolf and a moderate Shepherd; that so ^ou might cast off
the one, and embrace the other: and truly herein I cannot speak in ^allibly,
but give my thoughts at a distance, ^or Satan has transformed himself into an
Angel of light, and his works are more my^terious then ever; the Lord cannot
have ^is Church, but the Devil will have his Chapel; if they will have
Ordinances, he will have them too; if they will congregate themselves together
by uniting in one spirit, Satan and his company will unite together in one
form of communion, and afterward teach union: If the true Church of Christ
will teach first the Doctrinal par(...) and then the practical part; Satan
wi(...) allow his Ministers to preach the same, only with this difference, he
will put the^^ upon building before they have laid th^^ foundation; if the true
Chruch will buil^ upon the rock, Satan and his compan^ will build too, but his
foundation must (...) laid on sand. I shall now endeavor (...) give my
judgment of the pretended Min^ster first, and then of the true Minist^^ next,
that so you might hold to the o(...) and forsake the other.

A false Prophet or Minister then may (...) known, viz.

1. He is one that does cause the people to err, Mich. 3. 5.

2. He does bark at the Sheep an^ bite at the Lambs, and teach others so t^
do. Mich. 3. 5, 6. But God will write sham^ upon them. Verse. 7.

3. He is one that does seek and se^^ up himself, 1 Pet. 5. 3. and 1 Tit. 11.

4. He is one that seeks not to gain souls to Christ but rather to make
divisions and factions, Act. 20. 30.

5. Although they pretend to it, they take no care of the flock of Christ, Joh.
10. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Acts 20. 29.

6. They may be known by this also, ^ot withstanding all pretenses of Piety;
^ou shall find them profane either in ^rinciples or practice: 2 Pet. 2. 14,
18. ^ud. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 9. 13.

7. They deny and overthrow most ^f the substantial points in Religion un^^er
specious pretenses, 2 Pet. 2. 2. 2 Timothy (...). 18.

8. They may be known by this al(...)o, they will pretend an interest in God,
and an enjoyment of God, and so set up themselves, and speak evil of others. 2
Pet. 10 verse. 18, 19.

9. They do break the bruised reeds and quench the smoking flax; strengthen
the hands of the wicked, and weaken the Saints, just as their forefathers left
upon record and written for their learning, Ezekiel. 34, 2, 3, etc.

10. When these men do suffer as evil doers, and that justly, they will be
telling their Congregations it is suffering times, and they suffer for Christ;
when alas poor souls! you do now suffer for being enemies to Christ and his
people: you are a little buffeted, but is it not for your faults? have you not
of late backslided from Presbytery to Cavalierisme? What would become of
England this day, if the English Nation had been ruled by you as the Scotti^^
Nation was by their Clergy? Blood criet(...) for vengeance in England and
Scotland; an^ as for these things that you call suffering for Christ, let me
tell you, these be but the beginnings of sorrow to you.

Now as for these false Prophets and pretended Ministers, and ravening Wolves;
le^ me tell them that their trade is at the best those days of cheating do
shorten apace^ their work is almost at an end; they or a(...) least some of
them may continue some months, but not many years, for Antichrist is going
down, and then I am sur^ you cannot stand up; surely, his time is very short,
death-pangs are upon him, he is now breathing his last gasp, for he has
played his last game, and is discovered in his subtillest defigne, Sheeps
clothing and Lambs horns will no longer deceive; the Wolf is stripped and the
Beast discovered, and the stormy night of affliction is almost past with the
Church; the time of the singing of Birds is come, and the voice of the turtle
is heard, though ye like liars are telling the people that these Birds are
Birds of prey.

Then the true Ministers of the Gospel ^ay be known by these and the like
Chara^^ers, viz.

1. He that is a faithful Minister of Je^^s Christ, will seek the honor of
Christ be^^re his own good, Act. 3. 12, 13, etc.

2. A true Minister of the Gospel is (...) far from Monopolizing the Trade of
^reaching to himself (and a few of his Coat) ^^at he could wish in his heart
with Moses that all the Lords people were Prophets, ^umb. 11. 29. And with Paul
rejoice that ^he Gospel is preached, whether it be in ^retence or truth. Christ
is preached; and (...) do therein rejoice, and I will rejoice, Phil. 18.

3. A true Minister of the Gospel is ^xperienced in the mystery; he accounts
^he history dark without the mystery, (...) Cor. 2, 4. 10. 13. and 2 Timothy 3.
16, 17. and (...) Joh. 1. 3.

4. He is or ought to be faithful ^o dispense the Word of God in conscience
unto God, freely, not as pleasing men. 1 Thessalonians. 24. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. and 1 Pet.
4. 10, 11. 1 Timothy 1. 12. and 2 Cor. 4. 2. 5. and 1 Cor. 9. 16.

5. He is one that is pure in Doctrine and holy and unblamable in life and
conversation, 1 Timothy 4. 12. 1 Timothy 2. 7.

6. He is or ought to be one that is sou^^ and well-grounded in himself, that
so (...) might speak from experience. Romans 15. 1^ and 1 Cor. 11. 23. 1 Timothy 3.
6. Tit. 1. 9. (...) Tit. 1. 1.

7. He is or ought to be skillful in d^viding to every one his portion, that
(...) may not give Childrens bread to dogs, an^ Dogs meat to children, as most
do in th^^^ days. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Tit. 2. 1. 7. 15.

8. He that is a faithful Minister of Christ may be known by his tenderness
and gentleness toward his Flock, as a Father, Shepherd, and Nurse. Act. 20.
28. I Pet. 5. (...) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 2.

9. He is one that accounts no time no^ place unfit or unseasonable to reprove,
r^^ buke, exhort, with all long suffering an^ doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. 1 Timothy 4.
15. Rom^ 12. 7.

10. He is or ought to be one that dot^ freely and fully dispense the truth,
and no^ thing but the truth. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Act. 20. 27^ 1 John 1. 3.

11. If he be a Scholar in humane schools he lays that by whiles he is
preaching th^^ Gospel. 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 22^ 1 Cor. 3. 2. 1 Cor.
14. 18, 19.

12. He endeavors to carry himself so (...) that he may give no offense to any
one in any thing. 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.

13. He is one that may be known by this ^^so: If he has ought against any
man, ^^ther superiors or inferiors, either King, ^arliament or Common wealth,
he will re^rove them sharply, yet with the spirit of ^eeknesse, and that to
their faces, not rail ^ehind their backs. 1 King. 22. 8. and 2 Samuel* ^2. 7.
Nehem. 5. 7. Jer. 1. 17. Amos 7. 12. 13. (...) Chron. 24. 20. 21. Mar. 6. 18.

14. A true and faithful Minister of the ^ospel, will not do a thing that is
lawful, ^^nlesse it be expedient also. See an instance ^^r this in your
brother Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 9. (...) 1 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Here we find
Paul ^ad power, and it was lawful for him to ^equire wages for preaching, but
it was ^ot expedient, and therefore he would not ^o it, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. 1 Cor.
9. 12, 15, etc.

Now where there be men of this chara^er, whether they have received Ordination
from Prelacie or Presbytery yea or no, or ^ave renounced such their admission
to the ^inistry (as many of them have done upon ^ound terms, and so must the
rest, or else ^hey will be laid aside both by God and man) (...) say, of such
men I am fully satisfied; I honor them, I love them, I embrace them, as the
servants of Christ, and leaders of h^^ people: Yet I shall endeavor with the
Bereans, when I hear them preach, to sear^^ the Scriptures, to see whether they
spea^^ according to that rule: because I know, (...) the best, they be but men,
and know but in pa^^ and may err in vision, and stumble in judgment.

Now if thou examine our present Ministry by these and the like Rules, thou
wi^^ see how few there are, that may be trul^ called the Learned, laborious,
zealou^ pious, faithful Ministers of Christ Jesus And when thou have found such
a faithfu^^ Minister, esteem him highly for his work^ sake; for the feet of
those that bring the glad tidings of peace are beautiful. But o^ poor souls!
you have been deceived by the Deceivers, and devoured by the ravenin^ Wolves:
wherefore if you will be undeceived, you must be untaught again, and begi^^ at
the first principles of religion. The wa^^ to become rich, is to see your
selves poor (...) and the way to be wise, is to become a fool (...) and the way
to get Christ, is to see the wan^^ of Christ.

Oh claim thy common interest in the promises! for they be made to sinners,
and as a sinner thou have an interest in them* and for thy direction herein,
read my first ^ok called A word to the World. Read also ^at blessed place, Job
33. 27. 28. Joh. 3. 16. ^ev. 22. 17. Mat. 11. 28. Isa. 55. 7. Isa. 53. 56. Cor.
5. 19, 20, 21.

(...) brief Epistle to all the Lambs, that through (...) a Providence have not
been devoured by the (...) Wolves.

O You most noble, overcoming Saints, sons of Sion, and servants of the ^ost
High God! Awake, awake; Put on (...) strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful
garments (...) Jerusalem. Thou holy City, give ear a (...)le, silence thy own
thoughts, and thou (...)lt hear the Lord Christ calling and say(...)g, Arise my
beloved and come away: for the (...) is dawning, and the day star arising in
your (...)rts. Take the wings of hope, and fly in(...) the air of comfort,
where thy treasure (...) Behold, Christ comes, leaping upon (...) mountains,
and skipping upon the hills. (...)s the voice of my welbeloved, saying, open to
(...) my sister, my spouse. Oh how often did he (...)? how earnestly did he
knock? how ^^werfully did he strive? how long did he wait upon you, before
mine, and yo^ stubborn hard hearts would yield obe^ence to his desires: if he
had never lov^ you, you had never loved him; if he h^^ never drawn you, you
had never com^ if he had never sought you, you had be^ yet straying in the
wildrnesse of fin^^ Listen a little, for he knocks at the do^^ of thy heart;
open to him, bid him t(...) possession of that which is his own; and th^^ O the
breathings, and celestial streamin^ forth of love that be between the Crea(...)
and this creature! Oh how does the so(...) dance and leap for joy! Oh how is it
(...) vished with the presence of him so mu^^ longed for! Oh how does the love
Christ affect the soul, and even transpo^^ the heart to admiration! All the
pangs (...) the new birth, all the throws of its trave^^ all its after-births
of sorrow, are now fo^gotten, and swallowed up in ravishme^^ For me to live,
says the soul, is Christ, and dye is gain. I will not fear though the tr^^
should yield no fruit, the fields no meat, (...) flocks perish from the stall,
yet I will, says (...) soul with Job, bless the name of the Lo^^ yea I will
rejoice in the name of the Lord, for (...) the time of famine he will feed me.
The plagu^ of Egypt, the botches of Job, the enem^^ (...) David, the
imprisonment of Joseph, the ^^verty of Lazarus, the bonds of Paul, can^^t
deprive me; for his rod and his staff does (...)fort me. Let the earth quake
and swell, ^^d seas roar, and hell rent, and rocks and ^^untains be carried
into the depth of the (...); yea let all the proud opposers, and false
(...)chers tremble with horror and asto(...)hment, yet will I trust in the
Lord, and tri(...)h in my God (say the Lambs of Christ) (...) beloved has
pronounced me fair, and ^^ere is no spot or wrinkle in me; the day (...) mine
espousal is come, wherein all the ^^orious holiness of divine wisdom, yea
(...) the all of Christ is made over to me: that shall I want who have all
things to ^^joy? who shall lay any thing to my charge? it God that justifies
me, who shall condemn me? what is man that thou art mindful of him, or (...)
son of man that thou do thus regard him! (...) bless the Lord O my soul,
and forget not (...) his henefits. I was a dry and barren ^^ee, fit for nothing
but burning, but he ^^th given me life, and I have a promise ^^at I shall
flourish in his Courts. All the ^^ings that be under the Sun, are not so
^recious as one smile from his counte^ance. Let friends forsake me, let enemies
^^eride me, let all worldly comforts leave me. If I enjoy one smile from him,
it enough (say the enlightened Lambs (...) Christ) Oh how wonderfully he
preser^^ me from the late devouring sword whi^^ has cut down thousands, and
fro^^ famine, plague, and pestilence, which h^^ been round me! and for my
spiritual en^mies which were within me, he has bee^ with me in the fire that
it should not bu^ me, and in the water that it should (...) drown me. He has
delivered me in (...) troubles, and the seventh could not hu^^ me. O world,
flesh, and devil. Let me li^^ to him whose I am, for I am not my own^^ I am
bought with a great price, and I a(...) now to live to him whose I am. O what
(...) I render to the Lord for all his benefits? O th^^ I knew wherein I might
honor him th^^ has so highly honored me, says the tru^^ believing soul. O
taste and see that the Lo^^ is gracious; it is life to know him, it is heaven
to behold him, it is melody to hear^ him, it is endless happiness to enjoy
him he is the brightness of his Fathers glory yea he is altogether lovely; he
is all th^^ tongue can ask, thine heart can wish, o^^ thy mind conceive; he
is light in darkness joy in sorrow, rest in trouble, health i^ sickness, food
in famine, life in death ^eaven in hell. O be open everlasting doors, ^^at the
King of glory may enter in! Away from ^^e all ye workers of iniquity, (say the
Lambs ^f Christ) I will cleave to him that has ^reserved me from the wolf
that came to ^eceive me in sheeps clothing; I will now ^urne out of doors
sin and Satan, as ^^cob said to Laban, These many years have I ^rved you,
but now it is time to look to my ^wne portion, mine own house, my time (...)
almost spent, for my days are swifter then a ^eavers shuttle, Job 6. 7.

I will now return to, and walk entire(...) with my Father, and when he sees
me ^^mming, although afar off, he will run (...) meet me with sweet kisses
and loving sa^^tations. He will power the oil and ^ine of his graces into my
wounds, he will ^^t me upon his own strength, and bring ^^e into communion and
fellowship with ^^m, and his Saints in Mount Sion.

But now O Saints and servants of the ^ost High God, who have laid down your
^rowns at the feet of Christ, and have ^ade choice of him for your portion,
re^^yce in your portion; let your thoughts ^^e upon, and your speeches of your
por^^on.

You do say, that ye be sons and servants of the most High God: Let it
appear by your obedience to your Father, Romans 6. 16.

You say that ye are his sheep: do ye hear his voice? Joh. 10. 27.

You say that you do abide in him: learn to walk as he walked, 1 John 2. 6.

If Christ have dyed for you: let us know it by your living unto him, 2 Cor. 5.
15.

You do say that you do know him: let us see it by your keeping his
commandments, 1 John 2. 4.

You do say that you are righteous and religious: let us see it by your
bridling your tongue: l^st your Religion appear to be vain, 1 Jam. 26.

If you have received a Kingdom that cannot be moved, let us see it by your
serving him with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28.

You say he is your God, and that you see your particular interest in him: let
it be known to us by your obedience to him, 1 Pet. 1. 17.

You say that you be the Spouse of Christ: let us know it by your enquiring
after him, and telling of the excellencies that be in him, Cant. 5. 6. 9.

If you be his Disciples, let us know it ^y your love one to another, Joh. 13.
35.

You tell us that you believe in him, Show (...) your faith by your works, 2
Jam. 18.

If you live in the Spirit, let us know ^t by your walking in the Spirit, Gal.
(...). 25.

If you be grafted into the true Vine, ^et us know it by your fruitfulness,
^oh. 15. 5.

If you are Christ's, let us know it by the ^rucifying your flesh, Gal. 5. 24.

If you be indeed planted in the house of ^he Lord, let us know it by your
flourish^ng in his Courts, Psalm. 92. 13.

You say that he has chosen you to sal^ation: let us know it by your
fanctifica^ion of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, Ephesians. 1. 4.

You say that you live in the will of God: let us know it by your doing his
will, and by your rejoicing when his will is lone, though it cross your own
wills, Job 1. 21.

O my brethren, methinks the spirit of ^hankfulnesse is not up in your souls;
we ^e more sensible of our wants, then we be of our mercies: O what could the
Lord ^ave done more then he has done already! we have all we have sought for,
and much more! O England, England! Awake, awa^^ put on thy strength, O Sion,
put on thy beautif^^ garments. O Jerusalem, prepare to meet the King. Bid adieu
to all earthly comforts* (...) not mercies be so common, as not to return the
praise to him that gave them. O^ what would we have parted with, within these
10 years, for one of the least of the mercies that we do now enjoy! O be not
s^ much in craving and begging, and so little in blessing and praising the
fountain o^ our mercies.

Remember, praising the Almighty will be the work of a Saint in the life to
come (...) there will be no need of prayer, faith, hope, and patience; all
these will end in fruition Oh then begin the work here, that thou shall be
always doing in the life to come (...) The book of Revel. that speaks of the
last state of the Church upon earth, it speaks of Praising, but seldom of
Prayer: And why? Those things were granted that they had formerly prayed for.
Beloved, can a man reckon those mercies that the Lord has given in within
these ten years, both National and Personal? shall we forget all; and in stead
of rejoicing with the Saints fall a mourning with the world? The voice cries,
Rejoice ye righteous, and howl O Babylon! Rejoice ye righteous; for ye have a
Father to stand by you, a Christ to deliver you, Angels to guard you, Comforts
to refresh you, and Promises to sustain you; and rather then ye shall want, the
Ravens shall ^eed you, the Heavens shall drop down food to relieve you, the
Rocks shall stream forth rivers to refresh you: therefore let nothing dismay
you, or draw your hearts back again, like Lots wife, into Sodom, or the
Children of Israel unto the fleshpots of Egypt. The wicked and unbelieving,
they cannot praise him: And shall Christ have none to exalt him? O let your
mouths be filled with his praises! sound Hallelujahs to him, who lives for
ever and ever, for this is ^he will of God concerning you. As for the world,
alas, they know not how to praise him! How shall they sing the Lords song in
Ba^ylon? But the living, the living, in Mount Sion, shall praise thee.

O thou in whom are all our springs, and from whom we receive all our supplies;
and all you that be the true sheep of Christ, make it your work with Mary to
sit at his ^eet, and hear his voice. You have heard ^trangers a long time, and
have not considered that the glory of Christ does over^hadow all other glories,
his voice is sweet, and his countenance is comely, his presence desirable, and
his love unfathomable.

A few words by way of Prophecy concerning the glorious state of the Church of
Christ that will be shortly.
BEloved, if you a little take notice of what is past and fulfilled, and
diligenly observe what is present, you will be the better able to speak or
write of something that is to come; if you look back and see that the Lord has
delivered us, and then look upon the present state, and find that he does
deliver us, we shall be the better able to say with Paul, In whom we trust that
he will yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 10.

O ye the flock of Christ, for to you I speak chiefly: you were scattered,
but the Lord has gathered you together, and brought you home from exile, and
banishment, and caused you to sit under your own vine, and made you a praise
and a same amongst them that had you in derision, and a proverb of reproach; he
has advanced up between you and your enemies, and taken your part, and
overpowered them, and in a great measure stopped the mouths of the dogs of
Egypt that did so bark at you; some of them are fallen by the sword, others of
them are fled beyond the seas, and those that do still remain, the Lord is
now muffling their mouths.

Again, your spiritual enemies begin to fall also, the Lord has given you a
little more strength against them, and discovered his love in the face of Jesus
Christ in the doctrine of Free Grace more fully then in former days; he has
given you liberty to worship him in his own way, and established your liberty
by a Law both spiritual and temporal. He has manifested his care of you in
answering all your prayers, and granting all your requests that you heretofore
have, or now do put up to him in faith; so that it is but ask and have, seek
and find; and yet all this is but the beginnings of mercies to you, these be
but the dawnings of the day, and the first fruits of what is ripening: Your
eyes have not yet seen, your ears have not heard, your hearts have not yet
understood what glorious things are coming: you may now say to all the proud
opposers yet remaining, as once was said to Haman, Hest. 6. 12. If Mordecai be
of the seed of the Jews before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not
prevail against him, but surely fall before him. If those that hereto fore you
called Puritans, and now Separatists, be of the seed of Abraham, the father of
the faithful, before whom ye have begun to fall, you shall not prevail
against them, but surely fall before them: Assemble your selves together
against these people, you will be broken in pieces; take council together, it
will not stand; continue your Plots one after another as fast as you can, it
will be discovered; take council of Achitophel, and it will be turned into
foolishnisse; lift up your voices with Herod like a god, the Worms will destroy
you, and that immediately; Speak with the tongue of men and angels, you want
love, and you are but as sounding brass and tinkling Cimbals; Rejoice O Sion,
thy day is dawning; Howl O Babylon! thy day is ending, and thy plagues are
coming. The most glorious days that ever we read of in Scripture do begin to
dawn, although very few do see it; and the most doleful times that ever
appeared is almost come against the enemies of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus;
for all that they have hitherto undergone is but the beginnings of sorrows: the
first woe is past, the second is ^omming, see Revel. 18. 2. Babylon is fallen,
(...) fallen. v. 8. Her plagues are come in one day, ^^eath, and mourning, and
famine, and she shall be ^tterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord who
^^dgeth her. Silence thy thoughts and listen (...) little, and thou shall hear
that voice ^poken of Rev. 9. 10. 15, 16, 19.

Oh what weeping and wailing is there among the Great ones, the Kings and
^rinces, and Merchants, and mighty ones ^f the earth! Why, what is the matter?
^hy, Babylon is on fire, I cannot come near ^er, I am fain to stand afar off:
Alas, alas, ^^at great City that is clothed in fine linen, and ^urple and
scarlet, and decked with gold and pre^ious stones and pearls, in an hour is so
great ^^easures come to naught! Well, what follows ^hereupon? v. 20. Rejoice O
ye servants of the lord, for I am now avenging you on your enemies. Their day
of mirth and carnal pleasure is ^^ding, and their plagues beginning: but ^our
day of perfecution is almost over. Ye shall rejoice, but they shall mourn; ye
shall (...)ng for joy of heart, but they shall weep for ^orrow of heart, and
howl for vexation of spirit. Your enemies have already received their good
things, with the rich man, and ^^re now to receive the bad, Luke 16. 25. But
^ou have been, with Lazarus, in misery, and received your bad things, and now
you ar^ to receive your good; you shall be com^forted, but they shall be
tormented, Luke 16* 24, 25.

Give ear a little, silence your ow^^ thoughts, listen! Methinks I hear
Christ saying to his people, as in Luke 24. 17. wha^ manner of communication is
this that yo^^ have one to another, as you walk, and a^^ sad? (what, sad! you
had never so great cause to rejoice.) v. 25. O fools and slow o^ heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken* If ever these words were seasonable
to them it is also seasonable to us, and it is written for our learning: O
fools and slow of hear^ to believe all that the Prophets have said to believe
all that Christ has said, and tha^ all his Apostles have said! No marvel yo^
have communication together, as you wal^ and are sad: You do not believe the
Prophets, you do not believe Christ, you d^ not believe the Apostles; for if
you did you could not be sad; forall these do testify abundantly, that there
is none under the heavens have so great cause to triump^^ and rejoice as you;
for as all things wor^ for the glory of God, so they turn to you^ good. All
things work together for good to them that fear God.

Let not us then be fools and slow of heart believe all that the Prophets have
said: Why, what have the Prophets said?) ^he Prophets speak of the state of the
church in their days, and also they pro^^esied of the state of the Church in
the yes of Christ's incarnation, and lastly they ^^ophesied of the state of the
Church of christ in the latter days before his coming (...) judgment. Now all
is written for our ^arning: but that which does most nearly ^^ncern us, is to
know what state we are ^^der, and what God is now doing, and that we are now to
expect.

First then, the Lord is even now begin^^g (for the time is at hand) to bring
in the ^^ws; and that will be of great advantage (...) all the elect Gentiles,
as you may see ^om. 11. 12, 13. and Isa. 60. 3. 5. and 66. ^1, 12. So that will
be brought to pass, ^^a. 2. 1, 2, 3. The mountain of the Lords house all be
established on the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills, and all
Nations shall ^ow unto it. So the Law shall go forth of (...)ion, and the
Almighty will have a glori^us kingdom in the spirits of his people: and this is
the Name of Christ upon earth, and the New heaven we read of. In a word, ^e
will in and by his Saints rule the world. See Dan. 7. 27. The kingdom, and the
dominion and the greatness of the kingdom under t^^ whole heaven, shall be
given to the Saints the most High, whose kingdom is an everlastin^ kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and ob(...) them. Oh what a blessed day will this
b(...) when the Power both supreme and su^ ordinate shall be in the hands of
the Saint of the most High. The government ha^^ for a long time been in the
hands of t^^ basest of men, as in Dan. 4. 17. and sette^^ up over it the basest
of men. Look back little, and consider what kind of Magisteri^^ power we had:
begin at the Head; was no^ vice advanced, and purity derided? on who^ Justice
(that has no respect of persons has been executed. Next unto him, w^^ any man
fit for a Lord, unless he was railing persecuting Bishop? And then fo(...) our
Judges and Priests, did not the o^^ judge for reward, and the other teach
fo(...) hire? Mic. 3. 11. And then for the less(...) Lawyers, and Journy-men
Priests, ho^ fast would the one ride, and the other run(...) the one to cheat
you in temporals, the other in spirituals? Then the Constables Churchwardens
and Overseers, if yo^^ come not to Church to hear their refin^^ Mass, then
they give in your names to th^^ Chancellor and Proctor, and by virtue of a
Spiritual warrant from their reverend Lord and Master, the Apparitor must be
employed to summon you to appear before them; and if they have no witnesses
against you, then you must take an oath to accuse your self; and then the very
meanest Officer, as the Clark, Sexton, and Tithingman, if there be ever a
Puritan or Roundhead in the whole Parish, they will mischief him as much as in
them lies. But the measure of their iniquity being full, and their day of
calamity dawning, these men are in part ^lready laid aside, and shortly will be
fully rejected both of God and man: And the Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heavens shall be given to the Saints
of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlast^ng Kingdom; and then the
Nations shall ^ecome the Nations of Christ, and the go^ernment shall be in the
hands of the Saints; and the Nations and Kingdoms that will not serve thee, to
wit Christ in the Saints, shall perish. Isa. 60. 12. 17, 18. For brass I will
bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for
stones iron. I will also make thine officers peace, and thine exactors
righteousness; violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and
thy gates praise. Jer. 30. 21. And their Nobles shall be of themselves, and
their Governors shall proceed cut of the midst of them, and so the Lord will
punish all those that oppress you. Even now is the Lord beginning to restore
Magistracy and Ministry to it^ primitive institution: This work is begun in
England; Ireland and Scotland will follow^ and if I mistake not, France,
Holland, and Spain will come after, and so all other parts until that be
fulfilled Dan. 2. 35. Dan. 7. 27. and Rev. 11. 15. In Dan. 2. we read of a
little stone cut out of the mountains without hands, and it became so big as
to fill the whole earth. And that in Dan. 7. 27. The greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints. Rev. 11. 15.
And the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, and so all his enemies shall be made his foot stool. The hour of
temptation is begun, and will not end till it has gone over all the earth. O
England, England, thou was first in misery, thou shall also be first in thy
delivery: Oh that thou did now know what thou shall shortly enjoy! Thou have
been rough-hewed already, thou want nothing but plaining, and so thou will
be made fit for the spiritual building: thou have been rough-hewed by the open
profane, but now thou shall be plained by the most zealous Pharisees, those
that will fast twice a week, and give tithe of all they possess, and pray in
the corners of the streets, and say, Lo here is Christ.

In a word, the greatest formal professors will be thy greatest persecuters;
herein is the devils last, and most subtle design, he will now come with fair
words and specious pretenses; and if you look upon his habit, he is in sheeps
clothing, and if he has feet like a beast, he will have horns like a lamb;
and although under another garb, he will execute the power of the first beast
in persecuting thee, as Rev. 13. 12.

But God will bring these proud opposers down unto the dust. See Isa. 24. 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. Then the Lord God shall reign in mount Sion and in Jerusalem
gloriously. Therefore with Peter, let us expect a new heaven, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Behold I create ^ew heavens, and
a new earth, Isa. 65. 17. And you shall sing for joy of heart, and that whiles
your enemies do weep for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit,
Isa. 65. 1^ (...), 14. For the Lord is now turning to his people a pure
language, and they shall sho^tly serve him with one consent. Zeph. 3. 9. The
eyes of the blind begin to be opened, and the ears of the deaf to be
unstopped, the lame man begins to leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb
to sing; for in the wilderness do waters break out, an^ streams in the desert.

The brightness of Christ does begin to appear, which does not only discover,
but also destroy Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. Yea unto all you that fear his
name, is the Son of righteousness arising with healing in his wings. Mal. 4.
2. The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Sun shall be sevenfold. Isa. 30. 26. And so he will destroy i^ this mountain
the face of the covering cast over people, and the vail that is spread over all
nations, and the rebuke of his people he will take away. Isa. 25. 7. And so we
shall all know him from the least to the greatest. Jer. 31. 34. And the Lord
shall be one, and his name one, and as for (...) we shall all have one heart,
and one way, Jer. 32. 39. and Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. And this he will do for
light is sown for the righteous, and gladness ^or the upright in heart.
Therefore rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the remem^^ance
of hi^ holiness. Gird up the loins of you^ ^inde, be sober, and hope to the
end, for the grace ^^at is to be brought unto you at the revelation of jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13.

Now above half of the sons and daugh^ers of men are of a contrary judgment,
^aying of these and the like Scriptures, that they be either fulfilled already,
or else ^ay they, there is some other meaning in ^hese Scriptures, which might
be easily an^wered. Then for those men that do see ^learly that these things
are yet to be ful^^lled, they do vary and differ in their judgments.

1. The first says, It is true, glorious ^imes are at hand, Satan shall be
chained ^^p, and Christ shall reign personally on the earth for a thousand
years, Rev. 20. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

2. A second party of men stands up opposing the first, saying, It is true,
Christ shall reign upon the earth in the midst of his people; but when? not
till after the judgment is past, and this old earth burnt up, and then he will
create a new heaven and a new earth, when the first heaven, and the first earth
are past away, Rev. 21. 1. 2 Pet. 3. 13.

3. Then there be a third sort of sober Christians that do look for and expect
these glorious times, and yet they do deny that Christ shall reign personally:
he shall reign, it is true, say they, but how? Christ will come in the spirit,
and have a glorious Kingdom in the spirits of his people, and they shall by
the power of Christ in them reign over the world, and this is the new heaven,
and the new earth: And for my part, I do affirm that this is the glorious state
that is now coming, Isa. 66. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1.

And these are the times of restitution so frequently spoken unto in the
Scripture, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Act. 3. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Oh what a glorious time will this be, when Magistracy shall be restored to
its primitive institution, to countenance those that do well, and punish evil
doers! Romans 13. 3. Dan. 7. 27. Isa. 2. 3. Isa. 1. 26.

O what a joyful time shall this be, when Ministry shall be restored to its
primitive Institution, Jer. 3. 18. and Jer. 24. 4.

O what a blessed time will this be, when our God shall undeceive the people
that have been deceived by the Priests, the Dragon shall be cast out of heaven,
and his Chaplains out of the Church. God will take away the nature of wicked
men, that ^lthough they remain wolves, lions, and ^ruits still, yet they shall
not hurt nor de^^roy in all this holy mountain; For the ^^arth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Hab. 2. 14.
Wherefore most noble overcoming Saints, ^ook for great alterations and mighty
^hanges: see what dissolutions God is making in the earth, and look for the
Lord ^o be rev^aled from heaven, who will be mighty in his dispensation, and
glorious ^n revelation, and strong and powerful in operation; and he will bring
to pass his determination, which will be to the confounding of all things that
are in opposition against him. Oh then taste and see, that the Lord is
gracious; it is life to know him, it is heaven to behold him, it is melody to
hear him, it is endless happiness to enjoy him. And as you like the end that
the Almighty aims at, so approve of the way which he acts in, and wait with
patience for the accomplishment thereof.

There be glorious Deliverances for the Saints; (as has been said) but the
Saints are too sudden in expecting these deliverances.
WHen our first Parents were fallen, there was a promise made to them of a
recovery by the second Adam, in these words: The seed of the woman shall bruise
the serpents head. And as soon as Eve had conceived and brought forth a son,
Genesis 4. 1. says she, I have got a man from the Lord; (for so some of our
Translations render it) And seeing this was not he, when she brought forth her
second son, she calls him Abel, which signifies vanity. Seeing she was
deceived in the first, she calls the second vanity. Now our mother was just as
we are, too sudden in our expectation of deliverances.

So if we look into that of Moses, Exo. 5. ult. Neither have thou delivered thy
people at all, says precious Moses. Why Moses, thou art a little too quick:
Have not these people prayed, and has not the Lord heard the cry, and sent
thee to bring them out of Egypt, and am not I now upon delivering them? and yet
are they not delivered at all? ^oses, thou art a little too sudden in ex^ecting
deliverances.

So it was with the Apostles, Act. 1. 6. lord (said they) will thou at this
time restore ^e kingdom to Israel? The Apostles were too ^dden; this was not
to be done till many ^undred years afterward. Methinks I see ^he people of
England, yea many of the Lords ^wn Lambs, some of them in Egypt under ^haraohs
hard taskmasters, murmuring and ^omplaining at other Saints, as they did at
Moses and Aaron. And I see some others ^rought to the Red Sea, but in great
fears, before and behind, as they were; and some ^re got over the sea, and seen
all their ene^ies drowned as they were pursuing them, and so begin to sing; and
many be marched unto the midst of the wilderness, where they see great
miracles, waters flow out of ^he Rocks, and raining Manna from heaven; and yet
notwithstanding the people begin to murmr, and desire to go back again to
Egypt. Oh here is the state of the English Nation! they say, it is better to go
back again to Egypt to King Pharaoh; or if he be dead, to his young Son, that
he may reign over us, where we may enjoy our old Discipline, and eat our wonted
food, the onions, and the garlicks, and the leeks. But some are of a more
choice spirit and have sent unto Canaan to spy out the land: Well, there were
twelve men se^^ ten of them bring up a false report of the land; only two of
them were of another spirit, and speak the truth: the greate^^ part say it is a
barren land, the lesser pa^^ say it is a fruitful land. The people were
divided, and some fall to murmuring, an^ so are destroyed in the wilderness.
Well a few are gotten to Canaan; the enemy flie^ before them, they possess
their habitations; and having all things at the full they soon forget their
God. Is not this all along our state at this day? Some are traveling from
Egypt to Canaan; and some are journeying from Canaan to Babylon; and some are
walking from Babylon to Sion.

Q. Methinks I hear many saying, If there be such glorious times at hand, and
that God does intend good to us, why is it thus and thus with us?

A. It is true, there be many external and internal burdens lying upon us, that
we would be glad to have removed: But consider a little first, the fountain
from whence these come, Gods love; secondly, the end of them, for thy good;
this will cause the ^^ule to rejoice in tribulation; for to you is given not
only to believe, but to suffer ^^r his sake: must Job the justest man that
(...) alive be fought against with the terrors ^f the Lord, Job. 6. 4. Must
David a man after ^^ds own heart have no rest in his bones, because of his
sins, and be so wasted with ^^e grief of his heart, that his moisture is ^^rned
to the drought of Summer, Psalm. 32. ^^rs. 3, 4.

Must Heze^iah who walked before the lord in truth and with a perfect heart,
^ave the anger of the Almighty break his ^ones like a Lion, Isai. 38. 13.

Nay must the Son of God himself lie ^leeding upon the cross, and cry out in
^he bitterness of his soul, My God, my God, ^hy have thou for saken me! and
shall we think ^o be altogether free from chastisement? was ^ot Abel murdered
by his brother; Noah ^ocked by his son; Job scoffed by his wife; ^lie slain by
his sons? See the hardships that ^acob a man chosen of God went through; ^e is
threatened by his brother, banished ^^om his Father, abused by his Uncle,
^efrauded of his Wife, in the day he is ^corched with heat, in the night
troubled ^ith frost, as you may see at large, Genesis 31. ^ers. 40.

Then see the divisions between his tw^ Wives, two Sisters baulling for one
Husban^ after this they both went from their Father and now see a fresh pursuit
behind hi^ Laban follows Jacob with a Hue and Cry before him Esau is marching
up to him wi^^ four hundred men: so to go forward were intolerable, to go
backward un^vailable: Well, after the Almighty had d^livered him, and he
marched into his ow^ Country; his Wife Rachel dies, his daughter Dinah is
ravished, his Son Reuben lie with his Concubines; then his most beloved Son
Joseph they report is dead; the^ soon after this arose a Famine, and another of
his Sons in prison, and nothing can redeem him but his only Benjamine here is
the loss of son after son, Genesis 42. 36 And Jacob said unto them, Me have ye
bereave^ of my children, Joseph is not, and Simeon (...) not, and you will take
Benjamin away; (...) these things be against me. But there was (...) time then
drawing near, that Jacob should b^ delivered from his troubles, and enjoy the
company of all his Sons again: The way to true happiness is through many
difficulties; you must suffer a while, before you shall be established,
strengthened and settled. God is unstripping thee of thy riches and
righteousness, as he did Job, that he may give thee twice as much, and ten
times better in its room; the Vision is yet for an appointed time, Hab. 2. 3.
and at the end it will come wait for it; nay, it will surely come, it will not
tarry: It may be thou and I have heard, That the mountain of the Lords house
shall be established upon the top of the mountains; well it shall come to pass:
but the Vision is for an appointed time. Has the Lord promised that knowledge
shall cover the Earth, as the waters the Sea; and that we shall all know him
from the least to the greatest: Well, God is faithful, it shall come to pass;
but the Vision is for an appointed time. Do thou not read in Dan. 2. that
there was a stone cut out without hands, and became a great mountain, and
filled the whole Earth? well, the Vision is for an appointed time, wait for it,
for it will surely come, it will not tarry.

Has the Lord indeed promised to take away thy filthy garments, as once he did
from Joshua, Josh. 3. 3, 4. the Vision is for an appointed time, it will speak
and not tarry. Has he promised indeed that sorrow and sighing shall fly away,
and that all tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and thou shall have no more
pain and sorrow; why, h^^s faithful that has promised; only the Vision is for
an appointed time, it will speedily speak, it will not tarry.

Do the Scriptures speak of the calling of the Jews, and of the bringing in of
the fullness of the Gentiles, and of the restoration of all things? the Vision
is for an appointed time, it will speak and not tarry.

Has the Lord indeed promised that the light of the Moon shall be as the light
of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold? the Vision is for an
appointed time, it will speak, it will not tarry.

Has he said by his servant Isaiah, c. 25. 7. And he will destroy the face of
the covering cast over all people, and rend the veil that is spread over all
nations. He is faithful, so that one tittle shall not pass till all be
fulfilled, only it shall be done in its appointed time. How shall hope and
patience be exercised, if he should not make us wait? and how shall we say as
in Isai. 24. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us;
this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation: say not with Moses; Neither have thou delivered us at all; Exodus 5.
last verse. but say with Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who has delivered us, who does
deliver us; in whom we trust he will yet still deliver us. ^e thankful then
for what is already done, and believe and wait for what is ^ow a doing. I see
the Saints, saying with Abraham, Genesis 15. 2. Lord, what will thou give ^e? etc.
But methinks you should rather be saying with David, Psalm. 116. 12. What shall
I give thee for all thy benesits to me? Again, we read in the book of the
Revelation, of seven Seals, and seven Vials, and seven Trumpets: If we compare
these Seals, Vials, and Trumpets together, I suppose we shall find them hold
forth one and the same thing; And then if we consider what Seal is now
opening, what Trumpet is now sounding, what Vial is now pouring forth, thou will see what state the Church of Christ s now under, and what the Almighty ^s
now doing for her deliverance. Is not ^he seventh Seal now opening? is not the
^eventh Vial now pouring forth? Is not ^he seventh Trumpet now sounding, and
^ome of the Saints beginning to lift up their voices? Rev. 11. 15. And the
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven saying, The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ,
and ^e shall reign for evermore. Rejoice O Sion, ^hy day is dawning: Howl O
Babylon, thy plagues are coming: he is gathering his wheat into the barn, but
he will burn the chafe with an unquenchable fire. It i^ true, the Saints may
be shaken once more, as in Heb. 12. 26, 27. that those things that may be
shaken, may be taken away; and those, and only those that cannot be shaken may
remain. But Babylon shall be shaken down to the earth and ground to powder and
cast into the bottomless pit, there to continue for ever. Oh then lift up your
hearts with your hands unto our God in the heavens! Oh lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees! Take the two wings, the one of Faith, the
other of Love, and fly into the air of Comfort, where thy treasure is;
saying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; take possession of that which is thine
own!

I had many things more in my heart and mind to present unto thy consideration,
whosoever thou art, that read these words. I will here but name them unto
thee, but in another Treatise shortly present them before thee: which being
done, I shall apply those words of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 12, 13.

1. Beware of extremes. Men be very apt in this age, either to cry up all
Clergymen, or cry down all Clergymen: whereas we should endeavor the
plucking up and rooting out all false pretended Ministers, for they be the
worst of men: the Scripture calls them Dogs and Wolves, and Cheaters and
Deceivers, etc. But we should double our love to all that be faithful, for they
are the mouth of the Lord to us, and their feet are beautiful. The Scriptures
command us to esteem them highly for their works sake: And whereas they sow
unto us spiritual things, let not us keep back from them carnal things, 1 Cor.
9. 11. and Romans 15. 27, etc. Let us do this, lest they say of us as Paul did of
his hearers, 2 Cor. 11. 8. I have robbed other Churches, taking wages of them,
to do you service.

I once heard, that there was a godly man that had three friends; And to try
their wisdom, he sent to each of them an Apple, he knowing by a small
instrument that each Apple was rotten at the core. The first receives his
apple, and cut it in the midst, and found it rotten at the core, and so threw
it away. The second receives his apple, and found it rotten in the midst; but
because it came from his friend, he eat it all. The third received his apple,
and cut it as the former, and found it rotten; so he cut off the rotten, and
threw it away, but eat only the good. Now let us not be like to him that threw
away all, because there was some unsound: Neither let us be like the second,
that received good and bad together: But let us be like the last, that received
the good, and rejected the bad. And that thou may put a difference between
the good and the bad, thou shall see them set forth in their colors that they
may be known, in what I have written before in my Epistle to the World.

2. Beware of murmuring. Thou have been delivered from Egypt, and brought
through the Red Sea, and art now in the wilderness in thy journey toward
Canaan: If thou murmr at the present dispensation, or distrust Gods power, or
speak unadvisedly with thy lips against our Moses and Joshua, Parliament and
Army; thou art like to die in the wilderness, and not to have any part in the
deliverance that is at hand. See 1 Cor. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

3. My earnest desire and request is, that you would make Religion your
busin^sse, and the world a thing by the bie: for now Religion with most men is
but a stalkinghorse; men look after that, when they have nothing else to do;
the World, not Religion is our business: contrary to the mand of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, Mat. 6. 33.

4. Spend not so much time and pains aboutt he outside of Religion, as
Discipline and Order; but spend thrice as much about the inside, the principles
and grounds of truth. Me thinks I see most men spend much time in the outside
of Religion, viz. whether Presbytery, Anabaptisme or Independencie be the way,
etc. And so whiles they be disputing about the garment, the power of Religion
is much abated. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. Look to the power in
the first place, and then the form will follow after in its order.

5. The more spiritual any truth is, let thy soul take the more delight in it;
reject it not, as most do, if it be not clothed with some humane excellency.
Remember, the Stone which the wise builders rejected, is become the head of the
corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in the eyes of men.

6. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
ashamed to own Christ and his cause in public in the view of all men. If the
things ^e hold be sound and true, bring them forth, Truth seeks no corners;
light was never ashamed of darkness; the nature of tru^ light is to destroy
darkness. The Bishops have no Courts, the Apparitors no Commissions their day is
ended: wherefore come forth ye Doves, that have lain a long time in the clefts
of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs: let us see thy countenance,
let us hear^^ thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely,
Cant. 2. 14. Wherefore come forth, and so much the rather, because there are
some that seek occasion to speak evil of you: Take off that occasion, lest they
say of you as 2 Timothy 3. 6.

7. If ever thou intendest to do any thing for God in honoring him in the
world, do it presently, whiles it is called to day; for thy time here in this
world is almost spent; it was but short, at the longest; the thread of thy life
is almost spun out; thy days fly a way very swiftly, yea swifter then the
Weavers shuttle, Job 7. 6. and so thou and I shall speedily cut off our life
like a Weaver, Isa. 38. 12.

R. P.

FINIS.
Reader,
Let me entreat thee to correct those greater faults that appear at first view;
for I have not time to peruse it all: And pass by in love many lesser, caused
through my absence, and the Correctors oversight.


