Protestant Unity, The best Policy to defeat Popery, and all its Bloody
Practices.
OR, Englands Happiness under such a Blessing.
A Pleasant, New SONG.
Would England ever blessed and happy be,
It must be done by perfect Unity,
Let Procestants in all things then agree.
Then Rome shall fall like Lightning from the Sky,
And all her plots shall soon Expire and Dye,
Whilst we do prosper, and her Rage defy.
To the Tune of, Now now the Fight's done, etc.


C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms portrait of King Charles

London


NOw Plots upon Plots makes the Jesuits smile
Who do think our Nation at last to beguile;
Whilst Divisions grow rife, and Crowding come in
Whilst Schismatics Clamor and rail at the sin
Which themselves have contrived, for here it is plain
They were wheeling the Kingdoms to Forty again.
Whilst thus we are divided, the Pope has his will,
And thinks that at last he his Coffers shall fill;
With Protestant Plunder to make him amends,
For the infinite store that he yearly expends
To raise War and Bloodshed, and to carry on
His private designs, to the Devil best known.
For he is his Grand Counselor, who so often tried
The way for to Conquer, is first to divide;
For England United, not Rome, no nor Hell,
Have the power for to shake, nor once for to quell;
Our selves are the causers still of all our woe,
Whilst Protestants Protestants, seek to o're-throw.
Read but the Scriptures, and there you will find,
A Kingdom divided could never yet stand;
Then let all those whose Brains they did fume,
With the heats of Sedition, or have dared to presume
To think ill of their King, let them do so no more,
But a pardon of mercy, and goodness implore.
Which will grieve to the heart our Blood-seeking foe,
Who for this hundred years has sought our Woe
By Plots and devices, then let us agree,
Let Presbyter yield unto just Monarchy;
Beneath whose Protection they happy may Live,
And stiff-neck'd Baptists their Errors retrive.
When a King that is so gracious does over us reign,
What good man has reason or cause to complain?
No there is none, for all such may happily live,
And enjoy peace and plenty which Heaven does give:
By Union our Church so firm founded will stand,
That in vain all her foes then against her may band.
Let Religious Cavels that late have been bred,
All cease that the feet they may join with the head;
And cordially let each his Loyalty prove,
By striving to conquer eath other in Love:
And let kind Union Alleigeance create,
That the King and his Kingdoms may ever be great.
Then shall proud France no more dare to frown,
Least our bold Armies should take her pride down;
We conquering Ensigns to Rome might extend,
If each man was faithful and true to his friend;
There to unhive the old Pope and his Crew,
And lead them in Triumph New London to view.
The object of Envy at which they still aim,
And wish that once more they could see it in Flame;
But in vain they might wish if once we agree,
To support the great Throne of true Majesty:
To Maugre all Christendom, as we have done,
When by strict Union the Nation was one.
The let each Sect their pretenses lay down,
And to him submit that does wear Englands Crown;
And let us like Brethren in strict Amity,
To root out the Pope and his Agents agree:
That the Nations may happy remain and be blessed,
Whilst we are of plenty and pleasure possessed.
Then that proud Monarch past doubt we might awe,
Who undertakes to give Christendom Law;
And live in safety in spite of the Power
Of that Scarlet Whore who does seek to devour
Our Lives and our Fortunes, to which we make way,
When our King and his Laws we dare disobey.
On such weak pretenses as are not worth name
Then who but your selves have you reason to blame?
If Popery thrives and the upper-hand get,
Whilst murmuring against a good King you do sit:
Under whose Reign you so happy might be,
Then cease such Division, and let us agree.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke W. Thackeray, and T.
P^ssinger.


