(...)
By the directions of the Scriptures, and the examples of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Written for the good of all sorts of people, both rich
and poor, in this miserable time of necessity.
To the Tune of Aim not too high.


YOu that the Lord have blessed with riches store,
Slight not Gods word, but think upon the poor.
Bow down your earss of pity to the plaints,
Of them which now for want of succor faints.
Let charity be dealt abroad with speed,
amongst such people as are in great need,
Whose hunger starved souls are like to perish.
Through want of food, their children for to cherish.
The Scriptures bids us daily to take heed,
And have a care the hungry for to feed,
To cloth the naked in their deep dis^^esse,
And to give harbor to the harbourlesse.
But rich men's hearts of late are grown so hard,
That poor folks wants they never a jot regard:
Nor will they listen to the woeful cry,
Of them that are through hunger like to dye.
Do not we see poor aged men complain.
For want of food their hunger to sustain,
Begging of bread of every one they meet,
Till some have fallen down dead in open street,
Do we not see poor widows in distress,
Who through had times are now made husbanlesse,
Their outward sorrows and heartbreaking moan,
Is powered out, and to the world made known,
And do not many friendlesse children lie:
In The fields and under stalls in misery,
Each night being ready to be starved with cold,
And hunger which is worse a thousand fold.
There are but few regards the prisoners grief,
And fewer that gives alms for their releife,
Although it is known there can no means be wrought
They can have nothing but what is to them brought
Yet many men heaven knows, that have too much,
Whose humors and whose qualities are such
Rather then to help poor folk to broken meat,
They Will cast it under feet for dogs to eat.
Some servants also are so extreme proud,
Though by their wastres daily are allou'd,
Some certain scraps to give unto the poor,
They Will rather take it and cast it out o'th door.


BY this we see, Gods word is disobeyed,
Conscience is dead, and charity is decayed
Rich men that should the poor man's wants relieve,
Will sooner from them take then to them give,
This sin, all other sins on earth controles,
When men are so regardlesse of their souls,
They will not deal according to Gods word,
Nor yet take counsel of the living Lord,
Wherefore dear Christians: you that are in health
Having your limbs, your liberty and wealth,
I do desire you all for Christ his sake,
Some pity on poor people for to take.
Christ came into the world to do us good,
And shed as many drops of precious blood
even for the poorest wretch that goes oath ground,
as for the richest man that can be found,
Whilst in this world our Savior did remain,
He never spent one hours time in vain.
He preached the Gospel freely unto all,
That would give ear and hearken to his call,
The tidings of salvation sweet he taught,
And many miracles to pass he brought,
His bounty still he gave unto the poor,
And did relieve the needy more and more.
Five thousand poor folks on one day he fed,
With five small fishes and two loaves of bread,
Whereby that all the world might truly know,
None but himself such miracles could do.
The poor man that was born blind likewise,
When once our Savior had but touched his eyes,
Immediately he did receive his fight,
Which wonder strange was don by Christ his might
He made the deaf to hear, the dumb to talk,
He made the sick take up his bed and walk.
He cur^d the lame, and healed the Leapers evils,
And by his heavenly power he cast out devils.
Poor Lazarus when he had lain four days in grave
Whom no man could from death preserve or save,
Our Savior did restore his life again,
The holy Gospel does express it plain.
This was our blessed Saviors charity,
Bestowed upon the poor continually,
A sweet example he has left behind,
That rich folk should have poor folks still in mind
And thus the word of God has been decreed.
How they that help poor people at their need.
Shall live in bliss, after this earthly trouble,
And be with heavenly ^oyes rewarded double
L. P.

Finis.
London, Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-Hill.


