The King and Northern-man, Showing how a poor Northumberland-Man (Tennant to
the King) being wronged by a Lawyer (his Neighbor) went to the King himself to
make known his grievance.
To the Tune of, Slut.
depiction of a king

depiction of a Northumberland man

TO drive away the weary day,
a book I chanced to take in hand,
And therein I read assuredly,
a story as you shall understand:
Perusing many a History over,
amongst the Leaves I chanced to view:
The books name and Title is this,
The second Lesson, too good to be true.
There read I of a Northumberland-man,
that was born and brought up in the Kings land,
He paid twenty shillings Rent a year,
to the King, as I do understand:
By him there dwelt a Lawyer false,
that with his Farm was not content,
But over the poor man still hanged his nose,
because he did gather the Kings Rent.
He told him he his Lease had forfeit,
and that he must there no longer abide:
The K. by such Lownes has mickle wrong done
and for you the world is broad and wide,
The poor man prayed him for to cease,
and content himself if he would he willing,
And pick no vantage in my Lease,
and I shall give thee forty shilling:
I'ts neither forty Shilling, nor forty pound,
ise warrant thee, so can agree thee and me,
Unless thou yield me thy farm so round,
and stand unto my courtesy.
The Poor man said he might not do so,
his wife and his Barns will make ill wark,
If thou with my Farm wilt let me go,
thou seem a good fellow ise give thee 5 mark.
The Lawyer would not be so content,
but further in the matter he means to smell:
The neighbors bad the poor man provide his tent,
and make a submission to the King himsel.
He got a humble staff on his back,
a jerkin I wot that was of gray:
With a good blew Bonnet he thought it no lack
to the King he is ganging as fast as he may:
He had not gone a mile out o'th town,
but one of his Neighbors he did espy:
How far is it to the King, for thither i am boun,
as fast as ever I can hye.
I am sorry for you neighbor he said,
for your simplicity I make moan,
Ice warrant you, you may ask for the King,
when nine or ten days journey you have gone.
Had I wist the King had wond so far,
ise never a sought him a mile out o'th town,
He Is either had sought me, or we'd nere a come near,
at home I had rather ha spent a Crown,
But when he came to the City of London,
of every man he for the King did call:
They told him, that him he need not to fear,
for the King he lies now at the White Hall.
And with spying of Farlies in the City,
because he had never been there beforn,
He lee so long a bed the next day,
the Court was removed to Winsor that morn.
You ha lay too long, then said his Host,
you ha lay too long by a great while?
The King is now to Winsor gone,
he is further gone by twenty mile.
I think I was cursed, then said the poor man,
If I had been wise I might ha consider,
Belike the King of me has gotten some weet,
he had never gone away, had not I come hither
He fled not for you, then said his Host,
but hye you to Winsor as fast as you may:
Besure it will requite your cost,
for look what is past the King will pay?
But when he came to Winsor Castle,
with his humble staff on his back,
Although the Gates wide open stood,
he laid on them till he made 'um crack,
Why stay, may friend, art mad quoth the Porter,
what makes thee keep this stir to day?
Why, I am a Tennant of the Kings,
who have a Message to him to say:
The King has men enough, said the Porter,
your Message well that they can say:
Why, there is never a Knave the King does keep,
shall ken my secret mind to day.
I were told e're I came from home,
e're I got hither it would be dear bought,
Let me in, ise give thee a single Penny,
I see thou will ha small, e'te thou do it for naught.
Gramercy, said the Porter then,
thy reward is so great I cannot say nay:
Yonder Is a Noble Man within the Court,
i'se first hear what he does say.
When the Porter came to the Noble man,
he said he would show him pretty sport,
There Is fine a Clown come to the gate,
as came not these seven years to the Court.
He calls all Knaves the King does keep,
he raps at the Gates, and makes great din;
he is passing liberal of reward,
he would give a good single Penny to be let in.
Let him in, then said the Noble man,
come in Fellow, the Porter began say;
If thou come within thy self, he said,
thy staff-behind the Gate must stay.
And this Cuckolds Cur must lig behind,
what a Deel what a Cur have got with thee?
The King will take him up for his own sell,
Ise warrant when as he does him see.
Beshrew thy Limbs, then said the poor man,
then may thou count me a fool or worse,
I wot not what Bankrupt lies by the King,
for want of Money he may pick my purse.
Let him in with his Staff and Dog said the Lord
he gave a nod with his head, and a beck with his knee
If you be Sir King, then said the poor man,
as I can very well think ye be:
For as I was told e're I came from home,
your goodliest man that e're I saw beforn,
With so many jingles jangles about one neck,
as is about yours, I never saw none.
I am not the King, said the Noble man,
fellow, though I have a proud Coat:
If you be not the King, help me to the speech of him
you seem a good fellow, ise give you a Groat.
Gramercy said the Noble man,
thy reward is so great, I cannot say nay;
Ise go now the Kings pleasure, if I can,
till I come again besure you stay.
Here Is sike a staying, then said the poor man,
(...) the kings better than any in our country
I might a gane to the farthest Duke in the house,
neither Lad nor Lown to trouble me.
When the Noble man came to the King,
he said he could them his Grace good sport,
Here Is such a Clown come is the gate,
as came not this seven years to the Court.
He calls all knaves your Highness keeps,
and more than that, he terms them worse,
He Will not come in without his Staff and Dog
for fear some Bankrupt will pick his purse.
Let him in with his staff; then said our King,
that of his sport ^e may see some:
We Will see how he will handle every thing,
as soon as our match of Bovvls is done.
The Noble man led him through many a room,
and through many a Galleray gay,
What a deel does the King with so many houses
that he gets them not filled with Corn and Hay?
At last they spied the King in a Garden,
yet from his game he did not start,
The day was so hot, he cast off his Doublet,
he had nothing from the wast but his shirt.
Lo yonder is the King, said the Nobleman,
behold follow, lo where he goes:
Believed he is some unthrift, says the poor man,
that has lost his money, and pawned his cloths.
But when he came before the King,
the Nobleman did his courtesy:
The poor man followed after him,
And gave a nod with his head, and a beck with his knee.
And if you be Sir King then said the poor man,
as I can hardly think ye be:
Here is a good fellow that brought me hither,
is liker to be the king than ye.
I am the king his Grace now said,
fellow let me thy case understand:
If you be Sir king i am a Tenant of yours,
that was born and up brought in your own land
There dwells a Lawyer hard by me.
and a fault in my Lease he says he has found,
And all was for selling five poor Ashes,
to build an house upon your own ground.
Have thou a Lease here, said our king?
or can thou she to me the Deed?
He gave it into the kings own hand,
and said, Sir, here it is if that you can read.
Let Us see thy Lease, then said the king:
then from his Black Box he pulled it out,
He gave it into the kings own hand,
with four or five knots t'yd fast in a clout.
We'st never unlose these knots, said the king,
he gave it to one that behind him did stay.
It is a proud Horse then said the poor man,
will not carry's own Provinder along the high way
Pay me forty shillings as ise pay you,
I will not think much to unloose a knot;
I would I were so occupied every day,
i would unloose a score on 'um for a groat.
When the king had gotten these Letters read,
and found the truth wak very so,
I warrent thee, thou have not forfeit thy Lease,
if thou had feld five Ashes mo.
I, every one can warrant me,
but all your warrants are not worth a flee,
For he that troubles me and will not let me go,
neither cares for warrant of you nor me.
Thou'st have an Injunction, said our kin^.
from troubling of thee he will ceas
He Will either show thee good cause why,
or else he will let thee live in peace.
What Is that Injunction, said the poor man?
good Sir to me I pray you say,
Why, it is a Letter i will cause to be written,
but art thou so simple as thou showst to day?
Why if it be a Letter i am never the better,
keep it to thy self and trouble not me,
I could ha had a letter written cheaper at home,
and nere a come out of my own country.
Thoust have an Atachment, said our King,
charge all that thou see take thy part,
Till he pay there an hundred pound,
sure thou never let him start:
If any seem against thee to stand,
besure thou come hither straight way,
I marry, is that all ise get for my labor,
then I may come trotting every day,
Thou art hard of belief, then said our King,
to please him with Letters he was willing,
I see you have taken great pains in writing,
with all my heart ise' give a Shilling
I Will ^ave none of thy shilling said our King,
man with thy money God give theee win,
He threw it into the Kings bosom,
the money lay cold next to his skin.
Bethrew thy heart, then said our King,
thou art an Earl something too bold:
Do thou not see I am hot with Bowling,
and the money next to my skin lies cold.
I never wist that before said the poor man,
before sike time as I came hither.
If the Lawers in our Country thought 'twas cold,
they would not heap up so much together,
The King called up his Treasurer,
and bad him fetch him twenty Pound;
If ever thy Errand lie here away,
i will bear thy Charges up and down.
When the poor man saw the Gold down tendered
for to receive it he was willing:
If I had thought the King had had so mickle gold,
beshrev^de my heart i would ha kept my shilling,
The poor man got home the next Sunday
The Lavver soon did him espy;
O Sir, you have been a stranger long,
I think from me you have kept you by.
It was for you indeed, said the poor man,
the matter to the King, as I have tell:
I did as my neighbor put into my head,
and made a submission to him my sell.
What a deel did thou with the K. quoth the lawyer
could not neighbors and friends agree thee and me,
The deel a neighbor or friend that I had,
that would ha been such a days man as he:
He has gin me a Letter, but I know not what they cal't
but if the kings mords be true to me
When you have read and perused it over,
I hope you will leave and let me be.
He has gin me another, but I know not what too
but I charge you all to hold him fast,
Till he pay me an hundred Pound,
I will go tie him fast ttill a Post.
Marry God forbid, the Lawyer said,
then the Tachment was red before them there,
Thou must needs something credit me,
till I go home and fetch some me^^.
Credit, nay that is it the king forbad,
he bade it I got thee I should thee stay,
The Lawyer paid him an hundred pound
in ready money e're he went away.
Would every Lawyer were served thus,
from troubiing poor men they would cease;
They Would either show him good cause why,
or else they would let him live in peace.
And thus I end my merry song,
which shows the plain men's simpleness,
And the kings' great mercy in Righting wrongs
and the Lawyers fraud and wickedness.
Printed by and for Alex. Milbourn, at the Stationers-Arms in Green-Arbor
Court, in the Little Old Bailey.


