THE CASE considered and resolved: Whether Mr. Brooks his Pills to purge
Malignants were prescribed from Ignorance, Malice, or both?

OR (Mr. Tho. Brooks his inside turned outward:) WHEREIN All godly, humble, and
ingenious Christians, whether in a Congregational way or other, are concerned,
to inquire into the truth of those men's Commissions, who pretend themselves to
be Preachers of the Gospel.

Presented in general to the Inhabitants of Margarets New Fish-street, but
more particularly for the consideration of himself, and those of his
Congregation, to undeceive them of those gross conceits that they may have of
him, or he of himself, that he is appointed by Christ, and has a Commission to
preach the Gospel and Baptize.

Also Friendly advice to an unfriendly Neighbor, desiring him for the time to
come to abstain from reviling such persons as he never spoke word to, nor they
to him.

By Richard Parham, a Parishioner of the said Parish.

Matthew. 7.15, 20, 21. Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves: wherefore by their fruits ye
shall know them; not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.
Qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet.

London: Printed by R. A. for William Larnar at the Black Moor's head near
Fleet-Bridge. 1653.

To the impartial Reader.
Reader,
I Have observed, that many times a good Cause suffers deeply through weak
mannagement, when some there are who by the strength of persuasive oratory, and
studied eloquent expressions, are able, and do commonly persuade most of their
Auditors to believe any thing they tell them, though contrary to truth and
reason.

How prevailing a smooth and curious style is to work on the affections, it
cannot but be obvious to most; for, who is it that has not observed diverse,
when reading of histories, nay and some of those but fictions, have been drawn
forth exceedingly both to hope and fear, to joy and sorrow accordingly as they
have been variously inclined. Therefore, as from an untuned Instrument, you will
not expect melodious music, so from an unlearned Pen you cannot look for
delightful strains, or polisht lines. But such as is tendered I desire may
have as friendly acceptance, and favorable construction, as it is freely
offered and faithfully intended: And if you find truth in the Discourse, own
it, though clothed in rags: For certainly were there not an excellency in
truth, none would be drawn to love and own it on its own single account.

I confess there are many pretenders to truth, and the ways thereof, but it
is with such pretenders, as with those that followed Christ for the loaves. How
easy is it to find many men zealous to cry up truth, Ordinances, and the ways
of Christ, when a fat Parsonage, a Lecture, a gathered Congregation and some
outward preferment comes in the close. But how few, if any, think you, might we
have to preach upon Christ's allowance to his Apostles, Luke 9.3. And he said
unto them take nothing for your journey, neither staves, neither scrip, neither
bread, nor silver, neither two coats apiece. And upon the same allowance to the
Seventy he sent to preach, Luke 10.4. Behold I send you forth as lambs amongst
wolves, etc.

Reader, it is not strange to see (because we have been foretold of it) that in
the last days some should arise that should make merchandise of the word: And
if ever there were a time to try the spirits, certainly it is when that is
fulfilled spoken by Christ himself, that many false Prophets shall arise, and
deceive many, saying, lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, but he bids us not
believe them: and therefore if we are not willing to search the Scriptures, to
try who are false, there is little hope we desire those that are true. And
without controversy the Devil is most like to deceive when he is transformed
into an Angel of light.

Why should it be thought amiss, to question the truth of the Ministry, and
commission of those men that are continually questioning the truth of one
another doctrine, not only in forms of worship, but in the very points of
eternal salvation? I need not instance in those that preach universal
Redemption, or Christ dying for all mankind without exception, how hotly are
they opposed by those that hold election and reprobation of particular persons
in anoaher sense? Again, some that maintain childrens baptism, others baptizing
of believers only. Again, their difference in the manner of administration.

The cause of my setting pen to paper will be best seen in the following
Discourse, being briefly by Scripture to unmask the proud boastings of a
pretended Minister, whose last book many judicious men do conceive to be made
up of ignorance of Christ and his ways, and malice toward his Neighbors.

Secondly, that he and others of his stamp may understand that there are diverse
in and about the City, that take good notice both of their doctrine and
practice, that can so long as they are quiet suffer them to enjoy their
freedom in the largest manner they can desire, because they plead it upon the
account of conscience; but if once they break the bounds of modesty, in
reviling and abusing the Parishioners, they can soon strip them of their
Canonical Robes, and discover their deceit and hypocrisy to all the world.

Again, that the growing greatness of his self-conceit may be stopped; for if
by our silence we should grant him to be as he calls himself, viz. a Minister
of the Spirit, we should unavoidably be tied up to his Dictates, as much as the
Papists are to the Decrees of the Pope.

Reader, be pleased to take notice what disadvantages I have in presenting this
answer to his book, when the gentleman boasts in the nineth page thereof,
that be has spent more money at the University, in helps to learning, then
several of the Parishioners are worth: And therefore if the truth of what is
written cannot supqort it self, it is like to have but little help from my
Scholarship; not but that I have a high esteem of learning, so long as it is
used to its proper end, but not to have it used, as the Magitians did in
Pharoahs Court, to delude both him and the people, only be pleased to
remember, that those that were Ministers of the Gospel were fitted for the
preaching of it after another manner then studying at the University, as you
may read Acts 2.4. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, etc.

To conclude, in writing this piece I have to the best of my understanding cast
up the account, what it may amount to, and I hope I have not reckoned without
my host, which in short the reward I expect for my time and pains is;

First, that diverse ingenious, honest, and religious persons will accept it,
although it add not so much to their understandings as the casting a mite into
a treasury.

Secondly I expect the ill will and censure of such as measure other men's
writings and arguments, not by the standard of the Scripture and Reason, but by
opinions and practices grounded upon an implicit faith in their Teachers, from
these I look for an outcry like to that of Micha, Judges 18.24. And he said,
ye have taken away my gods which I have made, and the Priest and ye are gone
away, and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto me, what aileth
thee?

Lastly, that if I were considerable in that which they call Learning, I might
gain the repute to raise a swarm of such hornets about my ears, that if it
were in their power would sting me to death.

I shall not trouble thee further ar present, but leave thee to judge the
ensuing Discourse, as thou find it most agreeable to Scripture and Reason,
and so rest

Thy Friend, R. P.

To my loving and friendly Neighbors, the Parishioners of the Parish of S.
Margarets New Fishstreet, R. P. wishes you the true knowledge of the Gospel
here, and eternal happiness hereafter.
FRiends and Neighbors, having perused a piece, presented to the Parishioners
in general, entitled, Cases considered and resolved, or Pills to purge
Malignants, etc. Calculated more particularly (as Mr. Almanack-maker says) for
the Meridian of Margarets Fish-street hill, by a pretended Minister Tho.
Brooks. And amongst the rest, I having one of the hooks sent unto me, reading
it over, J thought it my duty to consider; and if I might, to be resolved of
the case, from what spirit such a language might flow; for as to my
understanding, I do not remember that ever I read such an Epistle through all
the New Testament, either from the Apostles, or any other Ministers; and by a
Pamphlet to have the Parish posted in print through the Nation, and to be
rendered under such vile terms and foul aspersions (by the malice of a Priest
or pretended Minister) as might justly, were they true, make all sober honest
men refrain our company; yea and to destroy us in our trades and livelyhoods,
by frighting people from dealing with so ungodly persons as he pretends us to
be: but for him to revile those that he never spoke word to, nor they to him;
(and therefore not knowing what temper we are of) is such a piece of madness,
that I am apt to think he either never read, or has quite forgotten the nineth
verse of the Epistle of Jude; yet Michael the Archangell, when he strove
against the devil, and disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring
against him a railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee.

Some Considerations on Mr. Brooks his Epistle to the Reader.
THe beginning of his Epistle he makes an Apology for himself, by condemning
many books, which he says, show the writers vanity, and vex the Readers
patience; but what a worthy work his is, I hope will be made appear in the
following discourse.

He tells us also, that what he has written, is out of faithfulness to
Christ, and love to souls. It Is like his zeal might be hot in writing it, being
of general concernment to the whole profession; but had he not told us, of its
being out of faithfulness; he that is no Witch might easily have perceived it
to be, not only out of faith, but also out of charity, but not out of ignorance
on any terms.

It is very true which he further speaks in his Epistle to the Reader, that
those that have the least right to Ordinances, (and I may add Ministry) make
the greatest noise and cry about them, so surely there are some such pretended
Ministers in our times, that like empty vessels make the greatest sound, who
have only a studied form of fine words, and experience proves, are as
affectionately zealous in delivering them, as those vagabond Jews the sons of
Sceava were, Act. 19.13. We adjure you by Christ whom Paul preaches; but read
on the next verse, and you will find they went not away without a reward fit
for their work.

He says further, though his candle be but little, yet he must not hide it
under a bushel, etc.

And truly I hope the gentleman will let us have so much care of our selves, as
not to follow an ignis fatnis, or such a light (as is reported) that when men
have followed it all night, they are never the nearer their journeys end in the
morning.

And though he desires, that the fruit might not be rejected for the trees
sake, I suppose it were well, could he demonstrate unto us what manner of fruit
he means; for if he means his book to be one of the fruits, some are apt to
think such fruit to be like the apples of Sodom.

As for the reasons he brings, they being considered, something may be said,
but I desire to be very brief.

And for the first, which is, that the honor, truth, and ways of Christ, which
are dearer to him then his life may be vindicated, etc.

I have read of some, who through blind zeal have offered great violence to
their own bodies, as in the case of the Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18.28. And S.
Paul says, though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits
me nothing.

And for the gentleman's charity, you have it in the second reason, which I
shall only name in short, and leave both it, and those Characters which he is
pleased to bestow on the Parishioners as testimonies to prove the truth of his
Ministry by, which are, that the foul months of profane, ignorant, malignant,
and scandalous persons may be effectually stope.

For the third, That the honest, just, and righteous proceedings of the
honorable Committee may be manifested, etc.

I confess it is a greater mercy then has formerly been enjoyed by the people
of this Nation, that those in authority are tender of the consciences of
Christians; but let me tell you, it is little or no thanks to the Priests; and
farther I find, that when ever that Tribe has been dandled on the knees of
Authority, they have commonly for a requital plotted, and many times effected
the ruin of their Promoters, if they have not on all occasions been ready to
humor them in executing their malice against pretended Heretics. I could
largely instance in this, but desire brevity.

Fourthly, that the importunate desires of several Ministers and Christians
might be satisfied, especially those to whom he preaches, etc.

Truly if several Ministers saw it before it was published, I wonder none was
so kind as to put in Imprimatur to it, or to write an Encomium in Praise of the
work, seeing they desired so importunately to have it published, that we might
have known the persons; but for those other Christians, to whom he faith he
preaches, I should rather judge it to be done by an implicit faith, then upon
mature deliberation, to post it into the world. But I remember what Christ told
the Pharisees, Mat. 23.15. that they compassed Sea and Land to make one of
their profession; and what got he, but to be twofold more the child of the
devil then before.

Fifthly, That his Ministry and good name, which should be dearer to him then
his life, may be vindicated, etc.

Oh this sweet morfell the Ministry! this great Dianah of the Ephesians!
should this become unmasked and undervalued, there might be a weeping, like
that of the Merchants of Babylon, Rev. 18. having none to buy their wares: But
for his good name which he so highly prizes, and values at so dear a rate,
certainly it had need be better then ordinary, when in exalting his own, he
defames and vilifies the reputation and good names of all the men in the
Parish, be pleased to consider one text, because I would not be tedious, it is
Mat. 7. and 5. Hipocrite first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then
thou shall see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

Sixthly, that others may be undeceived, etc.

Truly I am fully persuaded that his writing this last book will prove as
effectual for the undeceiving many people, as any thing that could have been
propounded; for I believe most people that have read the book, did before
account of him as a tender, humble, courteous, patient Saint, but I question
not, but by reading this they are clearly convinced of the contrary, and so
undeceived. And whereas he says, some said there were eighteen, others twenty
six things charged against him, I suppose what they wanted of their number
before, they may have now supplied with advantage.

The seventh is of the same kind and temper with the second, and therefore for
brevity I pass it.

Eighthly, because his Case is a gener all Case, and reaches all the godly
conscientions Miuisters in England, etc.

Truly I much commend the Captain for reserving so considerable a Party for the
Rear-guard, and it is an old Proverb, that many hands make lightwork; but had
he been confident of his Commission which he pretends to, and believing in him,
who he says sent him on the work, he need not make Proclamation to muster up
all the godly conscientious Ministers in England, for fear of theirs and his
being outed and routed by the profane, ignorant, and malignant party, as you
may read Jeremiah 1.17, 18. Thou therefore trusse up thy loins, and arise and
speak unto them all that I commanded thee, be not afraid of their faces, lest I
destroy thee before them, for I, behold I, have made thee a defenced City, and
an iron Pillar, and walls of brass against the whole Land, against the Kings
of Judah, and against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and
against the people of the Land. And so was it in the case of Stephen, Paul, and
others of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ; but we find it was notable
policy in Demetrius the Silver-Smith to maintain a tottering worship, Acts
19.24, 25, 26. ver. to call together the craftsmen of like employment; and it
was a persuasive argument to tell them, Sirs you know by this craft we have our
goods, etc. as you may read at large, and make such an application as is most
reasonable. I will not farther enlarge on this, lest I should seem tedious, but
having past the door, I would willingly take a short survey of the house and
furniture; so desiring you as loving friends and neighbors to bear with my
weakness, considering I write not myself Clark, but Fishmonger; and therefore
you may allow me a few grains of a favorable construction, more then to him
that has spent a large estate at the University, to attain the art of eloquent
writing and speaking.

Thus desiring the Lord in mercy so to direct us, that we may clearly
understand his will, revealed in his word and understanding, that he would
enable us to practice in our lives, so as may make most for his glory, and our
own comfort, both here and hereafter, is the prayer of your friend and
neighbor.

Observations on Mr. Brooks his Preamble.
THe next thing that comes in course is the Preamble he intended to make before
the Honorable Committee, etc.

And in it let us consider first his intentions, and secondly the thing it
self, and see what they will resolve us of.

First the intention of the speech.

Whither Alas does the countenance of Authority and selfeconceit, hurry
persons, who pretend most holiness, when once they forget themselves,
forsaking the fountain of living water, and digging to themselves Cesternes,
broken Cesternes that can hold no water?

In the 10. Mat. from the 1. to the 18. we find Christ sending out his
Disciples to preach the Gospel, and tells them how they ought to behave
themselves, and what usage they must expect from the world; for in the 18. ver.
he tells them; they shall be brought before Governers and Kings for his sake,
etc. ver. 19. but when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what you
shall say, for it shall be given you in that hour what you shall say, ver. 20.
for it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in
you.

Now if this be an absolute command of Christ to the Preachers of the Gospel,
not to study or premeditate what they shall say when they are brought before
Rulers and Governers, for speaking and practicing what he commands them: Truly
for my part I think the gentleman has but little cause to brag of his intended
speech before the Committee; I shall not be so cenforious, as to judge this
intended and premeditated speech a wilful sin against conscience, but rather
think it almost as great a weakness of faith, as when Peter denied his Master.

And I hope when he once considers his weakness, in letting such an Errata
slip into the world, he will be so far from boasting of it, that he will call
it in, and publish his repentance in the room of it.

The intended Preamble he begins with, it was a divine saying of Seneca, no man
sets a better rate upon virtue, then he that loses a good name to keep a good
Conscience. Ah Seneca! it is well the gentleman found you, for if he had not, he
might have lost the beginning of his Preamble, but as for the divinity in the
sentence, I wonder whether it be Church or School divinity, for we look for
sentences which are divine from Scripture, unless a miracle to confirm them;
but surely it is no miracle that his Criple should walk, having two such
cruches as Calvin and Lactantius to support it, but with an eye of pity take
compassion on the gentleman, and consider his case, which is very sad, having
such shrewd justlings on both sides, as may easily turn a weak stomach, seeing
one sort of people deny him to be a Scholar, others that he has the
qualisications, and distinguishing charactets of a Minister of the Gospel, the
first whereof I hope he has sufficiently confuted, by his Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, in his (Pills or) book, more especially by the initiall letter () of
the Hebrew word Tob, that in the text is rendered good, is bigger shen ordinary,
to show the more then ordinary excellency of a good name.

I hope this reason may silence all objections in that kind, it being produced
ab origin. And for the other, he may, if he can disprove them when he comes to
debate the business in public: But to come more closely to the business, I
remember what is said Acts 5.29. when Peter and the other Apostles were brought
before the Council to speak in defense and vindication of truth and
themselves, it was in this manner; then Peter and the other Apostles answered
and said, we ought rather to obey God then men, etc. And when Stephen answered
for himself before the Council, in that large and admitable speech of his,
Acts 7. he neither brought Seneca, Lactantius, or the like to speak for him, or
to help him out at a dead lift, but begins, Men, Brethren, and Fathers hearken,
the God of glory appeared to our Father Abtaham, while he was in Mesopotamia,
before he dwelt in Charan, etc. but such gentlemen as he is, sure think they
may speak and do any thing without control, and yet pass for true Ministers
of the Gospel.

The former part of the Preamble I take as it is, his glorying in his good
nnme, good conscience, and holdnesse therein.

As for the two former, if he has them not, I wish he may, but as for the
later, I suppose he is sufficiently furnished withal, else his Pills had never
been prescribed.

But concerning what he says of (as he is pleased to style them) the profane,
ignorant, maliguant, and seandalous Petitioners, as Lanctantius says of
Lucian, he spared neither God nor man; methinks this his opinion of them is
beyond the bounds of charity.

But if they in requital should think of him; as it was the Epitha of Peter
Aretine of Venice, which is thus englished:

The Tuscan Aretine lies herein grave,
That against all, excepting God did rave;
And if the reason you desire to have,
He knew him not, etc.
In the next place he says, it is said of Cataline that he was a compound and
bundle of warring lusts and vices, such are these Petitioners.

As for the comparison, it is fool to the purpose, and so suitable to the
persons in all particulars, that I shall leave it with an ipse dixit, as one of
his high raptures, or spiritual expressions.

But the next sentence is more admirable, wherein he compares the Petitioners
to raging made tigers, when they smell the fragrancy of Spices, suen are they,
says he, when they smell the fragrancy of the graces of Gods Spirit, in the
principles and practices, in the lives and religious exercises of the people of
God.

Truly it is a mercy, that as yet all the Petitioners that I hear of are in
their right minds, but I confess such strong purging pills as the Gentleman's
are, is the ready way to make men enraged and mad: And this I suppose may be
one of the principles and practices in the lives and religious exercises of the
people he speaks of, which if it be so, I am apt to believe he is not beside
the cushion; but if he means otherwise, I beseech him that he would not judge,
least he be judged.

In the next place he tells us (if we have faith enough to believe his bare
word) that he has preached the Gospel above these thirteen years, and not
only so, but that he has many precious seals of his Ministry, which are his
living Epistles, and walking Certificates.

Truly the more holy, just, and good men are, and that they love virtue and
goodness for its own sake (and not pretending Religion to attain preferment,
and such as may just suit with the temper of the times) I believe it ought to
be a rejoicing to men and Angels; but if conversion from profaneness, to an
acknowled gement and profession of faith, nay and to be zealous in a form of
worship, and blameless in conversation, be an argument to prove a true
Ministry, I suppose very many persons under both the forms of Episcopacy and
Presbytery, were and are as holy and blameless in their conversations, as any
of those that pretend to more pure di^pensations: And for all that, few of our
Churchmen have scarre so much charity as to judge them to be true Ministers of
the Gospel; nay if the Gentleman's argument may be granted, I suppose the
Popish Priests and Jesuits might produce three for our one, and upon that
account prove themselves as true Ministers as any in the world.

In the next place he says, in all his time none have showed themselves so
malicious, impudent, and ignorant, as to petition against him.

As for their being ignorant in petitioning against him, it may be it is true,
they not apprehending he could so effectually oppose them when it came to a
hearing; but for the other terms of malice and impudence for petitioning is a
doctrine contrary to the principles of all reason and liber^y; and if
petitioning, which has generally been concluded on, to be the most humble,
innocent, and harmless way of address, if that must be branded with impudence
and malice, it were well if the gentleman had prescribed something in the room
of it that might have been less offensive to his stomach; and if petitioning
deserve the brand of impudence, what titles would he have found for a
protestation against him!

But in conclusion, he is confident, that this act of the Petitioners shall
make for his external, internal, and eternal good.

So am I as confident as himself; and first for his external good, which I
conclude to be his maintenance, I believe he is more fully confirmed in the
benefice by their ooposition, then he was before.

Secondly, for the internal good, he may be much more quieted in his mind,
being delivered from the fear of any more such oppositions, having crushed the
Petitioners so effectually.

Thirdly, for the eternal good, if he should unfainedly repent, and desire
forgiveness of the Petitioners, for those black brands and foul aspersions he
has cast upon them, either by ignorance or malice, I question not but they
would freely forgive him.

And for a close to the Preamble, I should advise the gentleman, if ever he
should meet with such a sort of people again, who as he conceives, are such
opposers of the Ministry, not to follow the dictates of his own brain, how
good soever they may seem unto him, for as the Prophet Jeremiah says 17. and
9. the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it? But to follow the absolute rule of Christ, if he be one of his
messengers, which he gave to his Apostles in Mat. 10. and 14. and whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when you depart out of that house
or City, shake off the dust off your feet.

Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah,
in the day of Judgment, then for that City.

Having done with the Preamble, the next thing in course is the Petition it
self.

Which if this discourse should chance to come to the hands of strangers, they
may take a full view of it, and make the most strict scrutiny into it, and see
whether either it, or the Petitioners, are such monsters as they are rendered.

To the Honorable Committee for Plundered MINISTERS.
The humble Petition of the Parishioners of Margaret New-Fishstreet, London,
whose names are hereunto subscribed.
Showing,
THat one Mr. Thomas Brooks, was by order of your Honors, dated the twenty
third of March, 1651. appointed to preach for a month, next ensuing, as
Probationer; to the end, that upon the Parishioners, and the said Mr. Brooks
mutual trial of each other, the said Mr. Brooks might continue, or your
Petitioners have some other to officiate amongst them.

Your Petitioners are humbly bold to offer to your Honors consideration, that
they have had trial of the said Mr. Brooks ever since your Honors Order, but
cannot find that comfort to their souls they hoped; nor indeed is the said Mr.
Brooks so qualified to your Petitioners understandings, as to remain any longer
with them. And further, your Petitioners say, that the said Mr. Brooks refuses
to afford your Petitioners the use of the Ordinances of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, nor will he bury their dead.

The Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that your Honors will be pleased to
revoke your Order, and give liberty to your Petitioners for six months, to
present a fit person to your Honors to be their Minister; and in the mean time,
that Sequestrators may be appointed to provide for the service of the Cure, out
of such money, as shall arise for tithes out of the said Parish; And, etc.

IF you please seriously to consider of the Petition, I believe you will not
find one word of Malignancy or disaffection to the present Government, but
merely to entreat for that in point of Religion, which to their understandings
seems most reasonable; and if this be not agreeable to all those principles
and reasons which have been still pressed for liberty of Conscience, let the
world judge. And I hope the gentleman will not force a practice, before he
convinces the understanding.

Observations on some of his Quaeries.
IN the next place I come to the Quaeries he makes on the Malignants Petition,
as he terms them.

First, whereas he says, it was never propounded to him to preach as
Probationer amongst them, etc.

Truly how or upon what terms he came in I know not, neither did I trouble my
self about the choice, either for or against him, but I thought with my self,
and as some others said, we had as good to have him as a worse, seeing one we
must have; neither knew I of the Petition, or ever see it, before he printed
it; neither had I troubled my self with him or his way, had he been quiet; but
as I said before, for him to render the Parish in general under a scandal,
but especially the Petitioners, some of whom for diverse years I have known, and
truly may justly believe they are as honest, just, and righteous as himself, I
am sure more then some of his Congregation, I could say more, but will not,
least I might be accounted a f^atterer.

But truly it may be the Petitioners, as well as my self, care not to spend
our time to hear; this is a brave word, this a fine word, this is a sweet word;
and to have him speak with reverence, that had not Christ accomplished the work
of Redemption, for which he was sent, that God would have made heaven too hot
to hold him, and the like, but considering the whole Parish to lie under a
reproach, although I being one of the meanest, yet thought it my duty, (though
but weakly) to take off the stain so much as I might, for the Proverb is tread
on a worm, and it will turn: And least our silence might conclude us to be
altogether such as the gentleman himself, and friends, who pressed him to publish
the book are: pleased to term us, there could not in reason have been less
said.

He says, he preached above twenty Sermons in the winter on the Lecture
nights: But I wish he had told us what he means by preaching, because I judge
the Gospel preaching is to speak as the Spirit gives utterance, and not the
reading of a few written Notes, that have been premeditated and studied five or
six days before.

And also I further desire to know what rule or example there is in the
Gospel, that ever any Minister of the Gospel did, or ought to preach upon
trial to gain a benefice.

In the fourth Quaery he says, the profane, malignant Petitioners had neither
a hand in choosing, nor hearts to make trial of his Ministry, and that they
may well have a black brand put upon them, as men void of common honesty and
ingenuity, etc. with more of the same language, which I suppose he has done to
the purpose.

For answer to which, I say, if it should be granted that they had neither a
hand in choosing, nor hearts to make trial of his Ministry, yet I suppose the
gentleman had a trial of their money, and also a heart to make use of it,
though by his own words they had nothing for it, and therefore in modesty
might have used them more kindly: And whereas he says, that what the
Petitioners speak in the Petition, is as far from truth, as the Petitioners are
from being real friends to the present Authority of the Nation; it is clear
that the Petitioners do own the present Authority, by their humble address to
the Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers.

In answer to what he says, I beseech you bear with a little digression. What
shall I say to the gentleman? shall I retort his own language upon him, as one
being void of common honesty and ingenuity? for had the Petitioners formerly
been malignant, and enemies the present Government, yet considering the present
Authority, have been graciously pleased to pass a general Act of Pardon and
Oblivion, whereby all that emulation and heart-burning between several
parties, might be a greed and quite forgotten, for him to rake up the embers,
and blow the coals of division afresh in that kind, by branding of them with
that which ought not once to be mentioned, argues but little in the gentleman,
either of ingenuity or honesty.

But seeing that he is of such a strain, that he cares not what it be, so he
can find any thing to render the persons odious, with whom he is offended, I
shall take the boldness to remember him of some passages that may be very
considerable, as to the thing in hand.

How his affections might be to the present Government in the late Kings time,
I know not; but I did then, and still do know diverse persons which are most
zealous for a Congregationall way; that were the greatest promoters of his
interest of any people I knew in the City, and such as were not ordinary
members, but Preachers so called; I could name the persons, time, and places,
but shall only give a hint of something that I speak upon my own knowledge,
that you may know, and take notice how little the present Authority are
beholding to some Churchmen, though since I see the same persons are
exceedingly countenanced and advanced.

About the time the late King was brought to Hampton Court, these Churchmen had
a Petition on foot to press on a Personal Treaty, they used all the
prevailing arguments that might be to get hands to it, and persons to own it.
Amongst the rest, says a Preacher, I see no safety, nor how the breach can be
made up without compliance with the King. And said moreover, that he had an
opportunity to speak to him, and that he thought there was much of God in him,
and that he would be willing to comply to any thing, both religious and civil,
and abundance more that was very high in the commendation of him; as in
particular, that he offered to grant the Militia for so many years, etc.

Answer was made, that he had no Militia left to grant, for if it had been his
before, yet the right was only by the power of the Sword, and by the same
power he had lost it; but if he had a right to grant a term of years, that then
the power must rest in his person, which was a doctrine contrary to all the
Declarations of Parliament in that case.

He said moreover, that he would grant Liberty of Conscience, as much as could
be desired with an Act of Oblivion, and diverse other things which are too long
to insert.

But answer was made, he was not in a capacity to grant, for he was no better
then a prisoner, and that he had opposed so long as he had any power left; and
for him to grant an Act of Oblivion, was for to lay all the guilt and blood of
the Nations on them that opposed his proceedings, and how dishonorable it would
be to ask forgiveness of a conquered enemy, let the world judge: But after a
large debate, says the Gentleman, I profess, I thought not that what I
propound might not be for a public good, I would never persuade to it: I had
never instanced this, but that the vail might be taken off from some Churchmens
faces, that the world might not suppose they were the only Promoters of the
present Authority, when indeed the fault of the Personal Treaty, under which
diverse others suffered, they were the most guilty of, in pressing and
persuading to it, of any that ever I spoke with.

But amongst all their pretendings to the annoynting of the Spirit, and to make
known the mind and will of God, that there should not be one found amongst them
that could read the handwriting as it was done by Daniel, when he told the K.
Belshazzar, this is the interpretation of the thing, Dan. 5.6. God has numbered
thy Kingdom, and finished it, thou art weighted in the balance, and found too
light, etc.

But truly I could not find any of our Churchmen, who pretend so much to know
the mind of God, but were as ignorant of what God by his providence was about
to do in overthrowing the late King, and renting the Kingdom from him, as any
the Magitians, Astrologians, and Southsayers were to interpret the handwriting
to the King of Babylon And as far from truth, and the mind of God were they in
prosecuting the personal Treaty, as those Prophets that counseled Ahab to go
up to Ramoth Giliad and prosper.

Friends, I desire you would not look on me as an enemy to the ways of Christ,
and Gospel obedience; for I know diverse persons, who are eminent for a holy,
just, and righteous conversation, unto whom I stand greatly engaged upon the
highest account of friendship, that at this time, and I believe according to
their light, do in sincerity of heart walk in Church Fellowship: And diverse
others of my acquaintance, who upon good grounds have forsaken those ways,
though in the highest forms, and yet retain the principles of a holy life to
wards God, and just dealings toward men; and therefore why should we be ready
to judge those that are either above us, or below us in the practice of
religious duties, seeing the Apostle concluded, that there was as well milk for
babes in Christ, as meat for strong men.

But to return to the thing in hand, in the next place he says, the
Petitioners use to hear such, whose malignant principles and practices are such
as their own.

Truly whoever they hear, I believe they may soon hear as true Ministers as
himself: but it is no wonder to hear those that are uppermost to be offended
and angry with those that conform not to their way, though the same persons,
whilst kept under, were the greatest writers and pleaders for Liberty of
Conscience in the largest extent of any people in the Nation, but as the
Proverb is, the Priest forgets that he was Clark; so when some have attained to
what liberty themselves desire, they are presently ready to tie up all others
to their own humors, as I might largely instance.

He tells us farther, that they say, they cannot find that comfort to their
souls they hoped.

Truly this seems to me that they would gladly hear a Gospel Minister, by
whose preaching and practice they might receive both profit and comfort; and
certainly there cannot be a surer sign of their desire to have it, then their
being sensible of the want of it. But alas Christ tells the people, Mat. 7.16.
that they must not expect to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles.

In the next place he is pleased to Quaerie, and runs a large circumference
with inkhorn terms, the substance whereof is to prove, that the Petitioners
have no right to Gospel comforts.

For a brief answer to which in general, I say, if the largest and most
gracious tenders of the free mercy of God for forgiveness of sin, and eternal
salvation by Jesus Christ, be not to be offered to the vilest of sinners, I
must unlearn diverse Scriptures, which I do believe expressly prove, that not
only the mercy of God is so infinite, and the satisfaction of Christ so
undeniably full and sufficient for the forgiveness of sins and eternal
salvation by him for all persons, that it is to be tendered to all without
exceptions, unless such only who are so holy, that they think they need it
not, for Christ himself speaks in the like case, the whole have no need of the
Physician, and that he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; yet still the proud Pharisees laid this to his charge, that he was
a company keeper with, and a friend to Publicans and sinners. I speak not this
to justify any person in a wicked way; but certainly, if the infinite love and
mercy of God be not the way to bring in ignorant, profane and scandalous
persons to obedience and conformity to the ways of Christ, I would gladly
learn, what is meant by the Commission Christ gave to his Apostles, Mark ult.
and 15. and he said unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, etc.

Now if the Gospel be the declaration of glad tidings of salvation; and that it
must be preached to every creature, by the express command and Commission of
Christ himself, I wonder how any dare be such Traitors to the Lord Jesus, if he
has appointed them to preach the Gospel, as to conceal the glad tiding of the
Gospel of grace and mercy, and to thunder out the curses and three atnings of
the Law in the room of it, against them, who they call ignorant and profane
sinners.

We find upon the birth of Christ, Luke 1.10. the Angel, who was the messenger
to declare Christ's coming into the world, what said he but this? Be not afraid,
for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be to all people,
etc.

And in the 13. when the heavenly soldiers sung a Halelujah to the highest,
was it any thing but glory to God on high, peace on earth, and good will
toward men?

Friends, the consideration of the Gospel, as it is made known in the
Scriptures, is a thing so large, admirable and excellent, that in this
difcourse I have neither time nor opportunity to treat of it, and befides some
famous men have excellently, and are at present writing on that subject.

I should have made bold to have unravelled the Quaeries, piece by piece, and
have seen how agreeable they are in all particulars to the mind of Christ in
the Gospel: But I have given you this but as a taste of what I intend, if ever
it please God I shall speak to it again; yet in this small glass I hope the
gentleman may see, of how far different and strange a countenance he is of from
a true Minister of the Gospel, by the matter contained in his late book, and
also I desire an answer to this Quaery.

Whether the tender of the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, for remission of sins,
faith, and salvation, be to be made to them in a Church Fellowship, or those
without?

That I may be brief, I desire you seriously to consider one Scripture, because
the gent leman pretends to so many heavenly enjoyments, gifts of the Spirit,
and the bird in the bosom, that makes a heaven of joy in his heart, for it is
possible he may be deceived as much, if not more then that people which God
ownes to be a true Church; and it is that which God himself speaks to the
Church of Laodicea, Rev. 5.17. For thou say I am rich, and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing, and know not how thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

I think he may upon ferious considerations of his Ministry, say as Job did,
39, 37. I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken but will answer no
more.

In the next place the gentleman tells us of his qualifications, and because he
says further, that the understandings of ignorant, profane, and secandalous
persons, are not a fit rule or standard to try the abilities or qualifications
of such Ministers as are not Ministers of the letter, but of the Spirit.

Quaeries propounded to be debated in Public.
FOr the trial of his gifts and qualifications, I here propound, that which I
hope is equal, just, and reasonable, that we may in a friendly, loving, and
free manner, make an enquiry into the Scriptures, and see what they hold forth
to be the characters and qualifications of a true Minister of the Gospel; and
to that end, that he would save a labor of writing, and charge of printing,
and give the Parishioers, and some other friends, a public meeting, once a
week in the Parish Church, where freedom of speech may be to all that desire
it, they speaking to the Question, and one at a time, and to spend two hours in
an evening in the inquiry of the characters and qualifications of a Minister of
the Spirit; and in this I hope he will grant the Scripture to be a right rule,
and equal standard.

In order whereunto, I shall insert a few Quaeries as fit matter to be inquired
into.

In the 4. of the Ephesians 8.11, 12. we find what Ministers Christ gave to the
Church at his Ascension; in these words, and when he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, and he gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc.

In this Scripture we find two things chiefly contained, First, what Ministers
Christ gave, Secondly, what end he gave them for.

Now we may find in Scripture the several qualifications that belong to every
one of these Officers, and distinguishing characters to know thew one from
another,

And that it is so, I shall set down the distinguishing characters which the
Scriptures afford us to know an Apostle by. And leave the Gentleman, because he
says he is a Minister of the Spirit, to give the like of the others according
to the Scripture, that we may know under which of those Qualifications and
distinguishing Characters he comes; for a Pastor is not an Evangelist, nor an
Evangelist a Prophet, etc.

The first distinguishing Character that we find of an Apostle in Scripture
is, that he is a chosen witness of the Resurrection, Act. 1.22. 3.15. 4.33.
10.39.41. Luk 24.48.

2. An Apostle is one sent forth to preach the Gospel to all the world, Mat.
28.19, 20. Mar. 16.14. to the end.

3. The office of an Apostle did comprehend in it all the other offices of the
Ministry, Act. 6.2.3.

4. An Apostle was one endued with all the gifts of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.12.
Act. 13.9.

5. An Apostle was able to communicate these gifts by the laying on of their
hands, Act. 19.6, 17.

2. Querie, Whether the office of Apostles was to cease in the persons of those
to whom the Commission was at first given?

And to this end I pray consider, how long the Promise lasted, which is, Lo, I
am with you always until the end of the world. Christ could not be with their
Persons, for we find in Scripture, that most of them were martyred in a few
years after his Ascension; and yet the Commission of an Apostle was to teach
and baptize all Nations, teaching them to abserve all things whatsoever Christ
had commanded them. And in the 4. of the Ephesians, we find that upon the
Ascension of Christ, they were the first and chief Officers of the Church,
verse 12. that were given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the Edifying the body of Christ: till all come in the unity
of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the Stature of Christ, etc. I will not enlarge farther at present
expecting to have it debated at large in Public.

And because he pretends much of having a commission to preach and Baptize,

3. I Querie who appointed him to preach or gave him a Commission to Baptize.

Which two things I expect to have substantially proved by Scripture.

4. Querie, Where we find any in Scripture that did Baptize with water after
Christ's Ascension, that did not also Baptize with the holy Ghost. Acts 19.2, 3,
4.5. And he said unto them, have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?
and they said unto him, we have not so much as heard, whether there be any Holy
Ghost, and he said unto them, unto what then were ye Baptized? and they said,
unto John's Baptism, etc. And in verse 6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon
them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and Prophesied.

5. Querie, Whether the Baptism with water after Christ's Asscension was the
Baptism of Christ, or a contiouation of John's Baptism? And consider these
Scriptures, and diverse others of the same kind, Mat. 3.11. Mark 3.8. I indeed
Baptize you with water, but he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost. Act.
11.15, 16. And as I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at
the beginning: Then remembered I the word of the Lord how that he said John
indeed Baptized with water, but ye shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost, etc.

6. Querie, What the Scriptures do hold forth the Baptism of the Spirit to
be, after the Ascension of Christ?

We find the Disciples of Christ furnished with very great gifts while he was
with them, yet still he sixth their thoughts upon what they should expect to
receive after his departure from them, as Joh. 7.39. But this he spoke of the
spirit, which they that believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.

7. Querie, What command the Gentleman has in his Commission to Biptize
Infants?

8. Whether Infants can possibly be capable of the Baptism of the Spirit,
having neither knowledge, faith, nor repentance?

9. Whether in Scripture we read of any that did Baptize with water after
Christ's Ascension, whose Preaching and Doctrine was not confirmed by fignes and
miracles?

10. Whether the Scripture holds forth that all the gifts of the Spirit were in
particular Churches, after the Ascension? And these I hope will be a sufficient
ground work, for the beginning of such an inquiry, as through Gods blessing
thereon, may much enlighten our understandings in the order, method, and
practice of Gospel obedience.

I shall make bold to add two Queries more, which are of an other nature, which
I would willingly know.

1. Whether it be not jure Divino, and agreeable to the practice of the
Primitive Preachers, for men nowadayes to receive money for Preaching, from
such as never intend to hear them?

2. Whether it be not more reasonable for me, to send the Gentleman an Answer
to his book, then for him to send me a Paper of his Pills, at adventure, not
knowing the constitution of my body, and having never spoke word to me in his
life?

But to hasten to a Conclusion, because I am straightened in time, and have not a
convenience to answer to every particular which he calls Reasons, especially
that Profane persons ought not to be admitted into a Church Society. And
instances in the case of Judas.

For the understanding whereof, I desire to know whether Christ and his
Disciples were a Church before the Administration of the Sacrament of the
Supper? Luke 22.19. if they were, then certainle Judas was a Member, though a
wicked one.

But for that lamentable Lame thing which he calls his fourth Reason, which is
this: That Christ acted in giving the Sacrament, Ministerially as he was man,
leaving them a Pattern to walk by that should come after him, and such was the
carriage of Christ toward Judas all along. Now from his own words, if this be
the Pattern that Christ left to his succeeding Ministry, (whereof he pretends
himself to be one,) I Querie who granted him a dispensation not to follow it?

And for that bold affirmation of his in the following words, that Christ did
not act toward Judas, as he was an all-seeing God, or the heart maker or heart
searcher, etc. Truly I suppose he would have the Reader to take that upon
trust, or it may be it is one of his Revelations, for he brings not the least
tittle of Scripture to prove it by. But I wonder what he thinks of Peter's
acting in the case of Ananias and Saphira, Act 5. whether he acted in the
Ministerial office as God or man, when all will grant, that Christ was Master,
and Peter but Servant?

But that point of the lawfulness of refusing profane Persons, who desire to
join themselves to a Congregation, would ask a large debate; and though I
might draw diverse Arguments from this case of Judas. I shall offer one instance
more Material, which is, Act. 8.13. where we find Simon Magus though a Witch,
yet was he admitted into the Church by being baptized. Though afterward Peter
told him, ver. 23. That he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity.

Truly I gladly hasten to a Conclusion, and I hope by this little I say, you
will easily judge what manner of Mettle the rest of the Gentleman's Discouse is
made up of. And though he may tell us of his leaving the Spirit, yet I suppose
he was not guided by the Spirit in the penning his last book (unless it were
a Spirit of delusion) for the Spirit which Christ promised, John 16.13. Howbeit
when he is come which is the Spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth.
But to my understanding, I never read vanity, in so large a Character and small
a volume, as in the book entitled, Pills to purge Malignants, considering to
what end he says it was Composed. Well, let us rather pity then provoke the
Gentleman, by discovering any more of his weakness, at present remembering this
charitable Motto: Humanum est errare.

Thus having briefly, gently, and seriously (as I may) handled the Gentleman's
discourse, I hope he will as a loving Neighbor, kindly accept it, when he
finds that he has some Neighbors, that are willing, so far as abilities
will give them leave, to requite his Courtesies.

And for a Conclusion, I desire that some passages in Scripture, which are of
wonderful worth and weight may be humbly, earnestly, and ingeniously
considered, which may tend both to the obedience and comfort of those that
desire truly to fear God, and walk in his ways.

The Conclusion.
We find in Scripture that there are two fearful sins that most people have
been guilty of; The one in being Stubborn and Rebellious against the Will and
Council of God, declared by his Messengers and Ministers: The other delight in
believing and trusting in Lying Vanites, viz. the Dreams and Divinations of
men's hearts whom God never sent. And to the end we may not fall under either of
these extremes; it is our duty to take a survey of both these particulars, and
to inquire by that perfect rule of Scripture so far as we are able to
understand, and try, who are true, and who are false Ministers and Messengers.
That so as on the one hand we may not be found Fighters against God, or
Contemners of his Ministers; so on the other, we might not by blind obedience,
be so led by blind guides, that at last both we and they fall into the ditch.

As to the first of these, we find the people of Israel to be greatly guilty
of, both before, in, and after the Captivity. You cannot be ignorant of diverse
examples in that kind.

Jer. 7.13, 14, 15. Therefore now because ye have done all these works, says
the Lord. and I rose up early and spoke unto you, but when I spoke you would
not hear me, neither when I called would you answer, etc. And I will cast you
out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of
Ephraim, verse 26. Chap. 7.8. Chap. 17.23.44.16. As for the word that thou have
spoken unto us, in the name of the Lord we will not hearken unto thee, etc. And
so all the other Prophets declare the peoples Obstinacy, Contempt, and
Rebellion to the Commandments of God declared by his Messengers. But
afterward, more especially in abusing those gracious tenders of mercy unto
eternal salvation by Christ himself, and his Ministers, as is testified John
1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. And upon the first
sending out of the Apostles, Mat. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles,
and into any of the Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. 6. But go rather to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Yet for all this mercy and loving
kindness of Christ Jesus, we find their Obstinacy and Rebllion come to a
height of Blasphemy, when contrary to their own consciences, they told Christ
that he cast out Devils by Belzehub: Certainly a People come to such a
fullness of iniquity, cannot be far from that destruction, spoken of Proverbs
1.24. to the 31. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand and none would regard but have despised all my Council, and would none of
my correction; I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes like sudden desolation: and your destruction shall come like a
whirle-winde, when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, etc.

I might much enlarge this, but desire Brevity, that the discourse may not show
the Writers Vanity, or vex the Readers Patience.

Now as to the second thing which is the peoples trusting in lies and vanities,
even to their own confusion. Jer. 7.19.

We shall find if we serioufly examine whence it springs, that the root of
all the mischiefs, misery, and destruction of Nations, is from their wicked
Priests, lying Prophets, and pretended Messengers and Ministers of God, whom he
never sent, nor gave any Commission unto. How sad was the case of Ahab, Kings.
22. to have the advice and be thrust forward by the council of four hundred
lying Prophets to his own destruction.

We find when the Lord sent Jeremiah to declare his wrath against the people
of Israel; in chap. 2. ver. 2. he mildly reasons with the people, saying, Thus
says the Lord, I remember thee with the kindness of thy youth, and the love
of thy marriage, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness in a land that
was not sown: Verse 3. Israel was a thing hallowed unto the Lord: Verse 5.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? But in ver. 8. we have the
reason fully; The Priests said not, where is the Lord? And they that should
minister the Law knew me not, the Pastors also offended against me, and the
Prophets prophesied in Baal, and went after things that did not profit. And
chap. 4.30, 31. An horrible and filthy thing is committed in the Land, etc.
Chap. 14.14. The Prophets prophecy lies in my name, I have not sent them,
neither did I command them, neither spoke I unto them, but they prophecy unto
you a false vision, and divination, and vanity, and deceitfulness of their
own heart. Chapter 18.15. Because my people have forgotten me, and have burnt
Incense to vanity, and their Prophets have caused them to stumble in their
ways, from the ancient ways; to walk in paths and way that is not trodden.
Chapter 23.1.21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not
spoken unto them, yet they prophesied.

I might bring a cloud of witnesses to confirm what has been asserted, but
you may read them at large.

But let us inquire whether they gave the people any better counsel in the
time that Christ and his Disciples preached amongst them. Truly all along the
New Testament we find them opposing the Doctrine, and persecuting Christ and
his Disciples in person; and that they might be sure to fill up the measu^e of
their transgression, and to bring the Blood of Christ and all the Prophets,
upon their own heads, and unavoydable ruin on the Nation, you may read their
council at large, Mat. 27.1. When the morning was come, all the chief Priests
and Elders of the people, took council against Jesus to put him to death, and
in the 20. you may see the influence they had upon the people: But the chief
Priests and Elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barrabas and
destroy Jesus: But their wages was as sad as their work, when there was not
one stone left standing upon another in Jerusalem that was not thrown down.
But were not these people a zealous, strict, and exact people in their
Religion, and ways of Worship? Yea, and we find Christ often speaking of it,
but withal discovering the worm at the root, as their making of long
prayers, when they meant to devour widows houses? And their tything of herbs,
when they neglected Judgment and Righteousness, etc. Did they not condemn
Christ for keeping company with the Publicans and sinners, and yet did not they
drive a trade of treason by wholesale with Judas?

Think you they were not like to teach the people truth well, when they had a
Mint of Lies going to furnish the Roman Soldiers with? when they hired them to
say, his Disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept?

And were they not a people that boasted much in their Church and Ordinances,
John 8.33. Of being Abraham's children and free, and yet at that time they
would, and afterward did murder the Lord of life and glory? Was it not common
for them to fast (it may be twice a week) but was not the end to smite with
the fist of wickedness? And has here not lately been Conspiracy and Rebellion
(against the present Government) rapt in the mantle of private Fasts, which the
hand of Justice has found out, and deservedly punished for all the Cloaks of
precisest Religion? If that Tribes sufferings in this Nation has not been
great, it is the better for them, if they make a right use of it; and leave
them to consider their own conditions, for these last 12. years. But I will
give you a few examples of former times, and if to them they do not, yet to me
they strike Horror and amazement, to consider the dreadful dealing of God,
toward such as have pretended to be his Messengers, when indeed they have
been absolute Liars, running greedily after the error of Balaam, to Prophecy
for reward, and may well expect the reward of Corah. And that you may be sure
to know such deceivers, they have so large a Character, that he that runs may
read it, Jude 19. these be they that separate themselves, having not the
Spirit. We find in the 1 Kings 18. four hundred and fifty of Baals Prophets,
that after they had cried and bawled all day, and cut themselves with Knives
and Lances, could not prevail any thing, to persuade the people in the
presence of the true Prophet Elijah, what a tragical hand did the poor
deluding wretches make at the Brook Kishon. Jeremiah 28.15, 16.17. Then said
the Prophet Jeremiah, unto the Prophet Hananiah, the Lord has not sent thee,
but thou make this people to trust in a lie, therefore thus says the Lord,
behold I will cast thee from of the face of the earth; this year thou shall
dye because thou have taught Rebellion against the Lord. So Hananiah the
Prophet dyed the same year in the seventh month. I will amongst many, give you
but one instance more, because I hasten, Jer. 19.21, 22. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts and God of Israel, of Ahab the Son of Kolaiah, and Zedekiah, the Son
of Maasejah, which prophecy a lie unto you in my name, behold, I will deliver
them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and he shall slay them
before your eyes: And of them shall be taken up a Curse by all the Captivity of
Judah, which are in Babylon, saying, the Lord make thee like Zedekiah, and like
Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire.

Truly the Doctrine and use of these examples are so plain, and easy to be
understood in the Text, that I shall forbear any large applications, but come
to the thing, and that in short. It has been the misery of the world in
general, to pin their faith on their teachers sleeves. And without
Controversy, if the Leaders of the People cause them to err, they that are
led by them, will be destroyed. How many hundred thousands perished in dancing
after the pipe of Peter the Monk by his pretended revelation? perswaswading
almost all Christendom, to fight for the recovery of the holy Land from the
Turks, when the Scripture says expressly, Luke 21.24. That the Jews should be
led away Captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem should be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

Nay what brawlings, quarrellings and fightings is there in any Nation, but to
be sure the Clergy so called, are promoters of it. (I wonder what comfort the
Episcopal and Presbyterian Clergy have in their former abetting their
Interest) and assuredly what ever at present is uppermost, if it be not of God
it will fall. With what fury do both Popish and Protestant Churchmen excite
poor souls to murder one the other, upon a Religious account, the one because
Idolaters, the other because Heretics. Nay, none so eager as they which
pretend most holiness, thundering out curses of the largest size, upon the
refusers, as they pretend, of Christ and the Gospel, when indeed it is only
to ^^pe the power which keeps them under, whereby they may get into the Chair
to Lord it, as did the late Presbiters and others, in the ruin of their
Fathers the Bishops, but no more of this at present.

Now to the thing which is of most concernment, how shall we do to know who are
true Ministers, and if it be p^ssible to walk in a Gospel obedience; for answer
whereunto, in short, I cannot find in Scripture that ever God appointed any to
declare his will unto any person or people, but that they had something more
then their bare words to testify their sending as it was in the case of Moses
to Pharaoh, of the man of God that come from Judah, and prophesied against the
Altar in Bethel, 1 Kings cha. 13. of Elijah and Elisha, and so through the Old
Testament; and in the New Testament Christ himself says, John 5.31. if I
should bear witness of my self, my witness were not true, and ver. 36. but I
have greater witness then that of John, for the works which the Father have
given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me: Without question the Scribes and Pharisees had a formal
way of praying and teaching, but when Christ taught, he taught as one having
authority, and not like unto them; and he tells those hypocrites, Mat. 15.8, 9.
This people draws near unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their
lips, but their heart is far off from me, but in vain they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the traditions of men. Joh. 9.1, 2. then called he his twelve
Disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to
heal diseases, and he sent them forth to preach the Gospel, and to cure the
sick, Mat. 10.7, 8. And as you go preach saying, the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand, heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise up the dead, cast out the
devils, freely ye have received, freely give, and this not to Apostles only,
but promised to believers in general, Mark 16.17. And in the 20. we find the
word confirmed by miracles: Now if this was the confirmat^on of the Gospel
Ministry, I wonder our Ministers are not endued with such gifts, or prove to
us from Scripture, that the Church and Ministry was to continue, and yet the
gifts to cease. But it may be objected that these gifts were given for bringing
in of unbelievers, it were well if all in the Nation were believers, but
certainly we had need have something to ground our faith and obedience upon,
more then bare words, seeing if you hear four preachers upon one text, it is
much if three be not of a different opinion. But then comes in the great
objection, what if we have not a true Ministry nor Ordinances, then we have no
faith? well, not too hasty, it was a serious discourse that the woman of
Samaria had with Christ, John 4. about worship, and ver. 21. Jesus said unto
her, woman believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
not at Jerusalem worship the Father, etc. and ver. 24. God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth.

Certainly where much is given, much is required, and so on the contrary; but
if by reason of the overspreading of abomination God has withdrawn those
visible gifts from the Ministry, must we presently make us Gods to go before
us? let us rather a little consider what the Lord speaks by the Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 50.11. behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about
with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have
kindled, this shall you have at mine hand, you shall lie down in sorrow. When
Moses for a while had left the Israelites, and was gone into the Mountain,
Exodus 32. as you may read at large, it was a woeful worship they performed to
their god-calf, and surely Aaron. made a bad, bad exchange of his Priesthood,
in making an Altar, and proclaiming a holy day to it. I might instance in
diverse the like particulars, but I hasten; yet let me offer one thing to
consideration, which has been a brand fixed on diverse holy conscientious
persons, that they are a people that despise the Ministry, and live above
Ordinances; no certainly it is their grief and sorrow of heart that they live
below, and without them; and think you any persons professing Christ Jesus,
dare be such rebels to him, as not to yield obedience to his commands,
especially when he tells them, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light,
but blame them not for not believing Michals image to be David's person, 1 Samuel
19.13. And now let us consider what gracious promises are made to such a people
that see themselves at so great a loss, read Isaiah 50.10. Who is among you
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, Isaiah 41.17, 18.
Chapter 42.7.40.31.
that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. chap, 30.18. and therefore will the Lord wait that
he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are all they that
wait for him, chap. 42.16. J will lead the blind by a way that they knew not, I
will lead them in paths they have not known, I will make darkness light before
them, and crooked things straight, these things will J do unto them, and not
forsake them.

And did not Christ come to fill the empty, to cloth the naked, to feed the
hungry, and to set at liberty those that were bound* Without controversy, if
ever we intend to be partakers of these gifts before spoken, we must be first
sensible of the want of them.

Thus have I briefly and faithfully, to my own understanding, given you a small
taste, which upon your farther consideration I hope you will enlarge, and then I
believe you will clearly discern the shadow from the substance, which is to
know the difference of the Baptism of Christ from John's, or of water from the
Spirit, of speaking from study, art, and learning, or from the gift of the
Spirit to Prophecy, as 1 Cor. 12.10. and of all the rest of the gifts of the
Spirit reckoned up in that chapter; and be assured it is a duty, that highly
concerns us all, to try by Scripture the Spirits of those we hear; and it was
that which was commendable in the noble Bereans, that they searched the
Scriptures to see whether the things Paul spoke were so or not, Act. 17.11. Nay
it is the high commendation which God himself gives to the Church of Ephesus,
Revel. 2.2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou
can not bear with them which are evil, and thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them liers.

Now for those that desire to know, and to be thoroughly acquainted with the
practice, life, and power of Christian Religion, may find it laid down in that
incomparable Sermon preached by Christ himself in the Mountain, Mat. 5. to the
8. chapter, wherein the former part of the 5: chapter, the qualifications of
Saints are discovered to verse 12. and that their Religion might not rest in
formality, he tells them verse the 20. that except their righteousness exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they should not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; and to the end that they might not be unacquainted with the
difference between a legal and Gospel obedience, he lays it forth in sundry
particulars unto the 28. ver. of 7. chap. wherein, as by a most perfect rule,
we may be able to judge between Saints in word, and notion, and Saints in life
and power; for understanding whereof, let us weigh and seriously consider one
instance of many, where Christ tells the people ver. 43. of of 5. chap. ye have
heard that it has been said of old, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy, v. 44. but I say unto you love your enemies, bless them which
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which persecute
you, v. 45. that you may be the children of your Father which is in heaven, for
he makes his Sun to arise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the
just and the unjust; for if you love them which love you, what reward shall you
have? do not the Publicans do the same? v. 47. and if you be friendly to your
brethren only, what singular thing do ye? do not even the Publicans likewise?
if then this be the doctrine of Christ, and that which his Disciples ought to
practice, shall we not be ready to cry out with them, who then can be saved?
the world at present is full of Professors, and they full of fine words, such
as may justly be called enticing words of vanity: but I desire that we may all
weigh our selves at this balance, and measure our selves by this Standard; so
that when we find our selves qualified, as is here and more at large in
Scripture expressed, we may justly expect the performance of the promises, in
being made partakers of the like gifts, as the believers were in the primitive
time. And thus at present I have done with this, desiring the Lord in mercy to
give us a right understanding in all things:

A POSTSCRIPT.
THat the Gentleman and others may not be deceived, in thinking those of the
Parish, who were not Petitioners against him, are for him, in approving his
book; if they think so, it is a gross mistake, for to my knowledge diverse of
them did conclude it to be a great abuse to the whole Parish; and when I spoke
of answering it, they did press me exceedingly to it, not that I have any
thing whereof to glory, but considering their earnestness, which I could not
judge but to be in sincerity of heart, it put me in mind of a passage, which
when I was a Schoolboy I then learned, and have not yet forgotten, it is
Virgil Liber. 2 Aene^d. where Aeneas (though very unwilling, yet being
earnestly entreated by Dido Queen of Carthage) makes relation of the Trojan
wars, and give this reason, as you may read at large: Sed si tantus amor
casus cognoscere nostros,
Et breviter Trojae supremum audire laborem.
Quanquam Animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit,
Incipiam, etc.


But I shall say the contrary; ita finem facio, that though I abhorred to
discover my mind in print, yet a just cause, and friends persuasions, were two
prevailing arguments to do it, I shall only add one word more, and leave it to
the consideration of him that has most right to it, (and the riddle may be
unfolded hereafter) I can assure you, that in this discourse, I have not to my
knowledge made any false Muster, neither have I, like some Commander, scrambled
a pack of strange faces together, to march through the City with as much
confidence and little credit, as if they were his own listed company.

FINIS.

