A Psalm of thanksgiving, to be sung by the Children of Christ's Hospital, on
Monday in the Easter Holy days, at Christ Church, for their Founders and
Benefactors. An. Dom. 1643.
CHORUS.

This Chorus is to be sung by all the Children, and repeated after every Verse.
^ RIse Orphans, raise your Voice, in praise of God, for Patrones kind, ^ For
bounteous Citizens from whom, we daily favor find.

VERSUS.

^ BY tears spent Mothers in distress, to miseries enthralled, We were ^
Be-no-ni in their pangs, the Sons of sorrow called. Nor could our Fathers ^
tell what state, the Lord would place Us in, With better then our Mothers
hopes, to call us Ben-ja-min. ^ But dying, they bequeathed to want, the
Children of their fears, We wep't till from our eyes were ^ wiped, the pity
moving tears. Chorus. Rise Orphans, etc.

They moov'd the God of pity, He a King to pity mooy'd,
And he removed our heaps of want, which work the Lord approved.
The King young Edward was the Sixth, but Englands first Isiah,
From Heaven by grace endued with the spirit of Eliah.
Which Spr'it on our succeeding Kings, let ever (Lord) be breathed,
To them and Citizens O let poor Orphans be bequeathed.
Chorus. Rise Orphans, raise your voice, etc.
Which they did well discharge, and so does Charles our Sovereign,
You Senate who with Citizens, that Princes charge maintain.
Maintain therefore, O Lord the state, and stock of King and Queen,
On Parliament, and Clergy let thy work of grace be seen.
The City and the Scarlet Robe with wealth and honor guard,
Our Patrones in thy mercy great, with happiness reward.
Chorus. Rise Orphans, raise your voice, etc.
CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital, in the said House, in diverse places of this City and Suburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country, which is a far greater number then
hitherto has been since the foundation -- 870. The names of all which, are
Registered in the Books kept in Christ's Hospital, there to be seen, from what
Parishes, and by what means they have been from time to time admitted.
Children put forth Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past --
105. THere has been cured this year last pass, at the Charge of Saint
Bartholomews Hospital, of Soldiers and other diseased people, to the number
of -- 1007 All which were relieved with Money and other necessaries at their
departure.
Buried this year after much charge in their sickness -- 149 Remaining under
cure at this present, at the charge of the said Hospital -- 409 THere has
been cured this year last pass, at the charge of Saint Thomas Hospital, of
Soldiers, and other diseased people -- 854 All which were relieved with money
and other necessaries at the departure.
Buried out of the said Hospital this year -- 186 Remaining under cure at
this present -- 301 THere has been brought into the Hospital of Bridewell,
within the space of one year, of wandering Soldiers and other vagrants, to the
number of -- 957 Whereof some have been clothed and sent beyond the Seas. And
of which number many have been chargable for the time of their being there,
which cannot be avoided, by reason of their necessities, or passed away without
charge.
There is maintained and kept in the said Hospital, (in Arts, Occupations, and
other servile worksand labors) Apprentices, and other persons, to the number
of -- 152
LONDON Printed by R.O. and G.D. in the year, 1643.


