ON THE MUCH LAMENTED DEATH of the Valiant MAJOR WILLIAM COCKBURN, Who died at
Stonie-flet, June 6. 1683.
A Funeral ELEGY.
THis world's a boiling gulf of greefs and fears,
The Rendevouz of anxious sighs and tears:
This worm of five foot long, this moving span,
Composed of sin, and dirt, we call a man,
Is the tossed passenger; what tho the ga'le
Be strong, or weak, the Ship is still a Sail;
Whither the Passengers do stand, or lie,
She keeps a straight course to eternity.
And who so can the longest passage boast,
At last The Eternal Haven salute he must.
A pregnant, (tho a pensive) proof is here
To make this truth as with sun beams appear.
Here the undantoun'd COCKBURN full of years
That never gave place to ignominious fears,
Who like the Roman Scevola has stood
Bashing in flamm's his hands, his feet in blood,
Who in the storms of War, by day and night,
Could never flee from any thing but flight,
(Till now unconquered) yet at last he must
Lay down his valor in a bed of dust:
But with a deathless and renowned name,
Happy in Fortune, Family, and Fame.
He was no carking dunghill miser, yet
God blessed him with a plentiful Estate:
From which, as from an overflowing store,
He blessed the backs and bellies of the poor.
And with an active, and sagacious care,
He knew both when to spend, and when to spare.
(...) prayer, and praise, at morning and at even
With pious fervencie addressed to Heaven,
^^s house a Sacrid Temple did become:
(...) Soldier in the Camp, a Priest at home.
(...)one may be (tho rare) as Scriptures note,
(...) once both a Centurion, and devote.
A Soldier and devote, with Loyalty,
(...)ormist too, and each in high degree,
(...) in this age when its considered well
Appear at least next to a miracle.
A Father, and an Husband past compare,
(...) knew, which greatest was his love, or care.
(...)ly as I heard Friends and Strangers tell
Spouse and Children made the parallel:
whom he hes left five unspotted Plants,
^ill the Nation with such blessed Saints,
The pledges of his fruitful love, and bed;
Happy be he that might such darlings wed.
To him that brings not an unworthy flamm',
Kind may they be, as Heaven hes been to them;
In them he lives, to them he did bequeath
His virtues as a legacy at death.
And every one but some fantastic snake
Will love the offspring for their Fathers sake.
His EPITAPH.
HEre lies an honest heart, a valiant hand,
Knew both how to obey, and to command,
A loving Father, and an Husband kind,
A Soldier both in body, and in mind;
So stout that to the pale beholders wonder
He durst encounter the amazing thunder.
And did the Honor of the Scots advance,
By prowess both through Germany, and France;
His valor and his Loyalty was seen,
Against the Rebels at the Rullion Green.
He Hector and Ulysses both in one,
Knew to match valor with discretion.
In point of Honor when his spleen did rise,
He quelled his foes by lightning from his eyes.
His martial frown it could at once control,
And cure the Lethargy of a cowards Soul.
Nor did his worth alone consist in wars,
In him Minerva joined was with Mars,
He owed a breast to which it did appear,
Valor and virtue native Tennants were;
Yea virtue swayed her Scepter there, for both
He fear, and baseness equally did loath.
And in his Heart, which was a Sign of Grace,
God, and the Church, and King had chiefest place.
As King and Church did gratefully regard him;
So God has called him home now to reward him.
Therefore let us modestly bewail our cross
Heavens gain, and his can never be our loss.
Optima quaeque dies, miseris mortalibus aevi
Prima fugit: subeunt morbi, tristisque senectus,
Et labor, and durae rapit inclementia mortis.
Virgil.
Mr. N. PATERSON.


