coat of arms.

A WARNING-PIECE TO Repentance: Presented in an ASSIZE-SERMON Preached in the
Cathedral Church of LINCOLN. AUG. 15. 1664.

By WILLIAM RERESBY Doctor in DIVINITY.

Thus says the Lord; Shall they fall, and not arise? Shall he turn away, and
not return?

Jer. 8.4. It may be the House of Judab will hear all the evil which I purpose
to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may
forgive their iniquity and their sin,

Jer. 36.3. Heus tu peccator bono animo sis. --

Omnes ad poenitentiam commovet, sub comminationibus quidem. Non comminaretur
autem non poenitenti, si non ignosceret poenitenti.

Tertull. lib. de Poenitentia. LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T. Collins, at
their Shop next the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street. 1664.

DIGNISSIMO VIRO DOMINO JOHANNI BUCK BARONETTO, COMITATUS LINCOLNIENSIS
VICECOMITI; GULIELMUS RERESBY, S. T. P. HANC CONCIONEM D. D. CQ.

Perlegi hanc Concionem cui Titulus (A Warning-piece to Repentance) in quanihil
reperio Doctrinae Disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae aut bonis moribus
contrarium.

Ex Aedibus Land. Dec. 10. 1664. Joh. Hall. R.P.D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

AN ASSIZE-SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF LINCOLN. August 15. 1664.
AMOS 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: And because I will do
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.


JUstice and Mercy do usually in Scripture walk hand in hand, and as the doors
of the Temple, 1 Kings 6.34. folding one upon another. For God considering our
frame in his Wrath, remembers Mercy. Men shall know if he declare himself to be
Magnificus in Justitia, that he is withal Munificus in gratia and
misericordia, as St. Bernard sweetly. So in this Chapter, having dealt with his
people Israel by the infliction of sundry punishments; and yet, as he says, at
the foot of every verse, They would not return unto him; He will now exalt his
hand in judgment, putting them to the trial by a sorer and more grievous plague
than all the rest: viz. pluck them out of their Land, by the potent hand of a
prevailing Adversary, as Fishes are plucked out of the water their natural
Element, being caught by a Hook, and cause them to be led Captive into the Land
of their Enemies, where they should serve under an Iron yoke in hunger and
thirst, and nakedness, and want of all things. The Lord has sworn by his
holiness, that lo the day shall come upon you, that he will take you away with
hooks, and your posterity with fish hooks, ver. 2.

Now that this Commination might not drive them utterly into despair, least
they should be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, as those that had no hope,
like a mild Physician, who tempers and allayes the bitterness of his Potion
with some sweet Ingredient, he adds thereto a comfortable Exhortation, showing
them the way how to prevent and avert it, viz. if by Repentance yet at length
they would return unto him, and prepare to meet him. Therefore (says he) thus
will I do unto thee O Israel: i. e. I will as I threatened, take you away with
books, and your posterity with fish-hooks (for it has reference, as I
conceive, to the second verse) Thus I will do unto thee, O Israel: And because
I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

Now from this gentleness of God toward his people, we may observe:

God is very gracious and merciful.

God loves mercy best, and we need mercy most. God in Scripture is styled the
Father of mercies 2 Cor. 2.3. De extr. judicio These. 3.
. Excellent is that of Vossius upon that Text, Go ye Cursed: It is said -- Come
ye Blessed of my Father; but not go ye Cursed of my Father. Benedictionis
author and pater est, non item maledictionis, etc. He is a God so gracious,
that as the Church speaks, Lam. 3.33. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men. Punishments are in a manner heterogeneous unto him, whose
property is always to have mercy, and to forgive. He hires the Razor wherewith
he shaves his people. Esaias 7.20. The execution of judgment is opus alienum, his
strange work. Esaias 28.21. He loves freely, but corrects not willingly. He was
but six days in creating the whole World, yet seven in destroying one poor
City Jericho. Josh. 6.


We see what way God has gone before us, let us follow his steps. Lactantius
reports of the Heathens, that they had this Notion amongst them, That the way
to honor their gods, was to be like them, and to do as they did. Certainly the
way to honor the great God of Heaven and Earth, is to do as He has done. It
was the height of Caesar's Glory, to walk in the steps of Alexander; of Selymus
a Turkish Emperor, to walk in Caesar's steps. Let it be our endeavor, it
shall be our honor, to follow our heavenly Father, in being merciful even as
he is merciful. Luk 6.36.
He does not, let not us execute Justice, but when there is no place left for
mercy.

This Duty concerns all in general, but Judges are more especially to follow
Gods example herein. He has vouchsafed to honor them with his own Name, I
have said ye are gods, Psalm. 82.6. He has made them petty gods, for his Dixi
is a Feci; with him to say they are gods, is to make them so. It is therefore
the Duty of these mortal gods, to imitate the Immortal God in the exercise of
Mercy. And it is observable, that God instructs Magistrates in the performance
of this Duty, before he tells them of their godship. Defend, says he, the Poor
and Fatherless, see that such as be in need and necessity have right. Deliver
the Outcast and Poor; save them from the hand of the ungodly, Psalm. 82.3, 4.
And then, and not till then, he honors them with his own Title, I have said ye
are gods, ver. 6. As if he had said, exercise these works of Mercy, and then ye
are gods indeed, ye are then like the true God; but without these ye are like
the Idols of the Heathen, that had much worship from the people, but were good
for nothing.

But I would not be mistaken, I am not so far a Patron for Mercy, that I desire
Justice should any whit suffer. No! I subscribe to that voice, Fiat justitia,
licet confractus corruit orbis. Let Justice be done, though the world perish.
But then, as I said, let not Justice have its full course, till there be no
room left for Mercy: And that will not be as long as any thing remains doubtful
in such cases as are to be determined: For certainly it holds in Law, Idem est
non esse and non apparere. Therefore where things are not evident, it is both
safer and better to incline to Mercy, than Severity. In such cases the old
Rules are excellent: In peccatis evidentiam, in poenis aedificationem. And
again: Nec cito in apertis, nec unquam in ambiguis. Better Twenty offenders
should escape, than One innocent person suffer. But when things are notoriously
plain, Mercy must no longer walk alone, but Justice must take her by the hand.
They must then meet together, Psalm. 85.10. Mark, they must meet together. Even
in plain cases, Mercy is not utterly to be excluded; when there was no way
left, but that God was enforced to proceed to the punishment of his people, he
passes sentence with a groan as it were, Esaias 1.24. Ah! I will ease me of my
adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. It is a great trouble to a good
Judge, to be enforced to use Severity.

Ille dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox. But in some cases there is no remedy;
for rather than sin and sinners should go un^unish'd, he must with David, sing
not only of Mercy, but also of Judgment, Psalm. 101.^. Unisons make no good
Music; such are Gods Attributes, that he will not cease to be just, that he
may be merciful: As he is the Father of Mercies, so he is the Lord of Wrath.
Baal Chemah, a Possessor of Wrath, Nahum 1.2. The great God of Heaven and Earth
has a time of retroving, as well as a time of reprieving. A time of correcting
man for sin, as well as conniving at man's sin. His patience has fixed bounds
and limits; and Magistrates, those petty gods, ought to be like the great God
in this also: They must not leave sin unpunish't, upon pretense that God is
merciful. Aquinas Secunda Secundae. Quest. 64. Art. 2. Si salutis totius
corporis humani expediat praecisio alicujus membri, puta cum est putridum, vel
corruptivum al^o^um membrorum, laudabiliter and salubriter abscinditur.
upon that Question, Whether it be lawful to put Malefactors to death?
concludes it not only lawful, but necessary, as we cut off a putrid corrupted
Member, a Leg, or an Arm, when the more principal and vital parts are hazarded
-- Laudabiliter and salubriter abscinditur. And in answer to another Question,
he asserts, Secunda Secundae. Quest. 64. Art. 3. and 4.
That Princes and Judges may take away the Lives of flagitious Malefactors, in
quantum ordinatur ad salutem totius communitatis: If their death may conduce to
the tranquillity and prosperity of the Commonwealth. But enough of this, having
only gleaned it up by the way.

In the words observe a Denuntiation, and a Direction; or if you will, a
Prediction, and a Prescription.

The Denuntiation or Prediction in these words -- Therefore thus will I do unto
thee, O Israel.

The Direction or Prescription in these -- And because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. q. d. Now if thou would not have me
do this unto thee, O Israel, I Will tell thee what thou should do; direct thee
a way, and prescribe thee a means, whereby thou may prevent it, and that is,
Prepare to meet me by Repentance.

In the first again observe a double Demonstration, the (...), and (...). The
(...) being the Denuntiation it self; The Judgment that is threatened, Thus will
I do unto thee, O Israel. The (...) being the ground, reason, or cause of it,
in the word Therefore -- of which first, as it so lies in order. Sometimes it
is particula (...), or as they speak in the Schools, Consecutiva; a Particle
Syllogistical, or Conclusive, signifying only the sequel of a matter; here it
is (...), signifying the cause of that which follows, the (...) (as we said) of
the Judgment denounced; Therefore; i. e. for this cause. The Collection
thereupon is plain.

That God never punishes without a cause; the Judgments that He executes,
Doctr.
are always just and righteous.

For proof whereof, Job 34.
look into Job 34. Far be it from God that he should do wickedness, and from
the Almighty that he should commit iniquity. Ver. 10.
Surely God will not do wickedly, Ver. 12.
neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment. Ver. 23.
He will not lay upon man more than is right. Again, Chap. 37.23. Touching the
Almighty, etc. Job 37.23
He will not afflict (i. e. without cause, says the English Note in the
Margent) Romans 2.2. We are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth.
i. e. according to right and equity. (Est verum Vitae, Doctrinae, Justitiaeque)
Psalm. 9.8. He shall judge the World in righteousness, he shall minister
judgment to the people in uprightness. Again, Psalm. 92. ver. ult. To show that
the Lord is upright, and that there is no unrighteousness in him; Ne minima
quidem, not the least unrighteousness in him, as the word signifies. For its a
Rule among the Hebrews, that in words of the Feminine Gender, as this, when the
Note of the Gender is doubled, as in this (for else it should be Gnaulah, not
Gnaulathah) the signification is extended, and something is added thereto.

Now what should be the Reasons? I shall name one or two grounded upon
Scripture.

immutable Justice that is in Gods Nature, which seems to be laid down, Psalm.
119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. As if the
holy Prophet had said, Upright, O Lord, and Just are thy Judgments, which thou
have inflicted on me; they must needs be so; why? for thou thy self art Just
and Righteous. Again, Zephany 3.5. The just Lord will not do iniquity, do no
wrong; why? for he is Just. The person we know, specificates and qualifies the
action; such as is the one, such is the other. A good Tree, says our Savior,
Matthew. 7. brings forth good fruit, nay, and which is more, cannot bring forth
evil fruit, ver. 18. The Divine Attributes are neither really distinct from the
Divine Essence, Suarez. Metaph. 30. Sect. 6.
nor yet from one another; his Mercy is the same with his Justice, and both God
himself: A man may be a man, and yet be unjust; Justice is not his quid
constitutivum: But should the most High be unjust, he could not be God. Justice
is not a quality in him, but the very Nature of him; for in Essentia Dei nec
aliud, nec accidens.

loves Justice and righteous dealing, and therewith is wonderfully delighted.
Ask a man why he uses to do thus, or thus; and all the reason he will give you,
perhaps is this, Because I love to do so, its my de^ight. Now the righteous
Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. Again, Jer. 9.14. I execute judgment and
righteousness (...) the earth; for in these things I delight, with the Lord.
And if you mark, this Reason is there laid down, I execute judgment and
righteousness in the earth; for, or because in these things I delight. Nay!
(...) so much delights in the execution of ^^dgment, that he is contented, that
the (...) of his immediate Worship shall, for that purpose, be for a time
intermitted, and suspended. When Joshua, and the Elders of Israel were crying
to God in prayer, mark Gods Reply, Get thee up, why lie thou upon thy face?
Josh. 7.10
something else is now to be done; Israel has sinned, I am highly provoked,
Achan must dye. Though the prayer of the upright be Gods delight; Prove. 15.8
Though prayer be the most acceptable piece of all God's service; Cant. 2.14
Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and
thy countenance is comely; Yet Joshua is here called from his Devotion, to the
execution of Justice.

Office at the latter day. He shall judge the World, ponderrng the particular
actions of men, and weighing them, as it were, in a balance. So Solomon in the
last of Ecclesiastes, God will bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And if every work, then among the
rest, wrong-doing, and injurious dealing. Now this he cannot do, if injustice
and wrong should be found in any of his actions. A Judge must not be guilty of
those things he condemns in others. The Philosopher being ask't on a time why
he laughed? answered, (...).
I see great Thieves lead a little Thief to hanging. And this reason I find
laid down, Romans 3.5, 6. Is God unrighteous, etc? How then shall he judge the
World? So Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge (says Abraham) of all the Earth do
right? q. d. O Lord, Thou art Judge of all the Earth, How then can it be, but
thou should do right?

Now for Application: And the Use hereof is threefold. For Instruction,
Consolation, and Exhortation.

Instruction. If God never punish without a cause; if the judgments that he
executes, are always just and righteous; it teaches us when any punishment is
upon us, how to obtain deliverance from it, viz. by taking away the cause
thereof. The cause of any thing being taken away, its effect ceases; according
to that Rule, Sublata causa tollitur effectus. But what is the cause of all kind
of punishments? The Prophet Jeremy shall tell you, Lam. 3.39. Man suffers for
his sin. And David, Psalm. 107.17. Fools, because of their transgressions, and
because of their iniquity, are afflicted. Remove thy sins then, and forsake
them, and be washed from them, and let them be unto thee as the waters of Noah,
which God has sworn shall no more go over the Earth; not returning with the
Degrees unto his vomit again; nor with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire; and
then God will remove his judgments. Thou deceivest thy self, if thou expect
deliverance any other way. Jer. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction?
Thy sorrow is incurable: And why? For the multitude of thine iniquities,
because thy sins were increased. Thou do not cease to multiply and increase
thy sins, and iniquities daily, and yet cryest unto me for thine affliction,
that I should take it away; why do thou so? its in vain: I neither can, no^
will, till thou take away thy sins.

Use is for Consolation, and the Consolation of those whose Friends that are
dear unto them, are any ways afflicted, or visited under God's hand. Look into
the 14th. Chapter of Ezekiel, the Lord threatening there to smite Jerusalem with
a deadly destruction, bringing his four sore judgments (as he calls them) upon
it: The Sword, the Famine, Noysom Beasts, and the Pestilence; yet promises that
a remnant should escape, he would spare some few. But what favor was that?
They had better have perished with the rest, than survive with grief of heart,
and sorrow of eyes, to see the destruction of their neighbors, kinsfolks,
friends and acquaintance round about. How can I endure, says Esther, to see
the destruction of my people? No, says God, in the two last verses, They shall
be comforted concerning the evil that I will bring upon Jerusalem. But how?
When they consider that I have not done without cause all that I have done.

Exhortation: And, 1. To all in general. 2. To some more especially in
particular.

1. To all in general. Ephesians. 5.1.
Herein to be followers of God as dear Children, taking heed by all means of
wrong doing. In God there are some things (...), inimitable of the Creature;
some things (...), which are difficult, and hard to be imitated; other things
again, (...), which are easy to be imitated. And of this last sort is his just
and righteous dealing, and process against sinners. The sin, my Brethren, is
greatly aggravated, when what is done, is done without cause, no just occasion
being given. They have privily laid a Net to destroy me, says David of his
Adversaries; that was a sin; I, and without cause: Yea, even without cause they
have made a pit for my soul, Psalm. 35.7. It was greater by that. The Assyrian,
says God, oppressed my people; that was ill; nay, and which is worse, without
cause, Esaias 52.4. A sin too common and Epidemical in these times, wherein
Judgment, as our Prophet speaks, Ames 6.12.
Chapter 6. is turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock!
Esaias 59.14.
Or as another Prophet, Esaias 59. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice
stands afar off, Truth is fallen in the streets, and Equity cannot enter. But
I wish the Apostles saying were remembered, Col. 3. ult. He that does wrong,
shall receive according to the wrong that he has done.

2. To some more especially in particular: And they, 1. Those that are
instrumental for the execution of Justice, viz. Judges, Lawyers, Jurors,
Witnesses. 2. Those that suffer under Gods hand howsoever.

1. Those that are instrumental for the execution of Justice. And amongst
these, Judges have the first place. They are God's Vicegerents, his Substitutes
as it were; or as the Apostle calls them, Romans Romans 13.4.
13. His Ministers to execute wrath upon evil doers. In any wise to beware of
unjust executions and penalties, such as for which there is no cause. An
upright Judge looks at the justness of the cause, not at the persons of their
Friends, Kinsmen, or Favorites. Personam judicas exuit qui amici induit. He is
too little a Judge, who is too much a Friend. Justice must run down like a
River, says our Prophet, Amos 5 24.
Chap. 5.24. It must not be pal'd in as a Pond, but must lie open to refresh
all comers, rich and poor. Ye shall hear the small, as well as the great, Deuteronomy.
1.17. Justice is pictured with a veil before her eyes, and a pair of Scales in
her hand; her eyes are veiled, to denote unto us the impartiality that should
be in a Judge; he should have tars to scan men's causes, but no eyes to discern
the persons. Exodus 23.3. Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his cause:
And if not a poor man, much less a rich; for if the person of any should be
accepted, certainly in all Equity, the person of the poor does bespeak pity,
rather than the person of the potent; but then see here is a strict Command
against this. Again, Justice is pictured with a balance, to show that Judges
should scan those Causes exactly that are brought before them It was the
practice of holy Job, Chap. 29.16. Job 29.16.
The cause which I knew not, I searched out. It is not safe to ride Post over
matters; for that Judge does ill purchase to himself the Title of a man of
expedition, and dispatch, that overhastens Causes, and ends them before they be
ripe. Not that Causes are to be spun out with unnecessary Demurrs and
Protractions, to men's great charge and vexation; but only, that a Judge should,
with all possible pains and patience, hear both Parties, search Writings and
Evidences, weigh every Information and Circumstance, examine Witnesses, and not
suffer a bold Lawyer to dash plain men out of countenance, though, may be, they
cannot give in their Testimony in a fluent language; but (according to their
breeding) are only able to lisp out the Truth in a homespun speech. 'I was
good counsel which the good King Jehoshaphat gave unto his Judges, 2 Chronicles.
19.6.
2 Chronicles. 19.6. He said to the Judges, Take heed what you do. Rush not at
things by guess, but weigh them deliberately, exactly. And if you read the
remainder of this verse, and then afterward the seventh, Ver. 6, 7.
you will see three Motives to stir up Judges to this exactness. He said to the
Judges, Take heed what you do (now observe) for ye judge not for man, but for
the Lord (that is the first) Who is with you in judgment (that is the second)
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it; for
there is no iniquity with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts
(there is the third.)

1. Judges ought to look diligently at the justness of the Cause, and to
proceed very carefully, because they judge not for man, but for the Lord. Did
you only judge for man, though you should act negligently, injustly, yet you
might do it with so much untrivance, as you might come off well e^ough; but
since you judge for the Lord, you had need to behave your selves circumpectly,
faithfully; for there is nothing, though never so closely carried, that can
escape his eyes, Hebr. 4.12. He makes (...) search with Candles, Zeph. 5.12.
Nay, (...) himself is a light beyond Ten thousand Candles, so that he can with
ease make (...) discovery of all your Actions, though ^hey should be covered
with an Egyptian ^arkness. Quantascunque tenebras factis tuis superstruxeris,
Lib. de Poenitentia. c. 6.
Deus lumen est, says Tertullian. And as God sees what is done amiss; so
certainly, if he be not prevented by Repentance, he will punish it. The day
will come, when you shall be again ungodded; for he that has said, Ye are
gods, has also said, Ye shall dye like men, Psalm. 82.7. Dye you must, and come
to judgment. All the Lions of the World must bow before, and give account to
the Lamb of God. He has appointed a day ( Cornelius a Lapide, calls it Horizon
Temporis and Aeternitatis) in which he will judge the World in righteousness.
Acts 17.31. And shall the World be judged, and shall you be exempted? surely
no. And how severely the Lord Jesus Christ shall exercise his power, the same a
Lapide tells you; Ipse a Vobis rationem vel praestitae, vel neglectae justitiae
severam exiget, ac pro merritis praemiabit, vel puniet.

2. Judges ought diligently to mind the justness of the Cause, and to give
sentence accordingly, because God is with them in judgment. He stands in the
Congregation of gods, Psalm. 82.1. stands with attention, stands with power. He
takes notice of the whole behavior of the Judge, all the while he sits upon
the Bench; not (...) word, not a smile, not a frown passes from him, but he
observes it. There is a saying, That the King is vertually present in his
Courts, as long as they continue his Courts: God is really present in these
Courts of Justice. In Eccles. 8.10. The ^eat of Judicature is called the place
of the ^^ly. I saw the wicked buried, who had ^ome and gone from the place of
the holy. ^agnin renders it a loco sancto, from the ^oly place. Junius reads e
loco sancto, out of ^he place of the Holy: And why the place of he Holy? I
co^ceive this may be said, because ^e who is Holiness it self, sits chief
Justice ^here. Apud R^bbinos Deus dicitur Makom locus, quia omnia in se
comprehendit, and nullo loco comprehenditur. Bithner in Exodus 21.13.
The Rabbis (as Buxtorf tells ^^s) put Makom, which signifies ^lace, amongst
the Names of God. ^^thner brings them expounding that Text in Esther 4.14.
Deli^erance shall arise to the Jews from another place, i. e. from God. They
^alled him place, because he is in every ^lace. There is not any place, whether
Sacred or Profane, whether Private (...) Public, but we may say of it, as
Jacob ^^d of Bethel, Genesis 28.16. Surely God (...) in this place, and we were
not aware: ^t though we cannot go from Gods Spirit, Psalm. 139.7
or flee from his presence, because he is present everywhere, yet in his own
Court^ and in yours he is present more eminently, and more perspicuously. When
the Ethiopian Judges were set in their Seats of Judicature, certain empty
Chairs were set at the upper end of their Consistories, wherein they imagined
the Holy Angels came to sit: Angels are very frequent in, and observant of such
Solemn Conventions. Hoc judicium animos ad vigilantiam, and reverentiam
inflecteret, says Quintus Pius. This they thought (and so it ought) would work
an awe and fear in their Magistrates; a resolution and care in them to do
Justice exactly. He who is greater than any of the Cherubins, or Seraphins; He
whose Center is everywhere, and Circumference nowhere; He who fills Heaven with
his glory, the Earth with his mercy, and Hell with his fury, how full soever
your Hall anon be thwacked and thronged, will find a room among them; and this
should make all, from the Judge to the Witness, to beware of wrong-doing in
such a dreadful presence.

3. Judges ought diligently to look to the justness of the cause, because there
is no iniquity with our God, no ((...)) not injustice, so the Seventy;
therefore let there be none in you. Non tam mei quam ^ei estis Vicarii, etc. as
C. a Lapide. You are not so much the Deputy of the King, ^s of the King of
Kings. As therefore the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and ^^ly in all his
works, Psalm. 145.17. so ^e you just in all your Sentences.

These are the three Motives which Je^^shaphat presented to his Judges, to stir
them up to carefulness; I have only given ^ou the same: And I beseech you, my
LORD, remember, 1. That you judge not (...) Man, but for the Lord. 2. That God
^s with you in Judgment. 3. That there (...) no injustice in the Lord your God.
And ^hen I am sure, as you are the mortal picture ^f the Immortal God; so you,
as he, will ^ever punish without a cause; and those judgments that you execute,
will be al^ayes just and righteous.

2. This Exhortation does extend it self to Lawyers: Do you, after Gods
example, look at the justness of men's Cau^^s, and be more ready to compose,
than ^art differences. It is Panormitan's ad^ice, Promptior sit quisque vestrum
ad ^mponendum, quam ad contendendum. And ^bove all things, take heed that you
do not knowingly plead a bad Cause, else you cannot be good men. Bonus vir non
agit nisi bonas causas, as Quintil. tells you. Pl^^tarch reports, That Phocyon
would not defend his Son-in-law Charles, in an evil Cause. Why should you
Strangers? Undertake good Causes only; and having undertaken them, betray them
not for want of pleading: Take not Fees of both sides, Demosthenes said to one
of his Fellow-Lawyers, that bragged he had received (...) Talent for his
Pleading, Tush, Fool, I ha^^ more for holding my Peace. Some Lawyers sell their
very silence at a great rate; but would they deal uprightly, it would be more
for their advantage. Some write of the Ostriches feather, that it will in time
moult and consume all the feathers in the T^^ wherein it is put. Sure I am,
unlawful Fees will consume those Treasures which you have well gotten. You may
indeed, by playing Jack-a-both-sides, or by being for any side, right or wrong,
heap up an Estate suddenly; but it will neither do you, nor yours, any great
good; for it will not be permanent. An inheritance may be hastily gotten at the
beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed, Prove. 20.21.

3. This Exhortation does extend it self unto Jurors, they are also to take
heed of wrong-doing. Remember thy Oath, ^^d (as far as thou can) search out
the Truth; receive thy Informations attentive^^, and seriously before thou
go out, and then (all by-respects set aside) deliver ^^y Conscience clearly,
and plainly. Let ^ot the nearness of Kinsmen, the malice thou have to any man,
the frowns of great ^en, nor the hope of reward from rich ^en, cause you to
clear the Guilty, or oppress the Innocent. I speak to you all, not ^o the
Foreman only. I have heard indeed, that in Juries, all the rest are apt to
follow the first, as if they were so many Hor^es in a Teem: But I beseech you
remember, that you are all to kiss the Book, as well as your Foreman; and
therefore be not any ways biased, or coy'd in by him, to bring in an unjust
Verdict, but act according to your Consciences. Sheep will follow the first,
qua itur, non qua eundum, whether it be right or wrong; but you are Twelve men,
not twelve sheep; and therefore let reason and conscience, and not example
only, be your guide.

4. This Exhortation does likewise extend it self unto Witnesses; they must by
all means take heed of wrong-doing. Remember Gods Commandment, Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy Neighbor. Exodus 20.16
Do not forget thy Oath, take heed of Perjury. It is Mendacium juramento
firmatum, a Lie confirmed by an Oath. Thou shall swear in truth and judgment,
and righteousness, Jer. 4.2. Si ista defuerint (says St. Jerome) nequaquam erit
juramentum sed perjurium. If these be wanting, it is not an Oath, but Perjury.
The Prophet Zachary saw a flying Roll, and in it a curse written against
Thieves and Swearers, such as swear rashly and falsely, Zach. 5.3, 4. The curse
of God will follow thee to thy house, it is impossible to overrun it, for it
will fly after thee; and when it comes there, it will not stand knocking at
thy door, and be gone, but it shall remain in the midst of thy house, and shall
consume it with the Timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Did men consider
this Threatening well, they would not sell Oaths so cheap, as they say some do.
It is not thy Landlords abating thee a little Rent, or his giving thee a piece
of Money now and then, not his making thee eat and drink of the best, and to
the full all the Assizes, for swearing lustily in his Cause, and coming to him
beforehand, to know what it is that will do the deed. Alas, it is not all
this, nor greater things than these, thou possibly may gain by forswearing
thy self, that can lie in balance against the displeasure of Almighty God.
Though thou could gain the whole World for thy Perjury, thou would, for
all that, be a great loser by the bargain: For what shall it profit a man, ^f
he shall gain the whole World, and lose ^is own soul? Mark 8.36. These four,
Judges, Lawyers, Jurors, Witnesses are in ^he first place, more particularly
concerned (...) this Use of Exhortation.

2. Those that suffer under Gods and howsoever; and the Exhortation to them is
double.

1. To justify God in their sufferings, ^cknowledging themselves sinners, and
that ^e also is righteous in all that he has done. This has been the constant
practice of all ^e Saints of God in Scripture, as St. Au^stine observes upon
Psalm. 145. Omnes ^ncti in tribulationibus constituti, non de^^runt Deo
injustitiam, etc. The Lord is ^ighteous (says the Church in the Lamen^^tions)
Chap. 1.18. for I have rebelled against his Commandment. O Lord, righ^^usness
belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, Dan. 9.7
says Daniel, Chap. 9.7. Again, The Lord our God is righteous in all his works
which he does, for we obeyed not his voice, Ver. 14.
ver. 14. O my God, says Ezra, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to
thee, for our iniquities are incrcas^^ over our head, Ezra 9.6.
and our trespass is grown up unto the Heavens, Chap. 9.6. And in ver. ult.
Ver. 15.
O Lord God thou art righteous, behold we are before thee in our trespasses.
Howbeit, Neh. 9 33
says Nehemiah, Thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou have
done right, but we have done wickedly. Chap. 9.33. I know, O Lord, that thy
judgments are right, says David, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted
me, Psalm. 119.75.
Psalm. 119.75. Again, Righteous art thou, O Lord, Ver. 137.
and upright are thy judgments, ver. 137. Or as it is in the Original, upright
is thy judgments. To show that every one of his judgments is upright; and so
David confessed (for when a Verb singular is joined with a Substantive plural,
i^ notes a distribution) Again, Psalm. 51.4 Against thee only have I sinned, and
done this evil in thy sight; that thou mightes^ be justified when thou
speak, and be clea^ when thou judge. And if I justify my self, Job 19.20
says Job, my own mouth shall condem^ me, Chap. 9.20. i. e. My tongue shall
give it self the lie; whereas I cannot but confess, that God who afflicts me is
just, and I am a Transgressour.

2. It exhorts them with patience to take up their Cross, and therein possess
their souls.

Non animo tristi, says the old Verse,
fer poenam quam meruisti.
And so Oenone in the Poet speaking to Paris, Leviter ex merito quicquid
patiare ferendum est;
Quae venit indigne poena dolenda venit.
If all punishments be deserved, never any unjustly inflicted, then they must
be patiently endured. Micah 7.9. I will bear, says the Church, the indignation
of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. q. (...). I will patiently
sustain what the Lord ^n his wrath has laid upon me, because by sin and
iniquity I have deserved it, and pro^oked him thereunto. And so much for the
(...), Therefore.

Follows now the (...), being the Denuntiation, or Prediction it self, Thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel.

He had dealt with them already by sundry plagues and punishments; given them
cleanness of teeth in all their Cities, Amos 4.6
and want of bread in all their places; withheld the rain from them, when there
was yet three Months to Harvest; and caused it to rain upon one City, and not
upon another, so as two or three Cities wandered to one City, Ver. 7, 8.
to drink water. Smote them with blasting and mild-dew, when their Gardens and
Vineyards, and Fig Trees and Olive Trees increased. Ver. 9, 10, 11.
Sent the Pestilence amongst them, and the Sword too in part: Yet, as he says,
for all this, they would not return unto him; therefore now will he do Thus
unto them, i.e. lead them Captives into the Land of their Enemies, taking them
away out of their own Land, as Fishes are violently taken out of the water with
a hook (as it is in the second verse, Ver. 2.
whereto it has reference, as I told you) a sorer punishment than all the
rest, to see if yet at last their uncircumcised hearts would be humbled, and
they would accept of the punishment of their iniquity, and return unto him. The
Deduction thence is obvious.

That God, Doctr.
when lesser punishments do not prevail to make men return to him, ( i.e. come
home to him) by Repentance, and amendment of life, will inflict greater. --
Vehementius urit
Quos videt invitos succubuisse sibi.
As Aelian reports of Bees, AElian de animal. lib. 1. c. 9.
That the Drone in the Night entering the Hive, Aelian de animal. lib. 1. c. 9.
and eating their honey, as soon as they perceive it (for they have a custom
for some to wake, and keep watch whilst the rest sleep) fall upon him, and beat
him, but its but with their wings the first time, so as he receives no great
hurt; but if he take not this warning and correction, but adventure again the
second time, they then deal more harshly with him than before; pricking and
goring him with their stings. Or as Tamerlane, to obtain that famous Victory
over Bajazet the Great Turk with his numerous Host, used this Policy; Divided
his Army into three Bands, not suffering them all to fight at once, but first
set upon him with one Division, and when the fury of that was spent, retired
them, and advanced with the second, and relieved that likewise with the third;
and when it was out of breath, the first was ready to come on again. So God
has several sorts of punishments, and heaps them not all at once upon the
heads of Impenitents, but proceeds by degrees; first inflicting lesser and more
mild, then sorer, after that, if they do not prevail, yet sorer than they,
still coming upon them, as it were afresh, with new and more violent
Castigations. For proof whereof, look into Ezra 9.13, 14. And after all that is
come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou
our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given us
such deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments, etc. would
thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be
no remnant, nor escaping? q. d. We have endured the miseries of a long
Captivity, which was brought upon us by reason of our sins; and now that thou
do begin to call us home again, giving us a little reviving in our bondage,
and a nail in thy holy place; should we return to the same sins again, we
should taste of greater miseries than we have yet felt; instead of Captivity,
be brought to utter desolation, and destroyed from being a people any more. In
the mouth of two or three Witnesses, shall every word be established; observe
therefore two places more: John 5.14. Thou art made whole, says our Savior to
him he had healed of his infirmity, which he had had Eight and thirty years,
Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. q. d. Thou have had this
infirmity thus long, and art healed, see now thou return not again to thy
former sinful and flagitious course of life; for if thou do, God will have a
greater punishment for thee, a worse thing shall come unto thee. The other (and
its a special one) is Lev. 26.18, 21, 24. There, says God, I will appoint over
you Terror, Consumption, and the burning Ague, etc. If ye will not for all
this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins,
etc.

Now what should be the Reasons?

Truth, and having spoken it, he will do it; for he is not a man that he should
lie, nor the son of man that he should repent, Numb. 23.19. That Is the first:
He does so, because he has said he will do so.

gracious God, greatly desiring every sinners Repentance and Conversion, and
therefore punishes him more and more, till it be effected. For though some men
be like the root Anchusa, which they say is hardened with water, mollified with
oil; are soonest won with mercies and benefits, drawn by fair means; yet most
are like the Thracian stone, found in the River Pontus, or the Coals of Namurca
(of which they say, that steeped in water, they burn, but sprinkled with oil
are quenched) will not be wrought upon with the oil of mercy, till with David,
Psalm. 69.2. they come into deep waters, and the floods (of Affliction) overflow
them.

Holy God, that cannot endure iniquity. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes thon
to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity, etc. And therefore punishes,
not surceasing, till men surcease, and forsake their iniquities. This is it
which God said, Psalm. 68.21. God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses.

end of all punishments, which is nothing else but to bring us by Repentance
unto God, Heb. 12.10. Our Fathers in the flesh correct us, etc. but he (mark
now) for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Now that being
their end, and they being sent for that purpose, they will not away till it be
produced; even as a Messenger will not depart, till he have an answer of his
Errand, but continues, and that with more vehemence and importunity, if it be
deferred.

Use now of this is twofold: for Instruction and Exhortation.

For Instruction; and first to all in general.

Secondly, To some more especially in particular.

First, To all in general, teaching them, that (since God, when lesser
punishments will not serve the turn, will inflict greater) God has variety,
multiplicity of punishments. He is not like a Wasp, that has but one sting;
his Quiver is full of Ar^ows, so as when one will not serve, he can use
another, and after that another and another, as he did with Pharaoh. The
Trea^ury of his Justice, even as of his Mercy, ^s inexhaustible, according to
that of St. Bernard, Immensus est Deus, and infinitus in ^ustitia, sicut and
misericordia, multus ad ig^oscendum, multus ad ulciscendum: God is great and
infinite in Justice, as well as in Mercy; much in pardoning, much in punishing.
Wherefore it behooves us to fear and tremble, not daring in any wise to offend
him, as the Apostle makes the consequence, Heb. 12.28. Let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, for our God
is a consuming fire.

Secondly, The Use of Instruction does extend it self to some more especially
in particular, as Judges, Justices, and all that are in Authority, teaching
them, that (since God, when lesser, etc.) they are to rise in their
punishments, as offenders rise in their wickedness; if a frown will not serve
the turn, they must take the Rod; and if that will not prevail, they must use
the Rope. God proportions his punishments to men's offenses; and as they add sin
unto sin, till at length the measure of their iniquity becomes full; so he adds
one drop of anger to another, till the Vials of his wrath become full. His
wrath and their sins come to their height at the very same time, and then, and
not till then, he pours them out. The Amorites, though very wicked, Genesis 15.16.
were reprieved, till their iniquities were full. God will not punish sinners
beyond their deserts; little lesser sins, shall have little punishments. I know
indeed that to think any sin little, is no little sin; yet some sins are
greater than others, and God always inflicts the greatest punishments upon the
greatest sins. As God by our Prophet in my Text, threatens to inflict a most
grievous punishment upon the Israelites; so he tells them by him, that they
were guilty of most heinous transgressions, Amos 5.12. I know (says God) your
manifold transgressions, and ^our mighty sins. Peccata vestra valida, and
fortia, as Drusius. Gravia and copiosa, says Vatablus. Magnopere me
irritantia; Ribera. Obstinata and enormia scelera ve^ra vidi, says Lambertus
on the Text: Words are wanting to express the sinfulness of their sins. The
Original is more full and emphatical, and might extend to ^e rendered, Your
Boney Peccata Robusta, obdurata q. ossea: As the bones in the body.
sins. And when ^^ns are mighty and boney, Gods punishments are answerable. He
deals thus with ^is own dearest Children; even David himself being polluted
with mighty, Boney ^^ns, was afflicted with mighty, boney pu^ishments, as it
may appear very plainly ^y that prayer of his, in Psalm. 51.8. Make ^e to hear
joy and gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice. And as the
great God of Heaven equals, and but equals his punishments to men's
transgressions; so Judges (those petty gods) should write after his Copy: They
should punish Malefactors according to their Crimes, but they are not to
plague them beyond the measure of their Offenses. I cannot commend Draco's
Laws, which are said to be writ in blood, because (as A. Gellius says)
whatsoever the offense was, they were to dye that offended. Death is the height
of punishments, and ought not not to be inflicted, unless it be upon notorious
offenders. Non poena sed justitia delectetur judex, says Camero well. Let a
Judge be delighted with the execution of Justice, not with the infliction of
Punishment; in that the Lord delights, not in this, Jer. 9.24. Ferina rabies
est sanguine and vulneribus gandere, says Seneca: Illos crudeles vocabo, qui
puniendi causam habent, modum non habent. Many are not just enough, some
overmuch. He that Tills his Land overmuch, loses by it. 'Twas good counsel
which Artaxerxes gave to Ezra, Chap. 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy
God, and the Law of the King, let judgment ^e executed speedily upon him,
whether it be unto Deach, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to
Imprisonment. Here is ^ariety of punishments, all offenders must ^ot suffer
alike. We have Stocks for Va^rants Whips for Harlots, Ropes for Felons, Gallows
for Murderers. And as God, when ^sser punishments will not serve the turn,
^oth inflict severer; so may you, nay, so must you; only take heed of
sentencing ^en to the Gallows, when the Stocks or the Whip will do the deed.

any ^easure, to make our peace with him by re^entance, lest by the neglect of
the same, we procure greater evil unto our selves. Surely it is meet to be said
unto God, I have ^orn chastisement, I will not offend any more, Job 34.31. One
would think that this, viz, that else we shall procure greater evil unto our
selves, were motive strong enough, every one being willing to avoid punishment;
yet further take into your consideration three things, a threefold Cord is not
quickly broken.

1. That else (if thou do not) thou shall show thy self a Fool; as great a
Fool as he, who coming to the games of Olympus to try his strength, and having
received a foil, yet would not leave till he had got a fall. Malo accepto,
says the Proverb, stultus sapit: And accordingly the Poet; -- Tandem sua poena
nocentem
Consequitur, passusque sapit tum denique stultus.
It is the part of a Fool not to be wise, and take warning before punishment,
till thereby he be compelled thereto. And so Solomon, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man
foreseeth the evil (dangers that are imminent) and hides himself (endeavors
to prevent and escape them) but the simple (or a silly Fellow, Pothe.
the same word being so translated, Hos. 7.11.) passes on (goes on still in
his sin) and is punished. Now there is no man can endure to be counted a Fool.
Women, says the French Proverb, cannot endure to be counted hard-favoured, Nor
Men to be accounted Fools.

2. Consider, that as its a part of Folly, so an infallible symptom and
character of a wicked man. The proud man is not healed by his punishment; why?
for (the plant of wickedness) has taken root in him, Eccles. 3.28. So in Prove.
21.29. The wicked hardens his face, i. e. refuses occasions whereby he should
be brought to Repentance, and obstinately resolves to persist still, and go on
in his wickedness. Again, Esaias 26.11. Lord, says the Prophet, (speaking of the
wicked, whom he mentions in the former verse) when thy hand ( viz. of judgment)
is lifted up, they will not see, i. e. take notice of the same, to make an holy
use thereof, and thereby be brought to Repentance. Now there is none likewise
would be accounted a wicked man, not the wickedest man, and most profane that
lives, would be accounted so by his good will, Cambden's Remains.
it being Nomen abominandi ominis, as Atrius Umber was anciently among the
Romans.

3. Consider that such obstinacy, is not only a part of folly, the property of
a wicked man, but also greatly grieves, and displeases God, Esaias 63.10. His
people being afflicted, would not repent, but rebelled and vex't, its said, his
holy Spirit; no small thing. Argumentum fortius est ultimo loco ponendum.
There Is a Proverb, It Is no good living in Rome, when the Pope is not a man's
Friend: Surely there is no good living in the World, when the God and Governor
thereof is displeased and grieved at us. Nepthali being satisfied with the
Lords favor, was full of blessing, Deuteronomy. 33.23. David prefers it before all
worldly good, Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, Who will show us any good?
Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us (that is better than
all.) Nay! before life it self, which is more than all worldly goods (for skin
for skin, Contrariorum eadem est ratio.
and all that a man has, will he give for his life) Psalm. 63.3. Thy favor,
says he, is better than life. And if his favor be such, by the Rule of
Contraries, what is his displeasure, but full of cursing, worse than any evil
in the World, yea than death it self? How then dare we by our contumacious
demeanours, and obstinacy in sin^ provoke Almighty God? since to do so (...) a
part of folly, an infallible symptom and character of a wicked man; nay (which
is more) it greatly grieves and displeases him, whose smiles are Heaven, and
whose frowns are Hell. And here I might put a period to these words, but there
is yet some Sand left, and therefore I will make bold to pursue them a little
further.

It is St. Chrysostom's similitude, Hom. 35. in Johan. As they which dig for
Gold, having found the Mine, follow every little vein that goes from it, the
commodity being so precious, that not the least part of it is to be lost; so in
Scripture, not the least iota, or tittle of it is to be over-passed, but every
thing diligently to be searched out; for it all (as he adds the reason) comes
from the same spirit, and therein nothing is superfluous, nothing not
necessary. There are some things more therefore to be observed in the
Denuntiation, which I shall but briefly touch, and so conclude.

It is a Denuntiation. He says not, Thus have I done unto thee, and because I
have done Thus unto thee: But Thus will I do.

God never deals in wrath with a Land or People, Observe.
but he gives them warning of (...) before.

If he destroy a Nation or Kingdom, he will speak before concerning the
destruction of it, Jer. 18.7. If he bring the Sword upon a Land, his Watchman
shall ^low the Trumpet, to give the people warning, Ezekiel. 33. For he will do
nothing, but he will reveal the same beforehand to his servants the Prophets;
as it is in this Prophecy of Amos, Chap. 3.7. Jerusalem you know, before its
destruction by Titus, had Seventy Weeks warning, i. e. Seventy Weeks of Years,
which amount to Four hundred and ninety years, reckoning Seventy times seven
Years; for Seven Years are a Week of Years. The old World had an Hundred and
twenty Years before the Flood came. Israel in the Wilderness Forty Years.
Nineveh Forty Days; sometimes more, sometimes less, but God always gives some
warning.

I beseech you, my dearly Beloved, let this sink into your ears, and lay it to
heart; for God has given Us warning, not only by the voice of his servants,
but he has also spoken to us in that storm of WAR, (which now through God's
mercy is blown over) by the roaring voice of the Cannon; we have heard the
confused noise of War, Judge. 5.22.
and the pransings -- the pransings of the Horses; we have seen the bright
Sword, and the glittering Spear, and a multitude of slain, and a great number
of carcasses, and garments rolled in blood, and God (after that unnatural
issue, had held us longer than the issue of blood had held the diseased woman,
Matthew. 9.20.) did at last by the Thrice-happy Return of our most Gracious
SOVEREIGN, make us perfectly whole; and therefore let those warnings which we
have had already, serve our turns; else, as you have heard, God both can, and
will lay sorer plagues upon us.

Again, Thus (says the Text) will (I) do unto thee, i. e. Thy God; he that
frames the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares unto man what is
his thought, etc.

Though men may be Instruments, yet God is the Supreme, and principal Author
of any punishment, or evil occurrence that can happen unto us. Howsoever, I
say, men may be the Instruments, yet God is the primary and principal cause of
all punishments that can come unto us. Shall there be evil in a City, Amos 36
and the Lord has not done it? says our Prophet, Chap. 3.6. Deliver my soul,
says David, from the wicked, which is thy Sword, from men which are thy hand,
O Lord, the men of the World, Psalm. 17.13, 14. They are his Instruments, which
may teach us in all our afflictions to acknowledge him, and humble our selves
before him, not being carried with impatience after the instruments, means and
occasions of them, like the Dog, who runs at the stone which is thrown at him,
and bites it, not regarding him that throws it.

Again, Thus will I do unto thee. God in Scripture speaking to his Church,
usually puts her in the singular number, second person; and that in a threefold
respect. 1. Of himself to us. 2. Of us to him. 3. Of our selves among our
selves.

1. In respect of himself to us, to show his singular love and care toward us,
and over us.

2. In respect of us to him, to bring him home to us by particular
apprehension, with Thomas, my God and my Lord.

3. In respect of our selves among our selves, teaching us to be at one, and so
make up three by unity; one in Faith, one in Profession, one in mutual Love and
Charity; one in Doctrine, one in Government, and that the best. For as Monarchy
is the best Government in a Commonwealth, so is Episcopacy in the Church. Some
indeed, in the late Confused and Factious Times, (blanching it over with the
specious Titles of Christ's Government, Scepter and Kingdom) did endeavor to
establish the Presbyterian Government amongst us, and they had in part brought
it to pass. But, thank God, their design is utterly blasted; for sure I am, had
their ambitious imagination prospered, the poor Church should have been
enforced to play at an unequal game, for she would have lost all by the
elder-hand.

Lastly, Thus will I do unto thee, O Israel. What may be meant by Israel, St.
Hierom Preface before the (...) small Prophets.
resolves us: That whenever in the Writings of the Prophets, the Ten Tribes
are understood, they are set forth by some of these names, Ephraim, Samaria,
Jezreel, Joseph, Bethel, Bethaven, Israel, and sometimes Jacob; but when the
Two Tribes, they are called Judah, Jerusalem, Benjamin, the house of David,
Israel again, and sometimes Jacob: So then choose you whether by Israel here,
you will understand the Kingdom of Israel consisting of the Ten Tribes, or all
the Twelve Tribes, and take in the Kingdom of Judah also, choose you whether, I
say. Israel is threatened, a people ennobled with many singular and excellent
Prerogatives; for to them, says the Apostle, pertain'd the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God,
and the Promises, Romans 9.4. from which all other Nations were excluded. In
Jurie only God being known, and his Name great in Israel; at Salem his
Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion, Psalm. 76. whereupon observe:

no outward Privileges, nor Prerogatives whatsoever can exempt a people from
Gods wrathful severity when they have deserved it, and provoked him thereunto
by sin and iniquity.

A good Lesson for us to take out (even us of this Kingdom) who for outward
Privileges and Prerogatives, surpass (I may aver) all Nations of the World.
The Sun of Righteousness shining more resplendently in our Horizon, and the
dayspring from on high, through the tender mercy of God having visited us with
greatest light. We have the Law, and the Testimony, and Priests, the sons of
Aaron that wait on their Office. God has set his Sanctuary in the midst of us,
and here established the mountain of his house, his Church in the top of the
mountains. Esaias 2.2.
And to make us more Renowned, and more sensible of all this glory, of all this
happiness, God has miraculously made it to reappear unto us, and has
re-establish't it amongst us, after it had been much eclipsed, after it had
been miserably shaken, by a most horrid and unnatural Civil WAR. He, I say,
after all our Troubles, has again restored our Judges as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the beginning, Esaias 1.26. Surely therefore this happy change
must needs be unto us (as the Apostle speaks in another case, Romans 11.15.) as
life from the dead. The Pope scoffingly told an English Gentleman in the midst
of our greatest Confusions, That our ENGLAND was the Land of Wonders, because
we changed our Religion once a Month, and our Government once a Week. But now
it may be said, and that truly, That ENGLAND is indeed a Land of Wonders, for
all those Changes through the overruling Providence of him that changes not,
has brought about that most Royal Exchange, the restoring of that Government,
which we hope will never change: Nay, I am sure it will never change, if we
would but change such things as are amiss in us. But this we may be sure of,
That if we become guilty of the sins of former Times, and impenitently
persevere in them, God can make these Times as miserable as those Times were.
Justum est (says Gregory in his Dialogues) ut quos culpa simul inquinat, par
etiam poena adstringat; and qui nequaquam dispari sunt iniquitate polluti,
nequaquam tormento crucientur dispari. And Facinus quos inquinat aequat. They
that sin alike, must suffer alike, for God is just.

Yet though many, very many should persevere, and that impenitently in
wickedness, I can tell you a way how, for all that, Gods judgments against a
Nation may be prevented, viz. when condign punishments are inflicted upon such
Notorious Malefactors. God may pardon all, when but one man only is zealous in
the execution of judgment, Jer. 5.1. When Phineas stood up, and executed
judgment, he preserved not only himself, but also all the rest of the people
from the plague, Psalm. 106.30.
Numb. 25.8. And therefore, my LORD, and you Gentlemen of the Magistracy, when
neither you nor we; you by your Prisons, nor we by our Threatenings; you by the
Sword, nor we by the Word, can make men good; yet do but punish offenders for
being bad, and you may by that means, preserve the Nation from Gods judgments.
Gods Ministers are to beat down sin, but they never do it so effectually, as
when the Civil Magistrates are pleased to lend them their helping hand. And I
know you will readily give up your best assistance to beat down every sin. But
it would be too long to present the enormities of this disfigured Kingdom (so
very many are the crying sins thereof) one by one unto your view, and to desire
your help against them all. Others, that have more time, may do that. I shall
only at present, beg of you to help us to suppress, or justly punish Schism,
Swearing, Profanation of the Lords day, and (that most beastly sin of)
Drunkenness, which I take to be the chief.

It was Royal Counsel which our Henry 8. gave to Sir Thomas Moore, when he made
him Chancellor: Look first at God, then at me. Give me leave to present the
same to your Lordship: Look first at God, then at the King. First at Gods
Commandment, and then at two of the Kings Proclamations (the one against
vicious, debauched and profane persons, the other for the observation of the
Lords day) and then I am sure, you will be more ready to help ^s against all
these four enormities.

Gentlemen of the Magistracy, be pleased to help us against Schism; With holy
Polycarp may we ^ay, Good God! (...). etc. Unto that times have thou reserved
us, that we should live to see such Separations, Divisions, such cursed
Heresies, and horrible Blasphemies! In these late distracted Times, (I tremble
to speak it) there was so many Congregations, so many Distractions, so many
Companies, so many rents in Christ's Coat, so many Churches, so many Sects, yea
more than so, Quot capita, tot Schismata, as St. Hierom says; So many men, so
many minds, and consequently so many Schisms growing and budding out of them.
Gods inheritance being like Jeremy's Bird, a Bird of diverse colors, Jer. 12.9.

When there was no King in our Israel, Faction multiplied without all measure.
And the many Schisms which were then conjured up, could never yet be got down
again. Schismatics are still so numerous, that if we should ask them their
name, questionless they must answer as the Devil did, Mark 5.9. our name is
Legion, for we are many. And as many as they are, so many Enemies has God and
his Church. I beseech you therefore, my LORD, and you Gentlemen of the
Magistracy, help us against this many-headed Monster, for it is not fit that
the Enemies of God, and his Church, should be spared. Notable is that of
Anthony de Guevara, in an Epistle to the Emperor Charles the Fifth:
Christianus nulla re magis dignosci potest quam si Deo factas contumelias, and
blasphemias, senerissime ulciscatur, suas obliviscatur. A true Christian can by
nothing be better known, than by punishing contumelies and blasphemies
committed against God most severely, and forgetting injuries done unto himself.
It was the Decree of Nebuchadnezzar a Heathen Magistrate, That whosoever should
speak amiss (mark it) but speak ^miss of the god of Shadrach, shall be cut
(...) pieces, and their houses made a dunghill, Dan. 3.29. Or if his zeal be
thought less according to knowledge, as being but a Heathen, yet that of God
himself by Mo^s, Deuteronomy. 13. If thy brother, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
the son of by mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or ^e wife of thy bosom, or
thy friend, which (...) as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, Ver. 8.
saying, Let us go and serve other gods, etc. ^^u shall not consent unto him,
nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him, Ver. 9.
neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou ^^ceal him. But thou shall surely
kill him, etc. This, I say, unrepeal'd, may chal^age its first Authority (where
the more ^^eral Rules of Christian Prudence dispense not with it) That wilful
and incorrigible Apostasy in Fundamentals, and the Ringleaders especially
thereunto, are to be severely chastis'd. But, I know, we do not, nor do I urge
it, that we should punish Heretics with death. And for this (were there no
other reason to be given, yet) this were sufficient, That the Reasons of State
are not to be pried into by private persons. Who may say to a King, Cur sic
facis? Why do thou so? Eccles. 8.4. Or to the Princes you are unjust, Job
34.18
as Job has it. May be the higher powers see and know, That if Heretics were
cut off with the Sword of Justice, the more they would grow. I know they are
Thorns, and our Church is as a Lilly amongst them, Cant. 2.2. Now good Husbands
say, Cut Thorns, and have them; and a Father tells us, that not only
Christianitas, but even haeresis mortibus crescit, the more they are pruned,
the more they spring. Yet though it be not convenient to punish them with
death, I beseech your Lordship to give it in charge that the Laws enacted
against Turbulent Separatists of all sorts, may for the future be strictly
executed; for hitherto in many places, those Laws have been as so many golden
Swords put into withered hands. I know weak Consciences are to be tendered, yet
withal the obstinate are not to be indulged under that pretense; for if that
plea may serve for a perpetual protecti^n, it is absolutely impossible to have
any perfect settlement either in Church or State. P. Martyr in 1 Samuel 23.
Non semper infirmis cedendum est; si enim ^butantur patientia Dei, aut si
fides infir^etur, aut dogmata laxentur, fortiter agen^um est. Some of them
indeed are ex^eeding smooth in their words, Matthew. 24.24.
and blameless, for ought we know, in their lives: So ^mooth, so blameless,
that they might well, ^f it were possible, deceive the very Elect. But we must
distinguish between Samuel and the Devil in his Mantle. We read of Volves that
shall come in sheep's cloath^ng, and that Satan can dress up himself ^^ke an
Angel of light. False Prophets have worn rough garments next their flevh, (...)
well as the good; and Pelagius was as ^^rict for his life, as he was reprobate
con^erning the faith.

Trust not thine ear, believe not thine ^ye, be not cozened with their outward
Sanctity, warm not these Snakes in thy bosom. Remember the Church, and the
^eace of the Church the Coat of Christ, nay, the body of Christ. And Nulla
charitas ad eam charitatem qua obstringimur Ecclesiae. Let Saul take heed how
he spare Agag, and the fairest Cattle under specious pretenses. I would they
were even cut off that trouble you, was the zealous wish of St. Paul in this
case, Gal. 5.12. i. e. that they were Excommunicated, says the learned Dr.
Hammon upon the place. But alas! such is the hardness of their hearts, that
they regard not the bitterness of that grievous Censure, they value it not at
all. Since therefore the power allowed our Church, is slighted by them, it
behooves Civil Magistrates to look more strictly to them, and to take care to
stop their mouths, that they may not infect the people.

And you, my Brethren of the Clergy, let us likewise endeavor to stop their
mouths, by our laboriousness in our Calling, and by the holiness of our Lives.
We carry the Message of Christ in our mouths, let us have his Image in our
hearts. A little Crime in a Minister, is a great offense. He is like a Picture
in a Glass-window, every little crack, every little spot is easily discovered
in him, and is very scandaleus. It is truly said, An ill man is the worst of
all creatures; an ill Christian the worst of all men; an ill Professor the
worst of all Christians; and an ill Minister the worst of all Professors. We
above all ought to abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
That so with St. Paul, we may cut off occasion from them that desire occasion,
2 Cor. 11.12. And then, if for all this, we cannot win them, we shall howsoever
deliver our own souls. Let us do our duties, and then, though Israel be not
gathered, Esaias 49.9.
we shall be rewarded. And Non curatio, sed cura ovium a Pastore requiritur, as
a Lapide has well observed.

Gentlemen of the Magistracy, be pleased to help us against Swearing, it is a
very grievous sin. Because of swearing the land mourns, Jer. 23.10. Yet as
great a sin as it is, God knows it is very common, and not only among the
common sort, but even amongst those from the civility of whose education we
might well expect better things. Even some of the greater, I cannot say the
better sort, are so graceless, that they think Oaths do add a gracefulness
unto their Speech. Let such take heed, that their Oaths, which they look upon
as Rhetorical flourishes, do not bring them to everlasting destruction. Men
shall be called to account, Matthew. 12.36, 37.
and shall be condemned for idle words, much more for vain Oaths. It shall go
heavily with all sinners at the day of judgment; but those that are great in
this world, shall then undergo the greatest severity. For mercy will soon
pardon the meanest; but mighty men shall be mightily tormented, Wisd. 6.6.
Great men's sins are great sins; it is the misery of men that be great, that
their sins cannot be little, and their punishment must be much. One would think
this, the fear of punishment should persuade great persons to circumspection;
but because even some of these put far away the evil day, as our Prophet has
it, Amos 6.3.
Chap. 6. ver. 3. dread not at all the punishments of another world; It will be
necessary for those that have Authority to do it, to make trial, if the
pecuniary mulct, which the Law injoins to be inflicted upon vain Swearers, will
keep them in any better compass. Let them be compelled to open their Purses,
that they may shut their mouths.

3. My LORD, and you Gentlemen of the Magistracy, be pleased to help us against
the Profaness of the Lords day. Many, very many, notwithstanding the Kings
Proclamation, take no more notice of it than formerly. If they go to Church in
the Morning, they think they have kept the Fourth Commandment to the full. And
though they would be loath to pay a Mower or a Shearer a whole days wages for a
mornings work; yet they conclude that God must content himself with a Morning
Sacrifice, and will needs make the Lords Afternoon their own, To walk to the
next Town in about earthly business, to talk in about worldly Affairs (or at
the time of the year) to run a Nutting in [ Nutts will down with them a great
deal better than prayers; Let such take heed, that their cracking of Nutts,
when they should be saying their prayers, do not bring them to gnashing of
teeth] to sleep in, or may be which is worse, to be drunk in. Aug. de C D. lib.
6. cap. 11. Inter alias civilis Theologiae Superstitiones aprehendit Sacramenta
Judaeorum, and maxim Sabbata; inutiliter id ^^s facere affiemans, quod per
illos fingulos septem interposi^^s dies septimam fere partem aetatis suae
perdunt vacando, etc.
Seneca mocked the Jews, because they lost one day in seven; to observe the
Lords day, was with him to lose a day; sure I am, these Sabbath Breakers lose
half a day in seven, whilst they spend that most refined part of time, either
in doing nothing, or wickedly. Time was, our Savior whip't some out, now there
is need of Whips to bring some in to the Temple. And you my LORD, and you
Gentlemen of the Magistracy, would do God good service, if you would use the
very utmost of your Authority to enforce all men to a strict observation of the
Lords day; for were the Fourth Commandment but kept as it ought to be, it would
quickly bring us to a conscionable respect to all the rest; for none walk so
much after the Spirit on other days, as they that are most in the Spirit on
the Lords day.

4. Lastly, My LORD, and you Gentlemen of the Magistracy, be pleased to help us
against Drunkenness. In the time of the Law, this sin was punished with death,
Deuteronomy. 21.21. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21.
And shall it go (I should have said, shall it stagger) unpunish't now in the
time of the Gospel? Drunkenness is the Mother of all Vices, and will certainly,
unless Repentance prevent it, bring the Drunkard to Hell at the last. 2 Cor.
6.10.
Nay, Drunkenness brings Drunkards into Hell, even whilst they are here upon
earth. Many (...) your Alehouses are little better. Very many of them, as well
as Hell, are the very Forges and Storehouses of all kind of Luxury and
Wickedness. Where are Blasphemers, Swearers, Liars, Sabbath Breakers, Prodigal
and Disobedient Children, Murderers, Lascivious Persons, Slanderers (what
not?) but in such places? Drunkards enter into Alehouses, the Ale enters into
Drunkards, and the Devil withal. Nay, Drunkenness it self is a very Fiend, so
says St. Bernard (Ebrietas est manifestissimus Demon) Drunkenness is a most
manifest Devil. They that are possessed with Satan, or with Drunkenness, fall
alike into the fire, into the water alike, they gnash alike, Matthew 17.16. -- 21.
alike they foam; and as the Disciples could not cast out that one sort of
Devils, Epist. 64. Contra Ebriosos Aphros.
so not all the Preachers this; so says St. Augustine in his Epistle to
Aurelius, Tanta est (says he) hujus mali pestilentia, ut sanari prorsus,
quantum mihi videtur, nisi consilii authoritate, non possit. The Drunkard is so
wedded to his Vice, that he will never give over his throwing the Alehouse out
at the Windows, till his own house do throw him out a doors. The Alehouse has
pulled down many a stately Fabric, but does it self stand firm; and will
stand, though a Preacher bestow never so many powerful Sermons to batter it.
For those houses, though many of them are (as indeed its proper they should be)
rather like Swinesties, than houses (being patch't up of a few sticks, some
dirt, and a little straw) yet are more hard to conquer, than a wellfortifi'd
Castle. And how it comes to pass (whether by the Covetousness of the Justices
Clerks, or the countenance of some of the Gentry, who are too much addicted to
this Vice, or through what other cause I know not) but sure I am, it is almost
as easy to beat back the prevailing TURK, as to get down a rotten Alehouse.
Let these houses be reduced to a lesser number, and brought into better order,
which cannot be done, unless some course be taken, (by those which have
authority for the ordering of Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs) to enforce
Constables and Churchwardens to look better to their Offices than they have
done. It is through their negligence that Schism goes down so slowly, that the
Lords Name is abused, that his Day is sacrilegiously imbezel'd, and idled away,
and that this sin of Drunkenness is every day so much practiced.

Judges and Justices cannot see what is done in particular Towns. They (as I
conceive) belong to the inspection, and care of inferior Officers. But they
are either so partial, as being guilty of the same sins, or so careless, that
they will not make use of the Authority they have; and are so loath of their
labor, that they will suffer God Almighty to be highly offended, and
exceedingly dishonored, rather than go one step for a Justice of Peace's
Warrant, further to empower them to regulate Abuses: And are so desirous to be
accounted peaceable men amongst their Neighbors, that rather than they will
hazard the displeasure of any of them, they will not care how much God is
displeased, and dishonored; so that I cannot tell how to compare Constables
and Churchwardens better, than to those great brass Andyrons which stand in
great men's Chimnies, which are more for show, than for use. Let these Officers
be compelled to look better to their places, that so sinners may be punished,
and Gods judgments avoided. For we must not think that we can long enjoy ^eace
upon earth, if notorious sinners be ^^ffer'd unpunish't, to fight against
heaven. ^ut if all, from the highest to the lowest, do their ^uties, for the
reclaiming of siners, or punishing sin, that is the way to make us live in a
peaceful Kingdom; (...) when we dye, to depart into the King^^^ of Peace; Of
which blessed Kingdom, Lord make us all partakers, not for our me^^t and
worthiness, but for the merits and ^^thiness of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ the righteous; To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three
Persons, One Everliving, Ever-loving Lord God, be given, at is most due, all
Honor and Glory, Power (...) Praise, Dignity and Dominion, now and so ever.
Amen.

GLORIA IN EXCELSIS DEO.
FINIS.

