Partridges OBSERVATIONS For the Year 1692. OR, AN ACCOUNT OF Diverse Remarkable
Things Which shall happen in most Parts of EUROPE Each Month.

But particularly in France and Flanders, etc.

To which is added John Gadbury's Verses about the Prince of Wales, in his
Almanac 1689, Travesty'd.

Edinburgh, Re printed in the Year 1692.

The Introduction:
AN Ancient Hermit by a craggy Hill,
By Natur's help, and art, had formed a Cell.
Where he did live from Rage and Madness free.
And did observe that curse, Man's Luxury:
He spent his days in Peace conient, and Ease,
And long before foresaw poor Englands case.
He Imil'd to see French Apes fill Albions Hall.
And make the English Lion their Jack call.
And how the Gallick Circe did prevail,
How well she bowed, and crign d, and waged her Tail.
How sure she dealt, how Rich by a light gain,
How well she rid us, and was rid again.
He laughed to see Towns sold, and Faith betrayed;
Honesty sneak, Hypocrisy obeyed.
To see the great Ones how their manner was,
Roar against Rome, and yet they went to Mass.
But grieved to see how our Religion stood;
And Faiths pretense by Knaves was built in Blood.
How they proceeded, how they laid their Crimes
To Excommunications, Jails, and Fines;
From such a Faith, and Men, Lord set us free,
Whose Doctrine gives a murdering Destiny!
He piti'd England's fate, how tamely she,
Parted with Charters, Laws, and Liberty.
Observed their Passive Cant, their Noise, and Tools.
How with Church notions they betrayed the Fools,
He wept to see the Murdering Trade and Crew;
Sheriffs made, and Juries packt, they knew would do.
Crimes formed and forged, and when they wanted more
A swinging swearing Tool they had in store;
Or else some Inuendo, then in force,
By which those Judges with their Wise discourse;
If Brick bat was but named, 'twas proved a Horse.
Thus Whipe and Halter moved, as George gave Laws
That Butcher-General to the Popish Cause,
Imagined Crimes, Crimes that were never done,
Let Colonel Sydney's Murder stand for one,
Where Inuendo did our Work alone.
By these, and such like means was all destroyed;
By these, base Actions, and worse were employed.
PARTRIDGES Observations For the Year 1692.
Observations upon January.
Gadbury. Come mighty Muse! Assist me once again,
Touch thou my Cranium, and inspire my Pen;
And let the Black mouthed Tribe again reflect,
Tho I don't Prophecy I may Predict.
And that it may with Truth and Good be blessed.
Heaven guide my hand, let mighty Jove assist,

Partridge. All hail, my Masters! here is muckle do,
A year of Wonders do thou call it John.
'Twas such a year so fatal to your Crew,
It has not left you Ground to Anchor on.
Let Chains then be their Lot, who humbly crave,
And beg to be a little Bastard's Slave.

It is now just a year since our Holy Plot was discovered when Passive
Obedience was turned into Rebellious Resistance, and a design laid to destroy
the bravest Prince in the World, and this done by those who in their public
Auditories had be-rebell'd all mankind but their own Faction; by those, I say,
at whose doors lies all the Blood and miseries of Ireland

If we consider that the Ingress was attended with a of the and and a of and
the, those things compared with the beginning of this month, seems to show us
much news discoursed of among all People; and especially about Peace, and such
Affairs as relate thereunto, as Truces, Cessations of Arms, and the like; and
do you think there is any thing in it? Vix Credo.

For and are Gadent, and the old plotting Knave is in to, from the third and
ninth, the house of Religon: I hope we have no more holy Plots coming abroad
again, and yet I dare venture a Wager there is something in it, but it will be
smothered in the Birth: he that plots for the Church plots safe.

The Councils of Europs very hush

Observations on February.
Gadbury. Of late, Heaven's Cohorts did each other greet,
And at their General Rendevouz did meet.
Mavors in Gemini; there still resides,
While Chronos on his Half-hors'd Bowman rides.
The Effects lie snug and hush; and then begins,
When Sol and Stilborn do embrace the Twins.

Partridge. When Gadbury's Stars and Angels did appear,
The Friends of Rome flew swiftly through the Air.
From some small Cell or Cellar, as it is thought.
The Reaking Babe was in a hurry brought.
Immortal Elf: how often that did dye,
Its Real Father knows no more than I.

At the Ingress in December we find the void of course, but the is going to the
of, and on the Cusp of the Ascendant in, but the lately separated from the of,
and the Body of, and this so near the Tropic that I fear will spoil the
Influence of 's Balsamic Rays, which indeed tend to peace.

But here we find the going to the square of and, and toward the end of the
month we shall see the Effects of it in London among the New Non-cons, and the
murmuring Crew, and it will be about some seditious thing in reference to the
Government; perhaps meeting to affront the King and Queen, as they have done
before; but I remember when a Gollows used to be the reward of such things in
the two late pious Reigns; but the case is altered, the Murderers then are the
Traitors now.

It also shows some sudden surprise or treachery in Flanders; perhaps the
French Tyrant may go to market about this time to take Towns after his usual
way of fighting without Blood,

Observations upon March.
Gadbury. With full career, Sol to the Ram does hie,
He being there the Judge of Equity;
But ere he does his Regal Throne possess,
Grim furious Mars disturbs his happiness,
Hence Feuds and Differences; hence too, Treach'ry flows
Perfidious Friends are worse then open Foes.

Partridge. Who dars call eighty eight an empty year,
When things so plain in plenty did appear.
It gave a Prince by Miracles begot,
And smooth fat Priest from foraign nations brought
Mass houses public, did each City grace
The Regulators; and Salisbury Race:

At the Lunation now approaching, we find both and in exact square to from and
II. Lites Rixae, Interfectiones multas in multis Locis, Mars is in a human
Sign, from whence we usually find Quarrels and Contentions, as well public as
private, from whence also we shall hear of Duels and Murders about this time in
diverse parts: also Skirmishing by Parties of those Soldiers that guard the
Frontiers of Countries and Garrisons. We may also expect to hear of some
Cruelty, Murder, or other Villainies committed by the bloody Rappare^ Papists in
Ireland. In short, mankind in general are about this time inclined to Violence
and Villainies, Roberies, and Blood; as besides this Lunation, the square of
and, and the square of the and show*

Whatsoever the discourse is about a Peace at this time, will end in words and
noise, and have no other effect, for I can see no real ground to judge any such
thing, and besides, the War has not traveled its full Journey yet.

Much lying news spread abroad to the abuse of the Credulous and this about
some considerable thing as they report.

Observations upon April:
Gadbury. The Orbs and Stars; how steadfastly they are hurled?
Those Arks where God hides Judgments for the World;
That shake its Pillars; yet themselves we find.
Beyond the Rage of Thunder, Storms, and Wind.
And when the Almighty, through these Trumpets calls
Poor tottering Man, he staggers, and he falls.

Partridge. No, no, sour Critics, we cannot deny.
That Honest Jack has learnt to Cant and Lie.
That year's supplied in full witth Lies and Tales,
About the Glories of his Prince of Wales.
Poor harmless Babe! miscalled a Prince of Bliss,
Born for his Mothers Ease, not Consciences.

Holland seems active and early in their Preparations for this Summers Affairs;
and this as well for Land as Sea service, which is aptly enough showed by 's
being in, in to, and applying in, a Northern Sign, with North Latitude, free
from all Affliction, and in to, Lord of the tenth, shows, that the Armies of
Europe are endeavoring to take the Field betimes, and that the Princes of
Europe are making vigorous Preparations for the following Campain, and this the
rather, because is also Angular in the tenth house, and their applying to the
Sextile and Parallel of, Lord of the 7th, which they say is the House of War.
But this Application between and seems also to show some Propositions for
Peace, but I think it is for no other end, but to protract time till some other
design is ready.

Is it possible there should be an of and from II and, and no Knavish
Villainies acted or discovered in or about London at such a time! if there is
any Roguery now against the Government, be sure there is a Woman up to the Ears
in it; but be it what it will, a Woman is at the bottom, and the thing is
villainous. The of and, should give the Merchants good news.

Observations upon May.
Gadbury. As the Sun's Rays and heat without control,
Dissolves the frozen Mountains near the Pole*
So it is his Beams refreshes Earth and Air,
Excites to motion. calls out men of War,
In thy good time, O Lord, let mankind be,
From Rage, Oppression, Force, and Madness free.

Partridge. That Land's unhappy, and will e're be so,
That has a Prince can neither stand nor go.
For he that is led by Priests. by Priests is swayed.
And Priests by King and Laws must be obeyed.
'Twas from such Laws (that King resolved to shine)
As Lewis gives, and not a Constantine.

Some mighty Action near, of the nature o^; that is, fighting either by Sea or
Land, notwithstanding the is in with and to and in to likewise. And I really
judge the Arms of the victorious King of England is about this time successful
against the Christian Turk, he I mean that scorns to be just or honest the
French Tyrant; and I judge also, there is a probability of the Effusion of much
Blood, as well as a prospect of Victory.

These Rays do also show many Men according to their Qualities shall receive
various Favors and Marks, or Characters of Honor, either as Rewards for
Service and Valor, or else to qualify them for public Business.

On May 20. and 22, 1685* Dr, Oats was whipped; being tried by a Protestant
Jury, and Protestant Judges, such as they were; and found guilty on Popish
Evidence; he had 2256 Lashes with a Whip^ of six Thongs knotted, which amounts
to 13536 Strips: his Judges were Jefferies, Withins, Walcot and Holloway.

There is now an of and the, this makes a great Man frown, etc. There is work
for the Messengers abroad if they will but look out sharp, etc.

Observations upon June.
Gadbury. Saturn and Jove confront each other's Rest,
One Natur's States man, the other her High Priest.
They fall at odds; ay, let them quarrel too,
If Mankind suffered not for what they do.
They move and scatter what they have in store,
And snatch those Joys away, they gave before.

Partridge. By whose Examples must our after Kings.
Shun all those Causes whence Rebellion springs?
Your Prince of Wales I know, while your soft Names,
Of Golden Laws are joined to Iron Chains.
'Twas Tyrant-force made People try their Brains,
To Abdicate the Cause, and break their Chains

The Death of some old Statesmen, Officers or Persons eminent in dispensing
the Government of Nations, seems to prepare and make way for the rising of
others, for Removes and Preferments. etc. And where Armies are near there is
great expectation of Action between them, but I do judge the greatest and more
considerable part of such Motion and Action will be deferred till the end of
this Month, or beginnig of July, but still preparing and great expectation what
will be the Event of it.

The Affairs of this Month seem to concern Spain in their Military and Martial
Negotiaons; France in every thing that relates to her Government and Quiet;
Hungary and Dalmatia, etc. are affected with some Dissentions, either about
settling their Government, or about some Points of Religion. London is also
disturbed with some Divisions in her particular Government; uneasy murmuring
Spirits are still trying their Tricks to destroy their own Quiet, and the Peace
of all besides: Poor Men! they want a Hobby horse; but the best on it is, they
are Men of more Hope than Courage, etc. ^s London healthy? viz credo. Some
eminent Wedding ends the Mon^^ or near it.

Observations upon July.
Gadbury. Let all the Plagues of Murder now be flung
On that cursed Babe from whence those Mischiefs sprung
There Is ruffling work above; and hence must flow,
Mutations here; some Tyrants overthrow:
Tho at this distance, yet methinks I hear
Most pleasant News, some Abdication near.

Partridge. None need doubt Ease and Quiet, since we have
Heaven's Gift and Blessing in a Prince so brave.
Born to restore our Laws, that gasping lay,
That Papists and worse Men had torn away:
This is the Man, nor your Welsh Prince, shall be
The true Restorer of our Liberty.

Although the of, and have a large share in the Actions and Affairs of this
Summer* as the other Rays and Lunations have; yet it is to be considered
differently from them, they being both of a slower Motion and greater Bodies
than the rest; and always with their present In flux stamp a new face on the
public Affairs of the World, and at this time of Europe in particular, as a
few Months hence will inform us* for there are three Oppositions as well as
there were three Conjunctions.

But at present all things tend to Violence and Blood, the real Effects of War
and Confusion* Pax quaeritur bello, after a Storm comes a Calm* The of and *
and and from Humane Signs, shows great Effusion of Blood by fighting; quando
cum host manus co^^ererint; they also give Thieves intesting the Highways
with Murder rather than the loss of their prey; some Mischiefs done by the
Tories in Ireland, and I think they are diverse of them rewarded with a Halter,
their due desert.

This Month is attended throughout with much News and Intelligence, Some
removes among the Clergy, etc. and a merry Couple much talked of.

Observations upon August.
Gadbury. Is London free from Traitors? is that Crew
Still seeking that, some Years has been their due?
Alas good Men! the Passive Cant's laid by,
And now Resistance is no Blasphemy*
Well! they are Men of Noise, and so it proves:
Pray ask abroad how the grand Tyrant moves?

Partridge. Here John tells truth; in this sweet Prince (said he)
Our Hopes are laid of all Felicity*
Each pays his Tribute; John alone, you see,
Abounds in his Old Talent, Flattery;
This is his Off^ring, proper to his Sphere:
A precious Tool to breath a Holy Prayer.

At the Lunation that begins this Month we find no Planet angular; and
therefore do I judge no considerable thing that is really new can be expected
at this time: and notwithstanding there are so many Aspects in the Month, yet
it will follow the Fate and Effect of the Revolutional Ingress next preceding,
and the of and. The of and from and, gives abundance of lying false News and
Rumors, some about Sea-Affairs, Merchants, Merchandising* and the like; and I
dare be positive almost that there will be some notorious piece of Cheatery
acted and brought about under the Notion and Mask of Religion.

The of the and creates abundance of Difference in London. Heats in their
Councils, and it should be about something that relates to its Government, but
it will be for the City's Advantage in the Conclusion, and I think for the
Establishment of its future Peace. But I fear London and also some parts of the
Nation besides, will find it to be a sickly Autumn, some new Fevers, Colliks etc

Toward the latter part of the Month we may expect to hear of some Action from
beyond Sea, of a Battle, Skirmish, or* such like^ Enterprise.

Observations upon September.
Gadbury. Has Europe's Foes laid by their murdering Laws,
And the grand Murderer disowned his Cause?
Do Popish Projects with their Plots decrease
And Noah's Dove bring in the Branch of Peace?
Pray then inquire; ask if it can be;
If England's Monarch says it, I agree.

Partridge. And let September never be forgot,
Nor Modena* nor yet the bawdy Plot;
Nor yet Dada, who, as the Story tells,
Lent her his hand, and with that Aaron's Bells.
When Babes by Miraclet are got, as said,
Farewell the ancient way of Sheets and Bed.

The of the and and the and w^^^ in some measure influence September also, ar^
yet I do not think it will give any considerab^^ Action abroad either, as to
the Wars, by S^^ or Land, or to the state of Affairs and Cou^cils of Europe,
and yet it seems to show Diff^rence and Quarrels, but they will be in and among
private Companies and Societies which may prove the Cause of Duels, Murders,
etc.The of and as they are qualified at the last New Moon, shows the Death of
some eminent Lady, and the Misfortunes and Trouble of others. If be in the
seventh, as I do believ^ he is, in to, and both Peregrine, he show much Robbing
and Mischiefs toward the end of the Month; an^ also the discovery of People
that abuse the Coin of the Nation e^ther by clipping, coining, washing, etc.
Some cunning knavis^ Lawyer or Clerk caught in doing what he ought not to have
done*

A brave bold Fellow, one of the Sons of, receives Preferment as a Gratuity
for his Bravery. Mercury having been twice ^^ to this Month, will give good
News to the City of London and I think it comes from some of our Western
Plantations. etc.

Observations upon October.
Gadbury. There Is mighty News abroad, it is come from far.
About some King's Affairs of Peace or War:
Jove's in the Twins: Methinks I hear the Voice
Of the cursed murmuring Crew; the rest rejoice,
God save the King, and he that wont say so,
Burton and Graham's Blessing with him go.

Partridge. October did this Land a King afford,
A Prince (John says) that never broke his Word;
Whose Courage, Wit and Conduct has done more,
Than all our great Reformers could before.
His Reign was short; to Priests he owes his Fall;
For Priests and Church he lost his Crown and All.

At the Ingress of the into we find a very peaceable Position; the Moon who is
in to ^he place of the last in 1682. is in to, and; Why should there not be
Propositions made for Peace about this time, and that with ^uccess too? it
seems very probable, and the Heavens themselves favor it: God grant it may
succeed, if it is for the advantage of the true Protestant Religion. and the
beating down of Tyranny, Popery, and all Arbitrary Power. And indeed the of the
and does mightily persuade me that there will be something done ^o the purpose
in it in order to its Conclusion. And if it is now effected, the Illustrious
and Va^ant King of England will be the only Man to do it.

And besides if we consider that, the Celestial Foot-post, ^ath been three
times in to within a few weeks, and at the ^ngress in to the Moon in the fifth,
the House of Embassies and ^essengers, and Lord of the tenth, the House of
Honor and Gran^ur, it is the more probable.

The Month is generally spent in things of a private nature and ^uality, such
as are the Affairs of States, Kingdoms, Nations, and ^ountries.

Observations upon November*
Gadbury. Sol Mars and Saturn in a fiery Sign,
(What e're their project is) do there combine.
Something they will do* perhaps you will wonder what,
Why then I Will tell you it is some knavish Plot.
And something else too, will by them be done,
They Are all in Quartile to the French King's Sun.

Partridge. November, hanged, that plaguey Powder plot,
Which John so often wilfully forgot.
In Eighty Eight too, how this good Man fails?
He thought of nothing then but Prince of Wales*
The Babe being born, a Name you know's his due,
A Name he had, A plaguey long one too.

The former part of this Month will give litt^^ or no Alterations in the
public Affairs and B^siness of Nations and Kingdoms till toward t^ end, and
then there seems to be Projects a^^ Projections to the purpose, and these
attend^^ too with something of Violence; for the Ra^^ and Aspects are generally
not only from viole^^ parts of Heaven, but from humane Signs al^

About the middle of the Month the com^ to the of, near that eminent fixed Star
c^^led the Scorpions Heart, which will spend its I^fluence two ways. 1, In the
Elemental Worl^ 2. In the Intellectual. 1. It will give stran^^ and untoward
Weather, Corruscations in t^^ Air, and I judge Thundur in diverse parts as well
of this Nation of others. 2, It gives villainous and treacherous Designs and
C^^spiracies against the Powers and Government of England in pa^^cular. Here is
some cursed piece of Roguery at the door, but I ju^^ it will be discovered; and
the best way to prevent any more (...) is to hang all you catch, by what Name
or Title soever digni^^ or distinguished. But this Month will but give a
beginning to the Affairs; and therefore you must expect its farther Managem^^^
(...) in the next

Observations upon December.
Gadbury. Motion and Time, those Twins, older than Man;
When the dark Chaos altered, they began.
They lurked throughout the whole; but to appear,
God spoke them into being, and they were.
These are the two that work, tho different ways;
And as they do begin, conclude our Days,

Partridge. Now Muse forbear, the Year draws to an end,
And bid Friend John his next Year's Manners mend:
He who by Hocus Pocus, Priests and Tricks,
Foretold a Prince of Wales in Eighty six:
A likely story! for he could not say
When all his Makers were to run away.

Strange Weather ended the last and also begins this, and it is such as is not
usual. It Is ten ^o one but there may be a fine stroke of business ^t the
Old Bailey this Sessions.

The last Lunation is perhaps as remarkable one as will happen again in many
Years; for ^ere we find it falls upon an of and, and ^,, the and Moon all in in
and near ^he Stars of Orion in to them all, he above ^he Earth in the tenth in
Reception with, and ^hey all under the Earth peregrine: in a word, shows
Violence and violent Deaths: Let the ^ebellious Party take it among 'em.

If a Man should but ask you; how gravely you would tell one
Of Passive Obedience, yet caught in Rebellion:
If Rebellion' s a Sin, ye are dipp' d and a sinking.
You Squires of the Halter, that hang Men for thinking,
If St Paul had been here, and by you had been tried,
(No benefit of Clergy) he would certainly died,
^od save King William and Queen Mary, and confound their Enemies.
FINIS.

