A POEM ON THE TEST Dedicated TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The Duke of ALBANIE.

Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos. Mart. EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year,
Anno MDC.LXXXIII.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The Duke of ALBANIE.
ADmit Great Sir, (in earnest or in sport)
A trembling Stranger to your Princely Court:
Since ye for Meekness are the ages wonder
In time of Peace; in time of War a Thunder.
Its He who glories that he first did frame
True-Majesty, JAMES STEWARTS Anagram;
Which for your Anagram shall ever pass,
As wanting the dull omen of the as.
So Heaven from malice guard the Royal Throne,
As ye protect your
NINIAN PATERSON.

THE TEST. A Poem presented to His Royal Highness: wherein is conclusively
asserted the Kings Prerogative Royal, and Jurisdiction in Matters
Ecclesiastical, with the unlawfulness of resistance.
1.
Begone heart cutting cares, I scorn to be
Unfortunate, spite of adversity.
I he who all my life was bruised and broke,
On Fortunes wheel being racked from spoke to spoke;
Born under unpropitious Stars, which throws,
As I grow old, new loads of growing woes:
Now these misfortunes, which did me annoy
Are swalowed up in ane excessive joy.
I surfeit with delights! can Hell present,
What after this, I darr call discontent?
Nay now its a puz'ling doubt, whither I be
Composed of Joy, or Joy composed of me.
What unexpected Treasure makes thee blessed,
If any ask? I answer, it is the Test:
Which if well understood, for plenty, peace;
Scotland might write Nil ultra, to her Bliss.
The Test a store, wherewith enricht, the West
Needs not envy the bowels of the East,
By this the drowsy Sword shall snorting ly,
And JANUS of his gate shall lose the key.
And we in shade of heavenly peaces wing
Shall serve our GOD, and dearly love our King.
2.
GOD Bliss your Royal Highness, but I vow,
Never so Royal, nor so high till now.
No, when thy head being girt with verdant bays,
And every one sang Jo to thy praise;
Laden with Spoils, and honors thou advanced,
While victory upon thy ensigns danced.
Care of Religion is the glorious Gemm,
That Crowns the Crown, exaltes the DIADEM;
And makes your Highness, highly, Royal, since
The Prince of virtues most becomes a Prince.
Vile Ink a common tetter may command,
But the Kings evil requires a Royal hand:
So all the Godly Jewish Kings of old
By such a Test from dross did purge their Gold.
This is like JEHU'S Test: to try withal,
Who is for GOD, or who adhears to Baal.
Constantius Sire to Constantin the best
Did purge his Court by such ane other Test.
It Is this the Spanish annals do imput
As a chief Honor to their Sisibut.
French DAGOBERT did eternize the story,
And Legend of his life, by such a glory.
This Test will expiate our enormous crimes
Committed in our bloody Rebel-times.
This Unions Trophie will for ever blot
The Leprous scandal of a rebell-Scot;
And make the Worlds Amphitheater see,
A Scot and Loyal are Identitie:
And make our bright renown to spread as far,
As is the Artick from the Antartick Starr.
Lucretia's chastity no fame had gained,
Had she not with that loathsome rapt been stained.
Lucrece the glory of her Sex! O rare,
Who did her honor to her life prefer!
Mirror of Matrons, who did death endure
Rather then (tho by force) be thought a whore.
The Test's the touchstone, badge and livery
And Cognizance of faithful Loyalty.
It is the fan will purge this soultrie Isle,
And separat the precious from the vile.
And this will bind us to true Liberty,
Like Sons and Daughters of one Family,
And Servants of one Lord this bond of Peace
Will arts and plenty, and our Joys increase.
Nay it will here Commence the Joys above,
Make us all happy, and each other love:
Make us amongst our selves Compose all Jarrs,
And on the common foe discharge our Wars.
III.
Our Kirks the Sacred Argo, Noah's Boat
Can ride in tempests and keep still a float;
And this true Gospel Test, it is her yard,
Her Sail, her Compass, Cable, and her Card.
That no tempestous Cataracts can fall
Upon these lands shall boast their Funeral.
This TEST will waird of all rude laick hands
From Kirk or King, GODS beauty and bands:
That so our LORD he never may complain
Betwixt two Thieves he is Crucified again.
This is the Isthmus that our Kirk will save
Betwixt the Egean and the Ionian wave.
Touch ye not my anointed, and molest
No more my Sacred Prophets; that is the TEST.
By this the Clergy is secured now,
In ancient reverence and revenue*
One faith, one Lord, one Baptism now shall be;
Farewell Geneva, Rome farewell to thee,
Fare well on one hand, bloody Catholic Leagues,
And on the other, wild Geneva gigg's:
For after this will never honest man,
Or turn a Papist, or a Puritan.
Burst envy, burst, for now its be thy task,
To see resplendent truth without a Massk.
IV.
And yet some Owls cannot abide this Sun,
They scorn not to defend, what they have done:
And on this TEST they do more dumpish look,
Then English Panals that is denied their Book.
And this does chiefly their blind conscience grudge,
To make the King in all Church matters Judge;
Although Saint Paul this solemn rule did make,
We must be Subject all for conscience sake.
It Is ignorance, or else audacious nonsense,
That Princes hes no power of Subjects conscience:
For, as Religion makes us calm and mild;
So Superstition, Frantic mad and wild.
And if such rise in Arms upon pretense
Of a convulsion in their conscience;
If that the King may not control their doing,
He and his Subjects both involved in ruin:
And on the other hand, if that he may
Then of their conscience sure he bears the sway.
Or all things sacred, and all things that is civil
Shall be over thrown by every furious Devil.
If they can make a shift for to baptize
Their fury Zeal, they may do what they please:
So each Opinion makes a Sect from hence,
And every Sect a faction does commence,
And every Faction for a war will boad,
And every War will be the cause of GOD,
And every Cause of GOD will grow so high
To outface, and trample on Authority;
So while by hairbrain'd folly wee'r beguiled,
Religion is debauched and peace exiled.
These were the giddie methods, which of late
Confounded and destroyed both Church and State;
And all that these Fanatics now desire,
Is but the smook of that unquenched fire.
All they contend and fight for, is to bring
Themselves or equal, or above the King.
But grant ane other power as great as he,
Then likewayes grant that two Supreams may be;
And so the People may obliedged stand
Unto a contradictorie command,
Exemplified we saw this wry nosed quirk,
In late King James and his opprobrious Kirk:
Therefore there is no controlling of the Powers,
Or each Supreme will have Superiors.
V.
First oeconomick was the Government,
And from a family drew its descent;
Which families amplification
Became a City, Province, Nation:
And from his Loins, Because the race did spring,
The Father of the Family was King,
And Priest too, in one Person, which at death
Joyntlie to his first borne he did bequeath.
So for two thousand years the World did see,
The Priesthood joined with Sovereignty.
So, Numa, so, Augustus King and Priest,
So, all the Kings of Malabar, in the East:
Which tho, that God among the Jews divided,
Yet were all causes by their Kings decided,
Which did concern the Church not State alone,
By Ezekia, David, Solomon,
Jehu, Jehosophat, Josia holy,
Whose power in Church was Legislative wholly.
To show that this belongs in each respect
Unto the ancient Mishpat-Hamelek.
Melchisedeck expressly is named King,
Before he is called Priest; which very thing
The Gallicks against Boniface do show,
His Crown he to the Priesthood did not owe.
Moses, King in Iesurum too, their type
The Trumpets, and the Tables both did keep:
And what to him pertain'd GOD does allow
To every other Monarch as his due.
This argument Eusebius does repeat
From Moses unto Constantin the great,
As consequent, about the convocation
Of the Nice Council, and its Confirmation.
The Law of Ceremonies as behests,
Moses, not Aaron, gave unto the Priests
Long after that; to show it was in force,
David did constitute each Priest in's course;
And Solomon, that was both wise and just,
Did Abiathar from the Priesthood thrust.
This power continued, till the Virgins birth,
When GOD was seen in flesh upon the Earth;
Of which authority he never bereft it:
But as he found the Government he left it.
And so the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction
Of Princes is by nature, not by fiction,
Founded on reason, practice, and consent,
Unalterable, as the Firmament;
And this our Savior did suppose to be
Ane uncontrolable, and firm decree:
Wherefore St. Paul to Caesar makes appeal,
To show this Jurisdiction cannot fail.
Thus Kings do reign as Scriptures do confess,
As for our Honesty, so Godliness.
If it be said why did our Savior
Bequeath not by his testament such a power?
Our Savior lived under these ye know,
That did employ their power to overthrow
His Church and followers, and therefore, why
Should he give them Commission to destroy?
He only to the subject did enjoin
Meekness and Patience and Subjection:
But in no-wayes, either in weight or measure
Determines he the rights belong to Caesar;
Only according to Ius Gentium,
Render to Caesar, what is due to him.
The Jurisdiction of the Magistrate
In Church affairs, bears a far higher date
Then our blist Saviors birth. Coercive power
By nature lodges in the Governor.
Yea Christ and his Apostles acted then
In the Capacity of private men;
And left it only in the Sovereigns hand
(Which he forbad all subjects) to command:
And therefore at his very dying hour,
He did reject all Secularie power.
But when the Kings grew Christian, Constantine,
Did act in that capacity again;
Which he with faith and Courage too did show,
When he the Coventickles overthrew
Of the Cursed Donatists, and stoutly he
Dispelled the mists of Arian heresy.
Nor was he singular in these, each one
Of his Successors that same way have gone:
(...)the whole body of the civil Laws
Do show anent th'Ecclesiastick cause.
And should a Monarch, (would ye think it meet)
When he turns Christian, his power abate?
Nay word by word, the Apostle he averrs,
Our Kings as Kings, Liturgick Officers.
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, our Savior is:
Then sure by right all Christian Kings are his;
This was in force until St. Peter's chair
Did sleily rob this power from the Empire.
But at the Reformation we expressed it,
In our Confessions the Pope unjustly wrest it;
And yet there is a Spiritual exercise
Of preaching, Sacraments, and of the Keys,
Which is peculiar to the Priest alone:
Saul that did this mistake, he lost his throne;
All which who darr deny, he needs no more
Of arguments, But O what hellebore?
VI.
May not Heretical, Erroneous,
Oppressing Princes and Idolatrous
Resisted be? or otherwise Religion
Shall go to wrack, and all shall be undone.
Yes; if for wiser men ye needs must pass
Then Moses, (or the inspired Prophets) was:
Or if your selves more holy men ye call
Then Christ, or yet St. Peter, or St. Paul.
Six hundred thousand, and four thousand more
Under their Chiftain Moses, weapons bore.
All men of valor on Nil's fertile plains,
Whose Inundation serves in stead of raines;
Yet nothing's done without express consent
Of Pharaoh, then who had the Government,
Tho tyrant and oppressor both. And so
Shadrach, and Mesach and Abednego
Were thrown in flamms, yet not a word we hear
Of stirring people to take sword or speir.
And Daniel cast into the Lions den,
Yet praying for the King Darius then.
Yea with a miracles expense Our LORD
Did tribut to Tiberius afford.
To Herod, Pilat, and the Sanhedrim
He did submit, although they sentenc't him,
Unto ane unjust, and accursed death.
His Doctrine too did meek submission breath,
Give unto Caesar, what is Caesar's due,
And pray for those hes persecuted you.
And Pilats power he from above confessed, John 19:11.

And Challenged Peter for his furious have,
Charging his Champion with that dreadful word,
Who takes the Sword, shall Perish with the Sword.
And for the Apostles, none amongst them all
Taught to resist; St. Peter, or St. Paul.
St. Peter says directly contrare it,
To every ordinance of man submit.
These that despise dominion, or defame
Authority; Judgment will follow them.
And good St. Paul, obey them that you rule,
For Conscience sake be Subject every Soul.
Resisters on themselves Damnation bring.
Ane Item sad to Traitors to the King.
This Doctrine with their blood they sealing Died;
Paul was beheaded, Peter Crucified.
In Julian the vile Apostats reign
The Christians only tears for arms did bring.
They were not able to resist they will say.
Tertullian, tells in his Apology,
The Christians then, they were in number more
Then drops of rain or sands upon the Shore:
Cities and Countries both, they fill in swarms,
They every where abound in peace and arms;
Yet they Submission unto arms prefer,
Under a Tyrant and Idolater.
Six thousand and six hundred sixty six
In the Thebean Legion, never sticks
For to submit to Decimation,
Of Maximinian for Religion.
Then, Traitors is it a sport to you or laughter,
First to be hanged here, then damned hereafter.
VII.
Courage Great Prince, and make rogues stand in awe,
It Is Execution that is the Life of Law;
Wherefore hes truth it self called Princes GODS?
But that they are Masters of rewards and rods,
But that they can with Majesty command,
Or break in pieces who do them withstand.
Princes do show how they deserve their Crowns
By gracious favors, or by aw-full frowns.
Courage and Wisdom both a Prince maintains.
Undaunton'd valor must have breast and brains.
Your Highness still makes good your Saviors words,
These that are mighty, are called bounteous Lords.
Pattern of virtues Patron of all arts,
Who conquered Armies, now thou Conquers hearts:
It will deserve what Nobly is begun
Immortal fame and admiration.
Damned Donatists, it was their Tessera,
Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia.
And if our Donatists that same should plead,
Show them, Great Constantin yet is not dead,
And make our tottering Church now steady stand
With Papist there, Fanatic on this hand,
The Reprobats of Loyalty and Grace,
The Schilla and Charibdis of our Peace.
Exile them Sir, and let it be their doom
To be confined to Germany and Rome.
Theudas, or Judas, if they rise in Arms,
Disperse them, Sir, and keep us from their harms;
And make both Hills and Bridges exiled be,
The confines of this ages memory.
Make blinded Tobits too Apocriphal,
And banish them that do not know at all
Men's flesh by bread, nor yet what is in the cup,
Its dangerous with them to dine or sup:
For if their hand mistake or vary, then
They Are Polyphemus, we Ulysses men.
And when we are devoured, they will swear
They saw us not, but we did meat appear.
When we whom Neptune's Trident did divide,
And set a part from all the World beside,
Have by thy arts this Glorious Garland won,
In faith and Love united Albion;
Then on the head of thy triumphant Test,
The Eternal conquest of all trouble rest:
For it will teach (as GOD does) every Soul;
What Kings commands, no Subjects may control,
And in all after ages Christ'ned be
Ane Altar raised to Eternal Loyalty.
Carmina proveniunt animo deducta Sereno,
Me, mare, me venti, me fera jactat hyems
Verses run low and dead when men are Crossed,
I am with Seas, and Winds, and Tempests tossed.
ANNOTATIONS On the preceding POEM.
CAP. I. Of the name and nature of the Test, and the elegant allusions made
thereto, in the Scriptures and other Authors.
HAving observed in Goldmans English Dictionarie the word Test, rendered fornax
ad probandum aurum, I presently conjectured, it was some Instrument belonging
to a Goldsmiths, whereupon I addressed my self to James Cockburn, a Person of
great integrity, Judgment, and more then Ordinary both ingenuity and ingine in
his calling, who both showed me the Test and taught me the use of it. It is
made up of the ashes of calcined Bones, with an Iron Houp into which the ashes
are knead, and it put into the fire, the Metal is laid on it to be tried: what
is Lead sinkes into the Test, what is Brass or Tin evaporats with the
impetuous violence and force of the fire, while the Metal that remains on the
Test, is both purged and perfited; so that the use of the Test is threefold, 1.
to try and search into the nature of the Metal to discern betwixt the
Counterfit and the current. And so secondly, to separat the precious from the
Vile. 3. To consume that which is naughty, the base dregs and dross.
Accordingly probo in the Latin hes these 3. significations, probat qui tentat,
probat qui approbat, probat qui demonstrat argumentis. And in a sense that
comes more home to our purpose, to discover and manifest the nature of a thing,
as that in Ovid. Exitus acta probat, and in that Chymicall sense peculiar to
the Test, I find the word dokimazo is taken in the Scriptures 1 Pet. 1:7. Gold
tried in the fire.

From all which by an excellent Metaphor, it is translated to be verbum forense
and Iuridicum, a Law term signifying that Trial, whereby Magistrates examine
offenders, and particularly we find it applied to the Trial of Ministers. 1 Timothy 3:10. Let them first be proved, quos examine praevio constat esse Idoneos,
say'th Calvin on the place, or more excellently Hincmarus the Bishop of Rhemes,
Probentur primum, nam qui loco docti indoctum ordinat, facit Magistrum qui
debet esse Discipulus, and offert caecum Animal. So we read of Gods Test, 1 Thessalonians. 2:4. God that tries the Hearts Ier. 16:10. Act. 1:24. and of man's Test,
1 Thessalonians. 5:21. prove all things, hold fast that which is good. By man himself 2
Cor. 13:5. or others 2 Cor. 8:8.

2. This Instrument by the Greeks is called Kaminos from Kaio whence we have
our word chimney. And its ordinarily rendered fornax, which by Martinius in his
learned Lexicon Etymologicum is thus described, Vsurpatur says he, pro loco
cavo ferreis laminis concluso, Fit etiam ex lateribus aut Testis. From which no
doubt our word Test is derived. So the fining potes spoken of by Solomon, Prove.
17:3. and 27:21. being made of Earthen Vessels, which properly are called
Testae, to which the Psalmist alludes 12. Psalm. 6. Silver-tryed in a furnace of
Earth. Thus Iuvenal Sat. 3. Lin. 270. Tectis sublimibus, unde cerebrum testa
ferit; on which Britannicus notes appellatione Testae intelligimus omnia
fragmenta vasorum fictilium, ut sunt seriae, urceoli, urnae, tegulae and id
genus, and ipsa etiam vasa integra, ut illud, pictaeque incumbere Testae, which
he cites from Sat. 15. whence by a very proper and unstrained Metaphor, it
signifies that Instrument, whereby faith and manners are tried, to which Cicero
elegantly alludes, Epist. Fam. Lib. 9. Epist. 15. Nam etsi non facile
dijudicatur amor verus and fictus nisi aliquod indicat ejusmodi tempus, ut
quasi aurum igni, sic benevolentia fidelis periculo aliquo p^^spici possit.
Periculo, id est, discrimine, non experimento, as Bernardinus Rutilius there
observes. So Ovid. Trist. Lib. 1. Eleg. 4.

Scilicet ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempore sic duro est inspicienda fides.
Inspicienda not experienda, as some Copies hes it: for it is both better
Latin, and more elegantly relates to spectatur.

As force of Fire the Yellow Gold does try,
So faith is known best by adversity.
And Isocrates ad Demonicum, too men gar chryson en to puri dokimazetai, the
Scripture also in the same sense uses the word, Zach. 13:9. I will refine them
as Silver, and try them as Gold, which there is the proper word, used for the
trial of the Test. And by the Septuagint translated, hos dokimazetai to
chryson.

To all which if we add, that the proper Hebrew word for the Test is Cheres,
having great affinity with the word sheard in our language, and that both in
sound and signification, it will yet give greater light to the explication of
the word Test. For that same word Job 2:7. Is translated a Pot-sheard, and
explained by interpreters Testa ex argilla facta, and fictile igne coctum.
Buxtor in his Lexicon, calls it simply Testa. And this is the more to be
remarked, for where ever we have in our translation a Pot-sheard, it is still
in the Latin Testa, as Job 2:8. The Vulgar hes it, Testa saniem radebat.
Iunius and Tremellius, adeo ut assumeret sibi Testam ad scabendum se ea. Psalm.
22:16. Iunius hes it, arescit ut Testa vis mea: aruit tanquam Testa virtus mea,
the Vulgar. So Metaphorically Isa. 45:9. Prove. 26:23. and particularly
considerable is that in Isa. 30:14. called the Potters Vessel. The use whereof
is said there to carry fire. As also to purge Metalls. As will yet more clearly
appear from that allusion, God makes to it in Ezech. 22. from 18 to 23. where
he says he will melt them and purge them from their Brass, Tin, Iron and
Lead, and as Silver is melted in the midst of the Furnace, so should God melt
them by affliction: The old Scholiast his discant thereon is very pleasant,
thou which before was pure Silver, resplendent with Religion and shining with
virtue, is now degenerated into the Brass of malice, and Stubborn obstinacy:
into the Tin of Hipocriticall and dissembled piety; the Iron of Tyranny, and
the Lead of avarice, I Will set my furnace in the midst of Jerusalem, where I
shall make the Chaldeans the coalls and wood, my power and wrath the bellows,
Pestilence, famine and war shall be the fire wherewith I will consume my
obstinat adversaries, and expiat and purge my friends; where we have the very
manner of the operation of the Test clearly set down. Which kind of Tests to
have been in Solomon's days may be proved from Prove. 25:4. And above 150 years
since, the Test and its operation, in separando omnem materiam alienam vi ignis
ab auro and argento, is excellently described by Matheolus Medicus Senensis in
his commentaries on Dioscorides Lib. 5. Cap. 58.

Now there are three ways to try Metalls, the Balance, the Toutch-stone, and
the Test, to show its weight, its worth and its purity: To all which we see ane
excellent Spiritual allusion made by David, Psalm. 26:2. Examine me, that is by
the Balance; prove me, that is by the Toutch-stone; try me that is by the
Test, vide Burges spiritual refinings, page 87.

And these three several words point forth also the degrees, reality, and
foundnesse of grace. And indeed the word try me, is appropriat to the Test.
Try me tho it were by fire. Therefore the Vulgar hes it, ure renes meos, and
cor meum. Upon which words Didymus Alexandrinus, Ierom's Master (tho from his
youthhood blind) hes ane excellent commentary, as on many other Scriptures.
For whereas the Chaldee hes it perpurga, and Hieronymus, Consta, Didymus in his
notes conjoyneth them. Sicut aurifex igne explorat aurum, sic tu Domine eor and
mentem, and renes, i. e., intimos affectus meos constando and perpurgando
explora, si tibi visum fuerit, etiam per igneus tentationis, and tribulationis.
When in our language by a very significant Proverb, we say of a Person or thing
that is well approved, that is real and upright; That it has past the Test:
whereas on the contrary a thing or Person that cannot abide the Test, is called
reprobator adulterat; as money abused with base mixtures, Ier. 6:30. Is called
reprobat Silver. The Prophet gives this reason of it, verss.. 28, 29. They were
but Brass and Lead, that did consume, and could not abide the Test. So
Aristotle in his Oeconomicks, adokimon epoiese nomisma. And his commentator
there turns it, ab usu remotum. That is, un-usefull for Trade.

And as to Persons we find the word taken in that same sense in the New
Testament 1 Cor. 9:27. Lest I my self should be a castaway. The Vulgar hes it,
Ne reprobus efficiar. Certainly it does not there signify reprobat as
opposite to elect, as A lapide seems to insinuat, as if Saint Paul had no
assurance of his election, (as Tirinus on the place seems to intimat out of
Gregory) for that were contrary to many express Scriptures manifesting, that
Saint Paul both was elected, and also by ane immediate voice from Heaven, knew
himself to be so. Therefore some refer that word rather to the Ministry then
the Person of Saint Paul, lest his Ministry should be rejected as unsound, and
not able to pass the Test, So 2 Cor. 13:5. The word is taken ne pas receivable
as the French hes it. Tho both Beza and our translators following him, have
some what scrupulously turned the word Rejectaneus, Vt periculosam homonymiam
vitarem, says he.

But lastly observe, the Test may be made of any Beasts bones but the Swine,
because it can admit of no unclean Beast, Respuit immundum regia Testa Animal.
And so Testam habemus etiam cum pulvisculo. Vide Erasmi adagia sub titulo,
totum ut nihil reliqui.

And Janus of his gate shall lose the keye. CAP. II. Of Janus and his Temple.
JAnus was one of the most ancient Kings of Italy, Reckoned amongst the
aborigines, about the thirtenth hundred year before the Birth of our Savior,
he first taught Husbandry and coining of money; and because of his wisdom he
was reported to know things past and to come: therefore they pictured him with
two faces. And after his death being made a God, Numa built him a Temple, which
in the time of peace he appointed to be shut, and left open in the time of
war. Whence Ianus was called Patuleus, and Clusius. Or rather as Ovid hes it,
Patulsius and Clausius: As Lib. 1. Fastorum. He brings him in thus.

Nomina ridebis, modo namque Patulsius idem
Et modo Sacrifico Clusius ore vocor.
Of which Virgil according to his lofty manner, sunt geminae Belli portae,
Religione Sacrae and saevi formidine Martis. And a little after, nec custos
absistit limine Janus.

Has ubi certa sedet patribus sententia pugnae,
Insignis reserat stridentia limina consul.
Macrobius gives this reason of it, when Romulus was fighting against the
Sabines, there was a great eruption of Hot-water in that same place where now
Ianus Temple stands, whereby the Sabins were confounded and put to the flight.
The expectation of the like aid makes them ever since in the time of war, to
leave the door of the Temple open. Others say they leave it open, because they
hope to come back and give thanks for the Victory. And from the reign of
Numa, it was but thrice closed even to the times of Augustus. First by Numa,
then by Manlius Torquatus the Consul, after the first Punick war. Lastly by
Augustus himself, post confectum bellum actiacum; about which time it is
conjectured our Savior was born. All which times are pertinently discribed by
Stadius his Commentaries on Florus Cap. ult. Sect. 35. Goropius Becanus in his
Book he calls Cronia, thinks he was Iaphet: Whom our Countryman Mr. Baily in
the first Book of his Chronology page 4. hes demonstrated from Genesis 10:21.
(against the Vulgar translation) to have been the eldest Son of Noah. Quintus
Fabius Pictor, in his Book de Aureo Saeculo Printed in the year 1530. tells, he
was the first that ever taught the Italians the use of Wine, and the nature of
Sacrifices: and did first erect Altars to the honor of God. Fuit Ianus (says
he) Sacerdos and vir Religiosus, Doctus Theologus and Philosophus. Avenarius
(whom Fuller in his Miscelanies, and Foord on Psalm. 68. thinks, the most
skillfull in the Hebrew tongue, and that he has written the best Dictionary
either for singnifications or etymologies.) Is only in the mind that is
properly Noah that was so called: And derives Ianus from Iaijn vinum, from
whence he derives oinos in the Greek, and vinum in the Latin. And so says
Mercer, quia primus omnium vinum invenisse dicitur. And that he is Painted with
two faces, because Noah saw both the age that was before, and that which came
after the Flood, both the old and new World. Petavius in his Rationarium
temporum, Lib. 1. Chap. 11. Assures us, Ianus was the first King of Italy,
whom according to Eusebius computation in his Chronicon, he makes to be 1330
years before our Saviors birth: From which time he deduces the antiquity of
the Idolatry of the Gentiles, tho Jupiter and Ianus too were made Gods, long
after their death. He reckones it about that time that Ehud was judge in
Israel. But Lactantius in the second Book of his institutions de origin
errorum, Cap. 14. speaking of Noah, unde arguuntur (says he) qui authorem vini
Liberum putant, ille enim non modo Liberum sed etiam Saturnum atque Uranium,
multis autecessit aetatibus. In his first Book Cap. 13. He tells us how Saturn
was hospitably received by Ianus in Italy; Wherein if he contradict himself
viderint alii. But that which is most to our purpose is that of Ianus Temple,
which as Beaumont a modern Poet sweetly Sings: Whose Temple shutt to Romans,
did declare
A settled Peace; but open, open war.
D. Owen in his Book de natura Theologiae and progressu Idololatriae Lib. 3.
Cap. 2. Asserts Ianus to have been Noah on the same accounts. There is one
remark concerning Ianus, that I find in many Authors which will very much
strengthen the learned Petavius conjecture. Particularly Pompejus Festus de
significatione verborum page 34. speaking of the Chaos, ex eo chiainein Greci,
and nos hiare dicimus, unde Janus detracta aspiratione nominatur, ideo quod
fuerit omnium primus cui primo supplicabant, velut parenti, and a quo rerum
omnium factum putabant initium. And that Ianus was first invocat in all their
devotions, prayers and Sacrifices, is testified by Saint Augustine (out of
Varro) in his 7 Book de Civitate Dei, Cap. 9. As also by Macrobius Lib 1.
Saturn. Cap. 9. and Cap. 26. and by Servius in Lib. 1. Aeneid ad versum, cana
fides and vesta. Cicero Lib. 1. de not. deor. principem in Sacrificando Janum
esse voluerunt. Horat. Epist. 16. Lib. 1. Arnobius Lib. 3. adversus gentes,
doers extremely scorn them for this folly, Quasi ad Deorum audientiam viam
panderet Janus. So says Aurelius Victor in breviario Historiae Romanae.
Barnabas Brissonius in his Learned book de Formulis, hes told us, that the form
of the Heathens more solemn devotion did ever begin thus, Jane, Jupiter,
Mars-piter, Quirine, Lares. And Ovid. in Lib. 1. Fast. Brings in him thus
speaking for himself, ut possis aditum per me que limina servo. Ad quoscunque
voles inquit habere Deos. These that are curious to know more of Ianus may
consult Varro Lib. 4. de ling. Lat. Velleius Pater. Lib. 2. Plinius Not. Hist.
Lib. 34. Cap. 7. Sueton in Nero Cap. 14. and auctor libri de viris illustribus
Cap. 13. so Virgil. Lib. 7. and 12. Ovid. Lib. 1. Fast. And Lib. 4. de Ponto
Eleg. 4. Pomp. Fest. in voce opima and sororium tigillum. As also Plutarch in
aitiois. Fabius Pictor de aureo saeculo; in all which they may see what several
Names, Surnames and appellations and honor, the old Heathenish superstition
bestowed on Ianus.

SECTION II.
And every one Sang Jo to thy praise.
JO was ane exclamation uttering some ravishing joy, especially in the time of
Triumphs. So Ovid describing the Triumph of Augustus over Germany, and some
add Tiberius with him, whom he there calls, Victores Caesar uterque, he adds
long after.

Tempora Phoebea Lauro eingentur Joque
Miles Jo magna vote Triumph canet.
This was the ordinar acclamation unto the Emperor in the time of Triumph,
being carried through the City to the Capitol; so says Varro Lib. 5. de ling.
Lat. Livius Lib. 21. tells us of ane Infant in the Mothers Belly, that had the
same acclamation, but he is known to be superstitiously fabulous. Horat. Lib.
4. Carm. de Triumph. Augusti. Tuque dum procedis Jo Triumph etc. Idem Lib.
Epod. od. 9. Io Triumph tu moraris aureos currus. So Tibullus Lib. 2. Eleg. 6.
And Ovid. Lib. 4. Trist. Eleg. 2. ut supra. Idem Lib. 1. Amor. Eleg. 2.
Martial Lib. 7. Epig. Vulgus Jo magnos clamat tibi Roma Triumphos, where we
see he puts it in the accusative. As also Ovid. Metamorp. Lib. 1. Laeta
Triumphum vox canet, where be brings in Apollo speaking of the Laurel. Alsimus
Avitus Lib. 6. ad Fussinam sororem Cap. 6. Hostibus evictis and Jo clamante
Triumpho. To Io was ordinarily added Paean, which as the Scholiast of
Aristophanes observes, is a Song or Hymn praying for the ceasing of a war, or
preventing of a danger. Scaliger does learnedly write that Iao and Io are
contracted by the Greeks for Jehovah. And its affirmed by many, That Paean
comes from the Hebrew word Panah to behold and look upon. And so Io Paean will
have the force of Jehovah Penoth, Lord look upon us. From Panah comes the Greek
phainomai. Vide Rouse, Archaeologiae Atticae. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.

Care of Religion is the glorious gemm, Lin. 7.
Aristotle Polit. Lib. 7. Cap. 8. proton he peri theioon epimeleia, makes it
the principal part of the Princes office to have a care of Religion. Augustine
Tract. 11. on John, pertinet hoc ad reges saeculi Christianos ut temporibus
suis pacatam velint habere matrem suam Ecclesiam. Leo primus ad Imperatorem
Leonem, debes Imperator incunctanter advertere regiam potestatem, tibi non
solum ad mundi regimen sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam. The
Evangelicall Prophet foretells that Kings shall be the Churches Foster-fathers,
Isa. 49:23. and 44:28. Optat. lib. 3. contra Parmen: Augustine contra Crescon:
lib. 3. cap. 51. in his 48. Epist. ad Vincent. in his 52. Epist. ad Macedon. in
his 61. Epist. ad Dulcit. In all which he largely and learnedly demonstrats it
to be the duty of Christian Princes to have the chief care of matters that
concern Religion, affirming, in hoc Reges Deo serviunt, that its for that end
Principally God has bestowed their authority upon them. Isiod. Hisp. de sum.
bon. lib 3. cap. 53. Affirms that the chief end of secular authority, is to
fortify Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Who adheres to Baal lin. 16. 2 Kings 10:18, -- 29. Constantius Sir. etc. lin.
17.
Eusebius de vita Constantini lib. 2. page 251. The Test was either, they
should show themselves Idolaters, and Sacrifice to the Idols, and so become his
minions and favorits, else refuse it, and by that means denied ever after all
access to his presence, Sed commento quod caelatum erat, statim post
patefacto, alios propter sinceram and integram erga Deum mentem approbavit
plurimum, alios tanquam Dei proditores, servitio Imperatoris indignos censuit.
And a little after, illos qui veritatis Testimonio (the Test) digni Deo fuere
comprobati, similes erga Imperatorem fore affirmans stipatores, and ipsius
regni custodes constituit. Adding, that such faithful friends are more worthy
to a Prince then ane Exchequer full of richest treasure.

Sisibut, lin. 19. Isidor. lib. 5. Etym. and Hispan. annall. Anno 1616. French
Dagobert, lin. 20. Paulus Aemilius in Dagobert. An Appendix concerning Baal.
BAal so called by the Hebrews, is by the Carthaginians named Bal, and by the
Assyrians Bell, as is observed by Servius Grammaticus and Fabricius in his notes
on the Christian Poets, and is by interpretation Lord, Husband, and Patron;
because the Idolaters do subject themselves to their Idols as Servants to their
Masters, Wises to their Husbands, and Clients to their Patrons. This was the
most famous Idol in all the East; to whom the Jews by the instigation of the
Devil, and instruction of Balaam, (per intervalla) from the time of the Judges
to the Babylonish captivity, did homage and worship. To this cursed dance the
Assyrians first led the Ring. For Nimrod (as Victor Massiliensis writes in his
third Book) was the first that erected a statue and did Sacrifice to Baal, in
memorial of the death of his only Son. And Belus succeeding him did more
violently propagat that monstrous Idolatry, from whom the name Bell was given
this Idol, amongst the Assyrians. And as error hes ordinarily a prodigious
fertility, and a monstrous Birth (as Cassianus observes) sometimes from the
different rites of Worship, and different places where, and Persons by whom he
was worshipped, received distinct Titles, as also by the benefits ascribed to
him by his worshippers. For

1. He is called Baal-peor, the God of nakedness or gaping, Number. 25:3, 5. Deuteronomy.
4:3. Hos. 9:10. and simply called Pehor, Numb. 25. last verse. Ios. 22:17.
Psalm. 106:28. The God of the Moabits, worshipped on the mount Pehor, and by
Hieron. lib. 1. adversus Jovinian. and on Es. 25. supposed to be Priapus that
abominable and obscene monster. So says Adrichomius in his Theatro Terrae
Sanctae, in Ruben. Isidor. Lib. 5. Originum, Cap. 11. Theophilact on Hos. 4:9.
and Lorinus on Psalm. 105. Bucer and Calvin on 105 Ps. derives it from the
Hebrew word that signifies to make bare or open, from these shameful and
abominable Practices used in the service of Baal. With what arts and
inticements the Midianites brought the Jews to practice such pollutions,
Josephus tells in 4 Book of his Antiq. 5. Cap. Now Baalpehor is Baal worshipped
on the Mount Pehor Numb. 23:28. See Suidas in Belphegor. Just so was Jupiter
called Capitolinus, and Olympius. How the unclean Spirit Triumphed thus amongst
the Heathen, see Gerardus Vossius, de Origin Idolatriae lib. 2. cap. 1.
amongst the Romans was such a monstrous God of uncleanness called Lupercus, and
Mutinus, And amongst the Italians Arcalius.

Qualiter in caeno obscaeno, quantoque reatu,
Degitur hoc aevi quodcunque est?
2. Baalzebub or Belzebul, the God of Ekron, whom Ahaziah consulted anent his
health, 2 King. 1:2. Because they believed him to have power of listing or
laying on diseases. Also he was over their Storehouses and Butteries to drive
away the Flies, others think that the Sacrifices offered to this God, were so
infested with Flies, that they gave occasion to this Epithet, especially
amongst the Jews who did upbraid them with it, whereas in the Temple of Solomon
notwithstanding of the great and constant multituds of Sacrifices, yet there
was never any Fly seen to molest them. So in an holy Scorn is the Prince of
the Devils by the Jews 12 Mat. 24. called Belzebul, that is, the God of Dirt:
for Zebul signifies Stercus, i. e., Deus Stercoreus; this properly in the
Chaldee tongue. By Pausanias in Atticis, he is called Myiodes, that is Jupiter
Muscarius, and Lilius Giraldus in Syntagmate 2 de jove, proves at large to be
that same Jupiter that other nations worshipped. See Plinius lib. 29 cap. 6.
and lib. 8. cap. 29. and lib. 10. cap. 28. called Achor from Ekron. But which
is most considerable the septuagint in 2 King. 1. and 2. hes Baal Myian the
Flie-God. Who to the Ekronits was their Aesculapius.

3. Baal Phegor, that is, the God of Carcasses, 2 King. 19:35. They were all
dead corpses. Its that same word Phegor. Otherwise called Molech a Prince, for
its all one, as may be proven from Amos 5:26. This was the God of the
Phaenicians as Ennius hes it, Poeni sunt soliti sos Sacrificare puellos. And
Silius Italicus turns it.

Mos fuit in populis quos condidit advena Dido
Poscere coede Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus aris
Infandum dictu! Parvos imponere natos.
The Ancients generally call it anthropothusia Phaenicia; which Achaz and
Manasses the Israelits did Imitate. The reason is given by the Prophet Mic.
6:6. and 7. to Pacify, as they supposed, the guilt of their enraged
consciences.

4. Baal Bozor the God of scattering, and dissipation: to whom they made vows
when they went to war, as the Greeks did to Mars, and Pallas.

5. Was Baal Berith; the God of the Covenant. Judge. 8:33. After Gideon was dead
they made Baal Berith their God, and Judge. 9:4. We read of the Temple of Baal
Berith, and the 9:46. simply called Berith. Gideon their Governor being gone,
they entered in a Covenant to serve Baal and forsake their God; this is the Baal
that is meaned in the body of the Poem.

SECTION III. Lin. 1.
ARgo was the first great Ship we read amongst Heathen writers, and was that
wherein Jason and his Company fifty two in Number, went to Colchis to bring
away the Golden Fleece. It had the name of Argo from its Author or first
builder, as we call the Ark Noah's Ark, or rather if we believe Cicero
Tuscullan. quest. lib. 1. Argo nominata est quia Argivi in ea lecti viri vecti,
petebant pellem inauratam Arietis. But here its taken appellatively.

( Cataracts lin. 5.) A Cataract is properly a violent fall of Water from a
steep and high rock, with a great rushing noise, from the Greek katarasso,
which signifies to fall down head long with violence. We call it a Linn, such
as Carhous Linn on the Water of Clyd. Plinius in his 5 Book Chap. 9. speaking
of the River Nilus says, Cataractes inter occursantes scopulos, non fluere
immenso fragore creditur, sed ruere. It does not so much run amongst the
Steep-rocks as Rush. Strabo in his 14 Book: and Pomponius Mela in the
description of Pamphilia, tells us of a River called Cataracta adeo rapidus, ab
alta petra descendens, ut longissime strepitus exaudiatur, Here its taken for a
deludge or open flood-gate of rebellion, such as overflowed us lately: and the
Waters are not yet fully abaited. Dii talem terris avertite pestem! The Hebrew
word is Arrubah which signifies the Floodgates, as Genesis 7:11. The windows of
Heaven were opened. But in the deludge of rebellion the windows of Hell are
opened: For the Devil himself was the first rebel, and by our scattering is
his Kingdom gathered.

Lin. 8. (Beawtie and bands.) In allusion to that of Zech. 11. and 7. which
tho interpreters apply to the Government of the first and second Covenant, Old
and New Testament, Jews and Christians, as Vatabulus and others: yet here, in a
more Politic sense it signifies the Government of Church and State.

Lin. 12. (Isthmus) Is a neck of land on each side enclosed with Seas, whereof
we read several in Geographie: in Egypt, Chersonesus the Euxin Sea and this of
Peloponesus betwixt the Aegean and the Ionian Seas where Corinth stands; hence
it is that Corinth is called Bimaris both by Horat. lib. 1. carm. Bimarisque
Corinthi menia. And Ovid. Fast. 4. Hadriacumque patens late Bimaremque
Corinthum. And Isthmus is so called by Ovid. Eleg. 10. lib. 1. Trist. At
postquam Bimarem cursu superavimus Isthmum. Vide Martiani Capellae Satyricon
Lib. 6. de tertio sinu Europae page mihi 210. where he hes the Description of
Isthmus and Corinth with Crotius notes, which he wrote being but fourteen
years of age. But Isthmus Metaphorically may be taken for any thing that
divides betwixt two extremes: And some hes expressed by this word the middle
part or bridge of the nose, as Iunius in his nomenclatura tells us of some
Physicians that so expressed narium sepimentum. And the learned Budeus in his
annotations on the Pandects says, this word properly signifies the Neck or the
wessand of a Man, and by a Metaphore only comes to signify that narrow part of
a continent enclosed by two Seas: from whence says he that of Peloponesus by
ane Antonomasie only is so called. And tho there be but five miles distance,
yet neither Demetrius, Caesar, Nero nor Caligola who all attempted it were able
to break throw a passage. Whence it came into a Proverb, Isthmum perfodere; in
eum qui magno conatu sed irrito aliquid moliretur. Vide Plin. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
Sueton in Nero Cap. 19. Et in vitam Calig. Cap. 21. And so generally it is
exponed interstitium, intercapedo. Ab jenai ire. The opposite whereof is
porthmos. Vide Calepine in voce.

SECTION IV. Lin. 9.
It Is nonsense.
That Princes hes no power of subjects conscience.
CAP. III. Showing that the King hes power of the conscience of the subject,
and in what sense the same may safely be maintained.
FOr clearing this, we must consider these three. First what conscience is.
Secondly, what the nature of the obligation is, that binds the conscience.
Thirdly, the efficacy of this obligation.

Conscience by the ancients, generally, and more particularly by Clemens
Alexandrinus, is called Censor, Corrector, and Paedagogus animae. But it will
not be proper here to expatiat much on this subject; I having written a
treatise of the nature, effects, properties, obligation, acts and consequence
of conscience, in several Sermons Preached at Libertoun, on Act 24:16. and Acts
2:37. and Romans 2:15. which by assistance of God, and good neighbors, I intend
shall see the light of the World. It shall only now suffice to tell, that I
think it is no Act either of will or understanding, but a proper faculty of
the Soul it self; which of all the faculties of man hes received the least hurt
by the fall, it even in the breasts of the most unregenerat taking ordinarily
Gods part. It may suffice therefore to define it, that faculty whereby
application of general knowledge is made to particular actions, followed
always with joy or grief: In which sense the Scriptures are not the adequat
rule of conscience, otherwise the Heathen which never heard the Scriptures had
had no conscience contrair to Romans 2:14, 15.

The second thing to be considered, is what it is to bind the conscience, which
is briefly this; to impose a necessity of obedience upon it: so that the sense
of the question is, whither or not humane Laws do impose such a necessity of
obedience on the conscience, that the contraveening thereof is not only liable
to a temporal punishment, but deservedly also to the anger and offense of God.
The difference betwixt mandats and Laws, perpetual and cursorie, constant and
accidental obligations, we cannot stand to discuss.

For the third, we must 1. consider, that the power of making Laws is the
prerogative Royal given by God unto Kings, without which it were absolutely
impossible for them to attain the ends of Government, and therefore he that
said, by ^e Kings Reign, said also, by me Princes Decree Justice, that is,
ordaines, makes and executes, just and wholesome Laws. Wherefore King and
Lawgiver are put together in Scriptures, Isa. 33:22. The Lord is our King, the
Lord is our Lawgiver, Romans 13:1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2:13. shows what power Kings
are invested with, and there is a great reason for it; the execution of the Law
being that mean whereby the publict good may both be preserved and promoved,
and wherein essentially the office of the Magistrate does consist, and the
difference betwixt him, and his subjects lies, for which end God conferrs on
the Magistrate Numb. 11:17. a particular Spirit of Government, 1 Samuel 10:6.
Samuel tells Saul that the Spirit of God shall come upon thee, and thou shall
be turned into another man. And this by Solomon, Prove. 20:12. is called the
seeing Eye, as subjection is called the hearing Ear. It was the Magistrate
ruling by the civil Law even before it was Christened, to which we are
commanded to be subject by the Apostle Saint Paul Romans 13. and Saint Peter, 1
Pet. 2. And to the Privilege of the Roman Policy Saint Paul did appeal, Acts
25:10. All which invincibly infer not only ane approbation of the Law being
made, but also the Magistrates power in making of it. Neither was this ever
denied, but by Carolostadius, and the late rabble of Monsters amongst our
selves, who would send us from our Laws, as far back as the judicial System
amongst the Jews: tho it be confessed by all to be abrogated, as being only
temporary, and accommodat to certain circumstances of times, places, and
persons, which now can have no obligation upon us.

2. These Laws made and promulgat by the Magistrate, are of force to bind the
conscience: many both Protestants and Papists are down right against this
proposition, affirming it proper to God only to bind the conscience. So says
Calvin lib. 3. instit. 9. cap. sect. 15. And Sibrandus lib. 8. de pontifice
Romano cap. 7. Vasques lib. 1. Illust. contravers. 28. 1. And these would only
have the Magistrates power to reach the body or Fortunes of the subject,
alleging, no humane power can go further. To which we oppose these following
arguments.

1. A man may bind his own conscience; as is confessed by all in the case of
Lawful vows, they are in our own power before they are made, Act. 5:4. But
after that, they are Gods bonds, and do bind the conscience to performance.
Wherefore that does not altogether hold, that God only can bind the
conscience. Otherwise either vows do not bind, or else no man can engage
himself in them; either of which to affirm is absurd. I find Alsted. Theol.
cas. cap. 2. reg. 2. to make great use of this argument.

2. In the Romans 13. we learn that Magistrates have power and authority to enact
Laws, and therefore they are called powers. 2. That these Laws of the
Magistrate do receive strength and force from the Law of God: for the powers
that are (says he) are ordained of God. 3. That the Laws made by the
Magistrate have power to bind conscience, v. 5. We must be subject not only for
wrath but conscience sake. And if we resist them, we resist the ordinance of
God, and pull down Gods judgment and bring condemnation on our selves, when we
so do, says the Text, verse 2. And therefore to contemn the Laws of men, tho
not expressly, (for then they are Gods) but virtually contained in the word of
God, is to be disobedient to God himself.

3. Consider, that conscience has relation not to God only, but to man also,
Acts 24:16. Conscience both toward God and man, it has the principal relation
to God, as being the absolute binder thereof, yet in and through him to man and
his Laws also: For it is to be here remarked, that, at that same instant Saint
Paul was pleading before ane Heathen Magistrate.

4. We must consider that we are not only to make conscience of Religion and
the worship of God, but of civil things also: For tho things that are civil as
civil, do not of themselves, and immediately bind the conscience, yet by virtue
of ane higher Law to which they are subordinat and subjoyned; being made by the
Magistrate as the Minister of God, and backed by his Authority which is Gods
Seall, so they oblidge the conscience; and not to perform obedience to such
Laws, (as for instance sumptuary Laws made for moderating expense at
banquetings or burialls, or in apparel or the like: such as Aulus Gellius makes
mention of in his 2 Book Cap. 24. out of Lucilius the old Poet, and the Lex
Fannea, Emilia, Ancia, Iulia, etc.) To contemn such Laws, tho in it self be a
civil fault only; yet in another respect it is a moral sin (the Law being made)
contrary both to Justice, Charity, Peace, Saftey, and Well being of the common
wealth.

5. Who ever resists the ordination of God offends God, but every offense of
God is a wounding of conscience: wherefore of necessity it must follow by the
Law of contraries that we are bound in conscience to obey the Laws of man. He
is the Minister of God, Romans 13. Gods Legate and Ambassador: therefore what
contempt he or his Laws (for both are one, the King being lex animata do
sustain from us, it redoudes unto God whose Minister he is: And God takes it
done to himself what is done to or against the Magistrate. Toutch not mine
anointed.

6. Every just and good Law flows from the Law of God and the Law of nature,
as the Stream from the Fountain; And therefore hes an Intrinsic power of
direction and obligation as a rule of life and manners: The deviating from
which is a sin and consequently a wounding of the conscience: For if conscience
be the sense of sin, and fear of judgment as some discribe it, tho rather by
its effects then by it essential nature, as else where I shall make evident:
then it is certain what ever induces to sin concerns conscience, and brings
along with it the fear of judgment; but violating of a civil Law does infer
sin; for every particular breach is a violation of the general Law of obeying
the Magistrate, and becomes a moral sin against the fifth Commandment.
Therefore by the rule of contraries the civil Law does infallibly bind and
inevitably oblidge the conscience.

7. Every Law is either contrary to the will of God or conform to it, every
Law is either just or unjust; But herein we must cautiously observe a twofold
injustice, either intrinsic or extrinsick. The intrinsic is, when the matter
of the Law it self is injust. The extrinsick is when a thing intrinsically just
in it self may be unjustly commanded and imposed upon me. The first only takes
away the obligation to obedience, as dissolving the intrinsic ty of
conscience: for suppose a Prince should command something that in it self were
not unjust, merely to please his own ambitious Tyrannical or covetous humor,
that indeed would be unjust on his part; but I and every other subject were
oblidged to obey, tho he should sin in commanding, yet I should sin if I
obeyed it not. But on the other hand no humane Laws that on the matter are
unjust, can obleidge the conscience, for it is better to obey God than man.
From whence we may draw this invincible argument, from the intrinsic nature of
reason it self, that no man at one and the same time can be oblidged to
contradictories: but if a man were oblidged to perform ane unjust Law, he
should be oblidged in conscience to that, to the not performance whereof the
Law of God oblidges him. And to perform and not perform are contradictories.
Whereas humane Laws in things just, oblidge the conscience by a supervenient
obligation to the Law of God, for obligatio prior tollit posteriorem.

But on the other hand, if Laws be enacted by these who are not invested with
lawful power, then they do not oblidge the conscience, no more then a Sentence
given by one who is no judge, can oblidge the party to performance: for where
the power is wanting, the efficient cause of the obligation is wanting also.

8. We must distinguish betwixt a direct and indirect, a mediat and immediate
obligation: we do confess the Laws of man do not immediately and directly
oblidge the conscience, but by virtue of Gods command requiring to give
obedience to the Magistrate and his Laws, under the pain of Gods wrath and
displeasure. We are bound to perform civil duties on grounds of Religion; and
so humane Laws tho not qua humane binds the conscience. Its Gods command binds
my conscience to observe man's, as ye see it clearly and expressly, Eccles.
8:21. I Counsel you to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the
Oath of God. It would be a very Fanatic these, to affirm, that a Child is
not bound in conscience to do any Lawful thing which his Father commands him,
Id est, totidem verbis, it is not his duty, because perhaps totidem Syllabis,
it is not contained in the Scripture. But certainly, secundarly and
consequentially, with respect unto Gods general command, he is bound in
conscience to do that for his Fathers command which he was not bound to
undertake without it. See this fully asserted and cleared by Vrsine in his
Explicatio Catechetica, quest. 69. And in Loci Theologici in pree. 2. de cultu
Dei. So Pareus, edicta Magistratus obligant conscientias. So Alstedius, ut
supra. But above all most particularly and fully the learned Bishop Sanderson,
de obligatione conscienciae, and Bishop Tailor, in his Ductor Dubitantium, Lib.
3. Cap. 1. rule 1. and 5., and Chap. 4. rule 5. Vide Falkner, in his Libertas
Ecclesiastica Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Section 7. Par. 6.

But here we must take along with us these three caveats: first it must be
acknowledged, that no humane authority can bind the judging power of
conscience, so that it is oblidged to judge that a duty which is commanded
without having a liberty to consider its lawfulness. 2. The Laws of man does
not so illimitedly bind. I must obey God on the bair sight of his will, but I
may examine the Laws of man, whither they be just and equal, and suited to
the public safety, as Acts 9:29. 3. As not so illimitedly nor so immediately;
so neither does humane Laws so absolutely bind the conscience. For Gods command
binds even in Secret, and that perpetually, and to active obedience too: but
the Law of man may be obeyed by suffering the penalty, yea in private where
there is no scandal nor danger of contempt of authority, I may do the
contrary, especially in things in themselves indifferent. Wherefore, when it is
said Iam. 4. and 12. There is only one Lawgiver, it must be understood, one
only absolute and supreme, whose will is the rule of Justice; the Magistrates
under him being but deputes and substitutes responsable still to their
Superior, 2 Chronicles. 19:6. Take head what you do, for you judge not for man but
for the Lord.

Aquinas handling this same very question prima secundae quest. 96. art. 4.
determins it, as we have done in the affirmative, justae leges humanae obligant
homines in foro conscienciae, ratione legis aeternae a qua derivantur.

9. Therefore, any Law of the Magistrate that wants the Authority of Gods Law to
confirm it, is null, and ought not to be obeyed. But being a thing or matter
indifferent, the Lawfullnesse of it is determined to me by that particular Law,
which is derived from the general Law of obeying these in Authority. Yea even
these same things in case of scandal, will bind us to obedience, tho not in
case of conscience simply considered, as is clear in our Saviors paying
Tribute, Mat. 17:27. Rather then any scandal should have arisen. So Abraham
gave Lot his choice of the Country, tho he might otherwise have disputed his
right.

The last is the efficacy of this obligation; and it arises from the nature of
conscience it self, which being so intimat with every man, so important ane
enemy, and so worthy and true a friend, a faithful admonisher, a sad accuser,
a severe witness, an incorrupt judge, considering that it accuses to him, who
is the dreadful judge of all the Earth, whose wisdom cannot be deceived, nor
his Justice bribed or corrupted; the Execution of whose Sentence can neither be
suspended nor avoided, so that upon the one hand this meditation obviats all
grounds of rebellion, discontent, pride, ambition, covetousness and
hypocrisy, and overawes a man in the first rise of these corruptions,
destroying the Cockatrice in the Egg; so on the other hand, it manifests, that
horror and anguish must be a Traitors portion both here and hereafter.

(His opprobrious Kirk) of King James its known to all that knows his History,
how opprobriously the Kirk-men used him; not only molesting and contemning, but
counteracting him on every occasion. When he appointed a Feast, they appointed
a Fast, and e contra. And after all their Pranks, they openly scorned to answer
his tribunal, contrary to the practice of Christ and Saint Paul, both before
Jews and Heathen Magistrates. But alace Christ and Saint Paul were both
Episcopal. The jurisdiction of their Kirk was Paramount to all his decrees:
Yea in his Basilicon Doron he tells how they persecuted him even before he was
born, and all along till he came to the Throne: And when he was gloriously
seated there, the only Eclipse of his glory was from the Kirk. One passage
whereof I cannot omit, which will indeed justify my Epithet of that Kirk.
Crebrae adversus me in concionibus calumniae spargebantur, non quod crimen
aliquod designassem, sed quia Rex eram, quod omni crimine pejus habebatur. That
they constantly reviled and reproached him, not only in their private
conventicles, but in their public Preachings, not for any crime he had done or
intended to do, but because he was a King, which in their opinion was the worst
of all crimes. And this they made evidently appear in the Person of his Son,
that incomparable Prince and blessed Martyr, of whom we may say according to
the Letters on his Coffin, C. R. I. Clementia Religiosa interfecit.

Here lies the only King since Christ did die,
Was murdered for his pious clemency.
It was they broke his Scepter in pieces, by throwing the Militia out of his
Royal hands; that tore the Crown off this head; baffled his supremacy; barrd
him the very liberty of his conscience in the point of Church Government, which
he believed and strongly defended, to be jure divino Episcopal. And would have
him to acknowledge himself guilty of all the blood they had spilt. And after
they had hunted him like a Partridge on the Mountains, at last surprised and
murdered him in his own House. It was the Presbyterians held him by the Hair,
as he who wrote the History of Independency well observes, till the
Independents (a kind of Synonymous word for one thing) cut off his head.

Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli. Ovid.
We Are shamed that such a Tainture should be laid
Upon these Lands that cannot be gainsaid.
Sandys Ovid. Met. 2. Lin. 10 (Joined with Soveraignity) so Diotogenis
Pythagorici verba apud Stobeum, anagkaton teleion basilea strategonte agthaon
hemen kai dikasten kai hierea.

Lin. 11. (So Numa) Livius lib. 1. De Numa tum sacerdotibus creandis animum
adjecit, quanquam ipse plurima sacra obibat. And a little after, Flaminem Iovis
assiduum sacerdotem creavit: Julius Caesar Pontifex maximus fuit; Suet. in
Julius Cap. 13. And Augustus Suet. in Octavius 31. Pontificatum maximum
suscepit: And a little after, Sacerdotum and numerum and dignitatem sed and
commoda auxit.

Lin. 12. (Malabar in the East) Ferdinandus Lopez Lib. 1. Histor. Indicarum.
But to come nearer home, the learned Doctor Basier in his Book of the liberty
of the Britannick Church, in that part that he hes from Father Barns, makes it
out from Authentic Chronicles and Histories, and statutes also within
themselves, that the Kingdom of England has been ane entire Empire Governed by
one head, supreme both in spiritualls and temporalls. And this he makes out by
eighteen several instances in statutes by Kenulphus, Edward the Confessor,
Edward the first, the third, the fourth, Richard the third, Richard the second,
justifying the Act of Henry the eight; That it was according to the ancient
supremacy of all the Kings of England over all Persons and in all causes
whatsomever, as well Ecclesiastic as temporal.

Lin. 20. (Mishpat Hameleck.)

CHAP. IV. What is the meaning of the Mishpat Hameleck amongst the Jews, the
jus Regium: or the nature of the Prerogative Royal.
WHat this Mishpat Hameleck was, I find it mightily debated amongst the
learned: some will have it to be jus Regium, others only consuetudo Regia, the
one the allowance and ordinance of God, the other the Usurpation and Tyranny of
man, the greatest blessing or scourge that either the mercy or Justice of God
sends to mankind. The first and chief place we read of it, is 1 Samuel 8:11.
where we have it translated the manner of the King, in Deuteronomy. 17:16. we have the
Kings power and Prerogative described by God himself, but it is not termed
there the Mishpat. And how to understand it here is thought a very knotty and
puzeling difficulty: The perplexity whereof lies in this, that either de jure,
the Kings of Israel, and in them all other Princes ought to do after the manner
there described; But this we see is directly contrary to the duty of a King
prescribed by God himself in Deuteronomy. 17:16. He shall not multiply Horses, but
here in 1 Samuel 8:11. we have mention made of Chariots and Horsemen in
multitudes, which cannot be without multitudes of Horses, Deuteronomy. 17:17. Ye shall
not multiply Silver or Gold: but here verss. 14, 15, 16. He shall take your
Fields, Servants, your Vine-yeard, your Cattle, and dispose of them to his
minions and attendants: Deuteronomy. 17:20. He must not be proud; but here v. 17. All
must be his Servants and run and walk as he pleases, Ezekiel. 45:9. Take away your
exactions from my people. And Chap. 46:18. The Prince shall not take of the
peoples inheritance to thrust them out of their possessions: Here we find the
quite contrary. Their Fields, their Vine-yeards, their Sons, their Sheep,
their Servants and all to be disposed of by him at his pleasure. Yea by the Law
of God the Levits were to have the tenths as peculiar to them.

On the other hand, if it be said, that it only contains a prediction, that de
facto they should be so treated by their Kings, on the quite contrary, we do
not read in all the Books and Chronicles of the Kings of Judah or Israel, that
they did proceed thus far as it is here expressed. Yea even Achab that was one
of the most wicked amongst them all, a man that sold himself to work
wickedness, yet he did not take Naboths Vine-yeard by force, 1 Kings 21:25.
but by Iezabells craft, and wicked Policy, it was pretended to be legally
Forsaulted; tho the taking away of Vine-yeards is expressly mentioned here as
a part of the Mishpat Hameleck, or the jus Regium.

This difficulty has being looked on by a great many learned men, so
inextricable, that it hes made them think, that God is only here describing the
manner of the Heathen Kings that know not God, that so he might deferr them
from seeking a King; or at the least that he was angry that they sought such a
King as the other nations had, not such a King as God allowed them, as was
described in Deuteronomy. 17. but this is expressly against the very words of Deuteronomy.
17:14. likeas all the nations have about me. Others are of opinion that he
describes not here what Kings should or may do, but that they ordinarily
degenerat into Tyranny, and this is their Custom so to do. And we see the word
Mishpat is many times translated Custom and manner, Judge. 18:7. Carlessely
after the manner of the Zidonians Pemishpat, Genesis 40. verse 13. Former manner
when thou was buttler, Exodus 21:9. 1 Samuel 27:11. 2 Kings 11:14. 2 Kings 17:29.
Psalm. 119:131. As thou used to do, in the original is according to thy manner
and Custom. So that the Custom of Tyrants (say they) is only here described.
Of this opinion is Bartoldus de regimine civili Number. 4. Bodinus de Republica
Cap. 10. Melancton in Philosophia morali page 197. Brentius Hom. in 1 Samuel 27.
Osiander h. l. Pezelius part. ult. object. page 999. Zepperus in explicatione
legum Mosaicarum Lib. 4. Cap. 8. Tossanus in notis, hoc loco: Rossius de
Christianae Reipublicae potestate supra reges Cap. 2. Com. 103. and Hunnius in
resolut. disp. vol. 1. page 73.

But with reverence to so great authority and so great semblance of reason
nullius addictus jurare in verba, I take leave to dissent, and that I may more
clearly express my own opinion, I premit these two distinctions. 1. We must
carefully distinguish betwixt a Kings Crown and his coveteousnesse. If any
covetous Kings there be, they certainly are the perfect emblems of miserable
happiness, and rich beggary. But say, a King out of an avaritious lust should
gripp the goods, and seize on the possessions and Lands of his Subjects for his
own private Interest, certainly he does Tyrannically and unjustly: but if, for
the safety and advantage of the common wealth, this is one of the rights of the
Crown, to make use of the subjects goods for that end.

2. We must also distinguish betwixt the manner and measure of the thing, and
the thing it self. The King may for the necessity of the commonwealth, and
peace and safety of the subject, exact their service and goods, if not done in
a violent manner, nor exacted in ane exorbitant measure, not for his own
private gain and advantage, but for the good of the community whereof he is
the head. Now in such a case all things that belongs to the subject, they
belong also to the power and authority of the King, and he may make use of
them, observing that due measure (in the necessity or advantage of the
community) by his prerogative Royal, without incurring the odious name and
imputation of a Tyrant. This is Lyra's judgment in his Commentary on this
place of Samuel, as it is Lawful (says he) for a man to cut or mutilat
himself, to cut off a Hand or a Leg, for the preservation of the whole body;
so may a King Lawfully make use of the subjects wealth in the time of
necessity. And this I take to be the proper meaning of the Mishpat Hameleck in
1 Samuel 8:11. That a King not only de jure may, but will in case of necessity
require the goods of his subjects without any suspicion of Tyranny or
oppression: And my arguments for this my opinion are.

1. Because as I find the word Mishpat translated here, and else where, manner
and Custom, so I find it also oftentimes translated Judgment, Statute, Law, or
Right. Judgment or Right from Shapat, judicavit, therefore may be translated
the Kings Right or Prerogative Royal, for this is its most proper
signification, as its original imports, so Judge. 16:31. He judged Israel twenty
years, Id est, Rex erat qui jure and justitia vindicaverat: As Buxtorf on the
word Shapat page 838. And so in many other places there cited, to which I
refer the doubter. And the word Mishpat is taken many times so, Psalm. 105:5.
Ier. 4:12. Psalm. 72:1. The word signifies both the Sentence of a Judge and the
Right that is done to a man by that Sentence, as is observed by the excellent
Drusius on Joel 3:2. This being its most proper signification, but the word
Custom and manner but Metaphorical, there is great reason, we should rather
read it the Kings Right, and accordingly the Vulgar hes turned it jus Regis:
And Iunius and Tremellius, 1 Samuel 10:25. which we call the manner of the
Kingdom, hes turned it jus Regni, so we read of a place Genesis 14:7. called
Enmishpat, the Fountain of Judgment, as the King may properly be called. And
the septuagint turns this Mishpat into dikaioma tou basileos; which word
dikaiomad if we believe Beza on Romans 1:32. will signify sometime legem
naturae, vel jus gentium.

2. Consider we, what it was the Israelites sought, it was not a Tyrant but a
King, Rescripta sunt interpretanda juxta petita, according to the rule in the
civil Law, except we would say of God according to that Mat. 7:10. when we Ask
a Fish, he will give us a Serpent which is horrid blasphemy.

3. Why should Samuel say, this was the peculiar manner of Kings? Is not this
the custom of any other judges and Magistrates as well as of Kings, to
degenerat some times, and be Tyrannical? as we see what Iotham says of
Abimeleck Judge. 9:14. That he was become a Bramle in stead of a Vine. See also
what was said of the Sons of Eli and Samuel, that were no Kings, 1 Samuel 2:16.
That they turned cruel, Tyrannical, Base and oppressive, so that men abhorred
the Offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 8:3. Its said of his Son that he turned aside
after Lucre, took brybes and perverted judgment. Why then should this be called
the manner of Kings only, since it is also incident to inferior Magistrates, and
perhaps much more?

4. I would gladly know, if by the manner of the King and Kingdom, 1 Samuel 8.
verss. 11. and 10. and 25. Any thing that is unjust and unlawful be mean'd, as
Tyranny and oppression, as in their opinion the words must needs importe. Do
they think that the excellent Samuel should have taken the pains to have
written these unjust Laws in a Register, and laid them up beside the Ark of the
Covenant? Or rather if we believe Josephus lib. 6. antiquit. Iud. Cap. 5. in
the Ark it self, for a perpetual memorial. Nay he is so just a judge, would
have rather caused burn and destroy all these monuments of iniquity: Wherefore
this Mishpat Hameleck cannot be rationally supposed to involve any Tyrannical
exactions or oppression of the People, as they expone it. Samuel to make a Law
for oppression, a man both wise and holy, and to consigne it to that public
and holy repository, being a monument of iniquity, to preserve it to the
knowledge and use of the posterity, I hope scarce any sober man will be induced
to admit it amongst the least atoms of his belief.

5. I would know in effect, if David, Solomon and all the rest of the Kings of
Judah and Israel did not all this that is here expressed; And yet no where, are
accused of Tyranny. Had' not they their Tables in times of peace, magnificently
and splendidly furnished, which is intimat here by taking their Sons and
Daughters to be confectioners and Cooks? Had not they in time of war their
Horses, Chariots, Footmen, and Captains, and Soldiers of all ranks? And what
disparadgment is that, to be the Kings Servants, who himself is the
representative of God unto us? And by the way we have a remarkable instance of
this in Solomon, who 2 Chronicles. 9:25. Is said to have had 4000 Stalls for Horses,
and the 1 King. 4:26. He is said to have had forty thousand Stalls for Horses;
the word translated Stalls is different in the Original, yet only a Iod added:
And signifies either a particular standing for one Horse, or else a Stable
having in it many such standing places. Tho I have heard some Fools bogle at
this, yet it may be reconciled, considering 4000 Stables with ten Stalls a
piece, and each holding ten Horses will make just forty thousand. We read also
2 Chronicles. 1:14. He had 1400 Chariots, and 12000 Horsemen that attended him in
State. But consider with me, what a laborious and vast work he had in building
of the Temple of God, and of his own Palaces? And how many Horses that great
work would need? And how many Queens and Concubins he had, and what a number of
attendants both of pride and necessity they would require? Or consider also,
how provident, so wise a man would be in case of war: In which case we read
the Philistines brought to the Field 1 Samuel 13:5. thirty thousand Chariots, and
would Solomon think you be behind with them, on these considerations? It had
been unjust to have imputed that to Solomon either as Tyranny or oppression:
But certainly rather it was the jus Regium his prerogative Royal, to have and
maintain them. And although in the most strict sense, these things be the Kings
prerogative, yet good and gracious Kings make use only of their prerogatives as
Christ did of his Miracles, merely in cases of necessity, and for the publict
good, to which they will make their Pomp and State subservient.

Omne culmen attigit
Virtutis altae, qui timeri se timet;
Amore fidens, qui patrem se non herum
Studet Vocari. Baudius.
And for these passages of Ezekiel, of Achab, and the tenths bestowed on the
Levits; they are easily answered by what is said already. For 1. that of
Ezekiel is, thou shall not take away the possession of the subject, by
oppression; not, in case of necessity, and convenience of State. Therefore
Ezekiel. 44:9. what in one part of that same verse is called exactions, in the
other it is called violence and spoil: There exactions being neither with
justice nor moderation, Ezekiel. 46:18. Its also clear as the Beams of the Sun,
the Prince shall not take the inheritance of the People by oppression, which is
expressly added, importing in point of necessity, he may do it, and be neither
Tyrant nor Robber: For Achab all the World knows it was only his lustful and
covetous humor he gratified, not minding the benefit of the commonwealth. And
for the tithes of the Levits, Its known that it was not a ceremonial precept,
but moral founded on the judgment of right reason, according to the Law of
nature it self. And therefore cannot be in it self unlawful, nature teatching
us that a public Person should be served of the public. And therefore tribute
jure divino belongs to the public Magistrate, Mat. 17:25. and 22. and 15.
verss. Therefore all things both Sacred and civil must be serviceable to the
public benefit. This I take to be the true meaning of this Mishpat Hameleck.

But if we speak particularly of the prerogative Royal, Justinian makes it to
consist in these three, the power of things Sacred, the power of the public
good, and the power of denuncing war. Bodinus in his Book de Republica lib. 1.
cap. 10. extends it to these five, 1. The power of making and abrogating Laws,
2. Supremacy of jurisdiction, from which can be no appeal, 3. Power of
establishing all inferior Magistrates, and Officers of State, 4. Imposition and
exaction of tribute, 5. The power of war, To which Arniseus adds the right of
public ways, navigable Rivers, mines of Gold and Silver, and any thing that
hes no particular owner, that it should belong to the common Master; as
hunting, confiscation, coining of money, Arniseus lib. 2. de jure Majest. cap.
1. n. 8. Neither will any that remembers we swear in the Test to defend the
Kings prerogatives (we hope) think this digression impertinent: To which we
shall add the Golden observation of Chrysostom upon Romans 13. That to leavy
money, and exact stents for the public good is the peculiar prerogative of the
Crown; and therefore says he, the Apostle says not, give tribute, but verse.
7. render tribute, render Custom, non dicit date but reddite: For the subject
nihil gratuito dat, debitum siquidem est res ista: quod si non feceris perfidi
poenas dabis. The subject gives nothing to the King; its debt, which if he
refuse, he deserves to be punished as a false Traitor.

But to speak yet more particularly of the Royal prerogative in the most part
of all Nations: We begin with the Jews whose Royal prerogative (as we have
seen) is set down particularly in Deuteronomy. 17. and 1 Samuel 8. tho contradicted by
learned men; to whom forecited we are not yet afraied to add Saint Gregory,
Cajetan, Abulensis, and Vatablus on the place, and even Aquinas too, who in his
Book de regimine principis Cap. 11. is expressly against our interpretation,
and in his Sums, prima secundae quest. 6. Art. 1. in answer to the fifth
objection. Illud jus non debebatur Regi ex institutione divina, sed magis
praenunciabatur usurpatio Regum qui sibi jus iniquum constituunt, in Tyrannidem
degenerantes and subditos depraedantes. But considering that the most part of
Papists are ill affected toward all Kings, as well as our Presbyterians, the
one making the Pope their Presbytery, and the other the Presbytery their Pope:
Therefore all our Fanatic writers, as Lex Rex, Didoclavius and the rest, hes
all their arguments from Papists; yet we hope, we have said als much for our
opinion, as will abundantly satisfy any sober and intelligent Reader.

To come then to particulars, we find the Law of the prerogative Royal amongst
the Jews, after that ancient one established by God himself and promulgat by
Moses and Samuel; als fully and als amply (as can be) constitute in the Person
of Simon Macabeus, 1 Macab. 14. chap. from 41. to the 45. Wherein is contained
the Sanction of the Law. And the prerogatives are reckoned out to the number of
twelve, which at more length may be there seen, and corresponds much with our
own, one or two only excepted. Neither may it be objected, he was their Captain
only, and not their King: For his posterity did assume both the Title and
Estate of the King without any innovating of these prerogatives, as is known
all along their History. But more particularly, what the Royal prerogative
amongst the Jews was, both before and after that, may be more fully gathered
from the writings of Josephus against Appion, and from his antiquities; from
Mennochius, Sigoneus, Bertramus, and Cunaeus; to which we may add the most part
of the writings of Hottingerus: all which have written fully and learnedly of
the Laws and Customs of that Republic, but especialy in his Smegma Orientale,
and Epitome utriusque juris judaici.

The Royal prerogatives amongst the Romans, are fully described by Dionysius
Halycarnasseus, lib. 2. which were agreed upon (as he says) betwixt Romulus
and the People of Rome, the care of Religion, and the Laws; The convocating of
the People and the absolute power of war, with many others there to be read:
which still continued till the time of Tarquin the proud, who contemning these
decrees and ordinances, was deprived of his Kingdom, and banished the City.
What it was afterward, may be known by Suetonius, after the death of Julius
Caesar in Tiberius Cap. 30, 31, 32. And Tacitus Annals, especially the first
Book. And afterward in process of time, how they were increased and
established, may be seen in the Commentaries of Claudius Rangolius, ordinis
minimorum S. Francisci de Paula (who hes described them in a collection from
Hottoman, and Calvin Lawyers) on 1 Samuel 8:11. Yea the lex regia, as he there
writes, gave a kind of infinite power to the Emperors, in all things that
concerned the preservation or amplification of the commonwealth. To whose
writings we may add what hes been written by Scriverius his Respublica Romana,
and Lipsii Roma illustrata, and by Dion, Appianus, and Pollybius, the Greek
Historians; of whom it must be observed, that they wrote the Roman History far
more impartially then any Roman.

3. For the Greeks their prerogative Royal, to wit, of the Lacedaemonians, it is
fully described by Halicarnasseus in his 5 Book.

Of the Macedonians by Quintus Curtius in his sixth Book of the wars of
Alexander, anent the death of Philotas Parmenio's Son.

The Royal prerogative of Agamemnon, and other Princes of Grecia, may be
collected from Homer. And of the whole Greeks, both their History, and
Privileges may be gathered from Pausanias, and Plutarch, especially in the
lives of Solon and Lycurgus; and his Greek Questions. But most elegantly and
compendiously written by the learned Vbbo Emmius de Graecorum rebus publicis.
And from Postellus de Magistratibus Atheniensium. To which may be added Meursii
Athenae. Nicolai Damasceni Historia.

4. The prerogative of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Persians, may be collected
out of Herodot, and Zenophon, and Diodorus siculus his 2 Book, Cap. 3. But
above all out of the learned Brissonius de regio Persarum principatu.

5. The prerogative of the Germans out of Tacitus de moribus Germanorum.

6. Of the French, out of Caesar de bello Gallico, lib. 7.

Out of all which by a judicious and serious Reader might be collected a full
complete Volume of the prerogatives of all Nations: Which if it be yet done, in
whole, or in part, I know not; Only I could wish this would animat the generous
attempt of some learned head: but this being the work rather of a Lawyer, then
a divine, and not belonging to our design but by way of annotation, and
digression, Let these few remarckes suffice.

An Appendix concerning the Kings Treasure, as a consequent of his Prerogative.
HE that walks on the Battelments of Soveraignity had need of some massy
weight to keep him steady. A poor Governor (as Euripides says) being a scorn
to Authority, and a burden to the People. Wherefore in all ages to support
their Prerogative either in peace or war, it hes been the laudable Custom of
all Kings to mass up a great store of treasure. Hence nothing so celebrated
amongst all Authors as the Gaza Persica, Quintus Curtius in his 5 Book describs
it, and Isod. lib. 20.9. and the 70 retain ordinarily the word Gaza, as Esth.
4:7. Haman vowed to pay ten thousand Talents of Silver to the Kings treasure,
which in English money will amount to three millions fifty thousand and seven
hundredth pounds, o Pride! O Revenge! How dear guests are ye? Pomponius Mela in
his first Book of Geographie confounds Gaza a Town in Palestin with Gaza a
treasure, or at least says he, the one had the name from the other, not
considering, that Gaza a Town with the Hebrews is written with Hajin, a treasure
with Gimel. In the Scriptures also we read of the treasures of Egypt; The
treasures of the Kings of Israel and Judah, 2 Kings 18:15. and 20:13. and 39:2,
4. 2 Chronicles. 36:18. Ezeck. 28:4. Dan. 11:43. Neh. 13:12.

The Latin word Thesaurus, imports the providence of a Prince, eis-aurion
tithenai, to lay up something for to morrow. See Scaliger derives aurum, from
oorein custodire. They have other two words also, Fiscus, And aerarium: But
with this difference (as Budeus observes) that aerarium is pecunia publica
imperii, but Fiscus is pecunia Imperatoris. Fiscus a Fisu: quod eo ad vitam
degendam subsidio, homines fidere soleant. As in the Hebrew, Mammon from
Emunah, fides. The word aerarium is from aes, aeris, because the first money
used by the Romans was Brass, as Plin. lib. 3. cap. 33. and their casting
their Accounts was likewise with Brass pieces, which we call Compters, called
by the Ancients era. Of this way of compting, and of the era a Reckoning, see
Scaliger de emendatione temporum lib. 5. Where he alleadges what they called
era, we now call item. The Scripture makes mention not only of the treasures
of Heathen Princes, as Ezra 5:17. and 6:1. But also God allowed a treasury in
his Church Mark. 12:41. Luke 21:1. Ioh. 8:20. These things spoke Jesus in the
treasury. What this treasury was ye will read it explained by Shindler in his
Lexicon in the word Lishcah: and by Caspar Waserus who hes written learnedly on
that subject de pecuniarum repositoriis. Amongst Politicians the question is
not of the Lawfulness, but of the expediency of Princes treasures. Some
court-flatterers, with the fox in the fable, intending to cheat the crow of his
chief, they will tell the Prince that his glory stands rather in his bounty,
then his baggs; and will confirm it by the examples of Alexander and Caesar,
who by their generous and oblidging liberality did atchive great matters, that
Sardanapalus left ten millions to them that murdered him, Nero gave above 12
millions to them that flattered him, which gifts Galba afterward did revocke.
But they consider not, that these great and warlyk Princes as Alexander and
Caesar were liberal, rather out of the spoils of their enemies then their own
treasuries. But it is certain that a Prince that is not this way provident,
shall never be able to defend his prerogative, and maintain his right, but fall
under contempt and danger, the effect of Poverty; as by many pregnant instances
might be proven. See a treatise, entitled Englands treasure by foreign Trade,
by Thomas Mun, Londoner.

Appendix 2. Concerning a peculiar Prerogative.
THere is a peculiar Prerogative mercifully and miraculously granted by God,
unto some Princes, as to the Kings of Britain, and some say the French King
too, to heal that disease Scrofula commonly called the Kings evil. So Plutarch
in the life of Pyrrhus affirms, that he cured all these that were diseased of
the Spleen, with a touch of his foot only. And Swetonius in Vespasian Cap. 7.
makes mention, that a blind man, and a crooked at least debili crure (as he
speaks) were both restored by the Emperor to entire health; the one, by
spitting in his Eye; the other, by a touch of his Heel. (So divine a
prerogative hes but the touch of the worst part of a Prince.) Which made not
only a confirmation but an accession both to his Majesty and authority. And
that Princes by virtue of their Office, are endued from Heaven with a Sagacity
more then ordinary (as in King James's finding out the poweder plot) is
consented to, by all interpreters, to be Solomon's meaning in Prove. 16:10. a
divine sentence, some reads it, Prophecy or divination. See Petrus Molinaeus
decus illud Theologorum as Spanhemius calls him, in his 1 Book de
praecognitione futurorum Cap. 20. Where he not only brings in the instance of
Solomon deciding betwixt the two whoors, but of one Ariopharnes King of the
Thracians, who when the King of the Cymmerians was dead, and three contending
for the Succession, all pretending to be Sons to the defunct, (whereas it was
certain he had left only one Son) being elected Arbiter of the contention,
commanded the body of the dead King to be hanged on a Tree, and appointed the
three to shoot with Arrows, and who came nearest to his Heart should obtain the
Kingdom; the first shot through the Shoulder, the next through the Arm, the
third abhorring so unnatural an experiment, was content rather to lose the
Kingdom then to mangle the Corpse of his Father: And to him he adjudged the
Crown; the Story is in Diodorus Siculus.

By Ezekia, David, Solomon, all which ye will see cited and cleared, from their
particular places of Scripture, by Seth Ward Lord Bishop of Sarum his Sermon
before the King, against resistance of Lawful powers, the first of his six
Sermons Printed Anno 1672.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Melchisedeck who he was.
GReat hes been the toil of learned Men in all ages both Jews and Gentiles, to
loose this knot, and some after all their labor, have concluded the mystery
not only profound, but incomprehensible, alleging, where the great Apostle
makes difficulty the preface, it is fit for them to make despair the
conclusion. Heb. 5:11. Gesnerus in his Commentaries on Genesis 14 quest. 3. page
307. tells us of one Copres an Abbot in Scythia, who observing his Disciples to
contend much about this same controversy, pronunced a woe on himself, for
searching so much in it. Saint Ierom. 3. Tom. Epist. 136. speaking of it,
says, Si vas electionis stupet ad mysterium, and dum disputat ineffabile
confitetur, quanto magis nos vermiculi and culices, solam debemus scientiam
inscitiae confiteri. Mr. Bailly our Countryman, in the first Book of his
Chronology. page 18. Quis mortalium hic fuerit, frustraneus est
curiosissimorum labor inquirere; and ends his discourse of him, Necesse est
desinant homines in lucem velle protrahere, quod Deus decrevit in tenebris
occultandum. Rainolds on Psalm. 110. page 462. I cannot but wonder that men
should toil themselves in the dark to find out that, of which they have not the
least ground of solid conjecture, speaking of Melchisedeck. But yet with all
humility following the conduct of the Scriptures by the thread of solid
reason, we shall crave liberty to propone other men's Sentences, and to
interpose our own. There have been then 7 several opinions, ancient and modern
concerning Melchisedek. 1. Some have thought that, that whole business
concerning him was a mystery known to God only, and should never be revealed to
man. 2. Some, that he was some power and virtue of God, greater then Christ the
Son of God. 3. Some, that he was an Angel. 4. That he was the Son of God; who
in a preludie to his future humanity appeared to the Sons of Men. 5. Some, that
he was the Holy Ghost. 6. Some, that he was Shem the Son of Noah. But the
opinion I shall fix upon, is different from all these.

The first is the opinion of Prudentius, whom Gennadius in his Catalogue
illustrium virorum Cap. 13. calls Poeta Palatinus, sed Christianus saeculari
literatura insignis His words are in his preface to his Psychomach; Dei
Sacerdos, Rex and idem praepotens, origo cujus font inenarrabili, secreta,
nullum prodit Authorem sui, Melchisedeck qua stirpe, queis majoribus, ignotus,
uni cognitus tantum Deo. Of this opinion are many other modern Authors, see
Ravanel in his Bibliotheca in voce Melchisedeck.

To which I answer, I darr not be so impudent to obtrude into the World any
scrible of mine with that vain glorious and boasting preface, En reserata orbi
magni secreta tonantis: as Scaliger observes of a German in his time. For I
must confess with the great Apostle, that what concerns Melchisedeck is hard
to be uttered, that is, is both profound and mysterious, Heb. 5:11. Yet this
was not the obscurity so much upon the matter, as in the dullness and incapacity
of the Hearers to receive so excellent doctrine, otherwise he had superseded
all labor of any further explication; and the several sentiments of learned
men in all ages are enough to refute this faint and floating conjecture.

The 2. That he was some great power of God greater then Christ, was the
peculiar opinion of these Heretics called by Epiphanius in his 2 Book
adversus Hereses, Here Is. 55. Melchisedeciani. Megalen ten dunamin phaskousi,
alla kai Meizoteron tou Christou. Theodoret. de maleloquentia haeretica Lib. 2.
calls them Griveous Heretics. So said Augustine lib. de Heresibus ad quod
vult Deum Cap. 34. The ground of this opinion was, because its said of Christ,
he was to be after the order of Melchisedeck: Therefore say they, he was
inferior to him in dignity. This Epiphanius there refutes, showing a Servant is
not equal to his Master; Christ was God and Melchisedeck but a Man. Doctor
Gouge in his Lexicon on the Hebrews shows, that their own argument refutes
themselves, for Christ being an High Priest after the order of Melchisedeck:
Melchisedeck was a Type of Christ, and Christ the Truth of that Type, but the
Truth is always greater then the Type, and by that expression (as shall be
manifested) Melchisedeck is so far from having any prerogative to, that he hes
not so much as an equality with Christ.

The 3. That he was an Angel. A. Sixtus Senensis in his Bibliotheca Sancta lib.
5. Annot. 90. has observed out of Saint Ierom. in his Epistle to Euagrius.
That Origene was the first Author of this opinion, and says that Dydimus his
Scholar was of the same mind, and in his Annot. 91. he tells us that Saint
Augustine in his Book of the Questions on the Old and New Testament quest. 109.
endeavors to prove that Melchisedeck was an Angel, or the Holy Ghost. But
Alphonsus a Castro in his 10 Book against Heresies proves that, that Book
cannot belong to Saint Augustine: For in his Book of Heresies before cited he
condemned it for Heresy Cap. 34. and no mention made of it in his
retractations. But be the opinion whose it will, its easily refuted, by the
description of an High Priest, Heb. 5:1. That he must be a Man. Neither does
this any way accord to the History delivered of Melchisedeck, Genesis 14. Neither
any where in the whole Scripture is the Priesthood attributed to the Angels.
Besides what a ridiculous prerogative had that been to tell us, an Angel had
neither Father nor Mother nor Genealogy. So Gouge, Slegelius, Tena and
Molineus de praecog. futurorum Lib. 4. Cap. 11.

The 4. opinion is, That he was the Son of God. And this Epiphanius tells us was


