LONDONS Disease, and Cure: BEING A Sovereign Receipt against the PLAGUE, for
Prevention sake.
By JOHN QVARLES, Philo-Medicus
There Is none so ignorant, I hope, but knows,
Medicines are good, as well in Verse, as Prose;
Therefore consulting with my Thoughts, I found,
A rare Receipt to make the Infected sound:
And knowing that the Almighty does forbid,
In Times of Dangers, fecrets should be hid;
I thought it was my Duty to make known,
This Catholic Medicine unto every one;
That so their sad Distempers may be healed,
The cruel natre of this ssad Disease,
Is so otragious, that if speedy ease
Be not Presecrib'd, the Patient must be lost,
But here is a medicine without Price, or Cost;
Therefore let those that are inclined to be
My willing Patients, read, obeferve, and see
That my Prescriptions are, they shall be good,
And very cheap, not hindering them from food
Or honest labor; neither need they doubt
Restraint, but may with courage go about
Lawful Occasions; therefore without a Bribe,
Harken with patience, whilft I thus Prescribe;
Receipt.

WArm Tears, distilled from a pensive Heart,
With herb-of-grace, mixed with divinest art,
Prepared in the morning when the Light begins
To show it self, not gathired in our Sins;
But when the Sun of Grace has spread his Rays,
Then we must Gather has spread his Rays,
Then we must Gather it, and keep't with praife;
It must be laid, where neither Air of Lust,
Nor Heat of Envy, nor the injurios Rust
Of Malice can come near it, nor the Breath
Of Covethousness infect, for sudden Death
Will seize upon it, if we take not heed.
It Is also good (if possible) to Bleed,
Both at the Eyes, and Heart, for if those veins
Be not well breathed, the Physicians pains
Will prove invalide; if occasion urge,
The Patient must b'advis'd to take a Purge,
Or elfe a Vomit; When the infected Blood
Is clens'd, a pleasant Cordial will be good;
But let the Patient not forget to call,
With Thanks, unto the Sacred Hospital;
And then he may with covrage be affur'd
The worst is past, and his Distemper cured:
And if he keep a well compofed Will,
He need not fear the Apothecaries Bill;
Each Item's a Receipt, and all his Cost,
Returns to Profit, nothing can be lost
Eut the Disease, which the great Chyron cures,
Whilst the Physician all the pain indures.
Oh happy Patieut (if the Doctor please)
It Is Health to fall in love with thy Disease!
Oh teach me to be Sick, or I will make
My fealf a Patient for the Doctors sake!
Oh! who is he that would not be content
With a Disease, to be his Patient?
He has an Antidote, that can expel
All Griefs; it is dangerous sick ness to be well:
Oh make me sick to Death (I mean) of Sin,
That having done, my Doctor may begin;
Without all doubt, that Patient needs must thrive.
That makes Affliction his Preparative:
Oh! who would not Adore so blessed a God?
Good natured Children often kiss the Rod:
And so, let us with Patience learn to endure
Our own Distempers, and not doubt the Cure;
The Grand Physician will not spare his Skill,
If we submit our felves unto his Will;
The more our Patience labors to endure,
The sooner will he make a perfec Cure;
The sacred Scriptures this rare Cordial gives,
To let us know that our Redeemer lives:
He lives, who by his living gives us breath,
He died, and we are living by his Death:
Thus both in Life and 'Death we must confess,
That He Is the Author of our Happiness;
He is that God, whose Cross mst be our sCrown,
Whose shame our honor, whose reproach, renown;
His Blood must be our Bath, his Wounds, our Cure;
For it is his Certainty that makes us Sure:
Then let us like the Ninevites, be found,
Whose true Ropentance made them truly sound:
THough as (like carelesst Jonas) now we lie
In the Whales-belly of our Sins; let us cry
As Jonas did, and Heaven will foon advance,
ANd bless us with a quick Deliverance:
Delays are dangerous, it is therefore good
To take a Remedy, before the Blood
Be quire infected, it is a sign the Cure
Is difficult, and will not long endure
A Physical oppose, let us therefore ftrive
To quallifie it by a Corrosive.
A Bath of Tears is good, and will expel
The black diseases of an Infidedl;
The Chemistry of sighs, and doubled groans,
Will melt those hearts, which sin has turned to stones.
But one thing more is singularly good,
The dear Remembrance of our Saviors Blood;
Nor will it be unto our Souls a loss,
To take the Lignum vitae of his Cross;
And that sick-Soul that knows how to procure
The Balm of Gilliad, may (by Faith) asure
Himfelf a Remedy, Tears mixed with Rue,
Will make the Patient bid his Grief adue.
Finis.
LONDON, Printed by Edward Crowch, dwelling on Snow-hill. 1665.


