To the Memory of the Right Honorable THOMAS LORD NAPIER Who died in FRANCE,
Anno DOM. 1686.
A Funeral ELEGY.
WHO without pale Amazement ponder can
The Dissolution of the Frame of Man?
Heavens Masterpiece, in whom the ETERNAL drew
His Portracture, for ravished Earth to view,
That Heavenly, and Immortal sparks, might sway.
The Monarchy of brittle Clods of Clay:
Whose twisted Chains composed of Love, and Wonder,
Dissolves like Ice, like Glass does brake assunder;
So that each Man of Low or High Degree,
When weighed is lighter found than Vanity.
So swists this span of Frailty, Life, We know
Eagles compared, are supposed slow:
Posts on the Earth, Ships on the Sea, the Wind,
Motion it self is hovering left behind;
These to our Faith (the Souls enlightened Eye)
Scriptures makes Emblems of Mortality.
And by dear-bought Experience, it appears
Youth's downs may fall, as well as grizlie Hairs.
The Patient, and Phycisian, strong and Weak,
To Death the King and Beggar are alike:
If sins add fuel to the fire of Hell,
Thrice happy he in Youth that dies well.
Then only NAPIER, Thee We must confess
Placed in the Zenith of all Happiness:
To whose Nativity the Fates did owe
All Glories, smiling Fortune can bestow.
A Birth, blessed with such Honors, Virtues, Parts,
That Court, or Country can boast for their Arts:
A Name, all Albion over (it is clear)
For Learning, Valor, Prudence had no PIER.
Hence they, and only they, possessed that Name,
As a just Donative of Glorious Fame;
Which still from Age to Age no Limits knew,
Till Glories crescent to a Circle grew;
Which passing the Worlds bounds could bounded be
By nothing now, but vast Eternity.
Scarce four and twenty times the posting Sun,
Through his Celestial Inns, the signs, had run
Till Heavens great Privy Council (ruthless fates)
Above the Saphir Rafters him translates:
Where he pure Virtues Pleasures might obtain,
Who only here, had tasted of their pain.
Whose comely Person to our ravished Eye
Vi'd only with his Soul for Beauty:
Yet handsomness was but the outward Shrin
To vail the Glorious Saint was lodged therein;
His Judgment was so clear, it knew no night,
His Apprehension active as the Light;
Whose Vigor could Discover and Discern
The deepest Mysteries, frail Man can learn.
That had he lived, with that same Approbation,
He Had write a Comment on the Revelation,
As that great miracle his Grand-syre did,
Admired by all alive, adored when dead.
Such was this Noble Lord, where ever known,
Amazing Strangers, loved of his own.
At Home, Abroad, his Virtues proved his Name,
He Had NA PIER in the Deserts of Fame;
Yet his short Time denied to tell Us what,
Leaving Eternity to open that;
Only deserved such Trophies: at his Urn
That France and Britain both at once do mourn.
N. Paterson.

Foelix qui portum subiit, in quem si quis intra primos annos delatus est, non
magis queri debet, quam qui cito navigavit;

Seneca. Toll caput luctu mersum, quando omnia functa
Aut moritura vides; obeunt noctesque diesque,
Astraque, nec solidis prodest sua machina terris
Ortum qnicquid babes finem timet: ibimus omnes,
Ibimus; immensis urnam quatit AEACVS umbris.
Ast hic quem gemimus, foelix; non ille rogavit,
Non timuit meruitve mori; nos anxia plebes,
Nos miseri, quibus unde dies suprema, quis aevi
Exitus incertum: sed and hic jam numine plenus,
Et dubios casus, and caecae lubrica vitae
Effugit immunis fati: Christique beatus
Dulcibus alloquiis and vivis vultibus ardet.
Statius Evangelizans.

