DEVOUT ENTERTAINMENTS OF A Christian Soul.

Composed in French by the R.F. I.H. Quarre, P. of the Oratory of JESUS, and D.
D.

Translated into English, by J. M. of W. Prisoner in the Tower of London.

Printed at Paris, Anno Domini MDCXLVIII.

The Translators Address to the pious and Christian Reader.
THe most charitable and excellent title of this work, is properly, me thinks,
addressed unto you, (good Reader,) since you are the likeliest to relish and
make true use of the admirable conceptions which are offered you in this little
golden Treatise. It came to my hands, as a Missive of Charity, sent to
entertain me in my sad imprisonment; and upon a serious perusal, the finding
it of so divine a spirit, and of so universal a concernment, was invitement
enough to me to propose the naturallizing these Meditations in our Country, by
contributing so much as I am able to them, namely, an English Tongue, in which
though they lose something of their native grace, yet I have reason to believe
that the charity of the Author will be content to be somewhat diminished
himself, to become more beneficial to his neighbors; nor need I doubt, but
that the force of his heavenly spirit will break through, even my gross
language, and be not only heard, but reverenced amidst the noise of Drums and
Trumpets, so frequent in these unhappy times, wherein we have more cause then
ever, to remember the great Trumpet of the Angel; wherefore the voice of this
Author (which seems Angelical) will come very seasonable, both to awake
drowsy, and to advance pious souls in the ardors of their love toward God;
for here is a loud Alarm for all sleepy and slothful Soldiers, calling unto
them to take up the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, to defend
themselves by the supply of so powerful succors, as these holy Meditations,
against the furious assaults of our common enemy, whose principal attempt is
against (what these Entertainments seek the most to fortify, namely) the love
of God.

The Author shows you, that this love of God is the most Essential point of
Christianity. Be watchful therefore, I beseech you, and keep this fortress
safe from the surprise of our professed enemy, and then nothing can be feared;
for God expects more at your hands, and in loving him you fulfill his whole
Law, and sweeten to your selves the rigor of all humane Laws.

After he has set you in the way of applying continually those duties, which
appertain to the preservation of you in this happy state, he presents you with
some Considerations upon the whole Passion of our blessed Savior, as a
powerful motive to invite you to this pure love, which he demands of you, and
to render homage to this excessive goodness, for so great and inestimable a
benefit, which it has purchased for you at so dear a rate, as even the death
of the only Son of God.

And truly, when we look upon the sufferings which Jesus Christ has endured
for us, ought we not to reproach our selves, for bearing impatiently a few
crosses and contradictions in this short pilgrimage? for if so sacred a person
sustained such violent pains for us, can we conceive our selves exempt from
them? No, no, let us rather be ashamed at our cowardice and effeminate
affections, in desiring to find no opposition in our way, but to tread still
upon roses, thorns seeming too harsh for our dainty feet, which (if they be so
tender) cannot look like feet appertaining to a head stuck full of thorns;
and alas, we cannot expect a share in the glory of our head Christ Jesus, if we
(as his members) bear not willingly a part in his combats.

When we are called into the Field of the Cross, let us then consider, how
happy we are, that may make to our selves a Crown of these thorns, whereof
there are store at hand in these hard times; let us march joyfully, that we may
triumphantly pass through Mount Calvary, fastened (as S. Paul says) to the
Cross with Christ; and this is the nearest way to the heavenly Jerusalem,
where we shall be refreshed after all our labors, with the sight of that
sovereign object of our love, the increated Beauty and Verity, whose first
sight is no less then eternal beatitude.

Desiring to pay some respect to the Author, I shall rather do him injury, if
I keep you too long by any discourse of mine, from entering into his devout
Entertainments, whose prayers you have, and mine shall presume to attend on
his, to implore an efficacious operation of his holy labors, and my charitable
design.

J. W.

The Introduction.
Concerning the necessity of the Love of God.
ALL the favors which Heaven showers down upon us, are only to withdraw us
out of the captivity of sin, and the world, and to place us in the liberty of
the grace of Christianity, to the end God may reign in our hearts. It is for
this reason we are made Christians, and receive the faith of Baptism: Jesus
Christ died on the Cross for this end, and when he descended from the bosom
of his Father to be made Man, his design was only to establish the Kingdom of
God amongst the children of men.

And if we may be allowed to enter into consideration of the eternal thoughts
of the eternal Father, we may easily discern, that in the whole Incarnation
and Passion of his Son, and in the whole disposition of our salvation, he has
no other aim, then to seat the Kingdom of God in our souls, and to procure
that our heart (which is created only for God) may be really the Throne and
residence of the Divinity: In effect, all the Sacraments, which Jesus Christ
himself has instituted, and left unto his Church, as so many springs and
fountains of graces and benedictions, are only to dispose and place in us the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, to produce the reigning of God in us, and to abolish
the dominion of the world, the Devil and Sin.

When Jesus Christ taught his Apostles how they were to pray, he gave them the
Pater Noster, and wills us to desire above all things, that his Kingdom come;
that is (according to S. Gregory) to ask of God, that God may reign in us. And
Jesus Christ himself said to his Apostles, that the chiefest desire of a
Christian ought to be, that God may reign in his heart; Seek first of all
(says he) the Kingdom of God. It is certain then, that God ought to reign in
us, not sin, nor the world: And evident it is, that the grace of Christianity
causes the Kingdom of God to preside in our hearts.

Now God cannot reign in us but by love and charity; for S. John says, God is
charity; and he that abides in charity, abides in God and God in him. His
meaning is, that by love God makes his residence in the soul, he places there
his Throne, he reigns and commands there, and quickens the whole soul. He
is there, as the Sun to the Heavens,. which illuminates all of it; as a King in
his Kingdom, who commands all; as the Father of a family in his house, who
rules and directs every thing. And even as wind disperses smoke, and fire
liquifies and melts wax; so Charity, which gives us God, and is even God
himself reigning in us, dissipates our imperfections, consumes our inordinate
affections, and delivering us from sin, subjecteth us entirely to the power and
direction of Jesus Christ, who reigns in us.

Whence it follows, that whoever is willing to become a true Christian, of
what condition soever he may be in this world, ought to desire that God may
reign in him; he must dispose himself thereunto, and render his soul and
conscience worthy to be the Kingdom and habitation of God; And to arrive to
this blessed condition, he ought to be in the state of love and charity: whence
we are to infer, That all the true exercises of a Christian must tend unto
the obtaining of love; and all that he is to do, all that he is to learn, and
the very method which he is to observe in order to a good life, consists only
in love and charity. Wherefore it were to be wished, that we would learn no
other lesson in this world, nor embrace other exercise, then that of Love and
Charity.

And in effect God demands nothing of us but love, for he that loves, fulfills
the whole Law of God. And Jesus Christ being ready to die, recommends nothing
more to his Disciples, then love: virtue is not acceptable to God, and our
whole life has no merit, without Charity: Finally God gives not his Paradise
but unto love. Is it not then very true, that the exercise and practice of love
ought to be the sole entertainment and whole occupation of a soul that intends
her Salvation? In as much as it is most certain, that at the hour of death
God resolving to judge us will respect nothing but love; for he will receive
us, if we expire in the state of love, and reejct us, in case he finds us
destitute thereof.

I pray tell me now, (you that read what I write) when you shall come to the
hour of death, and be in that moment, wherein you are to appear before the
Tribunal of God, to receive the definitive sentence of your Eternity, if you
find your self void of the love of God, what sorrow will you not feel for
having passed away your life in toys, for having set your affection on
trifles, and not loved God, who is only amiable, and the true happiness of our
souls?

And at this last hour, which you cannot avoid, wherein you shall be
constrained to abandon both this life, and all that is in this world, what
anguish will you not suffer, for having rendered your self the slave of vanity,
and unto all inordinate motions of concupiscence, for having violated and
despised all holy, and divine Laws, to satisfy your own desires? Finally
what displeasure will you feel, for having shut your heart against the love of
God, to lodge therein the love of so many creatures? Surely at the time of your
death, you will (as I may say) even die for sorrow, and this grief will be
that worm which shall eternally gnaw your soul, for having so much studied to
please the creature, and for having been so strongly fastened thereunto, as to
prostrate your self to vanity and pleasures, and for having despised the love
of God, who is your happiness, and the true delight of your soul.

But suppose that you shall be saved, and that you are in the role of those
Elect, whom God intends to place in his Kingdom of glory, where there is no
other God, but Love, no law, but that of Love, and where the life and
entertainment of the Saints, is but a perfect and eternal Love: Though you be
(I say) of this number, and if your name be written in the book of life, yet
God will not save you without Love and Charity; for you must necessarily die in
Charity, if you will be saved. Let us suppose then that you have Love, at this
last hour, it will be surely a true love of God; If then you can ever Love God
with a true love, how much pain will you feel, for not having loved him
sooner. How much more bitterly will you detest the world, and all the creatures
which you have loved, and which have diverted you from loving a God, who loves
you so much, as to give you his Paradise? It is then, yea, it is then, when you
will understand the love, which God bears you, and that you will love God
truly; then will it be that the more light you shall receive, and the purer
your soul shall be, the more will you detest the world, and deplore your own
ingratitude; and undoubtedly in this point, will consist the sharpest: of your
pains, and the most insupportable dolours which you shall suffer in Purgatory,

I say all this, to recall your soul and persuade you, if you can, to prevent
the miseries of this hour and moment, which you cannot escape, and that from
this instant, preparing your self for death, you may begin to seek and desire
no other thing but love. In all your devotions learn to love God, and take
courage to despise manfully all impediments unto true love.

Let all your Entertainments and Devotions be in order to love, and in all your
exercises of mercy, strive only to root out of your heart, and remove from
your life, all that distanceth you from the love of God.

For your assistance herein, I thought fit to present unto you some few
documents, which I conceive very profitable for all such, as have a desire to
live well. I style them Devout Entertainments, because indeed the soul ought
to entertain and busy her self only in love and charity. And I call them
Devout, in as much as true devotion consists only in this point, of loving God.

It is not my intention, to discredit other Exercises, which are recommended to
souls, because they are good and profitable, if they direct unto Love and
Charity: But I may well say with S. Paul, that all is nothing without Charity.
Wherefore I could wish, that a true Christian had no other object, or end in
all his actions, then love; that he would study nothing but love, and strive
to correct all his defects, opposite to the love of God; for all being well
considered, whoever has Charity, has all things. And indeed we see so many
persons frequent the divine Sacraments, we see so many who exercise themselves
in works of piety, and nevertheless little profit and change is observed in
the life of Christians. If reasons may be given for it, there is no other in my
opinion, then their defectivenesse in loving God. This is the reason why in all
this little Treatise I speak of nothing, but Love and Charity.

It is true also, that I treat of the Presence of God, and show the practice of
it; but I have done it in consideration of love, because I conceive it to be an
exercise absolutely necessary, especially for such as live in the world, and
desire to lead a virtuous life, in the midst of the turmoyles and distractions,
which are frequent in our ordinary course of life. We cannot doubt, but that
the most part of Christians have their spirits still distracted, their thoughts
wandering, their hearts divided; and if every one will consider in what manner
he lives, he shall perceive that the soul is but seldom within the body,
wholly distracted, and as it were evaporated into exterior things, which is a
great misfortune to her. Now it is requisite to find out a means to recall
her; surely I see none better then that of the presence of God, in the same
manner, as I explicate it; Make use of it, if you please, and you shall find by
experience, that there is nothing more profitable and advantageous.

I recommend it as much as I can possibly; for if every one would but consider
at leisure, the disposition of his own soul, he should discern, that it will
be almost impossible for him to perform any exercise of piety, as one ought,
if he place not himself in the presence of God; for this posture is absolutely
necessary, to recall our soul, which is straying, and to render her attentive
to what she is doing; and moreover this is necessary, in respect we cannot
perform any good work without the grace of God. And when the soul is thus
presented unto God, she craves assistance and grace of him, without which she
is unable to act any thing.

This is what I desire to offer unto you; I beseech our Lord to affect you with
it, and to favor u^ all with his grace, to prepare ou^ hearts for him, and to
render us worthy of his love.

THese, or what other Erraeta's the Printer (through his unskilfulnesse in this
Language) has committed, the courteous Reader may please to pardon, and
correct thus.

Errata.
Page 33. l. 10. read require you. p. 107. l. 8. r. into the state. p. 111. l.
6, and 7. r. I know and you have said it. p. 114. l. 14. r. expecting.

DEVOUT ENTERTAINMENTS OF A CHRISTIAN SOUL.
Of the love of GOD, The first Entertainment.
. 1. Of the Excellency and Necessity of Love.
1. THe first thing I desire to propose unto you upon this subject, and which I
would gladly engrave in your heart, is the acknowledging that the reasonable
creature was created by God, for no other end, then to love and serve him. This
is a verity which I beseech you often to consider, and if you can, call it
often every day into your thoughts.

2. In order to this principle, remember that you have no right to live on
earth, but to love and serve God; for all that you have in the world, whereof
God has given you the use, he has put it into your hands, only to testify
his love, and to oblige you to love him: so that all things ought to serve you,
as motives to love him, who has bestowed them on you: For as God has created
nothing, which does not raise you to the knowledge of him, if you will consider
it: so has he made nothing, which does not attract you unto his love, and
fastens you to him, if you bring no opposition thereunto.

3. You know very well, that we are obliged to love God above all things, with
our whole heart and soul, etc. It is a Commandment which Jesus Christ calls
Maximum, the greatest, in as much as it compriseth all the duties of a soul
toward God; and if you can accomplish this, you will doubtless fulfill all
the rest. Wherefore esteem principally this Commandment: examine your self
seriously upon this point, and omit not to accuse your self of it in
Confession, whenever you fail therein.

4. As God does nothing but to oblige us to love him, so he demands nothing of
us but love. This moved the Apostle to say, that the whole law of God is
accomplished in loving God. Wherefore all your exercises ought to tend only
unto love: I mean, that all the practices of piety, all your desires, all your
prayers, and even the use of the Sacraments, ought to aim only at the placing
you in the love of God, to establish, conserve, and advance you therein.
Finally, you are to act nothing but by love, or for the obtaining the love of
God.

5. Consider this virtue, as the only happiness of your soul: for by charity
we adhere unto God, and are united and conjoined unto him: Nor can you be
ignorant, that all the good, and happiness of the soul, consists only in her
being united unto God, and adhering inseparably to him, because he that adheres
unto God, (says the Apostle) becomes one spirit. His meaning is, that Charity
invests us with divine properties, and makes us little Gods.

6. We should be very unfortunate, if God did not love us: Now he loves us
only, to the end we should love him, and in loving us, he can give us nothing
of greater value then love. For it is love only, which renders is* happy: It
is love only which gives us God, and unites us to him: Love only guides us
unto God. Briefly, it is by love only, that we become acceptable to God; and
nothing is agreeable to him, but what is done in love. See then what that soul
loses, which wants this love, and of how little account all exercises are
without this act of love.

7. All other virtues may be found amongst the good and bad, but Charity only
is the character and stamp of Gods children; Finally, she is the Queen, which
commands all the powers of the soul, and every thing obeyes her: And to speak
it in a word, she is the true virtue; for take away Love, and Charity, all that
is termed Virtue, is so but superficially and in appearance.

8. This is enough to affect you with the desire of acquiring Charity and
Divine Love. But to know how one may obtain it, and by what means we may
attain unto the possession of this happiness, is the subject wherewith I
intend to entertain you.

. II. Of the means to attain unto the love of God.
1. TO acquire Charity which we call Love, we must earnestly demand it of God;
besides, we ought frequently to desire it: Finally, we must labor seriously
therein, and act on our part what we are able. These are three points which I
am to explicate,

2. To affect God with a supernatural Love, is a pure gift of God: Wherefore I
advise you to beg it of him continually. And the first thing you are to ask of
him, is, that you may love him, as he would have you, conformable to your
obligation.

3. When I say continually, I mean that the most usual Prayer you are to make,
and the grace which you ought to demand still of God, is to have Charity and
Love: for if you possess this love, you have all, and if you want it,
whatsoever else you may have, is of no value, says the Apostle.

4. When you hear it so often mentioned, that we ought to perform acts of the
love of God, let not that produce a belief in you, that it is in our own
power, without grace, to love God with such a love as we owe him: For it is so
sublime a thing to love God, as it transcends all the power of Nature. It is
requisite, that God by his grace unite his power unto our whole faculties; to
enable us, to form one single act of the love of God. And indeed there is a
necessity of Gods giving us his grace, and love, for our loving him, because of
our selves we are unable to do it, without his assistance, and we render our
selves unworthy of it by our sins.

5. I will not then enjoin you to make often acts of the love of God; but say
only, that you must often request this love, and dispose your self to receive
it. And above all you are to annihilate in your soul, as much as you can
possibly, all that may divert God from giving you this love, or hinder the love
of God from reigning in your heart. This is the most important point; for to
implore the love of God, and to live quite contrary, is but to mock, and deride
him.

6. It is not enough to ask it of God, but you must likewise desire it
fervently: And surely I wish, that this desire may be great in your soul, that
it may be the powerfullest of all your inclinations, and the most lively
affection which reigns in you: For to desire love is a strong disposition unto
love. And truly one can hardly desire the love of God, without a present
concession of it.

7. Nay, I could wish for the benefit of your soul, that you had no other
desire, then to love God, and please him in all things, and that every moment
you did awaken in your self this desire of loving God. O what great things
would he operate in you! Surely your life would be pleasing, and all things out
of God indifferent to you. Endeavor that your exercises of piety and the most
usual occupations of your soul, even when you are distributing Alms, be with
an intention to increase this desire, to nourish and practice it. I mean that
all your employments, and exercises of virtue, should be either fruits of love,
or means to attain unto the love of God. Above all in the use of the
Sacraments I wish you to retain this pure intention; for if at any time you
are to seek the means of acquiring the love of God, it is by receiving the holy
Sacraments, principally that of Confession and Communion. Wherefore when you
Confess, and Communicate, endeavor that it may be always with this love, and
with an intention thereby to introduce the love of God.

8. It imports you very much, to have a good and pure intention in all that you
shall do. Now the Intention which I wish you always to have, is to act and
suffer all for the pure love of God; for God ought to be the object and end of
your life and actions. There are some who regard their proper interest, and do
every thing to the end they may merit. I do not condemn them, but I advise
not you to proceed in this manner; for it is a mercenary intention: I
contrariwise conjure you to do nothing, but for the pure love of God. If you
do all for God, God will do all for you; if you give all unto God, he will
give himself entirely unto you, and that ought to suffice you.

9. In few words, I desire that Charity and Love may be the object of all your
actions, the subject of your employments, and the most ordinary exercise of
your life and piety. Surely if you have a fervent desire to love God, all this
will be easy to you, and by the same degrees as this desire shall increase, by
the same you will advance in the love of God and Virtue.

10. It is not enough to demand and desire the love of God, you must cooperate
also in this point. I will recommend only two things unto you, and in my
opinion they will suffice.

11. The first is, that you be very careful to keep your conscience pure and
free from sin, and above all ingrave in your soul this disposition, which
ought to remain always in the center of your heart, to wit, that for no
worldly respect you offend God, and that neither the goods nor evils of this
life procure you to do any thing against the Commandments of God: My meaning
is, that neither the love nor fear of men, nor the world or mutual
complacency draw you to offend God, how little soever it be.

12. The other point which I would recommend unto you, is, the giving your
heart wholly unto God; for it is created only for him. By your heart I
understand your love, and I mean that you beware of fixing your self unto the
Creature by love and affection: And I intend by this Creature, the world,
temporal goods, and all earthly things.

13. I know very well, that you cannot live without love; but that which I
recommend unto you, is the remaining in the world, and in the use of creatures,
without placing your heart and affection on them: But since you ought to love
God, who is infinitely amiable, and commands you to love him above all things,
there is nothing difficult in this, which I propose to you; for there is
nothing sweeter or more facile then Love, and I only beg of you to prefer God
above all creatures: is there any thing more reasonable?

14. Remember this principle, which is always veritable, that a foul by the
same degrees she fastens her self by love unto the creature, by the same does
she loosen and separate her self from God; and as much as she sever's her self
from the creature, so much does she unite her self, and approach unto God.
Consider well this maxim, to reap profit by it; for if you will love God with
your heart, and if the desire which you have to love God, be sincere, you will
be very careful not to adhere unto any creature; which is all I recommend unto
you.

15. But in this point of the love of God, beware of being like unto the Jews
and Pharisees, who Fasted, Prayed, gave Alms, and bare on their foreheads, the
written Law of Moses; and yet their hearts were wholly alienated from God you
must needs understand my meaning without farther explanation.

19. Take heed also, that you resemble not those who speak much, and do little:
Finally, be not like unto the Samaritans, who adored Idols and the true God in
one and t^^ same Temple. To love God and the Creature both together, are things
incompatible; for true love is neither partial nor divided; but entire,
cordial, and perfect. Still call to mind, that the heart of man is created
wholly for God, And he ought to love God alone, or if he love any other thing,
let it be for? God, and in order to God.

17. I do not doubt, but that you will meet at first with some difficulties in
these practices, but do not think, that before the Judgment. of Almighty God,
you can be exempt from pain and labor: On the contrary you ought to animate
your self; for love and charity, which gives us God, and opens Paradise to us,
deserves well, that we labor seriously to acquire it, and that we be very
careful to conserve it, if God vouchsafe to bestow it on us.

18. To assist you in the acquisition of charity, or rather to dispose you to
receive it from the hand of God, I conceive it fit for you to practice the
three ensuing Acts, which I am going to set before you.

19. The first is, that you enter into the poor and simple thought of that love
and charity which Jesus Christ has for you, or else consider, how the Son of
God is all love: Then stay as little as you please upon this thought, adore in
your heart this love of Jesus with an humble respect. After this, you offer
your self unto Christ Jesus, and give your self entire to Him; open your heart
to Him, to the end he may infuse into it, the spirit of love, even as he
possesses the plenitude thereof, and according to the intention he has, that
you should love God.

20. The second is, that you renounce cheerfully all that diverts you from
loving God, and beseech Christ Jesus to indue you with a hatred, against all
that is opposite unto this love, or which may separate you from God.

21. The third is, that you resolve to be very circumspect, to avoid all that
hinders you from loving God. Now, nothing is a greater obstacle to it, then
mortal sin, and the love of Creatures. And to aid you herein, entertain
your self sometimes in thoughts which may produce love in you: At least,
endeavor as much as you may, that no day pass away without some spiritual
Lecture, which may encourage you in these practices of love and charity. You
may perform these three acts in the form which I am going to prescribe you.

22. My Lord, and my God! I adore you as the increated love; I give my self
unto your love, to bear the effects thereof, in what manner you shall please,
and I renounce all that is repugnant in me to the love which I owe you. Be
pleased, to gives me only the grace, that I may divest my self of all that is
opposite unto your love; and that henceforward, I may accept of nothing which
is averse unto it.

23. I particularly recommend unto you this last exercise, in as much as the
eternal Father bestows nothing on us, but by his Son, especially no Graces
and Virtues; And because our works have no other merit before God, then what
they receive from Jesus Christ, I say that in this exercise, you should give
and offer your self unto Christ Jesus, to the end he may bestow on you what is
necessary, and set on your works and good intentions, the price and value
which they are to bear in the sight of God: finally, that you may reduce into
act the desire you have of loving God.

24 Moreover when God is pleased to confer any grace on us, he would have us to
cooperate with it; and without this cooperation his gifts arc fruitless. Now
we begin to cooperate, when we give our selves unto Jesus Christ, to bear the
effects of the virtue which we desire of him, and when we renounce all that is
repugnant to it, These are the reasons which invite me so earnestly to
recommend unto you this exercise.

These are the few entertainments which I purpose to present unto you,
concerning the acquisition and practice of Charity. Let us treat now of Prayer.

OF PRAYER, AND Of the Presence of God. The second Entertainment.
. I. Concerning the Excellency of Prayer.
1. WE are all bound to pray; it is the duty of the Soul, it is a lesson which
Jesus Christ gave unto his Apostles and Disciples: it is the practice of the
Church, and the customs of all Christians: And God will have us to be sensible
o^ our infirmities and miseries, and acknowledge our poverty, to the end we
may resort unto him, and that he may be honored by our prayers.

2. Prayer is an entertainment and communication of the soul with God, and of
God with the soul: And in Prayer the soul elevates her self unto God and God
vouchsafes to descen^ unto the soul.

3. Prayer well made, is a mirror wherein the soul behold her self, and
where she find what she is; and sometimes she learnes thereby to know God and
begins to relish him.

4. Prayer obtaines all things for us; Prayer teaches all: It is finally the
food and aliment of the soul and so necessary, that as without natural meat
the body languisheth, so does the soul without Prayer.

. II. Of the Presence of God in Prayer.
1. I Advise you then to set your affection upon Prayer. There are two sorts
thereof, the one vocal, the other mental: I will not take from you vocal
Prayer, because it is very good, but indeed I counsel you not to charge and
oblige your self unto many vocal Prayers.

2 Nor will I oblige you unto mental Prayer, for few persons are capable of
entertaining the inselves with it: Nevertheless I conceive it useful, nay
necessary for you, to make choice every day of some point or verity of faith,
to meditate on it as long as you please.

3 It is an exercise which I propose to you as necessary: for, most certain it
is, that every one has need of recalling his spirit; and evidently your mind
is the more straying and distracted, the more you remain in the world.
Wherefore if you have any care of your salvation, you must strive to recollect
your soul, which is so much engaged in exterior things, as it may be said to
be scarce in your body.

4 Now the true means for recalling your soul, is to place your self every
day in the presence of God, and to remain some time in silence, taking some
good thought for your entertainment.

5 What time you shall make choice of, I leave unto your own convenience; at
least I advise you to take part of the holy Mass for your meditation, and to
employ it in this exercise; but do it with affection. As for the saying of your
Beads, or other vocal Prayers, you may find time enough. If I may be
credited, you will prefer this little recollection before all the rest; for
it is more important then it seems, and experience will teach it you if you
please.

6. What proportion of time you will employ therein, I leave unto your own
zeal and devotion; I beseech you only not to fail in taking every day some
good thought, and seriously to stay upon it, though it be but for some small
time, and if it be possible do this every morning. Affectionate your self
unto this exercise which is brief, and will prove more facile then you
imagine; however it is profitable for you, and I dare say in a manner necessary.

7. The subject which you are to take for your entertainment, shall be the
Passion of the Son of God, or the four final ends of man; sometimes Gods love
toward you, sometimes the vanity of all things; finally take some point of
Faith or of the Creed for your application.

8. The manner and method which you are to observe herein must be very
natural. I do not require to make use of reason or discourse, but of your
affection and will. Apply your whole heart unto it, and that suffices, procure
also that your attention therein be entire.

9. The first thing you must do, is to place your self in the presence of
God, because in all your prayers you speak with God, and treat of things of
great consequence; for you speak to him of the honor and love you owe him, and
you treat concerning your own salvation, and the benefits of your soul.

10 This exercise or practice of the presence of God is absolutely necessary
for you; for if you have a care of your salvation, and desire to live in the
fear of God, surely you ought to know how to keep your self continually in
the presence of God, remembering still, that in what place s^eve^ you are, God
sees and considers you, not exter^^lly only, but even into the center of your
heart. The presence of God is an exercise which detaines the soul, and
obliges her to act nothing which may be unworthy of God.

11. Moreover when you will pray, and what Prayer soever you make, were it but
saying the Pater noster, or your Beads, you still ought to do it with respect
and attention; for sure you cannot perform these Devotions as you ought, if
your spirit be not recollected. Now the means of recollecting your mind, is to
place your self in the presence of God: Wherefore I advise you to habituate
your self in this exercise, I mean, to place and keep your self often in
the presence of Almighty God.

12. You will say peradventure, that you are not able to fix your spirit: to
which I answer, that it is no good sign and for this reason you ought to pity
your self; For how can you hear well the holy Mass, say well your ordinary
prayers, use the Sacrament of Penance, or communicate as you ought, if you know
not how to setle your cogitation? see you not that this is to be sick indeed,
without discerning it? Now the practice of the presence of God (as I will
explicate it to you) is the true and only remedy for your disease.

13. It is a practice which is common and necessary for all good Christians,
who are willing to avoid sin, and preserve themselves in grace, or desire to
treat with God with that respect as becoms them, and this is what I desire,
that in the beginning of your prayer, you place your self attentively in the
presence of God.

14. You may do it in two manners. The first by imagination, when you recall
your mind and all the powers of your soul, and when you represent God unto your
self with a Majesty worthy God, and figuring to your self that you are
prostrated before the Throne of his infinite greatness, and that you remain
there to treat with him about the affairs of your soul, and what concerns
the service and worship which you owe him.

15. The other manner is by faith, and then you make no use of your
imagination, but having sweetly called back your soul into it self, you
conceive your self to be before God, whose greatness and Majesty is infinite
and incomprehensible; that this is the same God, whom the Angels and Saints do
serve and adore. You consider how faith teaches you, that this self same God
is every where; and he presides in the bottom and center of your soul with
the same Majesty, Power and Love, as he does in Heaven. Rest sometime upon this
thought, and if you can, procure to enter into your own heart, to adore God as
you conceive him to be there.

16. This last manner of considering the Presence of God, seems to me more
beneficial then any other, and has more force to recall our spirit, and to
bring back our soul into her self: it teaches us to seek God, not as far
distant from us, or in Heaven, but in our selves, and in the center of our
heart. And for this reason I advise you, to make often use of this exercise;
for I promise that you shall derive from it great advantages: And if you shall
persevere, you will make a little Paradise of your heart, and your soul will
perform on earth, what the Angels do in Heaven.

. III. A manner how to recollect ones self for mental Prayer.
1. AT the first entrance then into Prayer, place your self in the presence of
God conformably to the manner I have newly exhibited to you. And if this
thought of Gods presence possesses your soul, and retains you in great
attention, keep your self therein as long as you can, were it during the whole
Mass; and omit without scruple the rest of your devotions; for you enter not
into the Church, and apply not your self unto Prayer, but to remain before
God, to adore him with respect and humility, and to keep your self in his
presence as his devout servant. When you have attained unto this, rest content,
since God seems to be so with you: And in this case, you are to desire nothing
more, because you have all when God is satisfied.

2. And if this thought of Gods presence will not serve to entertain you any
long time, in that case, take presently some verity or mystery for your
meditation: For example, consider how Jesus Christ has loved you so much, as to
suffer death for you. Then pawse a while, how little soever you please, to
consider this benefit, strive only to ponder it with attention. And out of
this consideration endeavor to extract some little affection, or frame some
conference with God upon that which you considered. Now to the end it may prove
more facile to you, I prescribe at the end of this Book some Meditations upon
the principal points of the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will serve
you for a Model.

3. During the little time you shall employ in this manner of Prayer, if God
gives you some good inspiration or pious desire, do not neglect it, but hearken
unto God, and receive his grace and inspiration with respect and love. Resolve
to put in practice what God proposes to you, and give your self unto Christ
Jesus, and his holy Mother the Virgin Mary, to the end they may be pleased to
preserve in your soul the good desires which you feel; and supplicate them to
give you the grace to put them in practice, conformable to that manner which
God requires of you.

4. The profit which I would have you to make of this exercise, which I call
recollection of spirit, is, to establish and preserve your self in the fear
of God; to excite and advance your self in his love, and to induce in you a
hatred unto the vanity of the world. The virtues which you ought most to put in
practice, are humility of spirit, unadherence unto creaures, and the
mortification of the cupidities and passions of your soul.

5. Now what I have discoursed to you concerning the presence of God, in that
Prayer which we call Mental, you ought to practice in all your Vocal Prayers;
when you will begin to say your Beads, or the office of our blessed Lady, or
else when you prepare your self for Confession or Communion: Briefly, in all
your Devotions let the first thing you do, be the recalling of your mind, the
withdrawing it from all sorts of objects, and place your self in the presence
of God, in such a manner as I have proposed to you.

6. Chiefly when you come before God, be it in the Church or in your Oratory,
present your self always with a comportment full of respect, and strive to
place your self in an humble and Christian reverence; for you are in the
presence of God, before whom all the Grandeurs of heaven and earth are but
dust. Principally I recommend unto you the detestation of all petty
wantonnesses and levities, and all such effeminate fashions In a word, avoid
all affectation in the presence of God, before whom the Angels tremble, and
live only in a profound respect and reverence. You may now well judge how much
reason I have to condemn those complements which are used in the Church, those
curiosities and vain discourses. God preserve you from such disorders, which
oblige God to withdraw himself from the soul.

7. At the end of all your Prayers, and even out of Prayers as often as you
may, at the instant of your waking in the morning, I wish and desire you to
perform two things, which are very facile.

8. The one is to offer your self unto God, and to give your self to him, to
remain wholly his, in conformity to his holy will: The other is, to renounce
your self, and all that leads you unto evil, or diverts you from doing that
good which God requires of you: is for example, you may say or mediate on these
words; My God and my Jesus, I offer my self unto you as my Lord, on whom I will
depend all my life time; and I renounce all that severeth me from you, and may
divert me from following and fulfilling your holy will.

9 But still remember, that God is not content with words, he will have the
heart, and requires effects: Wherefore endeavor to put in practice all that I
have proposed to you, in these few entertainments, and above all, exercise your
self in the practice of such virtues as God shall inspire you; for he will
exact an account of all the graces which he conferres on you, and of all the
occasions which he presents unto you of doing good.

OF CONFESSION, AND COMMUNION. The third Entertainment.
. I.
I. THere remains one thing to tell you, but it is of consequence; and I wish
that I were able to fix it in the bottom and center of your heart. It relates
unto Confesion and Communion. I will entertain you with it, because I very
much apprehend, that there are great abuses committed therein and I fear that
in so holy and divine a thing we are often too profane.

2. By the Sacrament of Confession, it is certain, that we desire to return
into Gods favor; we seek to be re-established in the charity which we have
lost by mortal sin, and which we cannot repossesse but by Penance. And
though we be free from mortal sin, we yet desire by Penance to remove the
other sins, which freeze charity, breed a languishing in the soul, debilitate
and expose her unto greater danger. And then we go unto Confession, to renew
our selves in love, and to remove these sins, and all that may be opposite unto
love and charity.

3. In the holy Communion we receive Jesus Christ as ours; for he appertains
to us, and the same Jesus gives himself unto us in this divine and adorable
Sacrament, to honor us with his presence, to enrich us with his gifts, and
above all to confer on us his love. In fine, it is a Sacrament all of love;
it is a pledge of the love which Jesus Christ bears us, and a commerce of
love between Jesus Christ and men.

4. Now if you consider in this order these two great Sacraments, does it not
seem just and reasonable, that we receive them with estimation, holily, and
with a spirit of love, since both of them are holy, both of them confer
charity and the love of God upon us; both of them unite us unto God, when we
come to them, as we ought, with fitting and congruous dispositions.

5. For this reason I could wish, that when you go unto Confession or
Communion, it may be still accompanied with a sense of love, and a serious
recollection of your soul. Beware of going to them by custom, and of
performing so holy and divine actions indifferently, I mean without a good and
fitting disposition, for it would turn to your prejudice.

6. That which I require of you is to retain always a pure intention of
seeking God only, and demanding nothing but love. Let it be your desire to
forsake those vices and sins, whereof you seek to obtain remission by
Penance. Be you sorrowful for having committed, because sin is displeasing to
God, and opposite unto him, whom we desire to love. Finally, I wish that all
the motives which you shall have in receiving the Sacraments, may be always
with respect to the love which God has toward you, and of the love which you
owe unto God; for let men say what they please, since in the receiving the
Sacraments of Penance and of the Eucharist, you seek nothing but the love of
God and charity, surely it is reasonable, that you go to them with as much love
as you can possibly: This is that whereunto I invite you.

7. I do not say that fear is not good, useful and often necessary but I say
that fear ought to serve here only for the recalling of your soul, and
directing her unto love. It ought to be like the servant which opens the gate
unto charity, to introduce it into your heart. Take then the motives of fear,
if you have need of them; but stay not upon this fear, but pass unto love,
still calling to mind, that in these two Sacraments you seek the friendship
of Almighty God: Thus much touching Penance: and in the Eucharist you ask and
receive God only, who is love and charity.

8. In the Communion it is requisite to have fear, accompanied with a profound
reverence, and humble respect. An Angelical devotion and attention is required
therein; for this mystery is full of Majesty, since God is there present, whom
we intend to receive. But much more love is required therein; for whatsoever
we consider, there nothing but objects of love appear to us, and nothing is
to be found there, that is not as a band, which ought to fasten and unite us
unto God.

9 It is not my design to entertain you with prescribing you instructions for
the reception of these two Sacraments, since you have so many Books which
treat of it: I will only say, that if ever you stand in need, of all the
Entertainments which I have newly given you, it ought to be in the reception of
these two Sacraments, which are two fountains of love and mercy: For love and
recollection by the presence of God (as I have explicated) serve us for a
disposition to prepare us to receive worthily the Sacrament of Penance and the
Eucharist.

I beseech our Lord Jesus Christ, who came into this world, to establish
therein the Kingdom of charity, and to bring thither the fire of his love, and
who died on the Cross to draw us unto God, and withdrawn from death, the world
and sin, that he will vouchsafe to give us the grace to feel and he are the
effects of his Cross; I beseech him to consume us in the flames of his love,
and to fasten us so indissolubly unto himself, as we may never more sever our
selves from him, but that he would place us rather in a happy inability of
offending him, and in a more blessed servitude, never more to estrange and
separate our selves from him, nor to act any thing but for his fake. Amen.

MEDITATIONS Upon the Principal Mysteries of the Passion of JESUS CHRIST.
PREFACE.
IT is a great happiness for a man to be able to entertain himself with God,
and to speak to him as often as he desires. He may do it by vocal and mental
Prayer, wherein he treats with his God. It is a favor which Jesus Christ has
acquired for him; for it is by him (says the Apostle) that we have access
unto God: I call it a favor, in as much as man having severed himself from
God by sin, and being expelled out of his presence and banished from his
amiable company, the Son of God came into the world to expiate sin, and to
establish both in heaven and earth, a new alliance between God and Man.

One of the means which Jesus Christ himself has left us to preserve our
selves in this happy alliance, and the way which he has pointed out to bring
us near unto God is Prayer: for by Prayer we enter into society with God, we
entertain our selves with him, we elevate and unite our selves unto him, and
treat with him of the ineffable Grandeurs of his Divinity, of che effects of
his incomprehensible goodness, of the necessities and miseries of our life;
finally, by a holy commerce we speak to God, and God vouchsafes to speak to us.

There are an infinity of objects, upon which the soul may entertain her self
with God, and form her meditations; for as God is an inexhaustible sea of
greatness, so is he the object of an infinite entertainment unto a Christian
soul: But the most reasonable, most profitable, and easiest subject, wherein
our Spirit may employ it self, is the life, and death, the depressions, and
humiliations, the torments, and sufferances of Jesus Christ.

For as much as in the mysteries of the Passion, and in all the moments of the
life and death of Jesus, the soul discerns therein the excessive love which
God bears us: In the sufferings and ignominies of the Cross, she conceives
the weight of sin, and the punishments which our crimes do merit: And
considering what Jesus Christ has done, what he has said, and his holy and
adorable Virtues in all the mysteries of his death, she learns thereby the
Virtues which she ought to practice, and the way which she is to follow, to
attain unto the glory which Jesus Christ himself has acquired for her, at the
price of life and precious blood.

It is for this reason, devout Reader, that having undertaken to present you
with Entertainments conformable to the common life of all Christians, I have
added the Meditations upon the principal mysteries of the death of the Son
of God, to the end you may make use of them for your advancement in the love
and fear of God, and that by often considering them, you may learn to imitate
his Virtues, and place your glory and affiance in the death of Christ Jesus.
Would to God you could say with S. Paul, I will no longer glory, but in the
Cross of my Jesus, I will place my content and love therein; I will follow him
in the Cross, that I may possess him in glory. This is that which I desire of
you with my whole heart; and I wish that the death of the Son of God, may be
the Spirit and life of your soul.

The Prayer of JESUS in the Garden.
Point I.
COnsider the love which God the Father bears you, depriv^ng his Son of joy
and glory, to invest him with sorrow, and load him with pains and reproaches,
exposing him unto the rigors of tin divine Justice for the expiation of your
offenses. Desire ardently, that this self same spirit of love may divest you
of all vanity, self-love, and your own private interest.

A Prayer to the eternal Father.
I Adore your goodness, O eternal Father, and the love which invited you to
give me your Son, to set him in the opprobriousnesse of the Cross, and to
victimate him in the sufferances of an ignominious death, that he might be my
Savior, and my Jesus. The love which you bear me has been the cause that
you have not spared your own Son, but have clothed him with our infirmities,
and laden him with the confusion and pains which I have merited to undergo
for my offenses. After so great a benefit, is it not just for me to love you?
How happy should I be (O God of mercy) if you would fill my heart with this
love! how happy should I be, if you would consume me in the flames of this
divine fire! It is all that I desire, and a grace which I ask of you above all
the graces which you can give me. Grant then, O God of goodness, that I
unloofe my self from all other love, to love you alone; grant that the power
of your love may strip me of all vanity, and annihilate my self-love; to the
end, loving nothing but you, I may live only for you.

Point II.
BEhold how the Son of God lies prostrated on the ground, bearing the weight
and confusion of the sins of the whole world, and in this sort he is made the
object of the anger of God. You have your part therein by reason of your sins,
beg then of him the engraving in your soul, a desire and ability to satisfy
for your offenses, and the granting you a true contrition for your sins.

PRAYER.
ALas what shall I do! for if my Jesus, who is the Power of Heaven, if my
Jesus, who is the virtue of God, falls and remains under the weight of my
offenses, what will become of me? and how shall I bear them, when dying I
shall be presented before the Tribunal of the justice of a God, whom I have so
often irritated? What shall I do (O God of mercy) but endeavor to prevent the
day of your Justice, and from henceforth begin to satisfy by a holy Penance,
for all the sins which I have committed, ungrateful, and mserable wretch
that I am! I heartily desire it, but am unable to effect it without your grace:
Assist me then (O God of love and goodness) bestow on me a true contrition for
my offenses; Break my heart with grief, melt my heart in your love, liquifie
my soul in Charity, fill my will with a hatred of sin, and grant me the
grace never more to offend you. It is what I desire with my whole heart, to the
end I may give my self entirely to you, and renounce my self and all
creatures, which sever me from you.

Point III.
BEhold in this mystery the love of Jesus, who exercises the power and rigours
of it upon his own person: this love abaseth him even unto our sorrows, and
oppresses him with pains and attristations so violently, as he enters into an
agony, even to sweat blood in ahundance; he suffers all this, to invest you
with his virtue, and cleanse you with his Blood. This love is what you ought to
ask often of him, and with great humility.

PRAYER.
CAn it possibly be, O my Jesus, that you should love me even to such a degree,
as I consider you in this mystery, and I not love you? Can I be so insensible
as to see you languishing and suffering for my sins, and not abandon them?
Alas my Savior, can I endure to see you bathed in your own blood, and covered
over with so painful a sweat, by the horror which you conceive of my
offenses? Can I have the heart to behold you in the rigours which the Justice
of your Father exercises on you for my sins; and that considering you in so
pitiful a state, I should not conceive a horror of my pravitie, and a
detestation of my offenses? No, no, Lord, I will hate my self to love you, I
will detest all vice for your sake, and never more will I offend you: and for a
mark of my desire, I give you my heart, I offer you my soul, I dedicate to
you my life, and renounce all that is displeasing to you to the end I may no
longer offend you, but live in all things conformable to your holy will. This
is the intention and desire of my soul, but it will be fruitless if you
stretch not out your arm, and give me not your grace to accomplish them. This
is what I beg of you, prostrated in your presence, humbly imploring your
divine Mercy.

The taking of JESUS in the Garden.
Point I.
JESUS suffers himself to be taken, and deprives himself of his power, who
was able to annihilate his enemies, to the end that being made captive for us,
he might have right to place us in the freedom of grace. In imitation of
Jesus, who suffered himself to be made a captive for you, resolve never to
make use of your own power, when there shall be any occasion of suffering for
the glory of God.

PRAYER.
I Do not doubt (my Savior) of your power, but I admire your love, which
triumphs over you, and works so great a miracle on your self; for love
captivates your strength, restraines your power, and reduces you into a state
of impotency and weakness, to the end you may be capable of suffering for me,
poor and wretched creature that I am. Who will not be ravished in the thought
of this love? And who will not remain astonished that God suffers for man, the
just for the sinner. And thus you do, benign Jesus, in this mystery which I
contemplate. Now for this love, which you express toward me, and which
renders you captive, to set me at liberty, what else can I do, but cast my
self with heart and spirit at your feet, and become an humble suitor that your
love may render me his captive; that it may triumph over my heart, to the end
being denuded of all things, I may become for ever the slave of your love.
Grant that it may be so, my Jesus, since it is both my duty and desire.

Point II.
JESUS perseveres in the humiliations and sufferances of his captivity,
remaining in the midst of executioners in silence, without plaints, without
strength or power. In imitation of him affect such things as humble you, and
administer occasion of sufferance, and propose to your self never to reject
them.

PRAYER.
SInce I see you (O sweet Jesus) in the midst of executioners, exposed unto
their malice, and that in this mystery you abandon your self unto all sorts
of confusions, and to the false accusations of sinners, appearing as criminal
in the midst of these miscreants: what less can I do, Lord, then annihilate
my self in your presence, and humble my self in imitation of you in the view
of all creatures. And if in the various states of your life you embraced
humility only, and made choice of nothing but confusions, if you who are alone
worthy of honor and respect, despised the Grandeurs of the earth, and the
vain contentments of this world, to live and die only in depressions and
sufferances. Finally, if you (O benign Jesus) who are the only Son of God,
were pleased to become an object of scorn and contempt of men; alas what do I,
miserable wretch, deserve to be, and what rank shall I hold in the world, I who
am a sinner, criminal and unworthy of all things? Surely (my sweet Jesus) I
heartily condemn my pride, and do protest that with my whole affection
assisted by your holy grace, which I implore, I resolve from henceforth to
affect lowliness, and endure for your sake, all the humiliations, and Crosses
of this life: And why shall I refuse humbly to suffer them for your sake, since
you have endured them so holily for mine. I offer my self then unto you for
that effect, and I abandon my self with my whole heart unto your divine
conduct; grant only that I may be such as you require me to be.

Point III
ACknowledge the strange abasement of Jesus, who permits men to bind and lead
him captive, and to touch him with their profane hands, who is the Holy of
Holies: He offers his sacred mouth to receive the kiss of Judas his greatest
enemy. Offer your self unto him, to bear all the contradictions of men, and
the contempt of all creatures, and demand of him even love for your enemies, if
you have any.

PRAYER.
YOur life and the diverse mysteries of your passion, your labors and
sufferances, O my Savior, give me a lesson, and teach me what I am to do; but
how shall I do it, and how can I imitate you, if you lend me not your hand, if
you prevent and affist me not with your grace? For my perverted heart, and my
proud nature oppose themselves wholly to you, and contest against all that you
propose unto me. I see, my Lord, I see how you offer your sacred mouth to
receive of Judas the kiss of Treason; how you present your hands, and abandon
your adorable body to the rage of Devils, and to the malice of men and
sinners, to dispose of you and your life in whatsoever cruelty could suggest
unto them. Alas! who is able (O my sweet Jesus) to imitate you? I fervently
desire it, but acknowledge my own impotency; for I feel contradiction in my
self, and tremble at this thought: However leave me not ( O Savior of my
soul) in case I am not able to imitate you in all things, at least let me do
it in what I may, and I can do much if you give me your grace. Open then my
eyes, that I may discern what I am, change my heart, that it may affect what
you love, and animate my spirit humbly to endure all contempts and confusions.
All that I am now able to do in the presence of your Sovereign Majesty, is to
accuse my malice, to condemn my pride, and to offer unto you my will, my heart
and soul, to order them as you please. Succor my infirmity, fortify my
weakness, break my obstinacy, and by the fire of your love, be pleased to
consume all my iniquity.

JESUS is fastened, and scourged at the Pillar.
Point I.
SHead you not tears of love and compassion, beholding Jesus the Beauty of
Heaven, and the Glory of Paradise, exposed to the cruelty of barbarous men,
fastened all naked to a Pillar, to make you a bath of his blood, and to cleanse
the stains of your soul? Give him thanks, and render him tears of love and
contrition, for the blood which he has given you in this mystery.

PRAYER.
MY Jesus, Grant that my heart may break with grief, and my soul dissolve in
your love; for you oblige me to it by your benefits. And to say truly, who can
choose but love you, seeing that by the excess of the love which you bear us,
you have exposed your self to the rage of Devils, and to the malice of
sinners? And why shall I not break my heart asunder with sorrow and contrition,
since by my offenses I am the occasion of the pains which you suffer? How far
more just were it (O Savior of the world) that you should remain in your
Glory, in the Throne of your greatness, and that I (who have rendered my self
the slave of sin, and of my passions) should be fastened to this Pillar, and
torn with the scourges of your justice! But since your love is content to make
payment for me, grant that I may love you as I ought, and no longer offend
you. This is my intention I desire it with my whole heart, and I beg it of you
with an entire affection.

Point II.
CHrist Jesus upon the Pillar, put on the condition of a slave and criminal,
to bear the effects of the rage of Devils and men. He remains there, in the
midst of them, like a Lamb victimated and abandoned of his Father, deserted by
his Apostles, and afflicted by all creatures. Compassionate this state of
Jesus, and beg of him, that from henceforth you may remain abandoned, and
resigned unto all that he shall ordain.

PRAYER.
A Las! my Jesus, I have made the debt, and you have paid it, it is I, it is I
who am guilty, and you are punished; it is I, unhappy that I am; who have
irritated Heaven, and rendered my self unworthy of all your favors. I both
know and confess, that I deserve nothing but hell, and for my sins to be
sacrificed unto the divine Justice which I have so often contemned: but your
goodness which seeks nothing but my Salvation, by a prodigy of love, makes an
admirable exchange: For you enter (O Savior of my Soul) into my condition, and
loading your self with my offenses, you are now victimated like an innocent
Lamb, and left to the Justice of God, abandoned on all sides, and plunged into
to all sorts of sufferances. What less can I do (O my Jesus) in recognition
of this love, then adore your goodness, and abandon my self entirely to you,
to be what you please. I give my self then unto this mystery, and offer my
self unto you to bear the effects thereof in such a manner as you desire.

Point III.
THe Body of Jesus is covered all over with wounds from the very head to the
feet, and exhausted of blood and strength. Consider that the wounds and drops
of blood you see on it, are as so many tongues which enunciate to you his love,
and teach you how you ought to love him in humiliations and sufferances. Offer
unto him your life, your body and blood, never to employ them, but for his
glory.

PRAYER.
I Am yours, O good Jesus: my soul, my life, my body and blood are no longer
mine, but yours: in respect that for my sake you make a profusion of your own
blood, you abandon your body unto wounds and sufferances, your soul and life
you give to me upon the Cross: After all these graces and favors shall I not
be yours? No, no, Lord, all these drops of blood which you shed, and all the
wounds of your body, are so many tongues which condemn my ingratitude, and
invite me to your love. I am willing to love, and from this very instant and
for ever I desire to be wholly yours, and resolve to love nothing but you
alone. Bruise, bend, break and oppress my soul, if you please, combat my
life with a thousand afflictions, make me suffer as long as you please, yet
will I never utter any other words, then that I am yours, and that I love you
alone.

JESUS is crowned with Thorns.
Point I.
THe love which Jesus bears us, exercises on him the power and rigours
thereof: love places him amongst thorns, and even death it self: love
exposes him unto mockeries, spittings, buffets, and the contempt of his
enemies. Consider all this, and beg of Jesus, that the selfsame love may
exercise on you the power thereof. Offer your self unto all the effects which
he shall vouchsafe to produce in your soul, be it in the thorns of Penance,
or in the death of your vices and earthly affections.

PRAYER.
O How happy should I be, if your love would once take Empire over my heart!
Let not the fault be mine; for I desire it, I seek it, and offer my self
wholly to you to bear the effects thereof. Grant then, Lord, grant speedily,
that the power of your love may deeply wound my soul. In loving you nothing
will be difficult, for me, in this world; for if love has clothed you (O good
Jesus) with our miseries, and laden you with our sins; if love has fastened
you on the Cross, what will it not work on me, if it reign there and
exercise his power? Then would it be that I should truly die unto my self, to
live in you, that I should despise all things to love you alone, and that
stimulated by this love, I should satisfy for my past crimes never more to
commit the like. But when will that blessed hour arrive, that I shall love
nothing but you? It is high time, and I implore it of you; Be pleased then not
to deny me this grace, (my good Jesus) since you refuse me not your own life:
deprive me of all things if you please, provided that I love you.

Point II.
IN this mystery Jesus covers his greatness, and veiles his Majesty, in
contempts and mockeries; and by a miracle of love, he renders himself capable
of suffering the sharpest points of thorns, filthy and unclean spittings;
blows and buffets, which bruise his body and face; and by this holy artifice,
which love has contrived, he triumphs over the Devil and sin. Open your
heart unto this Jesus, that he may place there the throne of his love, and
triumph over your malice, and all the impure love which may reside in you.

PRAYER.
CAn I possibly behold you my Jesus) covered with spittings, bruised with
blows, crowned with thorns, and your body pierced with all sorts of dolors,
and not dissolve into tears, but remain insensible at the sight of so sad a
spectacle! Permit it not, O God of love, rather pierce my heart with grief,
and give me the grace to have a sense of what you suffer for me. Grant me this
favor, that I may bear the effects thereof; for it is not just that your
sacred body should be immersed in sorrow, and your adorable head crowned with
thorns, whilst I bathe my self in pleasures, or crown my self with Roses,
living always amongst delights: I rather wish, and would gladly implore, if I
had love enough, that I might no longer affect any creature, and that nothing
might afford me contentment, but that I might find wormwood every where, and
every thing prove distasteful to me, to the end I may take no delight, but in
you alone. This is what I aspire to, but I have not force enough to practice
it, nor sufficient love to ask it. There remains one only desire on my part,
that I may give my self entirely to you, to suffer whatsoever shall suit with
your good pleasure.

Point III.
JESUS in his Passion practiceth all sorts of virtues, to merit them for us, by
the actual exercise of them, to leave them unto us by way of testament, and to
bring them into esteem with the world, which contemns and rejects humility,
patience, poverty, and all sufferances. Address your self unto Jesus Christ,
to desire of him the love of his virtues, and the grace to be able to practice
them in such a degree as he requires of you.

PRAYER.
YOu have promised me (O my God) by your Prophet, to engrave your love in the
midst of my heart, and to imprint it in the center of my soul: I summon you in
order to your promise, for I offer unto you my heart opened, and commit into
your hands my soul and spirit, to receive of you the motions of grace, and the
impressions of your law: But what is this law which you give me, but the
imitation of your life, and of the virtues which you have been pleased to
practice on earth? For you had no need, my Lord, of this great poverty which I
discern in your birth, of the patience which you show in your torments, of the
obedience which sets you on the Cross, of meekness in the midst of your
enemies, nor of the humility and contempt of the world which is manifested in
all your life: But you have subjected your self unto all this, not only for my
salvation, but also to teach me both by words and actions, the virtues which
you affect, the way which I am to follow to obtain salvation, and the life
which I ought to lead, to become the most acceptable to you. In this sort, your
life and virtues, O Jesus, are the square of my actions, and the rules which I
am to follow. Grant me then the grace, that I may know them to esteem them,
that I esteem them to love them, and that I love them to practice them, in such
sort as you require of me: For I am well assured that I shall have no share in
your glory, if I do not imitate your virtues, and shall not partake of your
triumphs, if I bear not a part in your combats.

Ecce Homo.
Point I.
SEe the extreme confusion and contempt unto which Jesus is exposed, since his
own people prefer a notorious Robber before him, condemn him to the Cross,
and demand his death, to give life to a Malefactor. O blindness of humane
Spirit, which makes more account of Terrene, then Heavenly things, which
honors Barabas to reject Jesus. Deplore this unhappiness; and beseech the
same Jesus never to permit that humane respects or complacency, may ever cause
you to prefer men before God, or the Creature before the Creator.

PRAYER.
LOrd, I blush for shame and confusion, seeing the little account is made of
you; that they condemn you unto the Cross to give life to a Thief, and
reject you to receive Barabbas. Nevertheless, this is done in your Passion:
and at present (O unhappy soul) I find even that in my self, which I condemn
in the Jews; for alas! God of goodness, how often in my life have I rejected
your grace, to obey the cupidities of my heart? How often through a damnable
blindness have I endeavored to satisfy my self, and please the Creature
against your intentions? Finally how often have I preferred the Earth before
Heaven, men before God* and my own private contentment, before your holy will?
It is high time (O Savior of my soul) that I acknowledge my fault, that I
change my life, and open my eyes, to discern how the world is nothing to me
and that you are my All. I confess my crime, I accuse my infidelity, and
condemn both my life and all my actions past: Be pleased (O good Jesus) to give
me a true repentance of them, and grant that my heart may break with sorrow,
and my eyes distill fountains of tears to expiate all my offenses; for I
desire (my Jesus) to satisfy your love, and to live under your Laws.

Point II.
THe Son of God abaseth his holy and adorable humanity, to become the
reproach of men, the refuse of his people, and the object of their scorn and
derision; And he truly says, I am a worm of the earth. At the sight of your
Jesus dissolve into humility, and affect rather to be low and humble with the
humble Jesus, then great and honored with Pilate.

PRAYER.
IF you say that you are but a worm of the earth, the reproach of men, and the
refuse of the people, what must I be, my Jesus? For it is just, that I should
be much less then your self? If you hold so low a rank amongst men, who are
the Son of God, what place shall I find, who am but a sinner, a child of
Adam, and unworthy of your grace? O how much constrained do I now find my self
to confess, that I am nothing, and worthy of contempt and confusion? I
confess that I am too blame, and elevate my self above reason, when I desire
to be esteemed and honored by men. Wherefore in view of the contempt, which
you endure, I purpose to alter my course of life, and to imitate you if I can,
and with this resolution I cast my self at your feet, O my Jesus! I adore your
profound humility; I implore the power of this virtue to come upon me, and I
give my self entirely to you, to bear the effects thereof, in such sort as to
you shall seem good. I know very well that I ought to affect humiliations,
confusions, and contempts; I know that they are my portion; they are the most
conformable to my state, since I am a sinner. But my perverted spirit and quite
corrupted nature is averse thereunto: Nevertheless Lord, I will love you;
succor only my weakness, annihilate my aversions, and fortify my will, that
I may put in practice the good resolution which I have taken in your presence.

Point III.
JESUS bears the Rigours, Dolours, and Humiliations, which our sins have
merited. It is for this cause, he presents himself unto the people, to suffer,
and unto his Father, to satisfy his justice. Cast your self at his feet (O my
soul) and say affectionately, Behold the man, whom I seek; for he is my
Jesus, my Savior, and my All; I see him, I embrace him, and I resolve, that he
shall be my King, and reign alone in my heart.

PRAYER.
AT the sight of what you act and suffer for me, O my Jesus, I remain
distracted, and fall into a kind of rapture; for what am I Lord? And what need
have you of me, that you should seek my salvation at the cost of so many
labors? What is there in my soul capable of inviting you to offer your self
unto your Father, to appease by your torments his Justice which I have
irritated by my offenses? Surely is is nothing but love, which (exercising the
power and rigor thereof) made you become man, and suffer death for me. O Love,
how powerful art thou, since thou have reduced my Jesus into state wherein I
contemplate him, in his life and death! O Love how strong is thine arm, since
thou have drawn my Jesus from the Throne of his glory, to place him in
humiliations, and to subject him to so many pains? Love, if thou have power
over my God, must not thou have it over my heart? No, there is no means to
withstand it; whatsoever it costs, I must love him, who has loved us more then
his own life, who in giving himself, requires nothing but our love. I resign
my self then unto you (o Love of my Soul) to love you with my whole heart:
Grant only, if you please, that I may love nothing but you; for you both
command and oblige me to love you: I am content, but unable to do it, without
your grace. Effect then this work in me, of loving you, and loosen my heart
from all earthly affections, to the end I may entirely unite my self to you:
And be pleased to give me a holy inability, which may render me incapable of
severing my self from you, and of loving any other.

JESUS carries his Cross.
Point I.
COnsider the hunger and insatiable thirst, the extreme love and desire, which
Jesus has to suffer for us, having never said, It is enough, nor refusing any
torments which are inflicted on him, allowing all persons to torture him. Ask
of Jesus, that he would vouchsafe to estrange you from the pleasures of the
world, and admit no longer any repugnancy in your self, to endure for his sake.

PRAYER.
O Amiable Jesus! How just is it that I now confess the excess of your love,
and acknowledge the mercies which you show me; for you are not satisfied in
purchasing me, by the profusion of your blood, and appeasing the divine Justice
by your death, but excited by the love which you bear me, and by a desire of
my salvation, you expose your self to all sorts of confusions; and by a divine
patience, you refuse no tortures, and shun no pains, which impiety invents to
make you suffer. At the sight of so much goodness, and at the object of your
virtues, what can I do less, whereby I may become the most acceptable to you,
then imitate your life, and embrace with you, all crosses and sufferances? For
I know you have said of it, that he is unworthy of you, who bears not his
cross with you, and refuses to follow you. I purpose then (O Savior of my
soul) I purpose willingly to follow you, and (renouncing my own pleasures)
sufferance shall be my only love and delight. I cannot effect it without your
grace; be pleased therefore to bestow it on me; for without you I can do
nothing, and with you I am enabled to do all things.

Point II.
JESUS laden with his Cross, sinkes under the burden, not of the heaviness
of the wood, but under the weight of our offenses, wherewith he charged
himself before the Justice of his Father; And in view of the whole world, he
carries the confusion and contempt which our crimes have merited. Beg of him
the spirit and gift of Penance, to the end taking part in the satisfactions of
Christ Jesus, you may endeavor in some measure by your self to satisfy God,
whom you have so often offended.

PRAYER.
MY Jesus, give me light to discern the weight of sin; the grace to detest
it, as it deserves, and love to become repentant as I ought; for I intend,
Lord, to do Penance. I know that you have suffered for me, and that you died
to give me life, and to associate me to the number of your children: And true
it is, that all that you have done was only to obtain pardon for my offenses,
and to satisfy for the pain due unto my crimes; finally it is true, Lord,
that your merits are infinite: But yet, it is likewise just, and you give it me
in command, that I alter my course of life, and do Penance to sati fie your
divine Justice; for otherwise I cannot partake of the satisfaction of your
Cross, nor of the merits of your sufferings. Be pleased then to bestow on me
the spirit of Penance, and the zeal of your Justice, that I may exercise it on
my self. But vouchsafe to give it me from this instant, for fear lest I be
surprised, and (excepting the hour of death, and the day of vengeance) I find
my self unworthy of mercy. I desire to prevent, lest I be prevented. It is a
blessing which depends on you, and which I beg of you with my whole heart.

Point III.
COnsider the humiliation which Jesus has borne in the thoughts and judgments
of men, who esteemed him stricken and reproved, condemned and abandoned even of
God himself, judging him worthy of all the torments which he endured. Render
him thanks for supporting all this, in satisfaction for the pride of men, and
from henceforth strive to affect humility, and learn to despise the vain
judgments which may be made of you.

PRAYER.
ALl the sins of men (O amiable Jesus) are the cause of your death; but
pride, which is the mother of all sins, is the principal occasion thereof.
For if you came into the world to ruin and annihilate the Kingdom of death,
and the empire of sin, much more did you come, to combat the pomp of the
world, and to destroy the pride of men. It was to this end you were borne, and
lived so poor and abject: It was for this end, that you died in the midst of
so many confusions, laden with so many reproaches; it was to condemn pride,
that your whole life, your sufferings and death were only in humiliations:
Since them (O Lord) you neither lived nor died but to condemn pride, which is
the spring of all miseries, I condemn it with you, and detest it for your
sake. Be pleased to root out of my heart, and to ingrave in my soul the love
of humility. And as in this mystery you abandon your self to the false
judgments of men, who esteem you worthy all the tortures which you endure; so
vouchsafe to give me the grace, that for the combating my pride, I may affect
contempt, and despise the false judgments of men. And for the completement of
my blessing, I beg of you, that I may partake of the grace and spirit of your
Passion, and that you will be pleased to form in me your dispositions, your
actions and sufferings: for I shall assuredly reign with you, if I become like
unto you.

JESUS is nailed unto the Cross
Point I.
PIlate abandoneth Jesus to the will and malice of sinners, and Jesus himself
became obedient in every thing, even to the death of the Cross. He is
delivered up to the Jews, and Gentiles, to be nailed and fastened to this
ignominious piece of wood, in such sort as they shall ordain. Adore Jesus, who
satisfies by his obedience for the disobedience of sinners, and learn to love
obedience, and to prefer the will of God before all things, of this world,
even before your own life.

PRAYER.
O My Savior and my God! I remain not in this world, but to fulfill your holy
will; all my happiness depends on this point, and the perfection of my soul
consists in this virtue; hitherto both Heaven, Earth, the Elements, and all
Creatures, in obeying you, teach me what I ought to do: But the death of my
Jesus (o Eternal Father) and his obedience in all the mysteries of his
Passion, evidenceth to me that I ought to prefer your holy will, before my
own contentments, my private interest, and even life it self; that I must
fear neither contempts nor sufferances, nor even labors in all occasions,
which concern that obedience, which I owe your Sovereign Majesty; for if your
Son has abandoned himself to an ignominious death, if he has given his
adorable feet and hands to be cruelly nailed unto a Cross, and if he subjected
himself to the will of sinners, and executioners, what can I do less from
henceforward, then learn of my Jesus, the obedience, which I owe to all that
you require of me? In honor then of the obedience of your Son, and in homage
to this virtue which he has practiced, rendering himself obedient even to the
death of the Cross, I give my self unto you, (O Father of mercy!) and
acknowledge my self your Creature and Vassal, and I purpose faithfully to
obey you, and to live under the laws of your Empire. Do not permit Lord, if
you please, that I ever prove rebellious to you, or that to fulfill my own
will I forsake yours; but by an effect of the Mystery which I contemplate,
grant that I prefer your holy will before all earthly things, and even my
own life; for such is my desire.

Point II.
BEhold the submission wherein Jesus the King of glory, vouchsafes to place
himself, for our sins; when as with a profound silence he submits to the
Judges, to the Executioners and his Enemies: And he even abandoneth himself to
the power of Devils, obeying so humbly and readily when they go about to
uncloath him, to nail and fasten him to the Cross. Subject your self for his
sake, as much as you may, chiefly when there shall be occasion of being
humbled, or suffering any thing for the honor of God.

PRAYER.
GIve me the grace, O God of love and goodness! to know you, and understand my
self; for if you impart unto me this light, and affect me with a sense of this
verity, it will be easy for me to annihilate my self in the presence of your
Sovereign Majesty: it will be no longer uneasy for me to condemn and
confound my self, considering the little love I bear you, and it will be
facile for me to suffer contempts, humiliations, and the Crosses of this
present life: For (O benign Jesus) I see you all naked in the midst of most
cruel Executioners, stretched out upon this ignominious wood of the Cross;
and if you, who are the only Son of my God, have been pleased to endure for my
sake the scourges, the nails, and the Cross, why shall I refuse for the love
of you, the pains and contempts of this life? No, no, Lord, I detest my pride,
I accuse my remissness, and renounce the delicacies and effeminacies of this
world, to the end I may imitate you, and partake of the spirit, grace, and
merits of your death and passion.

Point III.
COnsider Jesus suffering in all things which may bring him pain, humiliation,
and confusion, to expiate the abuse we make of every thing, which we employ in
offending the Divine Majesty; and to condemn the inordinate love wherein we
prefer the creature before the Creator. Implore his grace to make good use of
all things and take an aversion to the wantonness of the flesh.

PRAYER.
O Amiable Jesus, you have created me to love you, and have loved me to oblige
me to your love, nay, all that you have done and suffered, was but to draw me
to you, and to engage me in your service. I render you thanks with my whole
heart, and I beseech you to give me the grace that I may love you above all
things, and love nothing but your self in all things. Be pleased to annihilate
in me, whatsoever is opposite to your love, consume in my heart self-love, and
all affections to creatures, to the end I may unite my self to you, and live
wholly for you. I know very well that my crimes and offenses have rendered me
unworthy of this grace; But (O God of love and goodness!) you have suffered
death on the Cross, to obtain for us this grace, and to attract us to your
love. Fix then if you please, (O benign Jesus) fix I say your love in my
heart, and your fear in my soul, and grant that I may love you with all my
power, and with all my forces in order to your command.

Jesus upon the Cross.
Point I.
Jesus suffers in all the parts of his body, who has nothing whole from the
feet to the head; for he is covered all over with wounds, bruised with blows,
and his blood quite exhausted. He indures all these several pains, to expiate
the abuse which we make of our bodies, and to condemn the pleasures and
volupties of the world. Offer your Soul, your body and life to Jesus, and
desire strength of him to despise the delights of this life, and grace to
suffer whatsoever shall happen to you.

PRAYER.
Benign Jesus, what comparison can there be between the grandeurs of your
Sovereign Majesty, and the abasement of the Cross? You are life in your
divine Essence, and you are life and glory to every rational creature. Why do
you then abase your self (O ineffable greatness) even to the torment of an
ignominious death? You undergo it for me, poor and miserable sinner, and your
love reduces you to a death on the Cross, to give life to me, who am dead by
sin. This state is too unworthy of your greatness, remain rather on the
Throne of your glory, and leave me in the miseries and misfortunes which I have
acquired by my demerits: And if your goodness excite and invite you to show me
favor, let it be at least without concernement of your greatness, or
abasement of your incomprehensible Majesty. But I clearly discern (O my Jesus)
that it is your infinite goodness that invites you to love us with an infinite
love, and has procured the communication of your self to our souls, in an
unconceivable manner; for you exhaust your own person, to give your self unto
men, and you even consume your self in the flames of Charity, to show me your
love and oblige me to love you. You suffer and die, to the end, that having
purchased me at the price of your blood, and life, I may be no longer mine, and
live no more to my self, but remain wholly yours, and live only for you. Alas
Lord! when will this happiness befall me? it is what I desire; for I am yours,
my soulde, my body, and actions are yours. I offer and submit them entirely,
and eternally to your holy will, that you may do in, and by me what you please;
for I am wholly yours, as you are all mine.

Point II.
JEsus thus covered over with wounds, and suffering in all the members of his
body, is on the Altar of the Cross, as a victime for all sinners, offering
himself to his Father, to heal them of the wounds made by their sins, and he
gives even to the last drop of his blood, for expiation of their offenses.
Compassionate his Dolous, render him thanks for the love he bears you, and
protest never more to offend him.

PRAYER.
ALl that you suffer on the Cross (O amiable Jesus) and the pains which have
consummated your Passion, are but the ransom of my offenses, and the
satisfaction of all my crimes; for they are my sins which have deprived you
of life, it is my pride which has humbled you; my self-love, and the
pleasures of my life, have scourged you; my perverse inclinations and vain
desires have crowned you with thorns: in fine you die upon the ignominious
Tree of the Cross to deliver me from the capiivity of the Devil and sin,
and to satisfy the divine Justice, justly irritated against me; so that I
consider you on the Altar of the Cross, as an holy victime, which you offer
unto your Father to appease him; and your death is a sacrifice, which you make
to him of your self, to merit life for me, and to obtain pardon for my
offenses. After so great a benifit, can I be so unhappy, as seek to revive
sin in my soul, and render my self still a slave to it? Can I desire to
enter into a new commerce with vice, and obey my own concupiscences, which have
crucified you? No, no, (succor of my Soul) I detest them with my whole heart,
and hate them with all my force, for the love of you. I will no longer offend
you by the assistance of your holy grace, which I beg of you by the merits of
your passion. Since you die only to extirpate sin in my soul, and to banish
vice out of my conscience: Effect Lord, effect what you desire, and give me a
holy inabilitie of offending you.

Point III.
Jesus sheds his blood in suffering, and expires by the effusion thereof; But
the nails and Executioners being unable to extinguish the ardor of his love,
which even in death it self cannot die, he conserves what remains of it in
his heart and body, to pour out upon the Cross, even to the last drop, that
he may evidence to us the profusion, which he intends to make of his spirit, of
his graces and love. Sacrifice unto him your heart, and offer your self to him
to bear the effects of the Cross, as he shall please to imprint them in your
Soul.

PRAYER.
I Adore you (O my Jesus) crucified, as the beginning of all happiness, and as
the Spring of all graces and benedictions, which either have been, or shall
ever be communicated to men: I adore all the thoughts and desires, which you
have had upon the Cross, of giving your grace and love to your elect; finally
(my Savior) I adore the profusion you make of your blood, even to the last
drop, and the excess of love, which you express in all the states of your
life, and death. Grant me the grace to bear the effects thereof, and
faithfully to cooperate with the merits of your Passion: for what will it
avail me (O God, of love) that you are dead upon the Cross, and bountiful in
communicating your Spirit, and grace, if I render my self unworthy of it, and
oppose my self against it by my iniquity? Nevertheless it is what I fear,
for I am too miserable, and shall surely remain obdurate in my sin, if you
prevent me not with your grace, if you guard me not with your succor, and if
you continue not your favor to me. Wherefore (O ^^exhaustible goodness) be
pleased not to think it enough to have given your blood and life; but bestow
on me over and above, I b^seech you, your spirit, your grace and love. And I
make a gift to you of my heart, my spirit and life, and remit into your hands,
the liberty wherein you have created me, to the end I may become from
henceforth a slave to your love, and that my soul may live no longer, then to
receive the effects of your death, and the life of your Cross.

JESUS lying dead between the arms of his holy Mother.
Point I.
IT is an unheard of thing to see God upon the Cross, and life in death; yet
you behold Jesus stretched out between the arms of his holy Mother. He is
dead, but by this means he becomes the life of our Souls. This manner of
death is infinitely distant from the greatness of God; but love has wrought
this wonder to convey life to your soul, and death to your sins. Give your
self to Jesus and Mary, to be are in you these two effects of life and death.

PRAYER.
IF I desire to live in God, and in order to what he requires of a Christian, I
must needs die to sin, alter my depraved customs, and withdraw my heart from
self-love and all affection to creatures. But how shall I do it, O blessed
Virgin, if I receive not powerful assistance? for I am able to act nothing, if
I want efficacious grace which operates in and with me, what God desires of me.
Now from whence may I have it, but from and by you, O Mother of grace and
mercy, since God has put into your hands, the price of my Salvation, and since
you hold in your arms, the fountain of all graces? I repair then to you (O
benign Virgin) and I give my self to you, to the end by the power which you
have in quality of my Saviors mother, you may produce in my soul the effects
of life and death; my meaning is, that you operate in such sort by your favor,
that I may really die to my vices and sins, that I may detest and hate them,
and lead such a life as God expects of me, and to which I obliged my self,
when by Baptism I was incorporated, and made a member of Jesus Christ, your
Son.

Point II.
THe Son of God vouchsafed to unite pains, sorrows, afflictions, and crosses to
himself, and his holy Mother, with design to render them from thenceforth
pleasing, sweet, and worthy to be esteemed and desired on earth. Begin to
esteem them because they are deified in Jesus, and honored in his holy Mother.
And if you are unable to ask them of God, at least resolve to be are them with
humility and patience, when they shall happen to you.

PRAYER.
YOu have ever been (O holy Virgin) the wel-beloved of the eternal Father: You
are amongst all the pure creatures, the worthiest object of his love; You are
his spouse, and the true Mother of Jesus, as he is his Father; and he gives you
his Son, and with him has put into your hands the treasures of Heaven, and
earth, and all the riches of Divinity. For this reason you are the worthiest
of all pure creatures, and with my Jesus you are the happiness of the whole
world; Nevertheless (O Mother of God) I see you in the midst of mount Calvary,
and at the foot of the Cross, holding your Son dead between your arms: You
take off the Crown of thorns, you wipe his wounds, you wash his body with
tears, and kiss a thousand times the bruises of his flesh: You suffer
likewise with him the ignominies, and dolors of the Cross; so that
humiliations, crosses and afflictions are both in you and in Jesus. In him and
you they are become divine, sanctified and rendered acceptable; And for this
cause they are worthy of being esteemed, and desired by Christians. What must
I then do (O holy Virgin) if I will love you? what other thing can I do, but
affect Crosses and humiliations with you, and humble my self like you. I
desine and purpose it thus in my soul, procure me only the grace that in all
occasions I may bear every thing with fidelity and patience, in such sort as
God requires of me, and you desire I should.

Point III.
THe holy. Virgin holding her Son between her arms, offers him to God and the
divine Justice, for satisfaction of our offenses; And as the Father has given
his Son to the world, and the Son delivered himself up to the Cross to save
us; So the holy Virgin both with heart and will, sacrifices her own Son, that
she may in this sort minister unto our Salvation. Give her thanks for this
extraordinary Charity, and beseech her to render you faithful to all the
graces, which the death of the Son of God has acquired.

PRAYER.
YOu have been chosen (o Mother of grace and mercy!) to be the repairer of the
world, and to cooperate in a most peculiar manner to the salvation of all
mankind. You did when you gave your Son Christ Jesus to be delivered up to
the death of the Cross, and you do it when, holding him dead between your
arms, you offer him to the divine Justice, as a Victime and Sacrifice of
propitiation, which satisfies God for the sins of the world: And in this
respect you are our Repairer; for Jesus who is the Savior of men is yours, he
is your Son, and you are his Mother. And in this quality, you have right to
his life, his preservation, and all his condition?. Nevertheless, (O Mother of
our Souls) you consent to his death, you encourage him to torments, you
conduct him to the Cross, and like another Abraham you sacrifice in will and
affection your only Son, and you sacrifice him for my sins, so great is
your charity and love toward me. But what can I do in recognition of so
sublime a benefit? Wherein am I able to acknowledge, (O benign Virgin) so
ardent a Charity? At least since you give your Son for me, procure that I may
be your slave, and since you resign him to efface the sins of the world, and
that he may merit for us such graces, as are necessary for our salvation, be
pleased to mediate, that I may be faithful to all the graces, which he has
purchased for me by his death, and that I may live no longer, but for his
honor and yours, as you give him to the Cross and deliver him up to death for
me.

Our LADY of Compassion.
Point I.
Since the Eternal Father can have no compatency in the dolours of his Son, he
substituted the holy Virgin, imprinting in her heart, and Spirit, the virtue of
the Cross, and the Spirit of his sufferings; and, piercing her heart with the
sword of sorrow, he made her suffer with her Son, that in some manner she
might cooperate to our Salvation. Consider what Jesus and the holy Virgin
suffer for you, and from henceforth take delight in the thought of their
sufferings, and in the love of the Cross.

PRAYER.
O Virgin and mother of my Jesus! I render you thanks for having contributed to
our salvation, not only by giving your Son, but also in taking your share in
his Passions; for if he endure, you suffer with him; The scourges, the thorns,
the nails and the lance, have pierced his body; but love and sorrow have
transpierced your heart, and gauled your soul. Wherefore (holy Virgin, the
true refuge of sinners!) I adore Jesus for my Savior; but I reverence you as
his Mother, and acknowledge you for the Repairer of the Universe; since you
cooperate doubly in the good of our souls; For you give us your Son, and
suffer with him for us. Be pleased also to mediate ( O Virgin, spring of life
and grace) that I may be from henceforward the object of your commiserations.
And since you have loved me so much, as to give me your Son, and to give him
even for the Cross: since your love and charity fastens you to my interests,
and makes you suffer for me, procure that I may suffer all for you; but
chiefly engrave in my heart such a hatred of sin, as I may rather endure a
thousand deaths, then so much as once offend my Jesus, your Son, who died for
my sins.

Point II.
THe great love of the holy Virgin, has made her suffer extremely; her life is
no other but a Martyrdom; her thoughts are fixed only upon the Cross, and her
eyes have no other object, then death, and the death of her Son: Her love is
now but languishing, and her languishments cause her incessantly to sigh after
her God and her Son. O my soul! how happy should you be, if you could live
no longer, but to love and suffer.

PRAYER.
Holy Virgin! how shall I attain so light enough to conceive your greatness,
and grace to imitate the several dispositions of your soul? I know and faith
teaches me, that you are the Mother of God, that your soul is full of grace;
and I confess that you are the worthiest object of love, and the most capable
of favors from the blessed Trinity; yet I see your soul all immersed in the
bitterness of the Cross, Your life is no longer but a Martyrdom, your love
is languishing, and the object of your sighs are fixed only on the death of
your Son. O how content should I be ( O Virgin, life of my soul!) if I could
lead such a life as yours, How happy should I be, if in imitation of you, I had
no other repose then in afflictions, no other delight but in the Cross, nor
other life but in the death of your Son! I deserve not this favor, I have
not grace enough to live in so holy a manner; nevertheless I desire to live no
longer, but to love, and no longer to love, but to suffer. I offer my self
unto you, for all this, dispose now wholly of me, as you shall please.

Point III.
IF Love makes our Soul live, in what she most affects; surely the holy Virgin
lives no longer but in Jesus suffering and dying, since (he loves nothing but
Jesus: And as Jesus is crucified in his body, so the Virgin is in her soul:
The Son dies on the Cross; The Mother swounds at his feet; The side of the
Son is pierced with a Lance, the heart of the Mother is transpierced with the
sword of sorrow; thus both of them live and die together. What will you do (O
my Soul) at the sight of this sad spectacle, since all this is done and
accomplished for you? Beseech the Son and the Mother to inspire you with true
love, and to render you worthy of bearing faithfully, the grace and effects of
the Cross and Passion.

PRAYER.
WEre I unwilling (O benign Mother of my soul) yet the affection, which you
bear me, obliges me to love you. I am content, nay I desire it with my whole
heart; but I am unable to effect it without a favor from heaven: But as it is
a great mercy, that you vouchsafe to love, and cooperate to my salvation; so
is it a great grace, that I may be able to love you, and live in your service.
I beg then this favor of you ( O Virgin, Mother of my soul) and I beseech you
to change my heart, that from henceforward I may be yours, and entirely
dedicated to your service. Put me in a state of perpetual servitude toward
you, establish me in the true love of Jesus, and procure that I may both live
and die, persevering in that love and service which I owe you. I remit my life
(O holy Virgin) into your hands; I remit into your hands the hour of my death,
because I will be wholly yours, and depend on you in such sort as my God and my
Jesus desires it of me. Be pleased then (O Mother of mercy!) to receive me into
your protection, and to look on me as the object of your goodness, and the
subject of your commiseration. Accept of my good will, fortify my weakness,
and give me the grace to put in practice the good purposes which God has
suggested to me by your intercession, and no longer permit that I act any
thing, which may annihilate in my soul the effects of grace: but obtain for
me a capacity of receiving in my heart such effects of the Cross, as my Jesus
shall infuse into it, and fidelity to cooperate therewith in such sort, as my
God and my Jesus requires of me.

ASPIRATIONS OF The Soul unto God, in form of PRAYER.
The oblation of ones self unto God.
Lord Jesus! of my self I can do nothing, for I am a miserable creature; but
with you nothing is impossible to me. Abide then in me, (O happiness of my
soul) live and reign over me to effect in me what is acceptable to you. You
have all power, and I offer it you a fresh over my life, and actions, even from
the bottom of my soul: I remit into your hands, the same liberty, will, and
life which you have given me. Be pleased to accept and keep them as yours; for
I am wholly yours, and will depend on you.

Another Oblation.
MY Jesus, by the nature of your being, by the eminency of your greatness, and
by the state of your miseries, you have been pleased to be, both my Father, my
Lord, and my Judge; I implore all these adorable qualities, and I invoke the
power which you have over me, by these holy properties which are in you, and I
beseech you by the same mercy and goodness, which has made you take on you
those states, that you would vouchsafe to inspire me with that fidelity, which
I owe you, that I may be by my life your Son, as you are my Father by grace,
that I may be your slave by a true subjection, since you are my Lord. And as I
acknowledge and adore you as my Savior, so let me be your captive, being
wholly yours, and acting nothing but for you. And since you are my Judge, and
that I confess my self criminal, be pleased to distill into my soul, the
zeal of your Justice, to the end by your Grace, and with vour Justice, I may
execute Justice on my self, and satisfy your just indignation, occasioned by
the multitude of offenses, which I have presumed to commit against your divine
goodness. Thus I desire it, thus do I give my self up unto you (O Jesus,
Savior and Judge of my Soul) to become the victime of your will, and to bear
the effects of your grace, Spirit, and mysteries, in such sort as you shall
please. In this manner I renounce my self, to enter into all the dispositions,
and states, which the eternal Father will have me bear in you, and for your
sake O Jesus.

A Resignation to the will of God.
O Jesus! Father and beginning of all light, illuminate my soul with your
splendour, that I may discern what is disagreeable to you, and give me the
grace to avoid it. Grant that I may both know your will, and accomplish it, in
every point; for I desire to be wholly yours, and to live no longer but for you.

To put ones self into the protection of Almighty God.
Savior of my soul, Author of my salvation! see the dangers wherein I am
remaining in this life, sustain me with your hand, that I may not fall, and
govern me by your Spirit, that I wander not in the nations of my perverse
inclinations. Defend me (good Jesus) and deliver me from my self, and permit
me not to adhere to my affections, nor to follow my own appetites: I renounce
them all, since they separate me from you; and I conjure your goodness to
annihilate them, to the end, that adhering wholly unto you, I may be for
nothing but your self; for such is my desire, you know it, O love of my soul!

To ask the love of God.
OBject of all Love, perfect Beauty, ineffable Goodness! who can choose but
love you? I purpose it, but am unable. I will love to death, and will die, but
in loving you. Transpierce my heart with your love, and my body with your
fear, effect (O powerful God!) effect powerfully, that your Spirit may
consume in me, all that is of my self, that I may be wholly yours, and love
none but you, and that living in you; I may die to all other things.

A protestation of Love.
Shall I be always overlightned in my self, distracted in my thoughts,
inconstant in my motions? How long will you permit me (Lord) to follow my own
inclinations, and to be violently affected with the Creature? Recall my spirit,
withdraw it from all things, to retain it for your self. Let not your just
conduct (O most amiable goodness) abandon me, for leaving me to my self, blind
that I am, I should lose my self in my Cupidities, and separate my self from
you, to live no longer but for my self. Let death rather force me away, yea,
fill (O God of love) fill rather my life with bitterness, my heart with fear,
and my soul with continual displeasure, then permit, that to please the
Creature, or to satisfy my self, I may displease your divine Majesty.

An Act of Love.
WHy shall I not love you (O most amiable goodness?) You oblige me thereunto
by your love, you attract me by your benefits, and you command it by your
goodness; I will then love you because I ought, and I desire that my heart may
love you with all his power, because nothing is amiable but your self: But I
cannot love, if you inspire me not with love. Abide then in me (O desirable
love!) live in me, to the end that following the laws of your love, I may
live, and consummate my self in you.

Aspirations of Love.
Whether are you gone (sweet Spouse of my soul?) Alas! I carry a heart
replenished with bitterness, when I have no sense of you. I keep my self
aloof from you, loft in my thoughts, I perceive my self wandering in various
objects, and for a height of misery, I walk in the night of a heart,
darkened with self-love. My life is all humane, and (as a child of Adam) my
life is in the old man. I know not whether I have a being or no, only I know
that I am miserable: but to live in this sort is a cruel death; it is not to
live at all, to live without you; it is too long a Martyrdom. Take pity on my
soul, return and possess me entirely. Restore me your spirit, give me your
life and change my whole heart. Why can I not like a Phoenix, consume my self
in the ardors of your eternal love, and alter my course of life and being, to
be no longer but in you, and to live no longer but for you? You can effect this
(O God) who can do all things.

Sighs of Love.
MY eyes are bathed in tears, and my voice is broken with sighs, my life is
but a death, and all things are but a Martyrdom to me, when I think where my
God is. Alas! this thought makes me power out all my soul, and I languish both
day and night, when I know that I must remain in this abode of misery. I cry
out from, the bottom of my heart, How long Lord, how long? And must I yet live
for a long time in the land of the dead and (absent from your face) remain
among the perils of this miserable life? Must I, being oppressed with my body,
feel my self removed from the sweet attractives of your Caresses; I am
content with it, since it is your Pleasure. Great God, Master of my soul! your
will is my delight, your love my direction: But effect ( O God, who can do all
things) effect by your mercy, that as your Son, and my Jesus lives only in
love, and this love makes him die; so I may live no longer then in loving you,
and that love may make me suffer.

To sue for the contempt of all things.
TOo long (O my soul) do thou seek vanity and affect lies: This world has
nothing in it stable and permanent, all is perishable therein; Goodness,
truth, peace and repose are found only in God; thou losest thy self, in
selfe-loving and seeking thy self, thou art estranged from God; Come then to
my succor (O Savior of my soul!) and reach me your hand, dissipate all these
allurements, which detain me captive: Open to me your heart (O my so amiable
Jesus!) to shelter me in the midst of so many surprises: see, Lord, see how
from all sides snares are laid for me, to make roe fall in love with this
world: Do not permit it (O love of my soul) my heart is for you alone,
preserve it then as yours.

Another.
MY eyes discern not (O Adorable verity!) the error of vanity, and my heart
feels not the horror of all vices: But come (O Sun of Justice!) come and shine
upon my soul, consume with your beams all that is displeasing to you; give me
your spirit, which opens my eyes to discern verity, which inspires me with
love to adhere unto it, which redresseth my will and teaches it to detest the
world, and gives me the grace to seek you alone, and to live only for the love
of you.

To demand light and direction for your soul.
Sun of Justice! illuminate the darkness of my spirit; Comforter of souls!
draw me out of the ignorance wherein I live. I walk in the shadow of death,
amidst the perils of this life, and (severing my self from you, who are the
way and life of my soul) I run like a vagabond into the curious research of
the objects of my senses: Do you not see it (O my God) who see all things: Come
then to my succor, (light of my soul) I ask nothing but your self; my heart
fighes after you, and my eyes seek you every where. Dart therefore (O Jesus!)
a glance of your face, infuse a ray of your beauty into the bottom of my
Soul, to call me back to you, and make me know who you are, and what I am; to
the end I may be wholly yours, and that being no longer mine, I may love you
alone.

To invoke Grace.
GReat God! your Treasures are unexhaustible, and your hands full of gifts. You
are rich only in goodness, and in showing mercy you evidence what you are.
Mercy then Lord, mercy, for I am a sinner, one glance of your eye, one word of
your mouth can deliver me from evils; for while you look on me, I shall love
you, while you speak to me, I shall follow and run after you, in the odor of
the sweet perfumes of your heavenly grace.

To call for Contrition.
FRom the depth of my misery I elevate my heart unto you, O God of goodness!
my soul sighs after you, God of mercy! And now that I am sensible of my
misfortune, and that the weight of my sins oppress me within, I cry aloud unto
you, lend me your ears, and fix on me your benign eyes, to withdraw me from
the evil whereunto I find my self fastened. Give me your arm (Father of
mercy) to sustain the yoke of my offenses, light to know them, tears to
bewail them, and the zeal of your justice to satisfy for them; I can no
longer endure the foulness of my life, nor to live any longer distant from
you; (O happiness of my soul!) I pant after you, you know it, but I cannot
escape out of the place which captivates me, nor break the bands which fasten
me, if the power of your Spirit, and the Spirit of your love, do not dissolve
and break them in pieces: loosen them then (O Lord) and render me the liberty,
which you have purchased for your children at the price of your life.

Affection to accomplish our good purposes.
I Feel my self seized with a flame of love, which makes me protest never more
to forsake you (O Jesus, the love of my soul!) I am weary to see my self in
the midst of so many inconstancies; I desire to be entirely yours, you know it
very well, Lord; for it is of you, as of a spring of goodness, that my soul
is full of desires, and my will of good affections; it is a gift of your hand,
preserve it by your grace, and give me your arm and benediction to uphold me
in my good purposes, and that I may punctually accomplish what I have promised
you, stimulated and incited by the motions of your Spirit, always holy; to the
end you may finish and perfect in me, what you have begun by your infinite
mercy; for without you I can do nothing, and by you am enabled to do all
things.

FINIS.
A PRAYER, which the Church uses to invoke the love of God.
DEVS qui diligentibus te facis cuncta prodesse: da cordibus nostris
inviolabilem tuae charitatis affectum: ut desideria de tua inspiratione
concept, nulla possint tentatione mutari: Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum,
etc. Amen.


