Qui Chetat Chetabitur: OR, TYBURNE Cheated.
BEING, A POEM, UPON The three Regicides Munson, Mildmay and Wallopp; who were
Drawn upon Hurdles to Tyburne on the 27th. of January, 1661.

GReat, and grave Tyburne, We are sent
To court thee in a Complement:
We come, oh strange! to make no stay,
Only greet, and so away;
Take notice how we do adore thee,
And in worship fall before thee;
Thus we fall before thy Trine,
And vow our selves for ever thine:
'Twas for thy sake we stirred up strife,
And now we love thee to the life;
Our humble hearts do make request,
Not to be mounted, like the rest;
We are content all strife should cease,
And love, what once we hated, Peace.
Did we not do a pretty thing,
To Murder a Religious King:
Oh! how we quafft his guiltless blood,
He only died for being good;
Whilst all the Punishment we had
Was but to live, for being bad;
If this be all we must incurr,
Who would not be a Murderer:
We care not now we know our hope
Must be intayl'd upon a Rope.
Pray tell us Lawyers, can there be
A Fine, without Recoverie?
We Will satisfy our selves a None,
We now are reading Little -- ton;
If Cook were living, he would advise us
In our distress, though you despise us;
But he (poor Wretch) was cast aside,
His Law was DUN before he died:
Some of his Brethren smiled to see,
Whilst others cried, And why not we?
Their Judgments did the thing enlarge,
Though he were Drawn that drew the Charge;
We see a boundance of our Gange.
(I hope they practice how to Hang)
That knew full well, the time 'was, when
Money made Knaves, now honest men:
Nor had we bin thus made a Theme,
Had we bin ruled by QUARLES his Dream;
He called us Rebels in our prime,
And told us of this very time:
But he n'ere dreamed, as some recited,
That for his Work he should be slighted:
Such Caveleirs we daily see,
Are constant to their Poverty;
Their's was the danger, their's the pain,
But we can tell who reapes the gain;
Now they may beg through Jron-grates,
That lost (by which we got) Estates.
Whilst once a year we pay our Vows,
To this our monstrous three legged Sp^us,
Who shows her love, in this our woe,
Poor Wretch she is loath to let us go;
Oh! how she labors, and inclines
To make us understand her Lines;
How she seems to swell with pride,
With her Champion by her side,
Who invites us to our woes,
That the Knave might have our clothes;
He tells us that we need not fear,
For old Noll, and Bradshaw's there;
We know, and all the world may see it,
That it is not merry when Knaves meet;
But this old saying now proves true,
The Gallow^ always claims her due;
Were not for fear we would proceed,
And out of love, be hanged indeed;
For unto us it does appear
Sad to be hanged once a year,
For like old Noll, though breath be fled,
We may be hanged when we be dead:
But one thing joys us to the heart,
The Cavel^irs can bare no part,
For if we see them but begin
To laugh we will bid them laugh that win;
And if they chance to make their braggs,
We Will bid them look upon their Rags;
Alas poor Creatures, they can hope
Only in Rags, and we in Rope.
But now, Grave Tyburne we must leave thee,
It Is no wonder we deceive thee;
Pray do not weep, for it is in vain
Next year, we will see the here again;
Till then, with a submissive bow
We make to thee, each Man, his vow:
And first we do resolve to be
Obedient unto none but thee;
Next, during life, we vow t'appeare
And do thee homage once a year;
These promises thou well may trust,
Necessety will make us just.
Thus we thy Servants, every one,
Wallopp, Mildmay, and Munson,
With all our might and power, will
Be always careful to fulfill
Thy sweet commands, not time, nor season
Shall hinder us, from thinking Treason;
What though we never loved our King?
Thou love us for that very thing;
In all things thou shall be our Chief,
Thou love a Traitor, and a Theife,
Therefore thou need'st take no care
For we can fit thee to a hair;
For our Deeds are so much famed
That Hell will blush to hear us named,
And thus for our Rebellious Pride,
We Will once a year on Hurdles ride,
And if Squire Dun will not oppose,
We Will every Winter find him clothes.
And now, great Charles, to thee we bow,
And, Satan-like, we all allow
And own thee for a gracious King,
Though unto us thou art no such thing;
We took away thy Fathers life,
His Blood still reekes upon our knife;
Then how can we expect thy Grace,
When Justice takes up Mercies place.
Therefore, if extracted be
The Quintescence of Tyranny,
It Is Love, compared to our Deeds,
Till we are dead, thy Father bleeds;
But if thy Mercy should out shine
Thy Justice, Thou would prove Devine;
Add Plagues, to Plagues, and even then
Thou art the mildest of all Men.
Thus we conclude, and from this hour
We will acknowledge Thee in Power.
FUNIS.
London, printed by Edward Crowch dwelling on Snow-hill. 1661. Who these
Traitors would once have hanged.


