LOGOMACHIA: A Harmony in Discord, SHOWING The mutual submission of the
Episcopal party in the City, and the Independent Soldiery, To CHARLES, by the
Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the
FAITH.
City. WHere am I now! upon some unseen wing,
Hither I have been brought; the presence of a King
Ere long will grace my bulwarks, and adorn
My brow with luster, like the gray-ey'd morn.
Though wayward fortune had malign'd my State,
And crossed my Noble Actions out of date,
Yet I am metropolitan, and my Name
Shall live, and stand equivalent with fame.
Rouse up ye slumbring Lions, hollow
My warlike hearts, go, and your General follow;
You whose undaunted valor has been crowned
With Noble Victories the world around,
Come forth, and with your fires chase away
The night, and meet the Chariot of the day.

Sold. Presumptuous wretch! to call me from my bed,
And with vain thoughts perplex my troubled head;
A dullness shuts mine eyes, I fain would rest
A while secure; how happy, Oh how blessed,
Are those that sleep eternally! and he
That lives and dies in obscurity!
Bear me thou gentle Earth, for ever I
Would press thy flowery green; alas to dye,
Is less than to be born; life is a bubble,
A minutes joy, and full of pleasing trouble;
Let me alone; ah me, that I could take
So kind a sleep, that I might never wake.

City. What pale-faced discontent does seize thee now?
Or why does anger furrow up thy brow?
Or is it despair, opinion, timorous fear
Makes thee look through the glasses of a tear?
Whose valor and brave fortitude aspires
Above the Earth in circles of blew fires.
The King grants mercy, will thou now refuse
T'imbrace it, and his Royal Love abuse?
The branded slave, that tuggs the weary Oar,
Having the Sabbath of a welcome shore
Procured for him by his Gracious King,
To free him from his slavery, and bring
Him home again, but he in love with pains,
Huggs his tormentors, and does kiss his chains,
Let him work on, till for his dull delay,
With torturing whips he weeps himself away.
How was this poor and pining City pained
With burdens, when the many rabble reigned?
When they had grasped in their greasy hands
The Kings, Lords, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands,
And the Rates of all Commodities did rise
By Taxes, Sesments, Customs, and Excise,
With wars, imprisonments, turmoils, vexations,
Changing, and clashing, death and sequestrations.
The Right of Government most did suppose
Lay first in one man's head, then the others nose;
Mean while the people flocked in numerous swarms
Of double tongues, false hearts, divided arms,
And a distracted brain, a poisonous breath
Of envy, and a life-expecting death,
Or death in midst of life. Oh were not we,
The only Monuments of misery?
But now we are approached to that we call
The good, if there be earthly good at all;
All earthly happiness those people gain
'Bove others, where a prudent Prince does reign.
Kings are not dismal Comets, but as fair
As Phoebus, burnished with his morning hair,
That from his flaming chariot sends his beams,
To wake dull mortals from their drowzy dreams,
Though often, his glorious face, when they grow proud,
He hides, and leaves them mantled in a cloud.

Sold. Dishevill'd hair I Will tear thee from my Crown,
Poor tangled Ornament; man's Renown
Is but a dream; be gone, I Will fill thy room
With dust, and break thee like a Spiders loom.
It is his Right, but wherein now do ye
Make famous his immortal memory?
What singular service now? that Heaven may deign,
To gloryfie him with a happy Reign,
On Earth? that his Illustrious Majesty
No more, may not in black oblivion lie?
Will drinking, swearing, singing roundelaies,
With Bonfires, May-polls, Garlands, Fiddlers, Plays,
Deriding, scoffing, persecuting too
Those that are good, are these the things will do
The King such honor? what, is this the thing
Required as solemnity for a King?
Will lust and rapine, madness, folly, pride,
In them who all true piety deride?
Whose poisonous breath, while they profanely call
To Heaven, would kill a Spider to the wall,
And hurt the wholesome Air; is this the thing
Required as Solemnity for a King?
No, come Great Charles and welcome, let thine eyes
A little check these numerous fooleries,
Rule us aright, and thou shall prove that we,
Though scorned, the best of all thy Subjects be,
Kings are Earth's Gods, sometimes their law their will,
They can encourage virtue, punish ill;
Thy lips are lips of knowledge, in thine eye
Is both Humility and Majesty;
The boisterous wind, that in its fury raves
Aloft, to beat the ebbing flowing waves,
Locked up in Eolus Gaol, sends gentle Gales
Of perfumed Air, to court the pregnant Sails,
That the recoyling Seas as still may lie
As Virgins, while our Sovereign passes by.
The Sun invest with Majesty will flee
The concave of the spangled Canopy,
Leaving the Southern Chambers, as he rides
Through Gemini, his flaming Chariot guides,
From bright Aurora, he will lash away
His horse, to view the triumphs of the day.
Where when thou art enthroned, if any woo
For Justice, then remember Mercy too;
So shall loud Acclamations lift thy Name
'Bove the resounding trump of flying Fame;
So shall thou flourish in th'inlarged store,
Of wealth and peace, thy temples arched ore
In a victorious Orb, which when laid down,
Because it is but a transitory Crown,
Thou shall be crowned above in streets of gold,
Where thou thy Royal Father shall behold,
In everlasting glory uncontroull'd.

By JEREMIAH RICH.
London, Printed for Peter Dring, at the Sun in the Poultry.


