The Passionate LOVER: OR, The Damsels Grief Crowned with Comforts.
To a pleasant New Play-house-Tune, much in Request.
This may be Printed,

R. P.







Maid. SIghs and groans, and melancholy moans,
I languish and anguish in doleful Tones,
For him I loved dear I do complain.
Because his company I cannot refrain.

Man. Sighs and groans you say you are oppressed,
You say I am he whom you loved best,
But if it be so, and your heart be true,
Then I will bear a part as well as you.

Maid. Men are deceitful, who can them believe,
Their flattering words, they Maids deceive
With their Ruby Lips, and their tempting Eye,
They terrify poor Maidens till they dye,
What cares he that never felt the smart
Of this my languishing Lovesick Heart;
Had you a sense of what I do endure,
Then you in love would grant a speedy cure.
It Is pale Death that now must give me ease,
For there is nothing else my Heart can please,
Then on my Tomb alas! it shall be read,
That here lies a loyal Lover dead.

Man. Thou have no cause my dearest to complain,
For as I am thy Love I will remain,
Do but believe me, thou shall be my Bride,
For I value none in the World beside.
None but thee my Love I adore,
Thy blessings dearest here I will restore,
Dry up thy Tears, and take this tender kiss,
Being in token of a true Loves bliss.

Maid. Was I sure that these thy words were true,
Then might I bid my sorrows quite adieu,
Yet I have known Men say as much as this,
And then have left their Lovers in distress.
For when they have brought us to their bow,
They then do prove our final overthrow,
True hearted Men I find there is but few,
Nay, I may say the very same by you.
None but I, you say you do adore,
Have you not said as much as this before,
When you declared that I should be your wife,
And yet you left me near bereaved of Life.

Man. When I left my love, it was to try
Thy pure affections, and thy constancy.
I know when Cupid does Men's hearts invade,
Females have oftentimes the Tyrants played.
But I find my Love is none of those,
Therefore my heart to thee I will disclose;
Thy Loyalty my purest Love has won,
It Is none I prize but thee beneath the Sun.
We'll never part while I remain alive.
Then let thy drooping Spirits now revive,
The very Mountains shall as soon remove,
As I found disloyal to my Love.
Now when he had uttered forth his mind,
There was no grief, but both to love inclined.
Where he embraced her in his tender arms,
With many sweet salutes and pleasing charms.
Thus was tears straight turned into joy,
There Is nothing can their comforts annoy,
By solemn vows their hearts are linked fast,
And live in love, as long as life shall last.


