THE QUAKERS ANSWER, To the Quakers Wedding, November, 8. 1671.
O Times! O Manners! Both indeed are Strange:
But wither did the Ry'mers Manners range?
We, I confess, took one another Word,
But when will be such Public Rites afford?
In this, I doubt, he deemed our Deeds amiss,
'Cause, with the Public he still private is.
'Twas a good Meeting, I presume, for him,
To make his Brains in Sack and Claret swim:
Well, I perceive since it did so Advance thee,
The Quakers Wine can raise the Poets Fancy.
We had good store of Offalls for the Poor^
And what are Poets? People think no more.
Know we have Linen too; And sure a Shirt,
If thou a Poet be? would do no hurt.
If we could see Thee to the Justice packt,
We Would judge there were great Justice in the act.
Thou talk of Banes, and Whipping-Posts severe;
We should not Cry, if we could find Thee there:
But Laugh to hear thee for thy self there Plead,
And see the Whipper too, Hand over Head.
Thou talk of Couples such as never were known;
Westminster-Weddings! Did thou mean thine own?
Fond Libertine, in thine own wrong and room!
Where thou were neither Parson, nor yet Groom.
Thou Babblest like a Brute, what thou have se'd,
As one acquainted with a Brothel-Bed.
Thou may indeed abate thy worldly Cares:
Who having many Children, need'st no Heirs.
For, if thou can not leave 'um an Estate
They Are almost bad as Illegitimate.
We should have had e'ne guests enough, if we
Nor Jew nor Gentile had, but only Thee.
And out of doubt, thou did thy self Invite,
For who of Thee would hope of Proselyte!
And for Thy sake, for ought that I can tell,
That Thunder, Lightning, and that Tempest fell.
Too Greedy too of what they might have had,
'Twas such as Thee that the Confusion made.
It was thy Self, if there were any Cheat?
For We got Nothing, but Thou gott'st our Meat.
Thou see I am no Quaker of that Sort,
That for their Lust, their Loves in Corners Court.
And to their Faith no longer will be Debtor,
Than till they see another they like Better.
I take her to my Wife till my Decease
And call the World to be my VVitnesses.
LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Armes in the Poultry, 1671.


