An Abstract, OF A LETTER From a Person of Eminency and Worth in Caledonia, To
a Friend at Boston in New England.
SIR,
I Have Received your kind Letter of the 26 December last, and Communicated it
to the Gentlemen of the Council here; to whom your kind Sentiments and
Readiness were very acceptable.

Certainly the Work here begun is the most Ri'pned, Digested, and the best
Founded, as to Privileges, Place, Time, and other like Advantages, that ever
was yet begun in any part of the Trading World. We arrived upon this Coast the
first, and took possession the third of November: Our Situation is about two
Leagues to the Southward of Golden Island. (by the Spaniards called Guarda) in
one of the best and most desenceable Harbors perhaps in the World. The Country
is Healthful to a wonder; insomuch that our own Sick, which were many when we
Arrived, are now generally cuted. The Country is exceeding Fertile, and the
Weather Temperate: The Country where we are settled, is dry, and rising Ground.
Hills but not high; and on the sides, and quite to the tops, three, four or
five foot good fat mould, not a Rock or stone to be seen. We have but eight or
nine Leagues to a River, where Boats may go into the South Sea. The Natives for
fitry Leagues on either side are in entire Friendship and Correspondence with
us; and if we will be at the pains, we can gain those at the greatest distance.
For our Neighbor Indians are willing to be the joyful Messengers of our
settlement, and good Disposition to their Country men. As to the Innate Riches
of the Country, upon the first Information, I always believed to be very great:
But now find it goes beyond all that ever I thought, or conceived in that
matter.

The Spaniards, as we can understand, are very much surp^ized, and alarmed and
the more that it comes as a Thunderclap upon them; Having had no notice of us,
until three days after our Arrival. We have written to the President of
Panama, giving him account of our good and Peaceable Intentions, and to procure
a good Understanding and Correspondence; And if that is not Condescended to: we
are ready for what else he pleases. It Merchants should once Erect Factories
here, this place will soon become the best and surest Mart in all America, both
for Inland and Over land Trade. We want here Sloops and Coasting Veslels; for
want of which, and by reason we have been all Hands at Work, in Fortifying and
fitting our selves, (which is now pretty well over) we had but little Trade as
yet: most of our Goods Unsold. We are here a Thousand one Hundred Men, and
expect Supplies every Day. We have been exceeding unhappy in loosing two
Ministers who came with us from Scotland; and if New England could supply us in
that, it would be a great and lasting Obligation.

Fort St. Andrew, April 18th, School, 9.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Reid, 1699.


