REBELLION'S DOWNFALL
Justitia Regis, Paxest populorum, Tutamen patriae, immunitas pl^bis, temperies
aeris, serenitas Maris, Terrae saecunditas, solatium paupuram, Cura laguorum,
Gaudium hominum hariditas Filiorum, et sibimet ipsi spes futura beatitudinis.
Greg. Mor. 5.
BEhold how Blood-hown- Vengeance has at last
Unlodg'd Security, and over-cast
Prospirous Rebellion, which so long has blazed
Like a prodigious Commet, and had raised
Vice to so high a pitch, that, Virtue seemed
As 'twere imposible to be redeemed
From sad Captivety, till Heaven thought good
To tracke Rebellion by the guiltless blood
Of Martyred CHARLES which has betrayed, though late,
The worst of Traitors to the worst of Fate;
Now they may see by this their sudden fall,
That slow-paced Judgment is the worst of all:
A prosperous Vice serves only to delude
Like Fatious Fire, the gazing Multitude.
How has this Nation bin a long time used
To these false Lights, how sadly bin abused
And led by them out of the quiet way
Of Peace, and Cheated by a yea, and nay:
Rebellion (like a monstrous Hydra) spreads,
Till Judgment, at one blow, cuts off her heads.
Thanks be to Heaven, that has in Merey brought
Israel, from Egypt, who, a long time wrought
Under the fatal Taskmasters, whose Law
Made us make Bricks, yet took away our Straw;
Moses and Aron (partners in this woe)
Could not prevail to let the Children go.
Pharaoh was still perfidious, Yet the God
Of our blessed Jacob, with his Iron-rod,
Scourged Pharaoh and his Host, and made them know
That Israel must not stay, if Heav'en bids go;
Yet this Jle say of Pharaoh and his Powers,
Though ours were Saints, yet his were Saints to ours:
Thanks be to Heav'en for this most happy day,
Judgments Red Sea has washed them both away;
Strange alteration! Pharaoh being drowned
In his own Floods, our Israel is Crowned;
Let not the Children grumble, or account
Their labors lost, Moses is in the Mount,
He will prevail to wash away this stain,
If like Lotts wife we look not back again;
He will prevail with God in our behalse,
If Aron does not make a golden Calfe:
Our Voes we see, if we observe, with care
Like Absalom are hanged in their own hair;
Rebellion leaves them underneath the Oak,
Whilst Justice (like to Joab) gives the Stroke:
But David mournes (thinking what they have bin)
Not for their punishment, but for their sin;
When Vengance comes in have it will not stay,
Like Pioneers, it cuts our Judgments way;
The Arc thus won, let David dance before it,
And, like the Isralites, we will adore it:
Thus as our David, with a faithful Sling
Has killed Goliath, let our David sing
As David did, My God which dwells on high
Has done this good for Israel, not I:
He has redeemed us from our great distress,
And led us from Rebellions Wilderness:
Now may the Isralites declare and tell
They were delivered by a Miracle;
Merey preserved them from the fatal brinke
Of death' nay and the R^^^ ^^d make them drink;
Heav'en sent them Qu(...) (...) all the ground was spread
With Manna, like a ta(...) ^or their bread;
Is it not meet that those which lived so long
With Isreal's mercy; should fing Jsraels Song?
But yet there are some Isralites forgot,
As they suppose, that drew the longest Lot
In our late Miseries, who now repine,
Being glad of Water, that expected Wine;
Some that were never constant to their Vows
They say, now snatch the Manna from their mouths;
But Moses does not know how they are fed,
Some having all, and others wanting bread:
They say Desert goes wandering up and down
Being loath t'intrench too much upon the Crown:
Since Heav'en in Judgment has rewarded Treason,
True Loyalty will never our of season,
Though at the present we are something lame
(Being Fortunes Criples) we are still the same,
It Is not within the power of griping sorrow
To make us good to day, and bad to morrow;
We are no old State-Juglens, that can be,
Honest for gain, or else nescessitie:
But hold, I shall be chidd, but it is no matter,
A Pen too full of Jnck, may some time scatter,
And leave a blott or two; and so has mine,
But J'le not write my self into a Line:
Therefore, as God has out of mercy sent
Our Sovereign home again, let us rest content,
And not with fruitless petulacies bring
Upon our heads, the anger of our King,
Lest God, whose goodness, takes delight to save,
Should take in Judgment, what his mercy gave:
Let us rejoice that our (once hopelels) eyes
Do see the downfall of our Enemies.
Now CHARLES the great, and good, has purged the Land
And Rules his Subjectes with a prosperous hand;
Let us be thankful, that in him are blessed,
Time, and convenience, will work the rest.
Qaesitor selerum veniet vindexque reorum,
Qui Commissa suis rimabitur argumentis,
In lucemique trahet, tacitaque licentia fraud,
Hine etiam immitis tortor poeneque minister,
Et quisque vero savit, culpamve perodit,
Proditur, atque alio qui iurgia Pectore tollat.
By John Quarles.
FINIS.
London, Printed by Edward Crowch dwelling on Snow-hill. 1662.


