On the DEATH of His EXCELLENCE GENERAL DALIEL OF BINNS, One of the Members of
His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
A Funeral Elegy.
THou Child of Sin and Fate, who only can
Measure the true Dimensions of a Man,
Who with impartial and triumphant Wings
O'retakes the poor man's Flight as well as Kings,
And with thy Martial All-controuling Drum,
Beats a cold March to the Eternal Home,
Tyrant o'r tyrants, who, with Fatal Force,
Betwixt the Soul and Body makes Divorce.
No more thy Trophies boast, thou here must yield,
Here Is on thou could not Conquer in the Field,
Who, spite of all the Forces him withstood,
Has dived for Honor in a Sea of Blood.
Who, whersoe're he Fought, or Seige did lay,
Honor and Conquest did their wings display.
Whose Heart by night nor day did ever feel
A cowards damps, often sleept in sheets of steel.
That Soul of Chivalrie, which no delight
Could weaken, or the face of Death affright,
The Great DALIEL, who with undazled eyes,
Affronted all the Flames from Steel could rise.
Just like the generous Eagle dare oppose.
The proudest light that ever in Heaven arose.
His Actions all were Generous, and Free,
And did no Interest own, but Loyalty,
He loved not Wars for Wars, nor Strise for Strife,
Not Prodigal, nor Nigard of his Life,
He did not loftly spare himself, but then
He did exact the like of other men.
For of his Generous, and Martial Heart,
Courage and Judgment had their equal part,
He was the Genius of the Camp, yet knew,
When to Retire, and when his Foes pursue,
He knew all Order of tumultuous War,
Ranks, Files, March, Countermarch, to make a Squar,
And from a Squar, to raise a Diamond,
And all Battalias ever yet were found.
How to Encamp, Entrench, and any part
Where Nature fails, to Fortify by Art:
How to Desend, or to assault a Town,
And Courtings, Bulwarks, Plat-forms to beat down.
He knew no treacherous Arts, nor cheating Charms,
But masculin Courage, and the Laws of Arms,
With these he made his Soldiers well trained Men,
With these he brought them on, and off again.
It was by those, he to his latest Breath,
In every War, Conquest Propound, or Death.
Like a Majestic General, by those,
He sold his Soldiers Lives dear to their Foes.
By his Example every minor Band,
Did take new Force from his Heroic Hand;
Soldier inspired Soldier; Foot, the Horse;
But he them both; so great's a Generals Force.
Who by his Valor, made it understood,
An ounce of Honor's worth a pound of Blood,
His never daunted Courage undervalu't
The iron salutation of a Bullet.
Therefore some grovling cowards low-pitcht eye,
That could not reach triumphant honors Sky.
What their affrighted sense could not behold,
Without being dazzled, yet to carp were bold.
But he at home, abroad, and in all parts,
His Blade imbrew'd in Rivers Sprung from Hearts.
Yet with such Moderation that he made
It clear; War was for Physic not for Trade.
In Ireland, and in Musco, and at Home,
Like Hercules he Monsters overcome.
In all which Interprizes we might see
His Counsel, Courage, Generositie.
He knew when to be harsh, when to be mild,
And did esteem each Soldier as his Child.
And trained them so, which Care was not in vain,
They as their Father Reverenced him again,
And with the Prophet did him thus bewail,
Horsemen and Chariots of our Israel.
But now being Enfranchised, and at large
From all our Wars, Death seals him a Discharge.
He with the Souls above and Hierarchy,
Has Valor turned into Ecstasy,
Where till the Earth and all its Trophies lie
A scattered Heap, and Time it self shall die.
He shall live unallarm'd with the blast
Of any other Trumpet but the last.
Invictissimi Ducis Thomae Dalelli EPITAPHIUM.
Non potes exiguo claudi Dalelle Sepulchro,
Tans brevis ingentem non capit Vrna virum.
Te Duce Monstra jacent Patria teterrima, cum nil
Restaret, superi scandis in astra poli.
N. P.

Niniani Patersoni ad Amicos Paraenesis.
Ille ego lugentum expertus solator, acerbis
Heu premer ipfe malis! luctu! atque labor! ruino!
Omnibus exhaustus jam casibus, omnium egenus
Defici^; Medicasque manus fomentaque quaere
Vul^tribus (sed sums) meis. Nunc tempus amici
Reddere ^pem, immeritis var^^^es exolvere curis.

