To the Memory of the right Honorable MARGARET COUNTESS OF WEEMS. Who departed
this Life at VVeems, February 20 1688.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
LIke as an aged lofty-fronted Oak,
Whose Verdure, Boughs, and Shelter, might provock,
The proudest in the Dodonean Grove,
Which Superstition did devout to Jove,
Has many blasts, and many Sun-shines known,
At last unto the dreadful Axe falls down,
So Dies this Lady, whom the Age did find,
Perfections Zenith to all Womankind.
But as when through crowds we make our way,
It falls, that each man's haste, the whole does stay,
So fares it in this Subject; that I doubt
So much would pass, that nothing can get out.
For as Her Birth was honorable, and hie,
Come of the greatest of Nobility.
Her Brother, the Great Rothes, nothing under
His Princes Darling, and the Ages wonder,
Whose Worth, and Wit, such hight of Honors won,
That made him Vice Roy, to the Imperial Throne.
Her self by Heaven, and Earth so honored
She heir'd three Earldoms with Her nuptial Bed
In all the which, either for Wife, or Mother,
Scotland shall never parallel another:
She in the Floods of Wealth, practiced Austerity,
And in a throng of Hypocrites, Sincerity.
When crossed (by Pious Patience) she was able
To make misfortunes look most amiable.
That her Familiars concluded all,
Dam Nature, had forgot to give her gall.
Her Humors so well poised all did see,
In stead of (...), she got Geometry.
So steadfast (...) to her was all one matter
If smiles, (...), did cause the eyes to water.
Of Fortunes both, she still such measures had,
The hottest Sun casts still the blackest shade.
Where honesty is fixed, there no wind
Can blow't away, or glittering look it blind.
She knew that the just Heavens oftimes decree,
For joys uncertain, certain misery.
That glorious nothing, gilded emptiness,
Honor; did Her great Soul the more depress.
So humble always, that Her very glance
Put pride imperious out of countenance.
She did abhor the world, tho lodged therein,
As fish continue fresh, in seas of brin.
In midst of Delicats she was content,
To make her Feasts, but hungers banishment,
To Reason always she did sense submit,
And made it bridle ranging appetit.
She neither was too bashful, nor too bold;
Pattern to young, and Patron to the old.
Her Charity, made her be like the Sun,
Extending Light and Heat to every one;
That with the rest she had this divine quality,
That most resembles Heaven, Liberality.
She of all, wherewith God had her endued,
Her self a Stuard, more than owner showed.
None of this ages iron-hearted wretches,
That rather part with God, then Gold, or riches.
Who to Eternity, will feell the knell,
Wealth was the bridge that past them post to Hell.
So debonair and complaisant was She,
Her Mind and Mouth had still a Sympathy.
Nor with these peevish Dams, could she complie,
Who what they covet most, do most deny
Truth rides in Triumph, when Fig Leaves do fail,
Hypocrisy it is but Virtues Vail.
But She excelled in a high degree,
Both in Devotion, and in Charity.
The great Examplar of all Good, beneath
We Will say She Lived, while others only Breath,
She Lived, and Died, a Lady most complete,
And which is wonderful, as Good, as Great.
To Ages all, then Lady Weems here lies
Justly sir named the Pious, Good, and Wise,
Nunquam parca minus quam hic, quae commaniatoti
Genti sceptra tenens, aternaque foeder a servans
Quae magnos parvosque terit, qua fortibus aquat
Imbelles, populisque duces, seniumque juventae.
Si frequentius de morte tua, quam de vitae longitudine cogitares, non dubium
est, quin ardentius te ipsum cirrigeres.
N. Paterson.


