To the Right Honorable my Lord Marquess of Queensberry, Lord High Thesaurer
of Scotland.
OAths of alledgeance, and supremacy
Show, that our Church, and State, in one aggree.
Then who dare blame me, if I Dedicate,
The Churches Pearl, to a Peer of State?
May Heavens protect the Noble Douglas blood,
Then which no race was ever An old Anagram of the name of Douglas. Al so gwd.
No name, no race, no pedigree, no blood, In Albions Isle, were ever all so good.
all so good.
OBSEQUIES To the Memory, of that Reverend, Learned, and Devoute Prelate,
ALEXANDER, Late LORD BISHOP of ROSSE.
MAN'S Life's a flying vapor, which does rise
Like a small spot, twixt two eternities:
An empty shadow of a lying dream,
Where we delusions, for delights esteem;
Which in our best, and prosperous state, does show,
Like drops of frailty plunged in Seas of woe.
Behold this Reverend Prelate, who to save
His Life, did only travel for a grave,
Not disregarded, tho abroad, and from
Both Family, and Friends, God Takes Him Home.
One, to this Earth, of purpose sent by fate,
This age might have a Saint to imitate.
And that deservedly; he is a theme,
Will naked Truth make masqued flattery seem.
For in the Firmament of fame, he will shine
To all posterity, a grand Divine,
A Prelate wise, devout in words and d^eds,
An Ornament to all the Mitred heads.
The draught, and mirror, of a spotles life:
The Preachers wonder, and the hearers strife.
Crowned with wisdoms rays; he bore a mind
From Earth, and ignorance alike refined.
Depths of all Mysteries he thoroughly knew,
While Trees for Men, and Men for Trees we view.
No interest in this Worlds affairs required,
From Pomp, and gain, he cheerfully retired.
His house a Bethlehem was, an house of bread.
The poor and needy to supply, and feed.
That Gospel Spirit of true charity,
His Hand, and Heart made always openly
To all his neighbor wants: To all a Friend
Delighting to do good, and to be kind.
All that afflicted were, he cured their care,
With prudent Counsels, and with holy prayer.
Our Pressours to relieve, our wants supply,
These were his riches, this his Luxury.
His Alms to all, no ostentation stains,
But Godly poor-men were his Benjamins.
Narcissus to the thing for which he pine'd,
Was not more like, then he in heart and mind
Was to the harmles Dove, almost in all
But chiefly herein, that he wanted Gall.
He was another Moses, in whose breast,
Passion (if entered) never found a rest.
His calm and Heavenly Soul, it could not be
Ruffl'd, not ranckl'd with an injury.
Nor scorn, nor spite of his worst foes could move
Him to restrain his Service, or his Love.
Whose Tongues with Gall, and Hearts with envy sweld,
He with Compassion, or neglect beheld:
For he who does to immortal glory post,
Is not with vain and empty trifles crossed,
He was no Temporizer, who did run
Or ever dance to present Fortuns tune.
No low-pitcht Soul, yet unaspiring he
Attained to grandeur by humility.
So tender to his Clergy, it did seem
Each Church man was a second self to him.
In trust and Counsel to his Friend so close,
If they were Nisus, he Eurialus.
His whole deportment Gentle, sober, sweet,
For in his breast, did Zeal with meekness meet.
High wrongs, high place, in which he was employed*
He meekly suffered, modestly enjoyed.
Chaste, as the blushes of a Virgin rose;
Kind to his Friends, and courteous to his foes.
For as a Princely Priest he wisely knew,
How to protect, and generously rescue,
With a mild Majesty, his Friends repute
From those who did their Honor persecute.
As a magnanimous and wise Commander
He keept the mean twixt flattery, and slander.
At home, abroad unto a scruple tried,
By every dispensation ratified;
So that the purging Fire, and fanning Wind,
Left but pure Grain, and Quintessence behind.
Preaching, and prayer hence, from grosser oar
He did refine to Spirit, and to power.
We saw in his discourses and exemple
Vnim, and Thummim, in the second Temple.
Yet with no borrowed wings did take his flight,
Nor Glow worm like, shined with a juggling light.
What ever from his Lips, or life there came
To us did sparkle from the Heavenly flamm'
Infused, more then acquired; and did inspire,
And then inflammed every meaner fire
Of his inferior charge (like Golden-hair,
The beams, the Sun darts through the lightsome air)
His light, and heat, at once in them appeared,
Although but in poor Camels hair attired.
But his more radiant, and more active spirit,
Does now a clear, and ample orb inherit,
Where it has lost it self, being rapt above,
In an eternal Maze of Joy, and Love:
Where shads are gone, and all the Ideas ripe,
Have now resolved themselves into the type.
Blessed is thy hap, our hope, thour't at thy rest.
Whilst we with Gog and Magog, must contest.
May Heavens bequeath to some, if not to all
That on our Spirits thy rich Mantle fall.
And to all aftertimes thy motto be,
YOUNG did both teach, and live Divinity.
This box of Spiknard, while on thee we cast,
Non but a Judas will surmise it wast:
Tho to thy memory much more we owe,
Yet praise, and tears is all we dare bestow.
2 Kings 2: 12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof. Occidit ante diem, and spes nostras morte fefellit,
HIS EPITAPH.

TO name all gifts, and graces were too long;
This all contains, Here lies Bishop YOUNG
Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori. Horat. Mr. NINIAN PATERSON.

Sold by Walter Pope in Roxburghs Closse, over against St. Giles Steeple, Anno
1683.


