THE RUN-AWAYES RETURN: OR, The Poor Penniless Pilgrim.
WHat, Come again? Where have you Roving been?
And what Rare Sights in the Country have you seen?
What News from thence? Did you the Plague Outrun?
Or tell me truly, Was it not Begun
Before you came? Or is your Money spent
Which you had in your Pockets when you went?
Will not the Country Trust? Your Credit's bad;
Is there no Entertainment to be had?
That to our City, daily Day by Day,
You flock as fast, as when you Ran away!
Does Homespun Jone, or Countrey-Tom deny
You for to Lodge, or in their Barn to lie?
It was the Plague did drive you out from hence,
And now the Plague of the Purse, I fear from thence:
What Fury dogs, and haunts you up and down,
First from the City, to the Country Town?
But when you are there, you are afraid to stay,
And with a nimble pace do Run away;
Like as the fearful Hare, or Swift-foot Deer,
Does fly before the Hounds: Your Panniek Fear
Does cause you with a swift and nimble pace,
To Run away, and flee from place to place,
For supposed Safety; yet you are much worse,
Having both Plague of Body, and of Purse:
They that shun Scylla, stern Charibdis shall
With sucking billows cause them catch a fall.
Did not you know that Gods Almighty Hand
Was great enough to cover all the Land?
Or from His Presence did you think to Run?
Or His Swift Arrows did you think to Shun?
No, no, they are Speedy, and will overtake
The Fearful Sinner, although he do make
As quick a Flight, as does the Sun in the Sky,
Yet they like Lightning, do more faster fly.
What have you got by Running up and down,
And Roving up and down from Town to Town?
But spent your Money, Credit, and good Name,
And now are forced to your Endless shame,
To this Infected place as fast to Run,
Which few Months since, Fear caused you for to Shun.
Does not God's Mighty Hand stretch over all
Empires and Kingdoms of Earths Massy Ball?
And if you Wandered all the World about,
Could not His hand of Justice find you out?
To stop Gods Wrath, is not to Run away,
But humbly at His Footstool for to pray;
Confess our Faults, Repent, and Turn to God,
Then would He ease us of His heavy Rod;
Withdraw the Plague, and Love us dearly too,
And this IN me sure our Gracious God would do.
Gods golden wings of Safety cover all
Who trust in Him, when twice Ten thousands fall
At their right hand; His silver feathers will
Them safely shelter, when His hand shall kill
All such as dare not to His Mercy stand,
But seeks to hide them from His wide-spread hand:
When from Infected London you did Run,
Thinking Gods Visitation for to Shun;
And in the Country wandered up and down,
From place to place, and eke from Town to Town;
And could find none that would you Entertain,
With Empty Pockets turned back again;
So that it seems in London those might stay
Who had no Money, you might Run away:
But now your Purse is Penniless, you drive
Into our City, as Bees to their Hive;
You may be gone the same way that you went,
Unto the Country Loobies, where you spent
Your Money, and your Credit, Go, be gone,
And eat your Christmas Pie with Dull Sir John;
With Sir John Lack Latin, who Ran away,
And left his Sheep for to be made a Prey.
It was your Duties to have Nourished
The bodies of the Poor; the other Fed
Their Souls with Food, and not to go away,
But in their Troubles by them for to stay.
Now if your Purse or Credit will hold out,
You may go Wander all the World about;
We are as glad your Backside for to see,
As for to have your Paltrey Company:
Return, Return, unto your Country Jone,
For Little Kindness here you shall have shown.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, M.DC.LXV.


