The Valiant hearted Seaman; Declaring a late Skirmish fought between our
English Fleet and the Dutch.
Wherein the Dutch was worsted, two of the Dutch ships sunk, and two taken as
lawful Prize, with a very small loss on our English side.
The tune is, Lusty Stukely.


BRave Gallants now of England
Cheer up your hearts, and firmly stand
Against all people which oppose our King
Let us sight with hearts lusty and stout,
To keep all Foreign Nations out,
Let Valor still the same of England ring.
The Hol ander as I am fold
adventure new to be so void
As to oppose our Gracious King to fight.
For truth it is I understand
They have some English in their Land
That right or wrong would do England a spite
In Histories we all may read
brave England nere was conquered,
But in five hundred seventy years ago
by William Duke of Normandy,
yet Kent held out most valiantly
And met that Duke so gallantly their foe.
Brave England then he not dismayed,
the Lord above will send you aid
If hand in hand you all together join
it is not the Turk nor Spaniards pride
nor Butter box which Traitors guide
Shall ever daunt this valiant heart of mine,




THe Duke of York himself is pleased
Chief Admiral upon the Seas
To venture life and limb for Englands right,
therefore our Valiant Seamen hold
does now while life and limb does hold
They will engage the Hollanders to fight.
there is now a Subject in this Land
but willing is with helping hand
To venture still for Englands Liberty.
therefore prepare you Hollander
which now is bent to civil War
We do intend to make you fight or fly.
In Fifty two, full well you know
England gave you an overthrow
How bare you now for to Resist again?
your Service then was not so hot,
as now shall be our Cannon shot
we will make you yield or sink into the Pain
a Gallant Fleet we have at Sea
well armed, and bravely manned they be
And men of Courage, Valiant, hold and stout
fear not in England but we shall
give all our enemies the fall
Ere long, of it you need not make a doubt.
an^ now you Valiant Seamen all
thear up I hear the Bowson call
See where the Fleet of Enemies do lie.
let Drums now beat, and Trumpets sound
and Canoniers turn your Guns round
Brave English hearts will scorn a foot to fly.
See where our Tygre Rides amain,
the Dolphin and the Pelican.
The Charles, the James, the Lion, and the Boar,
with many a Gallant ship beside,
hoping to cool the Dutch-mans pride
See how they fly along the Holland shore.
See Valiant hearts, we are for battle
hark how the thundering Guns do rattle.
The Lord above, I hope is on our side
stand to it now brave hearts so stout
see how the Dutchmen wheels about
They cannot long this Service hot abide.
me thinks I see a top sail fall
before our Noble General
Some loss is sure within the Enemy.
I hope ere long we all shall see
brave England get the Victory,
That we may live in Peace and Unity,
two Dutch ships sunk as we hear say
and two is carried quite away
The rest no longer would abide our shot
our Guns so rattles in their ear
I hope ere long we all shall hear
They will repent that they begun the plot.
J. R.

FINIS.
So the Lord preserve little England,
Convert O God, her Foes
That we may live in quietness,
our Enemies Plots disclose.
London, Printed for S. Tyus on London Bridge With Allowance.


