THE ROYAL RENDEZVOUS: Or, The Magnificence of His Majesty's Fleet.
BLess me! Where am I? To what Ruin bent?
I should be by this Moving Wood, in Kent?
Methought I saw a City on the Seas,
And by the Steeples, told the Parishes;
There might be (as I guess) twice Seventy Seven,
Whose Babel-Towers were climbing up to Heaven:
Their Language was Confusion; And, their Breath
Darkened the Air with Sentences of Death.
They seemed to me a stand of Pikes, or Trees
That overtop the humble Copices.
With these high Towering Mastes, our Muse begins;
And where such Sign-posts are, What are the Innes?
Those Trojan Horses, formed by Palla's Charms,
Not stuffed with Garbidge, but with Men and Arms.
Those Wooden Mountains on the Wavie Maine,
As if the Giants would Fight Jove again.
If Philip King of Spain did once call His
Invincible: What would he think of This?
Away with Xerxes Chains, fond Foolery;
It Is such a Fleet as this Fetters the Sea:
You would have thought that the Tumultuous Flood
Was not so much an Ocean, as a Wood:
And that vast Womb of Ships, Forest of Dean,
Stub'd by the Rebels, was grown up again.
A Floating- Island, a Realm did surpass
Denmark and Dantzick for your Choice of Masts.
I Am confident next Month we shall Advance
May-Poles enough to make the Dutchmen Dance:
Did you but see our- Frigates, you would swear,
Norway had left scarce either Pitch, or Tarr.
For Lead, you would suppose here Darby was;
For Iron, Bilboa; and Corinth for Brass.
And for Provision, you would think you were
In Egypt, to behold the Corn that is here.
Brandy, although sufficient, we Decline;
Spirits of Men are here, give Cowards Wine.
And, say, Seven Provinces United be;
Each Ship of ours is a Whole Colonie.
And Lofty Waves, that as Spectators, crowd;
Honored with such a Fleet, may well be proud.
Whilst, both the Waters, and the Winds, agree,
To swell our Sails into a Tympanie,
What shall we not be able then to do,
That have GREAT CAESAR, and His Fortunes too!
And, Superadd to this, a CAUSE so Just;
We might to Providence and Cockbotes trust:
But, Blessed be Heaven, we have a Royal Fleet,
Will make those Picture-Mongers Crouch to seer.
Talk not of Tempus est, Bacon's an Ass;
Our Wooden VValls are stronger than his Brass.
With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for T.W. 1672.


