A LAMENTATION OVER ENGLAND, Because of the Judgments that is now Appearing
against her for her manifold TRANSGRESSIONS.
OH England, England! What shall I say unto thee? or how shall I lay open
before thee thy unutterable Transgressions and Iniquities, of all sorts and
natures, that that thou may be thoroughly sensible of the cause for which the
God of heaven and earth is now appearing against Thee, with sore Calamities and
great Judgments? Oh, that my head were as water, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that Jer. 9. 11. and 10. 22. Jer. 19. 8, 9.
I might thoroughly lament thy sad condition into which thou have driven thy
self, through thy wilful resisting the day of thy Visitation. Oh, that thou
had thoroughly considered in this Jer. 9. 1, 2 Luke 19. 42, 43, 44
thy day, the things which did belong to thy peace; but now are they hid from
many, who are drinking iniquity as the Ox drinks water; therefore shall thine
enemies compass thee on every side, and shall prey upon thee, as the Ravens
upon a dead carcass, and none shall frey them away, unless thou break off thy
sins by repentance, and thy iniquities by showing mercy to the poor and
oppressed in thee; for from the head even to the foot, thou art a disjoynted
body, full of bruises and gangreen'd sores, which are so spread in every
member, that there is now little hopes of thy recovery. Oh, how often would the
Lord Mat. 23. 37.
have gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings; but thou
have mocked his Messengers, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of God 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
is broke forth against thee, and thy ttoubles come upon thee as an armed man,
which thou can not withstand; thy Pride, thy Wantonness, Luxury, Whoredom,
Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Oppression and Cruelty, cozening and
defrauding the Innocent, shall press thee down as a millstone, into the Sea;
fear, the Pit and the Snare shall be upon thee, and it shall come to pass, that
he that flees from the noise of fear of that Isa 24. 17, 18.
dreadful day that is coming upon thee, shall fall into the Pit, and he that
comes up out of the midst of the Pit, shall be taken in the Snars; for the
earth shall reel to and fro, like as thy Drunkards have reeled in thy streets,
and it shall be removed like a Cottage, and the Transgressions thereof shall be
heavy upon it, and the haughtiness of many shall be bowed down, and Terror,
Fear and Amazement shall seize upon the stoutest heart, before the fierce anger
of the Lord now broken forth be executed upon it, for the destroying Angel from
the Lord is gone forth to plague and famish thy Inhabitants, who has long
fatted themselves like fed Horses, devouring the good creatures of God upon
their lusts, sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to play, 1 Cor. 10. 7.
which was the Idolatry of the old World, and one of the evils for which God
took an occasion to destroy them. Oh, how often have thou tempted the God of
Heaven by thy abominable Oaths and Cursings; nay, thou have invented new Oaths
to please the lusts of wicked men, Therefore shall thy Land mourn, Jer. 23. 10
and thy pleasant places be dried up, and thy fruitful fields as the high
places of the Forest; for they that have wrought wickedness have been set up
in thee, and they that have tempted God (as aforesaid) Mal 3. 15.
have been even delivered, countenanced and tolerated: yea, Judgment has
stood afar off, and Justice has been turned backward, Isa. 59. 14, 15.
and Truth has fallen in the streets, and Equity could not enter; and he that
has departed from evil, has been made a prey upon by thy ravening Wolves, who
have laid many Snares for them who have reproved sin in the gate: Shall not I
visit for these Isa. 29. 21
things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
Oh, how often has Justice and true Judgment Jer. 5. 9.
been perverted by thy Judges, whose unparalleld proceedings (against righteous
men only, for the worship and service of God, and obedience to his Son (within
this late years) will be recorded to generations to come, who have first made
John 4. 23, 24.
Laws to trap and snare the righteous, and then have hunted them therewith out
of their peaceable habitations, and thrown them into many noysom prisons, where
they have long kept them, contrary to the known Laws and Liberties of England,
and exposed them to ruin in person and estate for ever, only because they
worship God and obey his Truth, according as he has persuaded their hearts;
let the Goals throughout this whole Land, be as a cloud of witnesses against
thee this day, yet with this thou art not satisfied, but thou must have such
banished out of their native Country, and exposed to slavery in a foreign
Land, whom thou could never justly charge with the least injury to any man's
person or Estate; The cry of whose Blood (murdered by Thee in thy close and
noisome prisons, for want of room and Air) is gone up to the God of Heaven, and
he has begun to pour out his Plagues upon Thee: And as thou London has
proceeded in the above said Cruelties, imprisoning many to death, cruelly
whipping, stocking, beating, pinching, buffetting, and banishing, etc. against
thee has God bent his bow, and there is wrath gone forth from him against
thee, and the Plague is begun, which shall imprison and banish thousands into
Number. 16. 46.
a dungeon where there is no redemption, and thy Calamities generations to come
shall reckon up; but though thou must first drink of the cup of the Lords
fierce indignation and hot displeasure, yet after thee it shall be given into
the hand of every Oppressor in the Land, until they know that the most High
rendereth to every man according to the fruit of his doings, who is now
pleading with thee by his Sword, by his Plagues and Judgments, which thou
can neither Suppress, Imprison nor Banish, but they shall hunt thy
Inhabitants out of their sealed Houses and fair Cities, even as thou have
hunted his chosen Ones out of their Meetings and Dwellings, for the same
measure thou have measured, shall be measured to thee again; and Mat. 7. 1, 2.
Jam. 2. 13
they shall have judgment without mercy, who have showed no mercy; the Sword
without, and the Famine and Pestilence within, shall destroy both the young man
and Maid; and thus Ezekiel. 7. 15.
shall thy Land be vexed, until the Lord have performed the thought of his
heart concerning thee, for thou have overpast the deeds of the wicked, and thy
wilful Transgressions has rendered thee guilty before God and man of all those
judgments that are come and coming upon thee: Alas, alas, for the misery,
destruction, and desolation which is hastening to come upon thee; the day of the
Lord shall come upon thee, as pain upon a woman that travelleth, and you shall
be amazed at one another faces, your faces shall be as flames: for, Behold the
day of the Lord comes, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to scourge the
Land, and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it; and he will punish
the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquities, and will cause
the arrogance of the proud to cease, and lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible, who has made strong the bonds and fetters of his Anointed; then
shall a man be more precious then gold, and the residue that shall remain,
shall return to Zion with songs of deliverance, and Hallelujahs to the Isa. 35.
10.
Lord for ever; and sorrow and sighing shall fly away, and they shall receive
beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness, that they
may be called Trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord. But thou shall
mourn as the Dove mourns, yea, thy laughter shall be turned into mourning,
and thy joy into heaviness; and thy swarms of false Prophets, who have long
daubed thee with untempered mortar, and made merchandise of thee through
covetousness, shall drink deep of the cup of the Ezekiel. 22. 28. 1 Pet. 2 1, 2,
3, 4. Mal. 4. 1.
Lords indignation, who is highly guilty of all the Cruelty and Oppression,
Pride and Iniquity, for which Gods anger is now kindled, which shall burn them
up, and leave them neither root nor branch; the great Globe of the World they
have so long hugged fast under their long robes, shall tumble from them as down
a mighty mountain, without recovery; and the arm of flesh (they have so long
fled unto, and trusted in) shall wither before their eyes; and the complaint of
the Widows they J^r. 17. 5. Ma. 13. 14.
have devoured, and of the Strangers which they have oppressed, evil entreated
and persecuted, and of the Fatherless which they have destroyed by their
covetous practices, shall be written before them, as in Tables of brass, and
they shall have time to read them, their creeping about upon their bellies, and
twisting every way like Serpents, to uphold themselves and their wives and
children in pride, fullness of bread, and abundance Ezekiel. 15. 49.
of idleness, shall be a Proverb in generations to come: And as those things
which I was moved to write concerning their brethren the Presbyters, a little
before their overthrow came upon them, which eclipsed all their glory, so shall
these things overtake this generation of Vipers, whose glory shall go out as
the snuff of a candle, for they have been as evening Wolves, ravening the prey,
and destroying many souls to get dishonest gain; the blood of both Prince and
People is upon their heads, crying now aloud for vengeance; and the Executioner
is even at the door, and they shall not proceed much further, till their folly
be made manifest to all men.

Oh England, England! how art thou like an ungirded Vessel, Romans 1. 8.
how often has the Lord invited thee to Repentance, warning thee of his fierce
Wrath, which is to be revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, but instead
of harkening and returning, thou have abused, stocked, stoned, buffeted,
persecuted in thy Synagogues, shamefully entreated, imprisoned to death, yea
and banished them whom the Lord raised up in tender love to warn thee, and
after their reproof, thou has invented how to be more desperately wicked,
surpassing the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, nay Matt. 11. 23.
if the mighty works which has been done in thee, had been done in them, they
would long e're now have repented in dust and ashes, but thou has hardened thy
heart and stifned thy neck, and set at naught all his reproofs, and despised
all his Counsels, therefore thou shall seek him early and shall not find him,
and in the morning shall say would God it were evening, and in Deuteronomy. 28. 67.
the evening would God it were morning, for the anguish which shall come upon
thee, all these things in the Lords appointed season shall overtake thee, and
much more, unless thou return unto him who has smote thee.

And now in the day of thy Visitation, thou has proclaimed a Fast, and
peradventure will hang down thy head (like a Bulrush) for a day, will thou call
this a Fast and an acceptable day to the Lord. Is not this the Fast which the
Lord has chosen to loose the bands of Wickedness, and to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke that
ye have most unjustly laid, and still retains upon the necks of the Innocent,
who lays in every County oppressed, and persecuted for the exercise of a good
Conscience toward God, and all Men: are you willing to set such free to serve
the Lord in England? and will you break the bond of iniquity, and undo every
yoke, this is the Fast the Lord requires of you, which if you be not willing to
keep; all your hanging down of your heads, prayers, and tears will be but as
Cain's Sacrifice, who persecuted his Brother (till he had slain him) about
Religion, unto whose offering God had no respect, and the Cries of their
Oppressions will more prevail with the Lord against you, then all your formal
Prayers will for you, for I must tell you, God hears not sinners, but if any
Man will do his will, him he hears, Joh. 9. 31.
[yea] when you spread forth your hands, he will hide his eyes from you, and
when you make many prayers, he will not hear, for your hands are full of
cruelty, blood, and iniquity; Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before him, cease to do Isa. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow; now come let us reason together (says the
Lord) though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though they
be red like Crimson, they shall be as woole; if ye be willing and obedient ye
shall eat the good of the Land, but, if ye refuse and go on in rebellion, the
aforesaid Judgments shall surprise you as an armed Man, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, and you shall know that the Lord rules in the Kingdoms
of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will.

Therefore if there be any yet amongst you whose hearts is not wholly hardened,
have, have to meet the Lord by Repentance, and remember what the King of
Nineveb did after Jonas had prophesied the Destruction of that great City for
its Jona 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
wickedness, who said Let Man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, and Cry
mightily unto God, [yea] Let them turn every one from his evil way, and from
the violence that is in their hands; who can tell if God will turn and repent,
and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not, And God saw their works
that they turned every Man from his evil way, and God repented him of the evil
that he had said he would do unto them, and he did it not, now this is the Fast
which the Lord expects at your hands, To turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence which is in your hands against his heritage, peradventure God
may turn from you that great Judgment which he has visited you withal, Oh
that I might be Instrumental in helping the worst of mine enemies out of the
snare of the Devil, much more my Native Countrymen whose hearts are breathing
after the Lord, but whether they will hear or forbear, I have answered the word
of the Lord who commanded me to write, and furnished me with matter faster then
my Pen could write, that his Judgments and the Cause thereof and the Remedy
against the Remainder thereof might be fully declared and published in the
ears of thee oh England, which in faithfulness I have done, according as the
word of the Lord arose in me without flattering. So thus far am I clear of the
blood of all Men, whether I live or dye, remain in Bonds or be at Liberty,
whether I be banished for the Testimony of Jesus and Word of God, or remain in
Prison here as I have done this several years, with several more of my
Brethren and fellow sufferers; in all which I am no way careful, but can
freely say, Oh Lord thy will be done in the Earth, etc. Therefore I rest in
that peace which the World cannot rob me of, and remain,

England's real Friend, called Ambrose Rigge.
From the Prison in Horsham in Sussex this 12th day of the 6th Month called
August, 1665.
THE END.

