The Royal Victory,
Obtained (with the providence of Almighty God) against the Dutch-Fleet, June
the 2d. and 3d. 1665. a Fight as bloody (for the time and number) as ever was
performed upon the Narrow-Seas, giving a particular Account of 17. Men of War
taken, 14 Sunk and Fired: But 40. that could escape of their whole Fleet, which
at this time are hotly persued by the Earl of Sandwitch. Their Admiral Opdam
slain by the Duke of Yorkes own Frigate. Van Trump Sunk by Captain Holmes, with
the gallant deportment of Prince Rupert, Capt. Minns and Capt. Smith. All the
Seven Dutch Admiralls (but John Evertson) killed. On our side, only one single
Ship (the Charity) lost; Sir John Lawson received a slight hurt in the knee,
the Lord Marlborough, the Lord of Portland, the Lord of Falmouth, the Lord of
Muskerry, Mr. Boil (the Earl of Corks Son) Captain Athelton of the Guiny,
Captain Kirby of the Breda, and Rear Admiral Sanson were slain, and about 383
Seamen and Soldiers. The number of the Dutch that were killed amounts to
10000, and 2200 Prisoners which we have taken.

To the Tune of, Packingtons pound.




LEt England, and Ireland, and Scotland rejoice,
and render thanksgivings with heart and with voice
That surley Fanatic that now will not sing,
As false to the Kingdom, and Foe to the King;
For he that will grutch,
Our Fortune is such,
does deal for the Devil, as well as the Dutch,
For why should my nature, or conscience repine
At taking of his life, that fain would have mine
So high a Victory we could not command,
Had it not been gained by an Almighty hand,
The great Lord of Battles did perfect this work
For God and the King, and the good Duke of York,
Whose Courage was such,
Against the Low Dutch,
that vapour'd and swager'd, like Lords in a hutch,
But let the bold Hollanders burn sink or swim,
They have honor enough to be beaten by him,
Fire, air, earth and water, it seems were employed
To strive for the Conquest, which we have enjoyed,
No honor or profit, or safety can spring,
To those that do fight against God and the King*
The Battle was hot,
And bloudily Fought,
the Fire was like Rain, and like Hail was ye Shot,
For in this Engagement ten thousand did bleed
Of Flemmings, who now are ye Low Dutch indeed.
In this cruel Conflict stout Opdam was slain
By the great Duke of York, and lies sunk in ye Main
It Was from ye Dukes Frigate that he had his doom^
And by the Dukes valor he was overcome;
It was his good Fate,
To fall at that Rate,
who sink under Princes, are buried in State.
Since valor and courage in one grave must lie,
It is a great honor, by great hands to dye.
The second part,
to the same Tune.
THat daring bold fellow, ye Son of Vantrump,
Whose brains were beat out by the head of the Rump
Ingageing with brave Capt Holmes, hand to hand,
His Ship sunk to'th' bottom, yet he got to Land,
His Fate looked grim.
'Twas well he could swim,
Else he that caught Fishes, ye Fish had caught him,
They eat up our Fish without Reason or Laws,
But now they are going to pay for the Sauce.
To mock at men's misery is not my aim,
It never can add to an English-mans fame;
But I may rejoice that the Battle is wonn,
Because in the victory Gods will is done,
Whose Justice appears
In such great Affairs,
who will for Amboina plague them and their Heirs
For he that does combat his conscience with gilt
In shedding of blood, his own shall be spilt.
In this cruel Contest (our fortune was such)
We took seventeen Men of War from the Dutch.
And likewise (as then the occasion required
and as God would have it) fourteen more were fired.
At Amboina when
They Tortured our Men,
they looked not to have the same paid them again
With fire and with water their Sinews they cracked
In fire and in water they died for the Fact.
According as our God of Battle commanded
The best of their Vessels were Fired and Stranded,
All ships, Men of War; for what power has man
To fight with that Army, where God leads ye Van
They Steer, and the^ Stem,
But 'twas so extreme,
our men were near dying, with killing of them;
They lost (when ye muskets and cannon so thundered
Twice so many thousand as we have lost hundr'd
'Twould make a brave Englishmans heart leap to seet
But forty ships made an escape of their Fleet
Which our men pursue with much courage and strenght
It Is doubtless but we shall surprise them at lenght,
If God be our guide,
And stand by our side,
we shall be be frinded with fair Wind and Tide;
If Providence prosper us with a good Gale,
The Dutch nor the Devil shall ever provaile.
Prince Rupert like lightning flew thorrough their Fleet
Like flame mixed with powder, their Army did meet
Ten thousand slain bodies the Ocean orespread,
That in few hours distance were living and dead,
Their Admirals all,
Save one there did fall,
and death had command like a chief General,
Brabe Smith in the Mary did shave out his way
As Reapers do Wheat, or as Mowers cut Hay.
Stout Lawson, and Minn, there did both play their parts,
who emptied their Guns in their Enemies hearts
The burly fat Dutchmen being cut out in Slips,
The Vessels did look more like Shambles then Ships.
God prosper the Fleet,
And send they may meet
Du Ruiter, to make up the Conquest complete,
God bless all the Princes, and every thing
That Fights for ye Kingdom, and prays for ye King.
FINIS.
A List of the Names of the Dutch Ships which were taken, fired and sunk, by
his Majesty's Fleet, under his Highness the Duke of York, June the 3.
Ships taken.
The Helderston, taken by the Bristol, Guns 60. The Mars, taken by the
Assurance, Guns 50. The Clove-tree taken by the Colchester, Guns 62. Charles
the 5th. taken by the Plymoutht Guns 45. The Delft, taken by the Breda and
Leopard. Guns 40. The Young Prince, taken by the Martin, Guns 36. The Zeland,
taken by the Centurrion, Guns 36. The Black Bull, by the Anne and Ruby, Guns
56. The Ruiter, taken by the Dolphin, Guns 18.

Diverse more takeh since, whose names we have ont yet* A thousand Manacles
found aboard one of their Ships, which they had provided to Hand-cuff the
English. O! Rogues in grain.

Ships burnt and sunk.
Opdams Ship blown up, Guns 84. The Merceven, Guns 78. The Steden, burnt, Guns
40. The Tergoes, burnt by the Dolphin, Guns 34. The Orange tree, burnt, Guns
76. Capt. Cuypers Ship sunk, Guns 30. One sunk by the Advice. Guns 46. One
Fire-Ship, blown up the night before the Fight. Another the night after.
Another great Fire-Ship sunk, going off. Others sunk and run aground.

Not above 30. of our Ships that did Engage in the heat of the Battle, wherein
we lost 1 Ship, 383 men.

With Alowance,

London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, R. Gilbertson, and J. Wright.


