ROOM FOR CUCKOLDS: OR MY LORD LAMBERTS ENTRANCE INTO SODOM and GOMORAH.
To the Tune of, Is there no more Cuckolds but I.
YOu Cow-hearted Citizens, what is your Damned pretense,
To keep your selves within your Beds, and not Fight for your Prince;
Whose Majesty should you behold. your shames would breed your woe;
And then (like Fools) you will cry out,
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
There Is some of you, whose Bishops Lands do so much clogg your heels,
That now you cannot sturr, where as else, you would Run on Wheels:
But yet I hope a time will come, when you shall be made know,
And told unto your faces, that you are
Cuckolds all-a row.
But yet for one most reverend Act, you are to be commended;
That through your Rams-head zeal you have your brother Rump befriended.
To set them in the Parliament house, their Wisdoms for to show;
But they (and you) are all a like
Cuckolds all-a-row.
Yet I advise you, set this Rump. in Salt, for fear of Stinking;
'Twill fall unto the Devils share, because it is his by drinking:
In spite of all their Acts, and Laws,
He Will carry them down below
Then Hell, and City, like to like,
Cuckolds all-a-row.
I doubt, your Lambert is undone, and now he may go Preach;
For 'ts the English all a-moade, For every Rogue to Teach:
He Will Nose it bravely in a Tub, to let the City know
That they will be Damned, unless they Dip,
Cuckolds all a-Row.
But where is your mighty Fleetwood now his Honor's worn to the Stump;
He Will serve Ambassador to Hell, to make way for the Rump.
And thus King-killers one by one will to the Devil go,
Upon the City Asses backs, like
Cuckolds all-a-row.
And now Cow-hearts, look to your Shops, the Red-coats will you fright,
And Plunder you, because they know your Horns hang in your light:
No matter, for You have been the cause of all the Kingdoms Woe,
And do deserve still to be called
Cuckolds all-a-row.
But if that you would honest grow, and do a glorious thing;
Which is, to Rowse and take your Arms and Fight for Charles your KING:
Which Act your Credits will regain, and all the World shall know
That you no more shall, then be called
Cuckolds all-a-Row.
Printed for W.R.


