RUB for RUB: OR, AN ANSWER TO A PHYSICIANS PAMPHLET, STYLED, The Stroker
stroked.
COme hither, Doctor, and behold in short
Something of truth, Sir, touching your report.
You with your beastly stories would delude
The Faith and Wisdom of the Multitude.
Ha, ha, Physician, is your envy such?
Are you so touchy, yet not brook a touch?
You played the Poet but were much deceived,
To think your Fictions would be believed.
We laugh and scorn thy envious Libel, pish,
It Is but the Froath of Malice, Womanish.
Whip behind Coachman, cries this envious Boy
Because he cannot, what that does, enjoy.
You envy't as his Happiness, and grutch
Because you cannot grope where he does touch:
Doctor, your Practice is too scant I trow,
Which makes you wound (another Credit) so.
And so you're in an Error most profound,
For he in Duty ought to Heal, not Wound.
Alas, his Craft he cannot always smoother,
We see he does the one as often as the other:
Doctor, you could not when you would defame,
You looked asquint, Sir, and so missed your aim.
True, you struck high, but wound you were not able,
For what you struck at was invulnerable.
It Was a Consumption in the Purse, I fear,
That made the Remedy, prescribed a Jear.
As once Demetrius fearing loss of Gain
Strove to confound what Heaven did maintain.
Alas, you fear your Craft should come to naught,
Because such Wonders by his Hands are wrought,
His Deeds pronounce his VVorth: But let us know
What Honor we, to you Physicians owe.
VVe're not beholding unto you I Am sure,
Not you, but it is our Money gives us Cure.
You Are Rhetoricians in our Cure, we see,
It Is wholly done by a Synecdoche.
Some Griefs you thoroughly Cure, and they are these;
A rich man's Golden Plurisie finds ease.
And presently you Cure, as 'twere by slight,
A heavy hearted Purse and make it light.
Doctor, your Art to every Grief extends,
But yet you do your Cures for your own ends.
A Friend of mine to prove the Doctor came,
And brought a Glass of Urin in's own name.
He took the Glass, he shook it, then replied,
A Fever strong, but faith the Doctor ly'd.
A Doctor for a Horse I swear he is,
The feav'rish Urin was a Horses Piss.
And by this instance, we may plainly see,
You're the Deceiver, Doctor, and not he.
Then he is a Jesuit, but you're in the wrong:
Physician, Cure thy self, thy Tongue's too long.
Rather than naught, the very Truth you will slander,
The Doctor's want of Practice makes him maunder.
But yet his envious Fictive Brain's not able,
To droll Reality into a Fable.
His hand is truly powerful whose stroke
Twice dispossessed and made the Devil smoke.
What if he clipped and clapped, what is that to you?
You Have clipped and clapped, and have been clapped too.
For, if to me my Author have not ly'd,
Though nor, of the back, he once was Scarifi'd.
Your foul report betrays you, and in truth,
I fear the Doctor has a liquorish Tooth.
Her Stocking off, he strokes her Lilly-foot,
What then? The Doctor had a mind to do it.
Her Legs, her Knees, her Thighs, a little higher.
And there is the Doctors Center of Desire;
Where he, as I for certain understand,
Has searched many a wenches Country-land.
One VVench, I hear, and her Discase was this,
And that no strange one is, the Green Sickness,
He saw the Maid was in a needy mood,
He strait presumed a Clyster might be good:
He lays her on the bed, O beastly story!
And then thrusts in his long Suppository,
And tells her on his Faith, deny't who can,
Nothing so good for her, as the Oil of Man.
And then I Am sure, if what is true, were spoke,
She gave him tuch for tuch, and stroke for stroke.
But passing this, and many of the like sort,
Doctor, your Practice has no good report;
And all suppose by your obscene Narration,
Your Brains and Back want a severe Purgation,
Your Pamphlet false, Reason it self implies,
For 'twas all Poetry, and therefore Lies.
Thus you and I upon the Matter Strike,
You give a Rub, and I Return the Like.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1666.


