J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Encouragement of Cloth-Manufactories.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Cur Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as by several Laws, and Acts of Parliament, and particularly by the
12th. Act of the 3d Parliament of King Charles the second, of ever blessed
memory; All Merchants, and other Persons whatsomever, are strictly prohibit,
and discharged to Import into this Kingdom, any Foreign Cloths, or Stuffs made
of Wool, with Certification, that all such Goods, as shall be Imported contrary
thereto, shall be burnt and destroyed, and the Importers, and Resetters thereof
Fined in the Value of the said Goods: As also, by an Act of Our Privy Council,
of the date, the 14. day of August. 1685. The Lords thereof, for the
Encouragement of Manufactories, did give full Power and Warrant to the
undertakers therein, or those to be Entrusted by them, to seize on all Foreign
Cloth, and Searges, etc. Imported within this Kingdom, contrary to Law; and did
thereby strictly Prohibit, and Discharge all Persons whatsomever, either by
Collusion, or otherways, to Import, or Traffic within this Kingdom,
concerning the Conveying, Vending, or Selling any Foreign Woollen Cloth, and
others aforsaid, within the same, under the Pains and Penalties made
thereagainst: And likewise, did thereby Discharge the wearing of all Woollen
Cloth, and Searges, etc. Except that which is Native, under the pain of 500.
Merks Scots Money, for each Transgression. The Persons challenged being always
obliged to declare upon Oath, from whom they had any of the said Prohibit
Goods: And likewise, We, by Our Royal Proclamation, of the date, the 16. day of
September. 1686. By advice of Our Privy Council, did Revive and Renew all Laws
made in Favors of Manufactories. Prohibiting, and Discharging the Importing,
or Wearing what is thereby Prohibited. And did Require and Command the samen to
be put in due and vigorous Execution, every manner of way, as is thereby
prescribed, and did thereby Prohibit and Discharge the Importing or Wearing of
all English-Cloth; as also the wearing of all Stuffs, or prohibited Cloths,
abroad, or in the Streets, under the pretense of Night-Gowns, or Night-Dresses,
under the Pains contained in Our Proclamation, and Acts of Parliament.
Notwithstanding of which Acts, tending so much to the advancement of
Manufactories, within this Kingdom, and thereby to the general advantage of the
Nation. The Merchants, and others have Imported great Quantities of Prohibit
Foreign Cloths, and Stuffs, to the great discouragement of the said
Manufactories; the considerable loss and prejudice of the Kingdom, and manifest
breach, and contempt of the Laws, which We understand to proceed from the not
putting of the said Laws to due Execution against the Contraveeners:
Therefore, We, with advice of Our Council of Trade, do hereby Revive and renew
all the said Laws, and other Acts of Parliament, and Council, for the
Encouragement of Manufactories, in all the Heads and Articles thereof; And
Ordain, that all who have Imported any such Foreign Cloths, or Stuffs, be
proceeded against, before Our Council of Trade, conform to the tenor of the
said Acts. And further, for the Encouragement of the Cloth-Manufactorie
already set up, and all those that in time coming, shall be set up within this
Kingdom, We, with advice foresaid, do strictly Prohibit and Discharge all
manner of Persons whatsomever, to buy any Foreign Cloth, Searges, Cairseys,
Freizes and milled D^ogats, all made o^ Wool, in time coming, or to make any
Wearing Cloths thereof, in case they have any of the said Cloths or Stuffs by
them already, under the pain of 500. merks Scots. And to the effect, that no
man may pretend Ignorance, whether Cloth be Foreign, or Native, We for
distinguishing of the samen, do Ordain all Manufactories of Cloth, to have a
Seal, which shall be put upon every Piece of Cloth, made therein, under the
pain of confiscation of the samen; And that all other Persons, making Cloth
above the Price of three Pounds Scots, shall have the Seal of the adjacent
Town, appended thereto, under the Penalty above-written, and the Magistrates of
each Burgh, are hereby Ordained to append the samen, upon their making Faith,
that the said Cloth was made within the Kingdom. For appending of which Seal,
the Presenters o^ the Cl^^^ are to pay two shilling Scots for ilk Piece. And in
regard the Tailors have generally been the greatest Traffiquers, in Buying, and
Selling the foresaid prohibit Goods; Therefore, We do hereby prohibit all
Tailors, to Buy, or make any of the foresaids prohibit Goods, under the Pain
of 20. lib. Scots for ilk Transgression, toties quoties. And that Our Pleasure
herein may be known, OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and all other Places needful, and there in Our Royal Name, and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that
punctual obedience may be given thereto, and none pretend Ignorance.

Given at Edinburgh the Fifteenth day of August, One thousand six hundred
eighty Years. And of Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Concilii
Commercii. To: Maine Cls. Concilii Commercii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty: Anno DOM. 1688.


