ACT For putting of the Kingdom in a Posture of War.
AT EDINBURGH the twenty fifth day of July, the year of God, one thousand six
hundredth forty and four years. The Estates of Parliament presently conveened,
by virtue of the last Act of the last Parliament, holden by his Majesty and the
three Estates, in Anno 1641. Considering the great Preparations made by
Strangers, and some unnatural Contrymen, to invade this Kingdom, and
destroy the Religion, Laws, and Liberties thereof: And that an Army under the
command of Prince Rupert, are marching in an hostile way toward the Borders of
this Kingdom for that effect, Do find it absolutely necessary, that for our
own preservation and safety of this Country, the famine should be put in a
posture of defense, as may raise the Country most speedily, and bring them
soonest forth to resist the present invasion. Therefore it is statute and
ordained, that all the sensible persons betwixt sixty and sixteen, of
whatsoever quality, within the Sheriffdoms of Berwick, Roxburgh, Selkirk,
Peebles, Drumfreis, and Stuartries of Anandale and Kirkcudbright, Constabularie
of Hadintoun, Bailiarie of Lawderdale, Edinburgh principal, Linlithgow,
Stirling, Clackmannan, Lanerik, Air, Renfrew, Wigtoun, Fyfe, Perth, and
Forfar, Be presently contrived in Companies and Regiments of Horse and Foot,
and that they be sufficiently provided with Arms and Ammunition, and thirty
days provision, and be ready to defend the Country, oppose any Invasion, and
pursue the Invaders; And that they be aiding and assisting to eithers, and be
ready to march where the Invasion shall happen to be, or to such places of
Rendezvous as upon certain intelligence and correspondence amongst these who
has command; shall be thought most fitting, for opposing and pursuing the
Enemy. And if any of the Heritors be aged or known to be infirm, That they send
out able men, with their best Horse and Arms. And statutes and ordains the
whole Forces Horse and Foot aforesaid, to be ready to march upon advertisement,
by putting forth of Beakons upon the accustomed places or such other
advertisement as shall be given in (excepting such (...) the Marquess of
Argyle shall (...) public service in the West, out of the Shires of Air,
Stirling, Perth, and Renfrew.) And to the effect the Forces in the Shires may
be the better provided with Arms, and more speedily and exactly brought forth,
The Estates foresaids ordains, that all such as were formerly appointed to be
Colonels, or Root-masters of the Shires, by the Convention of Estates and their
Committees, still remain and continue in that charge in these Shires where they
are nominate. And ordains the samine Divisions and Conjunctions of Shires
likewise to stand. And in like manner ordains the whole Noblemen and Committees
of War of the several Shires and Divisions, to meet all in their own
several Committees, in their ordinary place of meeting, betwixt and the sixth
day of August next to come inclusive at the farthest, and there to determine
upon the said Regiments Both Horse and Foot, and according to the number of
the famine Horse and Foot within ilk several Shire and Division, to choose and
appoint more Colonels, Root-masters, and all other Officers necessary for
leading and commanding of their Forces, as well Horse as Foot, and to provide as
many Arms and Ammunition as will arm all the able men in the Shire; and that
either by giving present Money for them, or Bands for the price thereof to a
certain day, and they to have Letters of relief against the Heritors for
repayment of the famine. With power to the Committees foresaids, and the
Heritors, to distribute the Arms in the several Shires and Divisions to these
persons that wants. And ordains all sensible persons whatsoever, betwixt sixty
and sixteen, to come forth upon the advertisement foresaid, under the pains
following, viz, Ilk Nobleman, Gentleman, Heritor, and Burgess, (except
Edinburgh and Stirling, who are ordained to put all the fensible men within
their Towns in Arms and Posture of defense) under the pain of a years Rent, and
ilk Yeoman, under the pain of confiscation of their whole Movables, to be
applied to the use of the Public, and to be farther punished, as contemners of
the orders and authority of Parliament, and infringers of their Covenant. And
ordains this present Act to be presently published at the Market-Crosse of
Edinburgh, by an Herald, by sound of Trumpet.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Registri.

Printed at EDINBURGH by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.


