C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Anent Presentation of MINISTERS.
At Edinburgh, 18. June, 1661.
FOrasmuch as the Kings most excellent Majesty, considering how necessar it is
for the right and orderly administration of Gods Worship, and the exercises of
Religion, and for keeping of His good Subjects ^ithin their duties they owe to
God, to His Majesty, to their native Country and fellow Subjects, especially
at this time, after so many confusions and distractions, both among Churchmen
and others; That more then ordinary care be had in presenting of Ministers to
all such Kirks as are, or shall be vacand within this Kingdom; has given
particular Commission under His great Seal, as to all Presentations, to all
Personages, Vicarag^s and other Benefices, and Kirks at His Majesty's
presentation. And a^ to all other Benefices and Kirks, whereof the presentation
belongs to any other Patron or Patrons whatsoever, His Majesty, with advice and
consent of His estates of Parliament, statutes and or^ains, That all Patrons or
Persons whatsoever, who has, or pretends any right to the Presentatio^s, to
any Patronages, Vicarages or other Benefices of cure, Kirks, or modified
Stipends, be caref^ll in all time coming, that Presentations to these
Benefices, Kirks or Stipends, be granted by the^ to such persons only, as shall
give sufficient evidence of their Piety, Loyalty, Literature and peace^ble
Disposition; And shall, in presence of the Patron or his Attorney, and of the
Sheriff of the Shir^, Stewart of the Stewartrie, or heretable Baily or
Commissar of the bounds, if it be in the Country and of the Magistrates of the
Buroughs within the Burgh, before the granting and their accept^ng the
Presentation, take and subscribe the Oath of Alleagiance, the said Sheriff,
Stewart, Baily, Commissar and Magistrates having first taken the Oath
themselves. And it is hereby declared, That if any person who has not so taken
the Oath of Alleagiance, shall be presented by any Patron, not only shall the
Presentation be void and null of it self, but the right of the Patronage, as to
that vacancy, shall belong to the Kings Majesty, and the Patrons be repute
disaffected to His Majesty's Government, and contemners of His Royal
Authority. And ordains their presents to be printed and published at the Market
Crosses, that none pretend ignorance.

A. Primerose, Cls. Reg.

The OATH of ALLEAGIANCE.
(...) for testification of my faithful obedience to my most Gracious and
re-doubted Sovereign, CHARLES King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Affirm, testify, and declare by ^his my solemn
Oath, That I acknowledge my said Sovereign only Supreme Governor of this
Kingdom, over all persons, and in all causes; and that no Foreign Prince,
Power, State or Person, Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any Jurisdiction, Power or
Superiority over the same; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all
Foreign Power, Juris^ictions and Authorities, and shall at my utmost power,
defend, assist and maintain His MAJESTY'S Jurisdiction ^oresaid, against all
deadly, and shall never decline His MAJESTY'S Power and Jurisdiction, as I
shall answer to GOD.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1661.


