BY THE COMMITTEE Appointed for Auditing and Stating the ACCOUNTS betwixt the
PUBLIC, and the Successors of Sir WILLIAM DICK late of Edingburgh, Merchant.
Whereas upon Application made by the Successors of Sir William Dick, unto the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, for
satisfaction of those great Sums alleged to be due unto the said Sir William,
by the Public of both Nations, as well England as Scotland. The Parliament
taking the same into their consideration, have referred the stating the said
Accounts, in so far as relates to Scotland, to his Highness Council here, who
have by their Order of date the Nineteenth day of August last past, appointed
Us to hear and state the same. Now, to the end the same may be more exactly and
impartially done without prejudice to either party; We finding that Sir William
Dick has charged himself with several considerable Sums of Moneys received
from several persons upon account of the Public, whereunto We being altogether
strangers, have, for Our better Information and Satisfaction therein, thought
fit to call for, And do hereby call for, and desire these persons following, or
those who represent them, if any of them be dead or out of the Country, to
appear before Us at the Council Chamber in Edinburgh, or any of Us, any time
before the Twentieth of November next, between the hours of Nine and Twelve in
the forenoon, And there exhibit to Us, or any of Us, all and every Acquittance
or Acquittances, they have for any Money paid by them, or their Assigns, to Sir
William Dick, or his Assigns, upon account of the Public, since the Twenty
seventh of November, One thousand six hundred forty six; or, through want of
the said Acquittance, to declare the same under their Hands, both how much, and
when they paid it: Viz. Sir Adam Hepburne sometime Commissary, John Hamilton of
Kinglasse, Sir James Fowls, Sir John Cooper, Sir Patrick Hamilton, Harry
Elphiston, Lord Elebanck, Sir George Sterling of Keire, Sir James Nicholson,
Mr. John English, Sir John Dalmahoy, Thomas Craig of Rickarton, Mr. Robert
Preston, James Hamilton of Wastport, Sir Alexander Hume of Halliburton, Lord
of Lugton, the Lord Elphiston, the Earl of Lowdian, the Master of Gray, the
Lord of Cunninghamhead, the Lord of Wedderburne, the Lord of Minto, Mr.
James Strachan, Mr. Adam Cunningham, the Lord of Greenock, the Lord of
Glenkindy, the Earl of Hume, the Earl Dalhousie, the Lord Burley, the Lord
Freeland, the Lord Dundass elder, William Drummond of Rickarton, Mr. Thomas
Rig of Atherney, the Lord Melvill, Mr. Robert Barckley, John Cockburne in
Haddington, the Lord of Touch, Lord Dury, Sir John Weames, Sir James Stewart,
Sir John Smith, And all and every other person and persons whatsoever, who by
themselves, or their Assigns, have paid unto the said Sir William Dick, or his
Assigns, any Sum or Sums of Money upon account of the Public as aforesaid, or
any that can give any Intimation of any Sums intromitted with by Sir William,
or his Assigns, belonging to the Public, to the end the Public being fully
charged by the said Sir William, they may also (as far as may) be fully
discharged.

At EDINBURGH, the 12. of October, 1657. Signed in the Name, and by Order of
the Committee. ADRIAN SCROPE.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1657.


