ACT Concerning the Privileges of the Office of Lion King at Arms.
Edinburgh, 10. of September, 1672.
OUr Sovereign Lord considering, That, albeit by the 125. Act of the 12.
Parliament, holden by His Majesty's Grandfather, in the Year, 1592. the
usurpation of Arms by any of His Majesty's Leiges, without the Authority of
the Lion King of Arms, is expressly discharged; And that, in order thereto,
Power and Commission is granted to the Lion King of Arms, or his Deputes, to
visit the whole Arms of Noblemen, Barons and Gentlemen, and to matriculate the
same in their Registers, and to fine in one hundred pounds, all others who
shall unjustly usurp Arms; As also to escheat all such Goods and Gear, as
shall have unwarrantable Arms engraven on them. Yet, amongst the many
irregularities of these late times, very many have assumed to themselves Arms,
who should bear none; and many of those who in Law bear, have assumed to
themselves the Arms of their Chief, without distinctions, or Arms which were
not carried by them or their Predecessors. Therefore His Majesty, with advice
and consent of His Estates of Parliament, Ratifies and Approves the foresaid
Act of Parliament: And for the more vigorous prosecution thereof, does hereby
Statute and Ordain, that Letters of publication of this present Act be direct
to be execute at the Market-cross of the head Burghs of the Shires,
Stewartries, Baileries of Royalty and Regality, and Royal Burrows, charging all
and sundry Prelates, Noblemen, Barons and Gentlemen, who make use of any Arms
or Signs armorial, wi^^in the space of one year after the said publication, to
bring or send an account of what Arms, or Signs armorial they are ac^^^^^^ed
to use, and whether they be Descendants of any Family, the Arms of which
Family they bear, and of what Brother of the Family they are descended; With
Testificats from persons of Honor, Noblemen or Gentlemen of quality, anent the
verity of their having and using those Arms, and of their descent as aforesaid,
to be delivered either to the Clerk of the Jurisdiction where the persons
dwell, or to the Lion Clerk at his Office in Edinburgh, at the option of the
party, upon their Receipts gratis, without paying any thing therefore: Which
Receipt shall be a sufficient exoneration to them, from being obliged to produce
again, to the effect, that the Lion King of Arms may distinguish the said
Arms, with congruant Differences, and may matriculate the same in his Books
and Registers, and may give Arms to virtuous and well deserving persons, and
Extracts of all Arms, expressing the blazoning of the Arms under his hand and
seal of Office: For which shall be paid to the Lion, the sum of twenty merks,
by every Prelat and Nobleman; and ten merks, by every Knight and Baron; and
five merks, by every other person bearing Arms, and no more: And His Majesty
hereby dispenses with any penalties that may arise by this or any preceding
Act, for bearing Arms, before the Proclamation to be issued hereupon. And it
is Statute and Ordained, with consent foresaid, that the said Register shall be
respected as the true and unrepealable rule of all Arms and Bearings in
Scotland, to remain with the Lions Office as a public Register of the Kingdom,
and to be transmitted to his Successors in all time coming: And that, whosoever
shall use any other Arms any manner of way, after the expyring of year and day
from the date of the Proclamation to be issued hereupon, in manner foresaid,
shall pay one hundred pounds money, toties quoties, to the Lion, and shall
likewise escheat to His Majesty, all the moveable Goods and Gear upon which the
said Arms are engraven, or otherwise represented. And His Majesty, with
consent foresaids, Declares, that it is only allowed for Noblemen and Bishops
to subscribe their Titles; And that all others shall subscribe their Christened
Names, or the initial letter thereof with their Sirnames; and may, if they
please, adject the Designations of their Lands, prefixing the word [of] to the
said Designations. And the Lion King of Arms and his Brethren, are required
to be careful of informing themselves of the contraveeners hereof, and that
they acquaint His Majesty's Council therewith, who are hereby empowered to
punish them as persons disobedient to, and contraveeners of the Law. It is
likewise hereby Declared, that the Lion and his Brethren Heralds are Judges in
all such causes, concerning the Maleversation of Messengers in their Office,
and are to enjoy all other privileges belonging to their Office, which are
secured to them by the Laws of this Kingdom, and according to former practice.

EDINBURGH, Printed, and Published by Authority. Anno Dom. 1673.


