HONI SOIT (...) ^AL Y PENSE


ACT, Authorizing certain COMMISSIONERS Of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, To Treat
with COMMISSIONERS Of ENGLAND, For the Well of both KINGDOMS.

At Edinburgh, the 30. day of July, 1670.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1670.

ACT, authorizing certain Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, to treat
with Commissioners of England, for the well of both Kingdoms.
At Edinburgh, the 30. day of July, 1670.
FOrasmuch as the Kings most Excellent Majesty, from His Princely Zeal and
Fatherly Care of the welfare and happiness of His Subjects (persisting in the
same pious and prudent resolution of His Royal Grandfather, King James of ever
blessed memory, to endeavor a nearer and more complete Union between His two
Kingdoms of Scotland and England) Has recommended it to the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, that Commissioners might be nominate to treat and consult
concerning this Union, to the end, that His Majesty's Royal and Gracious
purposes therein may be accomplished, and such a further Union may be treated
and agreed upon, as may complete and confirm for ever, a constant mutual love
and friendship betwixt His Subjects of both Realms.

Therefore, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament,
does hereby Statute, Ordain and Enact, That such Persons, or Quorum thereof, as
shall be nominated by His Majesty under His Great Seal of Scotland, are by
virtue and authority of this Act, Authorized, Commissionate and Empowered, to
meet and assemble at such times and in such places, as His Majesty shall
appoint; And thereon to treat and consult, according to the tenor of their
Commission and Authority in that behalf under the Great Seal, with the
Commissioners authorized by Authority of the Parliament of England, of, and
concerning such an Union of the Realms of Scotland and England, and of and
concerning such other matters, causes and things whatsoever, as upon mature
deliberation, the greatest part of the said Commissioners assembled, as said
is, and the Commissioners authorized by the Parliament of England, according to
the tenor and purport of the Commission in that behalf, shall in their Wisdoms
think convenient and necessary for the Honor of His Majesty, and the Well and
Common-good of both Kingdoms during His Majesty's Life, (which Almighty GOD
make long and prosperous) and of His Heirs and lawful Successors for ever.
Which Commissioners of both Kingdoms shall, according to the tenor and purport
of the Commissions in that behalf, reduce their Doings and Proceedings therein
into Writings or Instruments tripartite, every part to be subscribed and sealed
by them; To the end, that one part thereof may in all humbleness be presented
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, another part thereof offered to the
consideration of the Parliament of Scotland, and another part to be offered to
the consideration of the Parliament of England. at their next Sessions to be
held in either Kingdoms respective, after such Writings or Instruments shall be
subscribed and sealed by the said Commissioners; that thereupon such further
proceedings may be had, as by His Majesty and both the said Parliaments, shall
be thought fit and necessary for the Well and Common-good of both the said
Kingdoms; To whom the entire consideration of the whole, and the allowing or
dis-allowing thereof, or any part thereof as they shall think fit, is wholly
reserved. Likeas, His Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, does hereby
Statute and Declare, that no matter or thing to be proposed, treated of, or
agreed by the said Commissioners, by virtue of this Act, shall have any force
or effect, or be put in execution, until it be confirmed and established by
Act of the Parliament of Scotland.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1670.


