A DECLARATION AND ORDER OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, Requiring all
Persons to give due Obedience to the JUSTICES of Peace In Execution of the
Powers and Authorities given them by the INSTRUCTIONS heereunto annexed.

Wednesday the Twelf day of December,, 1655.

At His Highness Council in Edinburgh, ORdered, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

EMANUELL DOWNING, Cl. of the Council.

PRINTED at Edinburgh, and Reprinted at Aberdene, by JAMES BROWN, 1656.

A DECLARATION and Order of his Highness Council in SCOTLAND, Requiring all
Persons to give due obedience to the Justices of Peace, in Execution of the
Powers and Authorities given them by the Instructions heereunto annexed.
THE said Council having taken into their serious consideration how much it
may conduce to the peace and good of this Nation, That Justices of Peace should
be settled and re-established in every County and Shyre thereof; And finding that
by several Acts of the Parliament of Scotland, the said Office has been found
needful, and was appointed and established for preserving of the public
Peace, and suppressing and punishing of sundry Misdemeanors, have found it
necessary for the good Government of this Nation, to appoint certain Persons of
Ability and Fidelity in every County and Shire in Scotland to be Justices of
his Highness the Lord Protectors Peace; Which being accordingly done: The
Council have thought it fit hereby to declare, That they have given Co^missions
to such persons to be Commisioners and Justices of his Highness Peace in the
said Counties respectively, and authorized them to put in execution all the
Powers and Authorities committed to them by certain Instructions which were
agreed on by the Council, Printed by their Order, and are heereunto annexed.
And as the Council do expect that the Persons entrusted, as aforesaid, be
careful in the good discharge of the Trust reposed in them for the Peace and
happiness of the Nation; so the Council will upon all occasions give them all
due Countenance and Encouragement therein: And the Council do hereby strictly
require all People of this Nation, whom it may concern, to take notice and be
observant of the said Instructions (in what to them respectively appertains)
as the Contemners or Contraveners thereof will answer the contrary at their
perils. And to the end that that no person may pretend ignorance of them, The
Council do hereby Order, That this Declaration, with the said printed Copies
of the said Instructions, be forthwith Published at the Marcate Cross of
Edinburgh, and in the head Burgh or Town of each Shire in Scotland, by the
respective Sheriffs of the said Shires.

Given at Edinburgh the Twelfth day of December, 1655. Wednesday, the 12 day of
December, 1655. At His Highness Council in Edinburgh. ORdered, That the above
Declaration be forthwith Printed and published. EMANUEL DOWNING, Cl. of the
Council.


