At Edinburgh the 19. of November 1646.
ACT Anent the payment of Officers, Soldiers, and Dragooners, Horse and Foot,
in their Quarters, quantity of their Pay, and manner of payment of the same.
THe Estates of Parliament now conveened in this sixth Session of the first
Trienniall Parliament, by virtue of the last Act of the last Parliament, holden
by His Majesty and three Estates, in Anno 1641. Taking to their consideration
the great abuses committed by Officers and Soldiers, in their unorderly
Quartering through the Country; And the heavy burden thereby lying upon His
Majesty's good Subjects, And being resolved to apply their authority for
redress of these disorders, and protection of the Lieges; Do therefore
Statute, Ordain, and enact, That in time coming after the twenty sixth day of
November instant, All Officers and Soldiers have their pay delivered to them
at the end of every fourteen days (or sooner if they remove) by the Shire in
which they and their Regiments are Quartered, according to the establishment
hereafter subjoyned. And that the said Officers shall pay ready money for
whatsoever they take up for themselves, their Horse and servants, at the
ordinary rates of these places where they are Quartered without extortion. And
also that when they receive their payment ilk fourteen days, at the receipt of
their pay they bring with them and exhibit certificats and discharges of the
true payment made by them of all their furnishing and expenses from these
persons where they have lived, or from the Commissioners of Parishes or
Magistrates of Burrows where they have been Quartered. Here follows the
establishment for the Officers for their daily pay in their Quarters: viz. A
Colonel to Horse 7 l. 4 s. Scots Money per diem. A Lieutenant Colonel to
Horse daily 3 l. 12 s. A Major to Horse daily 48 s.. A Regiment Quartermaster
to Horse daily 30 s. A Surgeon to Horse where there is ane daily 20 s. Each
Root-Master daily 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Each Lieutenant daily 30 s. Each Cornet daily
24 s. Each Quartermaster daily 20 s. Each Corporal, being three allowed to
each Troop, daily 16 s. Each Trumpeter daily 13 s. 4 d. And to each Trooper
daily half Peck of Oats, six sheaves of Straw, and 6 s. 8 d. in Money: Or
otherwise 12 s. in Money, in the option of the persons where they are Quartered.

Item, For a Foot Regiment, The Colonel to Foot to have daily 4 l. 16 s. A
Lieutenant Colonel to Foot daily 48 s. A Major to Foot daily 32 s. Regiment
Quartermaster daily 20 s. Surgeon, where there is ane daily 20 s. Drummer
Major daily 8 s. Regiment Scriber daily 13 s. 4 d. Provest Marshall daily 8 s.
Each of ten Captains daily 44 s. 5 d. Each of ten Lieutenants daily 20 s. Each
of ten Ensigns daily 16 s. Each of twenty Sergeants daily 6 s. 8 d. Each of
thirty Corporals daily 5 s. 9 d. Each of ten Captains at Arms daily 6 s. 8 d.
Each of nineteen Drummers daily 5 s. 4 d. Each Foot Soldier allowance in Meal
and Quarters, or 4 s. daily, in the option of the persons where they are
Quartered.

Item, For a Regiment of Dragooners, The Colonel of Dragooners daily 6 l.
Lieutenant Colonel to the Dragooners daily 3 l. Major to the Dragooners daily
40 s. Quarter Master daily 25 s. The Surgeon, if there be ane daily 20 s. A
Captain of Dragooners daily 45 s. A Lieutenant to Dragooners daily 25 s. An
Ensign to the Dragooners daily 20 s. Each Sergeant to the Dragooners daily 11
s. 4 d. Each Corporal of Dragooners daily 10 s. Each Drummer daily 10 s. Each
Soldier of Dragooners to have daily 9 s. or else six sheaves Straw ane fourth
part Oats and 5 s. Money, in the option of the persons upon whom they are
Quartered.

And it is Statute and Ordained, That the Troopers and Soldiers of Foot be
equally Quartered through the Shires by the respective Committees thereof, And
that upon no pretense whatsoever any exemption be allowed to any person, but by
Warrant of Parliament or their Committee, except for lands burnt, wasted, or
possessed by the enemy: For it is declared hereby, that such Lands or Burghs as
shall be found by the Committee of Estates of Parliament, or Commissioners
appointed by them for that effect, to be still possessed by the enemy, or to
have been burnt or wasted by the enemy, our own Forces, or the Plague, so that
the Heritors thereof are disabled therethrough to bear any public burden,
Shall be free pro tanto of any pay, or giving of Quarters to Officers or
Soldiers, unless in case of necessity for the good of the Service, which is
remitted to the Commander in chief where these Forces are. And the Forces being
thus proportionably Quartered in the Shires to Burgh and Land equally, conform
to their valuation and Maintenance; It is Ordained, That no Shire nor Burgh pay
any Quarters to any common Soldiers Horse or Foot, but such as are actually
and locally Quartered within the bounds, and that none of these common
Soldiers, Horse or Foot, be paid when they are personally absent from their
Quarters. And it is declared, That the whole premitted Articles are to be
understood of the Winter Quarters allowed to the Officers and Soldiers for
their residence and Maintenance, conform as they are severally divided and
appointed through the whole Kingdom, and no ways to be understood of passing
or transient Quartering, nor extended to the Shires where the body of Forces
shall be commanded for the prosecution of the War, so that no Shire shall be
burdened above their proportion; but that the Estates of Parliament in their
particular Act for Maintenance and entertainment of the Forces, shall set down
the way of relief of the Shires of Aberdene, Bamff, and Murray presently, and
generally of all Shires which may happen hereafter to be overburdened in the
prosecution of the War.

As likewise it is Ordained that in passing Quarters the Officers and Soldiers
shall be equally and proportionably Quartered in the Parish by the advice of
the Commissioners thereof; So that the Officers shall not overburden any person
or place at their pleasure, In which case of transient Quarters, It is
appointed that the Quarter Master or Commander of the party shall deliver to
the Commissioner of the Parish or ane of the chief Heritors resident therein,
or their Bailies, Officers or Chamberlains, or Magistrates within Burgh, the
names of all the Soldiers to be Quartered in that Parish or Burgh, in a Roll
subscribed with his hand. And declares, that in these Parishes either in Burgh
or Land, so Quartered upon in these transient Quarters shall have their
proportional relief of the remanent Shire. And it is also declared That the
houses of Heritors and Liferentors shall be free of Quartering, they furnishing
Quarters upon their own Tennants or in Inns upon their own bounds. And also
that such Royal Burghs, where there is Garrisons of Foot be free of the local
Quartering of Horsemen, They always paying their proportion with the Shire
according to their valuation and maintenance.

And farther it is hereby Ordained that the Officers of the several Regiments
within the Kingdom, and all the Soldiers thereof shall repair to their charges
and Quarters within six days after the publication hereof at the Market Cross
of the head Bugh of every Shire (and for Pearth Shire Ordaines the publication
to be at the Market Cross of Abernethy) And not to remove from their several
Quarters and attendance of their charges without ane forloff and license from
the General Major, Parliament, or their Committee to the Colonel, and from
the Colonel to all inferior Officers under him (they always leaving
sufficient Officers to attend the charge) under the pain of casheiring and
loss of their arrears. And likewise, The Estates of Parliament, Ordains and
commands the Committees of War in the several Shires of this Kingdom (who
are hereby continued in their constant places, until the Parliament give new
order thereanent) To be assisting to see this Act punctually observed in the
whole Heads thereof. And for that end that they send in weekly to their
Commissioners during the sitting of the Parliament, ane account of each Troop
and Company with the Officers and Soldiers names, according as they are
Quartered within their bounds, And of the obedience given herein by the
Officers. And for that effect, That they call upon the Commissioners of
Parishes to give in to them upon oath, ane account of the number locally
Quartered in each Parish, and of the carriage of Officers and Soldiers
Quartered upon them; With this certification, that where the Commissioners of
the Parishes sends not such an account, It shall be reputed and holden that
there is none Quartered upon their Parish, nor any disorders committed therein.

And likewise it is ordained, That it shall not be lawful to the Officers o^
Soldiers to Horse or Foot, upon the not timous advancement to them o^ the pay
above written, to send out parties for uplifting the same at their own hand,
until first it be represented by them to the Committee of the Shir^ or
Magistrate within Burgh, That they may give warrant for the same And appoints
the Committees of Shires to meet every fourteen days for that effect.

And the Estates hes hereby declared, that no allowance, maintenance, o^
Quarters is to be given to any Officers or Soldiers for the tenth man, or the
Pediese or Boys and Horse, But totally and absolutely discharges the sam^ in
all time coming.

And last it is hereby declared, That if any of the Subjects of this Kingdom
be injured in Body and goods by any Soldiers within the same, tha^ the party
wronged make his complaint to the said Soldiers Officer; And upon his refusal
or delay to redress the wrong, That the party address himself to the Colonel,
Lieutenent Colonel, or Major of the Regimen^ if they be within the Shire for
the time, and make known his complaint t^ them; upon whose absence, or neglect,
or delay of justice, the parties wronged are to mean themselves to the
Committee of War in the Shire, o^ within Burgh to the Magistrates thereof; By
whom the same is to be represented to the Parliament or Committee of Estates,
That they may giv^ orders thereanent for punishing the said offenders, and
also the Officers for their neglect. And ordains the Lord Register to cause
presently Print the Act.

Alex. Gibsone Cler. Regist.

Edinburgh Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
1646.


