ACT ANENT THE LEAVIES OF HORSE and FOOT, To be put out by the SHIRES and
BURGHS. AND The List of the Colonells, with their several numbers of Horse and
Foot.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1648.

Edinburgh Quarto Maii. 1648.
FOrsamikle as the Estates of Parliament considering the great and imminent
dangers to Religion, the Covenant, His Majesty's Person and authority and peace
of their Kingdoms, have thought fit, and accordingly given order, That this
Kingdom be put in a posture of war, and that the Colonels and Commitees of
war in the several shires be careful in listing and exercising the hail
sencible persons within their bounds, and providing them with Arms, that they
may be in readiness to send forth such number of horse and foot as the
Parliament or their Committees shall call for. And now finding that the town
of Berwick is seized on, and that the dangers are nearer to us then formerly,
whether from Sectaries or Malignants, and that it is our duty to make use of
the power and strength of the Kingdom for its preservation and safety, And for
preventing those evils wherewith we are threatened, have thought it therefore
fitting to require the several Colonels and Committees of war of the Shires
on this side Tay, to meet upon the ninth of this instant, and these on this
side of Spey upon the twelfe, and those upon the North side thereof upon the
sixteenth day of the same month, and at their said meetings, to take present
course for listing and intolling the particular numbers of men, horse and foot,
according to the list hereunto subjoyned. And that they appoint and nominate
under officers to the foot, viz. Lievtenant-Collonels, Major, and Captain: and
that they cause the heritors, proper wodsetters, liferenters and others subject
in outputting of horse and foot conform to the Acts of Parliament, put out
their proportion of horse and foot well armed, the foot, two part with
muskets, and third part pikes, and all with swords, with two Dollors of Levy
money, and twenty days provision to each soldier, and to all officers under a
Captain conform to the Scotts establishment, at two part pay horse and foot:
And that for carrying of the necessary provision of their forces, They provide a
sufficient baggage-horse for every Twelve men: And that ane strong and able man
with sword and half pike be appointed to attend each two baggage-horse, who is
to have a soldiers pay: And that the heretors, liferenters, and others
aforesaid of the several Shires who are liable to the putting out of men, be
ordained to bring their several proportions of horse and foot Armed and
provided as aforesaid, to the place of Randevouz in each Shire, under the pains
following, viz. Under the pain of 400. marks for each deficient horsman, And
under the pain of 100 li. for each deficient footman not brought to the
foresaid Randevouz, which are hereby ordained to be kept at the dyets
following, viz. All the Shires on this side Tay upon the 24. of this month, and
these upon the Southside of Spey upon the 27. and those upon the Northside of
Spey upon the last of this month, and Ordains the said Colonells and
Committees in the several Shires to have their proportions of Horse and Foot
Armed and provided as aforesaid, in readiness at the place of Rendesvouze, and
at the diets respective before mentionat, to march according to such orders as
shall then be sent to them, under the penalties aforesaid; And for the more
speedy and effectual raising of the said Foot and Horse, the Estates of
Parliament gives power and command to the Colonells, with assistance of such of
the Committee of the Shire as will join with them; and are hereby commanded to
be assisting to them, to poynd and distrenzie the goods of any heretories and
others aforesaid, who are deficient in outputing either of their Horse or Foot,
viz. For every horsman wanting at the day of Rendesvouze the sum of 400. Marks
from every Heretor and others aforesaid, who are liable to put him out. And for
every Footman wanting, the sum of 100. l. And further the said Estates
declares, that the Heretors and others aforesaid failing in putting out of their
proportions shall be esteemed as enemies to, and hinderers of the public
service of the Kingdom, in persuance of the ends of the Covenant, and
notwithstanding some persons may be hereby overburdened in respect of the
means of their rents, and multitude of Tennants, living upon their lands: Yet
the Estates Ordains the foresaid Number of men providit as aforesaid to be put
out by them, and incase any of them find themselves thereby prejudged, and
make their complaint known to the Committee of the Shire, in that case the
said Estates Odains the Committee of the Shire to cast up the account, what
the price of the aforsaid Arms Levi-mony and price of baggage-horse will
amount to, and so to provide for their relief, that the burden may be equally
upon the whole Heretories and others aforesaid according to their rent, as in
the maintenance. And because the said Estates having after calculation found
that the number of horse, according to the proportion of the Levy in Anno
1644. are to be raised, will not exceed 2700. And seeing the present service
will necessarily require a greater number of Horse; and that the Shires of this
Kingdom will hardly be able to outreik the same: Therefore the said Estates
have ordained that each Regiment of horse shall consist of 180. Troopers, to be
framed in three Troops, and commanded by a Colonel, Major, and Rutemaster, and
the Colonel to have the nomination of all his under Officers; Providing the
Lieutenant or Cornet be appointed with advise of the Committee of the Shire,
out of the which the Troop is to be levied: And ordains the Regiments to be
made up in manner following, viz. The present Rutemaster to have assigned to
them locallie out of some Shire or Shires the number of 80. Troops, according
as is set down in the List hereunto subjoyned, which Troopers the said
Rutemasters are to receive at the day and place of Rendezvous of the foresaid
Shire or Shires beforewritten, and shall give sufficient security to leavy upon
their own charges as many Troopers well mounted, and Armed, as with the Troops
they presently have, shall make 160. in the whole; and that they shall have the
said Troopers so to be listed upon their own charges at the foresaid day and
place of Rendezvous, under the pain of 400. Marks for each deficient Trooper:
And for such Noblemen and Gentlemen designed Colonels, who have no Troops
presently, the Estates Ordains them to receive the number of 80. Troopers from
the Shire assigned to them for that purpose as is contained in the foresaid
subjoyned List; and to find sufficient surety for leavying the number of 100.
Troopers upon their own charges, and to bring them to a Rendezvous at (...)
upon the tenth day of June next, under the pain of four hundred Marks for each
deficient well mounted and Armed Trooper: And in case any Colonel shall upon
his own charges raise 60. horse more to make up the fourth Troop, the Estates
of Parliament allows him to have a Lieutenant Colonel; and what farther
Troopers the Colonel or his Officers shall leavy upon their own charges, they
shall have entertainment therefore as the rest of the Army: And the Estates of
Parliament ordains the foresaid Committees to use all diligence for performing
the foresaids duties entrusted to them, as they will testify their affection
to Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom; and that they fail not to make
report to the Parliament or the Committee of Estates of this Kingdom, within
six days after the days of Rendezvous respective abovewritten, assigned by the
Parliament to the Shires respective, as is aforesaid: And if the Committes of
Shires be remiss in their meetings, or in putting their Orders to execution,
that the Colonels with such of the Committee as are willing to join with them,
conveen upon all occasion for putting their orders to execution, and for doing
every thing that may further the Leavies, being always comptable for their
proceedings to the Parliament, or Committee of Estates: And if any person or
persons of what degree, quality or condition soever shall offer to oppose or
obstruct by violence, the resolutions of the Parliament, or Committees thereof,
With power to the said Committees and Colonels to use all means to compess
them, and if need be, to pursue the raisers of the tumults, and public
opposers of the Resolutions of the Estates in a hostile way by the strength of
the Shire: And if the Insurrection or opposition come to that hight, that the
Shire where it falls out is not able to suppress the same, that the Colonels,
Committees and Commanders of the next adjacent Shires, on all Quarters, join
for suppressing thereof, as they shall receive advertisement: And farther, the
said Estates upon consideration of the great abuses in former Leavies,
committed by Officers in taking of money from the Heritors, and others
aforesaid, who are liable in putting out of Men, Horse or Foot in place of
their said men; Declares that whatsoever Officer shall be found to have done
so, shall not only be cashiered from his charge, but also branded with ane mark
of infamy and disgrace: And that the said whole forces may be kept in the
better order and discipline, the said Estates Ordains all Officers constantly
to attend their said charges, and that none of them upon any pretext
whatsoever be absent the space of ane month, With certification to the
contraveeners hereof, that their places shall be declared vacant, and ane other
established in their charge. And the Estates of Parliament declares, that
whatsoever Officer or Soldier shall be found guilty of taking, at their own
hand, horse, or any other guids from the Subjects of this Kingdom, they shall
die for it without mercy. And for the better regulating of the putting forth
Horse and Foot of such as will not fall to put forth ane whole Horse or
Footman: It is declared, that the greatest Rent of these to be joined for
making up ane horse, shall provide the horse, and the rest that joyneth to
contribute, according to 160. l. for ilk Horsman; and who have the manyest men
to provide the Footman, and the remanent that joyneth, to contribute with him
according to 40. l. for ilk Footman for their outreik of Arms, and whole
furniture belonging to them with their twenty days provision: And where the
Rent, or number of men are equal, to cast lots.

Follows the List of the Horse and Foot, to be put out by the several Shires
and Burghs of the Kingdom, with the names of the Colonels of the Foot.
OUt of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 2000. Foot, and 200. Horse,
Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Roxburgh, the Earl of Bucleuche or his
brother, the Earl of Louthian, or in case of his refusal to accept, the
Sheriff of Tevitdail, or Richard Douglas his son. Out of the Sheriffdom of
Berwick 1200. Foot and 100. Horse, Colonel for the Foot, the Earl of Home. Out
of the Sheriffdom of Hadingtoun 1200. Foot and 100. Horse, Colonels for the
Foot, the Lord Zester and Lord of Wauchtoun, and in case of Wauchtouns
refusal, the Lord Zester to be Colonel for the whole. Item, out of the
Sheriffdom of Edinburgh to Land 1200. Foot, and 100. Horse, Colonels to the
Foot, the Lord Balmerino, or in case he accept not, the Lord of Collingtoun
and the Lord Cranstoun. Out of the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 500. Foot, and 60.
Horse; and out of the Sheriffdom of Peebles 400. Foot and 40. Horse, Colonel
for the Foot of their two Shires, the Lord Bargany. Out of the Sheriffdom of
Dumfreis 1200. Foot and 120. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of
Dumfreis, and the Lord of Kethead. Out of the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun 1200.
Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Lord Gairleis, and the young
Lord of Lag. Out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew, 2000. Foot and 240.
Horse, Colonels for the Foot, the Earl of Glencairn, the Lord Ross, and the
Lord Cochrane. Out of the Sheriffdom of Lanireck 1500. Foot and 200. horse,
Colonel for the Foot, the Lord Duke of Hammiltoun. Out of the Sheriffdom of
Sterling and Clakmannan 1000. Foot, and 120. Horse, and the Town of Stirling
exemed (in regard of the pestilence) from the one half of their proportion,
extending to (...) Colonel for the Foot, the Earl of Callender. Out of the
Sheriffdoms of Fyffe and Kinrosher 1500. Foot and 240. horse: Colonels for the
Foot, the Earl of Kellie and the Lord Elcho, and the Estates of Parliament,
remits to ane Committee of the Shire, which is to be equal of the Gentry and
Burrows of the Shire, to proportion the ease granted by the Parliament to this
Shire. Item, For the Sheriffdom of Perth 2400. Foot, and 240. Horse, the Town
of Perth and Culros to be taken in consideration by the Committee of the Shire,
inregard of the former vastations by the Plague, and all other places in the
Shire, which are now waste by the same or by the War; And the Estates declares,
that what the Committee shall deduce inrespect of wasted lands, shall be
deduced to the Shire: And also declares, that the heritors of these wasted
lands shall only be liable to put out their proportion according to the fourth
man they have presently. The Colonells of the foot, the Earl of Atholl, the
Earl of Tullibardine and Sir James Drummond younger of Machanie. Out of the
Sheriffdome of Forfar, 1500. Foot, and 140. Horse, the Town of Breichen exeimed
of 30. men of their former Levy, Colonel for the Foot, the Lord Carnegie: Out
of the Sheriffdom of Kincardine, and the Earl of Merschellis part of Aberdeen
1200. Foot, and 100. Horse, Colonells for the Foot, George Keith, brother to
the Earl of Marschell and Colonel Harie Mauld. Out of the rest of the
Sheriffdom of Aberdeen, and out of the Sheriffdome of Bamff, 1600. Foot, and
240. Horse, the Town of Aberdeen to be exeimed from 60. of their proportion,
inregard of their vastation by the Pestilence. The Town of Culane of 6. and the
Town of Bamff of 7. Colonells for the Foot, The Lord Bamff or his son, and the
Master of Forbes: and the Estates of Parliament remits to the Committee of 24.
to divide the proportion of Horse and Foot whilk Kilcardine, Aberdeen and Bamff
shall put out. Out of the Sheriffdome of Elgine, Nairne, and that part of
Innernes on this side Ness, 1500. Foot, and 120. Horse. The Town of Nairne to
be exeemed of the two parts of three of their formar proportion. The Town of
Forres to be exeemed of 6. men, and the Town of Innernes and Elgine to put out
their fourth man upon the Oaths of the Magistrates and Ministers: Colonel for
the Foot, the Earl of Murray. And the Estates of Parliament recommends to the
Committee of War of the Shire to have consideration of the vastation of the
Sheriffdom of Nairne, and the like consideration for the Town of Innernes, in
respect of its great and extraordinary condition. Out of the Earl of Seaforth
and Lord Lovattis division of Innernes, 1000. Foot, and 120 Horse, Colonel for
the Foot, the Barron of Kilraok. And the Estates of Parliament remits to the
Committee of 24. to make ane just division betwixt the Earl of Seaforth and
Lord Lovattis division foresaid. Out of the Earl of Seaforths part of Innernes,
Sutherland and Cathnes, 1600. Foot, and 120. Horse, Colonells for the Foot, the
Earl of Sutherland, or incase of his refusal, the Lord of Duffus and the
Lord of Murkill, and incase both Sutherland and Duffus refuse, the Lord of
Lumlar, so in this case the Lairds of Murkill and Lumlair to be Colonells, and
the Estates remits to the Committee of 24. to clear this division. Out of the
Marquis of Argyles division of Innernes and Badzenoche, 1000 Foot, Colonel,
the Lord of Macleoud or his brother Rorie. Out of the Sheriffdom of Bute, 50.
Foot. Out of the Sheriffdom of Dumbartan in of place of their Foot 40. Horse,
and this ease of their former Leavies to be given to these Parishes who hes had
greatest loss by the Enemy. And in particular, the Barronie and Parochine of
Lenzie, and each Horsman to be rated at 160. l. and the Town of Dumbartan to be
exeemed from Ten, of their old proportion. The Sheriffdom of Argyle exeemed.
Out of the Sheriffdom of Orkney 1000. Foot, Colonel, the Earl of Morton or any
that he shall appoint who is capable thereof, according to the Laws of this
Kingdom.
Follows the List of the Colonells of Horse, with their proportions of Horse
out of the several Shires.
The Earl of Arroll, out of the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen 80. Horse. The Earl of
Merschell, out the of Sheriffdom of Kincardine 54. Horse, and part of Aberdeen
26. Horse, inde 80. Horse. The Earl of Buchane, out of the Sheriffdom of of
Forfar, 70. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Bamff, 10. inde. 80. Horse. The
Earl of Dumferling, out of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe. 80. Horse. The Earl of
Lauderdaill, out of the Sheriffdom of Hadinton, 80. Horse. The Earl of
Traquair, out of the Sheriffdom of Peebls 40. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom
of Drumfreis 40. Horse, inde 80. Horse. The Earl of Dalhoussie or his son, out
of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh. 80 Horse. The Earl of Lanerek, out of the
Sheriffdom of Lanerk 80. Horse. The Vicount of Kenmure, out of the Sheriffdom
of Wigtoune and Kirkcudbright 80. Horse. The Vicount of Dudhope, out of the
Sheriffdom of Forfar 70. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Bamff 10. Horse
inde 80. Horse. The Vicount of Fendraught, out of the rest of the Sheriffdoms
of Aberdeen, and Bamff, not formerly assigned 80. Horse. The Lord Sinclare, out
of the Sheriffdom of Fyfe 80. Horse. The Lord Spynie, out of the Sheriffdoms of
Stirling and Clakmannan 80. Horse. The Lord Balcarras, out of the Sheriffdom of
Fyffe 80. Horse. The Lord Montgumrie, out of the Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew
80. Horse. The Lord Levinstoune, out of the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh 20. Horse,
and out of the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow 60. Horse, inde 80. Horse. Lieutenant
General David Lesly, out of the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. Horse. General Major
Midletoune, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 80. Horse. Colonel
Sir John Broune, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 40. Horse, out
of the Sheriffdom of Berwick 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of
Hadingtoune 20. Horse, inde 80. Horse. Colonel Robert Montgumrie, out of the
Sheriffdoms of Air and Renfrew. 80. Horse. Colonel Hary Barcley, out of a part
of Aberdeen Shire, and Bamff 80. Horse. Colonel James Merser of Aldie, out of
the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. Horse. Colonel William Lokhart of (...) out of
the Sheriffdom of Lanerk 80. Horse. Colonel William Keith of Ludquhairne, out
of the Sheriffdoms of Stirling and Clakmannan 40. Horse, out of the Sheriffdom
of Lanerk 20. Horse, and out of the Sheriffdom of Dunbar. 20. Horse, inde 80.
horse. Colonel Alex. Stranchane out of the Sheriffdom of Pearth 80. horse.
Colonel Gilbert Ker, out of the Sheriffdoms of Roxburgh and Selkirk 80. Horse.
Col. Sir Mungo Murray, out of the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis 80. Horse. Col. David
Barcley, out of Innernes and Murray 80. Horse. Col. William Vrry, out of the
Sheriffdom of Renfrew 40. Horse; out of the Sheriffdom of Dumbartan 20. horse,
and to receive 4000. Marks money, inde 80. Horse. Col. Hugh Frasar out of the
rest of the Sheriffdom of Innernes 80. horse. Col. (...) Innes younger of that
ilk, out of the Sheriffdoms of Elgine and Nairne 40. Horse, and the (...)
^

Alex. Gibson, Cler. Regist.

FINIS.

