DIEV ET (...) DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For Levying of Seamen.
Edinburgh, the fourth day of May 1693.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD and LADY, the King and Queens Majesty's, CONSIDERING a
Proposal given in from Their Majesty's Privy Council, for the more effectual
Levying of Seamen for Their Majesty's Navy, whereof the Tenor follows. The
Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, in Compliance with his Majesty's Letter
for that effect, recommends to Their Majesty's high Commissioner and Honorable
Estates of Parliament, that an Order of Parliament may be emitted, appointing
the Magistrates of all the Burghs-Royal, Burghs of Regality, and Barronies upon
the Seacoasts of this Kingdom, and others the Heretors upon the Seacoasts, to
make up Lists of the whole Seamen, Fishermen, and Boat-men within the bounds
of their respective Jurisdictions, and cause cast Lots for the fourth Man, that
is between sixty and sixteen, in all such Burghs and Places, which furnished no
Seamen the last year, in Obedience to the Councils Orders for that Effect; And
thereafter to cast Lots for the eight Man, contained in the said Lists, to be
made up by Oath, or any other legal method by the said Magistrates, within the
whole bounds respective above named: And the Magistrates and Heretors are
likeways to cast Lots for the Willful, Absent, or unwilling Seamen; And which
fourth and eighth Man, the said Magistrates and Heretors, are immediately to
seize, and deliver to Captain William Erskin, Lieutenant Governor of
Blackness, or such as he shall depute, and give Commission to, for that effect;
who (for the better ease of the Magistrates respective foresaid) is to be
entrusted for receiving and transporting the said Seamen, immediately after
they are listed, and to carry them to Leith, where every Seamen that engages
in the Service, is to receive Twenty four Pounds of Gratification, by and
attour their constant Pay thereafter, conform to the English Establishment. And
the said Captain Erskin, is to transport the Seamen to be levied from Largs to
Dundee inclusive, before the twenty day of May instant, and the Seamen of
other places, betwixt and the first of June next. Their Majesty's, with Advice
and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, do Order and Require Obedience to be
given thereto, in manner therein proposed, with Certification, that such as
faill therein, shall be punished as persons disaffected to Their Majesty's
Government: And if any of the Seamen who shall be so delivered, do or endeavor
to flee from Their Majesty's Service after they are delivered, they shall be
proceeded against with all Severity, as Fugitives and Run-aways from Their
Majesty's Host: And Their Majesty's with Consent foresaid, Authorize and
Empower the Privy Council to take such further Course, as may be most expedient
for making this Act effectual, both on this and the like occasions, during this
present War.

Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT. Cls. Regis.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno. Dom 1693.


