ACT For Securing Mr. James Guthrie and others.
At EDINBVRGH the 23. day of August, 1660.
THe Committee of Estates now presently conveened by His Majesty's special
Warrant and Authority, Upon Information given to them of a Conventicle and
private Meeting of some Remonstrator and Protesting Ministers and others at
Edinburgh, for which, they had neither Warrant from the Ordinary, Civil, or
Ecclesiastic Courts; And the said Committee, being by His Majesty's special
Commission and Commands, Entrusted and Empowered with the Caring, Ordering, and
Providing for what may conduce for the Peace of this His Majesty's Ancient
Kingdom, and support of His Power and Authority thererein, Finding such
unlawful Conventicles, upon what pretense soever, without Public lawful
Authority, expressly deregatory to His Majesty's Royal Prerogative, and tending
to the disturbance of the present Peace of His Majesty's Dominions: Gave Order
and Command to some of their Number, to search and make trial after the
occasion and reason of their Meeting, who in the said Inquiry, found them with
Petitions subscribed, and some Papers and Letters scroled, to be sent for
convocating all of their own Judgment, Containing many particulars reflecting
upon His Sacred Majesty, the Government of our Neighbor Church and Kingdom of
England, and Constitution of this present Committee, and many other things
directly tending to Seditions, raising of new Tumults, And (if possible)
re-kindling a civil War amongst His Majesty's good Subjects. Therefore, the
said Committee have thought fit, and hereby Ordains the Persons, Subscribers of
the said Papers, and these in Company at the up-drawing thereof; They are to
say, Mr. James Guthrie, Mr. Robert Trail, Mr. John Sterling, Mr. Alexander
Moncreif, Mr. John Semple, Mr. Thomas Ramsay, Mr. Gilbert Hall, Mr. John Scot,
Mr. George Nairn, Mr. John Murray Ministers, and John Kirko, Ruling Elder, to
be Committed Prisoners within the Castle of Edinburgh, therein to remain,
until His Majesty's pleasure shall be further made known; And gives warrant to
the present Captain of the said Castle, to receive them Prisoners, and to keep
them in safe Custody. Extracted forth of the Books of the said Committee, be me

JO. HAY Cler. Com.

Edinburgh, Printed by a Society of Stationers, 1660.


