ACT, For a Public Fast.
Edinburgh, the thirteenth Day of June, 1690. Years.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady, The King and Queens Majesty's, and the Estates of
Parliament, Taking to Their Consideration, the present Condition of the Kingdom
of Ireland, and the great Dangers Threatening this Kingdom from thence; And that
His Majesty has Adventured to go thither in Person, for Reducing that Kingdom
to its due Obedience, and thereby to Secure Our Religion and Peace; And it
being the Indispensible Duty (...) all the Leidges, as good Protestants, and
Dutiful Subjects, in this ^ime of Common-danger, Seriously to Call upon
Almighty God; and ^arnestly to Implore his Blessing upon this His Majesty's
Undertaking, ^^r the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Safety of His
Kingdoms: Therefore, Their Majesty's, with Advice and Consent of the ^^ids
Estates, Do Ordain and Appoint, That a Public and Solemn Fast and Humiliation,
be Kept and Observed throughout this Kingdom, by ^^l the Subjects, in a
Devout and Decent Manner, to Pray to Almighty ^od, for the Pardon of our Sins,
and that he would be Graciously Pleas^^d to Protect His Majesty's Person, and
to Bless His Arms with Success: and that the said Fast be upon the Days
following, viz. For the Shires on ^his side of the River of Tay, upon Tuesday
the Twenty fourth of June Instant; and for the Shires be-north Tay, upon the
Tuesday thereafter, being the ^^rst of July next; and Ordains the Ministers to
Intimat from their Pul^its, the Observation of the said Fast, upon the
Lord's Day immediately ^receeding the said respective Days, that the people may
meet in the Churches, or other places where they ordinarily attend Divine
Service, ^o hear Sermon, and join together in performing the Duties proper for
^^ch a Solemnity. And Appoints this Act to be Printed, and publicly Proclaimed
by Heralds, Macers, or Pursevants, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and
Printed Copies thereof to be dispatched to the Sheriff-Clerks of the respective
Shires, that they may send the same to the several Ministers in the Shire, to
Intimat the said Fast in manner foresaid. Extracted forth of the Records of
Parliament, by me

Th. Burnet, Cls. Reg.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


