A Relation of Their Majesty's Forces passing the Shannon, near Limerick, and
Defeating four of the Enemies Regiments of Dragoons: With the Precipitat
Retreat of their whole Camp.
Published by Authority.

Whitehall, September 24.1691.
BY an Express, which arrived here this evening, we have an account from the
Camp before Limerick, That the General having resolved to pass the Shannon, in
order to attack the Irish Horse, which lay encamped in the County of Clare, and
to strengthen the Town on that side, the better to conceal his Design, made a
show on the 15 th instant, as if he designed to draw off from before the Place;
which the Enemy believed, and expressed their Joy by great and repeated Shouts.
That Night a Bridge of Pontons was finished over the Shannon about a Mile above
the Town; and the 16th, by break of day, several Squadrons of Horse, with the
Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and a Detachment of Foot, passed over the Bridge to
a little Island, and having found a Ford in the other Branch of the River,
waded through it without any opposition; As soon as they were discovered,
Brigadier Clifford, who lay encamped not far from thence, with 4 Regiments of
Dragoons, brought down his Men on foot (their Horses being at Grass) to oppose
us; but they were quickly put to flight, flinging away their Arms, and leaving
all their Tents, Baggage, Accoutrements, the Standard of Maxwell, and two
Pieces of Cannon, behind them. Upon this their Camp, which lay higher up
toward Killaloo, drew out, but it was only to cover their Baggage, and to get
time to take down their Tents; for so soon as our Troops came near them, and
had passed the first Defile that was between them and us, they marched off with
what haste they could toward the Mountains. We took a French
Lieutenant-Collonel, and about 20 other Officers Prisoners; and that Evening
the General ordered most of the Horse and Dragoons, and 13 Regiments of Foot,
to march with 5 days Provision of Bread into the County of Clare, to fight the
Enemy, or at least to disperse them. Sir Alexander Fitten, Neigle, and Plowden,
who style themselves Lords-Justices of Ireland, with most of the Inhabitants of
Limerick, are in the Irish Camp; The Confusion among them is great, and they
will quickly want Subsistence.

The Lord Lisburn was killed on the 15 th by a Cannon Ball, as he was lying
upon his Quilt in the Trenches.

On the 17 th one Captain Taaff came over to us, who said that the Town is
quite ruined; that we have killed a great number of their Men; that they have
not ten days Bread in the Town, and not above 6000 Foot, and those very ill
clad. We continue to play our Cannon and Bombs, and doubt not but in a short
time to be Masters of the Place.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1691.


