AN ELOGIE WITH AN ACCROSTICK And an Epitaph On the Death of that Laborious
Servant and Minister of CHRIST; Mr. James Janeway; who departed this Life and
put on Imortality; the 16th Day of March 1673/4.
M^rs ommibus Commune est.
An Elogie.
AH! Whither, whither, into what Abyss
Of Sorrow, and unfatom'd Grief, is this
In which my troubled Soul is plunged? what Seas
Of terror causing (what strange) thoughts are these?
What ai^es my Heart, that thus with fear it quakes?
What? have the Furyes with their hissing Snakes,
And flaming Torches, left their Dark abodes?
What! has Black Dis, and the Infernal Gods,
Let loose those Hellish Fiends, confined to lie
In that Infernal place Eternally?
Ah? No: great JANEWAY'S dead: whose name even struck
Such fear, that (named) the Throne o^ darkness shook?
The Infernal Legions trembled at his Name,
More than the Dice Charms, Thessalian Witcke^ frame.
Their Great Antig'nist, who so often assailed
Their Power, and (spite of all their spites) prevailed,
He who so often did retake the prey,
Which else those Cursed Fiends had born away,
Now Is Dead: But FAME (loath to divulge his death.)
Refused to give her Trump its wonted Breath:
She decked her self in Sable Weeds: Then took
A ruthful Gesture, and a Mounrnful look;
And with great Grief (Tears bursting out,) did show
That he was Dead (alas! by far too true):
Which when those Damned Spirits heard, they all
With joy (if joy's in Hell,) kept Festival:
They joy to think that he from whom they fled,
And were so often overcome by, now is Dead.
He was -- But Oh! that some Celestial one
Would tell me what! 'till then I cannot make known.
CALIOPE, and all the Learned NINE
(Nay though with Great HYPERION they combine,)
Cannot sufficiently Sing forth his praise,
Unless Divine Assistance time my Lays
I shall but Blot, and Blur, (and not Indite)
His worth: then Lord, inspire my Pen to Write!
But why digress I thus? he is known so well,
That who, or what he was, I need not tell:
His Learning, Labor, Gifts, and Graces, show
His worth (which in his want we dearly Rue):
His Life confirmed his Motto still to be,
HOLY, and BLAMELESS in the highest Degree:
Such was his Death: he could Triumph, and Sing
Grave w^ere's thy Victory! Death where is thy Sting?
He was a Burning and a shining Light
(In this so wicked Age) to judge aright
Unto that place of Bliss, to which now he is gone,
(Except true followers) now he will live with none.
A Star a Famous star which did appear
With such great Glory in our Hemispheare
Is fallen: know ye not, (ye know full well,)
A Great Man's fallen this day in Israel?
I would, I wish (and therein I Would bear part)
That JANEWAY were ingrav'd on every Heart:
When (else) our Hearts would sin, they would forbear
For shame when as they find his Name writ there.
Ah! Cruel DEATH, could thy impartial Dart
Be Levelled at, and pierce good JANEWAYS, Heart?
Had he been one to whom the Glass of LIME
Had run Three (...) 'twere less; but in the prime
And Flower of all his Days! Ah, Cruel DEATH.
Then, to deprive him often Life, and Breath;
And Launch him-forth in to Eternity!
Virtus Post, fueri vivet.

Was he so fair and tempting to thine Eye,
That thou did long, and take? or was it that he
In this respect made like to Christ might be?
Or, were solic'ted by the Powers below,
(Who feared Subversion, and an overthrow)?
No, 'twas not Fate, or any other Power:
But Gods Decree, that caused that fatal hour.
And wherefore Lord (when as the Harvest's large,)
Remov'st thou those, who are faithful in their charge?
When faithful Laborers are so scarce, then will
Their Nunber lessen, and diminish still?
When Canaies out so fast, so fast decay,
It Is a sad Omen, God will take away
His Golden Candlestick from us, and give
It those, who will more answerably live.
And art thou gone SWEET SOUL! have thou forsook
Thy Earthly House of Clay? he could not brook
Those daring sins, which every where are found
In all Relations, and Degrees to abound;
For when he saw't, with holy Zeal he hurled
Contempt on this, and fled to the other World.
And could he dye, and yet no blazing Star,
Or Comet (usually portending War,)
Presage his Death? Ah! no: alas! alas!
The great decrease of worthys, that, that was
A certain sign: which seen, he would no more
Stay here behind's (Companions gone before).
Alas! alas! and shall he now depart
Without the sighs, and sobs, of every heart?
Oh! that mine Eyes had power to draw up
All, and each Spring, into my Brain! and sup
The Ocean into my Breast, that't might supply
Perpetual moisture to my weeping Eye.
Come, Widows, Orphans, all who are in distress;
Let this be the Object, here your Grief express.
And you ( Mr. Not. Vincent.
Dear Friend,) who had so large a share
Of his Affections, and of every Prayer,
'Twixt whom the Name of Brothti past: alas
You shall no more behold him as he was:
You shall no more on Earth, behold, or see,
His Heavenly face: and therefore now with me,
And with this Troop of Mourners, bear a part,
To weep and Mourn with an unfeigned Heart.
Let Us weep whole Flood's of Tears, that may surround
His Tomb; and keep the impure from holy Ground:
Then Metamorphose them to Crystal pure,
And grave his Fame for ever to endure.
And you his Hearers weep, Oh! weep full fast;
Now use your Tears, this day may be your last.
He spent his Strength and Life for you: Oh! then
In Tears, strive to retaliate it again.
Come, come, be liberal for God observes:
And in ordained Bottles, there preserves
Them as the Tokens of your tender Love
To, and esteem of him: by Grief you will prove
Your Love was real: Weep, and do not grudge,
God sees your Grief: and thereby will you judge.
An Accrostick.
It is a Truth, Ripe Fruit is soon'st pulled down:
And it is like Truth, he ripe, received his Crown.
Much pains, much fear^s, much care he here expressed:
Eternally he now ^njoyeth Rest,
Sorrow and (...) does stay.
Jn Heaven all is joy: no Night, ensues his day.
All Earthly things do change: are transitory:
No change is incident to Heavens Glory.
Ere we are aware, our Thread of Life (being spun)
Whilst we are secure is cut, or Life is done.
And now (from heaven.) his Voice this seems to be
You all must dye: prepare to follow me.
An EPITAPH.
WHat is it (Spectator) thou would see, or know
Who Is here Interred? Alas! I dare not show
Would know his Name? why, no unhallowed ea^
Must hear it named: avaunt then, come not near
You who are Profane: but you whose Gentle Eye
Can weep at will; know, JANEWAY here does lie:
Here Lies his Body: But, his Soul's at Rest,
In Glorious Glory, not to be expressed.
To his Late Wife, but now sorrowful Widow.
YOur Lost is great. It Is true: but it is much le^
That (though a Widow) you are not husbandless;
(The God of Heaven, and Earth's, Espoused to you)
Lessen your Grief: for why, Behold, all do
Lament your Loss in theirs: Look how their Eyes
Pay back Tear-Tribute to his Obsequies!
Ah! cease those floods of tears: though Death does sever
Your self, and him; yet know, it is not for ever:
For when, that, naught shall of this all remain,
You Will meet in Bliss, and never part again.
S. R. Aetatis Suae, 45.
NOx Erat et nigra velaverat omnia vest
Herebam Nexis tecam ego brachietis,
Membraqque lanqui duto reparabam fassa sapore
Cum steti^ ante oculos Pallid us ille meos
Scire velu quid agam? vivo modo, simodo vivit
P^nano ^ners, animae Corpus inare suae,
Sed (...) ingratas cev vivi Ducimus auras
Er (...) evan^mem languida vita moram;
San^tu^ sed JANEWAY castae Pietatis mago
Pramia sudorum quos habet ante tenet.
Es (...) supremae te^^get consinia metae
Hic Dixis Merti cur mihi tarda venis?
Nunc ubi seradies fatalem v^x erat horam
Quae solvat vin c'lis te quoqque corporeis
Laetus in Elysa mecum spatiabore ripa
Qua Lauri vitreas lucus inu^brat aquas.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril. (...)


