C R

(...)

DIEV ET MON DROIT

GOD SAVE THE KING

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For removing of Horses above the value forth of The Shyre, of
Lanerk, Renfrew,
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovites, (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as The Lords of The Committy of our privy Council met in the west,
By Commission from our privy Council, Having in pursueance of the Commission
and instructions given to them, emitted an act upon the tuenty eight of January
Last Requyring the Shireff principal of the Shyre of Lanerk, The baillie of
the Regality of Glasgow; and the Shireff deput of the Shyre of Renfrew, (in
regard of the absence of the Shireff principal forth of the Kingdom,) To
conveen the haill Heretors, Lyfrentars, Conjunctfiars and others in the said
two Shyres and Regalitie And to offer the Band (appointed by our privy Council)
To be Signed by them oblidgeing them there men Tenants, Servants, and Cotters:
for the security of the peace and quiet of the Country and preserveing the
same from disorders hereafter; betwixt and the day therein prefixed, And they
having returned an account that the greatest part of the said Heritors and
others forsaids had refused to subscrive the said Band; And We finding it very
unfit that any person (of what quality soever) within these bounds who have
refused the said Band should have or keep any Horses or Meers, but Such as may
be necessare for Ploughing, and Laboring of the ground. Do therefore with
advice of the said Lords of the Committy of our privy Council hereby require
and command all Heretors, Fewars, Lyfrentars, and Landlords within the said
Shyre of Lanerk, Regality of Glasgow and Shyre of Renfrew, or Jurisdictions
within the same (who have not given the said Band) To put out of there
possession, and forth of the said bounds, all Horses and meers belonging to
them, above the value of Fifty pounds Scots betwixt and the nynth day of April
nixt And do discharge them, and every one of them, to have or keep any such
Horses or meers thereafter, above the said value without Special License from
the Lords of our privy Council, or there Committy under the pain of
forfaulting of these Horses and Meers, And payment to the Lords Commissioners
of our Thesaurie for our use, or any that shall be appointed be them of the
soume of An Hundredth pounds Scots for each Horse or mere above the value
forsaid that the said persons or any of them shall have or keep after the said
day. As also we ordain all Tenants, Cottars, or Servants within the said
bounds betwixt and the first day of May nixt, To put out of there possession
and forth of the Shyres and Jurisdictions forsaids, any horses or meers
belonging to them and not to keep any above the said value without special
License, as said is, under the pain of forfaulting the said horses and meers
and paying of the penalty above written. OUR WILL is Herefore And we charge you
straightly and Command, That incontinent these our Letters sein, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Lanerk, Ranfrew, Glasgow, And other places needful, and
thereat in our Name and Authority by open Proclamation, make Publication of the
Premises, that none pretend ignorance. The which to do we commit to you
conjunctly and severallie our full power, be their Our Letters delivering them
be you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under our Signet at Glasgow, the twenty seven day, of March, 1678. and
of our Reign, the threttie Year. Per Actum Dominorum Commissionis Hugh
Stevenson. Cl. Com:

GLASGOW, Printed By Robert Sanders, Printer to the City and University. By
warrant of the Committy of Council 1678.


