REASONS Why the Report of the Committee for Security finding that the Tack of
the Pole Imposed in the Year 1693, should be turned to a Collection, should be
Approven in Parliament.
FIrst, Because it is well known, that the foresaid Pole being the first
general Pole that ever was in Scotland, was at that time greatly mistaken, and
over-valued by all that concerned themselves in it.

2. That the Tacks-men who were the Highest Offerers, by the Condition of their
Tack, had Ground and Right to expect to have had the Benefit of the Act of
Parliament, imposing the said Pole, and of the whole Contents and Orders
therein set down, specially as to the taking up of the Lists and Rolls, and
making due Returns thereof, which yet was not observed to them for the far, far
greatest part of the Kingdom, which rendered the uplifting of of the said
Pole Money in effect impossible.

3. That upon Trial, which could not possibly be discovered before, the Act of
Parliament, and the Degrees, Qualities, and Branches thereof, were found to
Labor under several Doubts and Defects, which made an intrinsic Insufficiency
in the Pole it self, as was fully cleared to the Committee.

4. That if the Tacksmen should be necessitat to hold their Tack, they must
exact the Quadruples, to which their Tack gives them full Right, and what an
Oppression and Confusion this would prove to the whole Country, and how great
a hinderance to the new Pole, is obvious to every body.

5. His Majesty in his Letter to the Lords of Thesaury, and Exchequer,
superceded all Execution against the Tacksmen, in regard he would not have the
Quadruples exacted, and Instructed the Commissioner his Grace anent the same.

6. It is Nottour to all Members of Parliament, that the new Pole has been
Contrived and Digested with Advantages, far above the old Pole; and that these
Advantages are commonly estimat to a far greater Value than the former Pole;
and yet upon Trial, it is now seen how little is offered for it, Which
evidenitly demonstrats that the Tack of the former Pole, did labor not only
under the Difficulties and Disappointments abovementioned; But likeways, under
such an intrinsic Insufficiency, as in all Equity pleads for the foresaid
Collection.

And therefore seeing that the Tacksmen were Disappointed, as to the plain
Conditions of their Tack, anent the Lists and Rolls, and that the Pole it self
was Discovered upon Trial, to be Insufficient and Imperfect: and that the
Quadruples to which the the Tacksmen have undoubted Right, would be an infinite
Prejudice to the Country. It is confidently expected, the High and Honorable
Court of Parliament, will approve the Report of their Committee, and free the
Tacksmen of their said Tack, and Declare them to be only Comptable as
Collectors, specially seeing that they are content to Account with all
Exactness, and by whatsomever rational Rules the Parliament shall think fit to
Prescribe. And that in a Word, it is visible, that if the Parliament do not
graciously Interpose in this Matter, not only the Country must sustain an
irreparable Prejudice; but many honest Noblemen and Gentlemen who intended to
serve the Country in this Matter, with great sincerity, must be greatly
Overcharged, if not Ruined.


