Religion made a Cloak for Villan(...) OR The Loyal Subjects Delight, Who is
neither VVHIGG nor TORY.
Being a most Pleasant New Play SONG.
Alas! what pity is it, when thus we see
Religious Masks often cover Villainy;
Tory and Whigg contend for Loyalty,
When both alike do Envy Monarchy:
The Name of Jesuit, Friar, and Monk's forgot,
It Is Whigg and Tory manage all the Plot,
Under those Names, Rome and Geneva lurk,
And daily carry on their Cursed Work,
To the Tune of, Now, now the Fight's done.




LEt Tories Curse and the Wiggs let them Rage,
While both strive the Nation in Wars to engage;
Whilst Religion's the Cloak to cover their Sin,
And Wrap up Rebellion and Sedition in:
Both alike dangerous to Monarchy why?
For they up do the Mass, and the Covenant cry:
But those are good Subjects that from Clamor cease,
And pray for the King and the Nations long peace.
When Gun powder Plots to destroy us were laid,
Then Tories and Whiggs did each Other upbraid;
Though then these Vile Names they so well were not known,
Yet Papist and Purican then they did own,
And Religion, Religion was then all the cry,
Though nothing but mischief they meant us there,
But those are good Subjects that from Clamor cease,
And pray for the King and the Nations long peace.
Religion in Forty-One Routed the Laws,
Or 'twas a thing called so, wrapped in the Old Cause;
O did not Jack Presbyter under that Curse,
Deceive all the Simple, and Cheat many Wise:
The League and the Covenant what were they mo(...)
Then to make Knaves Rich, and all Honest men Po^^
But those are good Subjects that from Clamor cease,
And pray for the King and the Nations long peace.
Was It not true Religion those Villains did plead,
Who' against the King, in his Name, Armies did lead.
And cried, we are the Righteous, to us Plunder's free,
And this is the way for to gain Liberty;
When as into Slavery they did us all bring,
And called Religion to Murder their King:
But those are good Subjects, etc.
O they were to be Sainted that Thimbles and Bodkins
Upon Public Faith were sent, with many odd things
When as the Rump turned them to Sack and to Claret
Though each old Wife did long after mourn for it:
Religion was then the cry, when none was used,
But in the Name they the thing much abused;
For those are good Subjects, etc.
Fift-monarchy Cullys, Religion did cry,
When as to get Plunder they purposed thereby;
Though it is plain, if the Doctor does tell us but right,
The Jesuits backed them and bid them to fight:
And now all the nosse for Religion must be,
When by such as make the stir, none's used we see:
But those are good Subjects, etc.
For Tories whose fortunes Ill Husbandry made
Bare as their Conscience, are never afraid
To lose what they have, but would fain be at strife,
For why? it is Contention they love as their life;
What care they for peace or for quiet, so they
Can Murder and Plunder, and for it have pay:
But those are good Subjects, etc.
In drinking of Healths they do take a great pride,
And swear they will be Loyal it they were but tried;
And that for the King and Religion they will fight,
But this with their Actions can not agree right:
For why they who Oaths against God do still fling,
Can never be Religions, and true to their King:
But those are good Subjects, etc.
Then were Whigg and Tory that make all this noise,
And would at all henest men's downfalls rejoice,
But once Unmasqu'd, and you plainly should see,
As to all Religion Impossors they be:
For from Geneva and Rome they are sent,
To trouble the Nation, and raise discontent:
But those are good Subjects, etc.
Religion it is Sacred when rightly it is used,
But in no age it was never more abused;
For why, for the most part a Cloak it is made,
To cover vile Treason, or else it is a Trade;
But Heaven defend it from such wicked men,
And make it to flourish and prosper again:
Whilst those are good Subjects that from Clamor cease,
and pray for the King and the Nations long peace.

