ACT Anent the MAINTENANCE of the ARMY And Moneys to be raised for that effect.
February 27. 1645.
THe Estates of Parliament now c^^veened in the second Session of this first
Triennall Parliament, by virtue of the last Act of the last Par^^^ment, holden
by his Majesty and the three Estates in Anno 1641. Taking to their
consideration: The great prejudice and danger which the Kingdom and Religion
have already sustained, By the late Invasion of the Irish Rebels, and our
unnatural Countrymen; And how necessarly it is incumbent to them being now
conveened, to provide for all speedy and solid remedies against the same; For
which effect, finding it most expedient, That not only this Kingdom may be put
in ane just Posture of Defense, but also, That ane constant and settled way may
be established for protectting, with Gods assistance, the War against the
said Invaders in ane hostile manner, to their utter overthrow and destruction;
Have thereunto thought fitting for the more speedy execution hereof, and for
(...) and recruting their Forces after-mentioned, and for the ^^^^tenance of
the same, in the most easy and proportionable (...) for the Lieges; To enact,
statute, and ordain Like as for (...) they enact, statute, and ordain their
presents following; To be obeyed and observed by all the Subjects of this
Kingdom, calle^ (...) hereafter expressed.

In the first, That the Country may be freed of Quartering (...) ^^^tings, and
Plunderings, and that the Laborers and Trade^^ (...) do their Labor at home,
except upon extreme necessary, Irish (...) for the ease of the Kingdom, and
most certain for the (...) This every Shire and Burgh, shall enter^^^ from the
(...) (...) to (...), to the last day of (...) ^^portion of Forces, Horse and
Foot, as well Soldier as Officer, according to the rule of Loan and Taxt,
extending in the particular, to the number and sums contained in the Rols
following, which is declared to be the two part of the pay due to be paid
within Scotland, to the Officers of Horse and Foot, and to the Soldiers of
Foot, and Fourteen shillings to the Trouper: The third to run in arears to the
said Officers and Foot Soldiers, and Four shillings to the Horse, and a
proportionable part to the Dragooners.

Here follows the tenor of the said Rols, payable to the Officers of Horse,
Foot, and Dragooners, by the Shires and Burrows, conform to the division and
proportion following, viz. The monthly pay of ane Regiment of Horse in their
Quarters, being the two part of their Pay, conform to the Scots establishment:
Officers of the Staff, Colonel per mensem 333 l. 6 s. 8 d. Lieutenant
Colonel 200 l. Major 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. Minister 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. Regiment
Quartermaster 45 l. Chyrurgion 30 l. Eight Root-masters, each of them 100 l.
per mensem inde 800 l. Eight Lievetenants, each of them 45 l. per mensem inde
360 l. Eight Cornets, each of them 36 l. per mensem inde 288 l. Eight
Quarter Masters, each of them 30 l. per mensem inde 240 l. Twenty four
Corporals, each of them 24 l. per mensem inde 576 l. Eight Trumpeters, each of
them 20 l. per mensem inde 160 l. Six hundredth Troupers, each of them 14 s. per
diem, is 21 l. per mensem inde 12600 l. The monthly Pay of a Regiment of Foot
in their Quarters, conform to the Scots establishment, being two part of their
Pay, Colonel per mensem 222 l. 4 s. 4 d. Lieutenant Colonel per mensem 133 l.
6 s. 8 d. Major per mensem 88 l. 17 s. 4 d. Minister per mensem 26 l. 13 s. 4
d. Regiment Quartermaster per mensem 30 l. Chyrurgion 30 l. Drummer-Major per
mensem 12 l. Regiment Scriver per mensem 20 l. Provest Mershall per mensem 12
l. Ten Captains per mensem 666 l. 13 s. 4 d. Ten Lievetenants per mensem 300 l.
Ten Ensigns per mensem 240 l. Twenty Sergeants per mensem 200 l. Thirty
Corporals per mensem 240 l. Ten Captains at Arms per mensem 100 l. Ninteen
Drummers per mensem 152 l. Ane thousand common Soldiers per mensem 6000 l.

Follows the sums monthly payable according to thirty days per mensem:
Together with the number of men to be entertained by the Shires and Burghs
according to the Taxt, viz. Orknay 127 men, monthly Pay 1143 l. Innernesse 464
men, monthly Pay 4176 l. Caithnesse 105 men, monthly Pay 945 l. Cromerty 11
men, monthly Pay 99 l. Sutherland 47 men, monthly Pay 423 l. Naime 35 men,
monthly Pay 315 l. Elgine 210 men, monthly Pay 1890 l. Aberdene 727 men,
monthly pay 6543 l. Bamff 159 men, monthly Pay 1431 l. Kincardine 174 men,
monthly Pay 1566 l. Forfar 556 men, monthly Pay 5004 l. Perth 889 men,
monthly Pay 8001 l. Fyffe 738 men, monthly pay 6642 l. Stirling 282 men,
monthly pay 2538 l. Kinrosse 16 men, monthly Pay 144 l. C^e, 6 men, monthly
Pay 522 l. Edinburgh 463 men, mo^^hly Pay 4167 l. Linlithgow 194 men, monthly
Pay 1746 l. Ha^ngton 376 men, monthly Pay 3384 l. Berwick 395 men, monthly
Pay 3555 l. Roxburgh 642 men, monthly pay 5778 l. Selkirk (...) men, monthly
pay 1278 l. Peebles 182 men, monthly pay 2638 l. Lanerk 598 men, monthly pay
5382 l. Air 674 men, monthly pay 6066 l. Wigtoun and Stewartrie of
Kircudbright 486 men, monthly pay 4374 l. Drumfreis 494 men, monthly pay 4446
l. Renfrew 245 men, monthly pay 2205 l. Dumbartan 197 men, monet^^^ pay 1233
l. Argyle 323 men, monthly pay 2907 l. Bute 3^ m^^ monthly pay 459 l.

Follows the sums payable monthly, together with the number of men to be
entertained by the Burrows; Edinburgh 574 men, at 6 s. per diem, inde per
mensem 5166 l. Perth 110. men, at 6 s. per diem, inde per mensem 990 l. Dundee
186. men, monthly pay 1674 l. Aberdene 160. men, monthly pay 1440 l. Stirling
36 men, monthly pay 324 l. Linlithgow 30. men, monthly pay 270 l. S. Andrews
60. men, monthly pay 540 l. Glasgow 110. men, monthly pay 990 l. Air 41. men,
monthly pay 369 l. Hadingtoun 36. men, monthly pay 324 l. Dysert 30. men,
monthly pay 270 l. Kirkaldie 46. men, monthly pay 414 l. Montros 53 men,
monthly pay 477 l. Cowper 24. men, monthly pay 216 l. Anstruther easter 31.
men, monthly pay 279 l. Drumfreis 44. men, monthly pay 396 l.. Innernesse 40.
men, monthly pay 360 l. Breichen 20. men, monthly pay 180 l. Irving 23. men,
monthly pay 207 l. Elgine 20. men, monthly pay 180 l. Jedburgh 18. men,
monthly pay 162 l. Wigtoun 15. men, monthly, pay 135. l. Pittinweyme 15. men,
monthly pay 135 l. Dumferling 12. men, monthly pay 108 l. Dumbartan 12. men,
monthly pay 108 l. Ranfrew 10. men, monthly pay 90 l. Lanerk 16. men,
monthly pay 144 l. Kircudbright 20 men, monthly pay 180 l. Aberbrothok 10.
men, monthly pay 90 l. Bruntiland 16. men, monthly pay 144 l. Peibles 10.
men, monthly pay 90 l. Carrail 24. men, monthly pay 216 l. Kinghorn 14. men,
monthly pay 126 l. Thayne 12. men, monthly pay 108 l. Selkirk 10. men,
monthly pay 90 l. Anstritherwester 6. men, monthly pay 54 l. Culros 12. men,
monthly pay 108 l. Dumbar 12. men, monthly pay 108 l. Bamff 8. men, monthly
pay 72 l. Whithorne 5. men, monthly pay 45 l. Forfar 6. men, monthly pay 54
l. Forres 6. men, monthly pay 54 l. Rothesay 5. men, monthly pay 45 l.
Rutherglen 5. men, monthly pay 45 l. Northberwick 4. men, monthly pay 36 l.
Culane 4. men, monthly pay 36 l. Nairn (...) men, monthly pay 36 l. Lawder 5.
men, monthly pay 45 l. Innerkeithing 10. men, monthly pay 90 l. Kiltynnie 3.
men, monthly pay 27 l. Annand 3. men, monthly pay 27 l. Lochmaben 3. men,
monthly pay 27 l. Sanchuer 3. men, monthly pay 27 l. Galloway 1. man,
monthly pay 9 l. Queensferrie 7. men, monthly pay 63 l.

Item, It is ordained for prosecution of the War against the Rebels within
the Kingdom, That there be made up of the present Regiments upon foot, by
Recrues or otherwise, 9000 foot, and these to be in Eleleven Regiments, each
Regiment in 8. or 10. Companies, and in each Company 100. men, and where they
are to be recruted, Th^^ (...) Company be made up of 126. men, where the same
may be co^^^ (...) gotten done. And that 600. Horse be employed in this
Service, with their Officers and Commanders, to be made up and commanded as
the Parliament and their Committees have given, or shall give order. And that
the 500. Dragoneers, with a Lieutenant Colonel Major, and other inferior
Officers, to be divided in 8. Companies, and to be ^ayed conform to the Roll
of establishment, which Officers and Soul^^^^s are to be entertained at the
Rates contained in the Table above-written, which they are to receive duly in
money and provisions monthly, The one half at least in money, and the other
half in Oat-meal, or other provisions useful for the Army, at the ordinary
Rates for the time. And for the better collecting and ingathering of the said
sums of money, for payment and entertainment of the said Officers and
Soldiers: The Estates nominates and appoints Sir Adam Hepburn of Humbie
General Collector, with power to him to substitute Deputes in ilk Shire, and
that other Collectors in Burghs and Paroches be appointed in sicklike manner,
as is contained in the Act of Taxt and Loan; with power to the said General
Collector to appoint a Clerk of Collection; Which Collector-Deputes, alswel of
Shires as of Burghs and Paroches and Clerk of Collection, shall have such like
Fees as is allowed in the said Act of Taxt and Loan, and that to be up-lifted
out of the said Shires and Paroches, by and attour the said maintenance: And
the Burghs to be free, in respect they collect their Taxt upon their own
charges.

Item, If any Shire, Burgh, or Person therein designed, be deficient in paying
their monthly proportion, so that the Soldiers for want be put to Quarters in
any other Shire or Burgh, In that case it is Ordained, that the Shire or Burgh,
who shall Quarter the Officers or Soldiers, shall have repetition of the
failzies, with a third part more in name of failzie. And after count and
reckoning with the Commissar of these Regiments or Troops, The Shires or
Burghs shall have assignation protante, and a third part more to their localitie
for their relief and satisfaction: And in case of their refusal, the Committee
of Estates with the Army, is to give order thereanent to the Committee of War
of the Shire, designed by the Estates, being conjunctly liable for the
proportion of the Shires, and the Magistrates of Burghs for the Burghs, except
for such lands of Burghs, as shall be found by the Committee of Estates with the
Army to be still possessed by the enemy, or to have binaitogether wasted and
burnt by them, so that they cannot be profitable to the Heritors, which
deficiencie is to be supplied by the Committee of Estates, out of the Fynes,
Forfeitures, or any other Moneys due to the Public: And the Committee of War
to have their relief of the disobedients to the double, and als to have the
assistance of the Forces, if they require the samine. And with power to the
said Committees of War in every Shire (who are hereby declared to be liable in
the monthly maintenance due to the Soldiers) to call unto them any Heritor
within their Shire respective, and to cause them bind with the said Committee
for (...) ^^^mes of Money to be contracted for the said maintenance: But (...)
always provided, That the Burghs that shall happen to be upon the said
Committees of War of the Shire shall be no farther liab^^ nor answerable for
the maintenance due by the Shire, but allanarly for the lands pertaining to the
said Burgesses lying within the Shire, if they any have.

Item, To the effect that the Shires and Burghs be not deceived wi^^ false
musters, and so pay for men who are not really in service. It is ^^dained, That
these who shall be appointed for mustering, shall (...) ^^ly, as they shall be
required, take a survey of each Regimes* (...) ^^^pany, as well Horse, Foot, as
Dragonners; and that the Shires (...) Burghs who shall pay their proportion, or
shall happen to quarter them, may have one, with such as shall be appointed by
the Committee, to muster them, if he be present with the Army; otherwise, in
absence of that Muster-master, the persons so nominate by the Shire or Burgh,
may muster them: And these Officers who are required to muster their men, and
refuses, shall forfeit their place and bygone pay; And whatsoever horse shall
be found to be made use of for making of false musters, the Horse shall be
confiscate, and the owner of the Horse shall pay one hundred pounds to the
Public, whenever it shall be tried: And a Footman who shall be made use of
for making of false musters, shall be punishable by scourging or burning. And
the Rootmaster, Captain, or any other Officer of Horse, Foot, or Dragooners,
shall be found guilty of such false musters, shall lose his place instantly,
and all his bygone pay.

Item, It is ordained, That Magazines of Victual be provided out of the moneys
to be raised in part of what shall be due, and put in convenient and sure
places of the Kingdom, from which it may be most commodiously carried to the
Army: And that there be Provant Masters appointed, as well for the North as for
the South. And to the end that these Magazines may be timously provided, the
Provant Masters are appointed to go about the same diligently: And the Shires
and Burghs are hereby ordained, before the first day of April next, To advance
three months of the sums laid upon them. And because by the present Stent
laid upon the Shires, the burden may be unequal, which cannot presently be
known, in respect the valuations of Loan and Taxt are not come in, It is
appointed, That the whole valuations within the Kingdom, not already brought
in to the Clerk of the Loan and Taxt, be brought in before the first day of May
next done and perfected, conform to the Act of Convention made thereanent: And
that they may be compared by ane person to be appointed for ilk shire, and the
comparing to be perfected betwixt and the first day of June next. And if it
shall be found that some Shires maintains more Officers and Soldiers then
others, they shall be eased thereof, and each Shire proportioned in an equal
way, conform to their Rents: And if the Shire shall failzie, and not bring in
the valuations betwixt and the said first day of May next, They shall not only
be debarred from any be^^^^ or ease to be granted to them, but also shall bear
the burden of any (...) shall be granted to these Shires who shall be found to
be (...) ^^^^ed. And for the Burrowes part of this Taxt, it shall be (...)
altered, according as their Taxt Roll shall be altered.

Item, The retention of six for the hundred of annuall-rents to be for the
year of God 1645. viz. From Martinmasse 1644. to Martinmasse 1645. Providing
always the annuall-rents be fully paid within the ^ame year, 1645. otherwise
no retention to be granted by the Credi^our, who notwithstanding hereof, shall
have power to charge his (...) at any Term, conform to his Band.

(...), That all Heritors of land within Burgh, or Pendicles and Liberties
thereof, all Burgesses, all Traffiquers exercising any Trade, shall be subject
to taxation within Burgh, but prejudice for the time to come of the whole
members of the College of Justice, their former Rights, Privileges, and
Immunities, wherewith for the present in regard of the present exigencie they
do dispense.

Item, It is ordained, That no suspension be granted of any charge to follow
upon this present Act, without a discharge from the party charger, or
consignation of the sum charged for, (if so be it be upon a special charge)
and whilk consignation shall be made in the hands of the Collectors respective,
viz. In the hands of the Collectors within the Shire for the Shire, and within
the Burgh for the Burgh, Pendicles, and Liberties thereof, including within the
Pendicles of Edinburgh, the Houses, Tenements, and Yards within Leith,
Cannongate, and Pleasance, so far as pertaines to the Town of Edinburgh in
property or superiority, and within the Pendicles of other Burrowes all that
has been in use to have been taxed with them: And all other suspensions to
be null; And that it be granted by the Committee of Estates. And these
suspensions to be past by the Clerk Register and his Deputes, upon production
of the discharge from the Collectors of the Shires or Burghs, or a Testifica^^
that the sums were consigned in their hands: And the same suspensions to be
discussed by the Committes or Estates of Parliament.

Item, It is statute and ordained, That all Fines, Forfaulters moneys for
forefaulted Lands, Rents, and others past and done in this Session of
Parliament, and in time coming, shall be employed for the present use of the
Army: As also that all Fines, Forefaulters, and moneys for forefaulters, past
and done in the former Session of this Parliament, which are not already
disposed upon by the said former Session of Parliament, or their Committees,
shall be likewise employed to the use foresaid.

It is always expressly declared, statute, and ordained, That no retention
shall be granted of this present maintenance hereby imposed upon Shires and
Burghs for any Debt, Cause, or Occasion whatsomever, and that no exemption
shall be granted therefrom to any person or persons whatsomever; except only
for Lands, Rents, Annual-rents, and other duties mortified to Colleges,
Schools, Hospitals, Ministers and ^^^ders Stipends, and for upholding of Kirks
and Bridges, but that all (...) Heritors, Life-renters, Taksmen, Titulars,
Proper Wodsetters, (...) Conjun^^iars, and Ladie-terces, and others subject to
the (...) within Shires or Burghs, whereby profit or commodity arises, shall be
liable to their proportionable part of this maintenance; (...) that the Lands
and Teinds shall pay as they lie locally in Shires, (...) not by annexation,
conform to the Act of Convention for Taxt (...) Loan.

Further it is declared, That the payment of the said (...) be made by the
Shires, shall begin the said first day of (...) come, and pay for the first
four months, conform to the former ^^^^tion, and thereafter as they shall be
rectified and given in by the Shi^^^ after the samine shall be revised by the
former Valuers: For the whi^^ effect the Estates of Parliament renewes the
former Commission granted by Act of Convention.

And finally it is declared and Ordained, That the Letters and Charges to
follow upon this present Act and Ordinance, shall be raised at the instance of
the General Collector and his Deputes, against the Committees of Shires, and
Magistrates of Burrows, and Letters for their relief, at the instance of the
Committee of the Shire, and their Collectors, against Heritors, Fewers,
Fermorers, in the common form: And all these Letters to be direct in the same
manner, with the same provisions, and with the same certifications, contained
in the Act of Convention of Estates made for the Loan and Taxt.

FINIS.

