C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Concerning the Imposition ON TOBACCO.
AT EDINBURGH, the 2. of December, 1673.
THe King's Majesty, considering the prejudice that does, and may arise to the
Trade of Tobacco, by, and upon occasion of, the late Imposition upon the
Tobacco, and the Gift of the same given under His Majesty's great Seal, to Sir
John Nicolson of Nicolson, of the date the second of December, 1671. Therefore
His Majesty, with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, does
discharge the said Imposition upon the Tobacco: and Declares the said
Imposition, and Gift thereof granted to the said Sir John Nicolson, to be void
and extinct in all intents, as if the said Imposition and Gift had not been
imposed or granted. And His Majesty, with consent foresaid, does allow the
importing of Tobacco in all time coming free and without payment of any other
Custom and Imposition but the ordinary Custom; conform to the book of Rates,
and the Excise. It is always Declared and Ordained, that such sums of money as
have been paid to the said Sir John, or to any person in his name, for and
upon the account of the said Imposition, and all bands granted upon the account
foresaid, shall pertain to His Majesty, and the said Sir John shall be
accountable for the said sums, and shall be obliedged to deliver the said
Bands to the Lords of His Majesty's Thesaurie, for His Majesty's use; Excepting
always, the Band given for the Tobacco, imported in the Ship called Kathrine
of Glasgow, whereof John Philips is Master, daily ^d (...) upon Clyd,in the
West, which His Majesty does discharge, and Ordains to be given back to those
who granted the same: And sicklyk, excepting any other Bands granted upon the
account of the said Imposition, where the Tobacco is not vented, as to such
proportions thereof, as the Merchands shall declare upon their oath, are not
sold by them; They always paying the ordinary dues, viz. Custom conform to
the book of Rates and Excise. And His Majesty, with advice foresaid, does
hereby Declare all Tobacco already imported, to be free of the said Imposition,
where money has not been paid, or bands granted for the same; and Discharges
any Arrestments laid thereon upon the account of the said Imposition.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, Anno DOM. MDCLXXIII.


