A Short TREATISE Of the Excellency of BEES, HONEY, MEAD and METHEGLIN; With
their Singular and Approved VERTVES.
By T. R. Med. Dr.
CHAP. I. Of BEES and their Excellency.
PLINY that great Naturalist ( Lib. 2. page 5.) to express the most
transcendent Excellency of the Nature of Bees, says thus, viz. Inter omnia
Insecta Principatus Apibus, and jure praecipua admiratio; solis ex eo genere
hominum causa genitis: Of all Insects, Bees are the Chief, and the most worthy
to be had in Admiration, being the only things of that kind, which are bred for
the behoof of Man.

He says further ( Lib. 2. Chap. 10. page 3.) That the Work and Fruit of of the
little Be, is so great and wonderful, so comely for Order and Beauty; so
Excellent for Art, Wisdom and Ingenuity; and so full of Pleasure with abundant
Profit and little Charge: That the Contemplation of which may very well beseem
an ingenious Nature: And therefore (not without cause) are the Bees called the
Muses Birds: Apes, cum causa, Musarum dicuntur volucres (Varro Lib. 3. Cap. 15.)

The Contemplation and Love of which, did so ravish those Ancient and great Be
Masters, viz. Aristomachus and Piliscus (as Pliny reports in his Natural
History, Lib. 11. Cap. 9.) that they were pleased to spend most of their time,
in this pleasing Business.

Further, Aristotle himself, the Ancient and great Philosopher, thought his
Historia Animalium very lame and imperfect, unless he had inserted a Particular
Tract of the Nature of Bees: of which he discourses more at large, than he
does of any other living Creatures.

Pliny likewise in his Natural History, is very copious in and about this
Melifluous Subject. Besides diverse others that have written thereof, as
Collumella Varro, Palladius and Averroes, etc. Yea, the Learned and Grave
Fathers of the Church (St. Ambrose and St. Isodore) have thought it a Subject
fit for their Pens.

Unto which I might add, both for Ornament and Authority, infinite others of
these our later times, etc.

Amongst which, I cannot but with all due Respect, approve of the late
Invention of the New Bee-Houses and Collonies (a Prospect of which may be seen,
in his Majesty's Garden, in St. Jameses Park) so much admired and approved of,
by the Royal Society at Gresham College in London; and wish the Management
thereof, might fall into the hands of such Ingenious Persons, as might further
improve so useful an Invention, being already encouraged, by his gracious
Majesty, and since by diverse persons of Honor.

Make but Inspection through their transparent Windows (before and behind the
Collonies) and you cannot choose but admire, the Bees most incomparable and
ingenious works, curiously adorned, fitted and accomplished by assiduous
Industry.

The Curiosity of their Fabric, with its exquisit Cells (when first I viewed)
on a sudden forced me into an unwonted Ecstasy, with extreme Admiration; as it
did the most Experienced Mr. Charles Butler, in his History of Bees, Cap. 6.
page 103. n. 9. whose Condign Merits, neither Envy nor injurious Time shall
ever obliterate, or bury in oblivion: nor anticipate my thoughts from perusing
his Feminine Monarchy Which when I Read; I Will to the World profess,
My Debt to him (love, honor, thankfulness)


And in the same acknowledgement, admire the curious Buildings of these small
Insects or pretty Bees; often divertising my self with this Quaere, viz.

Quid non Solertia Vincat? etc. And whilst (Reader) I admire the many Myriads
of both Sexes, with their admired Assiduity:

Non
Miraris Art Conditas mira Domos
Opesque Regales in his reconditas?
Solertia and Labor
Fiunt Omnia
CHAP. II. Of HONEY, and its Singular VERTVES.
NEXT I shall Treat of the Profits which arise from Bees, viz. HONEY, with the
ordering and use of Mead, Mead, Hydromel and Metheglin, with their singular
Virtues, for the Use and Comfort of Mankind.

HONEY, for the Extracting of which, the most natural and seasonable time is in
August (i. e. from the end of Dog days, until the sixth day of September or
thereabouts) because till then the Combs are full of Skadons (which deceive the
Hony-Men: make the Hive heavier and the Honey worse) for the Skadons, Maggots,
and young Bees, as well as the Sandarak, corrupt the same (experienced by the
Ancient Bee-Master Collumella, Lib. 9. Cap. 15.) viz. Pulli and rubroe sordes
sunt Mali saporis, et succo suo mella corrumpunt.

The time aforementioned for the running and working of Honey ( viz. English
Honey) is most proper fit and convenient, except in Hot Countries, where their
Gathering lasts longer.

Out of the new Invented Collonies, by reason of their neat contrivance, and
most ingenious Shutters, is drawn the most Nectarian and best Honey (for the
Bees by reason of the said Shutters, there is no necessity of killing them,
with either the Smoke of Brimstone, Bunt, Tutchwood, or Mushroom's) which makes
the Honey smell of smoke, and so consequently renders it much worse) for indeed
it were a pity to reward with Death, those pretty and industrious Animals, out
of whose Collonies we receive such vast profits, as Honey and Wax (no ways
adulterated) far excelling the other in Gust and Odor.

Of all Honey that which runs of it self, is most commendable. It Is called
(by our best Bee-Masters) Acoeton or the finest Nectar, which for its
incorrupted purity, (by others) is called Virgin Honey: because (as Plantius in
Fernel. Lib. 7. Method. Med) Quod, e Favis sponte primum defluit, virgineum
Mel, vulgo appellatur.

Whereof there are two sorts, viz. Right Virgin-Honey (which is of a Swarm, and
runs of it self) 2. Bastard Virgin-Hony (or rather to be called the finest
Ordinary) Varro Chap. 6. number 30.) which though it be of the same Swarm, yet
being mixed with other and laid up in corrupter Vessels, and not in the pure
Virgin Cells is rendered much inferior to the true Virgin Honey.

The differences and degrees of Honey in goodness, are as well Natural as
Artificial.

For it is made better or worse, by the ordering or handling of it: so is it in
it self better or worse, according to the different Condition of the Soil where
it is gathered: for Varro Cap. 6 ^um 32. affirms) that the Champain Honey, is
accounted much better than the Heath Honey, although they be ordered both alike.

Good Honey, when well wrought and fermented has these properties and excellent
Qualities, whereby it is known and distinguished; viz. It is clear,
odoriferous, yellow like pale Gold: but right Virgin Honey is more Crystaline
at the first, viz. sharp, sweet, and pleasant to the Taste, of a mean
consistence between thick and thin, so clammy that being taken up upon your
Fingers end, in falling it will not part, but hang together like a long string)
as that uses to do, which is clarified. Plant. in Fern. Lib. 7. de Oxymelite.
viz.

Mel probum est, quod inter Crassimum and tenuissimum est mediocre; sapore
dulcissimum and acerrimum; simulque dulcedinis sensum inferens, et vellicatu
pungens linguam, calore pallidumat subrutilum, nec non pellucidum, odoratum and
recentissimum; quodque sublatum, non facile ob sequacem lentorem abrumpatur;
pondere grave, and inter Coquendum spumae parum emittens. This good Honey
(especially that part which is in the bottom) will in time grow hard, (like
unto Corny-Hony, which is in the uppermost part of the Combs) such as is the
Honey of Spain, and Narbona in France.

So having given you, and Account of the best Honey, I shall likewise show its
singular Virtues, viz.

VIRTUES.
It is hot and dry in the second Degree; It is of subtle and thin parts, and
easily passes into all the parts of the Body. It Is abstersive with some
Acidity, and therefore it opens all obstructions. It clears the Breast and
Lunges of those Humors which fall upon them from the Head: It Is Laxative and
purges the foulness of the Body, and provokes Urine; it renders a good
Appetite, and cleanses the Stomach from its Phlegm, Filth and Crudities; It
purges away those things which offend the Eyesight. It nourishes very much;
It stirrs up and highly preserves natural heat; and thereby does not only
prolong, but likewise does very much Solace old Age. It preserves all things
that are put into it: It is a Sovereign Medicine both for inward and outward
Maladies. It helps the grief of the Jaws and Scurvy; it is good against the
Quinsy and sore Throat; it is Drunk with good success against the biting of
Serpents or Mad Dogs. Lastly in respect of which great and most admirable
Virtues (the right composition of those great Antidotes ( viz. Mithridate and
Andromachus Treacle) although they consist; the one of more then fifty, the
other of more then sixty Ingredients) requires thrice so much Honey, as it does
of all the rest.

All which Premises considered; no Marvel that King Solomon said; My Son eat
Honey, for it is good. Yea Honey, if it be pure and fine, is so good in it self,
that it must needs be good for them whose queasy Stomachs are averse to it.

Honey is most fit for old Men, etc. And for such as are Phlegmatic, or subject
to Rheums; and it is generally good for all those that are of Cold Constitutions.

In fine, The Quintessence of Honey, is of such efficacy; that if any be dying,
and presently does drink but two or three Dram's, he will suddenly Revive.

Furthermore, if you but wash any Wound therewith, or other Sore, it will heal
it with all the speed immaginable,

I need say no more in Praise of its most tramscendent Virtues; But only thus
much, Viz. Experto Creed Roberto.

CHAP. III. MEAD HYDROMEL and METHEGLIN, With their Uses and singular VERTVES.
THERE are two sorts of Hydromel, viz. Mead and Metheglin.

For the making of Mead, I shall only give you a hint or two (though not my
Design here to insert)

If the Must, when it is altogether be not strong enough, to bear an Egg, the
breadth of two pence above it: then put so much of your choicest white Honey
into it, as will give it that strength; then give it its fit boiling, etc.
After this, put in the Herbs and Spices, and so let it boil a quarter of an
hour longer.

The end of boiling is thoroughly to incorporate the Mead and the Honey (prepared
and ordered for that purpose) and to purge out the dross and all other
impurities.

Which being once done, any longer boiling is unproffitable, as diminishing
more the quantity then increasing the strength and goodness of the Mead.

As soon as it is boiled enough, take it from the Fire, and set it a cooling:
the next day separate the pure from the impure, still reserving the best for
Use: and then ordering it as the Artist pleases, in his best discretion: For
the right making of which, I much approve of Mr. Combs his way, at the
Bee-House and Colony, in St. Bartholomew Lane; In whose Habitation I have seen
considerable quantities of the best English Honey and Mead.

Metheglin is only a Stronger Hydromel: being unto Mead (as Vinum to Lora) for
it bears an Egg the breadth of six pence, and is usually made with more Honey
and less Water, receiving into its Composition, as well wholesome and sweet
Herbs, as also a large quantity of proper and fit Spices, etc.

MEAD, with its Singular VERTVES.
IT has all the singular Virtues of Honey abovementioned, with this Addition:

First it is equally, if not more Cordial then Old Malago, and therefore may
not undeservedly be called Sacks-Master.

Secondly it makes good Blood (by often drinking it) purging and carrying off
all its impurities, whereby its obstructions are soon removed, and its
circulation much bettered. It recreates the Spirits (when dull and stupid) and
gives them that solace, which will add much to their contentment; it is a proper
and wholesome Liquor to be drunk at any season of the Year; for what ill and
crude wines leave behind them, this takes off. I need say no more, of its
Excellent Qualities: but first Taste, and then Judge, that its further goodness
may both Answer and Crown its End with a Probatum est.

FINIS.

