News from the FLEET, Being a Full and Impartial ACCOUNT, OF A Most Signal
Victory, Obtained by Admiral Killegrew, OVER THE French Thoulon Fleet.
Commanded by Monsieur Chasten Regnaut.
In a Letter to a Person of Quality.
Printed, According to Order.

Worthy Sir,
GOOD News, at all Times, I know is very acceptable to You from Credible
Strangers; and if so, doubtless much more grateful from a Friend; and such a
Friend too, that would neither Deceive You, nor the Public, for the highest
Temporal Advantage: I know the Dignity of Truth is lost by many Asseverations;
I shall therefore say little more than this, (seeing you thoroughly know me,)
That the following Account of the late Sea Fight with the French Thoulon Fleet,
I here send you, is nothing but what I my self was both an Eye and Ear-Witness
to the Truth of; and you shall (God willing) have a farther Account of it, in
my next Letter: But for the present, take what follows:

We having received an Express that advised us of the Departure of the French
Squadron out of Thoulon, under the Command of Monsieur Chasten Regnaut, which
consisted of four First Rates, and Five Second Rate Men of War, and two
Fireships; who said, the Wind being contrary, they were forced to come to an
Anchor in Gibralter, within four Miles of Ceuta, not being able to get out of
the Narrow of the Straits: Upon which the Vice-Admirals Killigrew and Allemond,
with Rear-Admiral Evertson, weighed Anchor, with Ten English and Dutch Men of
War, and two Fireships to join the other Six Men of War that lay at Gibralter
perdue for them, and so attack them: They having a fair Wind, happily came up
with the Six Men of War aforesaid, just as they got sight of the French Eleet:
The French steered away at the sight of our Fleet, as fast as could be; but
perceiving our Fleet was resolved to pursue and fight them, they at last made
up to us with a seeming Gallantry; upon which, Admiral Killigrew gave the
Signal of Battle, and followed it himself with an undaunted Courage and
Resolution: And after a long and sharp dispute on both Sides, we took Three
French Men of War, which we have sent up to Gibralter: We have also sunk two of
their best Ships, and are still in pursuit of the rest: Admiral Killegrew was
Engaged, in this great Action in the Duke, against Monsieur Chasten Regnaut,
four Hours or more.

Sir, I hope to give you a farther Account of the remaining shattered French
Fleet, in a short time, our Fleet being well Manned, Admiral Killegrew having
got on Board the Fleet Six Hundred Volunteer Seamen, out of the Merchantmen
in Cales Road. This in haste is all at present, from

Your Cordial Friend, N. R.

There is lately published, A New Discovery of the Horrid Association and
Conspiracy of the Papists in Lancashire, to raise War and Rebellion in the
Kingdom of England, during the Absence of King William in Ireland. In a Letter
of Instructions from a Roman Catholic of great Quality, in London, to a Papist
Mutineer in Lancashire. Printed for Jonathan Greenwood.

Land. Printed for J. Dunton, at the Black Raven, in the Poultrey. 1690.


