TWO LETTERS The one to his Excellency the LORD FAIRFAX The other to
LIEUTENANT GENERAL CROMWELL, From the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland
now residing at LONDON.
May it please your Excellency,
WE have diverse times waited on you, to solicit your endeavous for
preservation of his Majesty's Person. And now having received particular
directions from the Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, to make Application
to your Excellency for the same end: We do in their names earnestly desire and
entreat, That you will take into serious consideration, that the Kingdom of
Scotland has undoubted interest in his Majesty's Person; And how hard a thing
it is to proceed against their King, not only without, but against their advice
and consent; That his Person was entrusted by that Kingdom to the Honorable
House of Parliament; And how much it will reflect upon the Honor of Scotland,
and the Faith of England to take away his life. Be pleased also to remember,
the many ties and bands of love and friendship, between the Kingdoms; Their
solemn Engagements in one Cause and Covenant; And the many Obligations, and
mutual good Offices which have passed betwixt them and betwixt the Kingdom of
Scotland, and the Forces under your Command. Consider what an unsettled peace it
is like to prove, which shall have its foundation laid in the blood of the
King; what dangerous evils, and grievous calamities it may bring upon us and
our Posterity; what reproach upon Religion, and the work of Reformation; And
what infamy abroad in other Nations. And let it never be recorded to future
ages, that you have been wanting in your duty, at such a time as this. But
according to the eminency of your place, honor and dignity, and the greatness
of your interest, improve this present opportunity, by all lawful ways and
means, to prevent the taking away of his Majesty's life; wherein also, we do
earnestly entreat the concurrence of your Counsel of War. And so we rest

Your Excellencies most humble Servants, LOTHIAN, JOHN CHIESLY, WILLIAM
GLENDONING.

Covent Garden the 29. of January 1649. For his Excellency the Lord Fairfax,
etc.




SIR,
WE have upon several occasions, earnestly solicited you, to contribute your
best endeavors, for preservation of his Majesty's Person; and this day we have
been thrice seeking you, twice at your lodging, and once elsewhere, but missed
the opportunity of meeting with you; whereof, we were very desirous; So much
the more, That we have received the Commands of the Estates of the Parliament
of Scotland to wait upon you; and earnestly to entreat your concurrence and
assistance, for preventing the taking away of his Majesty's life, as we have
also written in a Letter to his Excellency, which he will communicate unto you:
Sir, you have been a witness, both formerly and of late, of the real
affection and tender respect, which all the well-affected of the Kingdom of
Scotland have to the honor and welfare of England; And how zealous they have
manifested themselves, both by their actions and sufferings, to preserve the
rights and interests of this Kingdom. Wherefore, we have the better ground to
hope, That you will use your endeavors, That the right and interest of the
Kingdom of Scotland in his Majesty may be duly considered: And tender regard
had to their honor, who trusted their Brethren of this Kingdom, with the
preservation of his Person: We do therefore make it our earnest request to you
in their names, to interpose and to improve your interest and power (which we
know to be very great) for preventing the taking away of his Majesty's life;
which if you shall be pleased to do, It will be highly accounted of by the
Parliament of Scotland; and be looked upon as a special Obligation, and an
addition to all your former kindness and respects. We shall not need to add
any argument, as from our selves; but that it would be a Testimony that we have
not been wanting in our duty; And enable us to give evidence to the Kingdom of
Scotland, that we have been faithful in the discharge of our trust. And so we
rest

Your most humble Servants, Sic Subscribitur, LOTHIAN. JO. CHIESLY, W.
GLENDONING.

Covent Garden the 29. of January, 1649. For the Right Honorable Lieutenant
General CROMWELL.




EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAjESTY,
1649.


