ACT Anent Persons Traveling to England or Ireland without Passes.
At Edinburgh the Twenty Sixth Day of January 1694 years.
THE Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council understanding, that now when Levies
are appointed to be made for Their Majesty's Service, in the present War, so
necessary for the Defense of the true Protestant Religion, and the Preservation
of Their Majesty's Kingdoms, these most proper for the said Levies, may
possibly: (to decline the same,) retire out of the Kingdom to England or
Ireland; Do therefore Require, and strictly Command all Collectors of Their
Majesty's Customs, Surveyers, Clerks, Waiters at the several Ports, and all
others Their Majesty's Officers, Civil or Military who may be concerned, that
they suffer no Vessel great or small to Sail for Ireland, at any time after
Publication hereof, at the said Ports on the West Seas, until the first day of
May next to come, without a sufficient Pass from one of Their Majesty's Privy
Council, or the Sheriff or Sheriff-Deput, or two of the Commissioners of
Supply, or Justice of Peace of the Shire, within which the said Ports do ly;
which persons empowered to give the said Passes, are hereby also empowered,
and Required to take Caution of the Master and Skippers of the said Ships,
that they shall carry no person out of this Kingdom for Ireland, during the
space foresaid, without lawful Passes, under the pain of one hundred Merks
toties quoties, for each person so carried out by him: As also, the hail
forenamed Persons, with all Collectors, Surveyers, Clerks, and Waiters upon the
Borders betwixt Scotland and England, are hereby Commanded, that they suffer no
person to go for England or Ireland, without Passes from one of Their Majesty's
Privy Council, or from the Sheriff, or Sheriff-Deput, or two of the
Commissioners of Supply, or Justices of the Peace of the Shire where the said
persons did last Reside, and that as the hail foresaids persons will be
answerable at their peril. And further, the said Lords of Their Majesty's Privy
Council, do hereby prohibit all such persons who are fit, and in use to be put
forth in Foot-levies, to remove out of the Shire where they dwell, after the
date hereof, until the present Levy ordered by Proclamation be completed,
without Passes from the Heretor of the Ground where they live, or his
Chamberlain in his absence; Certifying those that presume to do in the
contrair, that they shall be summarly seized where they may be apprehended. And
it is hereby declared, that the Seazers and Apprehenders of the said Fleers,
shall have Right and Liberty to give them up to serve for such as they may be
obliged to put forth in the said Levy. And Ordains these presents to be
Printed, and to be published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at the
Seaports of the West-Seas, and hail other Head-burghs of this Kingdom.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


