Edinburgh, 22. September, 1648.
WHereas, many within this Kingdom have joined in Arms for prosecuting of an
unlawful Engagement against our neighbor Nation of England, contrary to the
Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms; the Warnings and
Declarations of the Commission of the General Assembly 1647. And likew se
against the unanimous proceedings and Declarations of the late General
Assembly and their Commissioners: And whereas God has evidently manifested his
displeasure and wrath against their sinful ways and proceedings, in
oppressing the well-affected in this Kingdom, invading the Kingdom of England,
by Routing and Defeating their Army there: And now some of their Army have
returned to this Kingdom, and joined with others their associats to disturb the
peace thereof: By which their proceedings and actions, the work of Reformation
of Religion, has been almost wholly overturned, the Liberty of the Subject
very near destroyed, authority weakened, the Person of the King put in hazard,
the union betwixt the Kingdoms endeavored to be broken, occasion of quarrel
given to our neighbor Nation, and this Kingdom brought to so sad and
deplorable condition, as (if the Lord in mercy prevent not) Famine and
desolation is like to be added to all our troubles and miseries: Therefore to
prevent the eminent dangers to Religion, and to the King, for settling the peace
of this greatly distracted Kingdom. And to the end the affairs of this Kingdom
may not be managed by such persons, as the Kingdom of England do esteem enemies
for their concurrence in the late Engagement: The Committee of Estates
consisting of such persons as were nominated to be on the Commission of
Parliament, and did dis-assent in Parliament from, and Protest against the late
unlawful Engagement. Do declare that they are resolved to Act and direct in
the publict affairs by virtue of the Authority of that nomination of the
Parliament, and their Legal Protestation in it: And that in Acting and
Directing, they resolve to proceed with the advice and consent of such Members
of the late Parliament, as did concur with them in the said Protestation, and
do now concur in Arms in prosecuting of the same: As also with the advice and
consent of such two Commissioners, and one Burgess as shall be entrusted
respect vely, by the Shires and Burghs joining with us in Arms for the
Covenant; and that they will not admit into their Counsels, or Committees, any
persons who have concurred in Arms, or Counsel for the late unlawful
Engagement, or who have subscribed the Bond, or sworn, or subscribed any Oath,
or Declaration for prosecuting that Engagement. And further that they will
admit none who have been aiding, or shall be aiding or assisting to, or
abetting and agenting for these who are now joined in Arms with the Earl of
Crawford, Earl of Glancairn, Earl of Lanerk, Lord Sinclair, Lord Register,
George Monre, and their adherents, nor any such as have, or shall declare their
judgment against this Cause and our proceedings in pursuance thereof: And we
ordain these Presents to be published: And also to be Printed that none pretend
ignorance.

M. Tho. Henderson.

Edinburgh, 22. September, 1648.
THE Committee of Estates considering that the putting of the dis affected and
Malignant Persons in places of trust and power in the several Shires and
Bu^ghs of this Kingdom, has been one of the greatest Causes which has brought
all these evils upon this Kingdom: And for the reasons contained in the former
Act, do therefore find it necessary to require: And do hereby Command and
require the several Shires in the Election of their Commissioners to
Parliament and Burghs in Election of their Commissioners to Parliament,
Magistrates and Counsel, that they make choice of none, but such as have
continued constant and faithful in this Cause: And that they will not admit
any to be in the former places of trust, Commissions, Magistracy or Counsels
who have concurred in Arms or Counsel for the late unlawful Engagement, or
who have subscribed the Bond, or sworn, or subscribed any Oath or Declaration
for prosecuting that Engagement. And further that they will admit none who have
been aiding, or shall be aiding, or assisting to, or abetting and agenting for
these who are now joined in Arms with the Earls of Crawford, Earl of
^lenca^rn, Earl of Lanerk, Lord Sinclair, Lord Register, George Monro and their
adherents, nor any such as have, or shall declare then judgment against the
Cause and our proceedings in pursuance thereof. And we ordain these presents to
be published at the Mercar Cross of Edinburgh and other places needful: And
also to be Printed that none pretend ignorance.

Mr. Tho: Henderson.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1648.


