At Edinburgh the twenty day of May 1645.
THe Committee of Estates taking to their consideration the traitorous designs
of the intestine enemy against this Kingdom, specially the Town of Dundie,
as being a place of very great importance and concernment, and the diverse
assaults made be them thereupon; Together with the resolution and courage of
the Inhabitants of the said Town, in opposing this Enemy; Whereupon has
followed not only the slaughter of many of the said Inhabitants of
consideerable condition, but also a great part of the biggings of that Town,
with the Corns and Movables belonging to the Inhabitants thereof, has been
burnt to ashes; whereby the said Town (which was one of the chief of this
Kingdom)is fearfully defaced, and the Inhabitants, most part of them ruined;
the Town it self disabled to undergo these services and burdens for the
public, which formerly they did, and without supply and help, this so
steadable a member of the Commonweal, is like to decay. And the Committee of
of Estates finding this Kingdom obliged by the mutual League and Covenant,
not only to be sensible of their sufferings, for this good and common Cause,
but also to do what in them lies to set up the losses of the said Town, and
to uphold the same from decay; And being confident of the affection and
charity of all good Patriots, and Christians of this Kirk and Kingdom, for
advancement of so good a work, as is the upholding of the said Town; which
has been a bar to the overflowing outrages of the public Enemy, and does
still strengthen themselves against the same, in regard the En^mie does not
cease, but is rather enraged with desperate spite and malice against the said
Town. Therefore the Lords and others of the Committee of Estates has
recommended, and be the tenor hereof Recommends the condition of the said Town
to the Christian and charitable consideration of all persons of whatsomever
rank, quality, or degree, in Kirk and Sat within this Kingdom, and to the
whole Judicatories, Civil and Ecclesiastical within the same. Requesting and
desiring them, and every one of them to extend such proportion of their
liberality and charity for the relief of the Inhabitants of the said Town,
as the importance of the Cause requires. And the said Lords has entrusted the
collection of this contribution and benevolence to such persons as shall be
nominate and authorized be the Provest, Baillies and Council of Dundie.
Giving, granting, and committing unto them full power and commission to deal
and travel with the whole Noblemen, Barons, and Gentlemen, Synods,
Presbyteries and Sessions of Kirks, Burrows towns and Villages and all others
his Majesty's subjects to Burgh and Land, anent the benevolence and voluntary
contribution to be given for the supply of the said Burgh. Which Commissioners
shall have a book delivered to them be the Clerk of the Commit, whereof every
leaf shall be marked be him. And wherein the Committee requests the
Contributers to insert their contributions. And if any by flouth or negligence
omit to do the same, that the Commissioners insert themselves, and report
their diligence herein, with their books to the Committee upon the (...) day of
(...) To the intent they may know what sums are collected and how the same
shall be employed. And the said Commissioners shall give their great and
solemn oath at the reporting of their diligence and books, that they have not
omitted nor left out of the said books, any of the persons contributers nor
sums contributed, Requesting hereby the Moderators of Synods and Presbyteries
to give direction to the Ministers of their several Parishes to stir up
their Parishoners to put to their helping hand to this so important and
necessary a bussinesse. This Commission to endure for the space of a year
after the date hereof. And the Committee declares, that what shall be gotten
for supply of the said Burgh, be virtue of this Commission, shall be
accounted in part of payment of their loss, for trial whereof, commission is
granted.

Extractum Per me. Arch: Primerose Cler: Commiss. Par.


