design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
ACT of PARLIAMENT, For an Additional Supply out of the Annual rent of Money,
June 14. 1690.
THE Estates of Parliament for a further evidence of their Duty and Affection
to Their Majesty's, and that the bygone Arriers, due to Their Army, and by the
Army to the Country, may be speedily and effectually satisfied: Therefore the
Estates of Parliament, for themselves, and in Name of the Kingdom whom they
Represent, Do make an humble Tender and Offer of one penny of six, or the sixth
part of all free Annualrents and Annuities for one year, due and payable within
the Kingdom (deducing the Annualrents and Annuities payable by the Creditor in
the said Annualrent or Annuity) to be Collected and paid at Martinmass next
one thousand six hundred and ninety years, to His Majesty, or such Collectors
as he shall appoint, Declaring that all personal Bonds, and likewise where
infeftments have followed, shall be liable in the payment of this proportion of
Annualrent or Annuity; but where after expiring of the Legal of Comprysings or
Adjudications, any Creditor obtains the Possession, no proportion of Annualrent
shall be due. Which dutiful Offer Their Majesty's do accept, and with Advice of
the said Estates, Do Ordain the foresaid proportion of all Annualrents and
Annuities within the Kingdom, viz. one of six for one year, to be Collected and
uplifted from the Debitors, or out of their Estates, at the Term of Martinmass
next, and allows all Legal Methods for discovering and inbringing the foresaid
proportion of Annualrent, to be used for inbringing of the same, which are
prescribed by the first Act of Parliament in the year 1633. And Their
Majesty's, with Advice foresaid, Do Allocat and appoint the first and readiest
of the foresaid Annualrents and Annuities, to be applied for the payment and
satisfaction of the sums due to the several Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom,
furnished, advanced, or paid by them to Their Majesty's Forces, these Debts
being always instructed and liquidate, according to the Rule prescribed by the
Act of Parliament, in anno 1681. And Declares that the payment of this
proportion of Annualrent or Annuity shall exoner the Debtor, so that he shall
be liable to the Creditor, only for five per cent that year; Excepting always
from this Act, the Annualrents of all sums mortified for pious uses. Extracted
forth of the Records of Parliament by me

TH. BVRNET, Cls Reg.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


