ACT, Anent the Deficients in the last Levy.
EDINBVRGH, the thirteenth Day of December, 1694.
THE Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, Do hereby Ordain Their Majesty's
Solicitor, to transmit to the Sheriffs of the Shires and Stewarts of the
Stewartries within this Kingdom, or their Deputs or Clerks, such Lists of the
D^ficients of the New Levy, as have come to his hands; and where no Lists shall
be sent by the Solicitor, Ordains the said Sheriffs, and Stewarts and their
Deputs, and Clerks of Supply, to make up full and exact Lists of the said
Deficients, and to transmit Doubles thereof to their Majesty's Solicitor,
within fifteen Days, after this Act shall come to their hands; And also Ordains
the respective Sheriffs, Stewarts of Stewartries, and Bailies of Bailiaries
within this Kingdom, and their Deputes, within the said space of fifteen days
after this Act comes to their hands, to exact and uplift from the persons
liable in putting out any Men of the New Levy; and who have not put out these
Men before the first day of November last, the Penalty of two hundred Merks,
wherein every such person is liable, conform to the Proclamations and
Instructions thereanent. And the said Lords Do hereby Authorize and Warrant
the said Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries and their Deputs, either
to call a Party of their Majesty's Forces, from any Commander within the Shire,
Stewartrie, or Bailliary: And Ordains the said Commanders to furnish Parties
to them, for poynding of the persons Failiers and Deficient, as said is, before
the said first day of November last, or otherwise to make use of their own
Officers, for that end, and Declares that the persons Deficient, as said is,
are to be poinded in manner prescribed by the Act of Parliament One thousand
six hundred and sixty nine, anent the Militia, and the expense of the poynding
is to be exacted from them accordingly. And the said Lords Do hereby Ordain
the said Sheriffs, Stewarts and Baillies, and their Deputs, to pay, or cause
pay in the Penalties to be exacted and uplifed by them, to the Collector of
Supply within the Shire, and Ordains the Collector to transmit the one half of
these Penalties to the General Receiver of their Majesty's Crown Rents, to be
applied toward the perfecting the Geographical Mapps of this Kingdom, and the
other half to be disposed of by the Commissioners of the Shire, for the public
Uses within the same, (the said Collector retaining always the twentieth penny
for his pains) with Certification to the said Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies and
their Deputs and Clerks, and Collectors of Supply respective who shall failie,
in discharge of any part of their Duty specified in this Act, that they shall
be liable for the Penalties of these Deficients whom they should have Listed,
and Poynded, and whose Penalties they should have Collected, and transmitted as
above appointed; And that Letters of Horning shall be direct, for charging them
for payment thereof simpliciter. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and
appoints their Majesty's Solicitor to send Printed Copies of the same, to the
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies, or their Deputs, or Clerks, with all convenient
diligence.

Extracted by me GILB: ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


