J R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms
A DECLARATION, And Offer of Duty by the Kingdom of Scotland, with an
Annexation of the Excise to the CROWN.
Edinburgh, April 28. 1685.
THE ESTATES of PARLIAMENT, now Conveened by His Majesty's Sovereign Authority,
Taking in to their Consideration, How this Nation has now continued upwards of
Two thousand Years in the unaltered Form of Our Monarchical Government, Under
the uninterrupted Line of One Hundred and Eleven Kings, whose Sacred Authority
and Power has been upon all signal occasions, so owned and assisted by
Almighty God, That Our Kingdom has been protected from Conquest, our
Possessions Defended from Strang^^^, Our Civil Commotions brought into wished
Events, Our Laws vigorously Executed, Our Propertie^ legally fixed, and Our
Lives securely preserved; So that We and our Ancestors have enjoyed those
Securities and Tranquillities, which the greater and more flowrishing Kingdoms
have frequently wanted. Those great Blessings we owe in the first place to
Divine Mercy; And in Dependence on that, To the Sacred Race of our glorious
Kings, and to the solid, absolute Authority wherewith they were Invested by the
first and fundamental Law of Our Monarchy; Nor can either our Records, or our
Experience instance our being deprived of those happy Effects, but when a
Rebellious Party did by Commotions and Seditions, Invade the Kings Sovereign
Authority, which was the Cause of our Prosperity; Yet so far has our primitive
Constitution, and fundamental Laws prevailed against the Innovations and
Seditions of Turbulent Men, as that these Interruptions never terminated, but
either in the Ruin, or at least the Suppression of these who at any time did
Rebel, or Rise in oppo^tion to Our Government. And since so many Ages has
assured to Us the great Advantages, which flow down to all Ranks of People from
^he happy Constitution of Our Monarchy, and that all Our Calamities have ever
arisen from Seditious Invasions, upon those Sacred Rights (...) Therefore the
Estates of Parliament for Themselves, and in Name of the whole Kingdom, Judge
themselves obliged to Declare, And they Do Declare to the World, That they
Abhor and Detest, not only the Authors and Actors of all preceding Rebellions
against the Sovereign, ^ut likewise all Principles and Positions which are
contrair^, or Derogatory to the Kings Sacred, Supreme Sovereign, absolute Power
and Au^^ority, which none, whether Persons, or Collective Bodies can participat
of, any manner of way, or upon any pretext, but in Dependence (...) him, and by
Commission from him. And as their Duty formerly did bind them to own, and
assert the just and legal Succession of the Sacred ^ine, as unalterable by any
humane Jurisdiction; So now on this occasion, They for Themselves and the whole
Nation Represented by Them, in most Humble and Dutiful manner, Do Renew the
hearty and sincere ofter of their Lives and Fortunes, To Assert, Support,
Defend and Maintain King JAMES the Seventh, their present Glorious Monarch, and
his Heirs and Lawful Successors in the Possession of their Crowns,
Soveraignity, Prerogatives, Authority, Dignity, Rights and Possessions against
all Mortals, and therewithal to assure all his Enemies, who shall adventure on
the Disloyalty of Disobeying his Laws, or on the Impiety of Invading his
Rights, That these shall sooner weary of their Wickedness, then they of their
Duty, and that they firmly resolve to give their entire O^edience to his
Majesty without reserve, against ^ll His Enemies, Foreign or Intestine; And
they Solemnly Declare, That as they are bound by Law, so they are voluntarly
and firmly Resolved, That all of this Nation, betwixt sixty and sixteen. Armed
and Provided, according to their Abilities, shall be in readiness for His
Majesty's Service, where, and as often as it shall be His Royal Pleasure to
require them.

And since the Excise of Inland, and Foreign Commodities granted to King
CHARLES the Second of ever Blessed Memory, by the 14. Act of the Parliament
1661. during all the Days of His Lifetime, and Prorogat by the 8. Act of the
Parliament 1681. For five Years there^fter, will shortly terminat; And the
Estates of Parliament Considering the usefulness of this Grant, to Support the
Interest of the Crown; Do, as the first Evidence of their Sincerity, in the
foresaid Tender of their Duty, humbly, and unanimously, Offer to His most
Sacred Majesty, King JAMES the Seventh, their present Monarch, and to His
Lawful Heirs and Successors, in the Imperial Crown of Scotland, The said Excise
of Inland and Foreign Commodities, expressed in the said 14 Act of Parliament
1661. To be Collected in the manner prescrived by ^he said 8. Act of the
Parliament 1681. FOR EVER, And His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, by force
of this Act, Have United, Annexed, and Incorporated, and Units, Annexes and
Incorporates the same to the Crown of this Realm, to remain therewith in
annexed Property, in all ^^me coming: And in respect that the alteration in the
Method of Collecting the Inland Excise, from what it was by the Act 1661. To
that pre^^^ived by the 8. Act, Parliament 1681. will require some time to
Establish it in Collection, Therefore His Majesty, with Consent of the ^states,
Continues the Collection prescrived by the 14 Act Parliament 1661. of the
Inland Excise, for three Months, from the first of May next ^lenarly.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


