ACTS AND STATUTES Set down by the COMMITTEE OF ESTATES OF SCOTLAND; For
regulating the matter of EXCISE, and speedy bringing in of the moneys to be
raised thereupon: Conform to the power given to them by the CONVENTION of
ESTATES.

EDINBURGH: Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.

At Edinburgh the 15. of February 1644.
FOrsameikle as the Estates of this Kingdom finding it necessary that some
means should be provided for settling a stock of credit or security,
whereupon moneys may be raised for supplying the necessities of the Armies
sent from this Kingdom into England and Ireland, did by their Act of the last
of Januarie unanimously agree and ordain that the same should be by way of
Excise, and recommended to the Committee of Estates to take the best way how
the same might be most speedily and with least expense managed and uplifted;
And the Committee of Estates having taken the same to their consideration, they
have thought fit, and accordingly concluded and agreed upon the Acts following,
as most conducing to the better regulating and uplifting of the moneys to be
raised on this Excise; And ordains the same to be printed, and published at the
Market Crosses and Parish Kirks of the Kingdom, wherethrough none pretend
ignorance of the same.

Of which Acts the tenor follows.
Commission of Excise.
THe Committee of Estates think fit, that for the better ordering of this Excise
there should be a Commission settled to have the charge thereof, And for that
purpose nominate and appoint John Earl of Lauderdale, John Lord Balmerino, and
Robert Lord Burgh- lie, Sir Patrick Hammiltoun, Sir Michael Balfoure of
Denmylne, Master James Reid of Pitlethie, Sir John Smith Provest of Edinburgh,
John Semple Provest of Dumbartan, and James Stuart Merchant in Edinburgh, or
any three of them, and the Lord Chancellor to be supernumerarie, to be
Commissioners of Excise; With power to them to govern the whole office of
Excise, To make Acts and Constitutions for the better regulating thereof, and
the more speedy uplifting of moneys to be raised thereupon, and to see the
same put in execution: With power also to them, To nominate, appoint, censure,
or displace, as they shall find occasion, all subordinate Officers, as
Collectors, Surveyers, Keepers of the Registers of Entries and Accounts, and
all other subservient Officers: and at their entries to take their oaths and
surety for the faithful discharge of their offices, and to allow them such
yearly and proportionable allowances for their pains, as they with approbation
of the Committee of Estates shall think fitting.

As also with power to them, To call to an account, als often as they shall think
sitting, the Thesaurer of Excise, Collectors, Surveyers, and others
Intrometters; And to keep in record all the moneys and entries that shall come
into the Office, to be represented by them to the Estates or their Committees,
as the same shall be called for; And generally with power to them to do every
thing that may tend for the right regulating of this Excise, and to give their
oaths de fideli administratione. This Commission to endure ay and while it be
recalled by the Estates or their Committees, to whom the Commissioners are to
be answerable for their proceedings.

Likeas the Committee of Estates nominates and appoints (...) to be Thesaurer
of this Excise, Thesaurer.
With power to him and his servant or under-Receiver, for whom he shall be
answerable, to receive the whole moneys of Excise from all the Collectors
thereof, and to disburse the same as he shall receive warrant from the Estates
or their Committees, without whose warrant he is to disburse nothing, except
the ordinary allowances, and other incident necessaries belonging to the
office, as he shall be warranted by the Commissioners of Excise: And the
Thesaurer is hereby appointed to make and deliver a faithful and true account
of all receipts and disbursements to the Commissioners or Quorum thereof
monthly, or oftener, as he shall be required by the Estates or their
Committees, and shall give his oath and find caution for the faithful account
and discharge of his Office.

Registers and Clerks
It is also ordained, That there be a Register belonging to the Office, who
shall keep a book wherein are to be insert all the receipts of moneys raised
upon this Excise (being allowed by the Commissioners) according as the same
shall be given up by the several Collectors in Burghs and other places in the
Country: Wherein also are to be insert the names and surnames of the
Collectors thereof, and of the several places and Parishes whereout of these
sums were collected, with the date of the deliverie thereof to the Thesaurer.
As also all extracts that the surveyors shall take out of any note or book
belonging to the Custome-houses, and entries to be made by the Surveyors of
Excisable goods, remaining in Cellars, Storehouses, or any other places or
houses of any persons that sels, buys, or spends any of these Commodities.

And this is to be without prejudice of the Office of Clerk to the Excise and
his deputes, who are to minute and frame all acts and warrants that comes
before the Commissioners, or issues from them, and keep a Register thereof,
write Missives, and do every other thing incumbent to the Office of a Clerk.

Collectors.
The Collectors are to receive and levy money of all Excisable goods, within the
bounds appointed to th^^^. And to receive from the Surveyers of these bounds,
the Inventar of Excisable Commodities, conform to the Survey: or they
themselves may enquire and take up the Excise as they shall think best for the
Service. The Collectors of the Shires of Edinburgh, Lithgow, Haddinton,
Berwick, Roxburgh, Peebles, Lanerick, Stirlin, Perth, Fyffe, Forfar,
Clack-mannan, and Kinrosse, shall the second Tuesday of March next, come to the
office of Excise, and bring in the Excise money paid the month before; they
shall enter the same in the book of office, and then by warrant deliver them to
the Thesaurer. Upon the second Tuesday of April, the Collectors of the Shires
of Renfrew, Dumbartan, Argyle, Tarbet, Bute, Air, Dumfreis, Stuartie of
Kircudbright, Wigton, Kincardin, Aberdene, and Bamff, shall do the like since
the tenth of February. And upon the second Tuesday of May, the Collectors of
the Shires of Murray, Innernesse, Nairne, Sutherland, Cromartie, Caithnesse,
Orknay, and Zetland, shall do the like since the tenth of February last. And
the Collectors are to do every other thing as they shall be warranted by the
Commissioners.

The Surveyers are hereby authorized and warranted; Surveyers.
To enter the Custome-houses, search, view, examine, take Copies of any Custom
and Impost book belonging thereto; As also to enter the Sellers, Storehouses,
Brew-houses, or any other houses or places belonging to any persons, that sels,
buys, or spends, any of the said Commodities liable to Excise: And to take
Inventar thereof, for the Collectors use in leavying the Excise money. They are
also to perform this Service, as they shall be commanded by the Commissioners.

Subservient officers.
The Subservient officers, are hereby authorized with power, To make seach for
un-excised goods, and of all those who shall refuse to make true entry of
their Excisable Commodities: And to summond offenders before the Commissioners:
And to do any other thing competent to such offices, as they shall be warranted
by the Commissioners.

Ale and Beer.
And that their Officers may the more readily perform their several charges,
and the Excise money timously lifted; It is statute and ordained, That all
Importers, or Brewers of Beer to Burgh or Land, for sale, or private use within
this Kingdom, shall weekly deliver to the Collector of Excise or Surveyer, a
true and perfect List of the Beer weekly brewed, or imported by them as said
is. And that they pay the Excise to the Collector weekly, and the Brewer for
private use monthly: And both are to give up an account, and make payment as
aforesaid, under the pain of forfeit of the double of the Beer concealed;
beside, That the Brewer or Importer for sale, shall be discharged his Trade for
a year thereafter; And this failzie to be proven by any lawful manner of
probation.

And it is declared, That the Excise of Ale and Wine shall be uplifted,
according to the several Rates in the Table of Excise, allowing to every Boll
of brown Malt, containing four Furlots of prikmet, within the Kingdom,
fifteen gallons of Ale; and to every Tun of Wine sixty (...) gallons. And
it is ordained, That the buyer of Ale, Beer, or any other Merchandise excisable
and retailed, shall notwithstanding of the trust of the stock, be obliged to
pay the Excise in ready money.

It is ordained that all Malt-men in Burgh or Land, shall keep a book, wherein
shall be insert all the Bols of Malt made by them, and the names of all the
buyers thereof, with the quantity sold to every person, and what quantity they
brew themselves, and which book or double thereof, the said Malt-man shall
deliver under his hand to the office of Excise Collectors or Surveyers, when he
shall be required; and failing herein, he shall confiscate all his Malt
concealed and not given up as said is.

Likewise it is ordained, That all Millers shall declare and give up to the
Collectors and Surveyers as they shall be required, of all the Malt, ground at
their several and respective Milnes every week, under all highest pain, and as
they will be answerable to the Commissioners of Excise.

Whereas a great quantity of Malt is usually transported to the far
High-Lands; It is ordained, That the buyers and transporters shall pay the
Excise to the sellers thereof, notwithstanding they buy the same upon trust,
and take a ticket of payment of the Excise, which being produced to the
Collector or Surveyer where they live, shall be freed of the Excise, otherwise
shall pay the Excise, and forfeit the whole Malt concealed.

It is also ordained, Wine.
That the Custom and Impost books, be made patent to the Surveyers, or other
Officers of Excise, who are ordained to take a note of the same, and of the
Wines entered therein; Besides, That the Merchant-Venturers or Owners, shall be
obliged to declare to whom he has sold the same, Vintner or other person
whatsoever; and what they sell for private use, that the first Seller or
Importer shall be liable for the Excise thereof, which is to be paid in by the
buyer for private use to them before the delivery thereof; notwithstanding the
Wine it self is taken upon trust. And for such Wines as the Merchant-Venturer
has before this time sold and delivered for private use; It is ordained, That
the buyer or receiver shall be obliged to give up an account thereof to the
Collector or Surveyer of the Excise, and pay the Excise thereof; As also that
the Vintner give up a weekly account to the Collector or Surveyer what they
sell, and pay Excise accordingly: Wherein if either the buyer of Wine for
private use, or the Vintner shall failzie, they are to forfault the double
avail of the Wine, concealed and not paid for; Besides, That the Vintner
shall be discharged sale of Wine for a year. And this failzie to be proven as
of before.

Aquavitae and strong Waters.
That all makers and sellers of Strong Water and Aquavitae, give up atrue
Inventar under their hands to the office of Excise, or to the Collectors and
Surveyers of the bounds where they dwell, as they shall be required, of all the
Strong waters and Aquavitae made by them before it be sold; and after it is
sold, give up a List of the first buyers thereof, with the quantity sold to
every person; to the effect the Excise may be tried and paid to the public.
And it is declared, That the maker or seller of the said Strong Water, shall
pay the Excise after they be sold, and take the Excise from the first buyer.
And if the maker or seller failzie to give the said Inventar or List, or if the
samine shall be improven according to the Laws of the Country, the said maker
or seller shall for fault the value of the Strong Water so concealed and
improven. Likeas the first buyers of Strong Water for sale, shall give an
account of all the Strong Water and Aquavitae lying in their hands as yet
unsold, and of what they have sold, after the tenth of February instant, to the
Collectors or Surveyers within their bounds: To the intent what is sold after
the said day, may pay Excise; and failing herein, to for fault the value of the
waters not compted and Excised. And the maker or seller paying the Excise,
shall give a ticket to every other seller of the said Strong Water, testifying
that the Excise is paid, and whosoever shall not instruct the payment of Excise by
the ticket foresaid, shall be liable in payment of the Excise, and for fault
the value of the waters not excised.

Merchant Wares.
And whereas it is the custom of all Merchant Ware excised, That at the
receiving of their Goods, they make Entry to the Office of Excise, and pay the
Excise before they retail the same: Or otherwise that the Surveyers enter
their Shops, Warehouses, or such other places where their Goods may be
apprehended, and take oaths for help and qualification, and confiscate the
double of what is concealed for the first fault; Yet notwithstanding, for the
ease and better accommodating the Merchants Traders with Excised Goods in this
Kingdom; It is ordained, that the Retailers and Sellers of Goods chargeable
with Excise, shall monthly give in to the Commissioners of Excise, or any
having their warrant, a Book subscribed by their hands, containing a note and
an account of all the several Goods and Commodities Exciseable and sold by
them within that month, with the days of the month, and persons names to
whom they were sold, and pay the Excise accordingly. And the failzie or
omission herein, to be the triple of the price of the Commodities omitted or
concealed, and to be proven as aforesaid.

And it is ordained, that all Excisable Commodities that are bought by a
Shopkeeper or Retailer from another, the first Retailer or Shopkeeper is
liable in payment of the Excise. Also whatsoever Commodities are bought by
others then Shopkeepers, for private use from the Importer, the Importer or
first Seller is liable for Excise. And whatsoever Commodities are bought from
any Importer, by any other Burger in any other Burghs, or by any Merchant that
keeps Booth, the first Buyer from the Importer pays the Excise in the place
where he lives. And therefore it is hereby declared, that the first Importer is
only liable to pay the Excise of those Goods he sells to any that have no
residence within Burgh, or Chapmen that have no constant residence, but
travells with his Pack through the Country. And therefore upon the Importers
certificat of the first payment of Excise, these parties are free.

It is also ordained, Fleshes.
That the Deacons of Fleshers within Burgh, or any Flesher elsewhere, shall give
up the names of all the Masters of their Calling, and the names of all those
that presents Fleshes to be sold in Markets: And that every Master shall give
up the names of all their Servants and Slayers; And that the Fleshers and
Slayers of Oxen, Bulls, or any slaughtered Goods, mentioned in the cable of
Excise in Edinburgh, Leith, Cannongate, or Liberties thereof; Potterraw,
West-port, or Pleasance, shall compeir on Monday of every week before the
Commissioners of Excise, beginning the fourth Monday of February, the 26. day
of the Month: Bringing with them a List of all the slaughtered and sold Goods
from the tenth of February, to the intent they may pay the Excise thereof; And
failing of compearance or paying the Excise, they shall forfeit the price of
each Beast concealed, toties quoties; And failing thereof, shall be imprisoned,
till they make payment of all bygone Excises and forfeitures unpayed: as also
find caution for their appearance and paying of Excises and forfeits they
shall incur in time coming, and be discharged of that Calling, during the
pleasure of the Commissioners of Excise.

It is also ordained, that every Porter, or any other that shall be appointed
within Burgh, shall keep a Book, to be given in under their subscription and
declaration to the Commissioners, wherein shall be insert the number and
several kinds of all Exciseable Beasts, both slaughtered and unslaughtered,
that enters within the Ports thereof, with the names of the persons to whose
behoof those Beasts are brought in. And the said Porter, or other appointed,
shall receive the Excise of the slaughtered Goods from the in-bringer thereof,
not showing a ticket from the Surveyer, that it is already paid; otherwise he
shall take the Excise, and give a ticket to warrant him at all other Surveyers
hands, and deliver the same to the Collector. And whosoever buyeth Skins or
Hides of slaughtered Goods within Burgh, shall keep a Book to be given in under
his subscription and declaration, wherein shall be insert the names of the
Fleshers, and sellers of the Skins and Hides within the said Burghs, that
the more exact trial may be had of all the slaughtered Goods therein, lest the
Public be defrauded of the benefit of the same. And if the said Buyers of
Skin and Hide neglect to bring in this Book monthly, and oftener as they
shall be required, they shall forfeit all the Skins they have cost and not
given up; and this concealment to be proven, ut supra: and the like or any
other course shall be taken by the Commissioners for the rest of the Kingdom in
Burgh or Land. The Excise of Fleshes is to be paid by the Slayer or Flesher
for sale; And siclike by any that have of their own, whether paid by their
Tenants, or of their own plenishing.

Touching Tobacco, It is ordained, that all the Custom and Impost Books be
patent to the Office of Excise, Tobacco.
or to the Collectors and Surveyors, to the intent an entry may be known for
the Excise; And that all Skippers, Mariners, and Owners of Tobacco, are obliged
before they put out any Goods out of their Ships and Vessels, to make a true
entry thereof under their subscription, and upon declaration, under the pain
of confiscation of what is concealed. And that they give up an Inventar of all
the Tobacco Imported in their Ships or Vessels, with the names of the Owners
thereof; and that no taksman shall take entry of other Goods, till the whole
Tobacco be entered: to the effect it being sold, the Excise may be paid to the
Public, for which the owners shall be liable; and shall keep a book, which
under their handwriting, and upon declaration, they shall produce to the
Commissioners, Collectors, or Surveyers as they shall be required; in which
book shall be insert the names and sir-names of all the buyers, with the
quantity bought by every one.

And it is ordained, That the first seller of Tobacco shall give a ticket to
every buyer, showing the Excise thereof paid to the Public: And if the buyer
cannot instruct payment of the Excise by this ticket; he is to be liable in
payment of the Excise by and attour the confiscation of his Tobacco.

And for trial of all Tobacco already imported, and yet unfold within the
Kingdom; It is ordained, that Shopkeepers, Taverners, Ale-sellers, or other
sellers of Tobacco whatsoever, shall be obliged to give a true Inventar and
account of all the Tobacco lying in their hands, or what they have sold, after
the tenth of February, to the office of Excise, or to the Collectors and
Surveyers within the bounds where they dwell. Which if they delay, till search
and trial be made thereof, they shall be liable to the double of the Excise by
and attour the confiscation of the Tobacco. And it is ordained that all
Skippers, Mariners, or Owners of Tobacco, when they make entry of the same,
shall find caution to make payment of the Excise after the sale thereof.

Coal transported.
It is ordained, That all Coale-Masters be obliged to cause their Grieves at the
loading of any Ship or other Vessel with Coal, to be transported out of the
Kingdom, keep a book, wherein shall be insert the just price of the loading of
the said Ship or Vessel, with the name of the Ship, Master or Skipper, and
date of loading, which book or double thereof he shall give up under his
handwriting to the Collector or Surveyer, the first Tuesday of every month,
beginning the first Tuesday of March next to come, for the Excise payable after
the tenth of February before: As also the Master and Owner of the Coal, shall
upon his honor and credit, subscribe the book foresaid, that it is just and
right to their best knowledge. And failing of the giving up of the said
Inventar, and paying of the Excise thereof, the Master and Owner of the Coal
shall pay the triple of the concealed Coal.

Bestiall transported.
It is ordained, That all Tacksmen of the Customs on the Borders, for the
Bestiall driven into England, shall keep a book, and give in the same under
their subscription and true declaration to the office of Excise, wherein shall
be insert the number and several kind of beasts, with the names of the
Drovers, and days of the month when they pass; and shall be comptable for
the Excise thereof four times in the year and oftener, as they shall be
required. And failing of their compearance, compting and paying, shall forfeit
the triple of the Excise foresaid.

Ale and Beer transported.
It is statute and ordained, That no Brewers, sellers of Ale or Beer, give any
Beer or Ale to Skippers for provision of their Ships, before the Skipper
deliver to them a Warrant and License for the quantity of the same from the
Collector or Surveyer within the bounds where they load their Ships, or (in
their absence) of the Magistrate of the bounds, to the intent they take in no
more Beer nor Ale under that pretext, nor may be judged sufficient for the
voyage. And in case of the deliverie of any Beer or Ale, without the Warrant
foresaid, the said Brewers or Sellers shall pay the double of the Excise of
all Beer and Ale, so and without Warrant delivered by them.

Made work imported, which is the explanation of the penult Act contained
within the printed Table of Excise.
It is ordained, That all kind of made Work, brought home and sold, viz.
Brasse-Chandlers, Spurs, Bridle-bits, Stirrop-irons, Horse-combs, Knives,
mounted-Swords above ten marks, or Guards above the same price. All manner of
Sadles, Sadle and Horse-graith, Goldsmith-Work of all sorts of Plate, Rings,
Jewels set or un-set. All foreign Pewter, Hangings, Tapestrie, mounted Beds,
Stools, Chaires, Cushions, Carpets, Blankets, Rugs, Coverings, Feather-beds,
Cods, Bowsters, Quilts, Trunks, Chamber-stools, Hat-cases, Caves, Cabinets, and
Cloak-bags, Gloves and Purses of all kind. All made Work of Holland, Cambrick,
Lawne, Tiffanie plain or laced, Needle or Cut-Work, Muffs, Fannes, Feathers,
Pokes, Embroidered Caps and Slippers or with Lace, drinking Glasses, wrought
Petticots; and Wascots, Clocks, Watches, and Munters, Boots and Shoes, shall
be given up by the Merchants-sellers thereof, under subscription and
declaration to the Commissioners, Collectors, or Surveyers, and pay the Excise
thereof for every twelve pound value 13. shillings 4. pence: And failing of
giving up, or paying the Excise, to forfeit the worth of the Goods concealed.

The Committee of Estates, Ordaines the Commissioners of every Parish, and
Collectors of the bounds jointly, to appoint the Surveyers, to take sufficient
caution of them, and administer to them the oath for faithful administration.
And the Surveyer shall give in their weekly or monthly accounts to the
Commissioners of every Parish, who shall subscribe the same jointly with the
Surveyer, and upon their credit and honor to their best knowledge, testify
the truth of the said accounts; to the intent there may be a true charge to
the Collectors of Excise: And also that the Collectors shall give in the double
of the Surveyers book so subscribed with their own books under their hands and
declaration to the Commissioners, that the accounts of moneys therein contained
are just and true.

If any person or persons, liable in payment of Excise, shall refuse, conceal,
or neglect to pay the same, according to the rates contained in the table of
Excise, or do any thing contrary thereto, the same being proven before the
Commissioners, they shall forfeit the triple of the value of the goods or
commodities so by him concealed or not paid: And the Commissioners has hereby
power to give order for poynding the readiest of the offenders goods, and
commit them to prison till they pay the forfeit; And that the Informer shall
have paid him from the Thesaurer, which shall be allowed him, the third part
of any forfeits that shall accresse by his information. And it is ordained that
all confiscate goods, fines, forfeits, and penalties, taken by the Collectors
or Surveyors, or other Officers, shall be paid to the office of Excise, with
the Excise moneys payable by them, the same confiscate goods and penalties
being insert in a book, with the names off whom they were taken, and for what
causes; which book they shall give into the office under their hand, and upon
declaration, allowing the third part to the Informer, as is aforesaid.

The Commissioners of Excise have hereby power and authority to call before
them any person or persons they shall think fit, to inform and testify
touching all and every one of the said ordinances in the Excise, and to
examine any persons upon oath for the better discovery of any fraud or neglect
in the not entering of any commodities to be entered, or not paying the Excise,
conform to the ordinances made thereanent; Which oath the Commissioners, or
any they shall appoint by their hand-writings, shall have power to administer,
and the testimony of two credible witnesses to be sufficient in that behalf.

It is hereby ordained, that all Commissioners, Thesaurers, Clerks; Registers,
Collectors, Surveyors, or other Officers of Excise, and all other person or
persons who shall do any thing in execution or performance of any ordinance of
the said office, shall be therein from time to time protected and saved
harmless by the power and authority of the Estates and their Committees.

Like as all Provests and Bailies within Burghs, Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies,
Constables, and their deputes, and other Magistrates to Burgh and Land, and all
Colonels and Committees of war in the Kingdom, for the time, are hereby
commanded and ordained, to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners
and Officers of Excise, and every one of them, in the execution of their
several offices and articles therein contained; and that they have a special
care that the Excise of Beer and Ale, Wines, Fleshes, and other things, be
duly paid, and the refusers punished, according to the Statutes in that
behalf made: And hereby they fail not, as they will be answerable to the
Estates; or their Committees.

Arch. Primerose.


