THE OATH TO BE TAKEN BY all members of the Parliament 1641. and in all
Parliaments hereafter, before they proceed to any Act or determination.
FOr so much, as the honor, greatness, and happiness of the Kings Royal
Majesty, and the wealfare of the Subjects, depends on the purity of
Religion, (as it is now established in this Kingdom) the Laws, Liberties, and
Peace thereof, which ought to be sought after by all good Christians, loyal
Subjects, and true Patriots; And to be furthered and maintained by them,
against all such as by any means indevoure to shake or subvert the same.

Therefore, We under-subscribers, and every one of Us, do in the presence of
Almighty GOD, promise and vow that in this present Parliament We shall
faithfully and freely speak, answer, and express our selves upon all and every
thing, which is, or shall be proponed so far as We think in our Conscience,
may conduce to the glory of GOD, the good and peace of the Church, and state
of this Kingdom. And employ our best indevours to promove the same: And shall
in no ways advise, voice, nor consent to any thing which to our best knowledge
We think not most expedient and conduceable thereto. As also, That We shall
maintain and defend with our lives, power, and estate, his Majesty's Royal
Person, honor, and estate, as is expressed in our National Covenant. And
like-wise, the power and privileges of Parliaments; And the lawful rights and
liberties of the Subjects: And by all good means and ways, oppose and
indevoure to bring to exact trial all such as either by force, practice,
counsel, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise have done, or shall do, any thing
in prejudice of the purity of Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdom: And further, that We shall in all just and honorable ways
indevoure to preserve union and peace betwixt the three Kingdoms, of Scotland,
England, and Ireland: And neither for hope, fear, nor other respect, shall
relinquish this vow and promise.

Decimo August. 1641. REad in audience of Parliament who approves the same,
And appoints the same to be taken by all Members of this Parliament, and in
all Parliaments hereafter, before they proceed to any act or determination.



EDINBVRGH, Printed by JAMES BRYSON 1641.


