ACT OF THE COMMITTEE OF ESTATES Against Run-awayes, and Fugitive Soldiers,
and their Resetters.
Edinburgh,11. July, 1648.
THE Committee of Estates considering the prejudices that has occured to the
publict service in former expeditions, by the base carriage of some Officers
and Soldiers who run away from their Colors, and becomes fugitives, and that
the like may fall out in this service, if tymous course be not taken for
preventing thereof. Therefore they do Statute and Ordain, That all those both
of horse and Foot who shall run away from their Companies and Colors without a
pass from the Lord General, or some of the General Officers, or at least from
the chief Officer of the Regiment shall be apprehended by the Committees of War
or any of them, by the Colonels of the Shire, Captains of Paroches or
Magistrates within Burghs, or others, now authorized by this Act for that
purpose wherever they can be apprehended. And that these by west or by north
this Town be sent to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh; And these by south Edinburgh be
sent with a guard to the Army or to the next Garrison to be punished according
to the Articles of Military Discipline, or that the Committees of War and
Colonells within ilk Shire, and Magistrates within Burgh (if they shall think
it expedient; for the terrifying of others) decimat the said fugitives both
Horse and Foot, and cause hang the tenth man; And if there be but one or more
within the number of ten, to cause hang ane, and send the rest as aforesaid.
And because the entertaining and resetting of their Fugitives, embolden them to
keep themselves still lurking, and encourages others by their example to run
away. Therefore it is Statute and Ordained, that whosoever shall resset or
entertain any of the said Fugitives, or shall have knowledge of their being
within their bounds, and shall not delate and deliver them to the Committee of
the Shire and Commissioners aftermentioned shall be liable in the sum of five
hundredth Marks for ilk Horsman, and one hundredth pounds for ilk Footman,
besides the making forth command the party reset or another in his place. The
one half to be employed for the publict expense in putting this Act into
execution, and the other half thereof to the delaters, who shall qualify the
reset or concealment by witnesses, oath of party or otherwise. Likeas the
Committee of Estates do hereby dispone the right of the said sums to be
applied in manner foresaid. And because the traveling of persons through the
Country without sufficient Passes may prove an obstruction to the due
execution of this Act. The Committee does hereby give warrant and Command to
the Magistrates of Burghs, or any person on the Committee of War of the Shires,
or any other who shall have Warrant by virtue hereof, to apprehend any person
they shall find traveling within their bounds without sufficient Passes from
these that sent them: And that none be allowed to stay or reside in any Shire
or Burgh, without sufficient Testimonial from the Magistrates of the Burgh, or
the Kirk Session where they last lived, under the pain of ane hundredth pounds
to be encurred by the resetters and to be employed as aforesaid. And for the
better and more punctual execution of this Act: The Committee of Estates do
hereby give power and Commission, express bidding, and charge to the persons
underwritten, or both or either of them within their several Shires by the
advice of the Committee of War of the Shire. And if the Committee shall be
unwilling, or delay to concur with them at their first meeting, than by advice
of such of the Committee as will join with them. And if none join with them as
said is, that then both or either of them, by themselves take course to see
this Act put in execution: That they appoint Commissioners in ilk Parosch to
see it done within their bounds, and once each fortnight take ane account from
them, and return it to the Committee of Estates: The Commissioners names are as
follows, For the Sheriffdom of Berwick, the Lord of Langton; For the
Sheriffdom of Hadingtoun, Sir John Sinclair of Herdmeston, and Mr. James
Dunhame of Lufnes; For the Sheriffdom of Edinburgh, Sir John Dalmahoy of that
ilk, and Sir John Gibson of Alderston; For the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh, the
Sheriff of Tiviotdail; For the Sheriffdom of Selkirk, Sir John Murray of
Philiphauch, and the Lord of Whytbank; For the Sheriffdom of Dumfreis, the
Lord of Lag; For the Sheriffdom of Peebles, the Lairds of Prestongrange and
Dawick; For the Sheriffdom of Lanerk, the Lord Lee and James Hammilton of
Boigis; For the Sheriffdom of Lithgow, William Drummond of Ricarton and (...)
Hammilton of Binnie; For the Sheriffdom of Stirlin, the Lairds of Polmais and
Carden; For the Shire of Clakmannan, the Lord of Sanchie; For the Shire of
Air, the Lds. of Culloin and Kilbirnie; for the Shire of Renfrew the Lds. of
Duchal and Howston; for the Shire of Wigtoun and Kirkcudbright. (...) For the
Shire of Fyffe, the Lds. of Reres and Cambo; For the shire of Perth, the L. of
Inchmartine and Balthayok; For the shire of Forfar, the Lds. of Balnamoon and
Fintrie; For the shire of Kincardine, Lairds of Pittarro and Morphie; For the
Shire of Aberdeen the Lord of Udine and Patrick Leslie Provest of Aberdeen;
For the shire of Bamff, the Lord of Birkinboig younger and Troup; For the
shires of Elgine and Nairn, the Lairds of Innes and Sheriff of Murray; For the
shire of Innernes sir John Mackenzie and Colonel Robert Home. And the
Committees Ordains this Act to be Printed and Published, and that the
Commissioners aforementioned to be careful that this Act be duly published at
the Market Crosses of the Burghs and Parosch Kirks within their Shires,
Wherethrough none pretend ignorance thereof, Extractum.

Arch. Primerose,

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1648.


