C R
(...) royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Discharging the vending of any Goods brought from England, till they abide
their forty days Trial.
Edinburgh, the second day of March, one thousand six hundred and sixty six.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that albeit it has
pleased the Almighty GOD to abate the violence of the Plague of Pestilence at
London, and other places infected in the Kingdom of England; Yet there is great
reason to fear and apprehend, that this Kingdom may be in danger, by suffering
a free Commerce and Trade to all persons, and permitting them to vend their
Commodities before trial; seeing, by sad experience, it has been found, that
the Infection may lurk for a long time in Merchant Wares and Commodities, and
after handling thereof will break out again, to the great prejudice of the
people and places where they are brought. Therefore, they, by these presents,
discharge all Merchants, Traffickers or other persons whatsoever, who shall
bring any Wares or Commodities from England, either by Sea in Ships and
Vessels, or by Land in Packs and other Carriages into this Kingdom, to unload
the said Vessels, or open the said Packs and Carriages, until first they
acquaint the Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, or others His
Majesty's Officers of these Shires and Burghs where they shall happen first to
come, where they did laden their Goods; and that they receive orders for their
forty days trial, and in what places they shall handle their Wares and
Commodities during that time, conform to, and under the pains contained in, a
former Act of Council, dated the twelfth of July last: And commands and charges
all the said Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, and others
His Majesty's Officers within their respective bounds, to meet and conveen, and
give order for such Guards, Watches, Overseers, Houses and Places, as they
shall think most convenient for putting of this Act in execution, and for doing
every other thing that shall be necessar for that effect: With certi^ication,
if they fallie, they shall be punished in their Persons and Goods to the terror
of ot^^rs. And ordains these presents to stand in force till the first of June
next, and longer, during the Councils pleasure; And that the same be printed,
and published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, Peer and Shore of Lies, and
other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1666.


