ACT, Appointing the Oaths of Allegiance taken for the benefit of the Indemnity
to be Transmitted to the Clerks of Privy Council.
EDINBURGH, January 12. 1692.
THE Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council having received Information from
their Clerks, that there are brought to their hands at this place, or sent in
to them by way of Missive, subscribed by Persons undersigned, and whom they
know not: Notes, or Lists of several Persons, said to have taken the benefit of
their Majesty's Act of Indemnity, and to have Sworn, and Signed the Oath of
Allegiance, in the Terms of the said Act; but that the Oaths with the Original
Subscriptions of these Persons in the Terms of the Indemnity are not
transmitted to the said Clerks: And the said Lords considering how much it
does concern their Majesty's Interest, and the Security of the Government, that
the Persons taking the benefit of the said Act of Indemnity be certainly
known, and that the Oaths, with the Original Subscriptions signed by them, be
in the precise Words of the Oath of Allegiance insert in the Act of Parliament,
and that the same be Sworn and Signed before the Persons, and in the express
Terms mentioned in the said Act of Indemnity: Therefore the said Lords of
Their Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby Require and Ordain the Sheriffs
Principals of the several Shires of this Kingdom, their Deputs and Clerks, to
transmit to the Clerks of Privy Council, not only the Lists of the Persons who
have taken the benefit of the said Indemnity, but likewise the Oaths already
Sworn and Signed by the Takers thereof, with their Original Subscriptions, and
that before the Persons, and in the precise Terms mentioned in the said Act,
betwixt and the twenty fifth day of January instant, for such as are on this
side of the River of Tay, and the tenth day of February next, for those on the
other side thereof; and that as they will be Answerable at their highest
Perril. And appoints Their Majesty's Solicitor timously to Transmit Copies
hereof, to the Sheriff-Clerks of the several Shires within this Kingdom. And
Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council by me DA. MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti.
Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's. Anno Dom. 1692.


