J R

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT OF PRIVY COUNCIL,
Anent the Shires of Dumfreis, Air, etc. their Out-rick.
Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of October, 1688.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, having thought fit, for His
Majesty's Service, and for preserving the Peace of some of the Western Shires
of this Kingdom, in stead of Calling out their Militia, to Authorize and
Require the Heritors of these Shires to keep together in Arms in a Body, and
that in such Proportions by turns, as the King's Service and their own
Security may require; And for the case of the small Heritors of these Shires,
The said Lords do hereby Require and Command, the Sheriffs, or their Deputs,
of the Shires of Dumfreis, Air, Lanerk, Wigtoun, Renfrew, and Dunbartoun, and
the Stewarts and their Deputs of the Stewartries of Annandale and
Kirkcudbright, wi^h all possible Diligence to Conveen a Quorum of the
Commissioners of Assesment, and forthwith by a Cast of the said respective
Shires and Stewartries, to conjoyn so many of the said small Heritors: as may
amongst them make up six hundredth Pounds Scots of yearly valued Rent, who are
to Contribute amongst themselves proportionally conform to their respective
Interests, to R^ek out a sufficient Horseman, well Armed and Appointed for His
Majesty's Service upon this Occasion. And the said Lords considering, That
several Burghs of Regality and Barony, having any considerable Common-good,
ought likewise to Contribute and bear their Proportion in this His Majesty's
Service in the above-written Shires and Stewartries; Do therefore Ordain, That
where any Burgh of Barrony or Regality, has of yearly valued Rent One Thousand
Pounds Scots, they be obliged to put forth a Horseman sufficiently Armed as
aforesaid; and where their valued Rent will not extend to the said Sum, that
they be joined with other small Burghs or Heritors for making up of the said
Proportion of valued Rent, and that for Reiking out a Horseman sufficiently
Mounted as said is; which Horsemen are to be under the Command of the Persons
Entrusted by His Majesty's Privy Council, for Commanding the respective Shires
and Stewartries above written. And to the end all concerned may have timeous
notice hereof, The said Lords Ordain these Presents to be Published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and whole Market Crosses of the Head burghs of the
Shires and Stewartries above-written; That none may pretend Ignorance.
Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me

COL: McKENIE Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


