C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
EDINBURH, the tenth day of August, 1677.
FOr much as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in pursuance of His
Majesty's Commands, signified to them by a Letter of the 7. of June, 1669. did
confine several outed Ministers to partieular Paroches, with allowance to
preach, and exercise the other Functions of the Ministry within the same, and
did deliver to them certain instructions to be kept and observed, upon which
they accepted the indulgence granted to them. And albeit ^hese instructions
have been frequently repeated and seat to these Ministers, ^et diverse of them
have contraveened the same, without any manner of reg^rd thereto: And whereas,
by His Majesty's Letter foresaid, it is left to the ^aids Lords; to allow to
these Ministers such parts of the Stipends, as the^ should think fit, and that
from time to time, the Council has given Order and Warrands to the Heretors
and others, liable in payment of the Stipe^d, to make payment thereof as they
saw cause, without which special Warrant, they could not, nor cannot,
warrantably pay the same. Notwithtanding whereof, it is imformed, that several
Heretors have paid, or inten^ to pay these Stipends, without special Warrant
and Order. The said Lords do therefore Prohibit and Discharge all Heretors,
Fewers, Lifer^nters, and others, liable in payment of the Stipends of the
Paroches where these Ministers are confined, to make payment of any part of the
Stipend to them for the Cropped and Year 1677; and in time coming, without a
special Order and Warrant from the Council, under the Penalty of being liable
in Payment of the said Stipend again, to such as the Cou^cil shall appoint, and
further Censured for their Contempt. And Ord^ins these presents to be Printed,
and Published upon a Sabbath day, at the several Paroch Kirks, where the said
Ministers are confined, that no person pretend ignorance.

Tho. Hey, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1677.


