The Privy Council of Scotlands Letter to the King, together with the
Archbishops and Bishops: As also several English Addresses to His Majesty.
Edinburgh, February 10. 1685.
LAst night arrived here a flying Packet, which brought us the most sorrowful
News of the Death of our late Gracious Sovereign; Whereupon the Lord
Chancellor, and the Lord Thesaurer called the Privy Council immediately to meet,
and having expressed their just Grief for the loss of so good a King and
Master, they unanimously, and with a great Alacrity, resolved to Proclaim the
next morning Our Dread Sovereign King JAMES the Seventh. Accordingly at eight
in the morning the Privy Council met again, and having read his Majesty's
Gracious Letter to them; the Lord Chancellor took the Oath of Allegiance, the
Oath of a Privy Counselor and the Test, and then administered the same to the
other Counselors; which done, they all Signed the Proclamation for Proclaiming
his Majesty, and then went to assist at the Solemnity of it. The Lord Provost,
Magistrates, and Town Council in their Formalities marched bare-Headed, next the
Lion and Heralds in their Coats of Arms displayed: Then the Lord Chancellor,
Lord Thesaurer, and the rest of the Officers of State and Counselors, and
other Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and after them the Lords of the Session in
their Robes, The Train-Bands standing on both sides of the Street: Being come
to the Cross, and mounting it, The Lord Chancellor Proclaimed the King, which
was followed with an Universal Acclamation from more than 30000 of all Ranks of
people present, who with up-lifted hands swore Alleagance to His Majesty. And
then was Proclaimed his Majesty's Gracious Proclamation for continuing all
Officers by Lion King at Arms; after which they marched back in the same manner
to the Council-house. In the afternoon the Privy Council met again, and went
with the Magistrates to the Cross, where they drank the King and Queens Health,
and the rest of the Royal Family. The Town was full of Bonefires, the Canons
from the Castle fired all the while, and the Night concluded with all
imaginable Demonstrations of Joy and Satisfaction.

A Letter to His Majesty from His Privy Council of Scotland.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty.
NOthing could support us under this great load of just grief and sorrow, for
the removal of our late Gracious Sovereign, who transcended all that ever
Reigned before him, in Wisdom, Justice, and Clemency: But that he being thereby
become without doubt more happy and glorious, has left us under your Sacred
Majesty's most Auspicious Government, who are the undoubted and just Lineal
Heir of Authority and Sovereignty, and the true Successor of his Royal
Virtues, with all those great qualities which can fit a Prince for the glorious
dignity of being Vicegerent to Almighty God. In whom also this your ancient
Kingdom cannot but be happy in a most especial manner, your Majesty being the
Lineal and Legal Successor, of that most ancient Race of Kings, by whom for so
many ages this Kingdom has been Governed with so much Justice, and defended by
so much Valor; and your Sacred Majesty having been so instrumental in your own
Person to secure us against those Confusions and Distractions, in which we were
involved, before your Majesty did us the honor to spend some time amongst us.

We therefore your Majesty's Privy Council, being Authorized by your Gracious
Letter, did meet, and in Recognizance of your just right and Title, we did
renew to your Sacred Majesty who now Reigns, the usual Oath of Privy
Counselors and thereafter attended by the Nobility and Clergy of this your
ancient Kingdom, the Lords of your Council and Session, and the Magistrates of
your City of Edinburgh, did at the Market Cross of this City, as use is,
Proclaim and Declare your Majesty our King and Sovereign, binding our selves by
a solemn Oath, to hazard our Lives and Fortunes, in the Defense of your
Majesty's Title and Person, which was most dutifully and joyfully seconded by
the universal Acclamations of those great crowds of your Majesty's Subjects who
were then present. After which we likewise Promulgated your Gracious
Proclamation, for continuing your Officers, Judges, and Magistrates in their
former Employments. And as to these wherein your Majesty is graciously pleased
to continue us. We shall make it our chief endeavor to improve the same with
all zeal and faithfulness for the good of your Majesty's Service. And that
Almighty God, by whom Kings Reign, may preserve your Royal Person, and make
your Government Glorious and Successful, is and ever shall be the Hearty
Prayers of,

May it please your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful,
and most Obedient Subjects and Servants.
Edinburgh, Feb. 10. 1685.
A Letter to His Majesty from the Archbishops and Bishops of Scotland.
Most Sacred Sovereign.
OUr deep and Just Sorrow for the Death of our late Blessed and Gracious King,
would certainly swallow us up, did not the righteous and peaceable Succession
of your Majesty support us under our unexpressible affliction.

Had we the honor and Happiness to prostrate our Persons at your Royal Feet,
our Tears would prove our best Orators for the former, as our Prayers and
Thanksgivings to the only Ruler of Princes, and our best and most faithful
endeavors to serve your most Sacred Majesty, shall ever express our Joy and
Zeal for the latter.

Your pious Zeal for the Honor and Interest of your Royal Brother our late
Sovereign now in Glory; and for this your Ancient Kingdom whilst we enjoyed the
happiness of your presence amongst us, as it did then demonstrate you to be the
best and most obedient of Subjects, so did it Prognosticate your being the
kindest and most Paternal of Sovereign Princes to your People.

At this distance from your Royal Presence, we are able in our present
circumstances to do no more than humbly to Address to your Majesty in Paper, to
pay that Duty we owe upon so Solemn an occasion; But are resolved (if your
Sacred Majesty shall allow) to desire the Archbishop of St. Andrews (who is
most desirous and ambitious to congratulate your most righteous Succession to
the Thrones of your Royal Ancestors) to Address himself to your Royal Presence,
more fully to express our sense and duty, than a Letter can allow, and humbly
to implore your Majesty's Protection and Favor to this National Church, and to
our Order and Persons; which we are humbly confident to obtain, when we reflect
upon your Piety and Zeal for all these Interests, during your abode in this
Kingdom.

To honor, serve and humbly obey your Sacred Majesty in all our Capacities, as
Gods Vicegerent over us, is not only incorporated into our Religion, but is the
most Zealous Inclination of,

Most Sacred Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Loyal, and most
Obedient Subjects and Servants.
Edinburgh, Feb. 10. 1685.
Dublin, February 11.
HIs Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom, having received
last night an express, with the sad News of Our Inestimable loss in the Death
of our late Sovereign King Charles the second, immediately summoned the
Privy Council, and there gave the Orders that were necessary on this occasion.
This morning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Privy Council, the Judges,
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and the Officers of the Army, as many of each
Degree as were in Town, with many other Gentlemen of Quality, all in the Habits
proper to their several Capacities attended his Grace in the Great Hall of the
Castle, and having their unanimously. Subscribed a Recognition of the
Indubitable Right and Tittle of King James the Second, took Horse in the
Castle-Yard, and riding out from thence attended with the Heralds, the several
Ensigns of Authority, and the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, Proclaimed H^s Majesty
in three places of this City, first at the Castle-Gate, then at the Tosi^, and
lastly in the public Corn-Market, with Volleys of Shot from the Great Guns at
each Proclamation. The whole Procession was performed with all the Splendour and
Solemnity the shortness of time would permit, and with all possible
demonstrations of Joy and Satisfaction. In the Afternoon the Councll was
summoned again, and two Proclamations were Signed to be sent forthwith to all
the Counties of the Kingdom, the one for Proclaiming the King in all Shire
Towns, and Towns Corporate, and the other for continuing all Magistrates and
Officers both Civil and Military in their several Employments: and the night
was begun with Bonfires and Ringing of Bells. The Recognition and Proclamation
was according to the Form used in England.

White Hall, Feb. 18. The Following Addresses have been presented to His
Majesty, who received them very Graciously. To the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutieful Subjects, the Governor and Company
of Merchant-Adventurers of England, having by the Royal Grace and Favor of
your Majesty's most Noble Predecessors, flourished as a Company of Merchants,
near the space of 400 years, as we are the ancientest in time, do think our
selves obliged to be the first in Duty, in making this our most humble Address
to your Majesty. And being overwhelmed in sorrow, for our unspeakable loss, in
the Death of our late Dread Sovereign, your Majesty's most dear Brother; are,
in a great measure comforted and supported in that our just grief, by the
Rightful Lineal, and unque^tionable Succession of your most Sacred Majesty,
Rendering infinite thanks for your Gracious Proclamation of the 9th instant;
and do humbly submit to your Royal Will and Pleasure therein, for the
Collection of the Customs as formerly; and always praying, (as in duty bound)
your Majesty's Government may be long and prosperous over us, We will ever be
ready to maintain and defend the same with our Lives and Fortunes.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Address of the Lord and
Proprietary, the Merchants, Traders and Planters, of and belonging to His
Majesty's Province of Maryland.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal, and Dutiful Subjects, the Lord, and Proprietary,
Merchants, Traders, and Planters of, and belonging to your Majesty's Province
of Maryland; as we do with the deepest sense of sorrow humbly bemoan your
Majesty's loss of the best of Brothers, in the Decease of our late most
Gracious Sovereign. So do we no less rejoice at your Majesty's happy Accession
to the Throne of your Royal Predecessors, and Sovereignty over us, since the
early and many Proofs which your Majesty has given abroad, and at home, in
Defense of your now Dominions, of all those Royal Virtues, which now render you
the greatest of Monarchs, and most especially, your Magnanimity and steady
Conduct in the most adverse of Fortunes, has given us assurance that our Lives
and Properties are securely Deposited in your Majesty's hands. We therefore in
regard that the Customs are the most considerable, and growing Branch of your
Majesty's Revenue. Do most humbly acquiesce and submit to the Proclamation
which your Majesty has been pleased to publish for Collecting the Customs, as
in the time of our late Sovereign, and shall pay all Obedience thereunto.
Wishing with most sincere and zealous hearts, that your Majesty may continue in
a long and Glorious Reign over us.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Address of the President,
Vice President, Treasurer, Court of Assistants, and Body of the Artillery
Company of the City of London.
THat your Majesty's said ever Loyal and most obedient Subjects and Soldiers,
do with all their Souls bless Almighty God, for the Deliverance of your Sacred
Majesty out of the hands of your blood thirsty and malicious Enemies, and for
Repairing the heaviest Calamities imaginable, in the loss of our late Dread
Sovereign, by so^liustrious a Succession, both to his Imperial Crown, and to
his Royal Virtues, all Plots, Forgeries, and Antimonarchical Bills of Exclusion
notwithstanding.

And your Majesty's humble Sub^^cts being conscious to themselves of the double
Duty, as well of a Military as of a Civil Allegiance, having for many years
last past; had the honor to bear Arms under your Majesty's Command, as their
Princely Leader, and at present as their Dread Sovereign, Do with their Lives
and Fortunes declare their uttermost detestation of all Conspirators, and
Conspiracies whatsoever; and that they will with their Swords in their Hands,
Defend your Majesty's Honor, Person, Crown, Title and Dignity against all
Opposers to their last Breath; Beseeching Almighty God to shower down upon your
Sacred Head all Blessings both of the Right and Left Hand. And your Majesty's
most dutiful Subjects do no longer expect mercy from Heaven, than while they
continue firm and steady in their Faith and Allegiance to your most Excellent
Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, King James the Second, The humble Address
of the Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonality of the City of Winchester.
Shows.
THat we your Majesty's most Loyal, Dutiful and Obedient Subjects, Do from the
bottom of our Hearts, and with unexpressible grief Condole the Death of that
Excellent Prince King Charles the Second (of blessed Memory) your Majesty's
Dear Brother, and our late Dread Sovereign, and with unspeakable Joy give
thanks to Almighty God for your Majesty's Accession to the Throne of your
Ancestors, and Government of these Nations, Rightly descended to you: And we
most humbly pray that your Majesty will please to accept of our Vows and
unalterable Resolutions, to venture our Lives and Fortunes for the Defense of
your Sacred Person, Crown and Dignity.

We should be ungrateful if we could forget, how often your Majesty has freely
ventured your Life for the Honor and Preservation of these Kingdoms, when your
Valor Crowned you with Laurels, and we must lose our senses to imagine you
will do less for their Welfare now, that Heaven has placed you on the Throne.

And your Majesty was Graciously pleased to be instrumental to your late Royal
Brother, and present Queens, honoring our City with their presence; and we
humbly hope and pray. That at some leisure time, you and your Royal Consort
will do us the like Honor, and enjoy the benefit of our Air, which both of you
found healthful, and we hope may conduce to your Majesty's having a numerous
Issue by that Virtuous Princess.

It is both our Duty and Interest to offer up daily Prayers for your Majesty's
long Life and most happy Reign over us; and since the latter will be
impossible, if you should lose what you love best on Earth, (and which best
deserves it) we shall add to our Prayers, That Queen Mary may equally live long
with your Majesty, that her life may be a lasting Pattern for Virtue, Reproach
to Vice, and her Person an unparallelled Grace to your Throne.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's
most Sacred Majesty; Anno DOM. 1685.


