Loves Mistress OR Natures Rarity.
To a most excellent delicious new Tune, called, Tell me you wandering Spirits
in the air.




TEll me you wandering Spirits in the Air,
when yt you saw a nymph more bright, more fair
Then Beauties Darling (wheresoe'r she flies)
Or twinkling Comets in the Starry Skies,
If in this world a Phoenix may be found,
It Is she, it is she, whose graces must and shall be crowned
Oh call her from the fair Elysium Bay
And tell her how my senses fade away,
For in her being was my fixed state;
But she is dissolved, my time is out of date:
She Is flown she is flown unto the Azure Skies,
Then cry, then cry, Amyntas for her absence dies.
Turn sacred Nymph, restore my latest breath,
That am designed for untimely death;
It Is she can cure me with her glorious looks,
Without the skill of Doctors or their books:
Then let thy beauty with such splendour shine,
To raise, to raise this drouping love-sicke heart of mine.
Search, search the Vallys, where the Vestal train
And Shepherdesses in their state remain;
walk through the woods, and view the myrtle Groves
where loves queen rangeth with her turtle doves;
She Is like fair Venus in her glorious Rays,
Then crown her, crown her with a wreath of royal Bays
Walk through the gardens, view the damask Rose
And smell what scent those precious leaves inclo^^
it is her sweet breath that gives this odorous sme^
And peerlesse virtue, (richly does excel:)
If there you see one like the Radiant Sun,
It Is she, it is she, whom I adore, Loves Paragon.
The second part
to the same tune




OH fast the fountains silver-streaming Springs
And Hellicon, where Lady Muses sings;
Distill the Sea, wade through the Ocean deep,
She may be Tombed in eternal sleep;
But she is conveyed from every mortal eye,
O Cloris Cloris, come away, or else for thee I die.
Search, search the rocks, where Sirens sing their charms
She may be lull^d in their enchanting arms;
Fish, fish for pearl, and you may Corals find
Or else a Jewel to content the mind;
My bliss, my joys are turnd' to destiny,
That I, that I must yield to dye for loving thee.
Scale high Olympus, where the Gods remain,
And Goddesses with all their royal Train,
View perfectly the spangled Orb and see
If Cloris, Cloris be in royalty,
She Is gone, she is gone, whilst I in torments frye,
Oppressed, oppressed with pain, fain would but cannot die
Search every quarter of the world, and see,
If Natures piece so excellent there be;
Turn round the Globe and view each center right
If there you find one like to Phoebus bright,
With lustrous beauty shining in extremes,
It Is she, it is she, eclipsing Luna with her beams.
O^ stay a while, I may inform you ill;
Were she on Earth, she had been with me still:
Fly, fly to heaven examine every Sphere,
And see what Stars are lately fixed there
If any brighter then the Sun you see,
Fall down, fall down and honor her for that is she
S. S.

FINIS.
London printed for Francis Grove on Snow-hill.


