C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ADVERTISEMENT Anent Stolen goods in the HIE-LANDS.
Edinburgh the 1. day of March, 1676.
FOrasmuch as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council have granted Commission,
from the date of their presents until the first day March, 1677. To Major
George Grant, to pursue, apprehend and bring to Justice all Thieves, and Broke
Men; haunting and resorting within the Shires of Innerness, on the south side
of Ness, Nairn, Murray, Bamff, Aberdeen, Mearns, Angus, Perth, Argyle,
Clackmannan, Monteith, Stiring, and Dumbartan: By acceptance of which
Commission, the said Major George Grant is oblidged, when any Theft is
committed within the said Shires, Either to restore the goods, or the true
prices thereof, without payment of money, or composition, or otherwise to
apprehend the Thieves, and bring them to Justice: Provyding, that within six
days after committing of the Thift, intimation thereof be given to the said
Major George Grant himself, personally: Or to Alexander Campbel of Locdochart
at Glenfalloch, Thomas Graham Fiar of Dochry at the Kirk of Aberfoyle, Charles
Stewart son to (...) Stewart of Innercheynachen at Dalnamein in Athol, John
Ferquhardson of Inneray, or Duncan Mckenie at the Castletoun of Brae-marr; Mr
Alexander Grant at Ballachastle in Strathspey, Robert Grant of Auchterblair, at
Auchterblair in Strathspey, Patrick Grant Baily of Badenoch, or Thamas
Mcpherson of Kylly Huntly at Ruthven in Badenoch, and Alexander Cheisholme
Sheriff Deput of Innerness, at the Kirk of Doors near Innerness: Or at the
said persons their Dwelling Houses in the said places, who are appointed to
remain there to receive intimations. These are therefore to give Advertisement
to all Persons concerned, That, when any Theft happens to be committed within
the bounds above-written, they may give tymous notice thereof as a foresaid:
Likeas all Landlords, Chiefs of Clans, and others His Majesty's Subjects, are
to concur with the said Major George Grant, in execution of his Commission,
which is granted but Prejudice or Derogation, in any sort, from the Bands given
for securing the Peace. And it is Ordered that these Presents be Printed; And
that the Sheriffs of the Several Shires foresaids cause Publish the same at the
several Market-Crosses and Parish Kirks within these Shires that all persons
Concerned may have notice.

Al. Gibson. Cl. Sti Concilii.


