J R
royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of COUNCIL, Anent Highways and Bridges.
Edinburgh, the Twenty second day of June, 1686.
FORASMUCH as by the sixteenth Act of the first Session of the second
Parliament of King CHARLES the second, in anno 1669. The Justices of Peace in
each Shire, are Ordained to Conveen at the head Burgh of the Shire, the first
Tuesday of May yearly, for Ordering of Highways, Bridges, and Ferries: And the
whole Heretors are Required to Conveen at the respective Head-Burghs, the first
Tuesday of June yearly, And to call for an Account from the Justices of Peace,
of what is needful for Reparation of the Highways and Bridges, what Expenses
is requisite for promoving thereof, and accordingly to Stent the Heretors, (not
exceeding ten shilling Scots upon the hundred Pound of valued Rent, in one
year.) And seeing by a late Act of this Current Parliament, Entitled,
Additional Act anent Highways and Bridges, the last Tuesday of June instant,
is appointed to be the first Diet of Meeting of the Justices of Peace, and
Commissioners of Supply, in the several Shires, for this year, but there being
no day appointed for Conveening of the Heretors: To the end the Reparation of
the Highways and Bridges (being so good and necessary a Work) may meet with no
Obstruction: Therefore the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Do hereby
Authorize and Require the whole Freeholders, and Heretors of the several
Shires, on this side of Tay, to Meet at the respective Head-Burghs within the
same, upon the second Tuesday of July next, for this year, to the Effect
mentioned in the foresaid Act of Parliament 1669. And these beyond Tay, upon
the third Tuesday of July next, and yearly thereafter, conform to the Act of
Parliament: And Appoints the Sheriffs of the respective Shires, or their
Deputs, to cause make Intimation of the foresaid Diets of Meeting, at the
several Paroch Kirks upon the Sunday, immediately preceding the same. And to
the end, these Presents may be more publictly and notourly known to all the
Leidges, Ordains the same to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, by
a Macer of Council.

Extracted forth of the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council, by me Sir
William Paterson, Clerk of Council. WILL. PATERSON.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1686.


