ACT. Discharging Person (...) go to Ireland without Passes.
September 26, 1690.
THeir Majesty's Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Council understanding,
That many are deserting the Country, and leaving their Landlords and Masters
unsatisfied, in keeping of their Tacks, or paying of their Rents, upon
expectation of getting Land in the waste places of Ireland at present, without
any considerable Rent, and that others who have been in Rebellion, may go
thither to escape Punishment (where they are not known) or to promove their
Disloyal Designs: Do therefore Require, and strictly Command all Collectors of
their Majesty's Customs, Surveyers, Clerks, Waiters at the several Ports, and
all Masters and Seamen of Ships, Barques, or Boats, as they will be answerable
at their peril, that they suffer no Passengers to go for Ireland, without
sufficient Passes from one of His Majesty's Privy Council, or from two of the
Commissioners of Supply, or Justices of Peace, (qualified by Law to Act) in the
place where such Passengers did last Reside; Bearing, That they did produce
their Landlords or Masters Certificats, if they were Tennents, Cottars, or
Servants, that they had satisfied them in their Rents, Duties and Services, and
observing of their Tacks, and giving evidence of the lawful Affairs that they
are to go about, or at least upon the Production of an Instrument of a Nottar,
bearing their Requiring their Masters Certificat; and in case of their Masters
refusal, expressing the Person or Persons, to whom they were to make Address
for their Passes, and the time when they were to Address, to the effect their
Masters may, at sight of the said Persons Authorized, as aforesaid, either
give their Certificats, or show a sufficient Reason for refusing the same. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA. MONCREIF, Cls. Sti. Concili^
GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Maji^^ties, Anno DOM. 1690.


