ACT Discharging Boats, Barks, or Vessels from Going to the Bass, or Furnishing
Supplys there to.
Edinburgh, February 28. 1694.
THe Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Coucil, being informed, that several of the
Rebels who hold out the Isle and Rock of the Bass, are at present come, or
driven ashore, and that by the late Storms, the Boats belonging to the said
Rebels are lost, which may prove an effectual mean of their Reduction, Do
hereby strictly Command and Charge all Persons, Skippers, Owners, or Possessors
of Boats, Barks, or other Vessels, great or small, residing and possessing the
said Boats, Barks, or Vessels, on either side of the Firth, from Stirling to
St. Andrews upon the one side, and from Stirling to Berwick one the other side
of the said Rock, that they carefully keep and secure the same, both Night and
Day, from being either seized upon, Stolen, or otherways taken away by the
said Rebels, or any of them, or any other person for their use and service,
under all highest pains; and that neither they, nor any person whatsoever
presume to Hire, Lend, or otherways furnish any Boat, Bark, or other Vessel to
the said Rebels, or any of them, or any other for their Use and Service, under
the pains due to Corresponders with, and Supplyers of Rebels and Traitors. And
farther, the said Lords, Do hereby Renew and Assure the Promise of twenty pound
Sterling, formerly made to any person who shall seize any of the said Rebels
wherever they may be found, and shall deliver the Person so seized to any of
Their Majesty's Officers, either Civil or Military. And they Ordain that these
presents be Printed and Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and also at
all the Towns on the Coast of either side of the Firth within the bounds
foresaid, that none pretend Ignorance.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


