I7 R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT of PRIVY COUNCIL In favors of the Clerks of Kirk-Sessions, and other
Church Officers of the Regular Established Clergy.
Edinburgh, the first day of December, 1687.
FOrasmuch, As the King's most Excellent Majesty has signified, that it is His
Royal Pleasure, that the Clerks of Kirk Sessions, and other Church. Officers,
such as, Readers, Precenters, Beddels, and others, who serve the regular
established Clergy, should not be prejudged of their Rights and accustomed
Fees and Casualties, arising to them by Baptisms, Marriages and Burials (the
ordinar mean of their Subsistence;) but that they should have the same for
bygones, since the date of His Majesty's late Gracious Proclamation of
Indulgence, and in time coming, (His Majesty in His said late Gracious
Proclamation, having declared that He will maintain the regular Clergy in all
their Rights and Possessions:) Therefore, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, in pursuance of His Majesty's Royal Pleasure, Do hereby Declare, that
the said Clerks of Kirk-Sessions, and other Officers of the regular Clergy are
not to be prejudged of their respective accustomed Dues, Casualties and
Benefits, arising to them by Baptisms, Marriages and Burials; and Ordains the
same to be paid to them for bygones, since the date foresaid, and in time
coming, by the persons concerned as formerly; And hereby Requires the several
Magistrates to Burgh and Land, to see the ordinar Diligence put in Execution
against the persons respective liable as aforesaid. And that these presents may
be made known and public, Ordains Intimation thereof to be made at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh by a Macer of Council, and at all the other
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom by Messengers
at Arms; as also to be read in all the Paroch-Churches of this Kingdom upon a
Lords day in the Forenoon, after Divine Service performed, that none pretend
Ignorance. Extracted forth of the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council, by me
Sir William Paterson Knight and Baronet, Clerk of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1687.


