I7 R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT OF PRIVY COUNCIL, Discharging any Leavies or Recruits for the Service of
the States General of the United Provinces.
Edinburgh, the nineteenth day of January, 1688.
FOrasmuch as the King's most Excellent Majesty, has signified to the Privy
Council of this His Ancient Kingdom, That they suffer no more Men to be Leavied
by way of Recruits, or otherwise, for the Service of the States General of the
United-Provinces, or for making up the Regiments already there, and Required
them to give the necessary Orders, Discharging the same. Therefore the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, in Pursuance of His Majesty's Royal Will and
Pleasure aforesaid, Do hereby expressly Prohibit and Discharge, all Officers,
or Soldiers, in the Service of the said States General, from Leavying, or
taking on any of His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, by way of Recruits, or
otherwise, for the Service foresaid; Requiring hereby all Magistrates and
others, who have any Soldiers taken on, as said is, in Custody, to set them
forthwith at Liberty; And in case they be put aboard of Ships, Do hereby
strictly Require and Command, the Masters, Owners, and Skippers of such Ships,
or other Vessels, forthwith to dismiss them, under the pain of Confiscation of
the Ship, or Vessel, in case they Transport them, or any of them abroad, after
Publication hereof, besides any other punishment the Council shall think fit to
inflict on them. And further, The said Lords Do also expressly Prohibit and
Discharge, all Masters, Owners, and Skippers, from taking aboard any persons
for the Service foresaid, under the Certifications above-written; And in case
the said Officers, and Soldiers, shall notwithstanding of this Prohibition,
continue to Leavie Soldiers, The said Lords Declares, That they shall be
punished for their contempt, with the outmost of severity. And to the end these
Presents may be made public and known, The said Lords Do hereby Require and
Command, the Macers of Council, to pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and
Messengers at Arms to pass to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs
of this Kingdom, and there, in His Majesty's Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the same, that none may pretend ignorance.
Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by Mr. Colin Mckenie Clerk to
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council

COL, McKENIE, Cls. Sti, Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.


