AN ACT Appointing a FAST throughout the whole Kingdom OF SCOTLAND.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom it effeirs, Greeting.
Forasmuch, as the Almighty God, in His most Wise and Righteous Providence,
after the sinful abuse of His most signal mercies of the blessed Gospel, of
Our Own and Our Subjects wonderful Deliverance from the Yoke of Usurpation and
Bondage, by the almost Miraculous Restoration of Us to the exercise of Our
Government, and of the long and merciful Continuance of Our despised Peace and
Plenty; Does, by His Warnings and Judgments incumbent and impendent,
manifestly discover His Anger and Displeasure against the grievous Sins of this
Kingdom; and particularly by the sad and pinching dearth, whereby many indigent
persons and families are reduced to a starving condition, and by the long and
threatening Drought, the Lord, in His Righteous Judgment, having so long bound
up the Clouds, making the Heavens Brass, and the Earth Iron, thereby threatening
Our Subjects of this Kingdom with the breaking of the Staff of their Bread, and
with the dreadful plague of Famine: Which Dispensation does with a loud voice
call upon all ranks of people for speedy and true Repentance, and the National
expression hereof by deep Mourning and solemn Fasting and Humiliation.

Therefore We, with Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do
Ordain a day of Public and Solemn Fasting and Humiliation to be kept and
observed by all the people of this Kingdom in the several Paroches thereof;
Strictly Commanding and Requiring them upon that day, to cease from all the
Works of their ordinary Callings, and to repair to their respective Paroch
Churches, and there make solemn Confession of their Sins, and implore the
Divine Mercy for the Land, by Praying, Mourning, Fasting, and such other
Devotions, as are requisite and usual upon such days of Public Humiliation:
And more particularly, Humbly to Confess and Mourn for the great Neglect and
Contempt of, and Disobedience to the Blessed Gospel, and the Ordinances
thereof, and the great and lamentable increase and prevalency of Atheism,
Profaneness, and Irreligion which is thereby occasioned, and for the sinful
undervaluing of the great Blessing of Peace so long enjoyed by Our Subjects
under Our Government. By all which, and many other crying Sins, the Lords
Jealousy and Anger are kindled, and His hand is stretched out against this
Kingdom, threatening the Destruction of the Fruits of the Ground, the necessary
Provision for the Life of Man and Beast, that by serious Mourning for, and
sincere and hearty turning from these provoking Sins, the Lord may graciously
pardon them and repent Him of the evil seemingly determined by Him, and most
righteously deserved by us, and may open the Clouds and grant the latter Rain
in its due season and measure, reserving for us the appointed weeks of the
Harvest. And for this end and purpose, We, with Advice foresaid, do seriously
recommend to, and require the Archbishops and Bishops, to be careful that
this Fast be duly observed by the Ministers in their respective Diocesses, as
follows; To the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, the Bishops of
Edinburgh, Dunkell, Brechin and Dumblane, to cause it to be intimated in the
several Paroch Kirks of their Diocies upon Sunday, the twenty fifth, and
observed on Wednesday, the twenty eighth of July instant; and the remanent
Bishops, whose Diocies are more remote, to cause it to be intimated on Sunday,
the first of August, and to be observed the fourth of Angust next. And as to
such Ministers, who, by reason of their distance from Edinburgh, cannot be so
soon advertised, that they celebrate this Fast upon the next convenient
Wednesday thereafter.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the fifteenth day of July, and of Our
Reign, the twenty seventh year, one thousand six hundred and seventy five
years. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBURGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY. Anno 1675.


