AN ACT By His ROYAL HIGHNESS, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of
Privy Council, Establishing the Order of the Ryding, etc. at the Opening of the
ensuing Parliament, and several Circumstances relating thereto, conform to the
ancient practice of the Kingdom of Scotland, appointed to be Recorded in the
Books of Privy Council, and the Lions Books, at Edinburgh, July 25. 1681.
I. HIs Majesty's High Commissioner, and Lords of Privy Council ordain, the
Magistrates of Edinburgh, to cause make a Lane of their Citizens, in Arms, and
best order, from the Lady-steps to the Nether-bow, (His Majesty's Foot-guards,
making the Lane from the Nether-bow to the Palace.)

II. The said Magistrates are appointed to order, that there be no shooting,
nor any displaying of Ensigns, nor beating of Drums; during the Cavalcade, nor
any Coaches to be seen within the Ports of Edinburgh, till the whole Solemnity
be over, under all highest pains. The said Magistrates are to cause make and
place two Banks of Timber within the Abbay-Close for mounting on Horseback,
and two at the Lady Steps, for Mounting upon Horseback and Dismounting.

III. The Constable and Marischal Guards of Partisans, are to make a Lane from
the Lady-steps, these of the Constables without, and these of the Marischals
within the House, allowing the Constable six of his Guard within Doors, conform
to the former practice.

IV. Every Member of Parliament must Ride, and the absents incur fyning,
conform to the Act of Parliament, 1662.

V. Where there be double Elections of Commissioners, neither are to Ride.

VI. The Nobility are to Ride in their Robes, and with Foot-mantles.

VII. The Officers of State who are not Noblemen, and who have Gowns, peculiar
to their Office, are to Ride in these Gowns.

VIII. The whole Members are to Ride Covered, excepting these who carry the
Honors.

IX. The Lion, Heralds, Pursevants and Trumpets, Ride immediately before the
Honors; the Lion in his Coat and Robe, Chain and Batton alone, and immediately
before the Sword; the rest with their Coats and Foot-mantles, bare-headed in
their accustomed order.

X. The two Macers of Council, and four Macers of Session, Ride on each side of
the Honors, bare-headed, with Foot-mantles; the two Macers of Council
attending the Crown, and the four Macers of Session, the Scepter and Sword.

XI. The Higher Degree, and most Honorable of that Degree, is to Ride always
last.

XII. Every Duke is to have eight Lackeys, every Marquess six, every Earl four,
every Viscount three, every Lord three, every Commissioner for a Shire two, and
every Commissioner from Burghs one; and every Nobleman is to have a Gentleman,
bare-headed, to walk by him, and to bear up his Train, and these Gentlemen are,
at their Entry to the House, to stand without the Bar.

XIII. The Archbishops and Bishops are to Ride in their Gowns and Tippets with
their Foot-mantles, and the Archbishops may have eight Lackeys, and Bishops
three, and each of them is to have a Gentleman bare-headed to walk by him, and
to bear up his Train.

XIV. The Noblemens Lackeys may have over their Liveries, Velvet Coats with
their Badges, i. e. their Creists and Motto's done on Plate, or Embroidered
upon the Back and Breast, conform to ancient Custom; or their ordinar Liveries.

XV. The Constable and Marischal, are in the morning to wait on His Majesty's
High Commissioner at the Palace, and to receive his Orders, and from thence,
returning privately; the Constable is to come out of his Lodging on Foot, and
having viewed the Rooms under and above the Parliament House, puts on his
Robes, and having his Batton in his hand, sets himself in a Chair at the Entry
of the Closs, at the Lady-steps, by the outmost of his Guards, from which he is
to rise and Salute the Members as they light from their Horses, and to
reccommend them to the Gentlemen of his Guard, to be conducted to the Marischal
Guards.

XVI. The Marischal is also to attend in his Robes, being set in a Chair at the
head of his Guards, and to receive the Members (having his Batton in his hand)
as they enter the Door.

XVII. The Officers of State who are Noblemen, so many of them as are in the
Kingdom, are to Ride up from the Abbay in their Robes, about half an hour
before the Cavalcade, and to wait in the Parliament House, until the High
Commissioner come. And when an ordinary Subject is Commissioner, the High
Chancellor is to take his own Purse in his hand, and to Usher him betwixt the
Bar and the Throne. But when His Royal Highness, or any lawful Brother or Son
of the King is Commissioner, he is to Usher them from the Door it self and back.

XVIII. The whole Members of Parliament are to wait upon His Majesty's High
Commissioner in the Guard-Hall, the Nobility being in their Robes, and the
Servants and Horses are to attend in the outter Closs.

XIX. The Lion King at Arms in his Coats, Robe, Chain and Batton (to whose
charge the order of the Ryding is committed) with six Heralds, six Pursevants,
and six Trumpets, in their Coats, attend likewise.

XX. How soon His Majesty's High Commissioner is ready, the Lord Register (or
such as he shall appoint) and Lion standing together, each of them having a
Roll in his hand, and the Rolls being read, the Lion is to call the names of
such of them as are to Ride, according to their Order; and one Herald is to
cry aloud at one of the Windows, and another Herald to stand at the Gate and
see them do accordingly.

XXI. The Members are to Ride two and two, each Degree by it self, at some
distance, without mixing with any other Degree, so that if there fall to be an
odd Member of one Degree, he must Ride alone.

XXII. The Lord Register is to make up the Rolls of Parliament, both for the
riding, and Calling in the Parliament House, conform to the Rolls of the riding
and calling at the last Parliament. Anno 1669. whereof he is to give the Lion a
just duplicat, except where there is just ground to alter the same; and the
Members are to Ride as they are called; but if they think themselves prejudged,
they may protest in the same manner as at the Calling of the Rolls in the
House, and may afterward as they think fit, apply themselves to the Parliament
for remedy.

XXIII. The Honors are to be carried immediately before the high Commissioner,
the Crown by the Marquess of Douglas; the Scepter next to it, by the eldest
Earl present; and the Sword before it, by the Earl next in Order, and the
Bearers are to Ride one by one bare-headed.

XXIV. The Dukes and Marquesses are to Ride after the high Commissioner, at
some distance, conform to the former Custom.

XXV. The Master of the Horse is to Ride bare-headed after His Majesty's high
Commissioner, but a little aside, when the Commissioner is the Kings lawful Son
or Brother.

XXVI. The Gentleman Usher with a White Rode in his hand, is to Ride aside
bare-headed near to the Commissioner, he before on the same side, and in the
same manner, as the Master of Horse behind, in the case foresaid.

XXVII. How soon His Majesty's high Commissioner alights from his Horse, the
Lord Constable is to receive Him, and to attend Him to the Marischal Guards,
and then both Constable and Marischal are to Convoy him bare-headed to the
Throne, and are in the same manner to attend him in his return to Horse.

XXVIII. When the Members alight, the Servants and Horses are to remove, and to
stand in the Land-Mercat, betwixt the Toll-booth and the Wey-house, until the
High Commissioner be upon his return to the Palace.

XXIX. The return to the Palace is to be in the same manner, with these two
alterations, viz. First, the Constable and Marischal Ride on the High
Commissioners right and left hand, with Caps of Permission, the Constable on
the right, and Marischal on the left. Secondly the Officers of State, who are
Noblemen, are not to take Horse until the High Commissioner be gone, and then
are to Ride at some distance after the Guard.

Order of the Proceeding on Horseback, to be performed the first day of the
ensuing Parliament, by all the Members of Parliament, in Convoying His
Majesty's high Commissioner, from the Abbay of Hally-rudehouse to the
Parliament House, and back again to the Palace, the 28. day of July 1681.
About the space of half an hour before the Ryding begin, the Lord high
Chancellor, and Lord Privy Seal (they being only present of the principal
Officers of State) Ride up in their Robes, the Chancellor on the right hand
with Mace and Purse before him; and the Privy Seal on the left; and in their
return to the Palace, they are to Ride at a distance, after the Guard.

Two Trumpets, in their Coats and Banners, bare-headed, Two Pursevants, in
their Coats and Footmantles, bare-headed,
To Usher the wa^ The Commissioners for Burghs, two and two. The Commissioners
for Shires, two and two. The four Officers of State who are not Noblemen, two
and two. The Lords or Barons of Parliament, two and two. The Bishops, two and
two. The Viscounts, two and two. The Earls, two and two. The two Archbishops.
Four Trumpets, in their Coats and Banners, bare-headed, two and two. Four
Pursevants, in their Coats and Foot-Mantles, bare-headed, two and two. Six
Heralds, in their Coats and Foot-Mantles, bare-headed, two and two. The Lion
King at Arms, in his Coat, Robe, Collar, Batton and Foot-Mant^ bare-headed.
Three Macers with their Maces and Foot-Mantles, bare-headed.
The Sword of State, born by the Earl of Mar, bare-headed. The Scepter, born by
the Earl of Argile bare-headed. The Crown carried by the Marquess of Dowglass,
bare-headed.
Three Macers with their Maces and Foot-Mantles, bare-headed. The Gentleman
Usher with his white Rode, aside, bare-headed, in the case foresaid.
A Nobleman bearing the Purse with his Commission, bare-headed. The Masters of
Horse, bare-headed, aside, in the case foresaid.
His Royal Highness his Majesty's high Commissioner, attended wi^ his Servants,
Pages and Footmen; and in the return to the ^lace, having the high Constable on
his right hand, and the Mar^chal on his left, with Caps of Permission, and in
their Robe^ The Dukes and Marquesses attending His Majesty's high Commissioner
in the^ Robes. The Captain of His Majesty's Guard on the head of the Troop of
Guards.
Extracted by me, WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.


