C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted by a crown
EDINBURGH, The nineteenth day of April, one thousand six hundred and sixty
four.
FOrasmuch, as notwithstanding it has pleased the Almighty GOD, to restore the
Kingdom to the great blessings of peace and prosperity, under the protection of
His Majesty's Royal Government, after their late grievous sufferings and
bondage under Usurpers: Yet, some seditious and ill-affected persons endeavor
to infuse the principles of rebellion in the minds of many good Subjects, of
purpose to dispose them to new troubles. And for that end, have adventured to
translate in the English Tongue, an old seditious Pamphlet, Entitled, De jure
Regni apud Scotos, whereof Mr. George Buchannan was the Author; which was
condemned by Act of Parliament in anno, one thousand five hundred and eighty
four, during the Reign of His Majesty's Grandfather of blessed memory; and
have dispersed many Copies of the said Translation, which may corrupt the
affections of the Subjects, and alienat their minds from their obedience to the
Laws and His Majesty's Royal Authority, and from the present Government, if it
be not timely prevented. Therefore, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
in His Majesty's Name and Authority, command and charge all Subjects, of what
degree, quality or rank soever they be, to bring and deliver to the Clerk of
Privy Council, all Copies which they have of the said Pamphlet or Book,
translated as said is; and that none presume hereafter to double any of the
said Copies or disperse the same; With certification, that the contraveeners
shall be proceeded against as seditious persons, and disaffected to Monarchical
Government, conform to the Laws, with all rigor. And ordains these presents to
be printed, and published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh and other places
needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1664.


