royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT, For the better Regulating of His Majesty's Forces.
At Edinburgh, the Twenty third Day of July, 1689.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, Considering how much it is the
Honor as well as the Interest of this Kingdom, that the Forces Raised and
Levied therein, for His Majesty's Service, be regularly and sufficiently
Clothed, and that good Order and Discipline be observed and kept amongst
them, and that all false Mustures may in time coming be prevented. They do
hereby Ordain the several Colonels of the Regiments of the new-Levied Forces,
with all possible Diligence, to have their Soldiers well Shod, and well and
Uniformly Clothed, for the present Service and Expedition, as they will be
answerable, and that they and the rest of the Officers of the Forces, do use
their utmost Discretion and Endeavor to hinder and imped the Soldiers and
others in the Regiments, from Cursing, Swearing, and Profaning of the Sabbath:
(which their own good Example will be the most effectual means to prevent) And
least His Majesty's Service, and the Interest of the Nation, may be prejudged
by the keeping of insufficient Men in the Companies, or by having a false
Musture of Men, which are not so In-rolled, as that they are engaged to a daily
and continual Service and Attendance: The said Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, Do hereby grant Order and Warrant to the Officers of the several
Regiments and Companies respectivee, to Dismiss, Carsheir, and put out of they
Companies, or Regiments, any unsufficient and unqualified Soul^iers that shall
be found therein; and they discharge all false Mustures in time coming, under
the pain of Cashierment of the Officer, or Officers, that shall be found guilty
of doing thereof; and under an Arbitrary Punishment to the Soldiers that shall
be so Employed for making up of the said false Muster: And they do Declare,
That if any of the Officers shall Lend their Men to Officers in their own or
other Regiments, they shall incur and be liable to the same Certification. And
for Encouragment to such Soldiers and others, who shall Discover such false
Mustures, they hereby promise a Reward unto them; and being Soldiers, Declare,
That they shall have their Pass from the Company, if desired. And for
preventing of any Discouragement, which the Commissionat Officers may think
themselves liable to of being Cashiered, and put off at their Colonels
pleasure through their wanting of Commissions from His Majesty, or the Meeting
of the Estates; They do Declare, That such Commissionat Officers as have been
Mustured and Listed, shall not by the Authority of their Colonels be changed
or put off upon any account, without the Sentence of a Council of War; and
Ordains the Colonels of the several Regiments, to pay unto their Respective
Captains their full Pay they receive for their Companies, according to their
Musture-Rolls, they always obliging them to keep their Companies complete. And
they hereby appoint all the Officers and Soldiers of the whole Forces, as well
Horse, Foot, as Dragoons, to take the Oath of Allegiance after-mentioned: I
(...) do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be faithful and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, and that I will be
faithful to the Protestant Religion, and obey my Superior Officers: So help me
God. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, Anno Dom. 1689.


