ACT, For an Anniversary Thanksgiving, in Commemoration of His Majesty's Happy
Birthday, being the fourteenth Day of October, etc.
Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of September, 1685.
FOrasmuch As It Having Pleased Almighty God to set Our most Rightful, and
Re-doubted Sovereign, JAMES the Seventh, by the grace of GOD, of Scotland,
England, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Peaceably upon
the Throne of His Royal Ancestors, our most August and Glorious Monarchs,
Notwithstanding of the Hellish Plots and Machinations against the Sacred Person
of Our late King, (of ever blessed Memory,) and of our said present Sovereign
(whom God long preserve) And als notwithstanding of the Desperate and Traitorous
Endeavors of those who lately, by Armed Force. Invaded these Our Sovereign
Lords Realms of Scotland and England, of Design, not only to have Subverted His
Royal Government, but even to have embrewed their wicked Hands in the Sacred
Blood of Our said Sovereign Lord the King, and utterly to have destroyed all
His Majesty's Faithful and Loyal Subjects; Which Traitorous Attempts, by so
signal and remarkable Instances of the Divine Providence, have been so
miraculously Defeated and Confounded; Of all which, His Majesty's Privy Council
being deeply sensible. They hereby, in His Majesty's Royal Name and Authority,
Ordain and Appoint the Fourteenth Day of October, being His Majesty's Royal
Birthday, to be Solemnly Kept and Observed throughout this Kingdom, for this
Year, and Yearly hereafter, as an Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving for His
Majesty's Happy Birth, and therein to Commemorat His most Auspicious Entry to
His Royal Government, and miraculous Deliverances aforesaid; And that all Signs
and Demonstrations of Joy, on such Solemn Occasions accustomed, be performed by
all His Majesty's Subjects: And further Recommends to the right Reverend the
Archbishops and Bishops, that they cause the Ministers in their respective
Diocesses, for this Year, and Yearly hereafter, upon the said Fourteenth Day of
October, with the People, at Divine Service in the Church, Devoutly give Solemn
Thanks to Almighty God, and Celebrat His Holy Name, for His so Signal Goodness
and Protection, to Our said Gracious Sovereign, and in Him, to these His
Kingdoms; And that all His Majesty's good Subjects may have notice, and be
Certified hereof, His Majesty's Privy Council does hereby Require and Command
His Majesty's Lion, King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of the
Privy Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, forthwith to pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and there, (having His Majesty's Coat of Arms
Displayed) by sound of Trumpet, and open Proclamation, in His Majesty's Royal
Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premises; And Ordains the Sheriffs
of the several Shires of this Kingdom, to cause Publish the same at the Market
Crosses of the head Burghs of their Shires; And the Magistrates of Burghs, at
their Mercat-Crosses respective, as they will be answerable at their highest
peril, that none may pretend Ignorance: And the Sheriffs aforesaid are hereby
strictly Required to cause deliver to the Ministers within their Sheriffdoms
respective, a Printed Copy of this Act, that they may from their Pulpitson the
Lords Day, preceding the said Day of public Thanksgiving, after Divine
Service in the forenoon, Read the same to the People, and give them the
necessary. Exhortations upon this Occasion. Extracted forth of the Records of
His Majesty's Privy Council, by me Sir William Paterson, Clerk to His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.

WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.


