C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The third day of September, One thousand six hundred seventy and
four Years.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council taking to their consideration, that
the work which the Magistrates of Edinburgh have undertaken, and are presently
about, in conveying and bringing in Water to the said Burgh, by Leaden-pypes
and Conduits, from a Fountain some Miles distant therefra, is a most
commendable enterprise, tending not only to the good and advantage of the
Inhabitants of the said Burgh, but also, of most of His Majesty's Subjects of
this Kingdom, who have occasion to reside in, or frequent the said Burgh, being
the chief City of the Kingdom, and the ordinary Seat of the Sun^^^^^ (...) very
expedient that the said Magistrates should be encouraged to proceed in, and
perfect so good a work, and that a strict course be taken for deterring any
persons to break or spoil the said Pypes and Conduits (if any should be so
malicious as to attempt the same) that the endeavors used, and expenses
employed in this Affair, may not be frustrat and rendered ineffectual.
Therefore the said Lords of Privy Council do strictly prohibit and discharge
any person, or persons whatsoever, so take up, break, embazle, or any ways
spoil the said Leaden-pypes, Conduits, Fountains, or Cisterns, which shall be
made use of for conveying the Water to the said Burgh, or any part of the
same, or to do any thing which may impede the said work, and current of the
Water, certifying such as shall be found to transgress, that they shall incur
the Councils displeasure, and shall be further liable to such pains and
punishments as the Law does provide in such cases, which shall be inflicted
upon them with all rigor. And the said Lords do recommend to, and authorize
the Magistrates of the said Burgh, Sheriffs, and others in Authority, within
their respective Jurisdictions, to make search for any persons who shall be
informed to be guilty of the said Crime, and upon evidence of their guilt, to
commit them to Prison until they be proceeded against according to Law. And
Ordains these presents to be Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Al. Gibson Cls Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by His Majesty's Printers: Anno DOM. 1674.


