LETTERS Of Inter-communing against the Rebels in the Bass.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
That where upon the twelfth day of May instant, Lieutenant Colonel Graham,
and Michael Middletoun two of the Rebels in the Bap, James, John, and William
Middletouns Brethren to the said Michael, Duncan Mcqueen, Thomas Hepburn, John
Turine, Mr. (...) Henryson, John Mcclain, (...) Morrein an English man, (...)
Nicolson, John Gladestones, Gawin Johnstoun, Lieutenant John Halket, and John
Halket Seaman, two Irish Seamen, two Hoboyes that belonged to the Earl of
Leven, Colonel Grahames Servant, and three or four more Servants, were orderly
denunced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by virtue of a particular Act and
Order of the Lords of Our Privy Council, used and execute at the instance of
Sir James Stuart Our Advocat for Our Interest, against them for not delivering
up themselves to Our Mercy, and the said Island of the Bass for Our Service,
whereto they were Charged by an Herald with his Coat displayed with a Trumpet,
under the pain of High Treason, as the said Act of the date foresaid, with the
Executions thereof duly Registrat at length bears: At the which Process of
Horning, the forenamed Persons Rebels, do still ly and continue, taking no
regard thereof, nor of Our Authority and Laws; and are encouraged to continue
in Rebellion by the Recept, Supply, and Intercommoning which they have with
several of their Friends and Acquaintances, to the high Contempt of Us, Our
Authority and Laws. Likeas, the said Lords of Our Privy Council, by their Act
of the day and date hereof, have Ordained these Our Letters of Intercommoning
to be direct against the said Rebels, and to be Published at the
Mercat-crosses underwritten, as the samine at more length bears. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of the several Burghs and Towns
upon both sides of the Water of Forth, and other places needful, and thereat,
in Our Name and Authority, Command all and sundry Our Leidges and Subjects,
that they, nor none of them, Presume nor take upon Hand, to Reset, Supply, or
Intercommon with any of the said persons Our Rebels, for the Causes foresaids,
nor furnish them with Meat, Drink, House, Harbor, Victual, or any other thing
useful, or comfortable to them; nor have Intelligence with them, by Word, Writ,
Message, or any other manner of way, under the Pain to be repute and esteemed
Art and Part with them in the foresaids Crimes, and Pursued therefore with all
rigor, to the terror of others. Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to
Apprehend and Commit to Prison, any of the Persons above-written Our Rebels,
when they shall be found within any of their respective Jurisdictions,
according to Justice, as ye will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do, We
commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters,
delivering them by you duly execute and indorsat again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of May, and of Our
Reign, the fifth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concili. In Supplementum
Signeti. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anna Dom. 1693.


