ACT, Appointing the Officers of His Majesty's Forces to attend their
respective Commands.
At Edinburgh, the 30 day of July 1689.
THe Lord high Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
Considering how much it Imports the Peace and Interest of the Nation, as well
as the necessary Defense thereof in this present Juncture, That all the
Officers of the Standing Forces, Horse, Foot and Dragoons, attend their
Respective Stations, for Ordering and Exercising the Troops of His Majesty's
Forces, under their Command, and to have them in readiness, to Prosecute and
follow forth such Orders, as they may receive from time to time from the Lords
of Privy Council, or the Commanding Officer of His Majesty's Forces for the
time; Do therefore in His Majesty's Name and Authority, strictly Require and
Command, all Officers of the Standing Forces, Horse, Foot and Dragoons, upon
this side of the River of Tay, who were not at the Engagement with
Major General Mackay, within twenty four hours, to repair to the places where
the Soldiers, under their Command lies, under the pain of losing their
Respective Offices, ipso facto, and being further Censured by a Council of mar,
and to March them from thence toward Striviling, and to continue and give
punctual attendance at their said Commands, and not to depart therefrom,
without a special Order from His Majesty's high Commissioner, the Lords of
Privy Council, or their Superior Officers, under the pain foresaid: And
sicklike, The Lord high Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council,
Considering, That many Officers and Soldiers, that have been at the late
Engagement abovementioned, are scattered and dispersed in diverse places of the
Country, Unlisted, or brought again under Discipline: Therefore they Require
and Command, all Officers and Soldiers, who have been at the said late
Engagement, betwixt Major General Mackay and Dundee, to repair with all speed
to the Town of Edinburgh, and there to betake themselves to their said
Officers, and List and Inrol themselves in their Service, under the pain of
being accounted and punished as Deserters; And that the said Officers, how
soon they have Listed, and gathered together the persons foresaids, make Report
thereof to his Majesty's high Commissioner, or Lords of Privy Council, to the
effect they may be furnished with Arms, and other Necessaries, for Military
Service. And that none may pretend ignorance, Ordains these Presents to be
Printed, and Published by Macers, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other
places needful.

Extracted by me, GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council,
1689.


