C R

(...) SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ADVERTISEMENT, Anent Stolen goods in the HIE-LANDS.
Edinburgh the 13. Day of February, 1673.
FOrasmuch as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council have granted Commission
to Sir James Campbell of Lawyers, until the first day of January next to come;
To pursue, apprehend and bring to justice all Thieves, and broken men, haunting
and resorting within the Shires of Innerness, on the south side of Ness, Nairn,
Murray, Bamff, Aberdene, Mearns, Angus, Perth, Argyle, Cl^^kmannan, Monteith,
Stirling, and Dumbartan: By accepting of which Commission the said Sir James
Campbel is oblidged, when any Theft is committed within the said Shires,
Either to restore the goods, or the true pryces thereof, without payment of
money, or composition, or otherwise to apprchend the Thieves, and bring them to
Justice; Provyding, that within five days after the Committing of the Theft,
intimation thereof be given to the said Sir James himself, or at the Town of
Dumblane to Alexander Cheislie Baillie thereof; at Perth to John Stewart
Merchant Burgess there; at Straphillan, to Duncan Campbel in Auchtertyre; at
Castletoun of brae of Mar, to John Mckeinie in Castletoun; and at Ruthven of
Badenoch, to Thomas Mcpherson in Kyllie Huntlie; or to David Cumming nottar at
Ruthven of Badenoch; Or at the said Persons their dwelling houses, in the
said places, who are appointed to remain there to receive intimations. These
are therefore to give Advertisement to all Persons Concerned, That, when any
Theft happens to be committed within the bounds abovewritten, they may give
tymous notice thereof as aforesaid: Likeas all Landlords, Chiefs of Clans, and
others, His Majesty's Subjects, are to concur with the said Sir James Campbel
in the execution of the said Commission, which is granted but Prejudice or
Derogation, in any sort, from the Bands given for securing of the Peace. And it
is ordered that these Presents be Printed; And that the Sheriffs of the several
Shires foresaids cause Publish the same at the several Market Crosses and
Parish Kirks within these Shires, that all Persons Concerned may have notice.

A. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Consilii.


