C R
(...) royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Discharging the vending of any Goods brought from Ostend, or any other
Town or Port of the Spanish Neatherlands, till they abide their forty days
trial.
Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of August, one thousand six hundred and sixty
six.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council being informed, that the Plague of
Pestilence is now broken out in the Town of Ostend, and other Towns and Places
of the Spanish Neatherlands; And that by reason of the Wars with Holland, there
is now more occasion of Trade with the said Towns then heretofore, so that the
conti^^^nce thereof, without any restraint, may endanger this Kingdom, (...) by
importing Foreign Ware and Commodities, may bring in the ^^fection; from which
it has pleased GOD in His infinite mercy heretofore to preserve this Kingdom.
Therefore, they, by these presents, discharge all Merchants, Traffickers, and
other persons whatsoever, who shall bring any Wares or Commodities from Ostend,
or any other Port or Place of the Spanish Neatherlands into this Kingdom, to
unload any of the Ships or Vessels wherein there Goods are imported, until
first they acquaint the Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, or
others His Majesty's Officers of the Shires or Burghs where they shall happen
first to come, where they did laden their Goods, and that they receive orders
for their forty days trial, and in what places they shall handle their Wares
and Commodities during that time, under the pain of confiscation of their Ships
and Goods, and punishment of their Persons, according to the quality and merit
of their offense, in manner contained in a former Act of Council, dated the
twelfth day of July last. And commands and charges all Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, Magistrates of Burghs, and others His Majesty's Officers within their
respective bounds, upon all occasions that shall require the same, to meet and
conveen, and give order for such Guards, Watches, Houses, Overseers and Places
as they shall think most convenient, for putting this Act in execution, and for
doing every other thing that shall be necessary for that effect: With
certification, if they fallie, they shall be punished in their persons and
goods, to the error of others, and that the Customers and others where Entries
are made, take notice hereof, and acquaint all Magistrates concerned to put
this Act in execution, as they will be answerable upon their highest peril: And
ordains these presents to stand in force till the first day of December next to
come, and longer during the Councils pleasure, and until they discharge the
same. And ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, Peer and Shore of Lies, and other Mercat-crosses of
all Seaports where there is any Commerce, by Macers or Messengers at Arms,
that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1666.


