C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ORDERS For regulating the MEETINGS of COUNCIL.
FIrst, whenever the Oath as Councellor is administrate to any of them, the
Lord Chancellor is in like sort to urge of them the Oath of Supremacy; and such
as shall either refuse or delay the giving of it, to be excluded from that
place. And he is to discharge all others of whatsoever rank, except the sworn
Counselors and the Clerk of Council only, from staying within the
Council-house the time of their Consultation. And the Macer of the Council at
all such times, when the Party shall be removed, is to ush the house, suffering
none other of other quality to stay within the same, except as is aforesaid;
and he is to close the door and stay without the same till he be called upon.

At all times when they conveen, so soon as there shall be a full number of
them, the Chancellor, if he be present, or in his absence, any such other
Councellor who is to supply his place, shall cause the House to be presently
ushed; and desire the Lords conveened presently to take their Seats, and suffer
none to abide or stay either soliciting, importuning, or conferring with any
Councellor, but that all other affairs, except such for which they are then
conveened, may be referred to other places, times and occasions.

All Counselors, after they are admitted, shall, during their stay in the
Council-house, sit in decent order according to their places and ranks, and
none of them shall stand on their feet after that the Council is once set,
until such time as they shall arise, except any such Councellor who is to
answer for himself in any cause, and then he is not to stand in the place
wherein he formerly sat, but at the head of the Council Table.

During the time of the Lords sitting, no man whatsoever is to stand covered in
their presence, but is to regard them with uncovered heads, as the
Representative of His Majesty's Presence and Authority.

Extract. per me Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
Anno Dom. 1661.


