design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the Fourteenth of January
instant, to the Fifteenth day of April next, 1692.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially, constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the Date the Twenty seventh day of August last, One thousand
six hundred and ninety one Years, Adjourn the current Parliament of this Our
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the Sixteenth Day of September last, to the
fourteenth Day of January instant, One thousand six hundred and ninety two
years; And now in regard that Our Affairs do not require the Meeting of Our
said Parliament, so soon as the said fourteenth day of January instant, and
that the Members of Parliament may not be put to the Trouble and Charge of
Meeting upon the said day. We therefore with Advice of Our said Lords of Privy
Council, hereby Adjourn Our said current Parliament, until the fifteenth day of
April next to come, in this instant year of God, One thousand six hundred and
ninety two; Hereby requiring all the Members of Our Parliament, to give their
attendance at Edinburgh on that day, in the accustomed manner, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS
Herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, you pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation of the said
Adjournment of Our Parliament of this Kingdom from the said fourteenth day of
January instant, to the said fifteenth day of April next thereafter; And
Ordains these presents to be Printed and Published.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of January, and of Our
Reign the Third Year, 1692. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. In Supplementum
Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's. Anno Dom. 1692.


