A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the Tenth of February next, to
the First of March next, 1693.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the date, the fifth day o^ January instant, Adjourn the current
Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the seventeenth day of
the said Month of January instant, to the tenth of February then next to come,
in this instant year of God one thousand six hundred and ninety three. And now
in regard the present State of Our Affairs, in this Our said ancient Kingdom,
does not require the meeting of Our Parliament so soon, and that the Members of
Parliament may not be put to the Trouble or Charge, of meeting on the said day;
We therefore, with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn
Our said current Parliament, until the first day of March next to come in the
said year: Hereby requiring all Members of Our Parliament to give Attendance at
Edinburgh on that day, in the accustomed manner, and under the Certifications
contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole
Head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom; And there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the said Adjournment of
Our current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, from the said tenth day of
February, to the said first day of March both next to come; And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the last day of January, and of Our Reign
the fourth year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum
Signeti. DA. MONCRIEFF. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1693.


