W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament till the twenty first of March next.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
to Our Lion King at Arms, his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
FORASMUCH, As We by Our Proclamation of the Date the fourth day of December
last, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the Current
Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom, until the fifteenth day of February
then next to come, now instant: and Our Affairs not requiring a Meeting thereof
at that time, We have thought fit, that the Adjournment thereof, shall be
continued from the said day, to the twenty first day of March next to come:
THEREFORE, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Adjourn
Our said Current Parliament, until the said twenty first day of March next
ensuing the Date hereof, Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament to
attend that day in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the
several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge
you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Market Crosses of the remanent head
Burghs of the several Shires of this Our ancient Kingdom, and there by open
Proclamation, make Intimation that Our said Parliament of this Kingdom, is
Adjourned till the said twenty first day of March next to come: and Ordains
these Presents to be printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twelfth day of February, and of Our
Reign the sixth year, 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELLIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1695.


