A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament from the 20 day of March instant, to
the 21st day of July next.
WILLIAM By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France Ireland, Defender
of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms; Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly
and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting,
Forasmuch as, We by Our Proclamation of the Date the Fifth day of November
last by past, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the
Current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, to the Twentieth day of March
then next to come, now Instant. And whereas the present State of Our Affairs,
does not require the Meeting of Our Parliament on the said Twenty day of March
Instant, to which it was Adjourned: And We being desirous to prevent the
unnecessary Attendance of the Members thereof on the said Twenty day of March
instant. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby
Adjourn Our said Current Parliament, unto the Twenty first day of July next
ensuing the Date hereof, Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament, to
Attend that Day in the usual way; and under the Certifications contained in the
several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Our Will is Herefore, and We Charge
you strictly, and Command, that in continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom,
And there by open Proclamation, make Intimation that Our said Parliament is
Adjourned to the said Twenty first day of July next to come, And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of March, and of Our
Reign the Seventh year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


