A PROCLAMATION Against the Importing of Irish Victual, Cattle, Horses, and
Mares, etc.
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, Frence and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:

To Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting,
Forasmuch, as We and O^ Estates of Parliament, by several Acts, Have, upon
weighty Considerations, discharged the importation of Irish Victual and Cattle
into this Kingdom under the pains and certifications therein contained. As
also, The Lords of Our Privy Council, have emitted several Acts and
Proclamations, (...) pursuance of the said Acts of Parliament; Notwithstanding
whereof, and of all the cates and endeavors taken, to prevent the importing of
(...) Victual and Cattle, the same is imported into this Kingdom: And
considering, the best and fittest way for preventing thereof, may be to
commission some persons of power and interest, in the several places of the
Country, where the said Victual and Cattle is ordinarily brought in and
landed: We therefore with advice of the Lords of O ur Privy Council, have
thought fit to grant full Power, Anthority and Commission, to Robert Campbel,
brother to the Lord of A^kinglass, John Boil of Kelburn, and James Dumbar of
Mochrum, by themselves, their Deputes, Servants, and such as they shall think
fit to appoint (for whom they wi^ be answerable) To search for, seize and
apprehend, all Irish Victual, and Cattle, and salt Beef, made thereof, as shall
be imported from Ireland into this Kingdom in the particular places
after-specified, ( viz) The said Robert Campbel, brother to the Lord of
Ardkinglass, in all places from Lochlung, to the mule of Kintyre, and r^ about
the same, The said John Boil of Kelburne, in all places from the burgh of
Glasgow, to the march of Galloway, on the south: and from Glasgow to Lock^ on
the north, and the Isles of Arran, Bute and Comray; and the said James Dumbar
of Mochrum, in all places from the March of Galloway, to the March of Nit^
Which Victual so imported, the said Commissioners and these entrusted by them,
are thereby authorized and required, to cause Sta^, Sink, and Destroy, and to
Bu^ Boats, Barks, and Vessels, in which the same shall be found to be
imported. And for the more ready and effectual prosecution of that Our
Commission, We (...) Granted full Power and Authority, to Our said
Commissioners, by themselves, their Deputes, servants, and such as they shall
think fit to entrust in the respective bounds foresaids, To secure all Barks,
or traveling Boats, whether Scots or Irish, until the Skippers or owners
shall find caution that they shall import no Irish Victual or C^tel hereafter.
The said Commissioners, and their foresaids, are thereby also authorized, to
search all Boats, Barks, or other Vessels, wherein any Irish Victual or Cat^
are suspected to be; And iccase they find any of the said prohibited goods,
therein; To burn the said Boats, Barks, or Vessels; and to Stave, Sink, and
^stroy the Victual: And for the better discovery thereof, all Merchants,
Skippers and Owners of Boats, or other Vessels, traveling to and from the
places fore^ hereby ordered, before they break bulk, or liver any goods, To
Advertise the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them, at one or other
of the (...) (viz) At the point of Garvel, near Greenck, the towns of Larges,
Irving, Turnberry, Dumbarton Rhothesay and Broddock, Dinoon, Tarbet, Camp^,
(...) Portpatrick, Glenluce, and Kirkcudburgh: (at which ports, Officers are
established to receive the said advertisements;) under the pain of
confiscation of ^sels, and Goods, and being holden as confessed Importers, of
Irish Victual; Provided that the Skippers or Owners, shall not upon such
occasion, be obliged to ^er then one Tides water; If upon pregnant
presumptions, the said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them, shall
suspect any persons gulley of Importing Irish ^ual, or Cattle, They are
thereby authorized, to convein any such person or persons, before the nearest
Magistrate, in Burgh or Landward: And to lead all man^ probation against them
for proving thereof; whereupon, the said Magistrates are to give present and
ready justices All Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baylles of Regalities, a^ Barronies, and
all Heretors, are thereby ordered, to give their speedy and ready assistance to
the said Commissioners, and these entrusted by them, when ever they (...) be
required, either for searching of Vessels by night or day, making open and
patent Doors, searching of Cellars, or other suspect places, for Irish Victual
or Cat^ which they are thereby Authorized to do: As also, the Officers of any
Garrison, are obliged to concur and assist, with any party of Soldiers, as
they shall be de^ upon any extraordinary occasion: The said Commissioners, or
these entrusted by them, are thereby empowered, with consent of the Magistrate
of the place, to send (...) person to prison, that shall be found guilty of
contraveening the Laws, or contumaclous in refusing to depone, (the Magistrates
of the place, being always free of the pris^ charges) In which case, the
Magistrates are to secure the prisoners, and their Vessels, and to be
comptable for them: The said Commissioners and their foresaids are all
Empowered to secure all Barks, traveling Boats, or other Vessels laden with
Meal, which shall happen to come within the said bounds, until a Certificat
be produced from the Owners, that such Barks, Boats or Vessels are come from
some port in Scotland, and that the Victual is of Scots growth, Upon the verity
whereof, the Masters (...) Company are to give their Oaths in presence of the
said Commissioners, or these entrusted by them, or the nearest Magistrate.
Likeas, We with advice foresaid, (...) Granted full Power, Authority and
Commission to the said Commissioners and these entrusted by them, to search
for and seize upon all such Irish Victual, as they shall be in^med has been
lately imported into this Kingdom, and to Stave, Sink and Destroy the same as
aforesaid: As also, to search for, seize and apprehend all Irish Horses and Man
which shall happen to be imported into this Kingdom, wherever the same can be
found within the foresaids bounds, and to value and comprize the same: the one
half there to be made forthcoming to the Commissioners of Our The saury for
Our use, and the other half to the said Commissioners or those entrusted by
them, conform to a form Proclamation of Our Privy Council, in the month of
April, 1668. And incase any person or persons shall make open resistance
against the said Commissioners, or these ent^ed by them, in the execution of
Our said Commission, and that thereupon there shall happen bloodshed,
mutilation or slaughter to follow through the said resistance, it is declare
that The said Commissioners or these entrusted by, or giving assistance to
them, shall never be called in question or pursued therefore, civily or
criminally in time comeing. An which Commission, is declared to begin and take
effect from and after the said first day of January next, and to continue and
endure until the first day of Janu^ 1681. years; and further, that Our said
Commission shall no ways free or liberat the Importers or Ressetters of Irish
Victual, Cattle, Horses or Mares, upon wh^ ground the same shall be Imported,
but that they shall continue still liable to the pains and penalties appointed
by the said Acts of Parliament and Council, as if O^ said Commission had never
been granted, to be applied, in the first place to the relief of the said
Commissioners, in so far as they shall pay the said sums engaged for them in
manner foresaid. And to the effect, all Our Leidges and uthers concerned may
have due and timeous notice of the same: We have thought fit, that these Our
(...) of Publication thereof should be direct. OUR Will is herefore, And We
charge you straightly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to (...) Mereat Crosses of of the head Burghs, and of the Shires of this
Kingdom, and other places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that all Our Leidges may
have Notice thereof, and give Obedience thereto, as they will be answerable on
their Highest peril.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the eighteenth day of December, One
thousand six hundred seventy and nine years, and of Our Reign, the thretty one
year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Consilii, WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty Anno Dom. 1680.


