monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Against Transporting Corns to France.
Edinburgh, October 12. 1693. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and
Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
FOR AS MUCH as We are now in War with the French King and his Subjects; And by
the Eighth Act of the Fourth Session of this Our Current Parliament, It is
Statute, that none of the Subjects of this Kingdom presume to Correspond, or
have Commerce with any persons residing within the Kingdom of France, or any of
the Dominions subject to the French King, under the pain of Treason. And We
considering, that the Transportation of Corn and Grain of any sort, to the
French Kings Dominions, will be of singular and great advantage to Our Enemies
in their present extreme want and scarcity. Therefore, We with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, Prohibit and Discharge all and every one of Our
People, and Subjects of this Our ancient Kingdom, and all other Persons
whatsoever, to Export, or cause be Exported, directly or indirectly, any Corns
or Victual, from this Our ancient Kingdom, to the Kingdom of France, or
Dominions belonging to the French King, under the pains contained in the said
Act. And for rendering this Our Prohibition the more effectual, We further
Require and Command all Magistrates of Burghs, Sheriffs of Sheriffdoms, Stewarts
of Stewartries, Lords and Baillies of Regalities, and Our other Officiars
whatsoever, and their Deputs ^ ^ake exact care within their respective
Jurisdictions, and give all diligence for preventing the Export of any Corns or
Victual, wi(...) by Our own Subjects, or Forraigners, to the said Kingdom of
France, or any other of the Dominions belonging to the French King (...) Ships
Loadned in whole or in part with Victual, be suffered by them to Sail forth of
any Harbor, Port, or other places within their respective bounds, until first
the Master of the said Ship enact himself before any of the said respective
Magistrates or Officiars, under a liquid Sum and Penalty equivalent to the value
of the Ship to be Sailed by him, and Loadning thereof, not to Un-load, or cause
Un-load the Victual A board of his said Ship, or any part thereof, directly or
indirectly, within any Place or Port of the Kingdom of France, or Dominions of
the French King, but that he shall Un-load the same at some Port or place
belonging to such as are in friendship with Us or Our Allies: And that also he
Swear and give his Oath, to be by him Subscribed, that he shall observe and
keep the terms of the said Enacting, which Enacting and Oath are to be taken
before the said Magistrates and Officiars respective foresaid, and Recorded by
their Clerks gratis, without any allowance therefore. And We with Advice
foresaid, in case of the failie or refusal of the said Master, Require and
Command the Magistrates and Officiars respective, within their particular
Jurisdictions, to secure and Arrest all Vessels Loadned with Victual, by taking
from the said Ships their Sails and Raes, and to detain them there until Our
Privy Council be acquainted therewith, and have signified their pleasure
thereanent, And further, We with Advice foresaid, Require and Command all
Masters of Vessels Loadned with Victual, who after Enacting themselves, and
giving their Oath in manner foresaid, shall Sail to any Foreign Ports, to
report and bring back sufficient Certificats and Documents under the Hand and
Seal of the Magistrates of the place, or Port-Town where the said Victual is
Livered, and also of the Conservator of the Scots Privileges, or English
C^^^ul, if any be upon the place, bearing the said Skipper or Master of the
Ship to have Un-loaded his whole Cargo of Victual at the said ^ort; which
Certificats are to be delivered in to the said respective Magistrates where the
said Skipper or Master Enacted himself, and gave his Oath, before he Sailed
forth of this Kingdom, and that within Fifteen days after their return back to
this Kingdom from their several Voyages; with certification to each of the
said Skippers or Masters of the said Ships, in case of failie of having their
Ships Confiscat to Us, and being further liable in the value of the Loadning
Exported by them, which We hereby require Our Solicitor to do diligence for,
and cause be paid to the Collector of Our Crown Rents. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE,
and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Market Crosses of
the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries, and also to all Seaport
Towns within this Kingdom; and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend
ignorance. And Ordains their presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twelfth day of October, and of Our
Reign the Fifth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secr^^^ ^^^^^^lii. In
Supple^^^^^^ ^^^^eti. GILB. ELIOT, (...)
William and Queen Mary.

