royal blazon or coat of arms W R
(...) SOIT QVI MAL Y (...) DIEV (...) MON D^OIT A PROCLAMATION Against Robbers
and Vagabounds, etc.
WIlliam by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting; FORASMUCHAS, it is generally Complained, that there be
many Idle, Louse and Vagabound Persons, who singly by themselves, and in
Companies, go throw the Country, And both to Burgh and Landward, Rob or Steal
from People their Goods, do Violence to their Persons, and extort from them
Meat, Drink and Lodging without payment, and commit several other Abuses,
contrair to the Laws and Acts of Parliament: THEREFORE, We have thought fit to
Enjoin and Command Likeas, We hereby, with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, strictly Enjoin, Command and Charge all Sheriffs, Lords of Regality,
Baillies of Bailliaries, Stewarts of Stewartries, and their Deputs, Magistrates
of Burghs, Justices of the Peace, and other Judges and Officers of the Law, to
put the following Laws and Acts of Parliament in due and vigorous Execution;
Viz. The seventh Act Parliament first, James the first, whereby it is Statute,
that no Companies pass in the Country, and ly on Our Leidges, or Thig or
Sojourn on them under the Pain of Assything of the Party Compleaning; The Act
James second, Parliament sixth, Caput twenty one, whereby it is ordained, that
for the away-putting of Sorners, Overlyers and Masterfull Beggars, Inquisition
be made by all Judges against them, and they be put in Our Ward or Our Irons
for their Trespasses, as long as they have any Goods of their own to live upon,
that their Ears be nailed to the Tron or other Tree, and that the same be cut
off, and they Banished the Country; And if thereafter they be found, that they
be hanged, Act James second, Parliament eleventh, Caput forty five, whereby it
is statute, that wherever Sorners are overtaken, they be delivered to Our
Sheriffs, and that furthwith Our Justices do Law upon them, as upon Thieves and
Robbers, Act Parliament 12. Caput 53. ibidem, whereby it is statute, that no
Man reive another of any manner of Goods which they are in Possession off, Act
James the third, Parliament tenth, Caput seventy eight ratifying the said
Acts; And Act James the sixth Parliament twelfth, Caput on hundred and forty
seventh, whereby it is statute, that all Men certify concerning Vagabounds and
suspect Persons, that they may be apprehended under the Pains due to these
Vagabounds; And generally, all other Laws and Acts made against Robbing,
Thieving, Sorning, and other Abuses of that sort, and for preserving the Peace
and good Order of the Kingdom and for the better preserving of the Peace and
Safety of Our Liedges; We with Advice foresaid, and in pursuance of the
foresaids Laws, do farther Command and Charge all Sheriffs, Magistrates, and
other Officers above named, that they cause special notice to be taken of all
idle and vagabound Persons, either in Burgh or Landward, and that they take up
their Names, and take such Security of them for their good Behavior, as they
shall judge needful: As also, We with Advice foresaid do hereby empower the
Justices of Peace, and Heretors within each Paroch, to appoint one or more
within the Bounds thereof, as they shall see needful, to be Watches both by
Night and Day, for preventing the foresaids Abuses, by giving timeous Warning,
and conveening the Neighbourhead to resist the foresaid Robbers, Thieves,
Sorners, or others committing the said Abuses, and Seize and Apprehend them,
and to defend Leil-Mens Persons and Goods, and bring to Justice and condign
Punishment the foresaids Persons guilty, for which these shall be sufficient
Warrant. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation hereof that none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty eight day of December, and of
Our Reign the ninth Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.


