royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION Against Importing of CORNS.
Edinburgh, the fourth day of May, one thousand six hundred and seventy one.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith:
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, greeting:
Forasmuch as when Native Commodities, and in special Corns, are of that plenty
within this Kingdom, that Our Subjects are, and may be provided and furnished
with the same, at reasonable rates and prices; the Importing thereof from other
Countries, will be a great prejudice to the Kingdom: And albeit such Corns of
the growth of the Kingdom as are in use to be Imported from Foreign parts, are
under the prices mentioned in the eleventh Act of the third Session of Our
first Parliament, allowing the Exporting of Corns when there is no scarcely and
dearth, and when the same are under the prices foresaids; nevertheless diverse
persons do, and may Import Corns from Foreign parts, unless they be
restrained. Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have
thought fit to restrain and discharge, and hereby do restrain and discharge the
Importing of any Corns into this Kingdom, after publication hereof, under the
pain of confiscation of the said corns, with the Ships and Uessels in which
the same shall happen to be Imported, the one half thereof to belong to Us, and
the other half to the discoverer; besides the inflicting and imposing of such
Censures, Punishments and Fines upon the persons guilty, as the Lords of Our
Privy Council shall think fit. And Ordains all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of
Regalities, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and other persons in
Authority under Us, to seize upon all such Corns and Uessels, for the use
foresaid, and to Imprison the persons of the Merchants and Masters of the
Uessels, while they be proceeded against according to Law. And Ordains these
presents to stand and continue in force, ay and while the same be expressly
discharged by Us, or the Lords of Our Privy Council. And that the same be
printed and published at the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Air, Dundee,
Aberdene, and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1671.


