royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the General Assembly.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Brittain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuchas, We being firmly resolved, that General Assemblies of the Church
of this Our Ancient Kingdom should meet according to Law; Did by Our
Proclamation, of the date the twenty seventh day of September last; Indict and
Appoint a General Assembly of the said Church, to meet at Edinburgh the sixth
day of December next; And We considering, that Our being detained from Britain
beyond our Expectation, did necessarly hinder the timely ordering of what
concerned the Meeting of the said Assembly, and hoping that a Delay may be more
for the Advantage of the Church in this Our Ancient Kingdom, and the good of
Our Service, seeing thereby we shall have time fully to instruct Our
Commissioner, and better prepare, and have matters in readiness for the Meeting
of the said General Assembly. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, have thought fit to Delay and Adjourn the Meeting of the said
General Assembly of the Church of this Our Ancient Kingdom, from the said sixth
day of December next, to meet at Edinburgh the twenty ninth day of March One
thousand six hundred and ninety four years; And that the Members of the said
Assembly be not put to the trouble of Attendance before that time: We hereby
declare the same to be Adjourned to the said twenty ninth day of March next
accordingly. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and whole other Mercat-crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires within
this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the
Premises, that none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains these Presents to be
printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty eight day of November, and of
Our Reign the fifth year. 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to Their
most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1693.


