royal blazon or coat of arms I R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE A PROCLAMATION, Against spreading of false News, etc.
Edinburgh, November 10. 1688.
Present in Council.
The Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. His Grace the Lord Archbishop of St.
Andrews. His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Glasgow. The Marquess of Athol, Lord
Privy Seal. His Grace the Duke of Gordon. The Earl of Errol. The Earl of Mar.
The Earl of Cassils. The Earl of Linlithgow, Lord Justice-General. The Earl of
Drumfermling. The Earl of Strathmore. The Earl of Southesque. The Earl of
Traquair. The Earl of Belcarras. The Earl of Bradalban. The Lord Viscount of
Tarbat, Clerk of Register. The Lord Strathnaver. The Lord Maitland,
Theasurer-Deput. The Lord Duffus. The Lord Kinaird. The Mr of Balmerino. The
Lord President of the Session. The Lord Advocat. The Lord Justice-Clerk. The
Lord Castlehill. Lieutennent General Monro, The Lord of Niddrie.
WHereas We have seen a Proclamation issued out in Name of His most Sacred
Majesty, Declaring, That the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, have designed
to Invade His Majesty's Kingdoms; and that now His Majesty has signified by
His Royal Letter, of the date at Whitehall the fifth day of November Instant,
That they are Landing in England, and in Order thereto, have Contrived and
Framed several Treasonable Papers, and Declarations, Hoping thereby to Seduce
and Corrupt His Majesty's Subjects, and that several persons are employed to
disperse the same; And since such Methods may be taken to Corrupt His Majesty's
Subjects, in this His Ancient Kingdom; Therefore We, the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, in His Royal Name, and by His Authority, have thought it
necessary to Admonish all His Majesty's Subjects within this Kingdom, of what
degree or quality soever, that they do not Publish, Disperse, Repeat, or Hand
about the said Treasonable Papers, or Declarations, or any of them, or any
other Paper, or Papers of such like Nature, and particularly a Declaration in
the Prince of Orange's Name, and another in the Name of the States General, nor
presume to Read, Receive, Conceal, or Keep the said Treasonable Papers, or
Declarations, or any of them, or any other Payer, or Papers to that purport; or
to disperse any false News, tending to the Amusing His Majesty's Subjects, or
to the Disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom, without Discovering, and
Revealing the same as speedily as may be, to some of the Privy Council, or to
some other Judges, Justices of the Peace, or Magistrates, upon peril of being
prosecuted according to the outmost severity of Law.

Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me, WILL. PATERSON, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOMINI. 1688.


