design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the General Assembly.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Whereas We had appointed the General Assembly of the Church of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, to Meet and Conveen the First day of November next: And We
Considering how necessary it may be, that Our Commissioner to the former
Assembly attend Us, before the sitting down of the said General Assembly, that
We may give full Instructions to Our Commissioner, who is to be present
thereat, for the better Adjusting Matters relating to the said General
Assembly; And for that end, having called up Our Commissioner, to attend Us at
Our return to Britain, he cannot in due time return before the said First of
November; Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to
Delay and Adjourn the Meeting of the said General Assembly, from the said first
day of November, to the fifteenth day of January next to come, One thousand six
hundred and ninety two years. And that the Members be not put to the trouble of
attendance before that time, We hereby Declare the samine to be Adjourned till
the day foresaid accordingly. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly,
and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of
the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority,
make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance: And Ordains
these presents to be Printed. According to Justice, as ye will answer to Us
thereupon: The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full
Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly Execute and Indorsat
again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty sixth day of October, and of
Our Reign the Third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, and in
Supplementum Signeti.n GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, 1691.


