royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION Against Patrick Carnagy.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defend^ of the Faith,
To (...) Our Lion K^ at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
or Messengers at Arms, Our S^riffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting;
We taking (...)Our Consideration, that it is incumbent to Us to protect the
persons of all Our good ^ obedient Subjects, but more especially these, who
because of their Nonage and Sex, being (...) able to defend themselves, do need
the same in a more especial way; and We being Our Royal Prerogative, universal
Tutor to all Minors, and being informed, that (...) Gray, daughter to the
deceast James Gray of Ballegerno, had been in a barbarous and (...) mane manner
taken away by force, out of the house of James Hay of Pitfour, her Tutor by
Patrick Carnagy, brother to the Earl of Northesk, in which house she had been
ordained to stay, by a Decision of Our Privy Council, and by their order Our
Advocat was o^ned to insist against the said Patrick, and if he had been
appearing, care had been taken (...) he should have been punished in a most
exemplary way, that others might have thereby been deterred from a Crim^
against which, We will-upon all occasions be most ready to show the severest
and deepest resentment: So he not having ^ peared, and being thereupon
denounced Rebel, and put to Our Horn, We, with advice of Our Privy Council,
have ^ned these Our Letters, to be direct in manner-underwritten: Our will is
herefore, and We charge you straightly, and ^mand, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye Pass to the Market Crosses of Edinburgh, Perth ^dee etc. And
there, with Our Coat of Arms displayed, by sound of Trumpet, in Our Name and
Authority, Co^ and Charge, the said Patrick Carnagy to enter his person in
Prison, within the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, there to rem^til he underly the Law
for the foresaid Crime, within fifteen days next after he be charged be you
the^der the pain of Treason; with certification to him if he failie, he shall
be called, accused, and demained as a Traitor, c^ to the Laws and Acts of
Parliament of this Our Realm. And because We do not judge the ordinary pains
of Rebel^ sufficient punishment for such a Crime; That therefore, ye command
and charge all Our Subjects, That they nor none o(...) after the expiring of
the said days of the Charge, presume, nor take upon hand to resset, supply,
harbor or intercomm(...) the said Patrick Cernagy, by word, write, or message,
Nor furnish him with meat, drink, house, or harbory, Nor trans(...) to, nor
from Ferries, or otherwise to supply him with any thing necessary or
comfortable to him, during the time of his ^lion and until he enter his Person
in Prison in manner foresaid; with certification to them if they failie, they
shall be ^^ed accused, and pursued as Art and Part with him in the foresaid
horrid Crime, and proceeded against accordingly, (...) form to the Laws and
Acts of Parliament of this Kingdom. And We ordain these Presents to be Printed,

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twentieth and fourth day of December,
One thousand six hundred and eight Years, and of Our Reign the thirtieth and
second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concili^ PAT. MENIES, Cls. Sti^ ^.

GOD save the KING.
EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majes^


