A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament till the ninth day of January next
to come.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, by the last Act of the last Session of Our present Parliament of
this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, dated the fifteenth day of the Month of
June last, Our said Parliament, is declared by Us to be current, and is
Adjourned to the twelfth day of September next to come. And We Considering,
that the present Condition of Our Affairs in this Our Ancient Kingdom, does not
Require that the Members of Our said Parliament should meet upon the foresaid
day, and We being Unwilling, that they should be put to any Trouble that may be
Dispensed with. Do therefore with Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, hereby Adjourn Our said current Parliament, until the ninth day of
January next: Hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to attend that
day in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several
Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-crosses of the Head Burghs of the
several Shires of this Our said Ancient Kingdom, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our
Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said twelfth day of September, to the said
ninth day of January next. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth day of August, and of
Our Reign the Fifth Year,1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEF Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1693.


