A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament to the Fifteenth day of March next
to come.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the date the Twenty ninth day of August last by past, Adjourn
the Current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the
Twelfth day of September also last bypast, to the Ninth day of January next to
come: And We considering that the present State of Our Affairs in this Our
Ancient Kingdom, does not require that the Members of Our said Parliament
should meet upon the foresaid day: And We being unwilling that they should be
put to any trouble that may be dispensed with, do therefore with Advice of Our
said Lords of Privy Council hereby Adjourn Our said Current Parliament until
the Fifteenth day of March next; hereby requiring all the Members of Our
Parliament to attend that day in the usual way, and under the Certification
contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you straightly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the
Adjourning of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said Ninth of January
next to come, to the said Fifteenth day of March thereafter. And ordains these
presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty sixth day of December, and of
Our Reign the Fifth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to Their
most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1693.


