C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the fifteenth day of March, 1683.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and h^s Brethren H^r^ulds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeing:
Forasmuch, as by Our Proclamation, dated the eighth day of May last, We did
continue the Adjournment of the meeting of the current Parliament, of this Our
ancient Kingdom, until the twentieth and eighth day of November next: And
whereas Our Service does not require the meeting of Our Parliament the said
twenty eighth of November: and that Our Royal and Dearest Brother (whom We
still continue Our Commissioner) cannot then be Present; And We being unwilling
that the Members thereof should be put to the Charge of meeting at that time,
Have therefore with Advice of Cur Privy Council, now again thought fit to
continue the said Adjournment, until the fifteenth day of March next ensuing
the date hereof: And to the effect, all persons concerned may have timous
notice of this Our Adjournment. OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you stricly and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and there, in Our Name and Authority,
make public Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our current Parliament,
until the said fifteenth day of March next ensuing, The which to do, We commit
to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters,
delivering them by you, ducly Execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the tenth day of October, One thousand
six hundred eighty and two, and of Our Reign, the thirtieth and fourth year.
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. Cls. Sti. Concilij. WILL PATERSON.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1682.


