C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent CONVENTICLES.
Edinburgh, the third day of February, one thousand six hundred and seventy.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, conjunctly and severally specially
constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch as We have taken to consideration, the disorderly carriage of
several Heretors, outed Ministers, Tennents and others of the Commons within
this Kingdom, by their keeping of Conventicles, and baptizing of their Children
by persons not authorized or allowed; which not only foment and nourish
Separation and Schism, but tend to Sedition, and the disturbance of the public
Peace. Do therefore, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, require all
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities and their Deputes, Magistrates of
Burghs in their respective bounds, and the Commissioners of the Militia, To
inform themselves where such Conventicles have been kept since the nineteenth
day of October last, or shall happen to be kept hereafter, and to call before
them the Ministers who have preached or shall preach at them, the Heretors or
substantial Tennents who have been or shall be present thereat, or have had
their Children baptized since the said nineteenth day of October, or shall
procure them to be baptized by any not allowed or authorized to do the same;
and according as they shall find any of them guilty, that they take caution of
them for their appearance before Our Privy Council, when ever they shall be
called: And in case any of them, being called before the said Sheriffs,
Stewarts, Bailiffs or Magistrates foresaids, or before the said Commissioners
of the Militia, compear not, or compearing shall refuse to give caution, That
they, with advice and concurrence of the Captain, Lieutenant or Cornet of any
of the Militia Troops of the Shire, seize upon their persons, and send them to
the Lords of Our Council by a Party of the Milit^a; Which Party shall be paid
at eighteen shillings Scots a day for each Horseman, and three shillings
Sterling for the Officer who shall command, from the time of their setting
forth to their return: And that they send along with them any proofs or
evidences they have received of their guiltiness: And Ordains the said
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs, Magistrates and Commissioners of the Militia,
from time to time, to give an account of their diligence to Our Council: And
that these presents be printed, and published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh
and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1670.


