W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION, Against the importing of Irish Victual.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, albeit by several Acts of Parliament, and Proclamations of
Council, the Importing of Meal or Victual of any sort from the Kingdom of
Ireland, and others therein-mentioned, Have been expressly prohibited and
discharged to be Imported into this Kingdom by any person or persons
whatsomever, under the pains and penalties therein mentioned, Yet nevertheless
several of Our Leidges, both of Our Kingdom of Scotland, and also of Our said
other Kingdom, in manifest defraud of the foresaid Laws and Proclamations, do
clandestainly Import Meal and other Victual from Ireland, and landing the same
in some remote Islands* or at Creiks within this Our ancient Kingdom, do retail
and sell the same as the native product of our Kingdom of Scotland, to the
great obstruction of the sale of the grouth of this Kingdom, and to the
manifest prejudice thereof, by exporting the current Money in specie: For
remeed whereof, We with advice of the Lords of our Privy Council ratify and
approve the former Proclamations made against the Importing of Foreign Meal
and Victual and particularly that of the date the 13th of March 1694 years, in
the whole heads, Clauses and Articles thereof, and penalties therein contained,
Hereby requiring and commanding the same to be put to effectual execution in
all time coming; Certifying all such Mariners, Seamen and Sailers, in any
Vessel, Importing any Meal or Victual, or others mentioned in the foresaid
Proclamation, and contrary to the same, from the said Kingdom of Ireland to
this Our ancient Kingdom, and certifying all and every other persons, who shall
be found to concur or assist the said Importers of the Meal, Victual and
others mentioned in the said Proclamation, or who resets the same, that they
shall be seized upon, and committed to the next Prison, there to remain during
the pleasure of Our Privy Council* And We with advice foresaid, do hereby
require and command David Crawfurd of Drumsuy presently appointed, and others
who shall be appointed in his place for watching the Coast against the
Importing of the said Irish Victual, And also the Sheriffs of the several
Shires, Justices of Peace, and Magistrates of Burghs within their respective
Jurisdictions, to seize upon, take and apprehend the persons respective
foresaid, who shall be found to transgress the premises in manner
abovementioned, and to commit and detain them in Prison* until they shall be
thence delivered by express warrant of the Lords of our Privy Council, to be
granted for that effect. OUR WILL IS Herefore, and We charge you strictly, and
command, that incontinent their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market cross of
Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the Burghs of Glasgow and Dumfries, and
of the head-burghs of the several Shires within the bounds, betwixt the Sound
of Mule and Dumfries, and thereat make publication of Our pleasure in the
premises, that none may pretend ignorance. And ordains these presents to be
Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the 12th day of March, and of our reign
the 6th year, 1695. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, anno Dom. 1695.


