PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the 21 Day of May instant 1700.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, notwithstanding we were positively Resolved Our Parliament
should Meet on the Fourteenth Day of May instant, yet We Understanding that a
short Adjournment is necessary, to the effect that all Members Concerned may be
in readiness. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have
Resolved to Continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said
Fourteenth to the Twenty First Day of the foresaid Month of May, at which Day
We are firmly Resolved Our said Parliament shall Meet; and that the Members of
Our said Parliament be not put to unncessary Trouble and Charges before that
time, We do hereby with Advice foresaid, Continue the Adjournment of Our said
Parliament, from the said Fourteenth to the said Twenty First Day of May
current, Ordaining and Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament to
Attend precisely the said Day at Edinburgh, in the usual Way, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make
Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance. And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Seventh Day of May, and of Our Reign
the Twelfth Year 1700. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1700.


