C R
(...) royal blazon or coat of arms James by the grace of god
A PROCLAMATION Anent Elders of Kirk Sessions, 1684.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch as by the Supremacy Inherent in Our Imperial Crown, as one of the
Prerogatives thereto belonging; It solely Resides in Us, to Enact and Emit such
Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Administration of the External
Government of the Church, and the Persons to be Employed therein, as We, in Our
Royal Wisdom shall think fit, (...) ^^^^^ly specified in the first Act of Our
second Parliament: And therefore We, and Our Predecessors, have always been
careful that the Discipline of the Church, by Kirk Sessions and otherwise be
observed; for preservation whereof, it being necessar, that Persons of good
Reputation, and known Loyalty, should assist the Ministers in the exercise of
Ecclesiastic Discipline. We therefore* with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby Empower the Ministers of the respective Parochs, within this
Our ancient Kingdom, to give in Lists to the Bishops, their Ordinaries, of such
as are fit to Serve as Elders in the said Parochs, and being approven by them;
We hereby Ordain and Command the Persons so Named and Authorized, to Serve as
Elders, except they can offer such sufficient Reasons, to be allowed by the
Bishop, as may excuse them from Serving in the said Employment, with
Certification to the Persons who shall refuse, not being lawfully excused, as
said is, that upon production of the said Nomination, and Instruments taken
upon their refusal, Letters of Horning shall be direct, under the Signet of Our
Privy Council, Charging them to accept and Officiate, within fifteen Days,
under the pain of Rebellion: And to the effect, Our Pleasure in the Premises
may be made known, to all Persons concerned* Our Will is, and We Charge you
strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh; and remanent Market Crosses of the head Burghs of
the Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there, by open
Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that all Persons concerned may
give obedience thereto, according to Justice, as ye will answer to Us
thereupon, the which to do, we commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our
full power, by their Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly execute, and
indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty two day of April, One thousand
six hundred eighty and four. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth sixth Year. 1684.
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1684.


