I7 R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Against Thieves, Robbers and Vagabond Persons.
JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We are Informed, That diverse Louse, and Vagabond Persons, Thieves
and Robbers, do pass up and down this Kingdom, and even within this Our Capital
City of Edinburgh, and other Our Burghs, and there, and on Our Highways, by
day and night, do not only Rob, Beat, and Abuse Our Innocent Subjects, but
sometimes enter into their Houses and Shops under Silence and Cloud of Night,
to that purpose: We therefore for preventing of such abuses for the future, Do,
With Advice of Our Privy Council, Hereby strictly Require and Command, all Our
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Magistrates of Burghs, and others in Authority under Us, to
use their outmost endeavors for Discovering and Apprehending the said Louse
and Vagabond Persons, Thieves and Robbers, their Accomplices and Abetters, and
others suspect guilty of Harboring, Resetting, or Entertaining of them, as
they shall be found within their Respective Bounds and Jurisdictions, and to
secure their Persons in Firmance, until they be brought to a Legal Trial, and
Punished or Acquit (according to Our Laws) for the said Crimes, as they will
be answerable. And for the better Discovery of such Louse and Vagabond Persons,
Thieves and Robbers, We, with Advice foresaid, Do allow any of the persons
accessory, or who shall be accessory to the said Crimes, to come in and
Discover their Accomplices, Resetters, Harbourers, or Abetters (so as some of
them may be found out) to Our Privy Council, or the nearest Magistrate without
any hazard; Declaring hereby, that upon their performance thereof, they
themselves shall be free of all Processes, Civil or Criminal, upon the account
foresaid in all time coming. And if any other person, not concerned with the
said persons in their Guilt, shall Apprehend, or so Discover them, as that
they shall be Apprehended, We hereby ensure them of a suitable Reward to be
paid forth of Our Thesaury, according to their Pains and Diligence. And We
further hereby fully and amply Pardon and Imdemnifie all Our good Subjects who
shall be assisting herein, as to any Blood, Slaughter, Mutilation, or other
Inconveniences that may follow, either in pursuit of the said Louse and
Vagabond Persons, Thieves and Robbers, and their Accomplices or Assistants, or
apprehending of them now, and in all time coming, and Declares them free of all
Process Criminal, or Civil, upon that account; And that Our Pleasure in the
Premises may be known and obeyed, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and whole other remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the
Shires of this Kingdom, and there, in our Royal Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that all
persons concerned may take exact notice thereof, and give punctual obedience
thereto, and that none may pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of January 1687. And
of Our Reign, the second Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. COL.
McKENIE, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1687.


