royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...) A PROCLAMATION, Against keeping of CONVENTICLES.
Edinburgh, the third day of August, one thousand six hundred and sixty nine.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly
and severally specially constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch, as from Our tender care and great zeal for preserving the peace and
quiet of this Church and Kingdom, by Our former Proclamations We have
prohibited and discharged all private Meetings and Conventicles, under the
pretext of religious Exercise and Worship: And yet nevertheless, in diverse
places of this Kingdom, some outed Ministers and others take upon them to
preach and exercise the functions of the Ministry, in meetings of Our Subjects
not warranted by Law, to the high contempt of Our Authority and Government, and
disquiet of the peace of this Church and Kingdom. Therefore, We, with advice of
the Lords of Our Privy Council, (but derogation in any sort from Our said
former Proclamations or pains therein contained) Do command all Heretors
timeously to delate any, who within there bounds shall take upon them to preach
or carry on Worship in such unwarranted Meetings and Assemblies, and make their
names known to Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords and Ba^s of Regalities and their
Deputes, Barons, Magistrates of Burghs, Justices of Peace, and Officers and
Commissioners of the Militia within whose bounds and jurisdictions they may be
apprehended. And do hereby authorize and command the Sheriffs and others
foresaids, that (after intimation made to them that the persons foresaids are
within their respective bounds) they make exact search and enquiry after them,
and if they be found, that they apprehend and incarcerate their persons, and
acquaint the Lords of Our Privy Council of their imprisonment; and requires the
Magistrates of Burghs to receive and detain them prisoners until further order;
and that this they do, as they wi^ answerable under all highest pain. Likeas We
will, that all Our good Subjects be hereby advertised, that We are resolved in
the future to put Our Laws, Acts, Statutes and Proclamations, vigorously in
execution, against with-drawers from the public Worship in their own Paroch
Churches. And ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the
Mercat-crosse of Edinburgh and other head Burghs of Shires within this Kingdom,
that none pretend ignorance.

Al. Gibson, Cls. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1669.


