PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the 5th of March 1700 years
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We by Our Proclamation of the Date the last day of August last
bypast, did Adjourn this Our current Parliament to the Eight day of November
instant; and whereas the present state of Our Affairs does not require the
Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said Day to which it was Adjourned.
Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, are Resolved to
Continue the said Adjournment, from the said Eight Day of November instant, to
the Fifth Day of March 1700 next to come. And that the Members of Our said
Parliament be not put to unnecessary Trouble and Charges before that time, We
do hereby with Advice foresaid continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament
from the said eight day of November instant, to the said fifth day of March
next to come 1700 years; And We do hereby with Advice foresaid Order and
Require all the Members of Our said Parliament to attend the said fifth day of
March next to come at Edinburgh, in the usual manner, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Our
Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
other Mercat-crosses of the remanent haill Head-Burghs of the several Shires
and Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom, and thereat, by open Proclamation,
make Intimation, that Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the said fifth day of
March next to come. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the fourth day of November, And of Our
Reign the Eleventh year 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1699.


