royal blazon or coat of arms I R
(...) A PROCLAMATION, Against Penny-Weddings.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith.
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by the fourteenth Act of the Third Parliament, held in the Reign
of Our dearest Royal Brother of ever glorious Memory, Entitled, Act
Restraining the exorbitant Expense of Marriages, etc. upon the considerations
therein-mentioned, the keeping of Penny-Weddings is Prohibited and Discharged,
under and with the Certifications and Qualififications thereby expressly
provided. And whereas^, notwithstanding of the said Act and Prohibition, diverse
persons, Vintners and others, have, and still continue to contraveen so
necessary and useful a Law, to the great contempt of Our Authority, expense,
and abuse of Our Leidges, contrair to the design and intent thereof. Therefore,
We with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Ordain the said Act of
Parliament to be put in full and vigorous execution against the Contraveeners,
conform to the tenor thereof in all points. And to the end that all persons may
be fully certiorate of this Our Royal Pleasure, We hereby Ordain the said Act
of Parliament to be of new printed, and subjoyned hereto, and published in
manner underwritten. And therefore, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly,
and Command that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of the Shires of this Kingdom, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation make publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, and also
read the foresaid Act of Parliament hereunto subjoyned, that none may pretend
Ignorance, under the Pains and Certifications therein-mentioned.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of December, One thousand
six hundred eighty seven. And of Our Reign the third year.
GOD save the KING.
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Follows the Tenor of the abovementioned Act of Parliament.
ACT Restraining the exorbitant expense of Marriages, Baptisms, and Burials.
September 13. 1681.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the great hurt and prejudice, arising to this
Kingdom, by the superfluous expense bestowed at Marriages, Baptisms, and
Burials. For repressing of which abuse in time coming, His Majesty with Advice
and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does Statute and Ordain, That
Marriages, Baptisms, and Burials, shall be solemnized, and gone about, in
sober, and decent manner. And that at Marriages, besides the married persons,
their Parents, Children, Brothers, and Sisters, and the Family wherein they
live, There shall not be present at any Contract of Marriage, or In-fare, or
meet upon occasion thereof, above four Friends on either side, with their
ordinary domestic Servants, and that neither Bridegroom, nor Bride, nor their
Parents, or Relations, Tutors, or Curators for them, and to their use, shall
make above two changes of Raiment at that time, or upon that occasion.
Certifying such persons as shall contraveen, if they be Landed persons, They
shall be liable in the fourth part of their yearly valued Rent, and those who
are not Landed Persons, in the fourth part of their Movables, Burgesses
according to their Condition and Means, not exceeding five hundred Merks Scots,
and mean Crafts-men and Servants, not exceeding one hundred Merks: And if there
shall be any greater number of persons than aforesaid, in any House, or Inn,
within Burgh, or Suburbs thereof, or within two Miles of the same, where
Penny-Weddings are made, That the Master of the House, shall be Fined in the
Sum of five hundred Merks Scots. And it is Statute and Ordained, That at
Baptisms, upon that occasion, besides the Parents, Children, Brothers, and
Sisters, and those of the Family, there shall not be present above four
Witnesses. And Further, His Majesty, with Consent foresaid, Statutes and
Ordains, That there shall not be invited to Burials, any greater number of
persons than those following, viz. To the Burial of Noblemen, and Bishops, and
their Wives, not above one hundred Noblemen and Gentlemen: To the Burial of a
Baron of Quality, not above Sixty, and other Landed Gentlemen, not above
Thirty. And that the Mourners at the Burials of Noblemen; and Bishops, and
their Ladies, do not exceed Thirty, and at the Burials of Privy-Counsellors,
Lords of Session, Barons, Provosts of Burghs, and their Wives, the number of
Mourners do not exceed Twenty four, And at the Burials of all other Landed
Gentlemen, and Citizens within Burgh, they do not exceed the number of Twelve.
And Prohibits, and Discharges the using, or carrying of any Pencils, Banners,
and other Honors, at Burials, except only the eight Branches to be upon the
Pale, or upon the Coffin, where there is no Pale, under the foresaids penalties
respective, in case they contraveen. And it is Statute, and Ordained, That
there be no Mourning Cloaks used at Burials, nor at any other time, under the
pain of One hundred pounds Scots.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1687.


