PROCLAMATION Ireland.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great- Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Importing of Victual; Horse and Cowes from Ireland into this
Kingdom, has been by diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament, made in the time of
Our Royal Predecessors Discharged under great Pains, notwithstanding whereof,
and by Reason of the unsettled State of both Kingdoms, the Observation of the
said Laws has been of late much neglected; And We being resolved, that due
and exact Obedience shall be given to the said Laws for the time to come, and
that they shall be Execute with all Rigor, against such as Transgress the
same: Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Strictly
Prohibit and Discharge the Importing of any Meal, or other Victual
whatsomever, or of any Horse, Mares, or Cowes from the said Kingdom of Ireland
into this Kingdom, either by the Natives thereof, or Inhabitants in Ireland, or
any other Foraigners whatsomever, from, and after the Day and Date hereof,
under the Pains and Penalties following, viz. as to the Importing of any Meal
and other Victual, that all the Meal and Victual which shall be Imported, shall
be Sunk and Destroyed; And the Seizer or Discoverer, for his Reward shall have
the Boat, Bark, or Vessel, wherein the said Meal or Victual shall be Imported,
to Dispose of at his pleasure, Conform to the fourteenth Act of the Parliament
1686: As also, the half of the Fines Imposed upon the Importers, Resetters, and
Heretors by the third Act, third Session, Parliament second, Charles Second;
And as to the Importing Horses, Cowes, and other Cattle, that no Horse, Mart,
Cowes, or other Cattle whatsomever, shall be Imported from Ireland to this
Kingdom, under the Pain and Penalty of Forefaulting thereof; and surder, under
the pain of paying the Sum of an Hundred Merks Scots for each Beast that shall
be so Imported, the one half of both the Beasts and Fines, to belong to the
Seizer and Discoverer, and the other half to Us and Our Thesaury: And We with
Advice foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge any Person, or Persons whatsomever, to
Buy, Use, or Retail any Irish Meal, or Victual, or Reset, or Buy any Horses,
Mares, or Nolt, that they know to be Imported out of Ireland, after the Day
foresaid, under the Pains Contained in the said Acts of Parliament. And We
with Advice foresaid, have Nominate and Appointed David Craufoord of Drumsuie,
to see the foresaids Acts of Parliament made against Importing of Irish
Victual, Vigorously put to Execution, during such time and space as Our Privy
Council shall think Fit, with Power to him to appoint Servants, and others
under him, to attend in all Places, betwixt the Head of Kintire and Lochryan,
and from Lochryan to Dumfreis for the more Effectual performing, and
Discharging their Duty in the Premises. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge
you Straightly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat Cross of the Burghs of Glasgow
and Dumfreis, and of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires within that Bounds,
and thereat make Public Intimation of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that none
may pretend Ignorance; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Thirteenth Day of March, and of Our
Reign the Fifth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBURGH, September 8. 1697.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby Revive the foresaid
Proclamation emitted by their Lordships upon March the Thirteenth, 1694,
Entitled a Proclamation against the Importing of Victual, or Cattle from
Ireland: And Ordains the same to be put to farther Execution in all Points. And
Ordains it to be Reprinted, and again Published at the Head-Burghs upon the
Western-Coasts: And appoints His Majesty's Solicitor to cause Transmitt Printed
Coppies thereof to the several Offices of His Majesty's Foraign Custom and
Excise where there is a Collector; And appoints the Collectors to affix a
Printed Coppie of the said Proclamation upon their several Offices: And Ordains
their Presents to be Printed with the said Proclamation, and to be sent and
affixt as the said Proclamation it self, to the Effect that none may pretend
Ignorance.

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh: Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM* 1697.


