monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the first day of March 1693, to
the sixth day of April 1693.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the date the last day of January last bypast, Adjourn the
current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the tenth day
of February instant, to the first day of March next, both in this instant year
of God one thousand six hundred and ninety three: And now in reguaird the
present State of Our Affairs, in this Our Ancient Kingdom, does not require the
meeting of Parliament so soon, and that the Members of Parliament may not be
put to the Trouble or Charge of Meeting on the said day. We therefore with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn Our said current
Parliament, from the said first day of March next, to the sixth day of April
thereafter, hereby requiring all Members of Our Parliament to give Attendance
at Edinburgh on that day, in the accustomed manner, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and the Mercat-Crosses
of the whole Head-burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there in
Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the said
Adjournment, of Our said current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom, from
the said first day of March, to the said sixth day of April both next to come.
And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of February, and of
Our Reign the fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary,
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's. 1693.


