monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament From the 17 of August, to the 16 of
November, 1692.
WILLIAM and MARY by the grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly
and severally specially constitute greeting;
Forasmuch as We, with Advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the date the twenty ninth day of March last bypast, Adjourn
the current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the
fifteenth day of April last by past, to the seventeenth day of August next, in
this present year One thousand six hundred and ninety two; And now in regard of
Our absence, and that our Affairs in this our said ancient Kingdom, do not
require the Meeting of our Parliament so soon, and that the Members of
Parliament may not be put to the trouble or charge of Meeting upon the said
day; We therefore with advice of the Lords of our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn
our said current Parliament, until the Sixteenth day of November next to come,
in this said instant year, One thousand six hundred and ninety two, hereby
requiring all the Members of Our Parliament, to give Attendance at Edinburgh on
that day, in the accustomed manner, and under the Certifications contained in
the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you
strictly, and Command, that in-continent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole Head-burghs
of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make publication of the said Adjournment of Our current
Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, from the said seventeenth day of
August, to the said sixteenth day of November, both next ensuing; and ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty sixth day of July, and of Our
Reign the fourth year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplimentum Signeti. GILB, ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to Their most excellent
Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1692.


