A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the 12th. of September next.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuchas, We by Our Proclamation of the Date the twenty first day of March
last by past, did Adjourn this Our current Parliament to the Fourteenth day of
June then next to come, now instant: And whereas the present State of Our
Affairs does not require the meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said day
to which it was adjourned; Therefore We with Advice of the the Lords of Our
Privy Council, are resolved to continue the said Adjournment, from the said
Fourteenth day of June instant, to the Twelfth day of September next to come,
and that the Members of Our said Parliament be not put to unnecessary Trouble
and Charges before that time; We do hereby with Advice foresaid continue the
Adjournment of Our said Parliament from the said fourteenth day of June
instant, to the said Twelfth day of September next to come, and we do hereby
Order and Require all the Members of Our said Parliament to attend the said
Twelfth day of September next at Edinburgh, in the usual way, and under the
Certifications in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent their Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make
Intimation, that Our said Parliament is adjourned to the said Twelfth day of
September next to come. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Ninth Day of June, and of Our Reign
the Eleventh Year 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

God Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


