A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the Twenty Eight of June, School.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great-Britan, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren, Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Shireffs in that Part, conjunctly
and severally, specially, constitute, ^^eeting:
FORASMUCHAS, We by Our Proclamation of the Date the ^th Day of December last
by past, did Adjourn this Our current Parliament ^ the Eleventh Day of March
then nixt to come; now instant: And ^hereas the present State of Our Affairs,
does not require the meeting of Our Parliament, so soon as the said Day, to
which it was Adjourned. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, are resolved to continue the said Adjournment, from the said Eleventh
Day of March instant, to the Twenty Eight Day of June next to come; And that
the Members of Our said Parliament be not put to unnecessar Trouble and
Charges: We do hereby with Advice foresaid, continue the Adjournment of Our
said current Parliament, from the said Eleventh Day of March instant, to the
said Twenty Eight Day of June next to come: And We do hereby Order and Require
all the members of Our Current Parliament, to attend the said Twenty Eight Day
of June next to come at Edinburgh, in the usual Way, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you strictly, and command, that incontinent
their Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation make
Intimation, that Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the said Twenty Eight Day
of June next to come; And ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third Day of March; And of Our Reign
the ninth Year, School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


