A PROCLAMATION, Against Deserters of the Regiments and Company which are to
March to Inverlochy.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch as by Our Letter, under Our Royal Hand at Kensingtoun, the
thirteenth day of November last bypast, Direct to the Lords of Our Privy
Council, for the Reasons therein-contained, We Authorized and Required them, To
cause such of the three Regiments, under the Command of the Earl of Glencairn,
the Viscount of Kenmuir, and Lodovick Grant of that Ilk, and the Independent
Company belonging to Meinzies of Weym, as were not at Inverlochy already, to be
Marched there with all speed; And that the said Lords of Our Privy Council,
have in Prosecution of Our Commands, in the above Letter contained, by their
Act of the date the twenty ninth day of November last bypast, Required Sir
Thomas Livingston Commander in Chief of Our Forces within this Our Kingdom, to
cause March the said Regiments and Forces, as above appointed, who are ready
to March accordingly; And lest any of the Soldiers of the above Regiments and
Company should desert Our Service, or run away from their Colors in their
March from their respective Quarters, to Inverlochie, upon any pretense
whatsoever; We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Command
and Require, The Sheriffs of Our Sheriffdoms, Magistrates of Our Royal Burrows,
Justices of Peace, and all other Magistrates, and public Ministers of the Law,
within this Our said Kingdom, to search for, seize upon, take and apprehend the
persons of any such Soldiers of the foresaids Regimentsand Company, who have
been since the first of August last in Our Service, worn Our Livery, and
received Our Pay, and who have Deserted, or shall desert Our said Service, in
the said Regiments and Company, and shall be found wanting Passes, or
Foreloffs from their respective Officers, to whom it is competent to grant the
same; and to put them in sure Firmance, keep and detain them Prisoners therein,
till Our Council be acquainted therewith, and their pleasure known therein: Or
that the respective Officers of the said Run-aways be informed of, and call
for, the said Soldiers so Deserting, with Certification to the Soldiers of
the said Regiments and Company, if they Desert and run away from Our said
Service, without a Pass or Foreloff, as said is, they shall be punished as
Deserters and un-aways, with all rigor; and that such Officers of the said
Regiments and Company, who shall not repair with their said Companies, conform
to their respective Commands to the said Garrison of Inverlochie, shall not
only lose the benefit of any Arrears due to them, but also be otherways
punished as Deserters themselves. And to the effect Our Pleasure in the
Premises may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you straightly and Command,
that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the whole remanent Head-Burghs of the
several Shires within this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend
Ignorance, as ye will answer to Us thereupon; The which to do, We commit to you,
conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by
you, duly execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of December, And of
Our Reign the second year, 1690. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA.
MONCREIFF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


