A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament, from the 15th Day of April, to the
17th Day of August next, 1692.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Did, by Our
Proclamation of the date, the fourth day of January, last bypast, Adjourn the
current Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the fourteenth
Day of the said Month of January last bypast, to the fifteenth Day of April
next ensuing, both in this instant Year of GOD, One thousand six hundred ninety
two years; And now, in regard that Our Affairs in this Our said Ancient
Kingdom, do not require the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon, and in
Consideration of Our Absence out of Britain for the time, and that the Members
of Parliament may not be put to the Trouble and Charge of Meeting upon the said
day: We therefore, with Advice of Our said Lords of Privy Council, hereby
Adjourn Our said current Parliament, until the seventeenth Day of August next
to come, in this said instant year, One thousand six hundred ninety two; Hereby
Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament, to give their attendance at
Edinburgh on that Day, in the accustomed manner, and under the Certifications
contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye
pass, to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the whole
Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the said Adjournment of
Our current Parliament, of this Our Ancient Kingdom, from the said fifteenth
Day of April, to the said seventeenth Day of August both next ensuing. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth Day of March. And of Our
Reign, the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. and in
supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printe^ to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1692.


