PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament from August the 26th till September the
8th. 1696.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great- Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part Conjunctly
and Severally, Specially Constitute Greeting;
For as much as, We by Our Proclamation of the Date, the Thirteen Day of June
last by past, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the
Current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, to the Twenty sixth Day of
August then next to Come, now Instant: And whereas, the present State of Our
Affairs does not Require the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said Day
to which it is Adjourned. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do continue the said Adjournment from the said Day to the Eight Day of
September next to Come: And being desirous to Prevent the unnecessary Trouble
and Charges that the Members of Parliament may be put to, by Attending the said
Twenty sixth Day of August Instant; Do hereby with Advice foresaid Adjourn Our
said Current Parliament until the said Eight Day of September next to Come, at
which time we are Resolved Our Parliament shall Meet at Edinburgh; And do
therefore Expect, and Perempetorly require, that all Noblemen, and
Commissioners of Shires and Burrows, and others Concerned, Attend the foresaid
Day and Place under the Pains and Un-Laws contained in the Acts of Parliament
against Absents from Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you
Strictly, and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of remanent Head-Burghs of
the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom; And there by
open Proclamation, make Intimation that Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the
said Eight Day of September next to Come. And Ordains these presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Thirteen Day of August, and of Our
Reign the Eight Year. 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. DA.
MONCRIEFF. Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


