PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly
and Severaly, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, We by Our Proclamation of the Date the seventh Day of June
instant, did Adjourn this Our current Parliament, to the twelfth Day of July
next to come; and whereas the present State of Our Affairs, does not require
the Meeting of Our said Parliament, so soon as the said Day to which it was
Adjourned: Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, are
resolved to continue the said Adjournment, from the said Twelfth Day of July
next to come, to the Nineteenth Day of the said Month of July, at which time
We are fully resolved Our said Parliament shall Meet, and that the Members of
Our said current Parliament, be not put to unnecessar Trouble and Charges, We
do hereby with Advice foresaid, continue the Adjournment of our said
Parliament, from the said Twelfth Day of July next to come, to the said
Nineteenth Day of the said Month: And We do hereby Order and Require all the
Members of Our said Parliament, to attend the said Nineteenth Day of July next,
at Edinburgh, in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the
several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge
you strictly and Command, that in continent, their Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remnant
head Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries of this Our Ancient Kingdom,
and there by open proclamation, make Intimation, that Our said Parliament is
Adjourned, to the said Nineteenth Day of the said Month of July next. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet Edinburgh the Twenty first of June, and of Our Reign
the tenth Year School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


