C ^

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament from the ninth day of September 1684,
to the tenth day of March, 1685.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas, We by Our Royal Proclamation, of the Date the twenty seventh day of
March last, Did Adjourn the Meeting of the Parliament, of this Our ancient
Kingdom, until the ninth day of September next; And seeing the present State of
Our ^ does not yet require their Meeting so soon, and We being unwilling that
the Members thereof be put to the trouble and charge of meeting at that time,
and still resol^^ to continue Our dearest Royal Brother to be Our High
Commissioner in all the (...) until the end of that Our Parliament (...) by
(...) Royal Proclamation, further to continue the ^^^^^ment of the meeting of
(...) from the said ninth day of September, to the tenth day of March next
ensuing the date her^^ Our Will therefore and We Charge you strictly and
Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ^e pass to the Market Cross
of Edinburgh, and remanent Market Crosses of the head Burghs of this Kingdom,
and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication
of the said Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said ninth day of
September, to the tenth day of March next ensuing; Recruiting hereby all the
Members of that Our Parliament, to attend that day in the usual way, and upon
the accustomed Certifications; The which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly
and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you
duly Execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty fifth day of August, One
thousand six hundred eighty and four years, and of Our Reign, the thirtieth six
year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii COLIN McKENIE, Cl. (...)

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 16^4


