design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the 15th day of May instant,
until the 16th of September next.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the Date the Third day of March last, Adjourn the Current
Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the Twenty Fifth day
of the said Month of March last until the Fifteenth day of May instant; And
whereas the present state of Our Affairs does not require a Meeting of Our
Parliament so soon as the said Fifteenth of May, to which it was Adjourned, and
that the Members of Parliament be not put to the Trouble and Charge of Meeting
upon the said Day; We therefore with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
hereby Adjourn Our said Current Parliament, until the Sixteenth day of
September next ensuing; hereby Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to
Attend that Day at Edinburgh, in the usual way, and under the Certifications
contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Mercat-crosses of
the Head-Burghs of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation of the said Adjournment of Our
Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said Fifteenth day of May instant, until
the said Sixteenth day of September next ensuing, as ye will Answer to Us
thereupon. The which to do, We Commit to you, conjunctly and severally as said
is, Our full Power by these Presents, delivering them by you duly Execute and
Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of May, and of Our Reign
the third year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,Cls. Sti.
Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's. Anno Dom. 1691.


