royal blazon or coat of arms C R
(...)
A PROCLAMATION Against the importation of Victual.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
to Our Lovits, (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute, greeting:
Forasmuch, as upon representation to Our Privy Council, of the great scarcity
and dearth of Victual in some Western Shires of this Kingdom; They did, by
their Act, of the second of December last, Grant license for Importing Oats,
Oat-meal, and Pease, to the Shires of VVigtoun, Air, Renfrew, and Stewartrie of
Kircudburgh, for supplying the necessity of these places until further order:
And seeing now, by reason of great quantities of Victual imported since the
said license was granted, the Rates and Pryces of Victual in this Kingdom are
much fallen, and that the continuation of the said license any longer, would
prove very prejudicial to Our Subjects of this Kingdom; We have thought fit,
with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, to discharge and take off the
foresaid License, and to renew Our former Proclamation against importing of
Victual, of the date the fourth of May, 1671. Likeas, We, with advice foresaid,
do hereby restrain and discharge the importation of Victual of any kind into
this Kingdom after the eleventh day of March next, under the pains following,
viz. For such Victual as shall be imported from Ireland, under the pains
contained in the third Act of the third Session of Our second Parliament, and
for any Victual imported from other foreign places, under the pains contained
in Our said former Proclamation, which shall be inflicted upon the
contraveeners with all rigor.

And ordains their presents to be Printed, and Published at the Mercat-Crosses
of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Air, and other places needful, that none may pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our signet at Edinburgh, the twenty fourth day of February, 1676.
and of Our Reign the twenty eight year. Al. Gibson Cl. Sti. Concilii.

God save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty.
Anno. 1676.


