C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament, from the Sixth of December, 1683.
to the Eighth of April, 1684.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren ^^^^^lds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Whereas, We, by Our Proclamation, of the Sixteenth of August last, Adjourned
the Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom, to the Sixth day of December next;
And the present State of Our Affairs yet not requiring their Meeting so soon;
And We being unwilling, that the Members thereof should be put to the Trouble
and Charge of Meeting at that time: Have therefore with Advice of the Lords of
Our Privy Council, thought fit, by this Our Royal Proclamation, to continue the
Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said Sixth day of December, to the
Eighth day of April next ensueing the Date of these Presents; We being always
resolved to continue Our Dearest Royal Brother to be Our High Commissioner in
all the Sessions, and until the end of that Our Parliament. And to the Effect,
all the Members thereof may attend that day in the usual way, and upon the
accustomed Certifications, and that Our Pleasure may be known in the Premises.
OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly, and Command that incontinent, these
Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the said Adjournment of
Our Parliament, from the said Sixth day of December next, to the said Eighth
day of April next ensueing. Requiring all the Members of that Our Parliament to
attend that day, in the usual way, and upon the accustomed Certifications. The
which to do, We commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by
these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute, and indorsed again to
the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rud-house, the fifth day of November, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and
fifth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti.
Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1683.


