royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Against the Importing Victual or Cattle from Ireland.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, Conjunctly and Severaly, Specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Importing of Victual; Horse and Cowes from Ireland into this
Kingdom, has been by diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament, made in the time of
Our Royal Predecessors Discharged under great Pains, notwithstanding whereof,
and by Reason of the unsettled State of both Kingdoms, the Observation of the
said Laws has been of Late much neglected; And we being Resolved, that due
and exact Obedience shall be given to the said Laws for the time to come, and
that they shall be Execute with all Rigor, against such as Transgress the
same: Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Strictly
Prohibit and Discharge the Importing of any Meal, or other Victual
whatsomever, or of any Horse, Mares, or Cowes, from the said Kingdom of
Ireland, into this Kingdom, either by the Natives thereof, or Inhabitants in
Ireland, or any other Foraigners whatsomever, from, and after the Day and Date
hereof, under the Pains and Penalies following, viz. As to the Importing of any
Meal and other Victual, that all the Meal and Victual which shall be Imported,
shall be Sunk and Destroyed; And the Seizer or Discoverer, for his Reward shall
have the Boat, Bark, or Vessel, wherein the said Meal or Victual shall be
Imported, to Dispose of at his pleasure, Conform to the fourteenth Act of the
Parliament 1686. As also the half of the Fines Imposed upon the Importes,
Resetters, and Hererors by the third Act, third Session, Parliament second,
Charles Second; And as to the Importing of Horses, Cowes, and other Cattle,
that no Horse, Mare, Cowes, or other Cattle whatsomever, shall be Imported from
Ireland to this Kingdom, under the Pain and Penalty of Forefaulting thereof,
and further under the Pain of paying the Sum of an Hundred Merks Scots for each
Beast that shall be so Imported, the one half of both the Beasts and Fines, to
belong to the Seizer and Discoverer, and the other half to Us and Our Thesaury:
And We with Advice foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge, any Person, or Persons
whatsomever, to Buy, Use, or Retail, any Irish Meal, or Victual, or Reset, or
Buy any Horses, Mares, or Nolt, that they know to be Imported out of Ireland,
after the Day foresaid, under the Pains Contained in the said Acts of
Parliament. And We with Advice foresaid, have Nominate and Appointed David
Crafurd of Drumsuie, to see the foresaids Acts of Parliament made against
Importing of Irish Victual, Vigorously put to Execution, During such time and
space as Our Privy Council shall think Fit, with Power to him, to appoint
Servants, and others under him, to attend in all Places, betwixt the Head of
Kintyre and Lochryan, and from Lochryan to Dumfreis for the more Effectual
performing, and Discharging their Duty in the Premises, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE,
And We Charge you traitly and Command, that Incontinent these Our Letters seen,
ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the
Burghs of Glasgow and Dumfreis, and of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires
within that Bounds, and thereat make Public Intimation of Our Pleasure in the
Premises, that none may pretend Ignorance; and Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of March, and of Our
Reign the Fifth Year,1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


