A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Parliament to the Fourteenth Day of May next
1700.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas We by Our Proclamation of the date the Fourth Day of November last,
did Adjourn this Our current Parliament to the Fifth Day of March next; and
whereas it may be convenient that We should hold the next Session of Parliament
in person, and seeing the present Juncture of Our Affairs will not allow of Our
coming to this Kingdom so soon as the said Fifth Day of March next, to which
Our Parliament is Adjourned. And We being positively Resolved, that it shall
Meet upon the Fourteenth Day of May next; Therefore, and that the Members of
Our said Parliament, be not put to unnecessary Trouble and Charges before that
Time, We do hereby with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Continue the
Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said Fifth Day of March next, to
the said Fourteenth Day of May next to come. And We do hereby with Advice
foresaid, Order and Require all the Members of Our said Parliament, to Attend
precisely the said Fourteenth Day of May next to come at Edinburgh, in the
usual Way, and upon the accustomed, Certifications. Our Will is herefore, and
We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the other Mercat-Crosses of the
haill Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Our ancient
Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make Intimation, that Our said
Parliament is Adjourned to the said Fourteenth Day of May next to come. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Sixteenth Day of January, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh Year 1700. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.


