monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
Anent Ministers not Praying for Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France* and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as albeit by the Act of the Meeting of Estates of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, Dated the thirteenth Day of April, One thousand six hundred and eighty
nine, Our Leidges were Certified; not to own; or acknowledge the late King
James the Seventh for their King, but that they and every one of them should
render their Dutiful Obedience to Us; and in particular, that all the Ministers
of the Gospel within this Kingdom should publicly Pray for Us, as King and
Queen of this Realm, under the Pains and Certifications specified in the said
Act: As also, We with Advice of Our Estates of Parliament, by Our Act of the
twenty second of July, One thousand six hundred and ninety, Ordained the said
Act and Proclamation of the Estates of this Kingdom; to be put to further
Execution, against all such Ministers; who had not given Obedience thereto, by
Praying for Us, in manner mentioned in the said Act; And that the Lords of Our
Privy Council should proceed therein, or empower other Magistrates to do the
same within their respective bounds, as they should see Cause; Yet
nevertheless; the said Acts have been so far from receiving the punctual and
exact Obedience due to them. That many Preachers have either presumed wholly to
neglect Praying for Us, as King and Queen of this Realm, conform to the said
Acts, or at least have so far testified a want of ingenuity and plainness
required in a Duty of this Nature, that they make use of such ambiguous and
unclear Expressions in their Prayers, as the hearers cannot distinctly know
they Pray for Us, to the great Disparagement of the said Laws, and contempt of
our Authority. Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do
strictly Require and Command the Sheriffs of the several Shires, Baillies of
Regalities, Stewarts of Stewartries, and Magistrates of the Burghs Royal of this
Kingdom within their bounds, and Jurisdictions respective, to make due and
exact trial what Ministers Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, within
their respective bounds, Pray not ordinarily for Us, in such circumstantiat
Terms, as their Hearers may distinctly know that they Pray for Us, as King and
Queen of this Realm; And for that effect, We with Advice foresaid, Hereby
Require and Empower the several Magistrates respective foresaids; To conveen and
call before them such persons as they shall think fit, to give Information and
Evidence against such Ministers Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, who
fail in their Obedience to the Acts abovementioned, in manner above set down,
and that the said Magistrates respective, Transmit under their Hands, to the
Clerks of Our Privy Council, betwixt and the first day of June next to come,
(for such as are on this side of the Water of Tay, and the fifteenth day of the
said Month, for these on the other side thereof,) the Names of the several
Ministers offending in the Premises, with the place of their residence, and
the original Information and Evidence they have received and taken against
them, To the Effect they may be prosecute with all rigor, and the Penalties and
Certifications in the said Laws contained, justly inflicted and execute
against them; With Certification to the said respective Magistrates, who fail
herein, they shall be repute as Connivers at, and Abettors of the said
Offenders, and negligent in the Execution and Performance of their Offices, and
Duty committed to them, and prosecute as such accordingly. OUR WILL IS
Herefore; and we Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
intimation of the Premises; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and
Published in manner foresaid.

Given under OUr Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty eighth day of April. And of
Our Reign, the fourth Year, 1691. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM* 1692.


