A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the seventeenth of January, to
the tenth of February, 1693.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
to our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, We with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did by Our
Proclamation of the Date, the third day of November last by past adjourn the
Current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the sixteenth
day of November one thousand six hundred and ninety two years, to the
seventeenth day of January current. And now in regard the present State of Our
Affairs, in this Our said ancient Kingdom, does not require the meeting of our
Parliament so soon, and that the Members of Parliament may not be put to the
Trouble or Charge of meeting on the said day; We, therefore with the Advice of
the Lords of our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn Our said current Parliament,
until the tenth day of February next, one thousand six hundred and ninety
three years, hereby requiring all Members of Our Parliament, to give Attendance
at Edinburgh on that day in the accustomed manner, and under the Certifications
contained in the several Acts of Parliament. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we
charge you strictly and command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of the whole
head Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom; And there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation make Publication of the said Adjournment of Our
current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, from the seventeenth day of
January current, to the tenth of February next, and ordains these Presents to
be Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the fifth day of January, and of Our Reign
the fourth Year, 1693. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum
Signeti. GILB: ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1693.


