design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, England.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and several, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We are informed, there has been of late great numbers of Horses
bought within Our Kingdom of England, and brought thence into this Our ancient
Kingdom; And considering, that it may be for the interest of Our Government,
and peace and tranquillity of Our well-affected Subjects, that the said Horses
brought, or to be brought from the said Kingdom of England, be so disposed of,
and kept in such hands, as may give no encouragement to the secret or open
Enemies of Us and Our Government. Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy
Council, do hereby Require and Command all and every Person within this
Kingdom, who have brought any Horses from the Kingdom of England to this
Kingdom, or bought any Horses from any persons, Importers thereof from the said
Kingdom of England, that they, and ilk one of them, betwixt and the Fifteenth
day of September next, give an Account under their Hands, to Our right Trusty
and well-beloved Cousin, William Duke of Hamilton, President of Our Council, or
to the Clerks thereof, what number of Horses, they, or any of them have
Imported and brought from England to this Kingdom, or bought from such who have
Imported the same since the first day of April last bypast. And sicklike, We,
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command any of Our Liedges, or others, who
shall Buy or Import from the Kingdom of England to this Kingdom, any Horses,
betwixt and the first day of August, in the year 1692. to give an account
thereof within a Month after the Buying, or bringing in of the same, in manner,
and to the persons abovementioned, with Certification to such who shall failie
herein, or do in the contrair of any of the Premises, the said Horses
brought, or to be brought in, and bought, or to be bought from such as bring
the same, shall be seized upon, and Confiscat, the one half thereof to Our use,
and the other half to such as shall discover and make out the said
Contravention, and that by and attour what further Penalty and Punishment Our
said Privy Council shall think fit to inflict upon the transgressors, for
their contempt and disobedience. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of
the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Thirteenth day of August, and of Our
Reign the Third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, and in
Supplementum Signeti. DA. MONCRIEF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's Anno DOM* 16(...)


