W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION
Anent the Poor, and providing Correction-Houses for them.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuchas, the Extraordinary Dearth and Scarcity for these several years
bypast, has hindered the due Execution of the several Acts of Parliament, and
former Proclamations of Our Privy Council, made and published, anent the
providing of the Poor; And that now the seasonable and plentiful Harvest may
Allow and does Require settled and ordered Provisions to be made for the
Maintenance of the said Poor, before the approaching Winter: Therefore, We with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Require and Command the Sheriffs of
Shires, and Stewarts of Stewartries and the Heretors, and Commissioners of
Supply within their respective Jurisdictions, To Meet and Conveen upon the
second Thursday of October next to come: And there take under Consideration the
Acts of Parliament and former Proclamations of Our Privy Council made anent
provideing the Poor: And in prosecution thereof, to lay down such Rules and
Measures for Maintaining and Subsisting the poor within the several Paroches of
the said respective Jurisdictions as have Resided within the same for these
three years by past, and for sending away such of the said poor as are
wandering Beggars, to the places where they have had their respective
Residences for the last three years by past, and that in the most orderly and
Regular Method they shall think fit. And for the better, providing and
Subsisting of the said Poor within the respective Shires and Stewartries We
with Advice foresaid, Require and Command the Magistrates of the several Burghs
after-mentioned, betwixt and the first day of December next to come, to provide
Correction Houses for Receiving and Intertaining of Beggars, Vagabounds and
Idle Persons within their respective Shires, conform to the Acts of Parliament
made thereanent, Viz. The Magistrates of the Burgh of Edinburgh, a
Correction-house for the Burgh and Shire thereof. The Magistrates of the Burgh
of Dumfreis, a Correction house for the said Burgh and Shire. The Magistrates of
the Burgh of Air, a Correction-house for the said Burgh and Shire. The
Magistrates of the Burgh of Glasgow, a Correction-house for the said Burgh and
Sheriffdom of Lanerk. The Magistrates of the Burgh of Stirling, a
Correction-house for the said Burgh and Shire thereof, and Sheriffdom of
Clackmannan. The Magistrates of the Burgh of Perth, a Correction-house for the
said Burgh and Shire thereof. The Magistrates of the Burgh of Dundae, a
Correction-house for the said Burgh and Sheriffdom of Forfar. The Magistrates of
the Burgh of Aberdeen, a Correction-house for the said Burgh and Shire thereof.
The Magistrates of the Burgh of Inverness, a Correction-house for the said Burgh
and Sheriffdom thereof: Each of which Houses shall have a large Closs
sufficiently enclosed, for keeping the said Poor people, that they be not
necessitat to be alwise within Doors, to the Hurt and hazard of their health:
And We with Advice foresaid Require and Command the said Correction-houses to
be provided and in readiness by the said respective Magistrates, betwixt and the
first day of December next to come, under the penalty of five hundred Merks
Scots Money, to be employed for the use of the Poor of the said Shire. And
Ordains the Magistrates of the respective Burghs abovementioned, to receive the
Poor of the the Shires above set down, which shall be sent to them at and after
the said day, and Intertain the same, whether the said Correction-houses be
provided or not. And to the effect the Sheriffs, Heretors Stewarts and
Commissioners of the several Shires within this Kingdom may have the said
Matter more fully before them, We hereby Ordain and Appoint the Proclamations
of Our Privy Council, dated the Eleventh day of August one thousand six hundred
and ninety two years, and the twenty ninth day of August one thousand six
hundred ninety three years, and last day of July one thousand six hundred
ninety four years, Ratified and Approven by the twenty ninth Act of the sixth
Session of Our current Parliament, to be Reprinted and sent to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires and Stewartries or their Clerks, to be laid before the said
Meeting at the day abovementioned; And which we with Advice foresaid, Ordain
to be put to punctual and Vigorous Execution in all points: And we hereby
Require and Command the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewartries of
Stewartries and Magistrates of Burghs to Report a particular Account of their
Diligence in the Premises to the Lords of Our privy Council betwixt and the
first day of February next to come, as they will be answerable at their highest
perril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE and we Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and Remanent Mercat-Crosses of the hail Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority by open
Proclamation make Intimation hereof: And Ordains Our Solicitor to transmit
Copies hereof, and of the several Proclamations above-writen to the Sheriffs
and Stewarts of the several Shires and Stewartries and their Clerks, to the
effect Copies of this Proclamation may be sent to the Ministers in the several
Paroch-Churches, to be by them Read upon the first Lords day immediately
proceeding the said Meeting of the Sheriffs, Stewarts and Heretors upon the
said day of their Meeting. And Ordains these presents to be Printed

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Fifteen day of September, and of Our
Reign the Eleventh Year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELLIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Domini 1699.


