royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Declaring War against the French King.
Edinburgh, the 6th of August, 1689.
WHereas the French King being the great Disturber of Christendom, these
several years, Has not only Invaded, and Seized the Territories and Rights of
his Neighboring Princes, His Majesty's Allies; but has used unparalelled
Cruelties, and Devastations, and by a most Unchristian Persecution, having
designed to Suppress and Extirpat the Protestant Religion, he has been the
great Supporter, and Abetter of the Arbitrary Courses in these Kingdoms, for
the Destruction of their Religion, Liberties, and Laws; and has of late,
without any Declaration of War, Invaded ^he Kingdom of Ireland, Fomenting and
Maintaining a Rebellion there: And likewise, he has lately Declared War against
His Majesty, and his Kingdoms of Scotland and England, and has sent Ships to
Transport Irish Forces to Invade the said Kingdom of Scotland; For which cause
His Majesty having Required the Lords of His Privy Council, To Emit a
Declaration of War in His Majesty's Name. Therefore the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, in Their Majesty's Names and Authority, Do Declare War against
the French King, and his Subjects, and Discharge all the Leidges of this His
Majesty's Ancient Kindom of Scotland, To Trade, Correspond, or have any
Intercourse, or Meddling with the said French King, or any of his Subjects:
Declaring nevertheless, that such of the French Subjects, as for the Causes
foresaids have been Expelled, or have abandoned their Native Country, and have
taken Refuge in this Kingdom of Scotland, that they living dutifully, and not
Corresponding with His Majesty's Enemies, they shall be secure in their Lives,
Liberties and Fortunes, under His Majesty's Protection, and the Shelter of His
Laws. Requiring likewise, all Officers of War, Captains, and Masters of Ships,
and generally the whole Leidges, to Prosecute the War against the said French
King, and his Subjects, with all Acts of Hostility, by Sea and Land, to their
uttermost. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by the Lion
King at Arms, or his Depute, Heralds, Macers, and Pursevants, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, at the Castle-Gate, and Peer and Shore of Leith, and
other places needful. Extracted by me

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council,
Anno Dom. 1689.


