A PROCLAMATION,
Edinburgh, the sixth of August, 1689.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Considering, that in obedience to
their Act of the Seventeenth day of July last bypast, several Leaders of Horse
within the Shires of Fife, Kinross, Edinburgh, Striviling and Clackmannan, and
the Magistrates of the respective Burghs within the same, have not sent out
their several proportions of the Baggage-Horse, for conveying of Provisions to
the Army, through whose default and disobedience, several Leaders, and other
persons, have had more than their proportion of Horses pressed, and taken from
them; And to the end, that such as have not given a just obedience to the
Councils Commands, may not go unpunished; And that these who have had more than
their proportion Pressed out, may be Redressed, and that such of the Horses sent
out, and their Graith which has been seized upon, bought up, and detained by
others than the true Owners thereof, may be restored. The Lords of Privy
Council, Do, in His Majesty's Name and Authority, Require and Command the
Sheriff-Deputs of the Shires abovementioned, to make a strict Enquiry anent
these who have been deficient in sending out their proportion of the Baggage
Horse, and to conveen and find them liable for the penalty contained in the
former Act, and to exact and uplift their several Fines to be forthcoming
toward the relief of others, who have had their Horses Pressed out upon the late
Expedition; And they Do, in Name and Authority foresaid, Require and Command,
all and sundry persons within the Shires abovementioned, and Towns thereof,
who have seized upon, bought up, or found straggling, any Horses, whether
Graithed, or not, since the 25 day of July last, that they give an account
thereof to the Sheriff-Deputs of the respective Shires, and Magistrates of the
several Burghs, and deliver the same over to them, to be made forthcoming for
the use of their Owners, betwixt and the first day of September next to come,
with Certification to such as shall not give an account of, and deliver the
said Horses to the said Sheriff-Deputs, or Magistrates of Burghs, that they
shall be proceeded against, and punished as guilty of Theft. And Ordains these
Presents to be Printed, and Published by Macers of Privy Council, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none may pretend
Ignorance.

Extracted by me GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, 1689.


