A PROCLAMATION Discharging Foreign. Copper or Brass-Coyn.
WILLIAM by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part Conjunctly and severally specially constitute
greeting; For as much as, We understand that several Persons both Natives and
Forraigners, presume to import into this Kingdom Foreign Black-money, as the
Black-money called French Doyets and Irish Half-pennies, or other Copper or
Brass Coin of that Sort, which is contrary to the Laws of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, and manifestly prejudicial to the Mint and Covnage thereof; Therefore,
We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to
discharge, and hereby do discharge all Foreign Black-money, and all Brass or
Copper Coin whatsomever not Coined at Our Mint, In this Our Ancient Kingdom, to
be thereunto imported under the pain of Confiscation of what shall be imported
in the contrary, and such other pains as the Laws inflict on the said
importers. And farther We with advice foresaid, ordain that no such Foreign
Black-money or Copper or Brass-Coin not Coined within this Our Realm, have
course therein, or be offered in Payments after the Day and Date hereof, under
the Pain of Ten pounds, toties quoties, to be exacted by the next Magistrate, in
case of transgressing the the Premises, by and attour the Confiscation of the
Brass and Copper-Money to be imported, or offered in payments contrair
hereunto. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and therein Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation hereof that none pretend Ignorance; And Ordains
these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the fourth day of May, and of Our Reign
the Ninth Year 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT. Cls.
Sti. Concilii

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.


