Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
PROCLAMATION Appointing the Heretors of several Shires to be in readiness upon
Forty eight Hours Advertisement, to attend His Majesty's Host, and Standard.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as this Our Ancient Kingdom is at present threatened with an
Invasion from abroad, of French, and Foreign Papists, and other Enemies, of
design to make this Nation the Seat of a Bloody War; For preventing whereof,
and in order to put this Kingdom in a posture of Defense: We have thought fit,
at this time, that the Heretors of the Shires after mentioned, should be in
readiness to oppose the said Invasion, and Suppress any Intestine
Insurrection that may happen; Therefore, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do command and Require all the Heretors, Wadsetters and Liferenters,
of whatsoever Quality, within the Shyres of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Berwick,
Roxburgh, Selkirk, Peebles, Drumfries, Dumbartoun, Bute, Linlithgow, Stirling,
Clackmannan, Fife, and Kinross, and Shyres of Wigtoun and Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright, Air, Lanerk, Argyll, and Renfrew and Perth Shyre. To put
themselves presently in readiness, with their best Horses and Arms, and
Provisions necessary, according to their respective Qualities and Estates, to
meet and conveen upon Forty Eight hours advertisement, and attend our Host,
and Standard, as they shall be called by order from Our Privy Council, for
resisting the said Invasion and Insurrection, if the same shall happen under
such Commanders, and Officers, and at such times, and places, as shall be
appointed by Our Privy Council, and there to receive such farther Orders, as
shall be given by Us, or these Commissionat by Us: And We do hereby Certify
all herein concerned, who shall not attend such Randevouzes to be appointed,
and obey these Presents, in manner above-ordained, that they shall be punished
as wilful Absenters from Our Host, and Standard, with all Rigor, OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, And We charge you strickly, and Command, That incontinent, these Our
Lettets seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh and Mercat-Crosses of
the remanent Head Burghs of the several Shyres and Stewartries abovementioned.
And there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premises, that
none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains, these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of December, and of Our
Reign the Eight year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
(...) most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


