monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent Persons Traveling to or from this Kingdom.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as several Persons of late have gone from this Our Ancient Kingdom
of Scotland into the Kingdom of France, and others have come from France into
this Kingdom, upon evil Designs against the Government; Therefore We with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Inhibite and Discharge all
Persons whatsoever, who intend to go out of this Our Ancient Kingdom (during
this time of War,) to depart forth of the same, until first they apply
themselves to, and receive a Pass from any one of the said Lords of Our Privy
Council for the time being, within Twenty Miles of the said Persons their
residence, and in case there be not a Privy Counselor within that space, then
any two of the Commissioners of Supply within the Shire, where the Person or
Persons craveing the said Passes Dwell and Reside, who have Accepted and
Qualified themselves by Law to Act as Commissioners. And further, We with
Advice foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command all Persons whatsoever, who
shall come into this Kingdom, at their Entry into the same, to present their
Persons, and show their Passes, or give a rational account of themselves, and
their business, and from whence they came, upon Oath in case of Suspicion, to
the next Counselor, Justice of Peace, Magistrate, or Officer of Our Army; with
Certification to such Persons as shall presume to go forth of this Kingdom
without Passes, or to come into the same, without presenting their Persons and
Passes, or giving account of themselves as said is, their Persons shall be
sought for, and if apprehended, shall be committed Prisoners, as Persons justly
suspect to be coming or going upon evil Designs against the Government. And
sicklike, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Prohibit and Discharge all
Skippers, and Masters of Ships or Vessels, that they receive no Passengers
(besides their Crew, for whom they must be Answerable) aboard their Ships, or
Transport them either abroad out of this Kingdom, or from abroad into this
Kingdom, except such as shall be provided with Passes in manner foresaid. And
We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Require and Command the Skippers or Masters
of any Ships, who are to go forth of this Kingdom, before they set Sail, to
give in a Lift upon Oath, of all the Persons aboard of their Ships, or who are
to go abroad with them containing their true names and Designations, to the
next Magistrate, or Justice of Peace, in the place from whence they are to Sail:
And Requires and Commands the Skippers, or Masters of any Ships who shall come
into this Kingdom, before they suffer any of their Passengers to Land, or go
out of their Ships, to give in Lists in manner and to the Persons above
appointed: With Certification to the said Masters or Skippers, if they failie
to give in the foresaid Lists, their Ships and Vessels shall be Arrested, and
their Persons secured, until they be proceeded against as Disobeyers of Our
Authority and the Law, and Abbettors of Rebels and Suspected Persons: And We
hereby Require and Appoint the Persons foresaids, to whom Passes are Appointed
to be presented by Passengers who shall come into this Kingdom, with all
convenient Diligence, to Transmit to the Clerks of Our Privy Council a
particular Account of such Passengers with their Passes, as shall be presented
to them from time to time, with the foresaids Lists to be given in by the
Skippers or Masters of Ships, as said is, as they will be Answerable. And to
the effect Our Pleasure in the Premises may be known, Our Will is herefore,
and We Charge you straightly and Command, that incontinent these our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of
the whole remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and there, in ou^ Name and Authority, by open Procla-mation, make
Intimation and Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance,
as ye will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly
and severally Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by you, duly
execute and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of May, And of Our Reign
the third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilij. DA. MONCREIF, Cls.
Secreti Concilij.
WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


