C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importation of BRANDY-VVINE.
Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of February, one thousand six hundred and sixty
eight. CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting.
Forasmuch, as by the frequent importation of Brandy-wine into this Kingdom,
there arises great prejudice to the Heretors, whose Barley and Malt is consumed
and employed upon brewing of Ale and Beer, and making of Aquavitie and other
Strong Water: As likewise, many Families are like to be deprived of their
Livelyhoods, who live by the said Manufacturies: And that by the sixth Act of
the third Session of the last Parliament, the importation of all Strong Water
of all kinds and Aquavitie, is altogether discharged, without mentioning
Brandy-wine, which for the reasons foresaids, ought likewise to be prohibited:
And that by the twenty sixth Act of that Session of Parliament, Our Royal
Prerogative in the order and disposal of Trade with Foreign Nations, and the
laying of restraints and impositions upon Foreign imported Commodities, is
asserted to belong to Us and Our Successors. Therefore, and for the good of
that Our ancient Kingdom, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
prohibit and discharge the importation of all Brandy-wine into any Port, Haven
or Creek of this Our said Kingdom, or the Isles belonging thereto, after the
respective times following; That is to say, That no Merchant or other person
whatsoever, by any Order, Instructions, Cockets, Bills of Loadning or
otherwise, give warrant to laden any Ship that is to go beyond Seas from any
Port or Place of this Kingdom, with Brandy-wine, after the publication hereof;
and that immediately they send their Orders and Instructions to their
Correspondents and Factors in all places, where they have Ships to be loadned
upon their account, that no Brandy-wine be put aboard any of the said Ships,
after the eighth day of March next; With certification, if they failie, the
whole quantity of Brandy-wine that shall be imported, contrair to this Our
prohibition, shall be confiscate to Our use, without any abatement or
composition whatsoever. And Ordains these presents to be printed, and published
at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, Peer and Shore of Lies, and other places
needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl.Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1668.


