A PROCLAMATION, Appointing a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as Great and Public Blessings, Conferred upon Us and Our People by
the Almighty God, of His Infinite Goodness, do justly call for Public
Acknowledgments and Solemn Thanksgiving; so it is our Duty, and the Duty of all
Our good Subjects, at this time, by a Day solemnly set apart, to return Praise
and Glory to His blessed Name, who in Answer to the frequent and fervent
Prayers, humbly and devoutly offered up, and poured forth before Him at the
several solemn Fasts observed and kept through this Our ancient Kingdom, during
Our last Campaign in Flanders, has been pleased to preserve Our Person from
the many and great Dangers of the War in Our late Expedition there, and to
Disappoint, and Defeat the Barbarous and Horrid Conspiracy for taking away Our
Life by Assasination, and to bring back Our Royal Person to Our Kingdoms; and
at Home to Protect and Defend the Protestant Religion and Our Government,
against the Designs and Attempts of their Open and Secret Enemies: And for
which Causes also, the Ministers assembled in the Synod of Lothian and
Tweeddale, with such as correspond with them from several other Synods, have
made Address to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that a Solemn Day of Public
Thanksgiving may be set apart, to be Religiously Observed thorowout this Our
ancient Kingdom. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
Do Appoint and Command, that the Tenth Day of November current for the Town of
Edinburgh and Suburbs, comprehending Leith, Cannongate and West-Kirk, and the
Twenty Fourth of the said Month of November for all the rest of this Our
ancient Kingdom, be Religiously and Devoutly Observed, as a Solemn Day of
Public Thanksgiving, by all Persons within this Kingdom, both in Churches and
Meeting Houses, for returning most Hearty and Humble Thanks and Acknowledgment
to the Divine Goodness, for his signal Blessings and Deliverances already
bestowed upon Us and Our People, and to Implore the Continuance thereof in the
Mercy of Our God, and that a Spirit of Council and Wisdom may Assist Us in Our
Consultations and Undertakings at Home and Abroad in time coming. And to the
effect Our Will in the Premises may be known, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and we
Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-crosses of the whole
head Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and of the Stewartries
of Kirkcudbright, Annandale, and Orknay, and there in Our Name and Authority,
make Publication hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains Our
Solicitor to cause make Intimation hereof to the Ministers within the Town of
Edinburgh and Suburbs, comprehending as abovesaid, by sending Copies to them,
or any other way he thinks fit, and to cause send Printed Copies hereof to the
Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewards of the Stewartries foresaids, whom
We Ordain to see the same Published, and appoints them to send Doubles thereof
to all the Ministers both in Churches and Meeting Houses within their
respective Jurisdictions, that upon the Lord's Day immediately preceding the
said Tenth and Twenty Fourth Days of November current, the same may be Intimat
and Read in every Paroch-Church and Meeting House. Certifying all such who
shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious and Important a Duty, as the Thanksgiving
hereby Appointed is, they shall be Proceeded against, and Punished as
Contemners of Our Authority, and as highly Disaffected to Our Persons and
Government. And Ordains these Presens to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of November, and of Our
Reign the fourth year, 1692. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, Et In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1692.


