C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging Levies, without His Majesty's special License.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas, We are informed, that some persons have of late presumed to levy Men
within this Our ancient Kingdom, although they have not any Authority from Us
for that effect. Therefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
do hereby prohibit and discharge any person or persons, whatfoever to levy any
men in this Kingdom, or to take or transport any of Our Subjects thereof into
the service of any Foreign Prince or State whatsoeever, without Our special
license: and discharges all Masters of Ships to receive on board, or transport
them, under all highest pains to be inflicted upon the Contraveeners; Requiring
hereby the Fermorers of Our Customs and Excise, their Collectors, and Waiters,
to take special notice of any such Persons, whom they shall find passing forth
of this Kingdom, upon the foresaid account; and to stop them in their passage,
as they will be answerable. And if need be, that they require the concurrence
of the Magistrates of Burghs, and others in authority under Us, who are hereby
ordained to be aiding and assisting to them herein. And ordains these presents
to be Printed, and Published at the market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places
needful, that none pretend ignorance. The which to do, We commit to you,
conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by their Our Letters: Delivering them
by you, duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty third Day of July, One
thousand six hundred and seventy four, and of Our Reign, the twenty sixth Year.
At. Gihson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1674.


