A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Exportation of Victual.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as by the Twelfth Act of the Third Session of the First Parliament
of King Charles the Second, Entitled, Act for encouragement of Tillage and
Pasturage; It is expressly provided, that when the Lords of Our Privy Council
shall judge it necessar, for the good of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and
preventing of Dearth, they may discharge the Exportation of Victual of all
sorts, for so long time as they shall think expedient. And We, and the Lords of
Our Privy Council considering, That by the laying up of Meal in the Stores of
Our Castles of Edinburgh, Striviling, and Dumbartoun, and the providing of
Magazines for the use of Our Forces, which are now in the Fields, there may be
Fears and Apprehensions of a Dearth and Scarcety of Victual: And We being
informed, that there is plenty of Victual, and all other Provisions necessary
for the use of Our Forces within Our Kingdom of Ireland. Therefore We, with
Advice and Consent of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Prohibit and Discharge the
Exportation of any Meal, Oats and Pease for Sale from this Kingdom to any
Kingdom, Port, or Place whatsomever, during Our Royal Pleasure, under the pain
of Confiscation of the Ships, and whole Goods and Gear belonging to the Masters
thereof, and Merchants, Transporters of the said Victual, and the Imprisonment
of their Persons during Our Pleasure, conform to the 55 Act, Parl. II. King Ja.
6. And We Command all Our Collectors, Surveyers, Waiters and others, to make
all diligent Search, that no Victual be Shipped Aboard any Ship or Bark, to be
transported forth of this Kingdom, more than is necessary for the Victualing
thereof, under all highest pains; and to seize, and cause seize upon the
samine, to be Confiscat in manner foresaid: And We require all Magistrates of
Our Burghs-Royal, Sheriffs of our Shires, and Justices of Peace, to give all
due Concurence for preventing the Export of Meal, Oats, and Pease, in manner
abovementioned. And Ordains these presents to be Printed, and Published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none may pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our Signet, at Holy-rude-house, the Twenty one day of June, One
thousand six hundred and ninety years, and of Our Reign the Second Year. Per
Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1690.


