W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION
Discharging the Importation of foreign Victual.
WILIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as the Importing and bringing from foreign Countries, any Wheat,
Bear, Barley, Oats, Meal, Malt, Pease, Beans, or Rye, into this Kingdom; is
highly prejudicial to the native Product thereof, and to the Trade upon the
growth of the same, and gives occasion to the unwarrantbale Exporting of much
Money forth of this Realm: for preventing whereof, and Obviating the
inconveniences that follow thereupon, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, Do hereby strictly Prohibit, and Discharge all persons
whatsomever, to Import, or bring by Sea or Land, into this Kingdom, or any of
the Ports Harbors, Towns, or Places thereof, any sort or Quantity of the
Victual abovementioned, excepting White Pease allenarly, without License had
from Our said Lords for that effect, under the Pain of Confiscation of the
said Victual, the one half thereof to the person or persons, who shall make
Discovery of, and seize upon the same, and the other half thereof, with the
Ships, Barques, or Boars wherein the same shall be Imported, to Our Thesaurie
for Our use; and other punishments to be inflicted upon them, conform to the
Acts of Parliament made thereanent: And Ordains all Our Collectors, Surveyors
and Waiters, within this Kingdom, at the respective Ports, Harbors and places
where they serve, to see this Act punctually observed, as they will be
answerable at their highest peril; with Certification to such as shall be found
Negligent therein; they shall incur the loss of their respective Offices. Our
Will is Herefore, and we Charge you strictly, and Command, that Incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole
other Mercat-Crosses of the Royal-Burghs and Seaports within this Kingdom, and
thereat, make public Intimation of Our Pleasure in the Premises, to the
Effect, none may pretend Ignorance: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty day of November, and of Our
Reign the seventh Year. 1695. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Andrsoen Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, 1695


