A PROCLAMATION
Discharging the receipt of the REBELS lately in Arms in the West.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To all and sundry Our Lieges and Subjects whom these presents do or may
concern, Greeting.
Forasmuch, as upon the first notice given to Our Privy Council, of the rising
and gathering of these disloyal and seditious persons in the West, who have of
late appeared in Arms in a desperate and avowed Rebellion, against Us, Our
Government and Laws, We declared them to be Traitors, and discharged all Our
Subjects to assist, resset, supply, or correspond with any of them, under the
pain of Treason: And the said Rebels and Traitors being now, by the blessing
of GOD upon Our Forces, subdued, dissipat and scattered, and such of them as
were not either killed or taken in the field, being lurking in the Country; and
we being unwilling that any of Our good Subjects should be ensnared or brought
in trouble by them, we have therefore, by the advice of Our Privy Council,
thought fit again hereby to discharge and inhibite all Our Subjects, That none
of them offer or presume to harbor resset, supply or correspond, hide or
conceal the persons of Colonel James Wallace, Major Lermonth, Maxwel of Monrief
younger, Mackclellan of Barscob, Gordoun of Parbrek, Mackclellan of
Balmagechan, Cannon of Burnshalloch younger, Cannon of Barley younger, Cannon
of Mordrogget younger, Welsh of Skar, Welsh of Cornley, Gordoun of Garery in
Kells, Robert Chambers Brother to Gadgirth, Henry Grier in Balmaclelan, David
Stot in Irongray, John Gordoun in Midtoun of Dalry, William Gordoun there, John
Macknacht there, Robert and Gilbert Cannons there, Gordoun of Bar elder in
Kirkpatrick-Durham, Patrick Macknacht in Cumnock, John Macknacht his Son,
Gordoun of Holm younger, Dempster of Carridow, (...) of Dargoner, (...) of
Sundiwall, Ramsay in the Mains of Arnistoun, John Hutcheson in Newbottle Rue
Chaplain to Scotstarbet, Patrick Listoun in Calder, William Listoun his Son,
James Wilkie in the Mains of Cliftoun-hall, the Lord of Caldwell, the Goodman
of Caldwell, the Lord of Kersland, the Lord of Bedland-Cunninghame,
Porterfield of Quarreltoun, Alexander Porterfield his Brother, Lockhart of
Wicketshaw, (...) Trail, Son to Mr. Robert Trail, David Poe in Pokelly, Mr.
Gabriel Semple, John Semple, Mr. John Guthry, Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Samuel Arnot,
Mr. James Smith, Mr. Alexander Pedden, Mr. (...) Orr, Mr. William Veitch, Mr.
(...) Patton, Mr. Cruikshanks, Mr. Gabriel Maxwel, Mr. John Carstairs, Mr.
James Mitchel, Mr. William Forsyth, Or any others who concurred or joined in
the late Rebellion, or who upon the account thereof have appeared in Arms in
any part of that Our Kingdom; but that they pursue them as the worst of
Traitors, and present and deliver such of them as they shall have within their
power to the Lords of Our Privy Council, the Sheriff of the County, or the
Magistrates of the next adjacent Burgh-royal, to be by them made forthcoming to
Law: Certifying all such as shall be found to fail in their duty herein, they
shall be esteemed and punished as favorers of the said Rebellion, and as
persons accessory to, and guilty of, the same. And to the end, all Our good
Subjects may have timeous notice hereof, we do ordain these presents to be
forthwith printed and published at the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Air,
Lanerk, Glasgow, Irwing, Wigtoun, Kirkcudburgh, Dumfries, and remanent
Mercat-crosses of Our said Kingdom: And we do recommend to the Right Reverend
Our Archbishops and Bishops, to give orders that this Our Proclamation be with
all possible deligence read on the Lord's Day in all the Churches within their
several Diocesses.

Given at Edinburgh the fourth day of December, and of Our Reign the eighteenth
year, one thousand six hundred sixty six.
Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1666.


