PROCLAMATION, Anent the Pole Money.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting,
Forasmuch as, by the Ninth Act of the Fourth Session of this Our current
Parliament, The Estates of Parliament have freely and cheerfully offered the
Pole Money therein specified, to be employed for the ends and uses expressed in
the said Act: And the Commissioners of Assessment, or their Quorum, and the
Magistrates of Burghs Royal, are ordained to meet and conveen upon the days, and
to the ends particularly therein mentioned: As also, the Lords of Our Privy
Council are empowered to order and appoint such further Methods and Courses
(besides these by that Act appointed) as they shall judge fit, for stating and
in-bringing of the said Pole Money. And We considering, that the Pole Money
offered by the said Act, may be most effectually and profitably raised and
levied by way of Public Roup, in favors of the persons who shall offer most
for the same. Therefore We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do
hereby Ordain public Intimation to be made to all Our Liedges, that the Pole
money in the above Act mentioned, is to be publicly Rouped by the Lords of Our
Thesaury and Exchequer, within Our Exchequer-house at Edinburgh, upon the
twenty fifth day of July instant, betwixt three and five hours in the
Afternoon; And that who shall bid most for the same, shall be preferred, and
have Commission or Right granted to them, for Uplifting and Collecting thereof,
in the terms appointed by the Act of Parliament. As also, That the Articles and
Conditions of the said Roup are lying in the hands of the Clerks of Our
Thesaury and Exchequer, to be seen by all concerned. And further, We with
advice foresaid, do hereby peremptorly Require and Command the Commissioners of
Supply, and Magistrates of Burghs within their respective bounds, to meet,
conveen, act, proceed, and do in the said matter of the Pole Money, as by the
said Act of Parliament is appointed; and to return Lists and Rolls to Our
Thesaury, in the terms, and betwixt and the time particularly therein
specified. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this
Kingdom; And there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
public Intimation of the premises, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of July, and of our Reign
the Sixth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1694.


