C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Appointing all Passes to Ships to be granted hereafter by the
High-Admiral, his Deputes, Judges and Officers.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, His Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
We having by Our Proclamation in the-Year 1676, for the security of the Trade
of Our Subjects of this Our Ancient Kingdom, appointed that Passes might be
granted by some in the several Districts therein-mentioned; discharging all
others (except those therein appointed) to grant Passes to any Ships within
this Our Kingdom, and appointed a general Surveyer for the whole Kingdom, who
was to receive his Commission from Our Council: But now finding that these
methods have proved ineffectual, and being fully informed that the granting of
such Passes and Safe-conducts to Ships, do of right appertain to the Authority,
Power and Privilege of the Admiral; and that it is now the only undoubted
right of Our dearest and only Brother, who is Great Admiral of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, and who by being lately here, has had occasion fully to know the
concerns thereof: We have therefore, with advice of Our Privy Council, thought
fit to declare it to be Our Royal Will and Pleasure, that in all time coming,
all Passes to Ships within this Our Ancient Kingdom shall be granted by the
High Admiral of the same, his Deputes and Judges of the High-Court of
Admiralty, and written, and sealed by the Clerks of the said Court, as formerly
they were in use to be; Hereby evacuating all former Passes, granted by any
Person whatsoever, and declaring them void and null in all time coming. And to
the end that this Our Royal Will and Pleasure may be known and obeyed, We do
hereby Require and Command all Our Subjects within this Our Ancient Kingdom, to
take Passes for their Ships when they go to Sea, from the said High Admiral,
his Deputes and Judges of the said High-Court of Admiralty, and from none else,
as they will be answerable to Us upon their highest peril: Having left it
entirely to the care of Our dearest Brother, High Admiral of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, (who knows all the several Treaties concluded betwixt Us and Our
Allies;) to give such Directions from time to time to his Deputes and Officers
of the Admira'ty, as may be effectual for the securing the Trade of Our
Subjects, and for preventing all Abuses and Inconveniences that may occur any
time hereafter. OUR Will is herefore, and We charge you strictly and Command,
that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, Peer and Shore of Leith, and to the several Mercat-crosses of the
Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and other places needful; and there by open
Proclamation, make publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises, that all
Our Subjects may have notice thereof, and give obedience thereto, as they will
be answerable on their highest peril. And We ordain Copies hereof to be posted
up in every Custom-House, to direct Persons concerned where and from whom
Passes to Ships hereafter are to be had. And We ordain these Presents to be
printed.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the sixth day of May,One thousand six
hundred and eighty Years; And of Our Reign the thirty two Year. WILL. PATERSON,
Cl. Sti. Concilij.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1680.


