A PROCLAMATION Discharging the payment of the Rents of the Bishoprics to any,
but the Persons named by the Council.
At Edinburgh, the Ninteenth Day of September, 1689.
WHereas the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, in their Claim of Right,
of the Eleventh of April last, Declared, that Prelacy, and the Superiority of
any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is, and has been a great and
insupportable Grievance to this Nation, and contrair to the Inclinations of the
Generality of the People, ever since the Reformation; And that their Majesty's
with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, have by their Act of the
Date the Fifth Day of July last by past, abolished Prelacy, and all Superiority
of any Office in the Church above Presbyters: And His Majesty considering the
prejudice it may be to His Interest, if fit Persons be not appointed to look
after, and receive the Rents and Emoluments, particularly those consisting of
Tithes, which formerly did belong to the Bishops, Has therefore signified His
Royal Pleasure, That the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council should give
Warrant to Alexander Hamilton of Kinkell, for Drawing and Uplifting the Tithes
and other Rents of the Archbishopric of St. Andrews, he giving sufficient
Security for his faithful performance of his duty in the said Office; and has
also left it to the Council to appoint fit persons for Drawing and Uplifting
the Tithes of other Bishoprics for this present Cropped and year of God 1689.
that none concerned suffer prejudice: Excepting the Bishopric of Orknay, which
His Majesty is resolved to have Uplifted with the Rents of the Lordship. And
the said Lords of Privy Council having in obedience to His Majesty's Commands,
Nominat and Appointed fit and qualified Persons for Drawing of the Tithes, and
Uplifting of the Rents formerly belonging to the Bishops, Deans, or any other
person of superior Order and Dignity in the Church above Presbyters; And least
before the time that some of them can be able to come to this place, and find
Caution for their faithful discharging of that Trust, and make Intimation of
their respective Commissions to uplift the said Rents for the said Cropped and
Year of God foresaid, to the persons liable in payment thereof, The Teinds and
other Rents of the Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics, and others foresaids may
be Imbazled, and Intrometted with by persons who have no Right thereto;
Therefore the said Lords of Privy Council, in their Majesty's Name and
Authority foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge all and sundry Heretors, Fevers,
Liferenters, Tacks-men of Teinds, Tennents and others whose Teinds were
formerly in use to be drawn, and who were liable in payment of any Rent or
Duty to the said late Archbishops or Bishops, or others foresaids, to draw or
suffer their Teinds to be drawn, and from payment of any Rental-Bolls, Feu,
Blench or Tack-Duties, and other Rents, Casualities and Emoluments, formerly
payable to the said late Archbishops, Bishops, and others foresaid, except to
such persons as shall be authorized by the said Lords of Privy Council for
uplifting thereof; with Certification to them, if they do any thing in the
contrary hereof, they shall be liable therefore, notwithstanding of any
pretended Discharge that may be Impetrat or Obtained from any other person or
persons for the said Cropped and Year of GOD foresaid. And Ordains these Presents
to be Printed, and Published by Macers of Privy Council at the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and by Messengers at Arms at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs
of the other Shires within this Kingdom, that none may pretend Ignorance.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Secreti Concilii.

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, 1689.


