C R

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the levying or transporting of Soldiers without
License.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We did by a Proclamation of the twenty third of July last,
prohibit any persons whatsoever to levy any men in this Our ancient Kingdom, or
to transport any of Our Subjects thereof into the service of any foreign
Prince or State without Our special license: and discharged all Masters of
ships to transport them under all highest pains. And we being informed, that
notwithstanding of the said Proclamation, since the publishing thereof, many of
Our subjects of this Kingdom, have been taken on and transported abroad, and
some of the soldiers of Our standing Forces have been, and daily are seduced
and debauched from their service, and engaged to serve in foreign Countries by
persons having no warrant or license from Us, in high and manifest contempt of
Our Authority, and contrare to the said Proclamation. Therefore, We, with
advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby prohibit and discharge all
Masters of Ships to receive on board, or to transport to any foreign Country
any subjects of this Kingdom who have been levied without Our special license,
or any other Passengers who are not Merchants or Seamen, unless they have a
Pass under the hand of any one of Our Privy Counselors: Certifying such as
shall transgress herein, that they shall be fined in the sum of three thousand
merks, Scots money; whereof a third part to be applied to the use of the
informer. Likeas, We do hereby authorize and require any one of Our Privy
Counselors, upon information given, that any of Our Subjects of this Kingdom,
Soldiers or others are taken on to serve in any foreign Country, without
warrant, as said is, to cause stop them in their passage, and imprison them,
and to cause seize upon and secure the persons who have engaged them, or who
shall be known to have been dealing with, and seducing them thereto, until they
find caution to answer for the same, and that they shall not levy or transport
any of Our Subjects to any foreign service; with power to any Privy Councellor
to give such orders as shall be necessary for that effect to the Magistrates of
Burghs, or any of Our standing forces, who are hereby required to put these
orders in execution, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And it
is hereby declared, that such persons as have already contraveened the former
Proclamation, shall be proceeded against, and censured conform to the tenor
thereof. The which to do we commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full
Power by their Our Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsat
again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Sig^^^ a^ Edinburgh, the first of October, one thousand six
hundred, and seventy four Years. Al. Gibson Cl. Sti. Concilii.

(...) to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1674.


