royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Appointing a National Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, Great and Public Blessings conferred upon Us and Our People, by
the Almighty GOD, of his infinite Goodness, Do justly Call for Public
Acknowledgments, and Solemn Thanksgiving; So it is Our Duty, and the Duty of
all Our good Subjects, at this time, by a Day solemnly set apart, to return
Praise and Glory to His Blessed Name, who in answer to the servent Prayers,
humbly and devotly offered up, and poured forth before him, At the Solemn
National Fast, observed and kept through this Our Ancient Kingdom, during Our
last Campaign in Flanders; has been pleased to preserve Our Person, from the
many and great Dangers of the War, in Our late Expedition there, and to bring
back Our Royal Person to Our Kingdoms; and at Home to-Protect and Defend the
Protestant Religion, and Our Government against the Designs and Attempts of
their open and secret Enemies; And for which also, the Ministers met together
at Edinburgh, in the Commission of the General Assembly of the Kirk of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, Have made Address to the Lords of Our Privy Council, That a
Solemn Day of Public Thanksgiving may be set apart, to be Religiously observed
throughout this Our Ancient Kingdom. THEREFORE WE, with Advice of the Lords of
Our Privy Council, Do Appoint and Command, That the Twenty two Day of November
current, for the Town and Shire of Edinburgh: And the Sixth Day of December
next to come, for all the rest of this Our Ancient Kingdom, be Religiously and
Devotly Observed, as a Solemn Day of Public Thanksgiving, by all persons
within this Kingdom, both in Churches and Meeting Houses, for returning most
Hearty and Humble Thanks and Acknowledgment to the Divine Goodness, for His
Signal Blessings and Deliverances already bestowed upon Us and Our People, and
to Implore the continuance thereof in the Mercy of Our GOD; and that a Spirit
of Council and Wisdom may Assist Us in Our Consultations and Undertakings, at
Home and Abroad in time coming. And to the effect Our Pleasure in the Premises
may be known; OUR WILL IS, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the whole Head Burghs of the several Shires
within this Kingdom, and of the Stewartries of Kirkcudbright, Annandale, and
Orknay, and there, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that
none may pretend Ignorance. And Ordains Our Solicitor to cause send Printed
Copies hereof to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the
Stewartries foresaids, whom We Ordain to see the same Published, and Appoints
them to send Doubles hereof to all the Ministers, both in Churches and
Meeting Houses, within their respective Jurisdictions, that upon the Lords Day
immediately preceding the said Twenty two Day of November instant, and Sixth
of December next, the same may be Intimat and Read in every Parish Church and
Meeting House; Certifying all such who shall contemn or neglect so Religious
and important a Duty, as the Thanksgiving hereby appointed is, they shall be
proceeded against, and punished as Contemners of Our Authority, and as highly
Disaffected to Our Persons and Government. And Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifteenth Day of November. And of Our
Reign the sixth Year, 1694. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


