A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Exportation of Broken-brass and Copper.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, albeit by the forty Sixth Act of the first Parliament of Our
Royal Predecessor, King Charles the Second; all Merchants, Tradesmen and
others whatsoever, as well Strangers as Natives, upon any Color or Pretext
whatsoever, are discharged to export forth of this Kingdom, any Broken-copper,
or Brass, under the pain of Confiscation of what shall be apprehended in the
Exporting; the one half to be applied for Our use, and the other half for the
use of the Discoverer and Apprehender of the same: Nevertheless, sundry of Our
Leidges, and others within this Our Ancient Kingdom, in manifest Contempt and
Defraud of the said Act of Parliament, as if the samine were in desuetude, have
presumed to export Broken-brass and Copper forth of this Realm, to the great
prejudice of this Kingdom, and Discouragment of the Tradesmen and Artists
within the same. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
for putting the said Act of Parliament in Execution; Do expressly prohibit and
discharge all Merchants, Tradesmen and others whatsoever, as well Strangers as
Natives, upon any color or pretext whatsoever, to export forth of this
Kingdom, any Broken-copper or Brass, under the pain above-setdown, contained in
the foresaid Act of Parliament; And We with advice foresaid, Require and
Command the respective Collectors and Surveyers at their several Ports, to use
exact diligence, that there be no Contravention of the Premises by any of Our
Leidges, as they and each of them will be answerable. OUR WILL IS HEIREFORE,
and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontenent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-crosses of
the several Sea-towns, Ports, or Burghs within this Kingdom, or other places
needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the
Premises, that none pretend Ignorance; And ordains these presents to be
Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty sixth day of January, and of
Our Reign the fourth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB ELIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1693.


