A PROCLAMATION, Anent Passes and the appearing of Ships upon the Coast.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially constitute Greeting;
For as much as there being an Invasion designed from France; We for the better
securing of this Our ancient Kingdom against the said Invasion; Do command and
require all Our loving Subjects, especially Our Magistrates and Justices of
Peace, Collectors, Surveyors, and Waiters at Our several Seaports, and upon
the Borders to Stop and Seize all persons coming into this Kingdom, who have
not sufficient Passes under one of the Secretaries of State, for either of the
Kingdoms of Scotland or England, or under the Lieutenant, or Justices of
Ireland, or any one of their Hands: And all persons going from this Kingdom
that have not Passes from one of Our Privy Council, and give account of the
persons names, who shall be Stopped and Seized to any of Our Privy Council, or the
next Magistrate, who is hereby ordered to give account there of, to some of Our
Privy Council; Especially of these persons who come by Sea: And We do Command
and Require all Our loving Subjects, to take special notice of any Meetings
that shall be kept by any persons Disaffected to Our Government; and that they
discover the samen timeously to some of Our Privy Council, or the next
Magistrate of the place, that the said persons may be Secured and proceeded
against, as persons designing to disturb the Quiet and Peace of Our Government:
And further, Appoints and Ordains the Magistrates of all the Towns in the
Seacoasts of this Kingdom, upon the first sight of any number of Ships
approaching Our Coasts, or advices by Sea, that they advertise Our Privy
Council and the next Commanding Officer of the same, by sending Expresses. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent,
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Market Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority by open
Proclamation make Intimation hereof, that none pretend Ignorance; and ordains
these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the eleventh day of December, and of Our
Reign the eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GIL B. ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


