A PROCLAMATION
At Edinburgh, the Sixth Day of August, One thousand six hundred and eighty
nine years.
WHereas the Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, by their Proclamation
dated at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of April, of this instant year of God,
one thousand six hundred eighty nine, did Command and Require all the Ministers
of the Gospel within the Kingdom of Scotland, publicly to Pray for King
William and Queen Mary, as King and Queen of this Realm, and to read that
Proclamation from their Pulpits upon the several Lords Days therein expressed; as
also, the Estates of the Kingdom did Prohibit and Discharge any Injury to be
offered by any Person whatsoever, to any Minister of the Gospel, either in
Churches or Meeting Houses, who were then, viz. on the 13th of April last, in
Possession and Exercise of their Ministry, either in Churches or
Meeting Houses, they behaving themselves dutifully under the present
Government. And it being most just and reasonable, that the foresaid
Proclamation be fully Performed and Obeyed, as most necessary for the Security
of the Peace of the Kingdom, and that such Ministers who gave Obedience should
be Secure under the Protection of the Law, and that the Pain of Deprivation be
Inflicted upon all those Ministers who have Disobeyed the Proclamation.
Therefore the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in their Majesty's Name and
Authority, Do strictly Command and Charge, that none of the Leidges take on
Hand to do any Violence or Injury to any of the Ministers of the Gospel,
whether they be Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, and that all such as
were in Possession and Exercise of their Ministry upon the 13th Day of April
last, be allowed to Continue undisturbed, and that such Ministers as have been
Removed, Dispossessed or Restrained without a Legal Sentence in the Exercise of
their Ministry, since the 13th day of April last, shall be Allowed to Return,
and Exercise their Ministry without Disturbance. And Ordains the Sheriffs and
their Deputs, Stewards, Baillies, and other Magistrates, within their respective
Bounds, to give their Assistance for making the Premises effectual; As also,
that such Ministers who have not read the Proclamation, and prayed for King
William and Queen Mary, according to the Tenor thereof, may be Deprived of
their Benefice, and Restrained to Officiat in their Churches. The Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council do Invite and Allow the Parochioners and Hearers of
such Ministers as have neglected and slighted the reading of the Proclamation,
and praying for King William and Queen Mary, to Cite such Ministers before the
Privy Council; and grants Warrant for Citing and Adducing Witnesses to prove
the same, that such Ministers as have Disobeyed, may by a Legal Sentence be
Deprived of their Benefices, and that none of the Leidges at their own hand,
without a Legal Sentence and Warrant, presume to meddle in this matter. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by Macers of Privy Council,
and Messengers, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful,
that none may pretend Ignorance. Extracted by me

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, By Order of His Majesty's
Privy Council, 1689.


