depiction of Scottish thistle, fleur-de-lis, Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging the Importation of Foreign Victual.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as the Importing and bringing from Foreign Countries, any Wheat,
Bear, Barley, Oats, Meal, Malt, Pease, Beans, or Ry into this Kingdom, is highly
prejudicial to the Native Product thereof, and to the Trade upon the growth of
the same, and gives occasion to the unwarrantable Exporting of much Money forth
of this Realm; For preventing whereof, and obviating the inconveniences that
follow whereupon, We, with the Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do
hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge, all persons whatsomever, to Import, or
bring by Sea or Land, into this Kingdom, or any of the Ports, Harbors, Towns,
or Places thereof; any sort or quantity of the Victual abovementioned,
excepting White-pease allanerly, under the pain of Confiscation of the said
Victual, the one half to the person or persons who shall Seize or make
Discovery, and prove the Importing of the same, either contrary to Our former
Proclamation, of the Date the sixth Day of January, 1691. or to these Presents;
and the other half thereof, with the Ships, Barks or Boats, wherein the same
shall be Imported: to Our Thesaury, for Our use, and other Punishments to be
inflicted upon them, conform to the Acts of Parliament made thereanent; And
Ordains all Our Collectors, Surveyers, and Waiters within this Kingdom, and the
respective Ports, Harbors, and Places, where they serve, to see this Act
punctually observed, as they will be answerable at their highest peril; With
Certification to such as shall be found negligent therein, they shall incur the
loss of their respective Offices. OUR WILL IS HERE FORE, and We Charge you
straightly and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole other Mercat-Crosses of the Royal Burghs,
and Seaports within this Kingdom, and thereat, make public Intimation of Our
Pleasure in the Premises, to the effect none may pretend ignorance. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of May.And of Our Reign,
the fourth year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplimentum
Signeti. DA, MONCREIF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1692.


