C R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION
Anent the Rendezvous of the Militia, for the Year, 1684.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and soverally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We find it necessary for Our Royal Service, that the General
Rendezvous of Our Militia be punctually kept and observed for this Year, and in
all time coming, Have therefore thought fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council,
to appoint the said Rendezvous for this Year, to be at the Dyets and places
after-specified, viz. the of woe Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of
the Shires of Fife and Kinross, to be at V^^^s-Moor, the eighth day of July
next: The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Perth;
at Perth, the ninth day of the said Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, and
two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Forfar, at Forfar, the tenth day of the
said Month of J^^^ The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of
Kincardine, and Marischals (...) of Aberdent, at Aberdene, the fifteenth day of
the said Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, an^ ^wo Troops of Horse of the
Shires of Bamff and Errols part of Aberdene, at Turreff, the seven^^^^^^ day of
the said Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shires
of (...) eighteenth day of the said Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, and
Troop (...) Earl of Seaforth, an^ (...) Lovits part of Innerness, at Innerness,
the twenty two day of the said Month of July: The (...)meant of Foot, and Troop
of Horse of the Shires of Ross, Sutherland and Caithness, at Dornoch, the
twenty fourth day of the (...) Month of July: The Regiment of Foot of the
Stewartry of Orkney and Zetland, the twenty ninth of the said Month of
July:The Regiment of Food, and Troop of Horse of the Shires of Linlithgow and
Peebles, at Selm-Moor, the twenty two day of the said Month of July: The
Regiment of Foot of the Town of Edinburgh, at the Links of Leith, the twenty
third day of the ^^id Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse
of the Shire of Edinburgh, at Musselburgh, the twenty fourth day of the said
Month of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of
Haddingtoun, at Beinstoon-Moor, the twenty fifth day of the said Month of
July: the Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Berwick, at
Foggo-Moor, the twenty ninth day of the said Month of July: The Regiment of
Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, at
Ancrum-Moor, the thirtieth day of the said Month of July: The Regiment of
Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Dumfreis, at Dumfreis, the twenty
third day of October next: The two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Wigtoun at
Mi^^o^^ of ^^^e the twenty fourth day of the said Month of October: The three
Troops of Horse of the Shire of Air, and part of the Shire of Renfrew, at Air,
the fifth day of August next: The Troop of Horse of the rest of the Shire of
Renfrew, at Renfrew, the sixth day of the said Month of August: The three
Troops of Horse of the Shire of Lanerk, at Hamiltoun, the eighth day of the
said Month of August: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shires
Stirling and Clackmannan, at S^^^^ie-Foord the twelfth day of the said Month
of August: The Regiment of Foot of the Shires of Argyle, Boot, and Dumbarton,
the thirteenth day of the said Month of August, for the Shires of Dumbarton
and Boot, and upon the seventeenth day of that Month at Innerrara for the
Shire of Argyle. And We Ordain the whole Officers of Foot and Horse to attend
their Charges at the said Dyets of Rendezvouzes, and the Heretors and others
Out-reikers of the Soldiers, to have their men present (habile) according to
Law; with certification to the said Officers and Heretors, if they neglect
their duty herein, they shall be proceeded against conform to the Laws and
Instructions made thereanent; And do appoint the Muster-Master-General by
himself, or his Deputes, to be present at the several Rendezvouzes, and to
return an account to Our-Council of the Absents and Deficients, that they may
be proceeded against according to Law. Our will is herefore, and We charge you
strictly, and command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and several Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of
this Kingdom, and Burghs of Regality, and several Paroch Kirks within the same,
upon a Sunday after Divine Service, and other places needful, and there in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises,
that none pretend ignorance: And We Ordain the Sheriffs of the respective
Shires to cause duly publish these presents. The which to do, We commit to you
conjunctly and severally Our full power, by these Our Letters, delivering them
by you duly Execute and Indorsat again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet, At Edinburgh, the Twenty two day of April, 1684. and
of Our Reign the Thirtieth and sixth Year. Per actum Dominoram Secreti
Concilii. WILL. PATERSON. Gls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the H^^^ (...) to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom.
1684.


