A PROCLAMATION, Continuing the Adjournment of the Current Parliament, from the
first Thursday of April next, to the twenty ninth of that Month, 1686.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms, and His Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas by Our Proclamation of the date, the Twenty first day of September
last, We thought fit to continue the Adjournment of the Current Parliament of
this Our Ancient Kingdom, to the first Thursday of April next ensuing the date
of these presents. And seeing Our Service requires the further Adjournment
thereof, for some Weeks longer; We, therefore with Advice of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby Continue the Adjournment of Our said Current Parliament,
from the said first Thursday of April next ensuing, to the twenty ninth day of
that Month. And to the effect Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be
known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, That incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all the
other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and
other places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation make Publication of the continuation of the Adjournment of Our
said Current Parliament, from the said first Thursday, to the said twenty-ninth
day of April next ensuing the date of these presents: Requiring hereby all the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Commissioners from the several Shires, and
those from Our Royal Burrows, to meet that day in the usual way, under the
accustomed Certifications: And We Ordain these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twentieth two day of March, 1686. And
of O^^ Reign the Second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Colin
Mckenzie Cli. Sti.Concilii.

EDINBURGH. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His (...)


