A PROCLAMATION, By the King and Queens Majesty's.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lovits,(...) Macers of Our
Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Whereas there has been several
Treasonable, and Seditious Designs and Combinations, set on foot of late, in
both Our Kingdoms, by Persons enemies to the Protestant Religion, and ill
affected to Our Government, who have presumed to take Commissions from the late
King James, intending not only to support the Rebellion in the Highlands of
this Our Ancient Kingdom, as appears by Bonds, Associations, and Letters, but
likewise, to Form Parties, and to Creat Sedition and Commotion, in other places
thereof; To which end Henry Navail Pain, Prisoner in Our Castle of Edinburgh, a
Traffecking Papist, was sent into this Kingdom, and seized in Annandale, and
several of his Associats and Correspondents, have been by Our Warrant secured
in Our Kingdom of England; and there being clear Evidence of a Correspondence
betwixt the said Pain and several persons in this Our Ancient Kingdom, and
there being many suspect and disaffected persons, lurking in, and about Our
City of Edinburgh; Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council have thought
fit for the Security of the Government, to cause Search be made in, and about
the City of Edinburgh, for the Apprehending and Securing of several persons who
have never acknowledged the Government now Established, and who are known to be
persons disaffected and opposite thereto; and because such persons will not be
wanting to give sinisterous impressions of Our Procedure, and to insinuat in
the minds of some, that there is great danger of an Insurrection, or Invasion,
and in the apprehensions of others Our good Subjects, that they may be in
hazard to be seized: Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Have
thought fit, to Issue forth this Proclamation, for the Information of Our good
Subjects, and assure all who do live peaceably and dutifully, that they are,
and shall be in perfect Security, and that We will give Our outmost Endeavor
to Protect and Defend Our good Subjects, from the attempts of the Enemies of
the Protestant Religion, and Our Government. Our Will is herefore, and We
Charge you straightly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye
pass, and in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of
the Premises, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the ninteenth Day of June. And of Our
Reign, the second Year, 1690. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Goncilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


