J R

(...)

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent Runawayes, and Deserters from the Scots Regiments lately
come from Holland.
Present in Council, The Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. The Duke of
Queens berry, Lord High Thesawer. The Earl of Drumlanrig. The Earl of Panmure.
The Earl of Kintore. The L. Viscount Tarbet. The L. Livingstoun. General
Dalyell. Lord Advocat. Lord Justice Clerk.

JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas We are informed, that several of the Soldiers of Our Scots Regiments
in the Service of the States. Gen^ral of the United Netherlands, do daily
desert and run away from their Colors, without the leave of their Officers,
and that thereafter they are either harbored and employed in this Our ancient
Kingdom, notwithstanding of this their Crime of deserting, or entertained in
Our Forces here, to the great prejudice of Our Service, and the ruin of such
Officers, whose Clothes, Moneys, and Arms they steal, and at whose Expenses
they have been brought into the Service. We therefore with Advice of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby strictly Forbid and Discharge any of Our Subjects from
employing any of the said Desercers and Runawayes: And hereby Require all Our
Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords of Bailiaries, or Regalities, Magistrates of Burrows,
and Officers of Our Forces, Justices of the Peace, and others having Our
Authority, to search for, take, and apprehend all or any of the said Deserters
or Runawayes, who have nor sufficient Passes from their Officers, and to commit
them to Goal, until they shall be demanded by the next Officers having Our
Orders for Recruiting those Regiments, to whom they are to be delivered: And if
any of them shall be taken on in any of Our Forces, or Garrisons (not having
good Passes as aforesaid) they are at the demand of the Officers authorized by
Us to Recruit those Regiments, to be delivered unto them to be disposed of in
the Regiments and Companies, as if they had been taken upon the place of their
deserting: And herein we Require all Persons concerned to give obedience
accordingly. And that Our pleasure in the Premises may be known, Our Will is,
and We Charge you strictly, and Command that incontinent these Our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other
places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation
make Publication of Our pleasure in the Premises, that all persons concerned
may have notice thereof, and give obedience thereto, as they will answer at
their peril.

Given under Our Signet, At Edinburgh, the last day of July, 1685. and of Our
Reign the first year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON,
Cls. Sti. Concil^^

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Maj^^^y, Anno (...). 16^^


