design incorporating Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis, and Tudor rose
A PROCLAMATION, Anent Soldiers Deserting, or Marrying without Certificats.
WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, albeit all Soldiers Listed, and Engaged in Our Service, ought
to be entirely reserved for that use, and no ways Entised or Seduced to desert
the same: yet of late, Several of Our Leiges, either through Ignorance, or
Disaffection to Our Service, have given too great Encouragement to the
Soldiers under Our Pay, to Desert, by Entising and Seducing them thereto, or
by Resetting, Concealing and Entertaining them, when they had Deserted, and
Relinquished Our Service: As also several Ministers having of late taken upon
them, to Join in Marriage Persons Employed in Our Service as Soldiers, without
certain Knowledge of their being Single Persons, and not Married to any other
Woman at the time; Wherethrough not only great Prejudice, and Discouragement is
done to Our Officers, under whom they Serve, but also great occasion of Scandal
is given, and dishonor done to God, and disgrace to the Protestant Religion;
For Remeed of all which, We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council,
peremptorily Prohibit and Discharge all and sundry Our Subjects within this
Kingdom, to Intise, Persuade, or Seduce any of the Soldiers in Our Service,
and under Our Pay, to Desert or Leave their said Service, or to Shelter,
Conceal, Harbor or Intertain any Soldier, who Deserts or Leaves the same,
without having a Pass, Sealed, and Signed by the Captain, and Commanding
Officer for the time, of the Regiment, in which the said Soldier, or Soldiers
last Served; Certifying all Our Leiges, who shall hereafter come in the
contrair hereof, and against whom it shall be made appear, and proven, that any
Soldier Resett, Concealed or Entertained by them, has Deserted Our Service,
and that it was known at the time to the Resetter of the said Soldier, or
Soldiers, or Inticer of them to Desert, that they were not Dismissed from Our
Service by a lawful Pass, Signed and Sealed in manner foresaid, they, and each
one of them shall be liable in the Sum of Ten Pound Sterling Money to the
Captain of the Company, under whom any of the said Soldiers Serve, to be
decerned to them by the Ordinar Magistrate of the Place, where the said
Resetter, Entiser, or Concealer lives, and that by and attour the Soldiers
being liable to a Military Punishment conform to the Articles of War. As also
we with Advice foresaid, do strictly Prohibit and Discharge all Ministers, and
others within this Our Ancient Kingdom, to Join in Marriage, any Soldier under
Our Pay, and Service, with any Woman whatsomever, without first Proclamation of
their Banns on three several Sundays, at the Paroch Churches where the Woman
lives, and the Soldier quarters for the time: And that no Proclamation of
Banns shall be granted to any Soldier, for Marriage, without a Testificar
subscribed and sealed by the Captain, and Commanding Officer of the Regiment,
wherein the said Soldiers Serves for the time, be first delivered to the
Ministers of the Churches where the Proclamation is to be made, and Recorded in
the Session Books thereof, bearing, that the said Soldier to be Proclaimed, is
a single Person; with Certification to any Minister, or others, who shall
Contraveen the Premises, that they shall be committed to Prison, for the space
of three Months, and be otherways punished conform to the Laws of the Land, as
the Merit and Circumstances of their Transgression shall deserve. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains Our Solicitor to send Printed Copies
hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewartries, whom We Ordain
to see the same Published at the Mercat-Crosses, and Stewartries, on a
Mercat-Day, and also at the several Paroch-Churches, and Meeting Houses within
their respective Jurisdictions, upon the Lord's Day, immediately after Divine
Service, as they will be answerable, and Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of September, and of
Our Reign the Fourth Year, 1692. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELLIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their Most
Excellent Majesty's. 1692.


