PROCLAMATION, Discharging Persons to be brought from the Netherlands without
Passes.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council,
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as, The Merchants and Skippers, and
others Trafficking and passing betwixt this Our Ancient Kingdom, and the
Provinces of the Netherlands Do presume, to bring into this Kingdom, persons
Obnoxious to Our Laws, and notourly Disaffected to Our Government: As also,
Deserters from Our Forces in the said Parts, for Remeed whereof, We with Advice
of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have thought fit, hereby strictly to
Prohibit and Discharge all Merchants, Masters, Skippers, or Mates and
Mariners, and Passengers, in any Ships; Barks, or Vessels; To bring home into
this Kingdom, or any of the Poris, or Coasts thereof, any person or persons
from the said Netherlands, unless they have Passes in manner following, viz.
Every one of the said persons not being a Soldier, a Pass from the
Secretaries of this Kingdom, or their Deput attending Our Person in the said
Netherlands for the time; and every Soldier or other Person who have Served in
Our Armies, a Pass from the Colonel of the Regiment wherein they Served, or a
Superior Officer; which Passes are to be presented to the Conservator of the
Privileges of this Our Kingdom, Residing in the said Provinces, or his Deput
in his absence, who is to make a List of the said persons, having and
producing their Passes, as said is, and to deliver the same Subscribed with his
Hand, to the Master or Skipper of the Ship, for his Warrant, to bring home the
persons named therein: As also, the said Master or Skipper at his arrival
within the River of Forth, or any Port or Creik thereof, shall, before he
suffer any of the persons contained in the said List, to go ashore out of his
Vessel, present the foresaid List to Our Advocat or Solicitor, at Edinburgh
for the time, or in their absence, to one or other of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, and receive his Order, for setting of the said persons ashore; And if
the Vessel shall arrive at any other Port, or Coast within the Kingdom, then
the Skipper shall present his said l^st, to a Magistrate of the next
Burgh-Royal, who shall be obliged either to take Caution of the persons
contained therein, that they shall present themselves, when called, by the
Lords of Our Privy Council: Or at least, if they cannot find caution, they
shall enact themselves, both, under a reasonable Penalty, to present
themselves, as said is: Which Bonds and Acts, the said Magistrate, is to
Transmit with all diligence, to the Clerks of Our Privy Council, within a
fourthnight at farthest, after receiving of the same: And the said Magistrates
having taken the said Bonds or Subscriptions, are then to give Order for the
persons coming ashore; Certifying the said Merchants, Masters, Skippers,
Mates, Mariners, and Passengers, and Magistrates abovementioned, that if any of
them fail in the Premises, they shall be liable in the penalty of five
Hundredth Merks Scots, each of them, toties, quoties, to be paid to Our
Receiver-General, for Our use: And farther, Requiring Our Solicitor, to use
exact Diligence, to see their Presents execute, and the foresaid Penalties, when
incurred paid. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly and Command,
that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several
Shires within this Kingdom; and also to the several Seaports Towns within the
same, (and Appoints the Sheriffs of the several Shires, to see their Presents
published at the several Sea-Towns within their respective Jurisdictions) and
there, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that none
pretend Ignorance. And Ordains their Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth Day of September. And of Our
Reign the sixth Year, 1694. Per actum Deminorum Secreti Concilii. GILB: ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew And^^^^^, Printer to
Their most Excellent Majesty's. 1694.


