A PROCLAMATION Discharging all persons in the Southern and Western Shires, to
Travel from one Jurisdiction to another without a Pass.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We having thought fit to Commissionat some of Our Privy Council,
to go to the Southern and VVestern Shires of this Kingdom, for supp(...) and
punishing disorders there, and We being-resolved to prevent the Traveling
(...)king and Vagrant persons, and others disaffected to Our Government, in the
said Shires, during the abode of Our Commissioners there, for carrying of
false News, and other wicked purposes. Do therefore, with advice of the Lords
of Our Privy Council, hereby strictly Prohibit and Discharge all Our Subjects,
of what quality soever, to go out of one Jurisdiction to another, in the said
Southern and Western Shires, without a Pass from one of Our Privy Counselors,
Our said Commissioners, or the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Magistrates of Burghs,
Commissioners of Excise, or Justices of Peace of the Jurisdiction from whence
they came, or any one of them, under the pain of being punished as persons
disaffected to Our Government. And We hereby Require the several Magistrates
foresaids, to apprehend and secure any person coming within their respective
Jurisdictions without having a Pass, as said is, until the return of Our said
Commissioners, as they will be answerable. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge
you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, you pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh and remanent Market Crosses of the head Burghs of
the VVestern and Southern Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and
there, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises, that all
persons concerned may have notice thereof, and give obedience thereto, as they
will be answerable.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of September, One
thousand six hundred and eighty four, and of our Reign, the thirtieth and six
Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, anno DOM. 1684.


