I7 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent the Repairing of Highways, Bridges, and Ferries.
Present in Council. The Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. The Duke of
Queensberry, Lord High Thesaurer. The Marquess of Athol. Lord Privy Seal. The
Earl of Drumlanrig. The Earl of Mar. The Earl of Southesk. The Earl of
Tweddale. The Earl of Belcarras. The L. Yester. The L. President of Session.
The L. Advocat. The L. Justice Clerk. The L. Castlehill. Colonel Douglas. The
Lord of Drumelier.

JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as notwithstanding of the 16. Act of the 1. Session of the 2.
Parliament of Our dearest Royal Brother Charles the 2. of ever blessed Memory;
and a Proclamation of His Privy Council pursueant thereto, dated the 14. day of
June 1683, for Repairing of Highways, Bridges, and Ferries, The Commissioners
of Excise, and Justices of Peace in the respective Shires of this Our Kingdom,
have been most negligent and remiss in performing of their Duty thereby
enjoined to them, to the great Prejudice and Danger of the Leidges. And We
Considering, that the ruin and decay of Highways, Bridges, and Ferries, so
commodious and advantageous to Our Subjects, is chiefly occasioned through the
default of the Overseers formerly appointed, and of the not frequent Meetings
of the Commissioners of Excise, and Justices of Peace. Do therefore, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, hereby Require, and Command the Commissioners of
Exoise, and Justices of Peace, in the several Shires of this Kingdom
respectively, to Meet and Conveen upon the Second Tuesday of October, at such a
place as shall be appointed by the Sheriffs principal of the several Shires,
Stewarts of the Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities, and their Deputs, and the
Magistrates of Burghs Royal (who are hereby appointed Overseers as formerly,)
and thereafter at such Times and Places as shall be by them appointed, and then
and there to do, and perform what is enjoined to them by the foresaid Act of
Parliament, and Proclamation of Council, and to see the same put in full and
vigorous Execution, conform to the tenor thereof; And to the end the foresaids
Overseers, who are hereby appointed to conveen the Commissioners of Excise and
Justices of Peace, for the more effectual prosecution of this so necessar and
public a Work, nor they, in case they fail to meet, being lawfully warned, may
not go unpunished, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Ordain, and Declare, That
all and every of the said Commissioners and Justices of Peace, who shall not
Meet and Conveen at the Diet foresaid, and thereafter, as they shall be
advertised by the said Overseers, that they shall be liable, toties quoties,
in Ten Merks Scots for each Meetings absence, to be exacted and employed
toward the repairing of the Highways, Bridges, and Ferries within the several
Shires, Stewarts, Regalities, and Burghs respective. And We hereby Require the
foresaids Overseers and Conveeners, to cause the same be punctually uplifted
and exacted, within Forty Days days after the imposing thereof, Certifying
them, that if they fail herein, that they themselves shall be liable in the
said Penalty, tho the Persons who incur the same are not hereby to be exempted,
but their Fines are to be uplifted by the Collector of the place, and employed
for the use foresaid, for which he is to be accomptable; And in case the said
Overseers shall not frequently Conveen the Commissioners of Excise, and
Justices of Peace, to the intent and purport foresaid, We Ordain them to be
conveened before Our Privy Council, and punished therefore, as they shall think
fit. And to the end this Our Royal Will and Pleasure may be made known to all
Persons concerned: Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent, these Ours Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and all the other Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the Shires of this
Kingdom, and other places needful, and there, by open Proclamation, in Our
Royal Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premises, that all Persons
concerned may have notice thereof, and give Obedience thereto accordingly. And
We Require and Command the Sheriffs of the respective Shires, to cause
timeously publish this Our Proclamation, as they will be answerable at their
peril.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty third day of July, 1685. And
of Our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL:
MACKENIE, Cls, Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1685.


