PROCLAMATION For calling down the French Three-Sons-Pieces to Three shillings
Scots, and Appointing the Scots Fourtie-pennie-pieces to pass at Three shilling
six pennies Scotsper Piece.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially,
constitute Greeting; FORASMUCHAS, The Subjects, and interest of this Our
Ancient Kingdom do sustain a great and growing Prejudice, by the inbringing
great Quantities of the small French Money called the three Sous piece, and
passing the same at three Shilling six Pennies Scots a rate far above their
true Worth and Value; And that several of Our Leidges does Scruple and Demur to
receive in Payments the Forty Penny Pieces Coined and Minted within this
Kingdom by Our Predecessors at the Rate of three Shilling six Pennies Scots,
upon pretense that they are Bare and Worn through Use, albeit the Print and
Vestige of the Coin of this Kingdom be visible upon them: Therefore, and for
remeed of the Fonesaids Abuses, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby Prohibit and Discharge the small French Money called the
three Sous Piece, which heretofore passed at three Shilling six Pennies Scots,
to pass for hereafter, or be offered in Payments, but at the rate of three
Shilling Scots only, and to be received at no higher Rate or Value by any of
Our Leidges: Ordaining and Commanding, nevertheless, the French Crown to pass
at fifty eight shilling Scots, with its half and Quarter proportionally as
before: And farther We with advice foresaid Require and Command all Our Leidges
to Pass and receave in payments of all Sorts, the forty Penny Pieces of the
Coin and Mint of this Kingdom, at three Shilling six Pennies Scots Money how
bare soever and Worn by use the famen be, if the Print and Vestige of the
Coin of this Kingdom be visible upon them; Discharging hereby any of Our
Leidges to refuse the said Scots forty Penny Pieces, at the Rate of three
Shilling six Penny, under the pain of being liable to pay the Double of what
they refuse to the Party who offered the same, which is immediately without any
Process to be decerned and exacted from the Refuser by any Magistrate within
this Kingdom in Favors and to the behove of him from whom any of the said
forty Penny Pieces is refused. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, And We Charge you
strictly and Commands, that incontinent these Our Letters seen ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent Market Crosses of the Head
Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in
Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation hereof; That none
may pretend Ignorance, And ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the ninth Day of December, And of Our
Reign the ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1697.


