Scottish thistle, fleur-de-lis, Tudor rose
PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Fast.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that
Part, Conjunctly and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as the Commission of the General Assembly of this Church in
Consideration of the Judgments of Almighty GOD already inflicted, and more and
more threatened upon this Our Kingdom, for Our manifold and heinous Sins and
Provocations, still continued in, and increasing, notwithstanding of the
foresaids Judgments, and Our professed Repentances for the same, Have addressed
to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that a Day be set apart for Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, for the Reasons and Causes contained in their Act and
Addresses thereanent. Therefore, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, have Commanded and hereby Command and Appoint the Twenty ninth Day of
this Month of August Instant, being the last Thursday thereof, to be kept
and observed in all the Churches of this Kingdom, as a Day of solemn Fasting
and Humiliation before GOD, by all Persons with serious and unseigned
Repentance of Sins, and Resolution of Amendment, and earnest and fervent
Prayers and Supplications for the obtaining of GODS Mercy, Grace and Peace, as
it is more fully contained in the foresaid Act and Address of the Commission
hereto subjoyned, and which Act, together with this Proclamation, We hereby
ordain to be publicly Read by all Ministers in all Churches the LORDS Day
immediately preceding the said Thursday. And We do again Require and Command
all Ministers and People to be careful of the observation of the Premises, as
they will be answerable to GOD and Us on the Pains formerly Ordained and
Statute against the not due observing of the like Days of Fasting. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries
within this Our ancient Kingdom, and thereat in Our Name and Authority by open
Proclamation make Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance. And
appoints Our Solicitor to transmit Copies of this Proclamation, and of the
above Act and Address of the General Assembly to the Clerks of the several
Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, to be by them transmitted to the
Ministers of the several Paroch Churches, and by these Ministers intimate upon
the Sabbath Day immediately preceding the Day appointed for keeping thereof.
And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the second Day of August, and of Our Reign
the Twelfth Year, 1700. Per Actum Daminorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT: Cls.
Sti. Concilii

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty.


