PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Fast.
WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuchas, it has pleased the Holy and Righteous God, for the many great
and heinous Sins and Provocations of this Kingdom, to afflict the same with the
lamentable Stroke of Dearth and Scarcity, (which if not in His mercy prevented)
does threaten a dreadful Famine; As likeways that the reformed Churches Abroad,
are through His Holy and Sovereign Displeasure, partly under grievous
Persecution, and partly under great and imminent Hazards, which justly call for
our humbleing of our selves for our own Sins, and for a tender Simpathie
toward our said afflicted Brethren: Likeas the General Assembly of this Church
lately conveened, Have therefore addressed the Lords of Our Privy Council, that
a day of Humiliation may be Appointed and kept for the Causes foresaids, more
fully mentioned in their Act thereanent. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords
of Our Privy Council, Command and Appoint a day of Solemn Humiliation and
Prayer and Fasting, to be observed throughout the whole Kingdom, upon the Ninth
day of March next to come, to the effect that all Our good Subjects may on that
day, make earnest Prayer and Supplication to GOD for the Pardon of Our Sins,
and for turning away and averting His Wrath from this, and other reformed
Churches, and that He may command Deliverance for His afflicted People, under
Persecution, bless and preserve Us and Our Government, for the continuance of
that Peace and Tranquillity, and liberty of Gospel Ordinances with Purity and
Freedom that we at present enjoy, and that He may bless His Gospel with
Success, and grant a seasonable Seed-time, and bless the Seed with increase for
the relief of the Poor, and of the present Distress of the Kingdom: Which Day,
We with Advice foresaid, do Require and Command to be religiously and most
seriously observed by all Ranks and Degrees of People, by solemn Prayer and
Preaching, and other Acts of Devotion to be performed for the Causes and Ends
foresaids, both in public and private throughout the whole Kingdom. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Lettersseen, ye psss to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries
within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make Publication hereof that none pretend Ignorance; And We Ordain Our
Solicitor to cause Print their presents, as also the Act of the General Assembly
thereto annexed, and to transmit the same, or Copies thereof to the Sheriffs of
the several Shires, and Stewarts of Stewartries, or their Deputs and Clerks, to
be by them published at the Mercat-crosses of their Head-burghs upon Receipt
thereof, and immediately sent to the several Ministers, to the effect the same
may be intimat and read in their several Paroch-Churches, upon the Lords Day
immediately preceding the Day above-appointed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the seventh day of February, and of Our
Reign the Tenth Year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT.
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


