W R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION For Publishing the Peace betwixt His Majesty and the French King.
WILLIAM, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great- Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion, King at Arms; his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly and
Severally, specially Constitute Greeting;
Whereas, a Peace has been Treated and Concluded at Our Royal Palace of
Reswick, the Tenth day of September last, between Us and the French King, and
the Ratifications thereof since Exchanged, in conformity thereunto; We have
thought sit hereby, to Command that the same be Published throughout all Our
Dominions: And We do hereby Declare, that all Ships, Merchandises, and other
moveable Goods whatsoever, which have been, or shall be taken from the Subjects
of the French King, after the Twenty second of September last, in the British
and North Seas; after the Twenty second of October Instant, from the said
British and North Seas, as far as the Cape-St. Vincent; after the Nynteenth of
November next, beyond the said Cape-St. Vincent on this side of the Equinoctial
Line, as well in the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea, as else where; And lastly,
after the Tenth of March next to come, beyond the said Line throughout the
whole World, without any Exception or distinction of Time or Place, and without
any Form of Process shall immediately, and without Damnage be Restored to the
Owners, according to the said Treaty. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
strictly, and Commands, that Incontinent these Presents seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and in Our Name and
Authority make Publication hereof, that all may have Intimation, and none may
pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty Sixth Day of October, and of
Our Reign the Ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.


