A PROCLAMATION, For Adjourning the Parliament to the twenty seventh of March.
At Edinburgh, the Fifeteenth day of March, One thousand six hundred ninety
years.
Whereas His Majesty by His Royal Letter of the date at Kensingtoun the
thirteenth day of February One thousand six hundred and ninety years,
Authorized and Required the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, To Issue
forth a Proclamation in Their Majesty's Names, Continuing the Adjournment of
this Current Parliament, till the eighteenth day of March instant, and that the
Council have in Obedience to His Majesty's Commands, and in Their Majesty's
Names, and by virtue of Their Royal Authority, Declared the said Parliament
Current, and continued the Adjournment thereof until the said eighteenth Day of
March instant; And His Majesty having signified by His Royal Letter to the
Lords of His Privy Council, of the date at Kensingtoun, the twenty eight Day of
February last bypast, That diverse Considerations now moved His Majesty to
continue the said Adjournment, from the said eighteenth Day of March, to the
twenty seventh Day of the said Month, Has Authorized and Required the said
Lords to Issue forth a Proclamation in Their Majesty's Names, continuing the
Adjournment of the said Parliament, until the twenty seventh Day of the said
Month of March instant: Therefore Their Majesty's High Commissioner, and the
Lords of Privy Council, Do in Their Majesty's Names, and by Their special
Command and Authority, Declare the said Parliament Current, and continues the
Adjournment thereof till the said twenty seventh Day of the said Current Month
of March; And Do hereby Require and Command, the Lion King at Arms, and his
Brethren Heralds, Macers of Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms,
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, that incontinent these
Presents seen, they pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and there, in Their
Majesty's Names and Authority foresaid, by open Proclamation, make Intimation
of the Continuation of the said Adjournment, from the said eighteenth Day of
March instant, to the said twenty seventh Day of the said Month of March
Current, Certifying all the Members of Parliament, that the Parliament will
then Sit; and Requiring hereby all the Members thereof to attend that Day at
ten a Clock in the forenoon, in the usual way, and at the ordinary place, and
upon the accustomed Certifications; for doing of all which, Their Majesty's
High Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Council, Commit to them, conjunctly
and severally Their Majesty's full Power, by these Presents, delivering the
same by them, duly Execute, and Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GLIB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the Privy
Council, 1690.


