letterhead with royal emblems
PROCLAMATION For a Solemn National Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs
in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as it has pleased Almighty GOD graciously to prosper Our Arms in
the Besieging and taking of the Town and strong Castle of Namure, and to
preserve Our Person in the manisold Dangers to which We were thereby exposed;
For which signal Mercy, and the other Successes and Advantages that We and Our
Arms have been blessed with, during this Campaign: As We and all Our good
Subjects are bound to render thanks to GOD, so We conceive it no less Our duty,
from so happy and propitious beginnings, to implore the goodness of the same
Almighty GOD, to continue his Gracious Countenance and Assistance with Us, for
such a happy Conclusion to this Campaign, as may procure Peace to Christendom,
and the security of the true Protestant Religion. Therefore We have thought
fit, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, to appoint, likeas We
hereby appoint a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving and Prayers to be observed within
this Kingdom, upon the days following, viz. In the Town of Edinburgh, and Shire
thereof, on the Fifteenth day of September instant; And in the other Parochs
and churches on this side of Tay, on the Twenty second day of the said Month;
And in the whole remanent Parochs and Churches of this Kingdom upon the Twenty
ninth day of the famine Month; Which day of Thanksgiving and Prayers, for the
Causes and Ends foresaids We hereby petemptorly enjoin to be observed, with all
Religious Exercises suitable to such an Occasion, and by all Ministers and
others therein concerned, as they will be answerable under their highest peril.
OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you that incontinent their Our Letters seen,
ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the Mercat-Crosses of the
remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom; And there in
Our Name and Authority make Publication hereof, that none pretend ignorance:
And Ordains Our Solicitor to cause send Printed Copies hereof to the Sheriffs
of the several Shires, and their Clerks, whom We ordain to see the same
published, and appoints them to send Doubles thereof to the Ministers within
their Bounds, that upon the Lords day immediately preceding the said days
above-appointed, the same may be publicly intimat and read. And ordains these
presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Third day of September, and of Our
Reign the Seventh Year, 1695. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, 1695.


