A PROCLAMATION for a Solemn Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren; Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms; Our Sheriffs in that part,
Conjunctly and Severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
For as much, as We and all Our good Subjects, are in Duty bound, to return
Praise and Glory to God, by a Day of solemn Thanksgiving, for His manifold
Blessings bestowed upon Us, and Our Kingdoms: and particularly, that He has
been pleased to preserve Our Royal Person, from the many and great Danger: of
War We were necessarly exposed to, for the Defense and Protection of the
Protestant Religion, and Our Government, against the Designs and Attempts of
all Our Enemies, during Our last Campaign in Flanders, and to restore and bring
back Our Royal Person in safety to Our Kingdoms, to the great Satisfaction and
Joy of all Our good Subjects; And that also the Ministers assembled in the
Synod of Lothian, and Tueeddale, and such as Correspond with them from several
other Synods, have Moved to the Lords of Our Privy Council, that a Solemn Day
of public Thanksgiving, may be set apart for the Causes foresaids, to be
religiously observed throughout this Our Ancient Kingdom. Therefore, We, with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do Appoint and Command, that the
sixteenth day of November current, for all within the Town of Edinburgh, and
Suburbs thereof; and the Shires of Edinburgh, Haddington and Linlithgow; the
Sheriffdom of Berwick, and Shires of Fyse Stirling, Kinross and Clackmannan.
And the twentythird day of the said Month for all the rest of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, to be Religiously and Devoutely observed, as a Solemn Day of publict
Thanksgiving, by all Persons within this Kingdom, In all Churches and
Meeting Houses, for returning most humble and hearty Thanks to Almighty God,
for the signal Blessings and Deliverances already bestowed upon Us, and Our
people: And to implore the increase and continuance thereof. And that His
Divine Presence, with a Spirit of Counsel and Wisdom, may direct and assist us
in all our Consultations and Undertakings, at home and abroad, in time coming.
And to the effect Our pleasure in the Premises may be known, OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and we Charge you strictly; and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Market
Crosses of the whole head Burghs of the several Shires and Srewartries within
this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof,
that none may pretend ignorance: And ordains Our Solicitor to cause make
Intimation hereof, to the Ministers within the Town of Edinburgh, and Suburbs,
by sending Copies to them, or any other way he thinks fit; and to cause send
printed Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of
the Stewartries foresaids, whom we ordain to see the same published, and
appoints them to send Doubles thereof, to all Ministers in Churches and
Meeting Houses, within their Respective Jurisdictions, that upon the Lords Day,
immediately preceding the respective Days foresaids, the same may be intimat
and read in every paroch Church and Meeting House: certifying all such who
shall contemn or neglect so religious and important a Duty, as the Thanksgiving
hereby appointed is, they shall be proceeded against and punished as Contemners
of Our Authority, and as highly disaffected to Our Persons and Government, and
ordains these Presents to be printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eighth day of November, and of Our
Reign the Fifth Year, 1693. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. and In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELLIOT. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1693.


