HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

PROCLAMATION For Crying down the Silver Scots Crown-Piece, and the forty
Shilling, twenty Shilling, ten Shilling, and five Shilling Scots Pieces to
their former Rates.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly, and Severally, Specially,
Constitute, Greeting: For as much, as by a Proclamation of the Date the twelfth
Day of July, one thousand six hundred ninety five Years, The Rate of the Silver
Scots Crown-Piece was raised to three Pound six shilling, and its Fractions
proportionally: Which Rates were then judged expedient. But it being now found
Just and Reasonable, That the said Species of Money be Reduced, and should
pass at no greater Rate than as they were appointed to pass by the Act of
Parliament, one thousand six hundred eighty six; Ordaining the samen to be
Coined. Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Have
thought sit to Cry down the said Silver Crown Pieces Coined in Scotland, the
Forty Shilling-Piece, Twenty Shilling-Piece, Ten Shilling-Piece, and Five
Shilling-Piece to the said former Rate of three Pound, forty Shilling, twenty
Shilling, ten Shilling, and five Shilling respective: And Ordains the samen
only to pass at the said Rates. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
Strictly, and Command, That incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and
there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof,
that none pretend Ignorance; and Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Out Signet, at Edinburgh, the second Day of June, and of Our Reign
the Eight Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
his most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


