CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A Proclamation, For settling of the Staple-port at Campvere.
CHARLES, by the Grace or GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs, in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas upon occasion of the unsettled condition of the SCOTS Staple in the
Low Countries; The Merchants of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland have for
diverse years past, suffered great prejudice, intheir Trade and Comerce to
those Provinces. And being graciously inclined to countenance all fair and just
means, for settling of the said Staple: We therefore gave full power and
commissios to Our Resident and Conservator of the privileges granted to Our
Subjects of Scotland in the Low Countries; to treat with any Town or place most
convenient and advantagions for the Merchants and Trade of this Our Kingdom: So
the Articles agreed by him with the Commissoners of the prince of Orange, and
Deputies of the town of Campvere, for the re-setling of the Scots Staple-court
within the said town, are approven by Us: Whereupon the said Staple court is
removed from Dort to the town of Campvere. And to the end this Our Royal
pleasure, may be made known to all Our loving Subjects of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, We with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do Ordain pablick
Proclamation to be made thereof at the usual places of this Our Kingdom; that
no person may pretend ignorance, but duly obey Our Royal pleasure herein, as
they will answer at their peril. And further, We, wish advice foresaid, Do
declare that the ancient standing Acts of Parliament made by Our Royal
Progenitors, in favor of the Staple-court, and the Conservator, are in full
force and strength. And further, We Ordain the Royal Buroughs in their
meetings to make strick Acts, that the Staple may be duly observed, which We
with advice foresaid, Declare to be binding upon all Our Subjects whatsoever
trading to, or residing within any town, or place of the united Provinces. And
We ordain their presents to be Printed and published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other Royal Burghs and Seaports needful, that none may pretend
ignorance thereof.

Given at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of October, One thousand six hundred and
seventy six years, And of Our Reign the 28 year. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, printer to His most Sacred
Majesty: Anno DOM. 1676.


