PROCLAMATION For apprehending Fergus Templetoun a Murderer.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council,
Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as We are well informed of a cruel
Murder committed by Fergus Templetoun a little black Curly-headed Man, Soldier
in Captain (...) Home his Company, in the Lord Strathnaver his Regiment, upon
James Dunlop in Kirkland, with in his own House or Barn where he was living
peaceably; the Murderer pretending that he was searching for Deserters; which
Fergus Templetoun being apprehended, and committed Prisoner to the Guards in
Pasley, did make his escape. And We being desirous that the Committers of so
heinous a Murder, should be brought to condign punishment. Therefore We, with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require and Command all our
Magistrates, Officers, Soldiers, and others Our Liedges, to do their outmost
endeavor and diligence to apprehend the said Fergus Templetoun, and deliver
him Prisoner to the Magistrates of any of Our Burghs, to be by them kept in safe
Custody, until he be brought to trial, and suffer condign punishment for the
said Crime. And We out of Our detestation to such a horrid Crime, and to the
effect the same may not go unpunished* And for encouraging of persons to search
for, and apprehend the Murderer; do hereby make offer of the Sum of Five
hundred Merks to any person or persons who shall apprehend the said Fergus
Templetoun, and deliver him Prisoner to the Magistrates of of any of Our Burghs,
which We hereby promise shall be faithfully paid as a Reward to the said
person or persons, lot their apprehending of the said Murderer, Indemnifying
hereby all Persons from all hazard of Slaughter, Mutilation, or any other Acts
of Violence, which they may commit against the said Fergus Templetoun, or any
Persons with him, in apprehending the said Murderer. And we with Advice
^oresaid peremptorly Inhibit and Discharge, all and every our Leidges
whatsoever, to Shelter Harbor, Conceal, or any ways Assist or Supply the said
Fergus Templetoun, upon their highest peril. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We
charge you straightly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and Mercat-Crosses of the whole remanent
Burghs in this Kingdom, and other Places needful, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none
may pretend ignorance. And ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the First day of February, and of Our
Reign the fifth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti Concilii.

GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printers to Their
Most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1694.


