WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament to the Twenty sixth of August
next.
WILLIAM By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
to Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly
and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuchas, We by Our Proclamation, of the Date the sixtenth Day of March
last by past, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, did Adjourn the
current Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, to the twenty first Day of July
next to come: And whereas the present state of Our Affairs, does not require
the Meeting of Our Parliament, so soon as the said Day to which it is
Adjourned: Therefore, We with Advice of the said Lords of Our Privy Council,
do Continue the said Adjournment from the said Day, to the twenty sixth Day of
August next. And being desirous to prevent the unnecessary Trouble and Charges
that the Members of Parliament may be put to, by ^ttending the said twenty
first Day of July next; Do hereby with Advice foresaid, Adjourn Our said
current Parliament, until the said twenty sixth Day of August, next ensuing the
Date hereof, Requiring all the Members of Our said Parliament, to attend that
Day in the usual way, and under the Certifications contained in the several
Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Our Will is herefore, And We Charge you
strictly, and Command, That Incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Headburghs
of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our ancient Kingdom, And there by
open Proclamation, make Intimation that our said Parliament is Adjourned to the
said twenty sixth Day of August next to come, and Ordains these Presents to be
Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh the thirtieth Day of June, And of our
Reign the eighth Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


