monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For a Solemn National Fast to be Kept Monthly.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Commission of the General Assembly of this Church, have
applied to the Lords of Our Privy Council, That they would interpose their
Civil Sanction, for keeping of a Solemn National Fast and Humiliation, in all
the Kirks and Meeting Houses of this Our Ancient Kingdom, for Imploring the
blessing of the Lord upon Us, in Our Counsels and Undertakings, in Defense of
the true Reformed Religion, and of these Lands; And especially, that God would
countenance Us in this present War, preserving Our Royal Person, and giving
Success to Our Arms by Sea and Land, at Home and Abroad. Therefore We, with
Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Command and Enjoin, that
the said Solemn Fast and Humiliation, for the Ends above-set-down, be
Religiously Observed, by all Persons within this Kingdom, both in Churches and
Meeting Houses, upon the last Wednesday of May next to come, and thereafter
Monthly, upon the last Wednesday of each Month, until the last Wednesday of
August next inclusive. And Ordains all Ministers either in Kirks, or
Meeting Houses, to Read these presents, publicly from the Pulpit, a Sunday or
two before the first day appointed for keeping the said Fast, and Humiliation,
and upon a Sunday, before each last Wednesday, during the space foresaid; And
to the effect that this so Necessary and Religious a Duty may be publictly
performed, and punctualy Observed, and Our pleasure in the Premises known, OUR
WILL IS Herefore, and We Charge you straightly, and Command, That incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premises,
that none may pretend ignorance. And We Ordain Our Solicitor, to dispatch
Coppies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires, and Stewarts of the
Stewartries, and their Deputs, or Clerks; To be by them published at the
Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon Receipt thereof. And immediately sent
to the several Ministers, both in Kirks and MeetingHouses; To the effect, they
may Read and intimate the same from their Pulpits, and may seriously exhort all
Persons to a sincere and devote Observance thereof, as they will be answerable
at their perril. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published in
manner forsaid.

Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the twenty day of April, and of Our
Reign the third Year, 1691. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. DA. MONCRIEF,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom.. 1691.


