A PROCLAMATION For Choosing the Additional Representatives of Barons to the
Parliament.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD; King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy
Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by an Act of the Second
Session of Our Current Parliament, of the Date the Fourteenth day of June, One
thousand six hundred and ninety years, We with the Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, have Statute and Ordained, that in all Parliaments,
Meetings and Conventions of Estates, from thenceforth, and thereafter, the
Barons and Freeholders of the Shires after-mentioned, shall add to their
former Representation, the number of Commissioners after-exprest, viz. The
Shire of Edinburgh two, the Shire of Hadingtoun two, the Shire of Berwick two,
the Shire of Roxburgh two, the Shire of Lanerk two, the Shire of Dumfreis two,
the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright one, the Shire of Air two, the Shire of Stirling
one, the Shire of Perth two, the Shire of Aberdene two, the Shire of Argile
one, the Shire of Fife two, the Shire of Forfar two, and the Shire of Renfrew
one: Declaring, that the said Act should take effect in the next Session of our
Current Parliament: And We considering, that by the said Act, there is no day
or days prefixed by Us and Our Estates of Parliament, for Conveening the Barons
and Freeholders within the respective Shires abovementioned; Do therefore
with Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy Council hereby Ordain all the
Barons, Freeholders, and others, who by Law have a Vote in the Election of
Commissioners, to Meet and Conveen at the Head Burghs of the respective Shires
and Stewartrie abovementioned, upon the particular days after expressed, viz.
These of the Shires of Edinburgh, Berwick, Lanerk, and Fife, upon the Twelfth
of August instant, and these of the Shires of Hadingtoun, Roxburgh and Perth,
upon the Fourteenth day of the said Current Month; These of the Shires of
Dumfreis, Stirling, Renfrew, and Forfar, upon the Fifteenth day of the said
Month; These of the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, the Shires of Air and Argile
upon the Ninteenth day of the said Month, and these of the Shire of Aberdene
upon the Twenty seventh day of the said Month of August instant. And that the
said Barons, Freeholders, and others foresaids, may have the more timely
notice hereof, We, with Advice and Consent foresaid, appoint the Sheriff-Clerks
of the several Shires abovementioned, and the Stewart-Clerk of the Stewartry
of Kirkcudbright, immediately upon receipt hereof, to cause make Publication and
Intimation of the Premises, not only at the Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs
of the several Sheriffdoms, and Stewartrie above-exprest; But likewise at the
several Paroch-Church-Doors within the respective Jurisdictions foresaid, upon
a Sabbath day in the Forenoon, after Divine Service, preceding the time of the
said respective Elections. And whereas by an Act of the Second Session of Our
Current Parliament, all the Electors of Commissioners, before they proceed to
choose their Representatives, are appointed to Swear and Sign the Oath of
Allegiance to Us, under the Certification and Penalty contained in the said Act
of Parliament: And that by another Act of the Second Session of the same
Parliament, all Persons who are in Law obliged to Swear and take the Oath of
Allegiance, are appointrd to Subscribe the Certificat, and Assurance subjoyned
hereto. Therefore We, With Advice foresaid, Command and Require all the Barons
and Freeholders of the respective Shires and Stewartries abovementioned, to
Swear and Sign the Oath of Allegiance to Us, and also Subscribe the Certificat
and Assurance abovementioned, before they proceed to their Election, under the
pains and Penalties contained in the said Acts of Parliament. And We Ordain
these presents to be Printed and Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and whole remanent Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Sheriffdoms and
Stewartrie above-written, and to be intimat at the several Paroch Church-doors
within the respective Jurisdictions, in manner foresaid, that none may pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of August, 1690. And of
0ur Reign the Second Year. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Follows the Certificat and Assurance.
I (...) Do in the Sincerity of my Heart, Assert, Acknowledge and Declare, That
Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, are the only Lawful Undoubted
Sovereigns, King and Queen of Scotland, als well de Jure as de facto, and in
the Exercise of the Government; And therefore I do Sincerely and Faithfully
Promise and Engage, That I will with Heart and Hand, Life and Goods, Maintain
and Defend Their Majesty's Title and Government, against the late King James,
his Ad^erents, and all other Enemies, who either by open, or secret Attempts,
shall Disturb, or Disquiet Their Majesty's in the Exercise thereof.

God Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


