CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Re-calling and Prohibiting Seamen from the Service of
foreign Princes and States.
At Edinburgh, the seventh day of June, one thousand six hundred and sixty
four.
The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, having received a Letter from the
Kings Majesty, dated at Whitehall the second day of June instant, commanding a
Proclamation to be issued in His Majesty's name; bearing, That the Kings most
Excellent Majesty has been advertised, That great numbers of Mariners and
other Seafaring men, His Majesty's natural born Subjects of this His ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, have be taken themselves to the Services of foreign
Princes and States, to the great disservice of His Majesty and their native
Country; and whereby His Majesty and His Realms are unfurnished of men of their
sort and calling, if there shall be cause to use them. For remiss whereof at
present, and preventing the like for the future, the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, both Will and straightly Charge and Command, all and singular Masters
of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, Ship-wrights, and other Seafaring men
whatsoever and wheresoever, being His Majesty's natural Subjects of this His
Kingdom of Scotland, who are in the Service of any foreign Prince or State, or
do service in any foreign Ships or Vessels, That forthwith they do withdraw
themselves, and depart from such foreign Services, and return home to their
native Country and lawful Vocations, or to some of His Majesty's Dominions.

And further, His Majesty both prohibit and forbid all and singular Masters of
Ships, Pilots Mariners, Seamen, Ship-wrights, and other Seafaring men
whatsoever, being His Majesty's natural born Subjects of this his Kingdom of
Scotland, from entering themselves; and both hereby first stre(...)y Charge and
Command them, and every one of them, from henceforth to forbear to enter
themselves into pay, or otherwise to be take themselves to the Service of
foreign Princes or States, or to (...) in any forr(...) ^essel or Ship, other
than the Ships and Vessels belonging to His Majesty's Domini^^s without ^^^nce
and obtained in that behalf. To all which His Majesty does, and will, expect
due obedience and conformity: And does publish and declare, That the offenders
to the contrary, s^^^l not only incur Hi^ Majesty's just displeasure, but be
proceeded against for their contempt, according to the utmost severities of Law.

Therefore, they have ordained, and by these presents ordains Macers or
Messengers at Arms, as Sheriffs in that part, in His Majesty's Name and
Authority, to make public intimation hereof at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
Peer and Shore of Leith, and at the Mercat-crosses of all Royal Buroughs where
there are any Seaports, that all persons therein concerned may give due and
speedy o^^dience to this His Majesty's Royal Commands, as they will answer upon
their outmost perils. And ordains these presents to be printed, that none
pretend ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan T^^^er, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1664.


