monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary)RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For Rouping the Rests of the Hearth-money.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
(...) To Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Estates of Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom, by their
Act of the date the Tenth Day of September One Thousand six hundred and ninety
Years, made an humble Tender and Offer to Us, of fourteen shilling Scots for
every Hearth within this Kingdom, payable at the Term of Candlemass, One
Thousand six hundred ninety one Years, by the Inhabitants Dwelling in the
Houses where the said Hearths are, without exception or exemption of any,
except the Hearths of Hospitals, and of poor people, who were upon the Charity
of the Parish; and where any Houses were not Inhabited, that the said
Hearth-Money should be paid by the Heretor, Liferenter, or proper Wodsetter,
to whom the same for the time did belong: And albeit We by Our Commission under
Our Royal Hand, Named a Collector, with power to him to constitute and appoint
Sub-Collectors, for the In-bringing, Uplifting and Receiving of the foresaid
Hearth-money; and with Advice of Our Privy Council, Did Emit and Publish diverse
Proclamations, Acts and Orders, for the better helping and assisting Our said
Collector and his Deputs, in the Execution of their said Commissions;
Nevertheless a great part of the Money that would have arisen from the Hearths
of this Kingdom, is yet deficient, and not uplifted or Collected from the
persons liable in payment thereof, to the great prejudice of Our Service, and
frustrating the intent of the foresaid Act of Parliament. And We Considering
that what rests unpayed of the foresaid Hearth-money, freely offered to Us by
the foresaid Act of Parliament, may be most effectually uplifted, and
profitably brought in, for the interest of Our Service, and satisfaction of the
intention of Our Estates of Parliament in their foresaid offer, by way of
public Roup, in favors of the Persons who shall offer most for the same:
THEREFORE WE, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do hereby make
public Intimation to all Our Leidges, that what is resting unpayed of the
Hearth-money, offered to Us by the foresaid Act of Parliament, is to be
publicly Rouped by the Lords of Our Thesaury and Exchequer, at Edinburgh in
the Exchequer-House, upon the Twenty fifth Day of July instant, betwixt Four
and Six Hours in the Afternoon, and that who shall bid most for the same, shall
be preferred, and have Commission or Right granted to them for uplifting and
Collecting thereof. As also, That the Articles and Conditions of the said Roup,
are lying in the Hands of the Clerks of Our Thesaury and Exchequer, to be seen
by all concerned before the said Roup, and thereafter to be published both for
the Security of Our Leidges against exactions, and better Direction of the said
Fermorer, in uplifting and Collecting of the same. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the
Head-Burghs of the several Shires of this Kingdom, and there in our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make public Intimation of the Premises, that
none pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twelfth day of July. And of Our
Reign, the sixth Year, 1694. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1694.


