royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament from the fifteenth of March
instant, until the fifteenth of June next.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith.
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and Severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Did by Our
Proclamation of the date, the twenty six day of December one thousand six
hundred and ninety three years, Adjourn the current Parliament of this Our
Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the ninth day of January last by past, to the
Fifteenth day of March. And We Considering, that the present State of Our
Affairs in this Our Ancient Kingdom, does not Require that the Members of Our
said Parliament should meet upon the foresaid day. And We being unwilling, that
they should be put to any Trouble, that may be Dispensed with; Do therefore
with Advice of the said Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Adjourn Our said
current Parliament until the fifteenth day of June next to come: Hereby
Requiring all the Members of Our Parliament to attend that day, in the usual
way and under the Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament
madethereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command,
that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-burghs of the several
Shires of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make
Intimation of the Adjourning of Our Parliament of this Kingdom, from the said
fifteenth day of March insant, to the said fifteenth day of June next to come.
And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twelfth day of March, and of our
Reign the Fifth Year, 1694. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELLIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their Most
Excellent Majcesties, Anno Dom. 1694.


