monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For the better Inbringing of the Hearth-Money.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by the second Act of the third Session of Our Current Parliament,
Our Estates of Parliament Have humbly Offered to Us, Fourteen Shilling Scots
for every Hearth within this Kingdom, payable at Candlemass last, by the
Inhabitants dwelling in the Houses where the said Hearths are, without
exception or exemption of any, except the Hearths of Hospitals and of Poor
People, who are upon the Charity of the Paroch; and where any Houses are not
Inhabited, that the said Hearth-Money should be paid by the Heretor,
Liferenter, or proper Wodsetter, to whom the same for the time does belong, to
be applied for the uses and ends in the foresaid Act of Parliament contained.
Likeas We, and Our Estates of Parliament, by another Act of the date, the tenth
day of September last bypast, have remitted to, and empowered the Lords of Our
Privy Council, to give such Orders for Collecting, and Inbringing of the said
Hearth-money, as they should judge fit. For the better Inbringing whereof, We
by Our Commission, under Our Royal Hand, have Nominated and Appointed James
Melvill of Cassingray, Receiver and Collector of all the Hearth-money within
this Kingdom, with Power to him to Constitute and Appoint Sub-Collectors, and
Receivers under him in every Shire or Paroch, for whom he is to be answerable:
Therefore, and for the more effectual and orderly Collecting, Uplifting, and
Inbringing of the same, We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, Do
hereby Command and Ordain, all Heretors, Liferenters, and proper Wodsetters, by
themselves, their Tutors or Curators, or Chamberlains and Factors, to give in
to the said James Melvill, or to his Sub-Collectors and Deputs, within the
several Shires and paroches, upon Intimation of their Commissions at the
several Paroch Churches, or Mercat-Crosses of the respective Shires on a Market
day, or any other manner of way they shall think fit, true and exact Lists,
Subscribed with their hands, of all Hearths in the Houses or Lodgings possessed
by them, and in the waste Houses belonging to them not possessed, and of all
Smiddies, Kilns for drying of Corn, Ovens, Furnaces for Brewing, Salt-Pans,
Soap and Glass-Works, possessed by them, or standing waste within their Ground
and Estate: And sicklike, Ordains all the Inhabitants, Tennents and Possessors
in this Kingdom, to give in to the said Collector, or his Sub-Collectors and
Deputs foresaids, upon Intimation of their Commissions, in manner
abovementioned, true and exact Lists of all the Hearths in the Houses possessed
by them, and of all Smiddies, Kilns for drying of Corn, Ovens, Furnaces for
Brewing, Salt-Pans, Soap, and Glass-works possessed by them, excepting always
Hospitals and poor people, who are upon the Charity of the Paroch; With
Certification to the said Heretors, and other Inhabitants, if they failie to
give up the said Lists, or give up false and short Lists, they shall be Cited
and Processed before the said Lords of Our Privy Council, and proceeded
against with all rigor therefore: But prejudice always to the said James
Melvill, and his Sub-Collectors foresaids, to use all other Legal Methods for
discovering of the true number of the Hearths of this Kingdom, and Collecting
and uplifting thereof: And Ordains all Magistrates, and Ministers of the Laws,
to be Assistant, and give their Concurrence to them, for that effect. And We,
with Advice foresaid, Do hereby Command and Require, the said James Melvill,
Collector foresaid, and his said Sub-Collectors, and Deputs, to report and
give in the said Lists, to the Lords Commissioners of Our Thesaury upon Oath,
when they shall be called or required thereto; To the effect the said
Hearth-Money may be uplifted, and Employed for the ends and uses in Our said
Act of Parliament appointed. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly
and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the whole remanent
Head-Burghs of the several Shires within this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name
and Authority, by open proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that
none may pretend ignorance, as ye will answer to Us thereupon, the which to do,
We commit to you, conjunctly and severally Our full Power, by these Presents,
delivering them by you, duly execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twelfth day of February, And of Our
Reign the second Year, 1691. Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


