A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning of the Parliament, From the 20 of December to
the 1 of March thereafter.
FOrasmuch as the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, by their Proclamation
of the date, the First day of October last by past, in obedience to, and by
virtue of, His Majesty's special Command and Authority, did in His Majesty's
Name Adjourn this Current Parliament, from the Eighth day of October then
ensuing (to which day the Parliament was formerly Adjourned) until the
Twentieth day of December instants, And diverse great and weighty
Considerations moving His Sacred Majesty to continue the said Adjournment from
the said Twenty day of December, to the First of March next, in the year One
thousand six hundred and ninety; and that the Members thereof may not be put to
the trouble and charge of meeting upon the said Twenty day of December, His
Majesty has by His Royal Letter, of the date at Holland-House, the Thirty day
of November last by past, Authorized and Required the said Lords to issue
forth a Proclamation in His Name, Continuing the Adjournment of this Current
Parliament to the First day of March next; And if His Majesty shall find it
necessary that the said Parliament meet sooner, he will signify the famine by
a Proclamation to Anticipat that Diet: Therefore the said Lords of Privy
Council do in His Majsties Name, and by His special Command and Authority,
Declare the said Parliament Current, and Continue the Adjournment thereof until
the said First day of March next ensuing the date of the present; and Require
and Command the Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, that incontinent these presents seen, they pass to the Mercat Cross
of Edinburgh, and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of this
Kingdom, and there in His Majesty's Name and Authority foresaid, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation of the Continuation of the said Adjournment, from
the Twenty day of December instant, to the First day of March next; Requiring
hereby all the Members of Parliament to attend that day, in the usual Way, and
upon the accustomed Certifications Declaring hereby, not with standing of the
present Adjournment, that if His Majesty shall find it necessary, the
Parliament should meet before the said First day of March next, he will be
favorably pleased to signify the famine, by a Proclamation for Anticipating
that Diet: For doing of all which, the said Lords commit to them conjunctly
and sseverally, His Majesties's full Power by these presents, delivering the
famine by them duly Execute and Indorfaragain to the Bearer.

Given at Edinburgh, the Fourth day of December, One thousand six hundred and
eighty nine years. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti.
Concilii.
WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council,
Anne DOM 1689.


