A PROCLAMATION For Apprehending the persons After-named, as having been in
France contrair to tke Acts of Parliament.
WILLIAM by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, Conjunctly, and Severally, Specially Constitute, Greeting;
For as much as by the Eighth Act of the fourth Session of this Our current
Parliament; It is Statute and Ordained, That none of the Subjects within this
Kingdom without express leave from Us or Our Privy Council should presume to go
to the Kingdom of France, or any of the Dominions subject to the French King
after the first day of June one thousand six hundred ninety three, or being
already in the said Kingdom of France, or Countries foresaid, should presume to
stay or abide therein after the first day of August then next to come, without
express leave from Us, or Our Privy Council under the pain of Treason:
Nevertheless in manifest contempt of the foresaid Act of Parliament, and Us and
Our Authority, (...) Grahame Younger of Duntroon, Mr. Charles Kinnaird brother
to the Lord Kinnaird, Mr. Alexander Maitland brother to the Earl of Lauderdale,
Captain (...) Deans, Captain (...) Ruthven, Lieutenant Isaac Threcal,
Lieutenant (...) Auchmouty, Ensign Alexander Innes, Lieutenants Daniel and John
Banes, Ensign William Ramsay, sometime in Hodge's Regiment, Ensign Alexander
Sandelands sometime in Wauchop's Regiment, Ensign Laurence Drummond of (...)
Captain Robert Somervail, Captain William Davidson, Lieutenant William Main,
Lieutenant James Henderson, Ensign Robert Southerland, Ensign Alexander
Sinclair, Lieutenant John Bell, sometime in D'Offerel's Regiment, Ensign
William Innes in D'Offerel's Regiment, Ensign William Lion in the said
Regiment, William and Hugh Southerlands Nephews to Major General Southerland,
Walter Nisbet son to Alexander Nisbet of Graigintinny, William Sinclair son to
the deceased (...) Sinclair of Dun, Thomas Clark brother to the deceased Mr.
William Clark Advocat, Robert Kinloch of (...) Mr, William Pearson son to (...)
Pearson sometime Minister at Stirling, Alexander Nisbet son to (...) Nisbet
Merchant in Glasgow, Mr. James Oswald sometime Chappeland to the Lady Halket,
(...) Cuthbert son to Cuthbert Provost of Inverness, Captain Patrick Grahame,
Captains Robert and William Charters, Captain John Ramsay, Lieutenant Colonel
Rattray, Lieutenant Colonel Oliphant, Lieutenant Colonel Douglas, Robert
Stuart Agent in Edinburgh, Ensign John Menzies son to (...) Menzies of Comrie,
Major John Gordon, Captain James Adamson, Charles Farquharson (...) Robert
King, Captain John Livingston, Lieutenant John Creighton, Sir John Mclain of
that Ilk, (...) Irwine of Stepletoun, Captain (...) Mair; have dared most
presumptuously to repair and go to the said Kingdom of France, or being therein
to Remain and Continue within the same, after the times prefixed by the
foresaid Act of Parliament; whereby they have manifestly incurred the pain of
Treason specified in the said Act: And We being Informed that the said Guilty
Persons are Returned to, and Lurk within this Our ancient Kingdom without being
Seized upon, and brought to Condign Punishment as their Crime deserves;
Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, hereby Require and
Command, the Sheriffs of the several Shires within this Kingdom and their
Deputs, The Stewarts of Stewartries, Baillies of Regalities and their Deputs,
and Magistrates of Burghs within their Respective Jurisdictions, To search for,
take, and Apprehend all and every one of the Persons above named, and commit
them to safe Custody, and sure Firmance, and detain them Prisoners within their
Respective Tolbuiths until they be brought to Trial and condign Punishment for
the Crimes above-written; And that they report their Diligence in the Premises
to the Lords of Our Privy Council betwixt and the first day of Aprile next to
come, under the pain of being reckoned Countenancers of, and Connivers at the
said Treasonable Persons; As also We with Advice foresaid, Empower and Command
all the Officers of Our Army, and Our other good Subjects within this Kingdom
to Sease upon, Take, and Apprehend all or any of the Persons abovenamed, where
ever they can be Discovered, And deliver them to the next Magistrate, to be
Committed and detained Prisoners in manner above-specified and to the effect
none of Our good Sujects may be Ensnared, or made partakers of the Guilt of the
said Persons by their Lurking among them. We with Advice foresaid Strictly
Prohibit and Discharge any of Our Subjects within this Kingdom, to Harbor,
Reset, Provide, or any ways Relieve and Supply any of the foresaids Persons;
but that they Deliver them up to one or other of the Magistrates foresaids to be
Proceeded against according to Justice, under the pains contained in the Acts
of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you
Strictly, and Command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remnant Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs
of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom; And there in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Intimation hereof, that none
pretend Ignorance; And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twelfth Day of March, And of Our
Reign the seventh Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


