A PROCLAMATION, For taking the Oath of Allegiance.
At Edinburgh, the second day of September, One thousand six hundred eighty
nine years.
Present in Council, E. Crafurd P. M. Douglas. E. Southerland. E. Annandale. L.
Ross. L. Ruthven. Sir Hugh Campbel of Calder. Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart. Sir
James Murray of Blackbarrony. James Brodie of that Iik. Sir John Hall L.
Provost of Edinburgh.


THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Considering, That Their Majesti^^
King William and Queen Mary, with Advice and Consent of the Estates
o^Parliament, Have Statute and Ordained, that the Oath of Allegiance should be
Sworn and Subscribed, not only by all the Members and Clerks of Parliament, but
also by all other persons presently in public Trust, Civil, or Military, or
who shall be hereafter called to any public Trust within the Kingdom;
Therefore the said Lords of His Majestics Privy Council, Do Ordain and
Appoint, all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Royalties, and Regalities, and
their Clerks, Commissars, their Deputs, Clerks and Fiscals, Justices of Peace,
all present Magistrates, Deans of Gild, Counselors, and Clerks of Burghs Royal,
and of Regality, and such as shall succeed them in Office, in presence of the
Sheriffs of the respective Shires, or Stewarts of the Stewartries, within which
the said Burghs lies, or their Deputs where any are, and where no Sheriffs, or
Stewarts, or their Deputs are, in presence of any Counselor, or Member of
parliament, the Admiral-Deputs, Judges of the high Court of Admirality, and all
particular Admiral-Deputs within the Kingdom, and the Clerks of the respective
Courts, and all other persons who presently are, or hereafter shall happen to
be in public Trust within this Kingdom, to publicly Swear and Subscribe the
Oath of Allegiance hereunto subjoyned, betwixt and the twenty fourth day of
September instant, which is to be Recorded in the Registers of the respective
Courts, and Extracts thereof under the Clerks hands, to be reported to the
Clerks of His Majesty's Privy Council, betwixt and the fifteenth day of
November thereafter, with Certification to them if they failie therein, the
former Acts of Parliament made anent swearing the Oath of Allegiance, and
penalties therein-con^^ined shall be impartially Execute against, and insticted
upon the refusers. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published by
Macers, or Messengers at Arms, at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other
places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
Follows the Oath of Allegiance.
I (...) Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful and bear True
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary, So help me GOD.


God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Secret Council,
Anno Dom. 1689.


