A PROCLAMATION For the more effectual In-bringing of the Hearth-Money.
WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, To Our Lovits (...) Macers of Our Priyy
Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as We with Advice of Our
Privy Council, by Our Proclamation of the date, the twelfth day of February
last, for the more Effectual and Orderly Collecting, Up-lifting and In-bringing
of the Hearth-Money, humbly offered to Us by our Estates of Parliament; conform
to the second Act of the third Session of Our current Parliament: Have in
prosecution of the Power given to the said Lords of Our Privy Council, by an
Act of Our said Parliament, of the date the tenth day of September, one
thousand six hundred and ninty years. Impowering them to give such Orders for
Collecting and In-bringing of the said Hearth-mony, as they shall judge fit.
Ordained Lists to be given in to Mr. James Melvill of Cassingray, Receiver and
Collector of all the Hearth-mony within this Kingdom, his Sub-Collectors, and
Deputs, of all Hearths, Kilns and others mentioned in the said Proclamation, in
manner, and under the Certifications therein specified. And now these Lists
being for the most part given in: We, with Advice foresaid, do hereby Require
and Command all Persons whatsomever, liable in payment of the said Hearth-mony,
to make payment of the same, to the said Mr. James Melvill of Cassingray, and
his Sub-Collectors, and Deputs, betwixt and the tenth day of May next to come,
With Certification to such as shall failie in punctual payment, that Letters of
Horning and Poynding shall be direct forth against them, at the instance of the
said General-Collector and Receiver, his Sub-Collectors and Deputs, or they
shall be allowed to Quarter upon the said Deficients, not exceeding one
Soldier for each three Hearths, for the more speedy In-bringing of the said
Hearth-mony. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly an Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the Mercat-Crosses of the whole remanent Head-Burghs of the several
Shires within this Kingdom, and there, in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend
ignorance, as ye will answer to Us. The which to do, We commit to you,
conjunctly and severally Our full Power, by these Presents, delivering them by
you, duly execute, and indorsed again to the bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty day of April, And of Our
Reign the third Year, 1691.
Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilij. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Secreti Concilij.
GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom,. 1691.


