I7R

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For a Thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom of Scotland, for the
late Defeat of the Kings Enemies.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as James Scot late Duke of Monmouth, and Archibald Campbel late Earl
of Argile, with their Traitorous Confederats and Accomplices, Having most
presumptuously Invaded both our Kingdoms of Scotland and England by Armed
Force, of purpose to have destroyed Us, and all our good and Loyal Subjects,
and subverted Our Government in Church and State; But it having pleased
Almighty God, (by Whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice) by his
Miraculous Providence and Omnipotent hand, to confound and blast Hellish
Devices and Projects of these Our Enemies, and utterly to discomfite and subdue
them. We have therefore from a Due and Religious sense of Gods so great Mercy
and Deliverance toward Us, and Our People in these Realms, Thought fit, with
Advice of Our Privy Council, Hereby to set apart solemn days of Thanksgiving,
for offering solemn Praise unto Almighty God, for so great and miraculous a
Deliverance, and making humbl^ (...) ^^^plications, that His Divine Majesty may
continue His undeserved Goodness toward Us, and (...) Our Kingdoms: And to the
end this so Solemn and Religious a Thanksgiving may be gone about in a devout
manner, We do hereby Recommend to the Most Reverend the Archbishops, and the
Right Reverend the Bishops, that they cause the Ministers in their Diocesses
respectively from their Pulpits, Read and Intimate this Our Royal Pleasure on
the Lords Day immediately preceding the Dyets appointed for the said
Thanksgiving, which are aftermentioned, viz. These for the Diocese of
Edinburgh, upon Thursday the Twenty Third instant; and these of all the other
Diocesses of this Our Kingdom, upon Thursday being the Thirteenth Day of August
next. And We hereby Require and Command all Our good Subjects Peremptorly and
Religiously to Observe these Solemn Days of Thanksgiving, as they would tender
the Glory of Almighty God for so Signal a Deliverance, and not incur Our high
Displeasure; yet We are not hereby to lessen the Resentments of Our good
Subjects on this Occasion, but allow them, after Divine Service performed, to
use all lawful demonstrations of Joy and Gladness. And that Our Pleasure in the
Premises may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command,
that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and all the other Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Shires of
this Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, in Our Royal Name and Authority,
make Publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that all Our Subjects may
have Notice thereof, and give Obedience accordingly.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of July, 1685. And of
our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL. MACKENZIE,
Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1685.


