royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Discovering and Apprehending such as Rob the Pacquets.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith,
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting:
Forasmuch as some Persons of Pernicious and Disloyal Principles, have
frequently of late made it their business to Rob and away-take the ordinary
Packet, and thereby have done their outmost endeavors to Intercept Our Royal
Commands to Our Commissioner and Privy Council, and to hinder that
Communication, which is absolutely requisite, both for the right Administration
of Our Government, and the Support of Trade and Commerce amongst Our good
Subjects, to the high Contempt of Our Authority, and the great Loss and Damnage
of Our People; and particularly, James Seton Youngest lawful Son to the
Viscount of Kingstoun, and John Seton, Brother-German to Sir George Seton of
Garlestoun, being highly disaffected to Us, and Our Government; Did upon
Saturnday last, the Sixteenth day of August current, in the Afternoon, (having
at first put on Masks on their Faces,) in an Hostile manner, Assault, and
Fall upon the Post-Boy of Cockburnspath, betwixt the Almshouse and
Hedderwick-muire, as he was Riding the ordinary Packet from Cockburnspath to
Haddingtoun; and holding a Bended Pistol to his Breast, threatened to kill him;
and having tied the Horse (...) Post boys Feet, and bound himself with Cords,
did carry away the Packet toward Garletoun; and the Persons a(...)ed, having
been afterward under Custody; and being Conscious to themselves of their own
Guilt, have made their and at thy(...) (...) of Justice: And We being earnestly
desirous, that these Persons, als well as any (...) and Villainous Crimes,
should be Discovered and Apprehended, that they may be (...) Punishment, and
that such a bold Enterprise may not be attempted for the future; Do therefore,
with (...) of Our Privy Council, Command and Require all Our Sheriffs,
Stewarts, Magistrates of Our Royal Burghs, Baillies of Our Bailliaries and
Regalities, Justices of Peace, and all other Ministers of Our Law, to make
diligent Search and Enquiry for the said James and John Setons, or any others
whom they can discover to have been accessory with them in the said Crimes,
and all such who hitherto have enterprized such a daring Attempt, as the
Robbing and Stealing of Our ordinary Packet and to Commit them to Prison,
until they be Tried according to Law. And We with Advice foresaid, hereby
peremptorily Prohibit and Discharge all and sundry Our Leidges, from Robbing,
Reaving, or Stealing, Stopping, or Intercepting of the ordinary Packet,
Black-Box, or By-Bag, whether by open Force and Violence, or otherways, under
the Pains and Penalties due to Common-Reavers and Robbers, and Disturbers of
the Public Peace, by the Laws and Practicque of this Nation: And in case any
shall be so daringly bold, as to attempt any such thing hereafter, We with
Advice and Consent of Our Privy Council, Ordain all Our Leidges, upon the first
notice thereof, immediately to Rise, Cry, Raise the Fray, and follow them, with
Certification to such who shall be negligent herein, or who ever Resets or
Intertains them with Meat, Drink, Lodging, or otherways, shall be holden and
repute as Partakers, and Art and Part of the said Crimes, and shall be
Punished accordingly. And for the more effectual Discovery and Apprehending of
the said James and John Setons, or any others, which have, or shall be guilty
of the said Crimes, of Seizing upon, Stealing, or Intercepting of the said
Pacquets, We, with Advice foresaid, do Assure and Declare, that whatever
Charges and Expenses shall be laid out by any of Our Leidges, upon the said
Service, or what ever damnage shall be sustained by them, in discovering and
apprehending of the said Criminals, shall be duly refounded and paid to
them, with a competent Reward for their pains and diligence, according to the
Quality and Merit of the said Service. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you
straightly, and Command that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Dunce, and other places needful, and
that at the respective Places, in Our Name and Authority, make Publication of
the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninteenth day of August, One thousand
six hundred and ninety and of Our Reign the Second Year. Per Actum Dominorum
Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


