A PROCLAMATION, For Bringing in the Accounts due by Their Majesty's Forces.
WILLIAM and MARRY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our
Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly, and
severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch, as by an Act and
Proclamation of Our Privy Council, of the date, the tenth day of January, 1690
pears, The Lords of Our Privy Council, by Our special warrant and Authority,
Did Require and Command the Commissioners of Assessment, or excise, or either
of them, where any of Our Forces have been Quartered, to make Intimation by
beating of Drums, and public Proclamation at the several Mercat-Crosses, that
the Landlords and other might bring in their Accounts, due by Our Forces to
them, betwixt and the twentieth day of February last by past; And We
Considering, That by an Act of the Second Session of Our Current Parliament,
there is a Fond secured for payment of what is due by Our Forces to the
Country; And We out of Our Royal Care, being earnestly desirous that these who
have so seasonably and willingly furnished any of Our Forces, with Meat, Drink,
Forage, and other necessary Provisions, or have advanced, or paid to them any
sums of Money for their Subsistence, should be thankfully re-imbursed, and
satisfied for the famine; And in respect that the former Proclamation took not
its full effect, and that since the day therein prefixed, there may be Debts
contracted by Our Forces, yet resting unpayed; Therefore We, with advice of Our
Privy Council, Do hereby Allow and Ordain, the said Landlords to repair to
the said Commissioners of Assessment and Excise, or any two of them, and
before them state and verify by Writ, or Witnesses, how many Soldiers were
quartered on them, and how long, and by Writ, or the Oath of the Landlord,
what they advanced to them, not exceeding two thirds of their Pay, and that
they have received no part thereof, and report the said Accounts due to them
by the Forces, as well upon the Scots as English Establishment, with the
verifications and probations thereof, to the Clerks of Our Privy Council,
betwixt and the first day of November next to come, with Certification to the
said Landlords and others, to whom Our said Forces are adebted, that if the
said Accounts be not reported betwixt and the said day, that thereafter they
shall be understood as satisfied: And to the end that all persons concerned may
have timous notice of Our Pleasure in the Premises; Our Will is herefore, and
We Charge you straightly and Command, that ye pass to the Mercat Cross of
Edinburgh and the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-burghs of the several
Shires and Stewartries within this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make
Publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. And We Ordain these
Presents to be Printed, and Published in manner foresaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourth day of August. And of Our
Reign the second year, 1690. Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GILB. ELIOT,
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anne Dom. 1690.


