WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament.
WILLIAM By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion, King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, by the last Act of the sixth Session of this Our present current
Parliament, dated the twelfth day of October last bypast, Our said Parliament
is Adjourned to the Eight day of December instant. And whereas the present
state of Our Affairs does not require the meeting of Our Parliament so soon, as
the said day, to which it was Adjourned. Therefore We, with advice of the Lords
of Our Privy Council, do continue the Adjournment from the said Eight day of
December instant, to the Eighteen day of March nixt to come: And being desirous
to prevent the unnecessary trouble, and charges that the Members of Parliament
may be put to, by attending the said Eight day of December instant, do hereby,
with Advice foresaid Adjourn Our said current Parliament until the said
Eighteenth day of March nixt ^nsuing the date hereof. Requiring all the Members
of Our said Parliament to attend that day in the usual way, and under the
Certifications contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR
WILL IS HEREFORE, And We charge you strictly, and Command That in continent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Market Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shyres and
Stewartries of this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation, make
Intimation, that Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the said Eightteenth day
of March nixt to come. And Ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the third of December, and of Our Reign
the eight year 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


