Scottish thistle, French fleur-de-lis and Tudor rose
PROCLAMATION For Adjourning the Parliament.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethreen, Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuchas, We by Our Proclamation, of the Date the ninth day of June last by
past, did Adjourn this Our current Parliament to the twelvth day of September
next to come: And whereas the present state of Our Affairs, does not require
the Meeting of Our Parliament so soon as the said Day to which it was
Adjourned: Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council are
resolved to continue the said Adjournment from the said twelvth Day of
September next to come, to the eight day of November next thereafter; And that
the Members of Our said Parliament be not put to unnecessary Trouble and
Charges before that time; We do hereby with Advice foresaid continue the
Adjournment of Our said Parliament from the said twelvth day of September to
the said Eight day of November next to come: And We do hereby Order and Require
all the Members of Our said Parliament, to attend the said eight day of
November next at Edinburgh, in the usual Way, and under the Certifications
contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Market
Crosses of the Remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of
this Our Ancient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation make Intimation, that
Our said Parliament is Adjourned to the said eight day of November next to
come: And ordains these presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the last day of August, and of Our Reign
the eleventh year 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELLIOT Cls.
Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson' Printer to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1699.


