A PROCLAMATION For Securing the Kingdom against an Invasion designed from
France.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, To ^ Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms,
Our Sheriffs in that Part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute,
Greeting: Whereas the merciful Providence of GOD to Us, and Our Kingdoms, has
discovered a most wicked and Horrid Conspiracy to Assassinat Our Royal Person,
which was designed to have been Acted before an Invasion, which is intended
from France, for the Ruining Our Religion, and all that is dear to Our Good
Subjects; We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council have thought fit,
upon this Occasion to Require, Likeways We hereby do Require all Our loving
Subjects to be in a Readiness, as they shall receive Orders from Our Privy
Council, with their best Horses and Arms, to defend against any such Horrid
Invasion from France, and against the Attempts which may be made by Enemies, or
evil affected Persons at Home: And hereby require all Our loving Subjects,
especially Our Magistrates, Justices of Peace, Collectors at Our several
Seaports, and upon the Borders, to Stop and Seize all Persons coming into this
Our Ancient Kingdom, who have not sufficient Passes under one of the
Secretaries of State for either of the Kingdoms of Scotland or England, or
under the Lieutennant of Ireland their Hands. And farther, do hereby require all
Our loving Subjects to take special Notice of any Persons disaffected to ^^ur
Government, their keeping Meetings, and that they Discover the same timeously
to some of Our Privy ^^^ncil, or the next Magistrate of the Place, that the
said Persons may be secured and Proceeded against, as Persons Designing to
Disturb the Peace and Quiet of Our Government. And We with Advice foresaid, Do
hereby Require and Command all Our Sheriffs and their Deputs, to Seize all the
Horses above an Hundred Merks Price, and all sort of Arms more than a Walking
Sword, of such Persons who are obliged by the sixth Act of the fourth Session
of this Our current Parliament, to have Sworn and Signed the Oath of Allegiance
with the Assurance, and who have not Sworn and Signed the same: And Appoints
and Ordains the Magistrates of all the Towns upon the Sea Coasts of this
Kingdom, upon the first Sight of any Number of Ships Approaching Our Coast;
that they, by putting on Fires and Beacons, Advertise all Our Leidges thereof:
And that they likewise Advertise Our Privy Council of the same, by sending
Expresses. OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the haill Head-Burghs of the several
Shires and Stewartries within this Our ancient Kingdom, and there in Our Name
and Authority, make public Intimation of the Premises, that none pretend
Ignorance. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty ninth day of February, And of
Our Reign the seventh Year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB.
ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concili.

God Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
His Most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1696.


