A PROCLAMATION, For Delivery in of the Arms and Ammunition, etc. lately
brought into this Kingdom by the late Earl of Argile, and the other Rebels.
Present in Council,
The Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. The Duke of Queensberry, Lord High
Th^s^^^^. The Earl of Dramlanrlg. The Earl of Man. The Earl of Sout^erk. The
Earl of P^^^re. The Earl of Tweddale. The Earl of Belcarras. The L. Viscount
Tarbet. The L. Livingstoun. The L. Yester. General Dalyell. The L. Advocat. The
L. Justice-Clerk. The L. Castlehill. The Lord of Drumelzi^^.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting: Forasmuch as, We understanding that several of the Arms and
Ammunition, and other Warlike Provision, lately brought into this Kingdom, by
Archibald late Earl of Argyle, and his Traitorous Accomplices, are Intrometted
with, Seized on and Dispersed through the Country, which may be of ill
Consequence to Our Government, if Remeed be not provided there-against, both
for In-bringing of what of the said Arms and Ammunition, and other Warlike
Provision remains yet undisposed of, and discovering what thereof has been
given, bought or sold in the Country. We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy
Council, hereby strictly Require and Command, all Our Subjects, who have any
ways Intrometted with the said Arms, Ammunition, etc. either by Seizing or
Buying, or otherwise been delivered to them, to bring in, and deliver the same
to Our Magazines of Our Castles of Edinburgh, or Dambartoun, within the space
of one Month after the date hereof; Certifying them, if they ^ailzie so to do:
And that if any part of the said Arms, or Ammunition etc. shall be found with
them thereafter, that they, and these who have, or shall any ways intromet
therewith, shall not only be proceeded against, and punished as Thieves, and
resetters of Thift, but as disaffected to Our Government, and incouragers of
Our Enemies, with the outmost severity of Law: And that Oar Pleasure in the
Premises may be known: OUR WILL IS, and We charge you strictly, and Command,
That incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of the
Head-burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other Places needful, and there
in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make publication of this Our
Royal Proclamation, that none concerned may pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the Twenty fourth of July, 1685. And of
Our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL. MACKENZIE,
Cls, Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty. 1685.


