I7 R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For Surpressing of Tumults in Edinburgh, and elsewhere.
JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as there can nothing tend more to overturn the Protestant Religion,
Liberty and Property of the Kingdom in general, nor of every particular person,
than the being exposed to the Arbitrary Insults of Licentious Tumults, who
being guided only by blinded Rage, are ready to make a Prey of any whose
Estates, or Persons can satisfy their Revenge, or Avarice; Therefore the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council Considering the late Execrable Tumults, raised
within this City, and the formidable Effects thereof, not only within this
City, but that it has spread it self over the Country, Have thought fit to
Discharge all Tumultuary Meetings within this City, or Suburbs, under the
highest pains that Law can allow; And as by former Proclamations, so now again,
Command and Empower the Magistrates of this City to take all Effectual Courses
for Repressing these Tumults, Assuring them, that if they fail therein, they
will Transfer the Judicatures to some other Town, that will be more Loyal and
Obedient to Law, and that they will Interpole with His Majesty, that not only
the Town and Magistrates shall be punished, but that all their Deaconries shall
be Dissolved and their College closed up; And that for the future, all who
shall be found guilty, shall be Excepted from Acts of Indemnity; And lest
Strangers should (under the presence of Business) come in to this City, to
disturb the same, by the assistance of the said Tumults; We Do in a most
special manner Require and Empower them, to take up Lists of such as enter into
the City, and to look exactly unto their behavior, and to put them under
Caution, if they think fit: As also, to prevent Tumults in other Burghs, they
Command and Require the Magistrates to put the Laws in Execution, against all
such as Convocate themselves illegally, or offer to Invade or Rob private
Houses, and they Empower all Sheriffs, Baillies of Regalities, Baillies of
Bailiaries, or their Deputs, to prevent and dissipat all such Convocations
within their respective jurisdictions, And to Convocat all Heretors and others,
who are hereby Ordered to assist them, to the Effect foresaid, under all
highest pain. And Ordain these Presents to be forthwith Published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the thirteenth day of December, 1688. And
of Our Reign, the fourth year. Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. WILL.
PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD Save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty: Anno DOM. 1688.


