A PROCLAMATION, For Apprehending the Lord Bellendine.
Edinburgh, the fourth day of July, 1689.
THe Lord high Commissioner, and Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council being
well Informed of the horrid Murder, Committed by John Lord Bellendine, on the
third of this Instant July, upon one of His Majesty's Soldiers, under the
Command of Major General Mccay, without any occasion or provocation: Therefore
the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, in His Majesty's Name and Authority,
Have thought fit, by open Proclamation, to Certify the Leidges of this
Inhumane Murder, and do Require all Magistrates, Soldiers, and other Leidges,
to do their outmost Endeavor and Diligence, to Apprehend the said Lord
Bellendine, that he may be brought to condign Punishment, especially such of
the Leidges as lives at Passes, or Ferries; and in case any of the Leidges may
have seen the said Lord Bellendine before they were certified of his Crime, and
Required to Apprehend him, that immediately upon Intimation of this
Proclamation, these persons give notice to the next Magistrates, Justices of
Peace, Officers of the Army, or Constables, where they did see the said Lord
Bellendine, since the committing of the said Murder, to the effect he may be
Pursued, and Seized. Indemnifying hereby any Person from the hazard of
Slaughter, Mutilation, or any other Acts of Violence, which they may commit
against the said Lord Bellendine, or any persons with him, in Apprehending of
him: And for the further Encouragement of this Service, The Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Do Promise and Assure the Sum of Two thousand Merks
Scots to any person or Persons, who shall seize the said Lord Bellendine, and
Deliver him to any of His Majesty's Magistrates or Officers of his Army;
Discharging hereby any of His Majesty's Leidges to Shelter, Harbor, or any
ways Assist or Supply the said Lord Bellendine upon their highest peril. And
Ordains these Presents to be Printed and Published by Macers, Pursevants, or
Messengers, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, or any other places necessary.
Extracted by me,

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the Privy
Council, Anno Dom. 1689.


