A PROCLAMATION For a solemn and public Thanksgiving.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits (...) Macers of our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, greeting;
Whereas, We have thought fit, to appoint a solemn and public Day of
Thanksgiving, to be kept, for giving Thanks to Almighty GOD, for the great
Success of our Arms in our Expedition into our Kingdom of Ireland, against the
Enemies of the Protestant Religion, and Our Government, and for Our Safe
Return. Therefore, We with Advice and Consent of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, do hereby Indict, and Appoint a Day of solemn and public
Thanksgiving, to be Religiously Observed and Kept in all the Churches and
Meeting Houses within the City of Edinburgh, and in the Shires of Edinburgh,
Haddingtoun and Linlithgow upon Sunday next, the twenty one day of September
current; and in all the Churches and Meeting Houses of the other Shires and
Burghs of this Kingdom, upon Sunday, the fifth Day of October next: And Ordains
the Ministers in the said other Shires, to cause Read, and make Intimation
hereof upon the Sunday preceding, and that all Persons give punctual Obedience
hereunto, as they will be answerable at their highest Perril. And We require
Our Solicitor, in the most convenient Way and Method to dispatch, and send
printed Coppies of this Our Proclamation, to the Sheriffs of the several
Shires, and the Stewarts of the Stwartries, and their Deputs, and Clerks, whom
We ordain to cause Publish, and immediately transmit the famine to the
Ministers in all the Churches and Meeting Houses within their respective
Jurisdictions. And ordains their presents to be Printed, and Published at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Mercat-crosses of the Head-burghs of the
several Shires, and Stewartries within this Kingdom, that none may pretend
Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet, at Holy-rood-house, the seventeenth day of September,
one thousand six hundred and ninety, and of Our Reign the second Year. Per
Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. Gilb. Eliot. Cls. Sti. Concilii.
God save King William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majestys, 1690.


