THE Devout Companion: Containing PRAYERS AND MEDITATIONS FOR Every Day in the
Week: AND FOR Several Occasions. Ordinary and Extraordinary.

Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and Morning* and at Noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and
he shall hear my Voice. The Twelfth Edition.

LONDON, (...) Henry Rhodes, at the (...)he corner of Brile-(...) 1699.

TO THE Truly Honored, The LADY J. C.
MADAM,
AT Your Request these ensuing Prayers and Meditations were composed, which I
here present to Your view; not that You want my weak Instructions, for You are
known to be so good a Proficient in God's School, and have more of this
Heavenly Language by Heart, than I can instruct you by Precept.

The Meditations I have taken from the Psalms of that sweet singer of Israel,
the Royal Prophet; and this Key opens not only the Kingdom of Grace, but the
Kingdom of Heaven too; it being an exact Composure of all Christian Virtues.

No Worshipping can be more true or more spiritual than the Psalter, said with
a pure Mind and a hearty Devotion. For David was God's Instrument to the
Church, teaching and admonishing (as our Duty is to each other) in Psalms and
Hymns and spiritual Songs, making melody to the Lord.

In your Voyage to the Almighty, You might have (I doubt not) a better Card or
Compass to sail by* than this Form of Prayer which I prescribe; yet I beseech
You encourage others by Your pious Example to feed upon this Milk for Babes,
(those which are weak) by tasting of it your Self.

So recommending it to Your Pious Acceptance, wishing You all Happiness that
this Earthly Paradise can afford, whist You remain upon Earth, and at the last
a Crown of Immorral Glory in the highest Heavens, is the earnest desire of,

Madam, Your humble and faithful Servant in Christ Jesus, E. S.

THE Devout Companion: Containing MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS, For every Day in the
Week, etc.
A Preparatory Prayer against wandering Thoughts, and vain Imaginations.
Thrice Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and One God, have
mercy upon me a miserable Sinner.

O Almighty God, the only Giver and Bestower of all good things, and without
whose special Favor and Grace, no Man has Power to perform any spiritual Duty
as he ought to do: O Lord! I know not what to pray for as I ought, O let thy
Spirit help my Infirmities, and enable me to offer up a spiritual Sacrifice,
acceptable to thee by Jesus Christ.

II.
Make me to remember into whose Presence I am come, and with whom I have to do;
even with a God of infin^te Majesty; before whom the Cherubims veil their
Faces, as being astonished at the Presence of so great a God as thou art. How
dare I then, a most vile and sinful Creature, who am but Dust and Ashes,
presume to appear at this time before thee, who have drunk Iniquity like Water,
breaking so often thy holy Laws and Commandments, by committing those things
thou forbiddest: and leaving undone those good things thou command.

III.
But I come unto thee, O Lord, in the name of thy dear Son, Jesus Christ the
Righteous; who has redeemed me with his most precious Blood. O then look upon
me in him, and for the merits of his Sufferings, pardon all my Sins, and blot
out my Offenses. Strike an awful reverence in my Soul, that I may continually
keep a watch over my Thoughts, Words, and Actions, least my Presumption, and
want of due Reverence unto thy Deity, should turn my Prayers into Sin.

IV.
Give me a lively apprehension of all my wants and necessities, and a right
Understanding both of those Blessings which I have received from thee, and of
those great Mercies which thou have promised to bestow on them that ask thee;
that so I may be endued with Expressions both for Prayer and Thankfulness; and
may become able, by the assistance of thy Grace, to pour out my Soul
continually before thee. Support me with Faith, that I may come with a good
assurance to thy Throne of Grace, to offer up my earnest Supplications unto
thee, and let me not go away from thy presence without a Blessing.

V.
Grant, Lord, that this holy Exercise of Prayer may prove a delight to me! O
make me constant and diligent in the use of it; remembering the speedy access
the Prayers of the Faithful have in thy Presence; and what a great Privilege it
is for poor Mortals to unfold their Wants, and lay open their Desires and
Griefs before thee.

VI.
Ever, O Lord, let the end of my Prayers be to thy Glory; always exercising a
Conscience void of Offense, by offering up my Thanksgivings for Mercies
received, as I shall be earnest in suing for those Gifts and Graces I stand in
need of. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for the sake of thy dear Son, my only
Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

Meditations for Sunday.
THis is the Day which the Lord has made, a Day of Rest to our Bodies, and for
the Benefit of our Souls. O let us rejoice, and be glad in it all the Days of
our L(...); leaving off our worldly Thoughts and Employments, and be ^eeking
after our future Happiness.

II.
Great i^ the Lord, and great is the Honor of this day above all others. The
Jews kept Holy the Seventh Day, and we Christians the Sunday, or Lord's Day:
They in their Sabbath were especially to remember the Creation of the World,
but we in ours, the Resurrection of Christ, who has made a way for us into
that better world which we expect hereafter.

III.
This convinces the Folly of the Jews, who are so superstitious in observing
the Ceremony of Rest, as that they think they ought not to prepare any Food for
their bodily sustenance on the Sabbath Day; neither do any work, though it be for
the Resection of Life it self. But God in the Institution of the S^bbath so
rested, whose Example we ought to imitate, as that he ce(...) not in ^^sting
from doing good, but in c^^sing to Create, he continued to Preserve, of which
our Savior says, My Father works hitherto, and I work.

IV.
This Day is set apart, to be employed in the Worship and Service of God; First
more solemnly and publicly in the House of God, from whence none ought to
absent himself, unless sickness or some extraordinary occasion prevent him.
Secondly, at home privately praying with your Family, or in your Closet,
exercising those other Duties of Reading and Meditation.

V.
O Praise the Lord then, O my Soul, and enter into Contemplation with thy self
upon all his Mercies, Consider what a great Benefit it is to thee, that there
is such a set time weekly for thy spiritual Relief and Comfort; cast off all
worldly Business then, and freely embrace this joyful Day of harvest whereby we
may lay up in store for the whole Week, nay even for our whole Lives.

VI.
This day furnishes us with that Golden Rule, by which we may square all our
Actions, and at last attain to the perfection of him whom the Royal Psalmist
makes mention of, to be a pattern of true Goodness, and tells you, The Lord
orders a good Man's going, and makes his way acceptable to himself: Though
he fall, he shall not be cast away; for the Lord upholdeth him with his Hand.

VII.
The Law of God is in his Heart and his goings shall not slide. O send out thy
Light and thy Truth, that they may lead me and bring me unto thy holy Hill, and
to thy Dwelling. And that I may go unto the Altar of God, even unto the God of
my Joy and Gladness, and upon the Harp will I give Thanks unto thee, O God my
God. We wait for thy Loving Kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple.

A Morning Prayer for Sunday: For the Worship of God.
MOst mighty and gracious God, which have brought me out of the Night's
Darkness into the mavelous Light of thy Truth, to see the Light of thy Love,
that I may rejoice in the Day of my Visitation and Salvation, whereby the
Dayspring from on high has visited me, and in the Day of Salvation thou will
succor me.

II.
This Day make me hear thy Voice, and not harden my Heart through unbelief or
deceitfulness of Sin, but that by Faith I may enter into thy promised Rest:
Give Grace unto me, O Lord, and to all People, to walk circumspectly and
diligently, to do such good Works wherewith thou may be well pleased; so
that walking in thy Ways, and according to thy Commandments, I may work out my
own Salvation with fear and trembling; that as my Body draws nearer the Grave,
my Soul may approach the nearer Heaven.

III.
O Lord, I beseech thee, to be merciful unto me, and as of thy goodness thou
give me time to Repent, so of thine infinite Mercy give me such a true, holy,
and perfect Repentance, never to be repented of: And grant, O Lord, that I may
unfeignedly Resolve and effectually Labor to amend my Life this Day, even to
my Life's end, that so I may never be tempted above what I am able to bear.

IV.
I am beginning the Week, but alas I begin not to be re^ormed in my Life and
Conversation, but the more Weeks pass over my Head, the greater burden of Sin
I take upon my Back, and do the more defile my Conscien^e. Day by Day I run on
in my Wickedness, and never say to my self, What have I done? If I should at
this Week's end cast up the Account of my good Deeds, how few Lines, alas would
they contain!

V.
O Lord, I beseech thee, pardon and forgive me all my Sins, remove them out of
thy presence, as far distant as the East is from the West. Accept of me in the
Death and Passion of thy Son Jesus Christ, that where I shall come into thy
Temple, to compass thine Altar, my Prayers may come up before thee as Incense,
and the lifting up of my Hands as an Evening Sacrifice.

VI.
And as I desire that thou would hear me calling upon thee in my Prayers, so
give me Grace to hear thee calling upon me in thy Word. It is the word of
Truth, Wisdom, Righteousness, and Reconciliation, which is able to save my Soul
in the Day of the Lord Jesus* grant therefore that I may hear it with
Reverence, receive it with Meekness, and mingle it with Faith, that it may
accomplish in me that good Work, for which thou have sent it.

VII.
I know not alas how to Worship thee as I ought; my Sins have made a Wall of
separation betwixt-thee and me, so that neither my Prayers can ascend up unto
thee as they should, nor thy Graces descend upon me as I would desire them. O
break, I beseech thee, this Partition Wall, slide thou down into the secret
Habitation of my Heart by thy mighty Power, and strengthen every privy Corner
of that neglected House, by the brightness of thy Illumination; feed thou every
secret part both of my Mind and Body; keep me from Sin, and let me serve thee
this Day in thy Sanctuary.

VIII.
Bless those Messengers o^ thine, O Lord, that break unt^ me the Bread of Life.
As tho^ have placed them like Beacons o^ thy holy Hill, the Church, giv^ them
Grace (with the five Wis^ Virgins) that their Light may never go forth, but
still shine brightly to arm us thy People against the Invasion of that Enemy of
Mankind, the Devil, and his Army, that Day and Night seek to devour us.

IX.
Let me spend the rest of my uncertain Life in a renewed Repentance for my Sins
past, and an holy Resolution to serve thee for the time to come. Grant, O Lord,
these and all other Graces meet for me, for thy Son's sake, my only Lord and
Savior; To whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all Praise and Glory, for
evermore.

Amen
A Prayer at our Entrance into the Church.
O Almighty God, who dwell in that Light which no mortal is able to approach
unto, yet art present with us in this thy sacred House! O Lord, my God, my only
Comfort and Riches, what am I that I dare speak unto thee? I am thy poor
Servant, teach me to climb and ascend up unto thee by Invocation and Prayer.

II.
Make this Religious Place as thine Ark, and let thy Dove, thy holy Spirit,
enter in at these windows; let a good measure of thy word, and an effectual
preaching thereof, be evermore preserved and distributed in this place; let no
evil Leprosy ever enter into these Walls, nor the hand of Sacrilege ever fall
upon them.

III.
The Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few; send forth, I beseech thee,
more into thy Vineyard, and endue them with such Wisdom as becomes thy holy
Gospel. Open unto them the Door of Utterance, and unto me the Gate of
Understanding, that they may faithfully dispend thy Mysteries, and I fervently
embrace the same, to thy Glory, and the Salvation of my Soul, through Jesus
Christ my only Lord and Savior,

Amen
A Prayer for Sunday Noon: For Perseverance.
O God, most gracious and merciful, who hate nothing that thou have made, but
^rt willing that all should par^ake of thy Celestial Love; I ^ave this day
visited thy House, ^he Place where thine Honor dwells; grant, I beseech
thee, that I may still persevere and press forward in that holy Duty of serving
thee all the Days of my Life.

II.
Vouchsafe to me, O Lord, I beseech thee, thy Heavenly Grace, that I may avoid
the precipices of Sin, which lead to destruction, and endeavor to serve thee,
in Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of my Life: Grant that in thy Light
I may see Light; and as I have begun this Day in praising and lauding thy holy
Name so let it end to thy Glory: To whom be ascribed all Honor, Power, and
Glory, both now and for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for the Afternoon, after Sermon. A Thanksgiving for the Word preached.
O Lord most Holy, whose Truth endures from everlasting to everlasting; Thou
have been merciful and gracious to me, and have filled me which am hungry with
good things, and none of thy Servants do thou send empty away from thy holy
Sanctuary: Plant thy Fear in my Heart, give me Wisdom and good Understanding,
and make me to have pleasure in thee and all thy works; that ^beying the
Precepts of thy ho^y Gospel, and performing the Conditions of thy Covenant
which thou have established for ^ver in Truth and Equity, in Verity and
Judgment, I may ^orthily praise and adore thy ^oly Name among the Faithful ^
this Life, and in the Congre^ation of Saints in the Life to ^ome, through thy
Mercies, O ^lessed Jesu, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ^ll
Honor and Glory, now and or ever.

Amen
A Prayer for Sunday Evening: For Pardon of Sin.
O Almighty God, I acknowledge and confess those many weaknesses and
imper^ections I am guilty of, in my performance of the Duti^ of this Day: I
have called up on thee for the pardon and fo^giveness of my Sins: I have heard
thy holy Word, but y^ find my self a very unprofit^ble Servant. So that, O Lord
though I have done thy Wor^ I have done it so negligently that I may rather
expect the fire of thy Anger, than a Ble^sing from thee.

II.
But if thou, O God, should be extreme to mark what done amiss, O Lord, who ca^
abide it: or stand before the when thou art angry? Remember that I am but dust
and ashe^ and the work of thine ow^ hands: Pardon, I beseech the^ and pass by
all my Sins, Negl^gences, and Ignorances; loo^ not upon the weakness of m^
Flesh, but upon the willingness ^f my Spirit, and so cover all ^y
imperfections, with the ^erfect and absolute obedience ^f thy dear Son, that
those Sa^rifices offered up by me this day ^ay be by thee accepted, in, and for
that Sacrifice which Christ Jesus offered upon the Cross once for me.

III.
And as I earnestly desire that my Sacrifices may be pleasing and acceptable to
thee, so let thine Ordinances be profitable to me. And as thou have this day
sown ^n my heart the precious seed of thy Word, so let neither the Fowls of the
Air devour it, nor the Cares of the World choke ^it; but let the former and the
^atter Rain of thy blessing come often upon it, that it may bring forth in me
the Fruits of true Repentance, and hearty amen^ment of Life. Pardon my m^nifold
Sins by which I have provoked thee this very day.

IV.
Be thou unto me a mercifu^ God, in despite of the Snare and Delusions which
Sin lays i^ the way for my Destruction and keep me under the shadow of thy
Wings, in perpetua^ Peace and Safety. Bless me thi^ Night; sleeping or waking,
giv^ thine Angels charge over me that at whatsoever hour thou call me, I
may, like a faithful Soldier, stand ready prepared to encounter Death, and to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Grant these things, O blessed Father, for
thy Son Jesus Christ his sake my only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen
Meditations for Monday: Out of the Psalms: For a holy Life.
MY song shall be of mercy and judgment, unto thee, O lord, will I sing. Let me
have un^erstanding in the way of godliness.

When will thou come unto me? ^ will walk i^ my house with a per^ect heart. I
will take no wicked thing: I hate the Sins of unfaith^ulness: there shall no
such cleave unto me.

A froward heart shall depart from me; I will not know a wick^d Person.

Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I destroy.

Whosoever has also a proud look and high stomach, I will not suffer him.

There shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, he that tells ^yes shall
not tarry in my sight.

I shall s^on destroy all the ungodly that are in the Land: that may root out
all wicked do from the City of the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Monday Morning For a Holy Life.
O God most Holy and Righteous, who show Mercy unto thousands, and hates^
nothing thy own hands have made: who fillest me with thy loving kindness every
Morning and keep me in Peace and Safety in the Night season.

II.
I confess, O Lord, that I am altogether Vanity, a shadow of Death, a dark
Dungeon, a barren and empty Ground, where no Water is, but deluges of Wrath and
Confusion: But, O Lord, I abhor my self, and repent before thee in dust and
ashes; and as Sins of Infirmity have thrown me down, raise me up again, I
beseech thee, by the Gift of Penitence, that I may lead a holy Life with all
Humility, Truth and Justice, Godliness and Honesty, in this present World.

III.
I bless thy holy Name for thy Care and Protection over me this Night; that
thou have safely brought me to the beginning of this day, delivering me from
the shadow of Death O Lord continue thy wonted goodness toward me this Day,
and grant that all my Prayers, Words, Works and Actions, may begin and end in
thy Glory.

IV.
Keep me, O Lord, I beseech thee, this day without, sin, and so replenish me
with thy Favor and Grace that my heart may rejoice and delight in thy praises.
Deliver me, O Lord, from lying Lips, and from a deceitful Tongue; keep me from
the Snare of the Hunter, and from the noisome and infectious Pestilence; from
deadly Vexation, mortal Sickness, and sudden Death.

V.
Protect me in the day of my Trouble; give me a contented Mind, which may
remain unto me a continual Feast, in whatsoever changes or chances may befall
me in this transitory Life. Grant that I may yield up my self to thy good
Pleasure in all things, and be obedient unto those holy Commandments which thou
have appointed for my Rule and Guide. So that at the last I may find, that in
keeping thy Holy Laws there is great Reward: Grant this, O heavenly Father, for
thy Son's sake, my only Redeemer.

Amen
A Prayer for Monday Noon: For Forgiveness of Sins.
O God the searcher of all hearts, and from whom no secrets are hid, but are
laid open to thine all-seeing Eye; I here acknowledge my Sins unto thee, and
mine Iniquities, which are many in number: I come unto thee, O Lord, who art
the fountain of all goodness, and forgivest all those that with hearty
Repentance come unto thee: Pardon and remit all those Sins, which this day I
have committed against thy Divine Majesty. Purge me with Hyssop and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow: Let the dew of thy Favor, and
the fire of thy Love, blot out all my Sins and purify my Soul.

II.
Create in me a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me: Let me not be
for ever separated from the sweet refreshings of thy Favourand presence; but
give me the comfort of thy help again, and let thy free Spirit loose me from
the bondage of Sin, and establish me in the freedom and liberty of the Sons of
God: So shall I praise thy Name, and evermore sing of thy Righteousness in the
Congregation of thy redeemed ones, now, henceforth, and for ever.

Amen
A Prayer for Monday Night: For Preservation.
O Lord most Holy, I praise and magnify thy holy Name for preserving of me
this Day both in Soul and Body. O thou who art Alpha and Omega, bless and
defend me with thy heavenly Grace this Night: let my rest be in thee, and grant
that neither much sleep overwhelm me, nor Satan invade me: though my Eyes
sleep, yet, O Lord, keep my Heart waking; lest the subtle Tempter overtake me,
and I sleep in perpetual silence. Keep me in the arms of thy Providence; give
sleep to my Eyes and slumber unto my Eyelids; compass me about, and raise me
up again to the joyful sight of the ^ext Morning Light; and after this
miserable Life is ended, grant that in thy Light I may see Light for evermore.

Meditations for Tuesday: For defense of our Innocenc^, and against the malice
of our Enemies.
O Lord, my God in thee have I put my trust: Save me from all them that
pers^cute me, and deliver me.

Lest he devour my Soul like a Lion; and tear it in pieces, while there is none
to help.

O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing, o^ ^f there be any wickedness in
my hands;

If I have rewarded evil unto him that d^al^ friendly with ^e* yea I have
delivered him that without any cause is mine Enemy:

Then let (...) Enemy pers^cute my S^u^ and take me: Yea, let him ^ead my life
down upon the Earth, and l^y mine honor in the dust

Stand up, O Lord, in thy wr^th, and lift up thy self; because of the
indignation of mine Enemies, arise up f^r me in the judgment that thou have
commanded.

And so shall the Congregation of the people come about thee: For their sakes
therefore lift up thy sel^ again.

The Lord shall judge the people: Give sentence with me, O Lord, according to
my righteousnes^, and according to the innocenc^ that is in me.

O let the wickedness of the ungodly come to an end; but guide thou the just.

For the righteous God tries the very heart and reins.

My Help comes of God, which preserves them that are true of heart.

God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient; and God is provoked every day.

If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword; he has bent his bow, and made
it ready.

He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordained his arrows
against the persecutors.

Behold he travaileth with mischief: he has conceived sorrow and brought forth
ungodliness.

He has graven and dug up a pit, and is fallen himself into the destruction
that he made for others.

For his travail shall come upon his own head; and his wickedness shall fall
upon his own pate.

I will give thanks unto the Lord according to his righteousness, and will
praise the Name of the Lord the most High.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Tuesday Morning: For Protection from our Enemies.
O Almighty God, who art a strong rock of defense to all those who trust in
thee; deliver me, I beseech thee, from those Mouths, who, like Lions roaring
for their Prey, seek to devour me: Abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and
confound their Devices; save me from the hands of all those who seek to do me
evil, and let their wickedness and Hellish contrivance come utterly to an end
for evermore.

II.
I magnify thy holy Name for thy preservation of me this Night. Grant that I
may walk this Day according to thy heavenly will in all things, not returning
evil for good, but on the contrary good for evil. Disperse from me all clouds
of Envy, Hatred or Malice which seem to hover over me; and though heaviness may
endure for a Night; yet, O Lord, let thy Joy, and light of thy countenance
appear in the Morning.

III.
Give me Grace not to rejoice in any thing that displeases thee, but evermore
to delight in those things which are most pleasing to thee, be they never so
disagreeable to my desires. Defend me, O Lord, from all shame and disgraces of
this life; mortify all the corrupt affections that are in me, and pardon the
innumerable Sins which I have committed. Bless, preserve and keep me this Day
by thy power from sin, shame and all evil, and so direct me by thy ^ace, that
all my thoughts, words and works may please ^hee, through the merits of Jesus
Christ, my only Lord and Savior.

Amen
A Prayer for Tuesday Noon: For God's Grace and Favor.
O God most Holy, who guidest and governest all those that trust in thee; I
beseech thee defend me daily; cherish, comfort, govern, and counsel me in all
my enterprises, so that I may employ this Day, and all the days of my Life,
according to thy blessed will; setting thee always before my eyes, and aiming
at thy Glory.

II.
Let me earnestly seek, and find thee, O my hearts desire; and let me hold thee
fast, whom my Soul loves; let me enjoy thee, O my spiritual comfort, in all my
faculties, even in my heart let me possess thee. Be thou for ever present with
me in all my undertakings; let thy Favor refresh me, and thy Grace which is
sufficient for me, support me; though I walk through this valley and shadow of
Death, I may fear no Evil while thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

III.
Convert and turn the hearts of those which seek to do me Evil; and do hate me
without a cause: keep me from their anger, which is fierce, and from the wrath
of them which are cruel; and bring them down in their high imaginations, lest
they be too proud. Grant that the remaining part of this Day, I may walk in thy
Fear; so that at the last I may enter into thy Glory, through the merits of
Jesus Christ my only Savior.

Amen
A Prayer for Tuesday Night: Of Thanksgiving for God's Mercies.
I Render thee most humble and hearty Thanks for thy Preservation of me this
Day, and relieving me according to my several Necessities. Thou have this Day
past defended me from all Danger, given me my daily Bread, and hourly breath:
continue still, I beseech thee, thy undeserved Mercies toward me; and accept
this my Evening Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving.

II.
Let not the meanness of my Devotion cause thee to turn away thine Eyes from
me, but according to thine accustomed kindness, spare thy Servant, good Lord,
and be not angry with him for ever. Preserve me this Night, O thou that
preservest all the World; and taking my natural repose, I may through thy
protection and ready help, be defended both now and evermore.

Amen
Meditations for Wednesday.
THe Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork.

One day tells another; and one night certifieth another.

There is neither speech nor language; but their voices are heard among them.

Their sound is gone out into all lands; and their words unto the ends of the
world.

In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun; which comes forth as a
Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoiceth as a giant to run his course.

It goes forth from the uttermost part of the Heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the Soul; the Testimony of
the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

The Statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart; the Commandment of
the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the Eyes.

The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they than gold; yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also
than honey, and the honeycomb.

Moreover, by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is great
reward.

Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over
me: so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offense.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be always acceptable
in thy sight,

O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Wednesday Morning; For Repentance.
O Eternal God, before whom all Creatures both in Heaven and Earth do bow, fear
and tremble; I a most wretched and miserable Creature, dejected with the
weighty burden of my Sins, fly unto thee for Succor. Plant in my heart the
Fear of thy Name, and in my body the purity and cleanness of Charity; and let
them abide there for ever. Cleanse me from all my secret Sins, and preserve me
from presumptuous and great Offenses: Touch my heart, O God, with true
Repentance, that thy Judgments present and imminent, may be prevented and
removed; and the overflowing silver stream and current of thy Mercies, be never
at an end.

II.
Be gracious to my Relations in the flesh, my Friends in the spirit, with all
those to whom I am any way bounden, or desire to be commended unto thee in my
Prayers and Supplications. Expel, O Lord, and cast out of my heart all evil
Imagination, Hatred, Malice, and all Uncharitableness, and whatsoever is
contrary to thy holy Commandments.

III.
I praise thy holy Name for thy preservation of me this Night past, for the
Gifts and Graces of thy Blessed Spirit; as Faith in thy Promises, Hope of a
better Life when this is ended, and strength against all the temptations of
Satan; all which have proceeded from the Fountain of thy Mercy: As thou have of
thy Providence kept me ever since I was born, and in Mercy preserved me the
beginning of this Week, so to my Comfort grant me the continuance of the same,
through Jesus Christ, my only Redeemer and Advocate.

Amen
A Prayer for Wednesday Noon: For God's particular Care of us.
O Almighty God, I cry unto thee for Mercy, by reason my Sins cry against me
for Justice; all the day long will I lift up my Heart unto thee: shut not thine
Ear, O Lord, but hear my complaint, and that right soon. Let me in all things
see that I am upheld by thee: Let me perceive it is thy Work, by the Health of
my Body and Peace of my Conscience in the Gift of my Mind, the Credit of my
Name, and the Work of my Calling.

II.
But, alas, can there be greater Mercies, O Lord, than thou have already
expressed toward me! for whilst I have enjoyed all thy Mercies, others have
lived in penury and want, in ignorance, profaneness, and without thee in the
World.

III.
What can I render unto the Lord for all his Mercies toward me? Let me not
pledge Joseph's Botler in his Cup of Oblivion, but David rather in his Cup of
Salvation; and if my single heart be too barren of thankfulness, let me borrow
a magnificat O my Soul, to magnify Thee O Lord, and let my Spirit rejoice in
thee, O God my Savior. What shall I say unto thee, O thou Redeemer of all
Mankind? I will praise thy holy Name. For evermore inspire me with thy Spirit,
convert me from Evil, confirm me in all Goodness, and bring me at last unto thy
heavenly Kingdom.

Amen
A Prayer for Wednesday Night: For deliverance from Sin.
MOST merciful God, I beseech thee to open the Eyes of my understanding, that I
may come to a particular knowledge of my secret Sins, especially those I am
most inclined to. Soften my hard and flinty heart, that I may sigh and groan
under t^^ weight of my most pressing sins; and acknowledge them a Burden too
heavy for me to bear.

II.
Stir up in me all dull and dead Affections, that I may hunger and thirst after
thee, the wellspring of Life. Forgive me all my misdemeanors of this day past;
make me to remember, that Sin is filthy and loathsome, even in the greatest
pleasure and act thereof; teach me to keep a continual watch over my inward and
outward Man, whereby I may be afraid to commit the least Sin, that so I may
walk according to thy holy will in all things.

III.
Give me this Night sweet and comfortable rest, and fit me, O Lord, for the
duties and service of the next day: Turn from me O Lord those judgments which
my sins have justly deserved, and renew those hopes which thou have been
pleased to frustrate; crown me with those blessings, which thou have promised
to all these that fear thy Name, so that at the last I may attain everlasting
Happiness, and live with thee in perpetual peace and safety for evermore.

Amen
Meditations for Thursday.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song; for he has done mavelous things. With his
own right hand, and with his holy arm has he gotten himself the victory.

The Lord declared his Salvation: his R^ghteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the Heathen.

He has remembered his Mercy and Truth toward the House of Israel; and all the
ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands; sing, rejoice, and give
thanks.

Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a Psalm of Thanksgiving.

With trumpets also and shawms: O show your selves joyful before the Lord the
King.

Let the Sea make a noise, and all that therein is; the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord; for he is come to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Thursday Morning. A Sacrifice of Praise.
O Most glorious and powerful Lord God who with thy holy arm has gotten for me
the Victory over Sin, Hell, and the Grave. I praise thee, O Lord, from the very
bottom of my heart, for all thy love and boundless mercy and kindness; for thy
holy Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and sitting
at the right hand of God the Father; where thou make Intercession for me.

II.
In thy merits I beseech thee to look upon me: thou art that living Sacrifice
that was offered up for me, and in thy Name do I offer up unto thee this my
morning Sacrifice; evermore praising thee, and magnifying thy holy Name.
Mortify in me all fleshly Corruptions; quicken me in the inner Man: By the
power of thy death let me die unto Sin, and by the power of thy Resurrection,
let me rise to Righteousness and newness of Life. Let the one as an antidote
expel the poison of Ungodlyness, and the other as a restorative excite me to
Holiness.

III.
Enlighten my Understanding, that I may know thy Will; reform my Life, that I
may do all things aright, and to discern Good and Evil. Teach me to fear thy
Name, to neglect all things in regard of thee, to be grieved at my own and
others Sins; but rejoice exceedingly whenever I can please thee. Let me this
Day labor, that whatsoever I do may be pleasing in thy sight; as I am thy
Servant, let me depend upon thee, and as I am a Christian, walk worthy of my
Vocation and Calling.

IV.
Be gracious and favorable unto the whole Church, and bless every particular
Member thereof; be good to the light of our Eyes, the breath of our Nostrils,
thy Solomon, our gracious King; bless thine own Tribe, the Tribe of Levi, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, and let thy Peace rest upon those that pray
for our Peace, wheresoever dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth. Lord
keep me the remaining part of this Day in thy Truth, and give me Peace and true
Faith in thee, now and for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for Thursday Noon: For God's Blessing on our Endeavors.
O Eternal and most gracious God, who though thou art ever infinite, yet
enlargest thy self by the number of our Prayers, and take our often Petitions
to thee to be an addition to thy Glory; so great is thy Humility toward poor
Mortals. I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, that thine Eyes may continually
attend upon me, and thy Grace daily defend me from all danger: succor,
cherish, and comfort me in my Necessities, and govern all my counsels, Studies,
and Labors, so that I may spend this Day according to thy blessed Will, and
the discharge of my own Conscience; that warily avoiding all things, that may
displease thee, and setting always before my Eyes thy Fear* I may by the
assistance of thy heavenly Grace, and the guidance of thy holy Spirit, work
that which is acceptable and pleasing unto thee, unto thy Praise and Glory, for
ever.

Amen
A Prayer for Thursday Night: For Deliverance from Sudden Death.
O Lord most holy, the giver of all good things, and the protector of all those
that love thee, I give thee most humble and hearty thanks, nor only for thy
preservation of me this day, but all my life; O Lord forgive me the Offenses I
have committed against thee this Day, blot out all my sins with the blood of
thy dear Son jesus Christ, and I beseech thee for his sake remember them no
more.

II.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to extend thine accustomed goodness, and protection over me
this Night, that I may peaceably and quietly take my rest, which thou have
appointed for the refreshing of my wearied and weak body: and I beseech thee to
defend me, that nothing hurt me; keep me also, good Lord, from sudden and
unprovided Death, and preserve me by the guard of thy holy Angels, that I may
enjoy my rest this Night in thee until the Morning, and then give my self to
the fulfilling of my Duty, the discharge of my Employment, and the working of
thy will unto my life's end.

III.
In whose Name I referr my self wholly to the Almighty Protection, even in the
Name of thy blessed Son Jesus Christ the Righteous; beseeching thee that when
this Life shall have an end, and my last sleep being come, I may take my
everlasting Rest with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom; for the which Kingdom, I do
heartily beseech thee of thine inestimable goodness, to fit and prepare me and
all other thy Servants to the attainment of the same; for the glory of thy holy
Name, and the everlasting comfort of our own Souls.

Amen
Meditations for Friday,
THe Lord, even the most mighty God has spoken, and called the world, from the
rising up of the Sun unto the going down thereof.

Out of S^on has God appeared in perfect beauty.

Our God shall com^ and shall not keep silence; there shall go before him a
consuming fir^; and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him.

He shall call the Heaven from above, and the Earth, that he may judge his
People.

Gather my Saints together unto me: those that have made a Covenant with me
with Sacrifice.

And the Heavens shall declare his Righteousness; for God is Judge himself.

Hear, O my People, and I will speak: I my self will testify against thee, O
Israel; for I am God, even thy God.

I will not reprove thee because of thy Sacrifices, or for thy Burntofferings;
because they were not always before me.

I will take no Bullock out of thine house, nor He-goats out of thy fold.

For all the Beasts of the Forest are mine, and so are the Cattle upon a
thousand hills.

I know all the Fowls upon the mountains: and the wild Beasts of the field are
in my sight.

If I be hungry, I will not tell thee; for the whole world is mine, and all
that is therein.

Think thou that I will eat Bulls flesh, and drink the blood of Goats?

Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most highest.

And call upon me in the time of trouble; so will I hear thee, and thou shall
praise me.

But unto the ungodly, said God, why do thou preach my Laws, and take my
Covenant in thy mouth?

Whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my Words behind thee.

When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst unto him; and h^st been partaker
with the Adulterers.

Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness, and with thy tongue thou have set
forth deceit.

Thou satest and spakest against thy Brother; yea, and have slandered thine own
Mother's Son.

These things have thou done, and I held my tongue: and thou thoughtest
wickedly, that I am even such a one as they self; but I will reprove thee, and
set before thee the things that thou have done.

O consider this, ye that forg^t God, lest I pluck you away, and there be none
to deliver you.

Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honors me: and to him that orders
his conversatition aright, will I show the salvation of God.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Friday Morning: A Confession of Sins.
O Most mighty and merciful God, I presume to present my self this Morning
before thy Divine Majesty, to offer up unto thee this my early sacrifice; but
in the performance of it, I make known my unworthiness and disclose my
Weakness, and exceedingly discover my imperfections and wretchedness.

II.
For, alas, I draw near unto thee with my lips, but my heart is far from thee;
I call upon thee with my tongue, but my soul at the same time commits
wickedness against thee: My righteousness comes short of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and are but as filthy Rags: my holiness but as a morning Dew, yea
all my actions of Devotion (if weighed in thy Balance) are but abomination in
thy sight: From the soal of the Foot, unto the crown of the Head, I am
altogether polluted and unclean; yea nothing to be found in me but wounds, and
putrefied sores, imprinted and stamped into my soul and flesh by the custom of
my Sin.

^.
My Eyes are full of Vanity, my Ears full of ^niquity, my Hands of Impurity, my
Will perverse to that which is Good, my Remembrance affable and pleasing to
that which is Evil, my Understanding is darkened, my Conscience seared, my Head
full of mischief, my feet swift to shed blood; Destruction and Wickedness are
in all my ways, and the way of Peace have I not known.

IV.
Since then, O Lord, that my Sins are so great and grievous against thy Law and
against thy Gospel, if thou should be so extreme as to mark against me what
I have done amiss, who is able to abide it? If thou should call me suddenly
to a strict account, how should I show my Face? If I deny waht is laid to my
charge, my Conscience will accuse me; If I forswear, the dumb and senseless
Creatures will bear witness against me.

V.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is no Friend in the Earth beneath,
which I have in comparison of thee, no other Mediator amongst Men and Angels,
but even thine only begotten Son Christ Jesus, in whom only thou art well
pleased? by the virtue of whose Death and Passion, and the remembrance of whose
precious blood, which trickled down from his side, wash me from my sins; and
besprinkle my polluted Heart from an evil Conscience.

VI.
And I beseech thee O Lord, not only to wash away my sins with the blood of
thine immaculate Lamb, but also to purge my heart by thine only Spirit, from
the dross of my natural Corruptions, that I may feel thy Spirit more and more,
killing Sin in the power and practice thereof; so that I may with more freedom
of mind and liberty of will, serve thee the ever* living God, in Righteousness
and Holiness this Day, and all the days of my Life, for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for Friday Noon: For God's Direction.
O Lord most holy, I beseech thee to direct all my ways, correct my wanderings,
and erect my wild and worldly Thoughts unto thee, the God of my Salvation.
Learn me that divine Art of living in thy Fear, to labor in thy Service, and
evermore run swiftly in the ways of thy Commandments. Direct my Thoughts, Words
and Works; preserve and bless me in my going out and coming in; and grant that
whatsoever my heart shall think, my tongue utter, or my hands exercise this
day, may tend to the glory of thy holy Name, the good of others, and the
comfort of my own Conscience.

II.
End these sinful days; O blessed Redeemer, and hasten thy coming; and give me
Grace to stand ready prepared to meet thee, who art the sweet Bridegroom of my
Soul; that at thy coming, whether it be by the hour of Death, or at the day of
Judgment, I may joyfully pronounce those blessed words of, Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

III.
Deliver me, O Lord, from all those heavy Judgments which hang over my head as
due unto me for my Transgressions: separate them as far from thy presence in
distance, as the East is from the West; bury them all in thy Grave, that they
neither rise to shame me in this Life, nor condemn me in the World to come: To
whom be ascribed for thine infinite Mercy, all Honor, Praise and Glory, from
this time forth and for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for Friday Night: Against carnal Security.
O Merciful Father, I here prostrate my self in all humility and reverence of
heart and mind, beseeching thee to guide and protect me this Night with thy
blessed Spirit, and though my sinful flesh shall slumber and sleep, yet grant
that my Soul may continually ^e vigilant.

II.
Let not the Enemy come upon me unawares and find me slumbering or sleeping, as
rocked in the Cradle of carnal Security; lest I being unarmed and destitute of
thy favor and help, he enter into the House of my sinful Body, and their takes
possession of my leprous Soul; and endanger both to be thrown into the Lake
which burns with Fire and Brimstone.

III.
Make me to consider that my Bed is but a pattern of the Grave, and that when I
lay my self down in it, I cannot rise up unless thy heavenly Providence enables
me. Teach me to acknowledge that sleep is the very Figure and Image of Death,
to whose stroke at thy appointed time, I must submit and resign my self; endue
me with Love and Charity to all Men; let my Lamp, O Lord, be filled with fresh
Oil, that whenever thy Messenger, Death, approaches, and knocks at the Gate
of this mortal Body, I may at his Summons in the day of the Resurrection of the
Dead, be ready to attend on thee my Bride with my Lamp burning.

IV.
Let me be ever mindful of the great and last day, wherein I must render an
account of every idle thought, word, and work, and grant I may be prepared with
Faith and Repentance, as with a Wedding Garment, against the time that thou, O
Lord, shall call for me out of this sinful World. In the mean time, let me fly
from Sin as from a Serpent, and from unrighteousness as from a Cockatrice, and
above all things seek thy Glory; and when this mortal Life is ended I may be
made partaker of Immortality, and Life Eternal, in thy most blessed and
glorious Kingdom.

V.
Let thy Mercy and Lovingkindness follow me, O Lord, all the days of my Life,
that I may dwell in thy House and evermore praise thy holy Name? grant that I
may in the acknowledgment of thy greatness, confess my own unworthiness; and
visit me, O Lord, by driving from me all the Assaults of my Enemies, both
ghostly and bodily.

VI.
Let thy holy Angel be with me, to keep me this Night, and evermore; fit me for
the duties of the next day, if it be thy heavenly will to spare me this Night*
this, O Lord, I beg at thy merciful Hands, through the Merits and Mediation of
my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee, and the
Holy Ghost, now and for ever.

Amen
Meditations for Saturday.
I Will cry unto God with my voice; even unto God will I cry with my voice, and
he shall hearken unto me.

In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not in the
night season my Soul refused comfort.

When I am in heaviness, I will think upon God; when my heart is vexed I will
complain.

Thou hold mine eyes waking; I am so feeble that I cannot speak.

I have considered the days of old, and the years that are past.

I call to remembrance my Song; and in the night I commune with mine own heart,
and search out my Spirits.

Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he be no more entreated?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and his Promise come utterly to an end for
evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious? and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

And I said it is mine own infirmity; but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most highest.

I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy wonders of old
time.

I will think also of all thy works; and my talking shall be of thy doings.

Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God as our God?

Thou art the God that do wonders, and have declared thy power among the
people.

Thou have mightily delivered thy people; even the Sons of Jacob and Joseph.

The Waters saw thee, O God, the Waters saw thee and were afraid; the Depths
were troubled.

The Clouds also poured out Water, the Air thundered, and thine Arrows went
abroad.

The voice of thy Thunder was heard round about; the Lightning shone upon the
Ground, the Earth was moved, and shook withal.

Thy way is in the Sea and thy paths in the great Waters; and thy footsteps are
not known.

Thou leadest thy People like Sheep by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for Saturday Morning: For God's Providence.
MOst gracious God, I yield thee humble and hearty thanks for preserving and
defending me this night past from all those Perils and Dangers, which poor Dust
and Ashes are subject to fall into. Had I not been preserved by thy almighty
Providence, I had long since, both Body and Soul, been carried into everlasting
Perdition; but thou art a God infinite in Mercy, and whose compassions fail not
toward poor Sinners, by supporting them in their several necessities.

II.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to forgive whatsoever I have committed against thy divine
Majesty this Night, either sleeping or waking; or at any other time, secretly
or openly: Grant unto me unfeigned Repentance, and newness of Life; open unto
me, O Lord, that ever-streaming Fountain, which thou have opened for Sinners,
even the Blood of thy dear Son Christ Jesus; and which thou have promised under
the New Testament to open to the penitent of the House of David.

III.
Give unto me thy holy Spirit which thou have promised to give (to the World's
end) unto all thine elect People, and let the same thine holy Comforter purge
my heart, heal my Corruptions, sanctify my Nature, and consecrate my Soul and
Body, that they may become lively Temples, to serve thee in Righteousness and
Holiness all the days of my Life. Give me, I earnestly beseech thee, a supply
of all those Graces I stand in need of, with an increase of all those good
Gifts thou have endowed me with.

IV.
As thou have now wakened my Body from Sleep, so, I beseech thee, rouse my Soul
from the sleep of Sin and carnal Security; give me Grace, as a Child of Light,
to walk in all holy Obedience before thee this day; and grant me to endeavor
to keep Faith and a good Conscience toward Thee, and toward all Men.

V.
To this end I recommend my self, with all my ways, thoughts, words, and
actions, (together with all that belongs to me) unto thy divine Protection,
praying thee to keep both them and me from all Evil, and to give a Blessing to
all my undertakings this Day, and for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for Saturday Noon: For Tranquillity of Spirit.
O Most merciful God, and loving Father, who beholdest all the dwellers upon
Earth; and none can live without thy arm of Providence supports him: No sooner
do I enter upon the Affairs of this World, but I am surrounded about with a
cloud of Miseries; the Flesh provokes me to Lust, the World allures me to
Pleasures, and the Devil tempts me to commit all manner of Wickedness.

II.
Fears of Enemies abroad afright me, Wrongs of ill Neighbors do oppress me,
Cares for the things of this Life do consume me, and even all the day long
something or other does afflict and torment me. Adversity on the one hand frets
me, and Prosperity on the other hand flatters me. Over my head Heaven's
Vengeance, due to my Sins, is ready to fall heavy upon me; and under my feet
Hell gapes ready to devour me.

III.
Amidst those many toils and perplexities, where to find rest I know not, or to
fly for succor, but to thee, O Lord, most holy and mighty; direct me and guide
me in these difficulties, protect me from these Perils and dangers, settle me
in a course of Godliness, and let me walk, soberly and circumspectly, as
becomes a Good Christian, spending and ending that small remnant of days which
thou have allotted me in this World, in thy Fear and Service.

IV.
Teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto true Wisdom.
Make me wise unto Salvation, simple to that which is Evil, and prone to that
which is Good. Fructify me unto good works, and grant that I may be
Charitable, Peaceable and Conscionable toward all men, now and for evermore.

Amen
A Prayer for Saturday Night: For Remission of Sins.
O Almighty God, I humbly beseech thee to bury all my Sins and Transgressions
in thy Grave, which I have committed from my Infancy, unto this present,
against thy divine Majesty. Be thou, O Lord, my light in darkness, then shall
my light shine clear as the day.

II.
O God, the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon me, and bless me; O God, the Son,
Redeemer of all the World, preserve and keep me; O holy and blessed Spirit,
proceeding from the Father and the Son, deliver me this Night from all Sin and
Evil; O holy blessed and glorious Trinity, Three Persons and One God, direct,
guide, and sanctify me.

III.
Be thou my protector and defender amidst all dangers, that when I lay me down
to rest, I may fear no Evil: And grant, O Lord, at my last hour thy spiritual
illumination; that when my strength fails, and the light of my Eyes is
departed from me, mine Ears wax deaf, and my Mouth dumb, and all my senses have
forsaken me; then infuse some sense into me of eternal Life, that I may taste
and relish, in this mortal Body, the beginning of thy everlasting Comfort; that
at my departure out of this World, I may, by the Eye of Faith, behold the
divine Presence.

IV.
Open my Eyes more and more, that I may discern the wondrous works of thy Law;
and open thou, O Lord, likewise my Lips, that my Mouth and Tongue may show
forth thy Praise, and extol thy great and glorious Name. Prepare my Heart, O
Lord, I beseech thee, for thy divine Service, this next day following: It is
thy holy day; O fit me for the sanctifying of the same, that I may not spend it
on my Lusts and the pleasures of Sin, but dedicate it wholly to thy Honor and
Glory.

V.
Let my chief delight be to cease from the works of Sin, as well as from my
worldly Employment, that I may, through thy Blessing, feel in my Heart the
beginning of that eternal Sabbath, which is Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.
Govern, O Lord, my heart in thy Fear, and guide and steer all the whole course
of my Life in thy Favor: Fit and prepare me against the hour of Death, and day
of Dissolution, that if thou should this Night make my Bed in the Grave of
Silence, I may live and die unto thee, who live for ever; to whom be ascribed
all Power and Glory, Adoration and Subjection, now and for evermore.

Amen
An humble Confession of Sins, before the most holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper.
O Most holy Lord God, who, according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies,
do put away the Sins of all those that truly repent, and remembrest them no
more. Open, O Lord, I beseech thee, the Eyes of thy boundless Mercy, and
fatherly Compassion upon me, the most unworthy of all thy Servants: from the
very bottom of my heart I earnestly implore thy pardon and forgiveness for all
my past Sins and Offenses; the number of them exceeds the ordinary expectation
of thy Mercy, and are so heinous that they can plead no excuse: the sad Account
being cast up, is no less than the breach of all thy holy Commandments, both in
Thought, Word, and Deed: thy Mercy and Goodness, which should have led me to
Repentance, I have abused: I have slighted thy Judgments, and thy Punishments
have I not feared; I have utterly neglected the means of my own Salvation, and
by my Wickedness have most grievously provoked thy Wrath and Indignation
against me? my Life which should have been wholly devoted to thy Service, I
have misspent in the desire and sinful Lusts of the Flesh: my ways have been
evil, and that continually; the secret cogitations of my heart most wicked, and
so detestable has the whole course of my Life been, that my heart is vexed
within me, and my soul trembles to look up to heaven for Mercy, for fear of
thy displeasure. If therefore thou O Lord, should be extreme to mark what I
have done amiss, and take Vengeance for my Sins, I should be as Chaff before
the face of the Wind, and in Justice might be swept away into the place of
everlasting Torment.

II.
But, O Lord, from thy ever flowing Fountain there is Mercy, that thou may
be feared; thou art a God of all Comfort and Consolation, a merciful, loving,
and gracious Father, ready and willing to hear all penitent Sinners, that with
hearty Repentance, and true Faith come unto thee: I come unto thee therefore,
in the name of Jesus Christ the Righteous, thy beloved Son, and my blessed
Redeemer; I humbly prostrate my self before the Throne of thy Mercy-seat,
provided with no other hope but what proceeds from the greatness of thy
Clemency; for his sake only have Mercy upon me.

III.
In all humility of Spirit, and with hearty Contrition, I submit my Soul and
Body to thy Goodness, beseeching thee not to let my Sins be as a Cloud to
intercept between my Prayers and thy Pity, thy Goodness and my necessities:
blot all my Transgressions out of thy remembrance, the Sins of my Youth, or
Sins of my Age; Sins of my Body, or Sins of my Soul; the Sins that I know, and
the Sins that I know not; Sins of Remissness, Omission, and Commission; all
notorious and presumptuous Sins; Sins of Pride, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all
Uncharitableness; [ here mention thy particular Sins] from all which, good Lord
deliver me; and grant me a full and a free Pardon, perfect Remission and
Absolution for the same.

IV.
As one deep calls upon another, with the prophet David, out of the Depth of
my Misery, I cry unto thee for the depth of thy Mercy. O Lord, hear my
Petitions, and hold not thy peace at my Tears: consider the Contrition of my
Heart, and the Sorrow of my Soul; and by the Merits of his most precious Blood
that was so plentifully shed upon the Cross for all Penitent Sinners, and True
Believers, wash away the multitude of my Transgressions, that my Soul, by thy
Mercy, being cleansed from the guilt of Sin, I may be found a worthy partaker
and receiver of this holy and divine Mystery.

V.
And now, O holy Lord, that I am about to receive the blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, how shall I, that am so great a Sinner, Dust
and Ashes, dare to presume and come into thy Sanctuary, or to approach thy holy
Table! Thou in whose sight the very Heavens are not clear, and the Pillars of
the Earth shake at thy Presence. What then shall become of me, poor, wretched,
and miserable, that I am! but O thou that art the true Balm of Gilead, have
left us a command in thy holy Gospel, Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laiden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11. 28.

VI.
Upon which Command, I come, O Lord, unto thee at this time, in a confident
Assurance of thy Promise in Christ Jesus, thou will have Mercy upon me, ease
and refresh my Soul, that is wearied with the burden of my Sins; wash me and
cleanse me thoroughly from all my Wickedness, and renew a right Spirit within
me. Direct me in this great Mystery with a reverend and awful dread of thy
Majesty, that all the faculties of my Soul and Body may rightly apprehend, and
joyfully receive this eternal Food, this Bread of Life: And grant me thy
heavenly Grace, that I may obtain the virtue, fruit, and benefits of my
Savior's Death and Passion, with a full remission of all my Sins, and
everlasting Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Most gracious God, I humbly beseech thee, help thy Servant, whom of thy
great Mercy thou have created out of nothing; repair the ruins of my Soul, and
enlarge the frame of my Understanding; cleanse it from all filthy Corruptions,
and supply it with all heavenly Graces, that it may be both conveniently fit
and furnished to receive thee, who art a God of all Purity: O Make an entry
into my Heart and take thy residence there for ever; possess that which is
thine own, both by Creation, Redemption, and Merits of that bitter Death and
Passion, through Jesus Christ.

Amen
A Thanksgiving after Receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
O Almighty God, I praise thee for my Creation, Redemption and Preservation;
and by whose Grace and Mercy I hope to be glorified; more-especially for
feeding me this Day with the precious Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. I will
therefore offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, and always
praise thy holy Name, beseeching thee to pour upon my Heart the sweet Streams
of thy Mercy: Conform my Life, confirm my Faith, and let thy Grace evermore
guide me, that I may with a strong assurance of thine infallible Truth, and
promised Mercy, vanquish and subdue whatsoever rebelleth against thy blessed
will.

II.
Keep holy my Soul and Body, and suffer them not to be defiled through
delectation of Sin; but that my full delight and joy may be in thee, and walk
before thee in sincerity of Heart and godly Conversation, that I may here on
Earth glorify thy Name, and after this Life, with all thy falthful flock,
possess that everlasting Inheritance, which thy Son, Christ Jesus has
purchased with his most precious blood. To whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen
John 5. 14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more least a worse thing come
unto thee.
Jude 25. To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty. Dominion and
Power, both now and ever Amen.
A Morning Prayer for a Private Person.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, I thine unworthy Servant do in all
humility prostrate my self before thy divine Majesty, acknowledging my own
Vileness, natural Corruptions, and abominable Sins, which from time to time
have been committed against thee. I am unworthy, O Lord, to appear in thy holy
Temple, or approach the remotest limits of the Place where thine Honor
dwells.

II.
But I beseech thee, for the sake of thy dearly beloved Son, accept of this my
morning Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for thy manifold Mercies extended
toward me this Night past, and heretofore till this moment: For my Rest, Food,
Raiment, Health, Peace, and Liberty, with the hopes of a better Life when this
is ended: Continue thy all supplying mercies unto me this day. Govern me with
thy Fear, and compass me about with thy Favor; set all my Sins to that
account, which thy Son Jesus Christ, my only Savior has made up for them upon
the Cross, and never lay any of them to my charge, but freely forgive and
forget them all.

III.
Prosper, O Lord, all that I shall take in hand this Day; let my directions
proceed from thy holy Will, and the success from thy merciful Hand: Give me a
Competency for maintenance in this mortal Life, that I may with quietness of
mind, and thankfulness of heart, pass my time in this vale of misery, in doing
good to all men according to my ability, without disparagement to my self or
harm to others.

IV.
Grant these things, O Heavenly Father, and whatever else thou see most
necessary for me, and all other thy Servants in the World, for the good of our
Souls and Bodies; guide and conduct me in the doing and performing diligently
those things that thou have required of me; and that the end of all my labors
may tend to the Praise of thy holy Name, and the benefit of my poor Brethren.
Grant this good Lord, I humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen
An Evening Prayer for a Private Person.
O Almighty and everlasting God, I do confess I am unworthy of the least of all
thy Mercies; yet being bound in duty, for thy preservation of me this day past,
and all the time of my whole Life, I offer up unto thee Praise and Thanksgiving
for my Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation, and Sanctification, with all
other Gifts and Graces appertaining to this Life, or that which is to come.

II.
O thou that sit above the Cherubims, my tongue and lips shall praise and
glorify thee, for preserving me by thy Providence this Day past, from so many
Miseries and Casualties, which I might justly have fallen into, had thou
entered into Judgment with me. But thou art a God full of Mercy and Compassion,
and passest by Offenses, to win me the more by thy patience and long-suffering:
make me truly thankful for thy Mercies, ready and willing to make a good
improvement of thy most gracious Forbearance, and careful to obey thy Will with
Conscience, Diligence, and Constancy.

III.
Strengthen me from above with thy mighty hand, to walk in every good way
without fearfulness, and to bring forth the Fruits of a true and lively Faith
in my Life and Conversation, all the days of my sojourning here. Arm me with
thy Grace and holy Spirit, against the Corruptions and Vanities of the World,
and Wiles and Temptations of the Devil, and the Allurements of the Flesh; and
so settle and frame my mind to the continual exercise of devout Prayer, hearing
of thy sacred Word, and watching for thy coming, both in public and private.

IV.
Keep me, O Lord, this night from all Evils which may happen, either to my
Body, or my Soul: Extend thy Goodness toward all those that have any
dependence upon me; give me sweet and comfortable rest, that when I shall
awake, all my Thoughts and Meditations may be on thee, and thy Law. Bless me, O
Lord, all the nights and days of my Life, and at the end thereof, send me a
blessed departure, and afterward a joyful Resurrection both of Soul and Body,
unto Life eternal; grant these things, O heavenly Father for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake, my only Savior.

Amen
A Morning Prayer for a Private Family.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, thou have promised, That where Two or
Three are gathered together in thy Name, thou will be in the midst of them, we
poor sinful Creatures, dust and ashes, here in all humility do prostrate our
Bodies and Souls before thee as living Monuments of thy Mercy. We are unworthy
of the least of thy mercies, yet have thou from time to time made us partakers
of many, for which we praise and magnify thy holy Name, beseeching thee to
give us understanding Hearts, to be sensible of our Evils, with direction and
assistance from thy holy Spirit to avoid the same.

II.
And as thou have, O Lord, kept us this Night, in the time of darkness and
dangers, so we beseech thee to preserve us this Day, that the Sun of
Righteousness may rule in our Hearts, and all the darkness that lurketh in them
may be scattered, to the comfort of our own Souls in the day of our Lord Jesus.
Endue us with those Gifts and Graces thou see to be most needful for us, and
grant that with sincere Hearts and pure Consciences, we may wholly employ them
in thy service to thy honor and glory.

III.
Continue to us, we earnestly beseech thee, thy blessing of Health, Peace, and
Maintenance, so far as thou see them convenient for us; chase away from us
all Rancour and Malice, Covetousness, Uncharitableness, and Unkindness, and
whatsoever is contrary to thy Law; take from us all Ignorance and Negligence,
and prevent all those things that thou know may hinder us in our Christian
Calling or Employment: Increase our Faith, Patience and Obedience, and let thy
Blessing be upon this whole Family; guide us in thy Truth, protect us in our
Ways, and all those whom thou have made dear unto us, whether they be present
or absent.

IV.
Give us Grace, by thy Chastisements, to fear thee more carefully, and to
grieve for our sins more heartily; let our minds be set upon thee, and give us
such hearts as we may learn something of every thing, and make a Spiritual use
of all our Earthly Affairs here till we come to dwell with thee in the Kingdom
of Glory.

V.
Bless, O Lord, the universal Church, with Truth, Peace and Unity, Soundness of
Doctrine, and holy Discipline; Preserve our gracious Sovereign, and all the
Royal Family; Bless his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and all others
in Authority, with necessary Graces.

VI.
Bless all Schools of Learning and good Education, especially the two
Universities of this Land: Bless this City and Place wherein we live; remove
the Punishment due for the Sins thereof, and give them a double portion of thy
Grace, to repent in time, before the Destroyer enters again amongst them.

VII.
Bless all our Friends, Relations, or others, for whom thou have appointed us
to make Prayers and Supplications; strengthen them that lie upon their Beds of
Sickness, send them the comfort and help of thy Spirit, that lie in anguish of
Conscience for remorse of Sin, and convert all those that go astray from thy
Commandments; teach us by their Examples to view our own Weakness, and to walk
more circumspectly for the time to come.

VIII.
Bless this Family with Grace and Peace, that all of them, from the highest to
the lowest, may know their several Duties, and may rightly and duly practice
the same in thy fear, and unto thy glory, through Jesus Christ, our only Lord
and Savior.

Amen
An Evening Prayer for a Private Family.
OEternal God, the Father of Mercies, and great Creator of Heaven and Earth, we
render thee humble and hearty Thanks for thy merciful Preservation of us this
Day, and all the whole course of our Lives; that thou have brought us safe
through so many Dangers and Difficulties we might justly have fallen into, had
not thy Arm of Providence been stretched out to support us.

II.
Morning and Evening thou take care of us, and heapest upon us so many
Blessings and Benefits, both Spiritual and Temporal; yet we neither fear thee
nor serve thee, as we ought to do; but thou art a God slow to anger, and of
great pity, and art ready to forgive our manifold Sins, which we from time to
time have committed against thee.

III.
Good Lord, we beseech thee keep us evermore from day to day, as thou have
done, and make us constant in the profession of thy holy Name, and the practice
of thy Law, that neither the Malice of Man, nor Subtilty of Satan be able to
make us turn away from thee, Lord, turn thy Face from our Sins, even from those
Sins wherein we have so much delighted; take from us those hearts of Stone, and
give us hearts of Flesh, and wash and cleanse our poluted Souls in the Blood of
the Lord Jesus.

IV.
Forgive us all that is past, and grant us the assurance of that Forgiveness,
sealed up by the holy Spirit in our Consciences; Oh kindle thy love more and
more in our hearts, that we may never depart from thee, but attain unto a due
thankfulness for thy benefits, and a most unfeigned and earnest Repentance for
all our Sins and Tranfgressions.

V.
Suffer us not to close our Eyes till our Souls have reckoned and made even for
all the Offenses which not only this day, but all the former minutes of our
lives, we have committed against thy divine Majesty: Give thine Angels charge
over us, that at what hour soever thou call us out of this Vale of Tears,
where we do but travail and toil all the day long, we may not be found to be
idle Loiterers in thy Harvest, but good and acceptable Servants, having Oil in
our Lamps, and on us the Robe of Righteousness, and Wedding Garment of
Regeneration, that we may be able to encounter Death, the King of Terrors, to
meet our blessed Lord in the Clouds, when he comes to Judgment, and to follow
the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

VI.
Expel and remove far away from us all wicked Spirits, and graciously protect
us from our Persecutors, which lay Snares to subdue us; do thou, O God, assist
us, that we may peaceably sleep and rest in thee: hide us in thy Tabernacle,
from the strife of all Men, and keep us that we may fear no Evil. O thou that
neither slumberest nor sleep, let thy Rod and Staff evermore comfort and
defend us.

VII.
Let thy mighty Hand and stretched out Arm, O Lord, be still our Defense; thy
Mercy and Loving Kindness in thy beloved Son, our Salvation; thy true and holy
Word our Instruction, thy Grace and holy Spirit our Comfort and Consolation:
Let thy Mercy, O God, prevent and follow us all the days of our Lives, that we
may dwell in thy House of Defense, in length of days, praising thee evermore.

VIII.
Let thy Blessing be upon all of us within this Household, guide us in our Ways,
and lead us into thy Truth: Bless our Parents, Kindred and Friends, wheresoever
dispersed, and howsoever linked unto us: Be a merciful Judge unto us, and
continually protect us from the snares of Satan the Old Serpent; and finally
conduct us into the society of Angels, and of all Saints, in thy holy Paradise;
to whom be ascribed, as is most due to thee the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
one true, gracious and everlasting God, all Honor, Power, and Glory, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion, now and for evermore.

Amen
Meditations for the Sick.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine Indignation; neither chasten me in thy heavy
Displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak. O Lord heal me for my Bones are
vexed.

My Soul is also sore troubled; But, Lord, how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul; O save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death no Man remembers thee, and who will give thee thanks in the Pit?

I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my Bed, and water my Couch with
my Tears.

My Beauty is gone for very trouble; and worn away because of all mine Enemies.

Away from me all ye that work Vanity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my
weeping.

The Lord has heard my Petition; the Lord will receive my Prayer.

Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee; have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy Servant away in Displeasure.

Thou have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation.

What profit is there in my blood when I go down to the Pit?

Shall the dust give thanks unto thee? or shall it declare thy truth?

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper.

Show thy Servant the light of thy Countenance; and save me for thy mercies
sake.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer in time of Sickness.
O Almighty and ever-living God, in whose hands consists the life of all
Mankind, and who correctest every Son, whom thou receivest; mercifully, I
humble beseech thee to hear my voice, and despise not the Prayer I make now
unto thee, in the time of trouble: In the vexation of my Spirit, and in the
very anguish of my Soul, I cry unto thee for mercy.

II.
O thou that have created, and made me of nothing, and have redeemed me from
the slavery of Sin, Death and Hell, by the most precious Blood of thy dear Son
Jesus Christ, which was spilt upon the Cross for my Sins, Have mercy upon me:
Bow down thine all-hearing Ear unto my complaint, and cast me not away in thy
fierce anger.

III.
My Sins cry aloud to Heaven for Vengeance, and I have deserved thy wrath and
heavy displeasure against me: Thou have cast me down upon the Bed of Sickness,
and I begin to fall as leaves beaten with a vehement wind; yet thy Chastisments
are less than my deservings; but of thy mercy and goodness, O Lord, correct me
not to death, but to amendment of Life, for thine own sake, for thy holy Name's
sake, for thy Son Christ Jesus s^ke, be merciful unto my Sins, for they are
great.

IV.
Spare thy Servant, good Lord, which confesses his Sins unto thee, pour the
Oil of thy sanctifying Grace into my Heart, and work thereby in me a true and
immediate Repentance and restore me again to thy favor, according to thy
gracious Promise to humble Penitents; let thy merciful Providence so guide and
govern me in this affliction thou have been pleased to lay upon me, that I may
never fall into utter darkness, ignorance of thee, or inconsideration of my
self.

V.
Let the faintness of my Spirit, and the Condemnation of my self be overcome by
thy irresistible Light; thou that art the God of all consolation, grant that I
may be mindful of the great account I have to make at the day of Judgment, and
that I may bear in mind the reward which is due to the faithful, the end of
misery, and the beginning of all happiness; but to the secure and careless, the
beginning of eternal punishment.

VI.
Strengthen my Faith, accept my penitential Tears, speak peace to my Soul and
Conscience; and say, Thou art my Salvation, then let thy holy Spirit descend
into my Heart, with this express, My Grace is sufficient for thee; then shall
my Heart leap for joy, and my Soul shall be exceeding glad, desiring to be
dissolved, and be at peace, that after this frail mortal Life is ended, I may
enjoy the eternal fruition of they heavenly Presence.

VII.
Suffer me not, O Lord, in this my trial, to be possessed with a fear of
Condemnation, or to despond of thy Promises; but in sure considence of heart
apply to my self the remission of all my Sins, that at the last hour, by Faith
in Jesus Christ, I may enjoy a taste of eternal Salvation: Let not Death (if
thou art pleased to send it) be terrible or bitter unto me; but when it comes,
I may rejoicingly receive the fame; and having escaped the storm of Temptation,
and the dangers of Satan, I may triumph like a Conqueror, and behold the Power
and Presence of thy holy Spirit.

VIII.
Let my last words be the same which thy Son did utter upon the Cross, saying,
Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; and when my Speech is departed from
me, hear the groanings, and sighs of my Heart, and the desire of my Soul, that
at the last thy Servant may depart in Peace, and reach those heavenly Mansions
prepared for him: My Soul, O Lord, heartily desires to attain to that
supernatural City whereof such glorious things are spoken.

IX.
Breathe inward Comforts to my Heart; though my Body be going the way of all
Flesh, yet let my Soul go the way of all Saints. Lord, hear me and help me,
stand by me and save me, and if thou have determined to lay my Body into the
Grave, receive my Soul into thy Kingdom, to rest in joy and peace for evermore,
through Jesus Christ.

Amen
A Prayer to be said by those that visit the Sick.
O Most gracious God, who have Compassion upon all Men, and hate nothing that
thou have made, mercifully we beseech thee to have Compassion on this thy
Servant, who by thy Visitation has been sorely afflicted, and by the same even
brought to the end of his Days, and period of his Life; be pleased therefore,
good Lord, to have Mercy upon him, accept of him as the work of thine own
Hands, a Lamb of thy Fold, thy Servant redeemed by Jesus Christ, who is
willing, by thy appointment, to leave this miserable World, in full assurance
of thy Mercy in Jesus Christ, for the remission of his Sins.

II.
Guide him, good Lord, in this his last Journey, that he being quit of all the
troubles of this transitory Life, he may be safely conducted by thy power to
the Heaven of Eternal Happiness into the Arms of boundless Mercy, to
everlasting Peace and perpetual Joys, there to reign with all the Company of
blessed Saints and Angels with thee in continual Bliss for evermore.

III.
And, gracious God, we beseech thee, by thy abundant Goodness, by the multitude
of thy tender Mercies, and Compassions, by the Merits of thy bitter Death and
bloody Passion, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the Coming
of thy holy and blessed Spirit, have mercy upon him, deliver him from the
burden and guilt of his Sins, from the fears and terrors of Death, and from
the fury and power of Hell.

IV.
Lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon him, that in all the pains of
his Body, in all the agonies of his Spirit, let thy Comforts refresh his Soul,
and enable him patiently to wait till his Change shall come: And grant, O Lord,
that when this earthly House and Tabernacle of his Body shall be dissolved, he
may have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens; and that for his sake, who by his most precious Blood has purchased
Salvation for all those who truly believe in him, even Jesus Christ our only
Lord and Savior.

Amen
Meditations after Recovery.
Psalm. 116.
1. I Am well pleased, that the Lord has heard the voice of my Prayer.

2. That he has inclined his Ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.

3. The Snares of Death compassed me round about; and the Pains of Hell got
hold upon me.

4. I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I shall call upon the Name of the
Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my Soul.

5. Gracious is the Lord and Righteous; yea, our God is merciful.

6. The Lord preserves the Simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.

7. Turn again then unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee.

8. And why? thou have delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and
my Feet from falling.

9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living.

10. I believed, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in
my have, all Men are Liars.

11. What reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the Benefits that he has
done unto me?

12. I will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

13. I will pay my Vows now in the presence of all his People: right dear in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

14. Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy Servant. I am thy Servant, and the Son
of thine Handmaid; thou have broken my Bonds in sunder.

15. I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving; and will call upon the
Name of the Lord.

16. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord in the sight of all his People; in the
Courts of the Lord's House, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the
Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Thanksgiving after Recovery.
O Holy and immortal God, I Laud and Praise thy holy Name that thou have been
pleased to deliver me from the Jaws of Death, and the Pit of Corruption; and in
some measure restored me again to my former Health, crowning me with thy mercy
and loving kindness, my Soul, and all that is within me, shall magnify thee; I
will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole Heart, and will extol thee, O thou that
dwell in the Heavens.

II.
It is thou alone that have preserved my life from destruction; thou did cast
me down upon my Bed of Sickness, and have raised me up again by thy Almighty
Power; thou have chastened and corrected me, but not given me over unto Death.
My time is in thy hand, O God, thou art the God of the Spirits of all Flesh;
grant that this remnant of Life, that thou have thus graciously spared, may be
wholly dedicated to thy Service, that I may walk before thee in newness and
amendment of Life.

III.
O thou that art the only Physician of Soul and Body, thou have once more
permitted me to take up my Bed and walk; O make me strictly careful, as the
watches of the Night, to be vigilant over all my Thoughts, Words, and Actions,
that I may sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto me. Let not this great
mercy thou have now given me, make me supine and negligent, and entertain those
Thoughts that my Lord delayeth his coming; but grant, I beseech thee, that I
may make a right use of this thy Fatherly Chastisement, and employ the
remainder of my Life to thy Glory.

IV.
I have found by experience of thine afflicting hand, what a dreadful thing it
is to be snatched away by the hands of Death, without our accounts, and
unprepared; O let it be a perpetual admonition to me, to stand upon my Guard,
and to watch for my Master's coming; and whenever the Pleasures of Sin, which
endure but for a Season, shall present themselves to entice and allure me, make
me to remember the bitterness of them at last. Lord, hear me, and grant me
grace to work out my own Salvation, for thy dear Son's sake.

Amen
A Prayer fit to be said at any time.
O Most glorious and powerful Lord God, who createdst all things out of
nothing, and support'st the whole Universe by thy Providence; I confess, O
Lord, I was conceived in Original Sin, now full of actual transgressions; I was
in the Womb a loathsome Substance; I am in the World a Lump of Corruption; and
I shall be in the Grave a prey for Vermin.

II.
But, I know (blessed Jesus) thy Grace is sufficient for me; thy Mercy can
express it self in my Misery. I know and confess (O Lord) that my Sins are
exceeding many, mighty, and heinous, yet thy Mercy is far greater; for thou art
infinite in mercy, but I cannot be infinite in sinning; and the Righteousness
of Christ Jesus the Righteous is more prevalent for me than my own
Unrighteousness can be against my self.

III.
The Fountain of thy Mercy (O God) has quenched the fire of thy Justice, and
graceless Man falling from Goodness, is by thee repossessed of Greatness.
Wherefore I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, give me the Grace of continual
Thankfulness, strengthen my Weakness, correct my Sinfulness, direct my future
Frailty, and protect me against the Adversary, kindle my Zeal, enlighten my
Understanding, soften my stony Heart, and save for ever my immortal Soul.

IV.
And though my whole Life, O Lord, has been impure and undefiled in thy sight,
yet through thy precious Blood and Passion, by thine all-sufficient Sacrifice,
Obligation, and Satisfaction, revert my deserved Punishment, and convert my
passed Evils, to present good and future joys, in thine eternal and most
glorious Kingdom.

V.
Pardon, good Lord, my loss of Time, my abuse of thy good Creatures, my
negligence in my lawful Employment, my unthankfulness for thy Lovingkindness;
and whatsoever is wanting in my Person, Practice, Prayer, or Thanksgiving, make
a supply of it in the Merits of thy Son Christ Jesus; to whom with thee, and
thy blessed Spirit, be all Praise and Glory, now and evermore.

Amen
Prayers for all Persons and Occasions.
A Prayer for the Church.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have revealed thy Glory both to Jews and
Gentiles in our Lord Jesus Christ, extend thy hand of Providence and Mercy over
all the World, that thy Church may spread like a flourishing Vine, and enlarge
her Borders to the uttermost Parts of the Earth, that all Nations partaking of
the sweet refreshments of thy Gospel, thy Name may be glorified, the honor of
our Lord Jesus advanced, his Prophecies fulfilled, and his Coming hastened.

II.
Bless, O Lord, thy holy Catholic and Apostolic Church with all Blessings of
Comfort, Assistance, and Preservation; extirpate Heresies, unite her Divisions,
give her Patience and Perseverance in the Faith, and Confession of thy Name in
despite of all Enmities, Temptations and Disadvantages; destroy all wicked
Counsels intended or levied against her or any of her Children, by the Devil or
any of his accursed Instruments; let the hands of thy Grace and Mercy lead her
from this Vale of Misery to the triumphant Throne of her Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Amen
A Prayer for the King.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, to bless and preserve thy Servant William our most
gracious King and Governor, with the richest Blessings of thy Grace and
Favor; make him valiant and prosperous as King David, wise and rich like
Solomon, be unto him a Helmet of Salvation against the Face of his Enemies, and
a strong Tower of Defense in the Time of Adversity; as for his Enemies, let
them be clothed with Shame, but upon himself let his Crown for ever flourish.
Grant him a long and a prosperous Reign; let Peace and Unity, Holiness, and
Justice, Truth, and all Christian Virtues flourish in his time. Let all his
Subjects faithfully serve him with Honor and due Obedience; and let him so
truly serve thee his God, here on Earth, that he may hereafter everlastingly
reign with thee in Heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Royal Family.
O God, the Father of all Mercies, bless and preserve Catherine the Queen
Dowager, the Princess Anne of Denmark, with all the rest of the Royal Family;
unite them unto thee with the Bands of Faith and Love, preserve them to their
Lives end in thy Favor, make them Instruments of Glory to thy Name, of
refreshment to the Church, of joy to all faithful People of this Kingdom;
prosper them with all Happiness here on Earth, and crown them at last with an
Eternal Weight of Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer for our Parents.
ALmighty God, who from the Loins of our First Parents, Adam and Eve, did
produce Mankind, and have commanded us to Honor and Obey our Parents, in
pursuance of thy holy Will and Commandment, and of our Duty to thee our God,
and in thee to them, we do with all humility beg a Blessing of thee for our
Parents, who from thy Mercy and Plenty have conveyed many to us; pardon and
forgive all their Sins and Infirmities, increase in them all Goodness, give
them Blessings of the Right Hand, and Blessings of the Left, bless them in
their Persons and Posterity, in their Goods and good Name, in the Comforts of
thy Holy Spirit, in a persevering Goodness, and at last in an eternal Weight of
Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer of Parents for their Children.
O God, the Creator of all the World, by whose Providence Mankind is
propagated; I bless thy holy Name for bestowing on me the Blessing of Children.
Lord, bless them with Life and Health, with good Understanding, fair
Opportunities, and Advantages of good Education; but above all, with the Gifts
and Graces of thy Holy Spirit, that they may live and be blessed under thy
Protection, grow in Grace, and be in favor with God and Man, and at last may
make up the number of thine Elect Children, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer for our Friends and Benefactors.
O Thou Fountain of all Goodness, from whom proceeds all Excellency both to Men
and Angels, extend thy favor and loving kindness to all my Friends and
Benefactors: Reward them and make them plentiful Compensation for all the
Benefits which from thy merciful Hand of Providence they have conveyed to me.
Let the Light of thy Countenance so shine upon them as they may never enter
into any Desolation or Affliction, but such as may be instrumental to thy
Glory, and their Eternal Comfort, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen
A Prayer of a Wife for her Husband.
BLessed Lord, who have been graciously pleased to call me to the holy State of
Matrimony, bless me in it with the Grace of Chastity, Loyalty, Obedience, and a
dutiful Complacency to my Husband. Bless him with a long Life, a healthful
Body, and an understanding Heart, and furnish him with all those Gifts and
Graces which may enable him to be and continue thy Servant, that he may be a
Supporter and a Guide to me his Wife, a Blessing and a Comfort to his Children,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer of a Husband for his Wife.
O Most gracious God, who art a Father to us thy Children, a Spouse to thy holy
Church, a Savior and Redeemer to all Mankind; have Mercy upon thy Handmaid my
Wife, endue her with all the Ornaments of thy heavenly Grace; make her to be as
Religious as Hester, Loving as Rachel, Fruitful as Leah, Wise as Rebecca, and
Obedient as Sarah, that being filled with Grace and Benediction here, she may
be partaker of thy Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer of an Orphan.
O God gracious and merciful, who art ready to succor all those that are
distressed, and have promised to be a Father to the Fatherless. Have Mercy upon
me, O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, who am left a poor Orphan, and by thy
heavenly will and pleasure deprived of my earthly Parents: Supply, O Lord, all
my Wants and Necessities, guide, govern and comfort me with thy good Spirit,
that in all my Words, Works and Actions, I may glorify thee my heavenly
Father. Let thy heavenly Grace sustain me, and work in me Obedience to my
Superiors, and those which have the charge and care over me; that they
discharging a good Conscience toward me, I may by thy ready help improve my
time, to the Praise and Glory of thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
The Widow's Prayer.
O Most holy Lord God, the Comforter of all those who are in any affliction,
sorrow or trouble The Bands of Death, by thy appointment, have made a
separation between me and him whom thou gave to be my Husband, who was my
Head and supreme Governor, and the only Guide I had in this World next under
thee. Grant me grace to bear this cross and loss patiently, and to put my whole
Trust and Confidence in thee; let thy tender Care go along with me, in
preserving me from all Oppression and Wrong, and deliver me from the Hands of
those who will devour Widows Houses. Bless me, O Lord, as thou did the poor
Widow of Sarepta, let not the Barrel of Meal wast, but grant me a competency
fit for my Estate, neither let the Cruise of Oil fail, but assist me with thy
Grace, that I may walk worthily toward thee, and all the World. Let my
continual Prayers and Supplications ascend up to thee; and hear, O Lord, and
have mercy when I cry unto thee, for the alone sake of thy dear Son, my only
Savior and Redeemer.

Amen
The Servant's Prayer.
O Most mighty God, and the great Lord and Master of all the World, who
beholdest with thine all-seeing Eye thy great Household and Family here on
Earth; look upon me thine unworthy Servant, I humbly beseech thee, with thine
Eye of Providence; grant me a contented Mind in that state thou have placed me
in, so shall I enjoy a continual Feast: Assist me, O Lord, with thy heavenly
Grace, that I may perform Obedience, and be subject to my earthly Masters, whom
thou have been pleased to set over me whether they be Good or Evil, Courteous
or Froward. Prosper all the Designs I shall take in hand, in this my Servitude,
which are not in opposition to thy Commands: Preserve and keep me from all
Evil, that no Enticements may allure me either to embezel away any thing
committed to my Custody, or have Society with such who are Enemies to my
Master's House: let me cheerfully proceed in my Service, that the Glass of my
Time may run out with Pleasure, and I in the end shall be made Free of that
City of thine, the New Jerusalem, where I may rest for evermore.

Amen
The Maid's Prayer.
O Holy Lord God, let thine Handmaid speak in thine Audience, and hearken unto
her when she calls upon thee, though I know not how to ask aright, yet teach
me the knowledge of thee, and how to beg those things that are requisite and
necessary for me: Inlighten my Soul with thy divine Inspiration, that I may see
and do those things that appertain unto Godliness. Let me keep my honest
Reputation in the Eye of the World, knowing that a good Name is better than
precious Ointment: But, especially in thy sight, let me be pure, honest, and
undefiled, so shall I not be ashamed in the great Day of Account. Defend me
from Sin, Satan, and the Poison of evil Tongues; assist me with thy directing
hand, that the labors which this day I am to undertake may prosper; grant me
Grace to love, honor and serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all my days,
that I may glorify thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer for one afflicted in Mind.
O Eternal Lord God, who art fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, I tremble, and
am even at Death's Door; for alas! I am the vilest of all Sinners, my
Conscience is so clogged with Evil, that I cannot look up; my Wickednesses have
gone over my Head, and are as a burden too heavy for me to bear; my Spirit is
sorrowful, my Heart is heavy, my words are stopped with Sighs, and my Plaints
watered with Tears: O Lord, what shall I desire of thee, that deserve nothing at
thy Hand? What can I hope for, that am even hopeless? My Conscience is
restless, and my Ungodliness fettereth me: and even all my unrighteous Actions
cry out for Vengeance against me; my Spirit is overwhelmed and weary of this
Bondage, and I have bid my life farewell.

II.
O but let thy Majesty (O Lord) yet appear in thy Mercy; forgive my Sin, the
unhappy ground of all this woe: Where my misery has thus abounded, there let
thy Mercy much more abound. I dare not add this grievous Sin unto my other Sins
to despair of thy Mercy: What were more Sacrilegious? for thou art a skilful
Physician and can cure all my Infirmities; thou art a merciful God, and can
forgive all my Sins: To thee do I fly for refuge which art the Land of Safety,
to thee do I lift up my Hands and my Heart, and to thee do I pray, desiring thy
Mercy. Let the power of thy Son's Death and Passion defeat all the Devices of
the Devil against me.

III.
Instruct me in thy heavenly Wisdom, lead me in thy Truth in this dangerous Sea
of Coffeehouse and Affliction: keep me from shipwreck, and bring me safe to
the Land of Peace-Strengthen my Faith, sanctify all those good means unto me
wherein I seek relief, as Prayer, Conference, Reading, and hearing thy holy
Word. Mitigate my Perplexities, grant me Patience, heal my Imperfections: Thou
that wilt not break a bruised Reed, spare and have Mercy upon me: Thou that
delightest not in the death of a Sinner, receive me. Though my Heart condemns
me, yet do thou release me. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord defer not, but
even now speak peace unto me: say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation; to whom be
ascribed all Honor and Glory World without end.

Amen
A Thanksgiving, for God's sending his Son to save Mankind.
O Almighty and most merciful Lord God, we might utterly despair, and be cast
down, considering our manifold Sins and infinite Offenses, had not thy Word
been made Flesh, and dwelt among us; but now we dare not despair, for if, when
we were Enemies, we were reconciled unto thee by the Death of thy Son; how much
more, being reconciled, are we saved by his Life? All our hope, and all our
confidence is reposed in that precious Blood which was shed for us, and for our
Salvation.

II.
O how greatly are we wretches bound to fear thee, to love thee, to bless and
praise thee, to honor thee, and to glorify thee, seeing we are redeemed at
such a price, saved with such a gift, cherished with so many promises and
blessings of the same, even thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ! Stablish, O God,
that which thou have wrought in us; finish what thou have begun, that we may be
able to come into the fullness of thy Mercy; make us through thy holy Spirit to
understand, and through thy Son to discern, and with due honor and reverence,
this high Mystery of Godliness, which is, how God was manifest in the Flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, and received up into Glory; where we doubt not but we shall
Reign with him for evermore.

Amen
The Prayer of a Woman with Child.
O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all Mankind, Comforter of all that call
upon thee, and the only deliverer of such as are in danger; be merciful, I
beseech thee, and look down in mercy from thy throne upon me thine Handmaid,
and upon the Fruit of my Womb; behold, I seek and sue unto thee for a Blessing
at this time; my Sin is great, my Danger at hand not small; my Pains to come
will be grievous, and my Life is now most uncertain.

II.
Assure me, I beseech thee, of the forgiveness of all my Sins, mitigate my
Fear, and assuage my Sorrows, strengthen me with the refreshing of thy Spirit,
confirm me in the Faith of my Savior, and bless all good means appointed for
my Comfort, that in due time I may be a joyful Mother, and see the Fruit of my
Body, safe, sound* and perfect, without blemish or deformity.

III.
O Lord, I know not how soon my Travail will overtake me, when I must encounter
with Life or Death* one drop of thy Mercy has sovereign power to cure all the
Wounds of those Sorrows: Shed therefore (O holy Father) that drop of Grace upon
me in that minute, when I am to encounter with so stern an Adversary:
Strengthen me with Patience, preserve me that I perish not, and bless the work
of my Midwife.

IV.
Let not the Child yet unborn, the Babe in my Womb, be punished for mine
Offenses, but give it growth, form, and what thou see in thy good pleasure to
be fit and necessary for it; and when the time is come that thou will call it
out of this close house of flesh, where it now inhabiteth, to dwell in the open
World, sanctify thy Creature; make it by Baptism a Member of thy Church, a
Lamb of thy Flock, and direct it in the ways of thy Commandments to its Life's
End.

Amen
The Midwife's Prayer.
MOst gracious God, who alone have the power to produce Children from the Womb
and bring them into the light of this World I thy most unworthy Servant, whom
thou have appointed for this Office, to be a help and comfort to all those
which are in Extremity and near the time of their Travail, do in all humility
prostrate my self before thee, beseeching thee to vouchsafe me thy divine
Assistance in these Performances.

II.
Have Mercy upon me and bless me, guide me and govern me in all my Actions,
prosper all my Undertakings, grant that I may be as careful of the Poor as of
the Rich, that I may do good and not hurt, save Life and not destroy it by my
negligence; help my Infirmities and Imperfections, that I may neither be too
timorious nor too rash in the performance of my Duty, but grant me art and
judgment in the happy finishing all my Operations.

III.
Work in me an understanding and a tender Heart, and whatsoever else is
necessary in my undertakings; and mercifully grant, O Lord, that whenever my
Duty calls me either by Night, or Day, I may be always prepared; preserve and
defend me from the infection of all contagious Diseases; by thy most gracious
Favor grant me a prosperous success, that whatsoever I do may tend to thy
Glory, the comfort and help of all good Women (committed to my charge) and my
own credit, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer to be said by those that are present with a Woman in Travail.
O Almighty God, we are here assembled for the comfort of this Woman, who
travaileth in pain to be delivered of a Child. Through the transgression of our
first Parents, she cannot be delivered but with great sorrow; for thou have
laid thine heavy displeasure upon us sinful Women, that in much sorrow shall we
bring forth Children; yet since thou have given us Faith in thy Son, give us
all (especially to this Woman thy Servant now in this Extremity) patience;
mitigate her Pains, prosper our Work, bless our undertakings, that by our help
she may be delivered, and forget her pains, because a Child is born into the
World.

IV.
We pray unto thee for this Child in her Womb; thou have enrolled it in thy
Book, thou have made it in thy Frame, the Bones thereof are not hid from thee,
all the Members of it are written in thy Volume. Thou did visit it at the
time of Life, visit it now at the hour of Birth, that thou may receive glory
by thy works and the Mother gladness in beholding her Infant, after all her
Sorrows. Give her, we beseech thee, neither a monstrous, a maimed, nor a dead
Birth; but as thou have blessed the Conception of this Infant, so bring it with
Perfection into the World. Hear us, O Lord, and help this thy weak Servant,
visit her as thou did Sarah, comfort her as thou did Rebecca, and cheer her
as thou did Leah; forgive her all her sins, and whether she be sure to live
or die, let her trust in thee, and let thine Angels pitch their Tents about
her, now and for evermore.

Amen
A Thanksgiving by those that are present after Delivery.
O Eternal God, infinite in Mercies toward all thy Sons and Daughters in
affliction; we desire to praise and magnify thy holy Name, acknowledging thy
Goodness to us, and thy special favor to this Woman thy Servant. We called
upon thee, and thou heard'st us; we petitioned for thy Favor to thine
Handmaid, and thou regardedst her; we begged a Blessing for her Child, thou
have blessed it, and have made her a joyful Mother. We offer unto thee the
Sacrifice of our Lips; let our thankfulness ascend up unto thee like a
sweet smelling savor.

II.
Continue thy loving kindness to this thy Servant, keep her from all further
peril and danger of Childbed; give her strength to recover her weakness, joy
to forget her late sorrow, and thankfulness that such a Child is come out of
her Loins, as one day shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Give thy Blessing to
the Infant now born that it may in due time increase in Wisdom, Stature, and
Favor with God and Man. Baptize i^ with Water and the Holy Ghost, endue it
with all heavenly Graces, defend it against all Dangers, provide for it in this
mortal Life, and crown it in the end with Life everlasting.

III.
Bless us, O Lord, that are here met together to behold the glory of our
Creation, and the wonders of our Creator in this little Infant: Let us in all
Sobriety, Chastity, and Godliness, walk before thee all the Days of our Lives.
Make us like fruitful Vines, and our Children like Olive Branches round about
our Tables: Let our Husbands rejoice in us, and make us careful to love them,
as thou have commanded us, that thy Kingdom may be increased, the Bed
undefiled, and our Savior Jesus Christ glorified, to whom be praise for
evermore.

Amen
A Thanksgiving by the Woman after Delivery.
BLessed Lord God, I yield thee all Honor, Glory, and Praise, who have now
delivered me from the great pain and peril of Childbirth, who have taken away
my reproach, and made me an Instrument to increase thy Kingdom. It is in thy
power to strike death into my womb, but thou have given me a double life; all
mine anguishes thou have sweetened with gladness. Continue thy Mercies and
Favors to me thy Servant, that my lips may render thee hearty thanks.

II.
Look upon this my Infant which thou have given me; preserve it in Health,
quicken it with Grace, crown it with long Life, that it may grow up to be a
Servant in thine household. Send the Father of it and me much Comfort by it,
that it may be a Staff to our Old Age: Bless it with store of Friends in this
World, and be thou a chief Friend to it for evermore.

III.
And for the better growth in Grace, feed it with the Milk of thy holy Word,
defend it from all dangers ghostly and bodily: Guard me, and regard this my
Birth, that Satan rule not nor reign within us, but deliver us still out of his
Jaws as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler; let thy blessing, O Lord, be
upon me and my Children, and evermore keep and defend us.

Amen
A Thanksgiving after a deliverance from any Calamity.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have suffered thy Church so to be tempted
with Afflictions, that it is never free either from the Sword of Ishmael, which
is a reviling tongue, or the Sword of Esau, a persecuting hand, having taught
us all to drink of the same Cup our Master did; so strengthen me with Patience,
direct me by thy Spirit, and uphold me by Faith, that all trouble may be as
welcome to my Soul, as afflicted Ruth was to the Field of Boaz. Though troubles
are many and increase daily, yet thou, O Lord, know how to deliver us out of
all: Heaviness may endure for a Night, but joy will come in the Morning:
Doubtless there is a Reward for the Righteous, and a Rod for the Wicked. Let
one Plague follow another as one Quail sings to another; yet as the Viper
leaped on St. Paul's Hand, and immediately leaped off again, so one trouble
shall leap upon the Righteous, and in an Instant shall as soon vanish; though
he fall he shall rise again; for the righteous shall not be forsaken for ever.

II.
I have lately tasted of thy goodness, O Lord, I have now been sensible of thy
Mercy in a great Measure by this great deliverance. I have had experience many
times of thy loving kindness, but never more than in thy late Favors. I
chattered like a Swallow, I mourned like a Dove, I panted like a Heart, but thou
have put life again into my Soul; thou have not dealt with me according to my
Sins, nor rewarded me according to mine Iniquities: As high as the Heaven is
above the Earth, so great is thy Mercy toward them that fear thee; since thy
Mercy, O Lord, has been so great toward me; grant that I may love thee more
zealously, fear thee more reverently, and obey thee more carefully all the days
of my Life. For as Elkanah was to Hannah instead of many Sons, so be thou still
to me ^ God, instead of many Comforters. G^ve me therefore patience in trouble,
a constancy in hope, rooted and grounded in love; and so bring me, O Lord, from
this valley of tears to life everlasting.

Amen
A Prayer before taking of Physic, or any outward means for restoring of
Health.
MOst mighty God, the great Physician both of Soul and Body, who by thy
blessing on a lump of dry figgs did heal Hezekiah's Boil, that he recovered;
and by laying thy hand upon the head of Peter's Wife's Mother, did cure her
of her Fever; and anointing the Eyes with Clay and Spittle, did restore the
Man that was blind even from his Birth unto perfect Sight, and by seven times
washing in the River Jordan, did cleanse Naaman the Syrian of his Leprosy;
and by thine appointment have provided means for thy Children, for the curing
of their Sickness, and recovery of their Health.

II.
I dare not, O Lord, without injury to my Soul, and indignity to thine
Omnipotency, despair of thy sufficiency and power for the restoring me to
health, or not use that help, and expect a blessing upon those means which are
requisite I should choose and use for the repairing of my Body, and the
restitution of my Strength. I dare not send unto Sorcerers, Wizards, Charmers,
or Inchanters for help; nor with Ahaziah go to Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, for
relief, and leave thee the God of Israel: But I renounce and reject all other
help but from thee alone; and upon the bended knees of an humble heart I come
unto thee, beseeching thee to sanctify what I am now to receive or apply to my
ease and good, and to give such a blessing thereunto, that it may remove such
pain and sickness as does afflict my Body.

III.
O Lord, grant me in all my Sickness, patience, and not to murmur or repine at
thy afflicting hand: and in health give me a provident care to prevent all such
maladies, as by reason of my manifold Sins thou may justly inflict upon me.
And as David's Troubles made him pray, Hezekiah's Sickness to lament, the
Prodigal return home, and Israel under Aegypt's burdens cry unto thee, so I
beseech thee, that every Chastisement of thine may compel me the rather to sue
unto thee for thy saving Health, Pity, Compassion and Grace: And as Christ told
his Disciples, that Lazarus's sickness was not unto Death, but for the glory of
God, so I beseech thee that none of my afflictions may be unto the death of my
Soul, but rather for the good both of Body and Soul. And as Noah's Ark, the
higher it was tossed with the Flood, the nearer it mounted toward Heaven, so
my Soul being sanctified by Grace, the more it is exercised with the water of
affliction, the nearer let it be lifted up toward thee, O God; grant this, O
holy Father, for thy dear Son's sake, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be
all honor and glory, both now and evermore.

Amen
A Prayer before a Journey or Voyage.
ALmighty God, who preservest thy Servants in all their ways, and did protect
and direct Jacob in his way to Laban, Jonah in his Voyage, and the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, and Travels over Jordan: Guide me thine unworthy
Servant in the Journey that I am now to undertake: Lord, walk with me, be about
my Bed, and about my Paths; keep me from all dangers both of Body and Soul,
refresh me when I am weary, comfort me when I am solitary, and send me health
and strength of Body to perform it. Deliver me from Thieves, Robbers, and
savage Beasts; furnish me with all necessaries, and send me home again in
safety.

II.
Send me, I beseech thee, good success in all my undertakings; and grant that I
may undertake nothing but what shall be pleasing in thy sight. If I meet with
Company, grant they may be such as I may receive good by, rather than harm; if
I am alone, let thy Law be my delight; grant that I may then meditate such
things as shall be for the benefit and salvation of my Soul; and grant that
after my business is fully accomplished, when I return home, I may find my
Friends, Wife, Children and Family in perfect Health; and though my whole Life
be but a continual Travel here, yet send me everlasting peace, with thee and
thy Son Jesus Christ.

Amen
A Prayer upon return from a Journey or Voyage.
MOst merciful and gracious Lord God, keeper of Israel, the wellspring of
Life, and the alone preserver of all Mankind; I render unto thee all hearty
Thanks and Praise for thy provident care, and gracious protection of me in this
my Journey, whereas I might have perished, e're I had seen again this my
Habitation; but that thou have walked before me, by day as a pillar of a Cloud
to guide me in the way, and by night in a pillar of Fire to give me light. Thou
directest me in all my paths, O lead me into the way of Life.

II.
Give me an humble and thankful heart; let me not bury this and other thy
Favors in forgetfulness; but let my Soul still praise thee; and thy good
Spirit lead me into the Land of Righteousness. As thou have brought me, O Lord,
through this Journey and Voyage, and kept this Tabernacle of my Body unsplit:
So in thy good time bring my Soul home to the Land of Promise, the Everlasting
Haven of eternal Rest, and that for thy Son's sake, Jesus Christ.

Amen
The Mariner's Prayer.
O Eternal God, who rebukest the Winds, and stillest the raging of the Sea, and
the noise of the Tempest, whose way is in the Waters, and thy wonders in the
Deep, we are in danger every moment of perishing, unless by thy miraculous
Power thou deliver us from death, when with thy Servant Peter we cry out, Help,
Lord, we perish; let thy hand be stretched forth to command the Waters to be
still. Fill our Sails with gentle and also prosperous Gales; save us from
Shipwreck, defend us from Pirates and Robbers, preserve us from Lightning,
Tempest, and Captivity; hold the Winds in thy right hand, and the Waves in thy
left, keep us from Thunder whose fearful Crack may rend us in pieces; save us
in the bitterness of Frost, Hail, Ice, Snow, or Whirlwind; let us be prepared
for Death, and meditate upon those things that concern our better Life.

II.
Send us the Prayers of those that are upon Land, and bless all our Friends
that are now parted from us. Save our Souls from the great Leviathan whose Jaws
are ready to devour us. Make good our Provision for Bodily Sustenance, as well
as Furniture for our Ships. Let thy Peace be amongst us; save us, succor, and
defend us, O Lord, thou Anchor of our Hope, for thy Glory, and for thy Name's
sake, to whom be Praise and Glory, World without end.

Amen
A Thanksgiving for a safe arrival upon the Land after a Storm.
O Almighty God, who have now delivered me out of the Prison of the raging Sea,
and brought me to a Port of rest; O make me truly thankful unto thee for this
thy favor and mercy, and in thy due time lead me also from out of the
troublesome Sea of this World, unto the longed for Haven, and eternal Bliss and
Happiness. Thou have brought me out of a great deal of danger, which I was
liable to whilst I was amongst the boisterous Waves and foaming Billows of the
Waters. I am subject, O Lord every hour to as many Perils being now at Land,
how secure so ever I may think my self to be; my feet are still slipping into
the Grave, I beseech thee to uphold me; to save, preserve and keep me, that I
may still glorify thee, the God of my Salvation.

II.
Give me Wisdom, Sobriety, and Temperance when I now come amongst my old Lovers
and Friends; Cause me to make a right use of those things which I have observed
and beheld in Foreign Parts; free my Soul and Conscience from any stain of
Corruption and Infection which may hurt or destroy me; keep me in all my ways;
send me Health, and all things necessary for this Life, that having passed the
Waves of this troublesome World I may at last safely arrive at the harbor of
everlasting rest, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer for Rain.
BLessed Lord, who command the former and the latter Rain; who in the time
of Elias did so shut up the Floodgates of Heaven, that it rained not on the
Earth for the space of Three Years and six Months; and yet when he prayed, the
Heaven gave Rain, and the Earth brought forth her Fruit; behold us thy People,
who mourn for want of moisture; the Rivers of Waters are dried up and the Trees
of the Field are withered: send now, we beseech thee, a gracious Rain upon
thine Inheritance, and refresh it now it is weary; make the Springs as Milk to
moisten and to water the Valleys, so shall the Earth bring forth her increase;
our Land have a plentiful supply, and our Garners be furnished with store: our
Baskets shall be replenished, our Cattle increased, and thy holy Name for ever
magnified.

II.
We do confess and acknowledge, O Lord, that our Sins call for nothing but
death and destruction; and considering our deservings, we cannot expect any
blessing at thy hands. Pardon, we beseech thee, what is past; give us Obedience
and Grace to do thy Will for the time to come, and to satisfy the lawful
desires of us thy Servants, that we may not be wanting of our Food and daily
Bread, but may be p^rtakers of thy heavenly Blessings, and wait upon thee for
our Meat in due season. Oppress us not with too much Poverty, O Lord, neither
puff us up with too much Plenty, but give us a competent store of things
necessary for this life, and grace to use them soberly to thy glory and our
comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen
A Prayer for fair Weather.
O Lord God, who feedest with thy blessing every living thing, and satisfiest
the lawful desires of thy Servants, with thy bountiful Goodness, we wretched
Sinners, unworthy of the least of thy Benefits, humbly beseech thee, that thine
Anger may cease which is threatened against us, by this Rain and Tempest. Defend
us from those Evils which we are now likely to suffer: make our Habitations
like the Land of Goshen, in the times of the Plagues of Egypt. Cause not the
Waters, O God, thus to swell; let not thy thunder go forth against us.

II.
Preserve our Bodies, Houses, and Goods; keep us from Deluge and Inundation,
and show us some speedy token of Peace: Send us a Remedy in this our present
misery; turn our Dearth into Cheapness, and our Scarcity into Plenty. Give a
blessing to that which we shall reap; bless our store; furnish us wherewithal
to relieve others; let not thy hand be shortened at this time, but rebuke the
Wind and Storm, that we may have a pleasant Calm.

III.
At thy Word, O Lord, the Mountains smoke, the Heavens tremble, and the Earth
quakes; at thine Anger the Sea roareth, and makes a noise, and the fearful
Depths are broken down and troubled; thou command the Clouds and they obey:
O shut them up for a time, and let thy punishing Angel be no more seen. Hear
us, O Lord, in these our Prayers, that with joyful and thankful Hearts, we may
sing Praises unto thee, who rulest all things, world without end.

Amen
A Prayer of a Child before he goes to School.
ALmighty God, who has promised, that out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings,
thou will have thy Wonders expressed; behold I am a Child, and cannot speak
unto thee, or call upon thee as I should; but open thou my Lips, that my Mouth
may show forth thy Praise: Pour into my Lips the Waters of the Well of Life,
that I may learn those things that may lead me unto the knowledge of thy holy
Laws.

II.
Let me remember thee, my Creator, in the days of my youth, while the evil days
come not. Teach me, O Lord, how to lead my life according to the Rule of
Godliness. Make me obedient to my Parents, dutiful to my Teachers, proud
toward no man, but rightly affectioned toward all People. Add unto me length
of Days, supply me with virtues, guide my feet in thy ways, direct my mind,
sanctify my stu^ies, govern all my actions, preserve my Body in health, my
Soul from uncleanness; take from me all dullness and incapacity, that may hinder
my growth in knowledge, and bring me to life everlasting, through Jesus Christ,
my only Lord and Savior.

Amen
A Prayer in time of War.
O Eternal God, who rulest and beholdest all the World, and have many times
miraculously preserved and defended us; we beseech thee to show thy power in
these needful and perilous times, whilst there is nothing but Wars, and
rumors of Wars amongst us. Save us, O Lord our God, from our Enemies, and put
them to shame that hate us, turn the weapons of our Adversaries and their
Accomplices into their own Bosoms. Bless those that are abroad for the defense
of our Country; and sanctify us at home to please thee, that whatsoever they
or we do, it may prosper.

II.
Be present and president amongst us in all our Consultations; send us wise
Counselors and Commanders, who may prudently foresee, and valiantly defeat the
devices and stratagems of their Enemies. Bless those that are prepared to fight
for us; command the Winds and the Seas to favor them, and let the Land speak
peace unto them. Let neither the Sun nor Moon annoy them, nor alteration of
diet or place disable them; anoint their Shields, hallow and consecrate all
their Engines of War, with happy success to do thy will.

III.
Refresh both Prince and People with the sweet savor and harmony of Peace,
rather than the bitter howlings and clamours of War, that we may every one in
our due order sit under our own Vine, and under our own Fig Tree, that there
may be no ^eading into Captivity, nor no complaining in our Streets; grant, O
Lord, these things we have begged, for thy Son, our Savior's sake.

Amen
A Thanksgiving after Victory.
WE praise and bless thy holy Name, O Lord, that thou have saved us from our
Enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us. Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, but to thy Name be given the glory; for if thou had not been on our
side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick.

II.
Thou, O God, wast pleased to do mighty and mavelous things for us, whereof
we rejoice, thine Angel encamped round about us whilst we were in great fear,
and has delivered us. O Lord, more and more increase our Thankfulness;
maintain still thine own cause, keep us from all Plots and Contrivances of the
wicked: And as thou have at this time by a hand unexpected, put Sisera to
flight, and brought our Foes to an end, so destroy their Armies evermore, and
disperse their Forces, that we may know thou art the Lord, whose Name is
Jehovah; to whom be Praise, now and for evermore, World without end.

Amen
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A Preparatory Prayer against wandering Thoughts, and vain Imaginations Page 7
Meditations for Sunday 11 A Morning Prayer for the Worship of God 15 A Prayer
at our Entrance into the Church 21 Sunday Noon; for Perseverance 23 A
Thansgiving after Evening Prayer, for the Word preached 24 Sunday Even. for
pardon of Sin 25 Meditations for Monday 29 Monday Morning; for a holy Life 30
Monday Noon; for forgiveness of Sins 33 Monday Night; for God's preservation 35
Meditations for Tuesday 36 Tuesday M^rn. for Protection from our Enemies 39
Tuesday Noon; for God's Grace and Favor 41 Tuesday Night; a Thanksgiving for
God's Mercies 43 Meditations for Wednesday 44 Wednesday M^rn. for Repentance 47
Wednesday Noon; for God's particular care of us 49 Wednesday Night; for
deliverance from Sin 51 Meditations for Thursday 53 Thurs. Morn. a Sacrifice of
Praise 55 Thurs. Noon; for God's Blessing 58 Thursday Night; for Deliverance
from sudden Death 59 Meditations for Friday 62 Friday M^rn. a Confession of Sin
65 Frid. Noon^, for God's Direction 69 Friday Night; against Carnal Security 71
Meditations for Saturday 75 Saturd. M^rn. for God's Providence 78 Saturd. Noon;
for Tranquillity of Spirit 81 Sat. Night; for Remission of Sins 84 A confession
of Sins before the Sacrament 87 A Prayer before the Sacrament 94 A Thanksg.
after the Sacrament 95 A Morn. Prayer for a priv. Person 98 An Even. Prayer for
a priv. Person 101 A Morn. Prayer for a priv. Family 104 An Even Prayer for a
priv. Family 109 Meditations for the Sick 115 A Prayer in time of Sickness 117
A Pray. by those that visit the Sick 123 Meditations after Recovery 126 A
Thanksgiving after Recovery 128 A Prayer fit to be said at any time 131 Prayers
for all Persons and Occasions. A Prayer for the Church 134 A Prayer for the
King, etc. 136 A Prayer for the Royal Family 137 A Prayer for our Parents 138 A
Prayer of Parents for their Children 140 A Prayer for our Friends, etc. 141 A
Prayer of a Wife for her Husb. 142 A Prayer of a Husb. for his Wife 143 A
Prayer of an Orphan ibid. The Widow's Prayer 145 The Servant's Prayer 146 The
Maid's Prayer 149 A Prayer when afflicted in Mind 149 A Thanksg. for our
Redemption 152 A Prayer of a Woman with Child 154 The Midwife's Prayer 157 A
Prayer by those that are present with a Woman in Travail 159 A thanksgiving by
those that are present after Delivery 162 A thanksgiving by the Woman after her
Delivery 164 A Thanksg. after any Calamity 166 A Prayer before taking of
Physic 169 A Prayer before a Journey, etc. 173 A Prayer upon return from a
Journey or Voya^e 175 The Mariner's Prayer 176 A Thanksgiving after a Storm 178
A Prayer for Rain 180 A Prayer for fair Weather 182 A Prayer of a Child, etc.
184 A Prayer in time of War 185 A Thanksgiving after Victory 187
The End of the Table*

