CR

HONI SIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AT EDINBURGH, The twelfth day of December, one thousand six hundred and sixty
seven.
WHereas, there are many printed Copies of a most treasonable and seditious
Pamphlet, Entitled, Naphtali; Or, wrestlings of the Church of Scotland, lately
imported, vended and dispersed within this Kingdom, of purpose to seduce the
Subjects from their loyalty, alleagiance and obedience, and to strengthen the
disaffected in their rebellions Principles and Practices; the said Pamphlet,
upon examination, being found to be full of treasonable and seditious
calumnies, and lies, traducing the Kings Sacred Majesty, His Government, the
proceedings of the late Parliament, Secret Council and other Judicatories, and
those entrusted under His Sacred Majesty with the Government of the Kingdom,
both in Church and State, to the great scandal of the Protestant Religion, and
the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, thereby to raise new sedition and
troubles, and to involve the Kingdom again in an unnatural and bloody war. The
printing of which Pamphlet, vending and dispersing thereof, being contrair to
the laudable Laws and several Acts of Parliament made against the same;
Therefore, and to vindicat the Honor of this Kingdom from such treasonable and
false aspersions, in detestation of such abominable Practices, The Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council ordain, that upon the fourteenth day of December
instant, the said Pamphlet be publicly burnt in the high street of Edinburgh,
near to the Mercat Cross thereof, by the hand of the Hangman; And that all
havers of any of the said Pamphlets, residing besouth the water of Tay, shall
bring in and deliver the same to the Sheriffs of the respective Shires or their
Deputes, to be transmitted to the Clerk of the Privy Council by them, betwixt
and the twelfth day of January next; and benorth the said water betwixt and the
first day of February thereafter: With certification, that if thereafter, any
person of whatsoever degree, quality or set they shall be of, shall have any of
the said printed Copies in their custody or possession, that they shall be
liable in payment of the sum of two thousand pounds Scots money, to be exacted
without any favor or defalcation. And farther, if they or any other person
shall be found hereafter to be contriver, abbettor or assister to the making
up, printing, publishing or dispersing of the said seditious Pamphlet, that
they shall be proceeded against as Authors, Printers, Importers, Venders and
Dispersers of seditious and infamous Libels, and all pains and penalties made
against them shall be inflicted without mercy. And ordains the Magistrates of
the Town of Edinburgh to cause burn one of the Copies of the said Pamphlet in
manner foresaid: and that these presents be forthwith printed, and published at
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh and other places needful, that none pretend
ignorance.

Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1667.


