The Pack-Man's Pater Noster.
On which to think, it makes me sweat for sham^
As are these Rites maintained in Romes Theater;
And first the casting of their holy Water.
Their Exorcisme, their Images, their Altars.
Of Crosses, Cups and Pals, Popes are exalters,
Of Candles, and of Churches consecration.
With vestments in the Church for Decoration,
Their Hypocritical hid Hermitages,
Their Penna^ce and Polluted Pilgrimages;
Free Will, and humane Merit for Offe^^^*
With juggling, Jubilees, and Indulgences,
And of the Saints their idle invocation,
And by the Pope their Cursed Canonization.
Auricular Confession, vile pollution,
And for their Sins a-pay'd for Absolution.
Their privat^ Masses, and their mu^^^^^ation,
Their Elevation, Transubstantiation.
Sir John, if you would hear me bot record,
Some Verses on the Supper of our Lord:
It was a Friend of mine to me did send them,
He Is not a Christian will not commend them.
Priests make Christ's both Body and Soul, we need not doubt,
They Eat, Drink, Box him up, they bear about,
One is to little, Bread and Wine,
Holds not him several so we Dine;
Thou with thy Christ, I with mine.
Is thy Mouth the Virgins Womb? Is bread he^ seed
Are thy words the Holy Ghost? Is this our Creed?
O presumptuous undertaker!
Never Cake could make a Baker,
Yet the Priest can make his Maker.
What Is become of all these Chistshe Priests have made?
Do these Hosts or Ostes abide? or do they fade
One Christ abides the rest do fly:
One Christ he lives, the rest do Die:
One Christ True, the rest a lie.
R. S. Into the Gospel, Take Ye, Eat Ye, Christ says,
For which Receive Ye, Swallow Ye, your priest says.
See how by popes the Sacraments are driven,
Where Christ makes two, they ad five, so make seven.
For Baptism and the Supper of the Lord,
These only two did Christ to us afford.
With Christ his Institution not content,
To these two True, Five Bastards they augment.
A Bastards name does duly them be fit;
For they were never Re-abled as yet;
Nor ever shall, but still will be abhorred,
Because they have no Warrant from the Lord,
As Confirmation, Penance, Extreme Unction,
With Priestly Orders to adorn their Function;
And Matrimony they maintain as One.
But here is a wondrous Thing to think upon,
How Popes do call themselves, Servi Servorum;
Yet in Procession keep a Strange Decorum,
They tread on Necks of Kings upon the Street;
And forcing Emperors to kiss their Feet.
Does God the Father in his Law allow
These vile Inventions your Church does Avow?
Does Christ his Son into his Gospel give
Such ways to walk in, such Faith to believe?
Or does the Holy Ghost in us inspire,
More than the Law and Gospel does require?
The Father has perscrib'd to us a Law,
To keep us in obedience and Aw:
And Christ his Son our Savior, did Provide us
His Glorious Gospel always for to Guide us;
The Holy Ghost does from them both proceed,
To Guard us from our Sins in time of need.
If we transgress the Law of God the Father,
Then neither Grace nor Confort can we gather.
If we believe not in his only Son,
Then our belief is doubtlesly undone;
And if we breath not of the Holy Ghost,
Then is our Labor all our lifetime lost.
But Gods Commandments your Church renverses
S me she conjoyns, and others she disperses:
She trust in Saints and Angels many one,
And should Trust in the Trinity alone:
Wherefore Gods Holy Spirit can never attend her*
Nor in distress or danger ever defend her,
And though she Reign a while in pomp and pride*
I hope in God my good and gracious Guide,
To her the True Religion he will advance.
Ere l^ng, and bring her out of ignorance,
Wherein she has these many Hundredth Years
Lain wilfully, which manifest appears,
By her unwillingness from thence to part,
She is so obdurate, and hard of heart;
So that except God by his mighty hand,
Her power, her pride and Cruelty, withstand,
And force her from her Filthiness to fly.
Of Errors great, and Gross Idolatry:
So if she follow not Christ's True Instruction,
I fear her Final dangerous Destruction:
Which God forbid: I hope in his own Time,
He Will both forgive, and purge her of all Crime.
Heard ever ye, Sir John, a purpose Quicker,
To prove the Pope to be Christ's only Vicar?

S. J. S. And though he were full Vicar to our Lord,
Should not his words and Christ's keep one accord?

Priest. Doubtless tho do, and never are contrary,
In Pater Nosier, Creed: nor Ave Mary.

Pack-Man. But Christ's Disciples when they made their m^tion.
To Christ their Master, how to make Devotion,
As I have done to you, Sir John, to day,
I pray you, in what tongue bade He them pray?
Christ did not one w^^^ ^^tin to them speak:
Their talk was all in Syriack, He^rew, Greek.
He bade all Nations pray after one Manner:
But bade not all tak^ Latin for their Banner.
Your Latin is but one of the Translations:
Why should it then exclude all other Nations?
And on my Soul, Sir John, if I but say,
(...) mine own Mother tongue, when I do pray;
lord, help me, Lord, forgive me all my Sins;
^^a, why not, Lord, increase my pack and pins,
^^d every thing whereof I stand in need;
For this depends upon our daily bread;
I hope in God, to (...) more comfort herein,
Than Latin ye would make me so parquier in.
And since some tongues have more Antiquity,
Than Latin, were it not Iniquity
To force all People to pray like the Pope?
No, good Sir John, ye'l not say that, I hope.

Priest. But Pack-Man, one Point would I fain make plain
Let us come back to our Lady again;
And if thou had as much Capacity,
As raving wit, with great audacity,
The case is clear, that Virgin Mary meek,
She could all Languages perfitely speak.
Have thou not heard, Man, how the Holy Ghost
Came down like cloven tongues at the Pentecost,
And filled the House where all the twelve were ready.
And one Tongue Truly lighted on our Lady?
And lest thou think I talk of idle themes,
Consult the reverend Jesuits of Rhemes;
I pray thee, Pack-Man, earnestly this note.

Pack-Man. In Faith, Sir John, it is not worth a Groat.
Will I believed, think ye, because they say it?

Priest. No; but they prov't as no Man can deny it.
Says not the Text, that when the Lord ascended,
Unto the Twelve he earnestly Recommended,
That from Jerusalem they should not go,
Until the Comforter should come; and so
Into an upper Room they went together,
Where Marie still was one, you must consider,
With many mo in number full six score,
That with the Twelve did daily God Adore;
And then he says, when Pentecost was come,
They were together in one place, all, and some,
And (all) were filled with the Holy Ghost.

Pack-Man. O good Sir John, ye count without your host.
Now I see well your Jesuitical Tongues
Have cloven the Text even to the very Lungs:
That (all) which first was spoken of six Score,
Is here meant only of the Twelve, no more,
Now Mary is not named now, as than;
What need I then believe it, holy Man?
On with your Spectacles, Sir John, and Read,
And credit this as a Point of your Creed:
The Holy Ghost could fall upon no more
Than He was promised unto before.
Doubtless He took not a blind-folded Flight,
Like fyled Larks, not knowing where to light.
Now, He was promised only to the Twelve,
Look on the Text, Sir John, and judge your selve;
Speak man, and be not silent: I am sorry
To see you ignorant of such a story.
And, as the stories in themselves are diverse,
Flowing and falling into sundry Rivers;
^n diverse Chapters so they stand divided,
Whereof ye have no Warrant in the Word;
And yet pursue us both with Fire and Sword,
As Heretics, fot not doing as ye do;
Yet what the World bids, and no more, that we do,
Think ye that any man can be so mad,
As to hold Christ his Savior; and so bad,
As to hold Marie for his Saviors Mother,
And not to love her still above all other?
We love her then, though we believe not in her.
Nor by will worship think we for to win her.
We hold her blessed, for Christ's flesh conceiving,
But far more blessed, for Christ's faith receiving
She is his Mother, and the Church his Wife.
Which was to him more dearer than his life
So if the one could fall out with the other,
He would respect his Wife, more than his Mother;
For this is every Spouses carriage,
But most in this spiritual Marriage,
And as she is Mother of his humane life
She Is but a Daughter of his heavenly Wife,
And by his Mother, member of Christ's body;
Who thinks not so, is but a very Noddy.
All this, Sir John, I do but briefly say,
To let you see, that ye play us foul play.

Priest, Well, Pack-man. though thou bear about that trunk
I fear thou be but some foreloppin Monk,
Of Luthers lore, or crooked Calvin's crew,
And sent abroad, such business to brew;
Transformed in the person of some Peddler

Pack man. Now, good Sir John; in faith I am no medler,
Nor have I mind nor means so high to Mount;
I can but Read a little, and lay a Count,
And seek my Meat through many an unknown Maison.
I know not what you call your Kyrie Laison;
So help me GOD, Sir John, I know not better,
Nor in your Latin can I Read one Letter.
I but believe in GOD and sometimes say,
Christ help me when I Wander out the Way.

Priest. R. S. I pray thee, Pack Man this much for to tell me,
Since thou presumes so far for to excel me.
Were It not a very Reasonable Thing;
If one were going to an Earthly King,
To get forgiveness for some great Transgression.
That he should shortly suite the Intercession
Of some great Favorite, and he for to pass
To purchase pardon for his high Trespass;
And not the guilty person to proceed
Presumptuously before the King to plead;
But use his moyen by His Highness minion.

Pack-man. Sir John, that motion is not worth an Onion.
What if the King shall hear the Poor Man's Suite,
Should he stand silent as if he were mute?
No: he should, prostrat, lay his Fault before Him,
And he himself for pity should implore him;
For Intercessors oftimes lurks and lingers,
Except the Pleaders largely fill their Fingers.
Be here to m^^^^w just 'tween six and seven,
And thou w^^^ (...) thyself half way to Heaven.

Pack-Man. Content quoth I, but there is something more,
I must have your Opinion in before.
In case the holy Prior have (...) le^^ure,
To speak of every purpose at our pleasure:
There was but one Tongue at the birth of Abel,
And many at the building up of Babel:
A wicked Work which God would have confounded,
But when Christ came all Tongues again resounded,
To build his Church by his Apostles teaching,
Why not in praying, as well as in Preaching?
Since prayer is the True and full perfection
Of holy Service: saying your Correction:
So if our LORD to mine own Tongue be ready,
What need I then with Latin trouble our Lady?
Or if both these my prayers must be in,
I pray thee, tell me at whom to begin?
And to pray Jointly to them both as one,
Your Latin prayers then are quickly gone:
For Pater Noster never to accord,
With her, nor Ave Mary with our LORD,
If I get him what need I seek another?
Or dare he do nothing without his Mother?
And this, Sir John, was once in Question,
Disputed long with deep digestion,
Whether the Pater Noster should be said,
To GOD, or to our Lady, when they prayed
When Master Mare of learned Diversity,
Was Rector of our University:
They sat so long, they cooled all their Kail,
Until the Master-Cook heard of the Tale,
Who like a Madman ran amongst the Clergy,
Crying with many a Domine me asperge:
To give the Pater Noster to the Father,
And to our Lady give the Ave's rather;
And like a Welsh-Man swore a great Saint Davies
She might content her well with Creeds and Ave's
And so the Clergy fearing more confusion.
Were all contented with the Cooks conclusion,

Priest. Pack-Man, this Tale is coined of the new.


Pack-Man. Sir John, I Will quite the pack, if it be not true.
Again, Sir John, ye learned Monks may read,
How Christ himself taught us of his own Head,
That every Soul that was with Sin oppressed.
Should come to him, and He would give them rest.
Come all to me, says he, not to another,
Come all to me, says he, not to my Mother:
And if I do all as Christ did Command it,
I hope her Ladyship will not withstand it.
And so, Sir John, if I should speak in Latin
Unto the LORD, at Even-Song and at Matine,
And never understand what I were saying,
Think ye the LORD would take this for true praying,
No: that ye cannot; for ye may consider,
My Tongue and Heart should pray to GOD together.
And hereupon ye shall hear what befell,
To certain Clerks that Latin well could spell;
With whom by chance, I Lodged at an Inn,
Where an old Wife upon a Rock did spin;
And toward Evening she fell to and prayed;
But neither they, not I knew what she said.
One said, the Carling Counterfeits the Canting.
Another said, it is but the Matrons manting.
Some called it Cibbers, other called it Clavers
But still the Carling speaks, and spins, and slavers,
Now good Sir John, what think ye of this Hussie?
Where was her Heart, when her Hands was so busy?
In end, one said, Dame, wot ye what ye say?
No, not, said she, but well I wot I pray.
Ye pray, said he, and wots not what? I grant.
Alace, how ye can be so ignorant?
The Matrone musing little at the Motion,
Said, Ignorance is Mother of devotion,
Then Dame, said he, if Ignorance be the Mother.
Darkness must be the Daughter, and none other.
Prayed ye, said he, when all the Time ye Span?
What reck of that? said she, God's a good Man,
And understands all that I say in Latin,
And this I do at Even-Song and Matine.
Alace, Sir John, was not this Wife abused,
Whose Soul and Senses all were so confused?
Ye know these unknown Tongues can profit no Man,
And one tongue is enough for any Woman.
But when one prays in true sincerity,
As God commands, in Spirit and Verity;
The heart sends up the Tongue as Messenger
Unto the Lord a Pleasant Passenger.

Priest. But Pack-Man here is a pretty little Book,
Wherein if thou will listen for to look,
Set out by a true Catholic Divine.
And out of doubt will settle thine ingine,
Faith, Read it, Pack-Man, for it is but little.
The gadge of the new-Gospel is it is tittle.
He clearly proves by Zacharias Example.
When He did Sacrifice within the Temple,
And all the People stood and prayed without,
They knew not then what Tongue He spoke, no doubt;
Ergo the Mass may both be said and Sung,
In other Language than the Mother Tongue.

Pack-Man. Sir John, I see your holy Catholic,
Upon the Truth, has put a pretty Trick.
Have ye not heard this Proverb oftimes founded,
Homo qui male audit male rounded?
So if the People heard not what he said,
How could they know in what Language he prayed?
Since understanding comes by the Ear,
He cannot understand that does not hear.
Or how proves this that Zachary the Priest
Spoke Latin, then the Language of the Beast?
Were Liturgies under the Law but so
In such a Tongue that all the Jews did know?
What e're He spoke, himself sure understood it
And so your Catholic did ill conclude it:
Because a learned Priest may pray in Latin,
And mumble over his Even-Song, Mass and Matin
Ergo a Pack-Man to the LORD may Pray,
And never know a Syllable he does say:
For when you put me to my Pater Noster,
I seek an Egg, and ye give me an Oster.


