SCOTLANDS THANKSGIVING TO THE LORD FOR HER Armies safe, joyful and prosperous
returning from England.
Lest be the living LORD, Who reigns above
To Scotland who has shown such signs of love:
And Maugra ravenous Rome, and spiteful Spain,
Kept us abroad, and brought us safe again
Unto our native soil, with songs of joy,
Foyling our foes, who would us all destroy.
Who would have looked when first we marched over Tweid,
So long, and well, in England we should speid,
Curbing all those did threat us to withstand,
And feeding on the best fruits of their Land,
Having Christ's word, and sacraments in peace,
And puritle, in superstitions Place,
Returning with such credit, joy, and fame,
And blessings great, which no pen can proclaim.
Seeing our Princes sweet and gracious face,
And feasting with contentment; with his grace,
Foes gnasht their teeth, so blessed a day to see,
When Scots (who traitors were proclaimed to be)
Now counted are best subjects, by our KING,
Which joys our hearts, above all earthly thing.
Blessed August, joyful lest month of all the year,
In thee we marched over Tyne, and did reteir,
With joyful hearts, and songs of endless praise
To GOD, who has us blessed, in all our ways,
GODS Israel no more marvelous savours sand
Nor we brave Scots, into a strangers Land,
They marvels great did find from GOD most hie,
But all were worlds of wonders, we did see.
Ah wretched vipers, to your native foil,
Who would have wished your countries final foil,
Who can paint out your woes, sin, shame, and scorn,
By GOD, your King, and all true Scots, forlorn.
Rome hing thy head, thy hellish plots are gone,
And bailfull Bishops, your bad change bemone,
Your dririe train no help from Laud can find,
And by Saint Peter's chair, is left behind,
New castle, Durrhame, and you to wnes by Ties
Kiep, what you heard from us, and saw with eyes,
Return not to your wonted dregs of Rome,
Left you be cursed, and doleful be your doom,
And one day we to your just condemnation
Bear witness of your breach of protestation.
LORD bless our wise, and valiant General,
Our Nobles, Cavaliers, and soldiers all,
Who for Chrysts cause, and their dear Coantreys good
Devoted honors, life, name, means and blood,
Fame (times eternal herald) shall proclaim
To ages all your never dying Name.
Cursd be those hellish sprits (who hence shall move)
Sturs us among; to break the bonds of love.
England farewell, LORD plant his truth in thee,
That thou with us, in peace and purity:
May worship GOD, and hate that man of sin,
Whose brood too long has Britane breathed within:
Welcome sweet Scotland, who is like to thee:
Pay GOD thy vowcs, so blessed thou still shall be.
LORD bless our good, our great, and gracious KING,
That long in their three Kingdoms, he may reign,
And that his feed, the scepter still may sway
While Titan cease, to rule the glistring day,
That grace, and peace, may flourish in our Land,
And blessed Astrea have the sole command,
That they Who love Sions felicity,
His Counselors, and Courtiers may be,
LORD from his throne all Parasits remove,
And firebrands Sion hare, that Rome do love,
So he the blessed King who reigns on earth,
That ages all, shall blaze his fame, and worth:
GOD shall be honored, and their Kingdoms three
Shall bless the time, they did King CHARLES see.
Hadingtoun, August. 28, 1641. M. Patrick Hamiltoune Minister at Cambuslang.

FINIS.
in the year that our Army came here 1641.


