PROCLAMATION, Recalling former Acts or Proclamations, declaring Foreign
Victual free of Duty, and ordaining all Victual to be Imported to pay Duty as
before the Said former Acts and Proclamation.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting;
Forasmuch, as by Our Proclamation of the Date, the Sixth day of August, One
thousand six hundred ninety six years, The exacting of any Custom, Excise, or
other Imposition said upon Victual Imported into this Kingdom by Sea or Land,
from any other Country, by any Act of Parliament, or Book of Rates, was
discharged: And sicklike, by an Act of the Lords of Our Privy Council, dated
the 29 day of December, One thousand six hundred ninety six years, all Victual
Imported into this Kingdom from Abroad, was declared to be free of all Custom
and Excise, or other Public Duties whatsomever: And seeing the foresaid
Proclamation and Act of Council were past and Published, for encouraging such
who should Import Victual, for relief of the Poor, under the then scarcity and
dearth, which now are competently provided against, by the plenty of Victual
already Imported, and the old Victual yet in the Country not consumed or
spent: And there being likewise the Prospect of a very good Harvest, and
plentiful Cropped approaching. Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our
Privy Council, have discharged the foresaid Proclamation, and Act of Council,
and declare the same to be of no further force; and hereby ordain the
Collectors, and others employed in Uplifting and Collecting Our Customs, to
Levy and Collect the Custom, Excise, and other Duties Imposed upon Victual
Imported from any Foreign Country: by Sea or Land, by whatsomever Law, or Act
of Parliament, and appoint them to be Comptable to Us therefore, conform to the
Laws made thereanent, as they were liable to do before the said Proclamation,
or Act. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly, and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and to the remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority make
intimation hereof, that none pretend ignorance. And ordains these presents to
be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty one day of July, and of Our
Reign the ninth Year, 1697. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT
Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, 1697


