CR

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION,
Anent the Sale of Forefeited Estates, dated the tenth of June, 1681.
AT Edinburgh, the tenth day of June, One thousand six hundred fourscore one
years; The Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Thesaury, Considering, that by
Commission under His Majesty's Great Seal, bearing date at Whitehal, the twenty
seventh day of April last. His Majesty, for the Reasons and Causes therein
mentioned, has Empowered them to Sell and Dispone, the Estates, both Real and
Personal, which pertained to diverse persons, who were in the late Rebellion,
and Treasonable Insurrection of that Party, who did rise in the Western parts
of this Kingdom, in the year One thousand six hundred and seventy nine, and who
were then beat and defeat, at Bothwel-Bridge, or were Accessory thereunto; and
does now pertain to His Majesty, by the Sentence and Doom of Forfeitures,
pronunced against them. And to that effect, to Treat and Agree with any person
or persons, who shall be willing to Acquire and Purchase the said Estates, or
any part thereof, and (...) and subscribe all Dispositions and other Writes
necessary for securing them therein, as is more fully co(...)in the said
Commission. And the said Lords Commissioners, conceiving it necessary, for
(...) that convenient Dicts be kept, for Treating with all ^^ch, shall
incline to Buy, and acqui^^ the Right of the said Lands, Teinds, Annualrents,
Tacks, Steadings, Rooms, Possessions, and other Estates, Real or Personal,
which pertained to the Persons already Forfeited, for being engaged in, or
being Accessory to the said Rebellion; Or who shall be Forefeited hereafter,
during this present Commission, as guilty of the said Crime. Have thought fit,
that Intimation be made to all His Majesty's Leidges, that the said Lords
Commissioners, are to meet at Edinburgh, in His Majesty's Exchequer-House, the
first day of July next to come, for the first Diet, and the eighth day
thereafter for the second Diet; and thereafter will continue the Diets, from
time to time, as they shall find cause, to Treat and Agree with all such
Persons, as shall be desirous to Buy any of the said Lands, Teinds, and others
above written, which belonged to the said Forefeited Persons, or any part
thereof; as well to the Price of the said Lands, as otherways, to appear
before the said Lords, the said days and place, to the effect above-written.
And ordains these Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, Pear and Shore of Leith: and at the Market Crosses of the Head
Burghs of the Shires of Fife, Roxburgh, Perth, Strivling, Lanerk, Dumbarton,
Renfrew, Linlithgow, Dumfreis, Wigtoun and Air: and Stewartries of Fife and
Kirkcudbright, and other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

GOD save the KING, Amen.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most
Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1681.


