A serious and faithful REPRESENTATION Of the Judgments Of MINISTERS of the
GOSPEL Within the PROVINCE OF LONDON. Contained In a LETTER from them to the
General and his Counsel of War.

Delivered to his EXCELLENCY by some of the Subscribers. Jan. 18. 1649.

Proverbs 24.11, 12. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto
death, and those that are ready to be slain:

If thou say, Behold we know it not; does not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know it? and shall not
he render to every man according to his works?

Imprinted at London by M. B. for Samuel Gellibrand, and Ralph Smith. 1649.

A LETTER From MINISTERS of the GOSPEL within the Province of London, whose
Names are Subscribed: Delivered to His Excellency by some of the Subscribers,
Ian. 18. 1649. With desire to have it communicated to the General Council of
the Army.
May it please your Excellency, with those of your Counsel:
WHereas of late diverse Applications have been made, as well in writing as by
verbal Messages, inviting the Ministers of London, or some of them, to meet
with the Officers of the Army, in their consultations about matters of
Religion; We, Ministers of the Gospel within the Province of London hold it
our Duty, as then to refuse any such meeting as was proposed; so now to give
your Lordship and your Council the Reasons of that Refusal, least by our
silence we should seem to be wanting in that ingenuity and Candor which becomes
all, but especially the Ministers of Jesus Christ. And understanding that some
of our Brethren, at one Conference before your Lordship and some of your
Counsel, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Whitakers, Mr. Sedgwick, etc. and at
another with some of your chief Officers, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Ash,
etc. have already manifested their dislike, both of your late Actions toward
many of the Worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons, and what
likewise you have published in your late Remonstrance and Declaration, as your
intention for settling the Affairs of the Kingdom, (as we were informed by
some of them, and willed thus to signify,) We thought fit hereby to manifest
our Concurrence with those our Reverend Brethren, Humbly desiring, That while
we use that Plainness and Freedom which becomes the Ambassadors of Christ,
this our performance may not be mis-interpreted, either as a trangressing the
Law of Christian meekness, or an exceeding the Bounds of Ministerial liberty;
We being commanded to cry aloud, and to lift up our voices as Trumpets, to
show the People their Transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Had a Conference been desired with us only to have given you resolution,
whether the ways wherein at the present you are walking, are agreeable to the
Word of God (which Case indeed had been suitable for private persons to have
propounded, and for Ministers of the Gospel to have resolved) We should most
willingly and freely have delivered our Judgments (as our forementioned
Brethren have done) concerning these your practices; and have given you this as
our Advice, grounded upon Scripture; Namely, That in stead of proceeding
further in such unwarrantable courses, you should have testified your timely
and godly sorrow for what (so clearly against the direct Rule of the Word) you
have already acted.

And if only for clearing of this Case, a Conference had been desired, It was
from the first professed that we should be ready and willing to meet, where and
with whomsoever, to assert and maintain our Judgment therein. But as if the
justness of your way were already granted by us; We were only invited to
contribute our assistance in prosecution of what you had undertaken, which we
conceive to be out of your Sphere; And for us to have joined in any
consultations of this nature, would have made us accessory unto them; guilty of
the evil which is in them, and even, partakers of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22.
contrary to the Apostles rule. who bids us, 1 These. 5.22. abstain even from
all appearance of evil, and, Ephesians. 5.11. have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather.

It is already sufficiently known (besides all former miscarriages) what
Attempts of late have been put in practice against lawful Authority:
Especially by your late Remonstrance, and Declaration published in opposition
to the proceedings of Parliament; As also by seizing and imprisoning the Kings
person, without the knowledge and consent of Parliament, and by that late
unparalled violence offered to the Members of it, forcibly hindering above one
hundred of them (if we mistake not the number) from sitting in Parliament,
Imprisoning many of their Persons; though many of them are known to us to be
men of eminent Worth and Integrity, and who have given most ample Testimony of
their real Affections to the good of the Kingdom; and besides all this, there
is an intent of Framing and contriving a new module, as well of the Laws and
Government of the Kingdom, as of the Constitution of a new kind of
Representative (as you call it) in stead of this and all future Parliaments;
and this to be Subscribed throughout the Kingdom, under the notion of an
Agreement of the People; as is Declared in your late Remonstrance, of November,
16. 1648. page 67. All which practices we cannot but judge, to be manifestly
opposite to the lawful Authority of those Magistrates, which God has set over
us, and to the Duty and Obedience, which by the Laws of God and Man, and by
our manifold Oaths and Covenants, we stand obliged to render to them. And
therefore we judge it our Duty, rather to testify our utter dislike, and
detestation, then to give any (though but implicit and interpretative)
approbation of them.

We remember the advice of Solomon. Prove. 24.21. Fear thou the Lord, and the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; And that of Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Withdraw from every Brother that walks (...), disorderly, and not
according to the Traditions which you have received of us: Of which this is
one, Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principallities and Powers,
and to obey Magistrates: And Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, for there is no powe, but of God, the Powers that be are
Ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists there Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
The fear of God therefore (whose Ordinance is violated, when Magistracy is
opposed) makes us afraid of meddling with those who without any color of Legal
Authority, merely upon the Presumption of Strength, shall attempt such Changes
as these are. And We cannot but be deeply affected with grief and
astonishment, to see that an Army, raised by Authority of Parliament, for the
Preservation of the Privileges thereof, and of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, should contrary to their trust, and many engagements, do that which
tends to the manifest Subversion of them all.

We have not forgotten those declared Grounds and Principles, upon which the
Parliament first took up Arms, and upon which We were induced to join with
them; (from which We have not hitherto declined, and We trust through Gods
grace never shall.) We remember, That when the King, with a multitude of Armed
men, demanded but a small number (in comparison of those now secluded by you)
of the Members of Parliament: It was deemed such an horrid Violation of their
Privileges, and an act so injurious, and Destructive to the good of the
Kingdom, as had not (then) any Precedent or Parallel; And of what nature it
was judged to be, by a Parliament then free and full may appear by the Order of
the House of Commons of January 3. 1641. When, hearing but of a purpose in the
King to Seize upon some of their Members, they declared If any Person
whatsoever, shall offer to Arrest, or Detain, the Person of any Member of this
House, without first acquainting this House therewith, and receiving further
Order from this House, That it is lawful for such Member, or any Person to
assist him, and to stand upon his or their Guard of Defense, and to make
resistance, according to the Protestation taken to Defend the Privileges of
Parliament; and by the Declaration of JANUARY 17, 1641. That the arresting of
any Member of Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a Legal
proceeding against them, and without consent of that House, whereof such person
is a Member, is against the Liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of Privilege
of Parliament; And the person which shall arrest any of these persons, or any
other Member of the Parliament, is Declared a public Enemy of the
Commonwealth.

And this Violation of their Privileges, was that which did occasion first a
Guard, and was afterward one Reason of raising an Army: But that an Army thus
raised by their Authority, and for their preservation, should now so far
exceed that Act which was then esteemed without parallel, could hardly have been
imagined by us, had not our eyes been Witnesses of it.

And although both Houses of Parliament (who are jointly together with the
King, entrusted with the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom) saw cause to take
up Arms for their own Defense, against the Attempts made upon them by the King
and his Evil Councellers; and for the preservation of the Protestant Religion
established (which was then endangered by the growth of several Errors and
Innovations;) and for the securing of the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions
of the Kingdom, which they apprehended then to be underminded by several
Illegal encroachments: Yet this cannot be pleaded as any Justification or
Precedent for you (who, in reference to the power of Magistracy, are but
private persons) to usurp an Authority over King and Parliament, and to
intermedle with affairs which belong not to you. For the Laws of GOD, Nature,
and Nations, together with the Dictates of Reason, and the Common consent of
all Casuists allow that to those which are entrusted with managing the Supreme
Authority of a State or Kingdom, which they do not allow to a multitude of
private Persons, though they have strength in their hands to effect it.

And moreover, although the Parliament thus took up Arms for the Defense of
their Persons and Privileges, and the preservation of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; Yet it was not their intention thereby to do violence to the Person
of the King, or divest him of his Regal Authority, and what of Right belongs
to him, (as appears by their many Declarations in that behalf:) Much less was
it their purpose to subvert and overthrow the whole frame and fundamental
constitution of the Government of the Kingdom, or to give power and authority
to any persons whatsoever so to do.

And therefore we apprehend our selves obliedged thus to appear for the
maintenance of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, together with the
Constitution, Power, and Privileges of Parliament, and the settled Government
of the Kingdom; both, on the one hand, against all Malignant Counsels and
Designs for the introduction of an Arbitrary and Tyrrannicall power in the
King; and on the other hand, against all irregular licentious proceedings of
private Persons, tending to the subversion of them, and to the introduction of
Anarchy, Confusion, Prophannesse, and Irreligion.

And we are the more strongly engaged thus to adhere firmly to these our
former just principles, by reason of the several Oaths and Covenants
generally taken throughout the Kingdom, as by the Protestation of MAY 5. 1641.
Wherein we do in the presence of Almighty God promise, vow and protest,
according to the duty of our Allegiance to maintain and Defend with our lives,
power and estates, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate, and the
Power and Privileges of Parliament. As also by the Vow and COVENANT, wherein
the Lords and Commons have Declared, that there had then been a treacherous and
horrid design to surprise the Cities of LONDON and WESTMINSTER with the
Suburbs, and by Arms to force the Parliament: And finding by constant
experience, that many ways of force and treachery are continually attempted,
etc. Required, That all that are true-hearted and lovers of their Country,
should bind themselves each to other in that Sacred Vow and Covenant, wherein
we Declare our abhorring and detesting the said wicked and treacherous design,
and that we would according to our power and vocation oppose and resist the
same, and all other of the like nature. And likewise by the Solemn League and
Covenant for the Reformation and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness
of the King, the Peace and Safety of the Kingdoms, etc. Wherein we have
Covenanted, That we will sincerely, really and constantly in our several
Vocations, endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments,
and Preserve and Defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and Defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms;
that the World may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

In all which obligations, though the matter of them may be, in part, of Civil
concernment yet the bond and tie of an Oath and Covenant is Religious, sacred,
and inviolable. Which though some may esteem no more then an ALMANAC out of
date, yet we look upon it as the Oath of GOD, in whose Name we have sworn, and
who will certainly require it at our hands.

We know with what a jealous eye, and severe hand, the LORD avenged the
quarrel of his Covenant made by Zedekiah to the King of Babylon, though
extorted from him, and prejudicial to him. EZEKIEL. 17.14, 15.18, 19. Shall he
prosper (says GOD) shall he escape, that does such things? Or shall he break
the Covenant, and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord, seeing he despised
the Oath by breaking the Covenant (when lo, he had given his hand) he shall not
escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely mine Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head. We dare not therefore (when we have lift up our hands to the most
High GOD) by the violation of a more righteous Oath, provoke the wrath of the
LORD against us, who is the Searcher of all hearts, and to whom we must give an
account at the Great Day.

In stead therefore of joining in Consultation with you; We do earnestly in
treat you, in the name of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, whose Ambassadors
we are, That you would commune with your own hearts, consider the evil of your
present ways, and turn from them; Remember from whence you are fallen, and
repent and do your first works. You were once honorable and precious in the
eyes of us and others of Gods servants, while you kept in Gods way, and within
your own sphere; you had our hearts, our help, and our prayers for success
therein: But alas! you have eclipsed your own glory, and brought a Cloud over
all your excellencies. You are now walking in bypath of your own. wherein we
dare not say, Psalm. 129.8. The blessing of the Lord be upon you, We bless you
in the name of the Lord, nor bid you God speed, lest we be partakers of your
evil deeds. 2 John v. 11. In stead of preserving the Truth and purity of
Religion and the Worship of God; we fear, you are opening a door to desparate
and damnable Errors and Heresies against the Truth of God, and to many
licentious and wicked practices against the worship and ways of God. How is
Religion made to stink by reason of your miscarriages, and like to become a
scorn and reproach in all the Christian world? How are the faces of Gods
faithful servants covered with shame, and their hearts filled with sorrow and
grief by reason thereof? How is the Golden Cord of Government broken in sunder?
the Honor and Authority of Magistracy laid in the Dust? How has the
Parliament, which sustained the force and opposition of professed Enemies for
many years, been made contemptible and torn in pieces by professed friends in
one day?

You cannot but know how fully and frequently Gods Word commands and
inforceth obedience and submission to Magistrates, forbidding also and
condemning (and that under pain of damnation,) such practices as these of yours
are. As likewise what severe threatenings and exemplary judgments from God have
been denounced against, and inflicted on the Contemners and Opposers of this
his Ordinance. You know what a Brand the Aposte Jude puts upon those that
despise Dominion and speak evil of Dignities. Jude v. 8, 11. Woe unto them
(says he) for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the
error of Balaam for a reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Corah.

You know the sad examples of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram in their mutinous
Rebellion, and Levelling design against Magistracy and Ministry, in the
Persons of Moses and Aaron, You take too much upon you (said they to Moses and
Aaron) Seeing all the Congregation are holy. (...) Or Saints. Wherefore then
lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Which Moses fears
not to call Agathering together against the Lord and warnes the people to avoid
their company Number. 16.3 11 26 32 33 29. Depart from the Tents of these wicked
men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins; After
which the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, with all that
appertained to them: And yet there were in that Rebellion a considerable number
of Eminent men, two hundredth and fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the
Congregation, men of Renown.

And consonant to the tenor of the Scriptures herein, has always been the
constant judgment and doctrine of Protestant Divines both at home, and abroad,
with whose Judgments we do fully concur; disclaiming, detesting and
abhorring the wicked and bloody Tenants and Practices of Jesuits, (the worst
of Papists,) concerning the opposing of lawful Magistrates by private Persons,
and the murdering of Kings by any, though under the most specious and
colorable pretenses. Which Jesuiticall Principles and Counsels we fear, may
have too great a concurrence with, if not an influence upon these late
transactions.

Now we desire you seriously, and as in the sight of God, to examine your own
hearts and ways, and to deal with your selves as sometimes Nathan did with
David. Put case some other Party of men in the Kingdom, whose Principles had
not been concurrent with yours, should have attempted acts of such a nature, as
those that you have performed; as seizing the Kings person, and removing him
from place to place without and against his and the Parliaments consent: would
it not have been judged by you an intolerable contempt both of his and their
authority? Put case they and their Confederates had attempted the removal of
the Parliaments Guards, secured or inhibited a great number of their Members,
contrived and promoted new Modules of their own, destructive to the being both
of this and all other Parliaments, with other acts of the like nature; we
appeal to your own consciences, what clamours and accusations against them
would from your selves have proceeded. And if in other Persons you would
condemn the fact, the Lord grant you hearts to see who are the men. Was it
once a crime of the highest nature, to endeavor the subversion of the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, to dissuade the calling, or persuade the
dissolution of Parliaments; to countenance Arminians, or connive at Papists:
and can it be now commendable to contrive the subversion of the whole Laws and
Government of the Kingdom all at once; and in stead of a few errors to allow,
(as we fear some amongst you endeavor) a total impunity, and universal
Toleration of all Religions? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: He knows how
frequently you condemn that as a great crime in others, which you would have
accounted a virtue in your selves; But God who is no respecter of Persons
allows no such rule. Romans 1.22. Those who knowing the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death; not only do the same things,
but have pleasure in, (or, consent with) them that do them, in judging another
condemn themselves. Romans 2.1.3. And think thou this, O man, that judge
them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the
judgment of God? Verses 2.6.11. No surely, we are sure the Judgment of God is
according to truth, against them which commit such things, Who will render to
every man according to his deeds; For there is no respect of Persons with God.

We desire that you would not be too confident on former Successes. If God
have made you prosper while you were in His way, this can be no warrant for you
to walk in ways of your own, and promise your selves Success therein; Nay, if
through Gods permission (for reasons best known to himself) you have had or may
have Success in an Evil way, yet is it no justification thereof, nor
encouragement to proceed therein. Yea, you know, that it is one of the greatest
Judgments, when God suffers men to prosper in sinful courses. Wise Solomon
tells us from his own experience, that there be sometimes just men to whom it
happens according to the work of the wicked: again, There be wicked men to
whom it happens according to the work of the righteous, Ecclesi. 8.14. There
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness, Eccles. 7 15. But, because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, shall therefore the
heart of the sons of men be fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. God
forbid.

And therefore the Providence of God (which is so often pleaded in
justification of your ways) is no safe rule to walk by, especially in such
acts as the Word of God condemns. God does not approve the practice of
whatsoever his providence does permit. When David, in the cave, had an
opportunity to destroy Saul, (who was then in actual pursuance of him for his
life,) David's men make use of such an Argument from Providence, Behold, say
they, the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine
enemy into thine hand that thou may do to him as it shall seem good unto
thee, 1 Samuel 14 4, 6, 7, 13. but David neither durst himself, nor would permit
his men to make use thereof; but says, The Lord forbid that I should do this
thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him.
Again, when David found Saul sleeping in his Trench, behold a Providence (might
Abishai have said) God, says he, has delivered thine enemy into thine hand
this day, now therefore let me smite him, etc. 1 Samuel 26.8.9. No, says David
Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed
and be guiltless? But if to follow providence, had been a sufficient warrant;
David should have taken another course. In sum, if this be a good warrant,
nothing can be a sin, for nothing can come to pass at all, unless the
permissive Providence of God afford an opportunity.

Nor is it safe to be guided by impulses of Spirit, or pretended impressions on
your hearts, without or against the rule of Gods written Word. For by this
means the temptations of Satan, and the motions of Gods spirit will be put in
equal balance. And we desire you likewise to consider, whether any History,
sacred or profane, records any example of an impulse of Spirit falling upon
Multitudes of persons at the same time, putting them all at once upon
performances contrary to Moral Precepts; as also, whether such persons who are
acted by an impulse of spirit, can Command others who want it, (nay, who do not
so much as pretend to have it (to do that unto, which themselves pretend to be
so incited? We know that it is the duty of Christians to try such instigations
by the Word of God, and examine how well they agree thereunto, that they may
accordingly Judge, whether it be the voice of God, or the voice of Satan, and
of their own corrupt hearts, that prompteth them. Tothe Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Isa. 28.20. The Apostle Peter directs the Jews to whom he
wrote, to adhere to the word written, as to a more sure word of prophecy. 2
Pet. 1.19. By the same Rule, whereby we must try the spirits, we must also try
the impulses of spirit, otherwise we do exceedingly strengthen the devils hands
against our own souls, and tempt him to tempt us.

If beyond all this you plead Necessity of doing thus, least what you pretend
as a glorious work, might else miscarry, and therefore venture on these ways,
which are by your selves confessed to be irregular and not justifyable; We
answer, that no necessity can oblige a man to sin; God stands not in need of
our sin to carry on his own work. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? says Job, Job 13.7.

And yet this Plea of necessity is of the less weight in your case, because,
we fear, the ends you aim at, are no more justifiable then the means you
use; and the necessity pleaded is either merely pretended, or at least
contracted by your own miscarriages.

But if at any time a precept of God may be dispensed with upon a necessity:
Yet, we suppose your selves will grant, That this necessity must be Absolute,
Present, and Clear; not Doubtful, Uncertain, and Conjesturall, as that which
is alleged in your case must needs be, it being discerned only by your selves
and your own patty. It is most apparent to us, that there was of late no
necessity at all of these your irregular practices; the Parliament being (till
forced by you) full and free, acting what was Covenanted for, and (if we
mistake not) what was agreed upon long before by the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms. Besides you have engaged your selves by an Oath to preserve his
Majesty's person, and the Privileges of Parliament; and this is most clear,
That no necessity can justify perjury, or dispense with lawful Oaths; That
dreadful flying Roll being ready to seize upon him that swears falsely by the
Name of God. Zach 5.4. An example of which severe judgment from God, for the
violation of an Oath, you have in SAUL, who though he did out of a good
intention, in his zeal to the children of Israel, slay the Gibeonites (a people
formerly accursed, and who had fallaciously procured a Covenant from JOSHua
above two hundred years before) 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, 6. yet for SAUL'S breaking of
that Covenant, was the whole Kingdom of Israel, and his posterity in
particular, most severely punished by GOD.

We do therefore upon the whole matter, seriously beseech you, as in the sight
of God, to recede from these evil ways, and contain your selves within your own
bounds, to learn John Baptists Lesson for Soldiers, Do violence to no man,
Luke 3.14. (or put no man in fear) neither accuse any man falsely, and be
content with your wages. But if you persist in these ways, behold you have
sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out; and take
heed, lest, when the hand of God shall overtake you, and turn the wheel upon
you, you be found to suffer both as evil doers, and as busybodies in other
men's matters. 1 Pet. 4.15.

And when you shall thus return to your duty; as we shall have cause to bless
GOD for it, so we shall not need to fear those threatenings which some of us
have received (we say not from your selves,) yet from Messengers directed (as
they informed us) immediately from your selves, to some of us, That if we
persist to stir up the People to Sedition (for so it seems our bewailing your
sins before the Lord, is interpreted) and Soldiers do us a mischief, we may
thank our selves; That if their follow another War, you will give quarter to
none that stands against you; That you will spare neither man, woman, nor
child, English or Stranger. But if these our Exhortations prevail not, we have
discharged our duty, and we hope, delivered our own souls, EZEKIEL. 33.9. and if
it be our portion to suffer, we trust we shall suffer as Christians, and for
well doing, 1 Peter 4.16. 1 Peter 3.17. and that such suffering shall be
exceptable with God; in whose sight the death of his Saints is precious; 1
Peter 2.20. Psalm. 116.15. Who when he makes inquisition for blood forgets
not the cry of the humble; Psalm. 9.12. and though some of us were told by one
of the Messengers sent from you, That if we put our selves upon suffering, we
shall have suffering enough; yet we know, That the God whom we serve is able to
deliver us: Dan. 3.17. To whom in the discharge of our duty, we commit the
keeping of our souls, as to a faithful Creator. 1 Peter 4.19.

And thus out of a zeal to Gods glory, a care to discharge our own duties, and
an hearty desire after the comfort and salvation of your souls, we have freely
and faithfully declared our judgments concerning your late and present
proceedings. If the Lord please to make it effectual for your Reformation, we
and all the Churches of Christ shall have cause to bless God for you; but if
for our sins, and the sins of the Land, the Lord shall make you instruments of
misery and confusion (which your present actings do certainly tend to) we will
say with ELI, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. 1 Samuel 3.18.
But we hope better things of you, and subscribe our selves,

Jan. 17. 1649. Your Servants in the Lord, Tho: Gataker, Pastor of Rotherhith.
Geor. Walker, Pastor of John Evangelist. Arthur Jackson, Pastor of Michael
Woodstreet. Char: Offspring, Pastor of Antholines. Henry Robrough, Pastor of
Leonards Eastcheap. Nicolas Profet, Minister of the Word at Fosters. Thomas
Case, Minister of Maudlinsmilk-street. Stanly Gower, Minister of the Gospel at
Martins Ludgate. Andr. Janeway, of Alhallows on the Wall. Samuel Clerk,
Minister at Bennet-Fynk. Tho: Clandon, Pastor of Alhallows-barking. John Wall,
Minister of Michael Cornhill. James Cranford, Pastor of Christophers. James
Nalton, Pastor of Leonard Fosterlane. Thomas Cawton, Pastor of Bartholomew
Exchange. John Fuller, Minister of Butolphs Bishopsgate. Francis Roberts,
Pastor of Austins. William Tenken, Pastor of Christ-Church Elidad Blackwel,
Pastor of Alhallows Undershaft. William Harrison, Minister of Grace-Church.
John Sheffield, Minister of Swithins. Matthew Haviland, Minister of
Trinity-Parish. George Smalewoood, Minister of Mildreds Poultrey. William
Tailor, Pastor of Stephens Colmanstreet. Christopher Love, Pastor of Ann
Aldersgate. Robert Mercer, Minister of Brides. Ralph Robinson, Pastor of Mary
Woolnoth. William Blackmore Pastor of Peter's cornhill. Fran: Peck, Pastor of
Nicolas Acons. Stephen Watkins, Minister of the Gospel at Saviors Southwark.
Wiliam Wickins, Pastor of Andrew Hubbard, John Wallis, Minister of Martins
Ironmonger-lane. Thomas Manton, Minister of Stoke-Newingtoun. Tho: Gouge,
Minister of Sepulchers. Tho: Watson, Pastor of Stevens Walbrook. Nathaniel
Staniforth, Minister of Mary-Bothaw. John Halk, Preacher at Alhallows on the
Wall. John Glasscock, Minister of the Gospel at Andrew Undershaft. Thomas
Whately, Pastor of Mary Wool-Church. Jacob Tice, Pastor of Buttolph
Billingsgate. Jonathan Lloyd, Pastor of James Garlickhith, John Morton, Pastor
of Newington Buts. Ioshuah Kirby, Minister of the Word. Arthur Barham, Pastor
of Helens. Ben: Needler, Pastor of Margaret Moses. John Wells, Minister of
Olaves Jury. Robert Matthew, Minister of Andrew Wardrobe.


FINIS.

