A seasonble Proposal for the Benefit and Advantage of Women-Servants.
THO Projects of this Nature at first view are generally slighted, yet if it be
considered deliberatly, how much these Servants are exposed in an ignominious
manner, when through Age, Sickness, or Accidents, they are rendered incapable
to serve; It will be found to have its due weight, seeing it tends not only to
prevent the Abuses that are committed by such rigid dealing with Servants, who
without their own fault are disabled from working, but also will prove a great
Encouragement to Servants to be more faithful and useful in their Service.

It must be a melancholy Prospect, and discouraging for Servants to consider,
that by reason of the smalness of their Fees, they cannot in many years put as
much to the fore as will maintain them one Month in Sickness, and in case any
Accident befall them, they foresee themselves to be undone, which tempts many
of them to take unlawful Means to prevent these foreseen evils to the prejudice
of their own Soul, and of the interest of those they serve.

And therefore it is unquestionably a Duty that proper Methods be fallen upon
to remedy this Evil; In order to which, a very small part of Servants Fees, not
exceeding Twelve pennies of each pound Scots, ought to be collected to begin a
Fund for erecting an Hospital for maintaining such Servants, as through Age,
Sickness, Infirmity, or other Accidents are rendered incapable to serve; And
it is certain there is no Servant will grudge at this small Proportion, when
they know it is to be applied only to the use foresaid, so much for their
Advantage and Encouragement: Neither can it be uneasy or burdensome, the
Proportion being so small.

The Advantages that will attend this Undertaking are, 1. It will ease the
Place of a Burden that is otherways more than sufficiently burdened already. 2.
It will encourage Servants to be dutiful and honest when they foresee a Remedy
provided for them in case of distress. 3. It will provoke others to go in to
the Example. 4. It will prevent the Uncharitable and Inhumane Ejection of
Servants when in distress. 5. When any Servant is advanced to a better Station,
she may be provoked to a charitable Contribution for such a good Work in
favors of those that are in the Station she once was in. 6. The Hospital may
be under such a Government as may help to take care of the Souls as well as the
Bodies of such as come into it, and so prevent the unlawful Means that many
take sh^n their Misfortune.

Some will allege that such small In-comes will never make a Fund suitable to
the Design, and the collecting thereof w^ll be difficult.

To which it may be answered 1. That many Smalls make a Great. 2. ^perience
shows that smaller Contributions has produced Funds effectual for such Designs,
such as the Contribution of single Senti^els to their Invalides, Seamen
Servants to their Poor, viz. 8 Pennies per pound of their Wages each Voyage
Journeymen in I^corporations, Carters, Porters, Trone-men, yea even L^nk-boyes
in Edinburgh have such ^egular Contributions in favors of the Poor of their
^wn Societies, and the condition of Women servants is much better than several
of these forementioned, and their Numbers vastly above any of them. 3. There
may be other funds besides their Fees, out of which these Contributions may be
made, such as a part of the legal Pains imposed by Law against Profaneness and
Immoralities of Servants, and many People may be induced to give considerable
Contributions to such a charitable Work, from a plain Sense of the
charitableness and usefulness of the Design. And Lastly, there will be no
difficulty in collecting, seeing Masters will readily and cheerfully advance the
Proportion from the plain Advantage and Prospect they will reap by the designed
Project at any time after the Fee falls due, and the Collector may in a shorter
time, and with less Trouble gather in the whole, than many of the small
Branches of the Towns Revenues are collected; considering, that it will take no
great Time or Pains for the Collector or Thesaurer to visit all the Families
within the City sometime after Whitsunday and Martinmass, and take up the Names
of all the Servants, and those the^ serve, with the Quantity of their termly
Fees, and book the same, which will clear the Quota of the Contribution to be
collected.

As to the Government of the said Hospital within the City of Edinburgh, it may
be lodged in Eleven or Thir^^en Persons chosen out of Masters of Families,
Ministers and Town-Council, viz. 9 Masters and Families, one Minister to be
chosen out of the general Meetings of the Sessions, and one of ^he Town Council
to be chosen by their Council, with a Thesaurer or Cash-keeper and Collec^or,
etc. besides the foresaid Eleven, the Quorum declared to be 5 or 7, and this
Nomi^ation is to be renewed annually, with Power to them to choose their own
Preses, or any other more effectual way of Management may be considered upon by
the Magistrates, and eight Sessions in case the Project take.


