The SEAMAN's COMPLAINT FOR HIS Unkind Mistress of Wapping:
Together with The Young Woman's Answer in her own Vindication.
To the Tune of, I love you dearly, I love you well, etc.
Licensed and Entered according to Order, etc.





When I went early in the spring,
On board a ship to serve the King,
I left my dearest Love behind,
Who said her heart for e're was mine.
Her Love appeared most true to be,
And she on board would go with me;
She went as far as the Boy in the Nore,
And then returned back to the shore.
Oft-times I hugged her in my arms,
I thought she had a thousand charms;
Our vows we bound with kisses sweet,
To marry next time we did meet.
A golden chain I did present,
She seemed very well content;
She sighed, and said, It breaks my heart,
To think my Love and I must part.
While I was sailing on the sea,
I took all opportunity,
To send letters unto my Dear,
But yet from her I never could hear.
When we were booming of a town,
Where cannon-balls flew up and down,
IN the worst of all those dangers there,
My thoughts was still upon my Dear.
But since we are returned home,
My Love I went to wait upon,
Who did in Wapping dwell of late,
And now has made me unfortunate.
For when I to her Father came,
And asked for my Love by her name,
Her Father churlishly did cry,
Sir, all your love she does defy.
Said I, what mean you, Sir, by this?
To tell you true, she wedded is
To a rich old Man for all her life,
And you may look for another Wife.
Cursed on all false love where-e'r it be,
A curse on all such perjury;
A curse on those who-e^r do make,
Or break a vow for riches sake.
A curse on gold and silver too,
A curse upon that Miser, who
Has made his Daughter change her mind,
Oh! Women's tongues are like the wind.
Adieu all comfort of my life,
Adieu the pleasures of a Wife,
Adieu all false hearts here on shore,
For I will never see England more.
I Will go where boombs and cannons play,
Where they never cease both night nor day,
I Will range the seas until I die,
Where waves are tossing mountains high.
Since I have lost my heart's delight,
I bid unto the World good night,
I Would rather be where bullets fly,
Than in a Woman's company.

The young Women's Answer.
In every street I hear 'em sing
My Love's complaint, who served the
I went with him to the Boy in the Nore,
And could have gone all the World over.
He says my love appeared true,
I do declare it was so too;
And let his love be never so great,
Mine was as much though unfortunate.
A golden chain I had of him,
Which I will freely return again;
As for my sighing when we did part,
'Twas from the bottom of my heart.
Then both of us did straight agree,
At his return married to be;
As for his letter he sent to Town,
I do declare I never had one.
But now I find it (though too late)
My Love complains of his heard fate,
But it is my Father's fault indeed,
He often said that you were dead.
Those letters that you sent to me,
My Father would not let me see;
But always said, Child be at rest,
For thy Sweetheart was slain at Breast.
Then he persuaded me to wed
To a rich old Man that is almost dead;
It Is true I Am married, and am a Wife,
I wish I Would lived single all my life.
I always loved a Seaman brave,
And once I was in hopes to have
Him which I now never expect to see:
You Maidens all then pity me.
While we are young and once in love,
It looks like blessings from above;
Yet our Friends oftentimes will make
Us break those vows for riches sake.
And as for gold and silver too,
I freely curse it as well as you;
For if that had not caused this strife,
Then you and I had been Man and Wife.
Although we both are crossed in love,
Your resolution I Would have ye move;
Since now you see the fault's not mine,
Think not so hard on womankind.
Where one Woman is false in love,
A hundred Men they false do prove;
Though I lay not this charge to you,
Nor I hope you don't think me untrue.
Return, return, I beg my Dear,
For here are thousand Woman here,
That are more beautiful than I,
Therefore never go where bullets fly.
'Twould be the comfort of my life,
To see you have a happy Wife,
Though I am crossed, 'twill ease my pain,
To see you once returned again.

London: Printed for Charles Baker.


