I7 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATI^N Requiring all Heretors and Freeholders, under an hundred
pounds Scots of Valued yearly Rent, to come presently out and attend the Kings
Host.
Edinburgh, the nineteenth day of May, 1685.
FOrasmuch as His Majesty, with Advice of His Privy Council, Having by His
Royal Proclamation of the eleventh instant, Required and Commanded all Heretors
and Freeholders within this Realm, above One hundred pounds Scots of valued
yearly Rent, to be in a readiness, sufficiently Armed and provided, to come out
and attend His Host on Horseback, with their Followers and servants, and (...)
ty four hours advertisement, to obey such Orders as they should Receive from
the Counil, or one of His Majesty's General Officers, under the pains and
Certifications mentioned in the foresaid Proclamation: And whereas Heretors and
Freeholders, under the said sum of One hundred pounds Scots of valued yearly
Rent, may suppose themselves exempted from attending His Majesty's Host, by
which their number would be greatly lessened, and His Majesty's Service
Retarded, not withstanding of His Majesty's Proclamation, of the 28 day of
April last past, Requiring all his Subjects to be in a readiness to attend His
Host. Therefore, and that the said petty Heretors and Freeholders may not
pretend ignorance, His Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy
Council, Do hereby Require and Command all Heretors and Freeholders, under an
hundred pounds Scots of valued yearly Rent, as well as above, to come presently
out, and March with the Heretors in the several Shires on Horseback, or with
the Militia on Foot, if they cannot be provided with Horses, sufficiently
Armed, and with twenty days Provision, and herein they are not to fail, as
they will answer, under the pain of being holden, and repute as absents from
His Majesty's Host, and being proceeded against, and punished accordingly,
conform to the said two Proclamations, And that all persons concerned may have
notice hereof, Do Ordain these presents to be published by the Macers of
Council, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Market Corosses and
places needful, by Messengers at Arms, requiring all Sheriffs, and other
Magistrates to cause publish the same accordingly.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


