C R

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
PROCLAMATION Prohibiting the Nobility, and others to withdraw from this
Kingdom without License.
CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally
specially, constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Lords of Our Privy Council, having taken to their
consideration, That upon the great Disorders lately committed in some Western
and other Shires, they did write to them, Requiring them in Our Name, to take
such course therein, as might secure the peace in these places, With
certification to them if they failied therein, they would employ Our Authority
for doing thereof: Which offer having received no satisfactory Answer, and they
having declared. That they were not able to suppress those Disorders, nor free
the Country thereof, We did Command and Warrant Our Privy Council, to arm
such of Our Militia, and such others as should offer to serve Us for redressing
the said Disorders; and did authorize them to charge all Heretors and others,
and if need be, all betwixt sixty and sixteen, to come and attend Our Host
under the pain of Treason, according to the ancient Laws of this Our Kingdom:
In obedience to Our Royal Commands, the said Lords have thought fit to send a
Committy of Our Council, to attend Our Forces so to be employed: And therefore,
left any person should withdraw from the said Service, by going out of this
Kingdom, We, with Advice of the said Lords of Our Council, do hereby require
and command all Noblemen, Heretors, and Magistrates of Burghs Royal (except
actual Traffickers within Burghs) to remain and continue within this Kingdom,
and not to depart forth thereof upon any pretext whatsomever, without special
License from Our Council, as they will be answerable at their highest peril.
Our Will is herefore, and We charge you straightly, and command, that incontinent
these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other
places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation,
make publication of the Premises, that none pretend ignorance: The which to
do, We committ to you conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by these Our
Letters, delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of January, 1678. and of
Our Reign the 29. Year. Thomas Hay Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1678.


