Sad News from Salisbury, And other Parts of the West of ENGLAND.
Being an Account of a most sad and Dreadful Frost and Snow, which happened on
the 23d. of December, 1684. in and about most Parts of the West of England,
which Froze to Death many poor passengers who Traveled the Rode, besides many
Beasts, Incredible to believe, but that some who were in the same Storm are
alive to justify the truth thereof, the like scarce ever being known in this
Kingdom.

To the Tune of, Aim not too High.


GOod Christians all that live both far and near,
A sad and dreadful story you shall hear,
Which I do hope will warning be to all,
Least greater Judgments on this land befall.
pon the three and twentieth of December
A day which some have reason to remember,
A dreadful storm did happen in the West,
Whose sad effects shall chiefly be expressed.
As Passengers along the Rode did go
The North-east wind most bitterly did blow,
And flakes of Snow did from the Heavens fall,
As if it meant destruction unto all,
The Carryers that the rode full well did know,
Did loose their way, by reason of the Snow,
Many were forced to refine their breath,
And in this tempest frozen were to death.
Collins the Taunton Carryer, people say,
Upon the Douns did strangly loose his way,
Two of his Passengers were starved with cold,
A fearful Spectacle for to behold.




And Mathews that belonged to Shaftsbury,
Did bare a part in this extremity,
Two Horses died, and by the Snow and Frost,
Some say the use of both his hands are lost.
Two Passingers that were both Man and wife
In this extremity did part with life,
It would have grieved a stony heart to see it,
How these poor souls lay starved feet to feet.
And this for truth report us plainly tells,
The Carryer that belonged to Bath and Wells,
His own dear Son was frozen unto death;
And on the Douns did loose his dea rest breath.
The father grieved to see his son so lost,
By reason of this sharp and cuel Frost,
It was a great affliction to his mind,
Yet forced was to leave his corpse behind.
My Lady Fines that at New-Tony dwelt,
One of her Servants this cold season felt,
He froze to death was driving of his Cart,
Which pierced his tender Lrdy to the heart.
A Shopkeeper that did to Market go,
To Salisbury, was like wise lost also,
With many more which here I shall omit,
Yet this sad time I never shall forget,
And thirty more in Somerstshire were lest
In this unusual Snow and cruel Frost,
Who little thought when they went out of door,
Their wives and children they should see no more,
Near Tiverton in Devonshire they say,
As many to the Markets took their way,
Were in this Tempest lost, and never were found,
Till at the last found starved on the ground.
This judgment came from gods almighty hand
For sins committed in our native land,
Lord grant that it to us a warning be
And teach us how to shun iniquity.
Our sins for vengeance do to Heaven cry,
Yet we like sinners live in vanity,
O grant that we our sinful lives may mend,
That we may live with thee when life does end.
From storms and tempests Lord preserve u^ still,
Teach us thy holy laws for to fulfill,
So shall we gainers be by loosing breath,
And ride triumphant over the second death.
For the better satisfaction of the Incredulous, I here insert the Names of
several who have sufficiently tasted of the bitterness of this outrageous Storm
and Frost, and are yet alive to testify the Verity thereof.

Mr. Mathews the Carrier of Shaftsbury, who had several of his Cattle dyed, and
he himself lost the use of both his hands: Mr. Morris and Mr. Clark, Carriers
to Exeter and Shaftsbury, were much endangered of their lives: the Carrier to
Bath and Wells, had one passenger froze to death besides his own Son, a man and
his Wife going with the Taunton Carrier, were both froze to death, and found
dead foot to foot, with about 30 more near Evil in Somersetshire; and 6 or 7
near Chard, and many more, besides some store of Horses and Oxen, too many to
be here inserted.

FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball in Pyecorner.


