THE DETERMINATION OF THE QVESTION, Concerning the Divine Right of Episcopacie.

By the famous and learned Divine Dr. Abrahamus Scultetus, late Professor of
Divinity in the University of Heidelberg.

Faithfully translated out of his Observations upon the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus.

*

LONDON, Printed for NATHANIEL BUTTER. 1641.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
KNow Reader, that whereas in one of those many angry Pamphlets, vvch have
been lately published, there is an intimation given of some disgraceful
language, that fell from Dr. Voetius, the learned professor of Virecht,
concerning the person of Dr. Hall B. of Exeter; there has bin serious
inquisition made into the truth of that report; and that the said Dr. Voetius
disavowes (to the party that inquired of it) any such words of vnder-valuation,
by him spoken, as is testified under the hand of Sir William Boswell Knight,
his Majesty's Lieger with the States: And, if, upon the sight of a displeasing
title of a Book (contrary to his own judgment) any learned Divine, should
have passed a censure upon the work; there was small reason for the reporters
to reflect upon the person of the author: Yea, I am confident, that many of our
worthy brethren at home, were differe^tly minded concerning this Tenet of the
right of Episcopacy, if they would be pleased to inform themselves thoroughly
of the state of the question, as it is defended by the Author of that treatise,
would find small cause of scruple in this opinion. For whereas there are three
Degrees of truths, and holy institutions (as they are commonly distinguished)
Humane, Apostolic Divine; The first from mere men; The second from men
Apostolical; The third from God himself immediately; The Author desires to
go a Midway in this difference; holding it too low to derive Episcopacy from
a merely humane, and Ecclesiastical Ordinance; holding it too high to deduce
it from an immediate command from God; and therefore pitching upon an
Apostolical institution; rests there: but because those Apostles were divinely
inspired, and had the directions of Gods spirit for those things which they did
for the common administration of the Church, therefore, and in that only name
is Episcopacy said to lay claim to a Divine right; howsoever also it cannot be
gainsaid that the grounds were formerly laid by our Savior in a known
imparity of his first agents; Now surely this truth has so little reason to
distaste them, that, even learned Chamier himself can say; Res ipsa coepit
tempore Apostolorum, vel potius ab ipsis profecta est. And why should that
seem harsh in us, which sounds well in the mouths of lesse-interessed
Divines? But because the very title of that Book has raised more dust then
the Treatise it self; Be pleased, Readers, to see, that this very question is
in the very same terms determined by that eminent light of the Palatinate; Dr.
Abrah. Scultetus; whose tract to this purpose I have thought fit to annexe.

Peruse it, and judge whether of those two writers have gone further in this
determination; And if you shall not meet with convincing reasons to bring you
home to this opinion; yet, at leastwise find cause enough to retain a
charitable, and favorable conceit of those, who are (as they think, upon good
grounds) otherwise minded; and whilst it is on all parts agreed by wise and
unprejudiced Christians, that the calling is thus ancient and sacred; let it
not violate the peace of the Church to scan the original, whether
Ecclesiastical, Apostolical, or Divine. Shortly, let all good men humbly
submit to the Ordinance, and heartily wish the Reformation of any abuses.

And so many as are of this mind, Peace be upon them, and the whole Israel of
God.

Amen.
The Question. Whether Episcopacie be of Divine right? That is, whether the
Apoctles ordained this Government of the Church, that not only one should be
placed over the people, but over Presbyters and Deacons, who should have the
power of Imposition of Hands, or Ordination, and the direction of
Ecclesiastical Counsels.
THis was anciently denied by Aerius, as is related by Epiphanius, in his 75
Heresy, and by John of Jerusalem, as appears by Hierome, in his Epistle to
PAMMACHIVS. And there are not wanting in these many learned and pious men, who,
although they acknowledge Aerius to have erred, in that he should disallow of
that manner of Ecclesiastical government, which had been received by the
whole world; yet in this they agree with him, that Episcopal government is not
of Divine Right. From whose opinion why I should sever my judgment, J am moved
by these strong reasons, famous examples, and evident authorities.

My judgment is this;

First, in the Apostles Epistles the name of Bishop did never signify any
thing different from the office of a Presbyter. For a Bishop, Presbyter, and an
Apostle, were common names, as you may see Acts 20. Phil. 1. v. 1. Tit. 1. 1.
Pet. v. 12. Acts 1. 20.

Next. In the chief Apostolical Church, the Church was governed by the common
advice of Presbyters; and that for some years in the time of the preaching of
the Apostles. For first of all, companies must be gathered together, before we
can define anything concerning their perpetual government.

Then, the Apostles, as long as they were present or near their churches, did
nor place any Bishop over them, properly so called, but only Presbyters,
reserving Episcopal authority to themselves alone.

Lastly, after the Gospel was fair and near propagated, and that out of
equality of Presbyters, by the instinct of the Devil, Schisms were made in
Religion, then the Apostles (especially in the more remote places) placed some
over the Pastors, or Presbyters, which shortly after, by the Disciples of the
Apostles Ignatius, and others, were only called Bishops, and by this
appellation, they were distinguished from Presbyters and Deacons.

Reasons moving me to this opinion? First, Hierome upon the 1. chapter of the
Epistle to Titus, writes, that a Presbyter is the same with a Bishop, and
before that, by the instinct of the Devil, factions were made in Religion, and
it was said among the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, but I of Cephas, the
churches were governed by the common counsel of Presbyters: afterward it was
decreed in the whole Word, that one chosen out of the Presbyters, should be
placed over the rest,

From whence J thus argue.

When it began to be said among the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, but I of
Cephas, then one chosen out of the Presbyters, was placed over the rest.

But whiles the Apostles lived, it was so said among the people. As the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, besides other of St. Paul's Epistles, puts it out of
doubt. Therefore, while the Apostles lived, one chosen out of the Presbyters
was placed over the rest.

Again, There can be no other term assigned, in which Bishops were first made,
then the time of the Apostles; for all the prime successors of the Apostles
were Bishops: witness the successions of Bishops in the most famous churches
of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome, as it is in Eusebius, therefore,
either the next successors of the Apostles, changed the force of
Ecclesiastical government, received from the Apostles, according to their own
pleasure, which is very unlikely, or the Episcopal government came from the
Apostles themselves.

Besides, even then in the time of the Apostles, there were many Presbyters,
but one Bishop, even then in the time of the Apostles, (...), he that was
placed over the rest, which afterward was called Bishop, did impose hands, or
ordain Ministers of the Word, which Presbyters alone did not presume to do.
Even then, therefore, the calling of Bishops was distinct from the Office of
Presbyters.

If any desire the examples of Apostolical Bishops, the books of the ancient
are full of ye Episcopal authority, of Timothy, and Titus, either of which,
howsoever, first performed the office of an Evangelist, yet notwithstanding,
ceased to be an Evangelist, after that Timothy was placed over the Church of
Ephesus, and Titus over the church of Crete; For Evangelists did only lay the
foundations of Faith in foreign places, and then did commend the rest of the
care to certain Pastors, but they themselves went to other Countries, and
Nations, as Eusebius writes in his 3d. book of Ecclesiastical History, and
34. chap. But Paul taught sometimes in Ephesus and Crete and laid the
foundations of Faith there; therefore he commands Timothy to stay at Ephesus,
and Titus at Crete, not as Evangelists but as governors of the Churches.

And indeed, the Epistles, written to either of them, do evince the same; For
in these, he does not prescribe the manner of gathering together a church,
which was the duty of an Evangelist, but the manner of governing a church,
being already gathered together, which is the duty of a Bishop and all the
precepts in those Epistles, are so conformable hereunto, as that they are not
referred, in especial to Timothy, and Titus, but in general to all Bishops,
and therefore in no wise, they suit with the temporary power of Evangelists.

Besides, that Timothy, and Titus, had Episcopal jurisdiction, not only
Eusebius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Ambrosius, Hierome, Epiphanius, Oecumenius,
Primasius, Theophylact, but also the most ancient writers, of any that write
the History of the new Testament, whose writings are now lost, do sufficiently
declare. Eusebius without doubt appealing unto those, in his 3. book of
Ecclesiastical History and 4. chapter, Timothy (says he) in Histories is
written to be the 1. which was made Bishop of the church of Ephesus, as Titus
was the first, that was made Bishop of the church of Crete.

But if John the Apostle, and not any ancient disciple of the Apostles, be the
author of the Revelation, he suggests unto us, those seven new Examples of
Apostolical Bishops: For all the most learned Interpreters interpret the seven
Angels of the Churches, to be the seven Bishops of the Churches; neither can
they do otherwise, unless they should offer violence to the text.

What should I speak of James not the Apostle, but the brother of our Savior,
the son in law, of the Mother of our Lord: who by the Apostles, was ordained
Bishop of Jerusalem, as Eusebius, in his 2d book of Ecclesiastical History,
and 1 chap. out of the 6. of the Hypotyposes of Clement, Hierome concerning
Ecclesiastical writers, out of the 1. of the Comments of Egesippus, relate,
Ambrose upon the 1 chap. unto the Galatians, Chrysostom in his 23. Homily upon
the 15. of the Acts, Augustine in his 2d book and 37 chap. against Cresconius,
Epiphanius in his 65. Heresy, The 6 Synod in Trullo, and 32. canon, all
assenting thereunto. For indeed, this is that James that had his fixed residence
at Jerusalem, as an ordinary Bishop, whom Paul in his first, and last coming
to Jerusalem, found in the city; almost all the Apostles, preaching in other
places, Gal. 1. 19. and that concluded those things, which were decreed in the
assembly of the Apostles, Acts 21. For he was with Chrysostom, Bishop of the
Church of Jerusalem, from whom when certain came, Peter would not eat with
the Gentiles, Galat. 2. 12.

From examples, I pass to authorities, which Ignatius confirms by his own
authorite, Whose Axioms are these.

The Bishop is he, which is superior in all chiefly, and power. The
Presbytery, is a holy company of counselors, and assessours to the Bishop.
The Deacons are the imitators of angelical virtues, which show forth their
pure, and unblameable ministry. He which does not obey these, is without God,
impure, and contemnes Christ, and derogates from his order, and constitution,
in his Epistle to the Trallians.

Jn another place, I exhort that ye study to do all things with concord. The
Bishop being president in the place of God. The Presbyters in place of the
Apostolic Senate, the Deacons as those to whom was committed the ministry of
Jesus Christ in his Epistle to the Magnesians.

And again. Let the Presbyters be subject to the Bishop, the Deacons to the
Presbyters, the people to the Presbyters and Deacons, in his Epistle those of
Tarsus.

But Ignatius was the Disciple of the Apostles, from whence then had he this
Hierarchy but from the Apostles?

Let us now hear Epiphanius in his 75. Heresy. The Apostles could not
presently appoint all things: Presbyters and Deacons were necessary; for by
these two Ecclesiastical affairs might be dispatched. Where there was not
found any fit for the Episcopacy, that place remained without a Bishop, but
where there was need, and there were any fit for Episcopacy, they were made
Bishops. All things were not complete from the beginning, but in tract of time
all things were provided which were required for the perfection of those things
which were necessary, the Church by this means receiving the fullness of
dispensation.

But Eusebius comes nearer to the matter, and more strongly handles the cause,
who in his third book of Ecclesiastical History, and 22. chapter, as also in
his Chronicle affirms, that Erodius was ordained the 1. Bishop of Antioch, in
the year of our Lord 45. in the 3. year of Claudius the Emperor: at which
time, many of the Apostles were alive. Now Hierome writes to Evagrius, that at
Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclus and Dionisius the Bishop,
the Presbyters called one, chosen out of themselves, and placed in a higher
Degree, the Bishop. But Mark dyed, as Eusebius, and Bucholcerus testify, in
the year of our Lord, 64. PETER, PAVL, and JOHN the Apostles, being then
alive: therefore, it is clear, that Episcopacy was instituted in the time of
the Apostles, and good Hierome suffered some frailty, when he wrote, that
Bishops were greater then Presbyters, rather by the custom of the Church, then
the truth of the Lords disposing; unless perhaps, by the custom of the
Church, he understands the custom of the Apostles, and by the truth of the
Lords disposing, he understands the appointment of Christ, yet not so, he
satisfies the truth of History. For it appears out of the first, second, and
3. chapters of the Revelation, that the form of governing the Church by Angels
or Bishops, was not only ratified, and established, in the time of the
Apostles, but it was confirmed by the very Son of God. And Ignatisn called that
form, the order of Christ.

And when Hierome writes, that it was decreed in the whole world, that one
chosen out of the Presbyters should be placed over the rest. And when J have
demonstrated, that in the lifetime of the Apostles, Bishops were superior to
Presbyters in Ordination: and that each Church had one placed over it, do we
not without cause demand; Where, when, and, by whom Episcopacy was ordained?
Episcopacy therefore is of divine right. Which, how the Prelates of the church
of Rome, for almost 300. years, did adorn with the truth of Doctrine,
innocence of life, constancy in afflictions, and suffering death it self for
the honor of Christ; and on the other side, how in succeeding times, first by
their ambition, next by their excessive pragmaticall covetousness, scraping up
to themselves the goods of this world, then by their heresy, last of all by
their tyranny they corrupted it, that the Romain Hierarchy, at this day, has
nothing else left but a vizard of the Apostolical Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and the lively Image of the whore of Babylon, our Histories both ancient and
modern, do abundantly testify.

Wherefore all Bishops are warned from hence, that they thoroughly weigh with
themselves the nature of Apostolical Episcopacy, of which they glory that they
are the successors.

That Episcopacy had two things peculiar to it, the privilege of succeeding,
and the Prerogative of ordaining: all other things were common to them with the
Presbyters: Therefore both Bishops and Presbyters, should so exercise
themselves in godliness, should so free themselves from contempt by their
conversation, and so make themselves examples to their flock; not neglecting
especially the gift of prophesying, received from above, but being wholly
intent, to reading, consolation, and teaching: to meditate on these things, to
be wholly conversant in them; and so perpetually employed in this holy
function, and divine affairs, with this promise, that if they shall do these
things, they shall both save themselves, and their Auditors, but if after the
custom of some great ones, they follow the pride and luxury of this world,
they shall both destroy themselves, and them that hear them.

FINIS.

