A PROCLAMATION, Prohibiting the Exportation of Victual forth of this Kingdom.
WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
Part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
FORASMUCHAS, the present cold and backward Season, does threaten the Scarcity
of Victual, so that it appears necessary that there be a Restraint and
Prohibition of the Export of Victual, at least of Meal, Oats, Pease, Barley and
Bear, whereby the foresaid threatened Scarcity may be the better prevented.
Therefore We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to
prohibit, and do hereby strictly prohibit and discharge the exporting forth
of this Kingdom, either by Land or by Sea, any of the foresaids Kinds or Grains
of Victual, viz. Meal, Oats, Pease, Barley or Bear after the Day and Date
hereof, under all highest Pains, to be inflicted upon the Contraveeners, either
Merchants, Skippers, or others whatsomever: And farther, We hereby require and
Charge all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies and their Deputs, Magistrates of Burghs,
Justices of Peace, and other Officers of the Law, as also of Our Customers;
That they take all lawful and effectual Means and Methods to restrain and
hinder the said Export, as they will be answerable, and these presents to be
but prejudice of the former Order and Restraint issued out by the Lords of our
Privy Council, of the date the twenty sixth day of April last. OUR WILL IS
HEREFORE, and we charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and to the
Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Hea(...)burghs of the several Shires and
Stewartries within this Kingdom, and to the (...)aill Sea ports of this
Kingdom, and there in Our Name and Authority, make Publication hereof, that
none pretend Ignorance, and Ordains these Presents to be Printed.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the tenth day of May, and of Our Reign the
tenth Year School. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii GILB. ELIOT. Cls. Sti.
Concilii.
Save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to
the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. School.


