monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Prorogating the Diet for Inbringing the Accounts Due by the
Forces.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
To Our Lovits, (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our
Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as, We, out of Our Royal Care and Tenderness to Our good Subjects,
who have advanced and furnished Meat, Drink, Forage, Money, or other necessar
Provisions to Our Forces, Have already, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy
Council, Emitted two several Proclamations, for Inbringing the Accounts of what
has been so Furnished, that the same might be paid to the Furnishers; And
Considering, That there are several of these Accounts not yet come in to the
Clerks of Council, and that there are several Advancements made to the said
Forces, which could not come in at the Diets prefixed in the said
Proclamations; And being Resolved, That the old Rests als well as new
Advancements be timously paid out of the Fonds appointed for that end by Act
of Parliament: Therefore We, with Advice, of the said Lords of Our Privy
Council, Do hereby Prorogat the Dyets appointed by Our former Proclamations,
for Inbringing the Accounts due by Our Forces to the Country, to the first day
of March next; and Appoints all Persons to give in the Accounts of what is
furnished by them to the said Forces, with the Instructions and Verifications
thereof, in the Terms of Our former Proclamations, to the said Clerks of Our
Privy Council, betwixt and the said first day of March next, with Certification
to such as shall fail to give in the same, they shall never be received, nor
allowed at any time hereafter, but shall be repute as satisfied: And to the
effect that all Persons concerned may have timous notice of Our Pleasure in the
Premises, Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straightly and Command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh,
and the whole remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Shires
and Stewartries within this Our Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none may pretend
ignorance. And We Ordain these Presents to be Printed, and Published in manner
foresaid.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty ninth day of January, And of
Our Reign the second Year, 1691. Per actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. D A.
MONCREIF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
William and Queen Mary.
Edinburgh Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1691.


