A PROCLAMATION PROROGATING THE ACTS of PARLIAMENT AGAINST CONVENTICLES. And
Separation from the public Meetings of DIVINE WORSHIP.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lovits (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch as, the fifth Act of the second Session of Our second Parliament,
entitled, Act against Conventicles, and the seventh Act of that same session
of Parliament, entitled, Act against Separation and Withdrawing from the
Public Meetings of Divine Worship, Were appointed to endure only for the
space of three Years, unless We should think fit to continue them longer. And
having considered a posterior Act of Parliament, past upon the fourth day of
September, one thousand six hundred seventy and two years, whereby the said
two Acts of Parliament were appointed to endure for the space of other three
years after the expiring of the first three, and longer as We should be
Pleased to appoint. And finding it now necessary for Our Service, that the
said Acts be continued for three years further; And that the same remain in
force ay and while We declare Our further pleasure thereanent; Therefore We,
with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do prorogate and continue the
said Acts of Parliament for other three years and further, during Our
Pleasure; And do ordain the same to continue in full force ay and while We
declare Our further pleasure; thereanent. OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge
you, that incontinently their Our letters seen ye pass, to the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful; and thereat in Our Name and Authority
make open Publication of Our Royal Pleasure in the premises that none may
pretend ignorance thereof. The which to do We commit to you conjunctly and
severally, Our full power by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duly
execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixth day of August one thousand six
hundred seventy and five years, and of Our Reign, the twenty seventh year. Th.
Hay, Cl. Sti Concilii.

God save the King.
EDINBURGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY. Anno 1675.


