PROPOSALS To the High Court of PARLIAMENT, For Finishing the Ancient and
Present State of SCOTLAND.
1. THis Work consists of two Volumes, the first gives an Account of the
Ancient and Present State of the Nation, the Contents whereof have already been
laid before the High Court of Parliament; The second Volume consists only of
fine Sculptures, and the whole Design when finished, will be one of the finest
Things which was ever published for any Nation: It will contain the Planns and
Prospects of the Kings old Castles and Palaces, as also the chiefest Houses of
the Nobility and Gentrey, with an Account when they were Built, by which the
World may see, that in these days they were als considerable as other Buildings
of this kind which were then Extant; Some of our modern Edifices will compeat
with many in other Nations, the Ruins of such magnificent Monasteries as shall
be here insert, and the variety of so many pleasant Prospects of Towns, will
testify the same.

2. The Armorial Atchivements of all the Nobility of Scotland, with their
Supporters, Crests and Mottos, are to be engraven by the best Artists in
England, as also the entire Coats of Arms of the chiefest Barons in this
Nation, with two or three Lines of Description, relating to the Families they
are descended of; To which will be added the Arms of all the Royal Burghs, and
the Names of their chief Magistrates for the time.

3. The Solemnities used at the Baptizms of the Princes of Scotland, the
Funerals of the Kings, Dukes, and other Peers, and the way of Ryding the
Parliament, is to be represented in fine Sculptures; by which it will appear,
that Solemnities of this Nature are performed here with as much Magnificence as
in other parts of the World.

4. The above mentioned two Volumes will contain about Ten Quair of Royal
Paper, consisting of above 140 large Talliduces or Prints, the rest will be the
Description of the State of the Nation, and nothing relating to it is to be
published, before it be approven by such as shall be appointed to revise the
same. The Paper will cost 40. sh. sterling the Rim, so that the very Paper, and
the Printing of the Copper Plates will be 30 sh. sterling: And Captain Slezer
obliges himself to furnish the Liedges with these two Volumes in Sheets, at
Thirty sh. sterling, that is to say, without a Penny of Profit to himself.

5. For ordering of which, he only proposes to be reimbursed of the Charges
which he has already bestowed for carrying on this Work. The said Charges as
is instructed to the Right Honorable Committee of Trade, do amount to upwards
of 1200 lib. sterling. And it has been likewise made appear, that to finish
the same, it will require at least, as much before any Copy can be Printed or
taken off.

6. From which it is evident, that the Expense of this Undertaking, can never
be reimbursed by the Sale of the Book; because the Price would rise so
excessive high, that it could not be sold under Six pounds sterling. And all
the advantage Captain Slezer proposes to himself, in furnishing the Leidges
with these Books at the same Price they stand him, is the expectation he has
to dispose of a few of these Copies, at a greater Rate in other places of the
World.

7. It will be necessary to know in time, how many of the Leidges are desirous
of these Books, that Paper may be provided accordingly. For clearing of which,
Captain Slezer designs to inform himself of it by way of Subscription, and to
convince the World of the Sincerity of his Intention: he designs to take no
Subscription money, till such time as the Privy Council shall order the same:
but he desires it may be Consigned in every Shire, in the Collectors hands, or
any other who shall be appointed to receive the same; to wit, fifteen shillings
at the Subscription, and the said persons appointed to be obliged, not to make
any payment of it to Captain Slezer, or to any by his order, till it be intimat
to them by some of the Privy Council, that the Work is so far advanced, that
the Money Collected for this use may be paid to Captain Slezer. The rest of
the Subscription-money is to be paid at the delivery of the Book, as is usual
in the like Cases, of which a more particular Account and Intimation shall be
given hereafter.


