THE CATALOGVE OF THE Hebrew Saints Canonized by St. Paul, Heb. 11th. Further
Explained and Applied.

Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, etc. James 5.10. Take my
Brethren, the Prophets for an Example. Ambr. l. 1. Off. c. 25. Exempla majorum
proponimus, quae neque obscuritatem afferunt ad intelligeadum, neque ad
tractandum versutias: Sit igitur nobis vita majorum disciplinae speculum, non
calliditatis commentarium, imitandi reverentis, non disputandi a^^^^ia. Idem
Orat. de side Resurrect. Vivant Patriarchae, etc. Vivemus and nos si gesta,
moresque majorum voluerimus imitari: Miremur eorum praemia, imitemur obsequia,
praedicemus gratiam. Newcastle, Printed by S. B. 1659.

MOSES his Minority.
Heb. 11.23. By Faith Moses when he was Borne, was hid three Months of his
Parents, because they saw he was a proper Child, and they not afraid of the
Kings Commandment.
Joseph's Death Concluded the former Part, and the Saered Story of those most
holy Men, which the Spirit of God has Recorded, and Commended to Posterity,
for the space of 2368. Years, (for so many are computed from the Birth of the
World, till Joseph's Death.) And this Second Part begins with Moses his Birth,
and a Narrative of the signal Providence which not long after occurred; For,
By Faith Moses, etc.

The first Part.
As Moses his Preservation from the Tyranny of the Egyptian Edict and
Inquisition, Exodus 1.15. was a most eminent work of the Divine-all-ruling
Providence; so was it a most heroical and Religious Act of his both
affectionate and holy Parents; For though Nature (not assisted by any other
guide) will sufficiently enstruct Parents both to desire, and endeavor (and is
therefore often found to be very ingenious to contrive ways for) the
preservation of their Issue: Yet Religion both sharpens those desires, which
threatened and apprehended hazards might either dull or divert, and also seconds
and backs those endeavors which might be stopped and stayed with an infidel
persuasion, and an unbeleeving belief of an impossible event. Nature is full
of jealousies and fears, and so apt to make men doubtful and remiss; Religion
is made up of hope and ingenuity, and renders Men clear, confident, and
resigned. For Faith in emminent dangers, both superadds resolution to the
scrupulous and faint wishings and wouldings of false and fearful, and also
diligence and constancy to the recoyling and revolting endeavors of the same
traiterous and declining nature; Nature will not hold out, unless Religion
command in chief; terrors and threats in the loss of life or estate will lay
her off, and cow her, unless the auxiliaries of grace be called in for
assistance; and when both these concur in this subordination, the effect is not
only a work of Nature, but an act also of Faith. And this seems to be the case
betwixt Moses, and his Parents here; affection and humanity told them they
should endeavor his preservation; and the way for that was, by his
concealment: Religion goes higher, and commanded them thus to do; and also
assured them that what they did thus in obedience to her dictates, should
prosper and succeed, according to their affectionate desires and inclinations.
Nature set forth the enterprise; Faith kept it a foot. Nature says, This I
would do: Faith says, Go on, and prosper; Nature is right set, and never
sails, when she is subject to the counsels and commands of Grace.

2. But Faith not well grounded, is either a fancy and delusion; or rashness
and presumption: and therefore it was not sufficient to denominate this their
concealment an act of Faith, because the concealers were persuaded, and
therefore presumed that it would take, and prove according to their
expectation, (for a strong persuasion, may be a strong and strange delusion; a
fantastic Faith is but the believing a lie, 2 These. 2.11.) unless also they
had sufficient Motives and Arguments to bottom and found that persuasion and
confidence.

3. Now that Moses his Parents had such supports and grounds for their
concealment; we have these following enducements, and considerations, to
evidence to us, and secure our Faith, that what they did, was done (as the
Apostle here declares) by Faith.

Look then upon this contrivance with the Eye of Faith, and you will find, by
searching into the rule of Faith, that it was a commanded work, and design of
Faith; For,

1. Consider it in thesi, that must needs be looked on as an effect and
production of Faith, which has an express revelation from Heaven for its
foundation, and Gods truth and goodness for its warranty and security. Now
Moses his Parents knew the Prophetical praedictions of dying Israel and
Joseph; the former recorded Genesis 48.21. the latter Genesis 50.25. and both of them
relating to the Hebrews Deliverance, the accomplishment whereof they fully
believed, and apprehended as approaching and drawing nigh. 2. Consider it in
hypothesi, that the set time was come for the Hebrews Deliverance, and that
Moses should be preserved, that he might be the Deliverer of his Brethren; they
had high and cogent Arguments to engage their belief. For the former, They
knew that Pharaohs rage was near the height, and his tyranny almost at the
full, and that God would declare his Power, in restraining and suppressing
Pharaohs, Exodus 9.16.17. that it was Gods usual Method to lead captivity
captive, to confound the policies of Tyrants, when they seem to them most
prudent; and to subdue their power, when they appear most potent to
themselves, and most terrible to his persecuted people; and withal, That God
was a fure and present refuge in due time of trouble, Psalm. 9.9.10. and Psalm.
46. And for their confirmation (besides these contemplative) they had
experimental grounds: For, de facto, God (through the Religious temper of the
Hebrew Midwives, and the motions of compassion, and common humanity in some
neighboring Egyptians,) had preserved many Hebrew Infants from that barbarous
Massacre which Pharaoh had projected, and by his cruel Edicts ordered; and
therefore it was very obvious for Moses his Parents (from those received
axioms, and attested experiments of Gods goodness) to draw conclusions of
mercy toward themselves, and their tender Infant, and particularly to apply
them to themselves in his behalf. For the latter, That Moses should be
preserved for his Brethrens Deliverance, besides what was contained and folded
up in the general Propositions of holy Faith, Moses his Parents, (though we
have no express special Revelation in that Record that they had) had some
more distinct and clear Declaration from God; which St. Steven Acts 7.20. seems
to report, when he tells us, that Moses was, (...), which the vulgar reads
Gratus Deo: Tremel. Dilectus Deo: and the Genevah enclines to this; and then
this expression is Argumentatively full to our purpose: Thus, God at Moses his
Birth, did represent to his Parents; and they accordingly did apprehend in him
somewhat extraordinary, for which he would deliver and preserve him; then God
manifested he should be his Favorite and Agent. Beza translates it, Divinitus
venustus, which also is home enough; and the rather, because it fully accords
with Philo's reports concerning them, that they saw (...), a greater beauty or
Majesty of countenance, then would belong to a private or ordinary Person; and
therefore that God had designed him for some High and Honorable employment,
some rare and extraordinary work and service. Certainly, there appears very
often in the countenances of Men, rays and streams of Wisdom and Prudence,
of Authority and Majesty, of quickness and clearness of Spirit, of
magnanimity and greatness of courage, that as from such evidences (we in our
Vulgar account) conclude them hopeful and promising; so where all these (as
all these were in Moses, and so notorious to his Parents) are conspicuously
shining in a most illustrious, transcendent, and divine manner; there God has,
as it were, marked them out for Places and Offices of eminency, renown, and
dignity: Yet if this relation of St. Steven may fall short of a convincing
proof to this assertion, That Moses was to be the Deliverer of his Brethren,
and that God had discovered so to his Parents, then Moses his own supposition
Acts 7.25. will concludingly infer it; For from thence it is most clear, That
this was early revealed to Moses, and that it was also sufficiently and
convincingly declared to the Hebrews, (and Moses his Parents were such, and so
it was notified, and remonstrated to them also, and reason there is, both in
respect of their relation to Moses, and their noble extraction, to believe
rather to them, then to the generality of the Hebrews) though the Scripture of
the Old Testament be silent in it; for otherwise how could Moses (unless we
will suppose what we may not, that his supposition was groundless) suppose,
that they would have understood it, unless this future contingent had been
presaged to them? Or why should Moses reprove them, that they did not
understand, unless it had been duty in them to understand; and not to
understand culpable? and this it could not have been, unless it had been
proposed to them; and every proposal of God is an object of Faith; and the
belief of every such proposal, an act of Faith. And therefore from these
premises it is evident, That what Moses his Parents did, they (as it is here
set down) did by Faith. 4. But how can this act of Faith be verified of Moses
his Parents, when the Record Exodus 2.3. ascribes it solely to his Mother? Yes,
because the act of the one, is deemed the act of the other; however, the
silence of Moses, in this particular, cannot prejudge the Relation of St. Paul;
nor the bare reciting of it as the act of the Mother, necessarily exclude the
concurrence of the Father; and probably, both were the designers; and though
the first advice might be from the Mother, (as usually it is with them to be
more eager and passionate) yet his consent went along; and though she appeared
(it being in such cases always more safe for them, then their Husbands, and
their acts more favored and indulged then their Husbands, who are not willing
to be seen therein) the only active Instrument in Moses his concealment, and
managed it; yet he also was in truth as free, and willing as the Mother. 5. But
how can it be said, they were not afraid, etc. when fear put them upon this
contrivance and artifice? and the noise of the Inquisition forced them to this
very hazardous attempt?
Yet their fear was not a fear of despair, but of care and caution; not of
distrust, but of wisdom and prudence, which made them wisely to foresee, and
warily to forecast the prevention of the danger, and no way to retard or
forbid duty: What humanity and religion commanded, they would adventure on; and
that as Pis. observes, Non obstante Edicto, notwithstanding the severity of the
Edict, and would carefully, and sollicitously prosecute it, nothing could
obstruct their endeavors for his preservation, the enterprise shall go on,
and in their confidence prosperously. The contexture of the circumstances of
that provision (so ordered, as if they wisely foresaw both the danger and
event,) for his safety, seems to conclude the premises; The rate composition of
the Arc wherein he was concealed, and exposed; The situation of the Arc upon
the Brinks of the River Nilus, where Pharaohs Daughter used to Bathe, her
Attendants not far off to walk, and the Dames of the Court to Recreate
themselves; The Party to whom Moses was committed, his Sister; and her
Instructions to attend him, and observe the success. Thus, as the three
Children. Dan. 3. feared not Nebuchadnezzars Decres. (for they would not bow,
notwithstanding the cruel and certain penalty for their recusancy;) so these
feared not Pharaohs Order, let him threaten and punish as he would, they would
be so natural and religious, as to discharge their duty toward their tender
Infant: But above all this, they needed not to fear, neither morally could
they fear Pharaohs wrath; for they did believe, their affectionate and holy
care and endeavors would prevent and stay, arrest and stop the precepts and
judgment of his Inferior Court, by a cessat executio, an Injunction and
Decree from the Supreme Lord and Judge of the whole Earth.

The Second Part.
1. Moses in his Infancy, his first entrance into the World, is exposed and
left to the wide World, after he had been a while concealed; his Parents are
put to hard shifts for his preservation, either to hide him, or leave him to
all hazards. And thus it happened to Christ himself, immediately after his
Birth; there were Plots, and Designs for his Life, that his Parents were
forced to fly for his safety, and remove him into Egypt: And thus also it
fares with the Church of Christ; she has no sooner Conceived, and brought
forth to the Birth, but her Issue is set on by the Dragon to devour it, Rev.
12.4. and she, with her Issue, must fly into the Wilderness for a hiding
place, to escape his fury. Further yet, this is the Portion of every Member of
Christ; he is no sooner Born again by the Water and the Spirit, but the great
Enemy of Mankind goes about to poison and corrupt him; The old Serpent
persecutes the Seed of the Woman from the Cradle to the Grave, from its Birth
to its Burial. 2. But as God prepared a place in the Wilderness to feed and
nourish the Woman, Revel. 12.6. forewarned Joseph of Herod's plot against
Christ, Mat. 2.13. and provided for Moses a Tutor and Curator; so he will not
leave his Members devoted to him in the hands of the Destroyer, but will with
the temptation, also make a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. 3. If we with
resignation wait Gods leisure, in a Christian use of the means, God will
reward, and prosper, and bless our Endeavors, and Patience of Hope, nor only
according, but above and beyond our expectation: Moses his careful and tender
Mother aimed no further then his Preservation; God gratifies her Religious good
Nature with larger bounties; she had also the delight and comfort to Suckle and
Swadle him, and not only by connivence or permission, but by special Favor
and Commission from Pharaohs Daughter; not upon her own proper costs and
charges, but with a certain Honorable Salary and Stipend, and with full
expectation of high preferment in Pharaohs Court for a surplusage: So true is
that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.20. God is able to do exceeding abunndantly, above
all that we can ask or think. And the Psalmists supposition is here in some
sense affirmatively true, When his Father and Mother forsook him, then the Lord
took him up, Psalm. 27.10. for Moses his Parents durst not take notice of him;
neither was there any to look for, or after him, but a timorous Damsel, who
yet but looked at a distance; God took the care then upon himself, who is a
present help, when all other second auxiliaries fail to all distressed
persons; but above all others, to exposed Infants, Their Angels in Heaven,
(when no Guardians on Earth,) do always ( says our Savior, Mat. 18.10.)
behold the Face of my Father, stand before, and about him, as his Guard,
continually to attend and wait for Orders toward their protection and
preservation: And as he appoints his noble Hosts to be their Overseers and
Assistants; so he makes the most honorable among men to be the instruments of
his good providence; Kings shall be their Nursing Fathers, and Queens their
Nursing Mothers, as was here in effect demonstrated, and was in some part
proved and experienced by David, and so by him witnessed and attested, Psalm.
22.9.10.11. 4. The experience of Gods merciful dispensations, and gracious
dealings, is a great aid and assistance to our Faith, and a strong and
powerful encouragement for our cheerful dependence on Gods good providence.
It was an experiment which satisfied Peter's scruple, removed his error and
prejudice, and produced that determination and conclusion of Faith, Of a truth,
I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, Acts 10.34. And it was an
Argument of sense which fetched that answer and confession of Faith from
Thomas, My Lord, and my God: But as it is an help to Faith, so it is the
settlement and strength of hope and obedience; former favors provoke us to
thankfulness in prosperity and good days, and incline us to confidence and
resolution in adversity, in dangerous and difficult times: take a proof and
instance of both; Joseph's rejection of his Mistrisse, her solicitations was
grounded on his Masters favor, and Gods goodness in his former deliverance,
and present preferment, Genesis 39.8.9. Behold my master, etc. as if he had said,
Such an unworthy compliance and condiscention as she moved, was both a sin
against God, and an injustice against Pharaoh; the former an act of irreligion,
the latter of ingratitute, both a great wickedness. When Benhadad was in
straits, and knew not which way to turn himself; his Servants counseled him to
join with them in a submission to Ahab King of Israel; and the motive to this
their counsel, and his acceptance, and all their submission, was this; Behold
now, we have heard that the Kings of the House of Israel are merciful Kings,
etc. 1 Kings 20.31.32. Doubtless it is a good Argument, God has been found in
this, and such emergencies, when we sought unto him, therefore let us seek
again to him; he has heard when we called, therefore let us call again: David
frames such an Argument, when from an induction of mercies, he concludes a
continuation; The Lord that delivered, etc. 1 Samuel 17.34.35.36.37. And Saint
Paul from the former experience of mercies, builds his future hopes of a
succession, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.10. So true is that of the same holy Apostle, Romans
5.4.5. Patience works experience, and experience hope; not an hypocritical
presumption, which has the luck always to be bafled; but a grounded
dependence, which makes not ashamed (as all hypocrites shall be, when their
vain confidences fayl them) which always obtains either what it expects, or
better, or more, and is therefore a rejoicing hope, because an obtaining, ver.
2. or which is more pertinent, Because the love of God is shed abroad, etc.
ver. 5. former receipts of mercies, has produced in our hearts an assurance
that God loves us; and if so, then we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, Romans 3.28. and none but such, God loves so as to
reward: And this made the Psalmist use that Exhortation, Taste and see that the
Lord is good, etc. Psalm. 34.8. and that solemn and sacred Protestation, I will
remember the years, etc. Psalm. 77, 10.11.12.13. 5. Acts of nature and reason,
if performed in Faith, are taken in, and converted into Religion; Moses Parents
did an act of natural affection in Faith, as was before cleared, and so they
were not only natural, but religious and faithful for so doing: and the
ground hereof is, That as not the opus operatum, not the doing of a work of
Religion is a duty abstractedly and simply considered, removed from all
adjuncts and circumstances, (for even the most wicked transgressors may do
that which for the substance of the work is Religious, and yet they are not
Religious in doing it, because of a defailance in the right manner of
performing; as in Jehu his Zeal; the Pharisees Prayers; the Hypocrites Alms;
for they do them not in aim, respect, and order to God and his Laws, but to
other ends and purposes, as is expressed, Hos. 7.14.16. Zach. 7.5.) so the most
common acts of life, of nature and civility may become acts of Faith and holy
Religion, if they be duly circumstantiated, done spiritually and divinely,
with relation and reference unto God, obedience and submission to his will; for
it is the manner of doing, and the end, which differenceth and distinguishes
holy and profane actions, acts of Faith, and acts of Reason, of Grace and
Nature: and therefore those acts which materially are natural and civil,
rational and moral, if performed with a desire, a care, and conscience to
please God, they are formally and truly Religious, and Christian; as the
Philippians Contribution sent by Epaphroditus, is called a Sacrifice
acceptable, [a Sacrifice acceptable] because done to him with an Eye and
respect to God; the liberality was to Paul; the Sacrifice, the Service to God,
and this sauctified it, and adopted it into an holy office, or an act of Faith,
Aug. lib. 19. de Civ. Dei, cap. 25. throughout. 6. To denominate an act a duty
of Faith, it is sufficient to walk and move according to that degree and
measure of light we have received, and to believe proportionably to the
evidence of the Revelation: That which stayed Moses his Parents their Faith,
and for which they were reputed faithful, was not a clear Philicall or
Mathematical demonstration, for this carries its evidence so strongly along
with, that it commands and forces assent; neither was it an Enthusiasme, or
immediate Revelation; but such motives and inducements as were before recited,
which amounted only to strong and high probabilities, yet sufficient enough in
an humble modest heart to produce Faith, a certainty of adhaerence, though not
of evidence; and this sufficient to produce acts and operations of Faith, to
provoke to the obedience of Faith; A bruised Reed God will not break, nor
quench a smoking Flax, Mat. 12.20. if we have but Faith so much as a grain
(for a little Faith, if sound, is true Faith) of mustard seed; let the motives
be what they will, if this incline and promote obedience, the least degree
thereof is well pleasing to God; he will accept without being furnished with
the (...), full Armor of infallibilities and demonstration: Nathaniels Faith
had neither Enthusiasme, nor demonstration; but a Topic, or Argument, a
paribus, backed by an humane testimony or report, John 1.48. and Christ
approved this his Faith, and rewarded it with an higher concession of grace,
ver. 30.51. and so Christ accepted Thomas his Faith, though enduced by senfible
experiments, John 20 28. whatsoever the instrument, or beginning, or motive of
belief be, if that work by love, and work in us a care and desire to find the
truth, humility in following, and constancy in professing it, this shall be our
reasonable service of God.
The third Part, the Prayer.
O Eternal Lord God, in whom to believe is Eternal life, give to us thy
grace, which may suppress every motion of infidelity that there be not in us
an evil heart of unbeleife; and however we be not able to manage the shield of
Faith, yet perfect thou thy strength in our weakness, making it mighty through
thy power working in us, to pull down strong holds, cast down imaginations and
every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God. O holy
Jesus, the Eternal Word of the Father, we believe thou have the Words of
Eternal Life, Lord help thou our unbeleife, and increase our Faith; bring into
captivity every thought to thine obedience, that thy servants and followers may
submit to thee our Lord and Master, resigning our Understandings to the Truth,
our Wills to the Goodness, our Affections to the holiness of thy Precepts,
and by Hope depending for satisfaction on thy precious promises. O Immortal
and all-glorious Spirit, sanctify unto us all those means and methods which
are the preparatives and Introductions of Faith, that they may be Isntrumental
to Principle us in wholesome Doctrine, to beget in us a love of the truth, and
obedience to thy Laws, unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the Dead, and advance us to further degrees of Knowledge and spiritual
Wisdom, to the spirit of obsignation, the confidence of hope, and the
assurance of thine eternal love and favor: O holy blessed and glorious
Trinity, to whom belongs the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory throughout all
Ages, World without end, Amen.

MOSES his Choice.
Heb. 11.24.25.26. By Faith Moses when he was come to Years, refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, etc.
MOses in his Infancy and Minority being saved and preserved by a miraculous
mercy (...), and in his Minority and riper Years preferred, educated, and
advanced in Pharaohs Court; when he had arrived at full maturity and strength
of days, he bethinks himself how to exercise his Princely perfections and
accomplishments; supposing God had been so good and gracious to him for some
great and honorable ends, and purposes of mercy, and believing no better way
to employ those powers, then in the service of God, the interest and
concerments of his Church and People; and further conceiving, God therefore had
delivered him, that he might be the Chief and Principal Instrument of his
glory in the Preservation of his Fathers House, and the redemption of his
Brethren according to the Flesh; For, By Faith, etc.

The first Part.
Q. But why should Moses desert and relinquish Pharaohs Court in which he was
so Honorably Educated and Entertained? Or why should he deny (for so the
Vulgar renders it) the appellation and title of the Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
who by her tender care and liberal bounty had obliged him? Was it not both
gross ingratitude and great incivility thus to slight her, and her high
respect? Could he not at once be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and be
indeed the Child and Servant of God? a Courtier, and a Christian? Did not
Joseph the holy Patriarch before him, live both magnificently and religiously
in the same Egypt, and enjoyed the dignities and wealth thereof? And long after
this, was not Devout Esther Queen to Ahasuerus? Daniel and his Associates,
Nobles to Nebuchadnezzar?

A. Doubtless, had not Pharaoh and his Court been implacable, and merciless
Tyrants, violent Persecutors of, and incorrigible, irreconcilable Enemies to
the people of God, Moses might still have resided in that Court, and without
any violence to his Religion, possessed whatsoever Egypt afforded; but in this
juncture of time, the case was otherwise to be stated, then it was when Joseph,
Esther, and Daniel had charge and command under Infidel Princes; for these had
liberty and opportunities to exercise their Religion, to improve and manage
their Royal Privileges and immunities to the behoof and advantage of their
civil and sacred relations; whereas Moses must either in a base and unworthy
compliance join with the Egyptians to vex them whom God had wounded; or in a
dull sleepy security, and Epicurean softness, neglect the remembrance and
afflictions of Joseph, and stifle, and choke that public Spirit which God had
endowed, and enobled him withal for eminent and illustrious atcheivements; for
besides what is above mentioned, Moses had sufficient Authority and Commission
to enterprise and undertake the Deliverance of his Hebrew Brethren from the
Egyptian Bondage; a Command, Call, and Order from God, the Lord of Lords, the
only Supreme, and so, as Pharaohs cruelty did lessen Moses his Obligation of
gratitude, (for he being a Public Spirit, and no pure self-lover, every
indignity and injury to his Brethren, was so to him) so Gods command did quite
supersede all Obligations to Pharaoh his Daughter or Court; both, because they
were but the Instruments of Gods providence, who of Enemies, made them Friends
and Benefactors; and so the highest Obligation was to the principal efficient
God, and also, because a command from God (to whom proud Pharaoh was but a mean
Subject) the Supreme of all, does null and void all Orders and Obedience to the
Inferior; for though Religion does not take away, or disanull the ties of
Nature and Civility, but rather enforce and perfect them; yet, where their
Ruler and Offices are counter-checked by an express command or prohibition
from God, there it is Religion and Duty to wave them, and observe the express.
The result then is this, That if it come to this pass and point, that our
temporal preferments and possessions, our natural or civil endearments be
either inconsistent with, or prejudicial to our holy profession, any lets or
hindrances to us in the discharge and performance of the duties of Piety or
Charity, the love of God and Man, then we are by all means to quit and dis-own
them; we must come out of Babylon, though our Interests be there, if we cannot
stay but we must partake of their sins; we must forsake Egypt, if she distress
the People of God and our precious Faith; for we cannot serve God and Mammon,
Christ and Belial.

Q. But what? is there such a power and faculty in man to refuse, or choose
what he will? And if so, then does not this power necessarily infer a freedom
in the will of man?

A. Certainly man is a free Agent in all his exercises and operations and what
he does not freely, he does not as a man, but as a horse and mule, which have
no understanding; and we are forbidden to be such, Psalm. 32.10. for it is
natural for the will of man to move freely, rationally, and deliberately; and
this freedom, or liberty of the will, is an essential of humanity; and the
proper act of that freedom is Election, which is exposed both to coaction and
compulsion: ( Voluntas non cogitur; for that which is compelled, is against the
will; and that which is against the will, is not willed: It is true, the will
may be let, changed, and the commanded actions thereof compelled, that is,
those inferior faculties which are moved by the will; but the immanent actions
of the will, that is to deliberate, will and choose cannot be so) and also to
necessitation and determination to one; For if the will be determined by the
Physical and special influence of outward causes; then morives were in vain,
reason in vain, deliberation in vain, all persuasions and threats in vain: but
therefore are these used, because man has a power of Election, that he may
deliberate and act indifferently, and either do, or not do; or do this, or
the contrary. For what exercise have we of our wills, if we act not voluntary?
And how act we voluntarily, if we be necessitated absolutely? And to what end
and design are those terrors, and promises of the Lord, the danger we shall
incurr by our disobedience, and the reward we shall reap by our obedience, if
they be not as rational motives, and have not with them a persuasive efficacy?
It is true indeed, that the will often mistakes, and errs in her choice,
putting bitter for sweer, evil for good, and one the contrary: But this
proceeds not from any forfeiture of what was natural to the will, (and all, or
certainly very few excepted, confess that Adam had true and entire liberty)
but from the corrution of nature, or the natural faculty depraved, (which is a
contracted contagion) whereby we are averse and indisposed to good, we are
refractory and rebellious to the very Laws of Nature, as well as of Grace; of
right Reason, as holy Religion; and we are prone and strongly inclined to
observe and follow the desires and delights of the carnal sensitive appetite,
and to satisfy the lusts of the flesh; for the understanding is full of
ignorance and darkness, during this state of corruption, of pride and
contradiction, against all sacred and saving truth; the will is full of enmity
and opposition against that which is good, the conscience full of impurity and
sophystry, the heart of folly and madness, of infidelity and hypocrysie; and
therefore no wonder if every imagination, fancy, and conception of the heart be
unto evil, and that continually: Yet even in these aptnesses, inclinations,
and prejudices, the will moves freely, and acts by choice: For as Angels, and
good Spirits, by a most free agency, do good, and nothing but good, because
their understandings are taken up with the contemplation and satisfaction, and
their affections with the desires and delight of good only: So Devils, and
wicked men long and thirst, pursue and prosecute sin, by choosing the evil, and
refusing the good, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness
of their heart, Ephesians. 4.18. and so allowing and approving of sin and
wickedness; So that whether the object be chosen good or evil, the will acts
(...), by deliberation, and with indifferency, though that the good is chosen,
be from the causality of Faith, and influences of spiritual Grace; that evil
from the corruption of Nature, either transmitted and passed over to us by
carnal propagation, or contracted by vicious habits, customs, and education;
and this properly concerns not the liberty of the Agent, but only expresses
the reasons, causes, and motives, for which he thus exercises and manageth his
liberty: It was from Nature that Moses chused, or made a choice; it was by
Faith he made this choice, He chused rather to suffer affliction, etc.

Q. But what? does Faith Catechize and direct men rather to suffer affliction?
Can sufferings be the objects of our desires and longings? Or, are afflictions
in numero eligibilium, matters worthy of our election and complacency?

A. Doubtless they are in some degree and measure, though not of themselves;
yet secondarily in respect of their uses, as they relate either to the
prevention of a greater threatened and demerited impendant evil; or as they
conduce to some present, or future good. For, sometimes they are Fatherly
corrections, to avoid the wrath and severity of dis-inheriting; When we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
World, 1 Cor. 11.32. and that is an happy temporal judgment, which bars an
Eternal; a desirable chasticement, which wards off future condemnation.
Sometimes they are Instructions, It is good for me that I have been afflicted:
that I might learn thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.71. and to receive Instruction is
highly appetible, and that with the most ingenuous and noble, as well as holy
and religious spirits. Sometimes they are preparatives for Glory, having not
only a purging, but also a purifying quality; 2 Cor. 4.17.18. For our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory, While we look not at the things which are seen, but
at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal;
but the things which are not seen, are eternal. Sometimes they are discoveries
of the truth of the inward parts, of our sincerity. That the trial of our
Faith, being much more precious then of Gold that perishes, though it be tried
with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. that though they be sharp and biting, yet have
they in them somewhat of the bonum jucundum; but indirectly, and by
consequence, For we are to count it all joy when we fall into diverse
temptations, Knowing this, that the trying of your Faith works patience,
James 1.2.3. much of the honestum, that the trial of your Faith might be
precious, etc. 1 Pet. 1.7. The Apostles adjudged their sufferings honorable,
Acts 5.41. and therefore, they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his Name. Add to this, they consorm us to Christ our Head, the Prince
of sufferings, who by his sufferings has sanctified and enobled all ours; but
they are most of all of the utile, they are infinitely profitable to prevent
the greatest evils, and to procure and secure the greatest good; and if they
be in some degree all these, both joyous, and honorable, and profitable, then
also they must be eligible; not simply and absolutely, for so they are not;
because mala poenae, evils for sin, or the evils of punishment, contrary to
Nature; but comparatively, and upon supposition; not as the matter of our
first, but second, and sometimes better choice, when they are received as
Medicines, taken as trials of the most eminent graces of humility,
contentation, meekness, steadfastness, and Faith; and when managed to the use
and exercise of these; or when applied as assurances of after felicities; and
thus even Death it self may be desired, as a determination of humane
imperfections and miseries, as an Introduction to a new and more excellent
life; Thus Elias prayed, that God would take away his life, 1 Kings 19.4. not
positively, or peremptorily (for he fled for it is safety) but conditionally,
rather then Baal should seem to prevail against God; rather then he see the
whole design of Ahab and Jezabell acted with all sury and cruelty upon the
Prophets of the Lord. And Saint Paul knew not what to choose in that strait,
Life or Death; yet his desire was rather to depart, because thereby he should
obtain to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. and we long to be clothed, etc. 2 Cor.
5.4 and, we are willing rather to be absent in the body, and to be present with
the Lord, ver. 8. And this was the case of Moses his choice, it was not through
passion; but with deliberation, with a (...) rather; the act was neither purely
voluntary, nor involuntary, but mixed; as Patients take bitter Pills and
Potions, rather then they will languish and consume, suffer one part of the
body to be Cauterized or amputated, and cut off, rather then the whole perish;
as Mariners in a Storm at Sea, will rather lose their goods, then lives; and
Moses did this the rather, because he esteemed his and their sufferings, the
sufferings of Christ.

Q. But how were they the sufferings, or reproach of Christ? Was Christ then
exhibited in the flesh? Or could he suffer, who had no flesh to suffer in? Or
could Pharaoh reproach him whom he knew not, whose Person was without his reach,
and no way subject to his power?

A. Doubtless their sufferings here, have the appellation of the reproach of
Christ upon the same account, that Saint Paul's reproaches are styled, the
afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. for, as Christ could not suffer personally
before he assumed our Nature, and took our flesh; so neither was it possible
for him to suffer after the Resurrection of his Flesh, and that his Body was
Glorified: For, on the Cross, his sufferings had their determination, and
period, with that Consummatum est, It is finished, John 19.30. And Saint Paul
tells us, Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more, death has no more
dominion over him, Romans 6.9. and if not Death, then no penalties, or miseries,
which are but either the Harbingers, and Forerunners, or Attendants and
Followers of Death. So that this (...), and that (...), is all one; Christ,
before his Incarnation, and after his Glorification, suffers, and is reproched;
not in his Personal capacity, as he was during his residence on Earth; but in
his politic capacity; and in this consideration, he was from all Eternity,
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; and he suffers, and
did always suffer, when any part of his Body suffers. As therefore in Moses
and his Hebrews, Christ mystical was reproched; so in Saint Paul, and the then
Church of Christ, he was mystically afflicted: Christ ever did, and now does
suffer in his Members; he ever did, and still does count their afflictions his
own: God did so, ( Isay 63.9.) and still does so; witness that Voice from
Heaven, Acts 9.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, uttered by Christ: and
ver. 5. I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest in his Members; For he that touches
them, touches the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2.8. for he is the Head of his Body,
the Church; and the Head is sensible of the sufferings of the Body? nay, the
Church is expressly called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the Body is one, and
has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many, are one
Body, so also is Christ. He says not, Ita and Christi; but, Ita and Christ us,
unum Christum appellans caput and corpus, Aug. de pecc. mer. lib. 1. cap. 31.
so is Christ, so is the whole, consisting of Head and Members; the denomination
is taken, not from the subordinate Members of the Body; but from the supreme,
the Head; so is Christ, that is, Christ mististicall. And that this is the
genuine meaning of this place, may be concluded from that we find expressed,
Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; He says not,
And to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. And
therefore, this most significantly, and comfortably does denote and ascertain
unto us, that close union and conjunction betwixt Christ the Head, and the
Church, his Bady; and from thence results that sympathy and compassion of
Christ, in the sufferings and injuries of his people and servants. Now, that
the believing Hebrews (for otherwise this would not have been argumentative to
them) had also this persuasion; there are besides the forementioned, two
places in the Old Testament convincingly to demonstrate it. That place where
David in spirit called [Christ] Lord; Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord,
etc. My Lord indeed fiducially, and obedientially; but not exclusively: for it
is plain, he was Lord over the Collective Body, the whole Israel of God, a
Ruling Lord over his People, whereof David was but one, though a Chief one.
And as David thus gives us an account of his Faith, That he expected a Messiah,
and believed that that Messiah was the Head of the People, the Lord of the
aggregated of Israel; so he assures us, that that persuasion was a part of the
Jewish Creed; for that whole Israel esteemed and adjudged, that all projects
and defignes to prosecute and oppress the Peoof God, were conspiracies and
associations against the Lord, and against his Anointed, Psalm. 2.2. Moses
therefore did choose both Religiously, and Prudently, because he esteemed his
and his Brethrens sufferings, the reproach of Christ; a choice not of Faction,
but Faith, because of a state and condition wherein Christ his Lord was
interested and concerned; yet Moses had not only this motive of Faith to
persuade him to this choice; but he had another also, and that a powerful one;
For he had respect also to the recompense of the Reward, that is, believed the
Deliverance of his People was approaching, and they should receive the promised
Inheritance, the Land of Canaan, a Type and Figure of Heaven.

Q. But what? does Faith Eye temporal Objects? or, are temporalties as well as
spiritualties taken into the cognizance of Faith? or, is that true Faith which
moves for either of these respects? could Moses fight the Lords Battles, and
look for Pay, or Recompense? Is not this to be a mercinary Soldier, no
Voluntiere? or rather, thus to act, Is it not to love our selves, and the
reward; not the Lord and his Service? Is it not to serve him for Hire, not for
Duty?

A. Indeed it is most true, That the Glory of God should be both the prime
mover, and ultimate end of all actions which are truly Religious, because all
Religion is to be terminated in God; yet our immortal souls, whose chief
felicity and complement, is the Union and fruition of God, may deservedly
challenge our secondary and subordinate thoughts and respects, both because
that in these respects, we aim at God, who is our perfection, and reward; and
also because our respects are regular, when we take in the intermediate end,
with order and respect to the last and chiefest; For in this case, we overlook
our selves, by Eying an higher and more glorious Object: And for this we have
warranty, both from those Precepts which enstruct us to seek the Kingdom of
God; to lay up a sure Foundation of good works, For the hope of the Eternal
Reward; to strive with all care to secure our Election, Luke 16.9. 1 Cor. 9.24.
Tit. 2.12.13. Colos. 3.23. and also from those great presidents who have
practiced before us; Moses here in this place; Saint Paul, Phil. 3.11.12. If by
any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead. Not as though I had
already attained, either was already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Our Savior
Christ, that grand Exemplar, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God. And also from good Reason; for, Qui uult finem, nult media, and e contra;
now God commands the means, faith, and the end of that is salvation, 1 Pet.
1.9. Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls. He
commands holiness of life, and the end of that, is Eternal life, Romans 6.22.
an happy end is a great provocation and encouragement to action; and for this
end, God proposes to us that most blessed and comfortable end; The result is
this, That to act merely propter mercedem, for an hire, is slavish and
self-ish; but to do ex intuitu mercedis, to look upon the Reward, as an
incitement and comfort, is a most useful help, and so morally necessary to
piety and devotion, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Col. 3.24. Knowing that
of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the
Lord Christ. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing.

The Second Part.
1. By Faith, For Flesh and Blood would have persuaded Moses to a contrary
choice, to continuance and residence in Pharaohs Court: and if he had consulted
with worldly men concerning his Design, if they disliked his Person, he would
be censured and derided, as weak and unpolitick; if they had a kindness for
him, they would rebuke him, as Peter did our Savior, upon a somewhat like
account, Be it far from thee Lord; This shall not be unto thee, Mat. 16.22. But
Faith advises not with Flesh and Blood, neither resolves with the men of this
world. No, it advises with the Word of God, and resolves with the Church of
God; and therefore that which the World so much admires and fancies, the
gallantry and splendour of a Princes Court, the Title and Dignity of his Son
and Favorite, the Treasures of his Exchequer, he did with great resignation
and freedom relinquish and forsake: And which is yet more, that the World most
dislikes and abhorrs, poverty, persecution, ignominy, slavery, he did with much
cheerfulness embrace; for then he left the powerful prevailing party, and
sided with an afflicted, and despised people, vexed and oppressed with
arbitrary impositions, and inhumane servitudes. See what Faith can do; it can
overcome the World, it can count all things but loss, to be found in Christ:
It is Faith, and nothing but Faith, that sets a just estimate and value of
things; not because current, but because worthy, that distinguished betwixt
truth and appearances, substantial, and fantastic happinesses; and so makes a
Christiam esteem and adjudge the persecutions of an holy Church, an higher
preferment, then the promotions of a tyrannical Court; that more then
Heathenish Law of self-preservation, is superseded by Christ, Mat. 10.33. (
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
is in Heaven. And ver. 37.38.39. He that loves Father or Mother more then me,
is not worthy of me, and he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me. And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not
worthy of me. He that finds his life, shall lose it; and he that loses his
life for my sake, shall find it;) and so abolished by that Law of Faith which
he prescribed. 2. By Faith, because done in obedience to that Law and Rule of
Faith, which the Captain, and High Priest of our profession had enacted and
ordered. The main difference betwixt that (...) 1 These. 1.3. the Work of Faith,
which is the fincere observation of Christ precepts and that (...), Romans 2.15.
the work of the Law written in our hearts, which is the dictates of a natural
conscience and the common notions of humanity, betwixt an act of Grace, and
that of Nature; that the oue is done only rationally, the other obedientially;
the one is a faculty, the other a duty that we perform as man, a rational
creature made by God, and so his (...); the other as a Christian, a devout
sworn servant of Jesus Christ, who has brought into captivity every thought,
even the most rational, most excellent thought or suggestion of Nature, to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. as the elect of God, holy and beleved; and so
his (...), created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. that is done
in respect and regard to our selves; this with reference and relation to God.
This indeed is that, which both constitutes, and denominateth an act, the work
of Faith, that it is both truly done, and truly said to be done by Faith,
that it is done in obedience to God, submission to his will, and in order to
his glory. The same act for the substance may be both moral and spiritual;
that which differenceth them is the manner and end of doing: for some good
things are done by a common light of Reason, and with a freedom and ingenuity
of Spirit; and those are heroical, noble actions, and it is generosity; some
with respect to humane society, neighborhood, and conformity to the Laws of
that place where they live, and these are civil, moral actions, and it is
civility or policy; some are with sincere affections to God, and obedience to
his will and word, and those are Divine Spiritual actions, and it is Faith and
Religion which enjoins and requires these, Aug. lib. 19. de civit. Dei. cap.
25. throughout. 3. But this act of Moses was both morally good; for when he was
at years, he undertook the cause of the oppressed, it was heroically good; for
then also his Reason was at the full, and he did work freely and generously; it
was spiritually good, because then also he knew it was the will of his God, and
he did it faithfully; Reason told him the enterprise was both just and
honorable, and so morally good; reason conducted by religion, ascertained him
it was both just, honorable, and holy, and so divinely good: And therefore it
is added, When he was at years. 4. When he was at years, when his reason was
ripe, and his faith active and stirring, or come to maturity, full forty years
of age, Acts 7.23. For had Moses refused those offers of Pharaohs Daughter,
etc. in his Infancy, and tender age, it might have been interpreted folly, and
childishness; or (if after in his minority, and less discerning age)
weakness, and inexperience; or, (if upon the persuasions of his Parents) this
at the best, would be called, good Nature; at the worst be taken for
Indiscretion, or vain glory, and so still he might be supposed to refuse he
knew not what nor why. And very likely thus, or some one of these ways, it was
censured at Court, and he esteemed a rash, unfortunnate fellow, that stood in
his own light, and hindered his own preferment. But as Luther in another case,
aliter Romae, etc. so here; they were of one Opinion at Court, it was thought
otherwise in Heaven. For Moses was now of a very discerning Spirit, being in
full height and vigor, both of body and mind; a great observer of causes, and
of great abilities to distinguish and separate betwixt the precious, and the
vile, having all advantages to improve his judgment, and sufficient
opportunities to balance every thing aright, to take and make an exact account
of wisdom and folly, of a moment, and Eternity: so that this act of his
reprobation and election, was not conjecturall upon peradventures, or surmises,
but prudentiall; not upon any humane consideration, of case, pleasure, profit,
or honor, etc. but upon conviction of conscience; not of a scrupulous
conscience guided by light and undiscussed Arguments not througly weighed, or
not right set with an even hand; neither by an erroneous mistake of good for
had; nor an opinionative compliance with the examples and conceits of others:
but of conscience rightly informed, walking exactly according to it is Rule.
Jesus Christ our Lord would have engagers and subscribers to his Discipleship
and Government, to ponder and to consider before hand what they are resolving,
whether they can endure the contempts and hatreds of the world, the common
attendants of his service; whether they can be content to follow and take part
with that persecuted Prince, the King of sufferings, and his little Flock, his
despised, sequestered, plundered Subjects, les=t, in the conclusion, they prove
like that ridiculous Husband, who begun to built, without proportioning the
charges, and his abilities; or comparing the expenses, and his revenues: Good
Works ought also to be well done, with sober advise, and religious prudence,
lest they lose their value, and degenerate into indiscretions, rashness, or
heat of spirit: and therefore the circumstance of time is signanter dictum, is
taken for a further proof of Moses his Faith, When he was at years: For, 1.
Youth is suspected, and commonly, if that Age produce any good Fruit, it soon
decays; and if it follow not the vanities of the World, it is much under
restraint: And therefore Aristotle resolves, That a young man was not (...), a
fit hearer of the severer precepts of morality, (...), because usually with
them, passion and vanity rules all, and commands in chief; and with them, there
is an impetus, or fervor, their passions are violent and headstrong. 2. As
this clause was added, to show it was a dis-passionate act, not moved thereto
by any youthful heat or incitation; so it was unprejudicate, directly contrary
to those prejudices his Education might have infused into him. Passion and
prejudice are two great tyrants, and where these sway, Reason and Religion are
excepted or exiled: and youth is most subject to passion; and Education most
apt to beget and breed a prejudice: and so these words may seem to be inserted,
both to denote, that as this act of Moses was no passionate fit, or pange of
Youth; so it could not be an effect of his Education, for this should have
biassed him the other way, as being all his minority trained up in Pharaohs
Court, and tutored in the Egyptian Learning. Strange it was, his Piety should
thus cross his Education, that in the confluence of worldly satisfaction, (if
they deserve that expression) he should contemplate the excellencies and
perfections of the Eternal Reward: For, Quod semel est imbuta, etc. Education
(especially unto what also we are naturally inclined, as all are, to folly and
vanity) has a great influence on our after dispositions, and conversations:
And those sollies we have been acquainted with in our softer Age, we after
fancy and dote on; and therefore to move in a direct opposite course to Nature,
and it is second, Education, which is (...), a new acquired Nature, whereby sin
and the world takes possession on us, must needs argue great strength of
Religion, and holy affections, by reason of that received Rule, intus existens,
etc. and this was Moses his case. 3. Had Moses done this in his old Age, it
might have been conceived dullness, or policy, or dotage, and therefore also
might these words be used. For we read of several Princes indeed, who have
deposited their Robes of Majesty, surrendered their Crowns, and become reclase
Hermits; yet this course of life they begun not, till they had well-nigh
finished their course, when the negotiations and transactions of State was a
burden, when the multiplicity of businesses had tired them, or the variety of
pleasures surfetted, or spent them. But Moses was now in his prime, most able
both to undertake and under-goe weighty employments, as after he did, and to
receive what content any worldly delight could afford, at his best, both to
endure hardness, and enjoy softness. 4. From this Observation, let us learn
this Instruction, to be wise in time, to employ our choysest opportunities, our
best strength and vigor of body and spirit for the purchase and possession of
the Eternal Inheritance. God will have the prime of our years devoted to his
service, while we have marrow in our bones, and life in our senses, and
clearness in our spirits, Mal. 1.8. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it
not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now
unto thy Governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says
the Lord of Hosts? and then also to increase in knowledge and spiritual
understanding, not to be children carried away with every wind of Doctrine, or
with the togish garish vanities of the world: but to be men, approving (...),
(Romans 2.18.) the things that are excellent, that we embrace not Nubem, pro
Junone, a vain empty shadow of comfort, for real, solid, substantial
happinesses; gaudy fantastic appearances (like Caligula's Banquet, to please
the Eye, not to satisfy Nature) in stead of the Heavenly Reward; that so we
may fix our desires there, where true joys are to be found, being skillful in
the word of righteousness, that we endeavor to be, as Moses was, of full age,
that is, perfect, such as by reason of use, have our senses exercised to
discern both good and evil. Heb. 5.13.14. For every one that uses milk, is
unskilful in the Word of Righteousness: for he is a Babe. But strong meat
belongs unto them that are of full age, even those, who by reason of use,
have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. For this commended,
and approved his Faith, that he did this when he was (...), great in years and
discretion, great in knowledge, and learning, great in temper and moderation,
great in fame and favor at Court, and therefore it was an act of great Faith,
to refuse to be called the Son of Phar^ohs Daughter. 5. He refused, (...), or
denied; and, he refused, not in complement, and civility, to gain the
reputation of being modest, humble, and moderate, an Art, which self-seeking
ambitious spirits have learned and exercised, seeming to decline that, which
they most passionately fancy, and labor for; and by underhand, and secret
contrivances most greedily prosecute; neither in cunning and policy, that he
might be more earnestly follicited to accept what he had plotted and gaped for;
another Art, which ambition also has found out to deceive the World: neither
was it an humor of discontent, or desire of change, accompanied with an
overgrown troublesome Zeal: for then, this act had been either design or
pretense; an handsome piece either of hypocrifie, or civility. But he refused,
as upon serious and sober consideration; so in truth and singleness of Heart:
a direct proper work of self-denial, and so a clear evidence of his Faith.
True piety and contempt of this World, is not a bare, naked pretense, set forth
in a demure look, or holy language; but an effectual mortification of all
Worldly motions contrary to justice and charity; a not daring to venture on any
unlicensed artifice: a serious fixed endeavor of exact walking; not to value
any transitory thing at an higher rate then the Rule of Faith, and Law of
Christ has set upon them, that they be current to us, not upon the old vulgar
account of interest, or self-preservation, to purchase, or preserve an Estate
with an evil Conscience; but upon the new reformed account of love to God, and
our Neighbor. Indeed men may usurp and assume the Title and Appellative of
Saints to themselves, and yet be so far from observing the self-denying
Ordinance of Christ, Mat. 16.24. that they strictly lay hold on every advantage
which shall fall in their way; and if none be tendered, they will cast about
all ways to find one; and upon any discovery, chase and follow the ways of
unrighteousness with all passion and eagerness, by all indirect and unlawful
ways; some of these pretenders following the way of Cain, some of Balaam, some
of Corah, some of Achan, some of Gehazi, some of Ahab, some of Judas, etc.
whereas indeed there is no surer Title to Heaven, then contempt of the World;
no better assurance that we are in the Faith, then our overcomming the World, 1
John 2.15.16.17. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World.
If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that
is in the World, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but of the World. And the World passes away, and
the lust thereof: but he that does the will of God, abides for ever. And 1
John 5.4. For whatsoever is born of God, overcommeth the World, and this is the
Victory that evercommeth the World, even our Faith. No stronger proof that we
are true Israelites indeed, then that we forsake Egypt, and come out of
Babylon; that we are Disciples, then that we deny our selves, the advancement
of our interests, the satisfaction of our passions, and take up our cross,
unite our selves to the body of Believers, and persevere in their Communion in
despite of all temptations, and follow Christ as a Lawgiver, in his Precepts,
and a Leader, by his example both for obedience unto, and patience under his
Fathers will. 6. For a season the pleasures of sin are short, the punishment is
long: Sin may be sweet for a while, but it is sharp for ever: And who would
hazard a lasting pain, for a little pleasure? or be tickled either into a
Disease, or unto Death? An optares malam scabiem, quod scalpendi sit altqua
voluptas? Eras. Epic. It were madness to be in love with a Leprosy, or Itch,
for the pleasure of scratching; to lose everlasting pleasures, and the fullness
of joy, for a transitory delight; nay, a mere outside formal delight, without
all inward content and satisfaction: for the whole World, and every thing in
it, is but a Scheeme, a shadow, an appearance, an empty nothing, in two
Apostles judgments, 1 Cor. 7.31. And they that use this World, as not abusing
it: for the fashion of this Word passes away. 1 John 2.17. And the world
passes away, and the lust there: but he that does the will of God, abides for
ever. 7. Of Christ: Moses then was a Christian; and then God had a People. God
had always a Church, and that a Christian Church too: a Church of Christ; and
the sufferings of the people of God, the rebukes of Christ; though then the
people of God had not the Title, yet they had the Religion of Christ: and
albeit in outward expression and denomination, they were not called Christians,
till long after at Antioch, Acts 11.26. yet such they were really, and in
truth. For Believers, before Christ's coming and since, are admitted into the
same Covenant of Grace, because consigned by the same Sacraments, (not indeed
in the same Signs but in the Spiritual thing signified, 1 Cor. 10.3.4.5. And
did all eat the same spiritual meat: And did all drink the same spirituaell
drink (for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that
Rock was Christ.) But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were
overthrown in the Wilderness,) which did Scale the same promises (though not
so immediately as ours; but under a covert of temporal things, even ever since
that Grant, the Seed of the Woman, etc. Gen 3.15. and is the express
affirmation of the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. And this I say, that the Covenant that
was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after, cannot disanull, that it should make the promise of none
effect,) which relates to the same object Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.8: Acts 3.25.
and 4.12. for the same excellent purposes of mercy, remission of sins,
reconciliation with God, and life eternal: So the Covenant was the same for
substance, though not for circumstance and fashion; and so their Faith and
Religion the same: For Christ was the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the
World, Rev. 13.8. So Aug. Epist. 157. ad opt. Eadem fides, and nostra, and
illorum, quoniam hoc illi crediderant futurum, quod nos credimus factum: And
therefore here we may say with Saint Paul, Romans 11.33. (...), O the depth of
the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! And with David, Psalm. 40.5. Many, O
Lord my God, are thy wouderfull works which thou have done, and thy thoughts
which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would
declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. But to this I
have said somewhat before in the first Part, and 8. Page, and 1. Observe. 8. To
suffer with the people of God. The people of God are eo nomine, so far from
being exempted from the common calamities of mankind, that they are the
greatest sufferers of, and sharers in them: And if judgment begin at the House
of God; where shall the ungodly appear? Gods People are a persecuted People.
But of this largely also before; and more is to be said after. 9. (...),
Esteeming; That which put Moses on this choice, was a well-grounded conviction
of Conscience [that it was a duty] and a right informed judgment; for
resolution and action without warranty and sufficient grounds of conviction, is
but perverseness and obstinacy, sin and impiety; the mistaking of evil for
good, will necessarily infer evil doing: Hence, sins are called, the Works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. and Heathens, darkness, ver. 8. Walking in the vaenity
of their minds. Having the understanding darkened being alienated from the life
of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart, Ephesians. 4.17.18. And the Apostle notes this, when he tells us of the
unbeleeving impenitent Jews, They err in their hearts, and so they have not
known my ways, Heb. 3.10. and therefore he admonishes them, ver. 12. Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. And hence Minutius Faelix concludes, Non minoris
est seeleris Deum ignorare, quam laedere; Ignorance of God, is as bad as
Sacrilege: Hos. 5.4. They will not frame their doings, to turn unto their God:
for the spirit of whordoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the
Lord. On the contrary, the right discerning and separating evil from good,
conduces much to the eschewing of evil, and doing good; to deny the world,
and self, and choose Christ and Heaven; And therefore the Apostles supplication
for the Philippians, Phil. 1.9.10.11. is, that they may abound in all
judgment; To what end? that they may approve, or try things that are
excellent, and differ; be able Christians to distinguish betwixt evil and
good. And to what are such abilities required? that ye may be sincere, and
without offense till the day of Christ. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. And
his Petition for the Colossians, is to the same purpose, Col. 1.9.10. For this
cause we also since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to
desire that ye might be filled with the Knowledge of his will, in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding: That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the Knowledge
of God. As the bodily Eyes guides our feet; so the understanding is the leader
of the will and affections. Hence those Prayers of David, Psalm. 119.18.34.73.
and 125. Open then mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy lay; yea, I shall observe it with
my whole heart. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: give me understanding
that I may learn thy Commandments. I am thy Servant, give me understanding
that I may know thy testimonies. And hence that Exhortation of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.20. In understanding be ye men, otherwise ye will prove Children,
tossed too and fro, still Children, and never come to be perfect men, Ephesians.
4.13.14. 10. He had respect, (...), He first looked on the Duty, now the
Reward; that, to set him forward; this, to encourage, and back him; that, as
principal; this, as second to his choice; that to lead and command; this to
fortify and strengthen; that, as finis agentis, his design; this, as finis
rei, his happiness, and felicity. See here, and admire; admire, and
acknowledge the great love of God to man, who not only gave us understanding
to know our Duty; but furnishes with ayds and helps to further and assist us
in our Duty: he not only teaches us what to do; but supplies strength for to
do, and affords means to preserve that strength: he deals with us in those
ways which are most proper for us, by threatenings and persuasions, punishments
and rewards. Deuteronomy. 11.26. Behold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a
curse. The Lord knows our frame, Psalm. 103.14. and so frames all his
dispensation, accordingly; he considers we are but men, weak and impotent
creatures, and therefore he gives Grace: Yet withal he considers that we are
men, rational creatures; and therefore proposes rational methods to engage
us to accept his Grace; rational punishments and rewards, because we are to
deal with a righteous Judge; Who will render to every man according to his
deeds: To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and
do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, Romans
2.6.7.8. 11. Its the Observation of Theoph. Moses accounted it a sin not to
suffer with the people of God; and unless it were a sin, (not to be sensible
of the sins and sufferings of his Flock) God would not have caused a mark to be
set, Ezekiel. 9.4. nor upbrayded and threatened their either dullness, or hardness
of heart, who grieved not for the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6. nor the
Apostle required us, to be kindly affectioned; and this to be expressed, as in
others, so in this Duty, to weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. 12. I shall
add one more from Haymo; Quando quisque, etc. in suffering times and
condition, look and remember the promised reward, and these Texts, Mat.
5.10.11.12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falfly for my
sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven: for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Romans 8.18. For I reckon,
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us. 2 Cor. 4.16.17.18. For which cause we
faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day
by day. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. While we look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things
which are not seen are Eternal. Promises, though always necessary; yet most
useful in extremities.

The Third Part.
O Lord God of infinite excellencies and mercies, who sent thine only Son holy
Jesus to redeem us from an intolerable servitude, the commanding and
condemning power of sin, and to teach us an holy Religion, to despise the
world, the pomps and vanities thereof, and the sinful desires of the flesh;
strongthen us by thy grace, that as we would accept of thy Son for our Savior;
so we may follow him as our teacher, refusing the glories and treasures of this
Egypt, this land of darkness wherein all things shall be forgotten, choosing
the better part, which shall not be taken from us; esteeming our Adoption to be
called the Sons of God, the highest honor; the mercies of God, and merits of
Christ, the most desirable treasury; the Kingdom of Heaven, the best
Inheritance; the glory and joys of Heaven, the only satisfactory pleasures;
the most happy exchange, to give or lose all for the fruition of Christ; make
us to covet the best things: And to this end, make us wise and prudent in our
choice, to be men in understanding, to approve what is excellent, being filled
with all spiritual understanding; not to be ashamed to suffer for well doing;
to count it all joy when we are called to endure affliction with the People of
God, and to bear in our bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus. Sanctify them to
us by thy grace, attend them with thy spirit, and reward them with thy glory:
Satisfy our Souls, that we may taste and see how gracious the Lord is, even in
those his dispensations; and fill them with the apprehensions of the
excellencies and preciousnesse of the promises in Jesus Christ, that we may
resolve with David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on Earth
we desire besides thee: That like as the Heart, etc. Break, O Lord, we pray
thee, the powers, infatuate the policies of the persecutors of thy Church:
Bring her out of Egypt, and lead thy People by the Hands of Moses and Aaron.
Sanctify all their sufferings, and conduct them to the heavenly Canaan, to
live with their Lord unto all Eternity; to whom be honor and power, might,
majesty and dominion, for ever, Amen.

MOSES his Courage.
Heb. 11.27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for
he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.
MOses had before mastered the false hopes of Egypt; now he is to encounter
with the foolish fears thereof; and having quit himself of the right hand
assaults of the World, its allurements, objects, promises: he is now to conquer
the left hand, temptations, threatenings, force, and fury of Pharaoh, and his
Host, the Giants and Sons of Anak; and by Faith in Christ, he is in all these,
more then Conqueror; For the Discourses and Reasoning: of Faith, first taught
him to slight Pharachs Court; then his Power: First to conquer himself, (and
Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit;) and then his, and the people
of Gods enemy: It first instructed him with Piety, and then furnished him with
Resolution and Courage; For, By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath
of the King, etc.

The first Part.
Moses did twice forsake Egypt; The first time was, as was last Recorded, When
at forty Years old he fled into Midian, Exodus 2.15. The second time was, when
that after Egypt was smitten in every quarter, he, and the whole Body of the
Israelites departed thence. And upon this difference of time, a question
arises, which time the first clause here in the Text relates unto: Some will
have the former to be referred unto here, as Iun. Paral. lib. 3. because the
Apostle in this Historical computation, strictly observes the circumstance
and order of time through all the foregoing and subsequent instances. And it is
clear, Moses celebrated the Passe-over before the second time; which yet is
after related here in the following verse; and therefore it cannot relate to
this, unless we invert the Order; And also, because in the 29. ver. the
Peoples departure out of Egypt is set by it self, as a several and distinct
instance of Faith, from this here. Others conceive it to be meant of the second
time; for if the former were here considered, the Apostles Position here, seems
to contradict the Historical Natration, Exodus 2.14. where it is said, He
feared, and fled. Others, as the most judicious Calvin, understand it of both
times; tam de priore quam secundo; For though it be said, that at the first he
feared; yet this fear was a fear of prudence; he had not strength to oppose
Pharaoh, and so he could not, he had not as yet sufficient authority, and so he
might not; not of difference, or the event, that God would not preserve him
from Pharaoh, if he used the most safe course for his preservation, and
reserved himself for a better opportunity. But indeed, the true cause, both of
his fear, and flying, was, Because, that although he was then designed for to
be the Deliverer of Israel; yet then, his Commission to execute that
employment, and empower him, was not Sealed and Delivered; this was not done
till after, Exodus 3.9.10. Now therefore behold, the cry of the Children of
Israel is come unto me; and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the
Egyptians oppress them. Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh,
that thou may bring forth my people the Children of Israel out of Egypt. And
so, it is most clear of the second time, he feared not. The History is
express, Exodus 10.28.29. ( And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take
heed to thy self: see my face no more: for in that day thou see my face thou
shall die. And Moses said, Thou have spoken well, I will see thy face again no
more,) that sentence of wrath which then Pharaoh pronounced. And therefore
Calvin concludes, Omnibus expensis, ad secundum exitum refer male; and for
that fear, that this would invert the Order and Method; this is removed, by
observing that here is only touched, what after is more amply and fully
instanced: This of Moses in his personal capacity, what related unto himself;
That following, of his politic capacity, as referring to the whole body of the
Hebrews; this (...), that, data industria; Here, his forsaking of Egypt, is
mentioned with respect to all the Antecedents and Consequents, the preparatives
and concomitants thereof: So that precisely, neither the first, nor the last,
are intended, but the whole time of the contest betwixt Moses and Pharaoh;
though principally and chiefly, it denotes the whole space, after the return of
Moses out of Midian, till his departure out of Egypt with Israel, and their
Families; in the intervall, or some part of that time, the Passe-over was
Instituted and observed; there it is mentioned only in order to the last act,
when Moses and the People forsook Egypt once for all; not by entreaties, and
permission; but by the Power, and Authority, and Faith of Moses.

Q. But how appears this to be an act of Faith?

A. Certainly, to contest with Pharaoh, was an attempt, which would have
assrighted a Worldly Politician, distract him, and make him shrink: If Moses
had consulted with flesh and blood, these objections might have overawed him
from this enterprise; For,

1. Moses knew the rage of Pharaoh (and withal, he knew the wrath of Pharaoh
was as a messenger of Death, Prove. 16.14.) against him particularly was
implacable, for that he killed one of his Egyptian Subjects; which he might
easily perceive by that strict enquiry which was used for the discovery of the
mistaken murderer. 2. Moses had no visible strength and force; only Aaron for
an Assistant and Counselor, and a Rod for his Arms and Weapons. 3. He came on
a Message to Pharaoh from that God which he knew not, Exodus 5.2. whom he was by
his superstition obliged to hate, and whom in his sury and pride, he opposed.
4. His demands to Pharaoh were most distasteful, as being highly prejudicial
to his Crown and Dignity, and such, as no worldly wise man would be brought to
condescend unto; demands as ridiculous, as insolent; to part with his slaves
and interests upon no consideration, and for a bare word of a more bold
command, to manumit, enfranchise, and set at liberty his Villains and Bondmen,
who bore all his Burdens, tilled his Grounds, dressed his Gardens and
Vineyards, wrought his, and all the Countries drugery and bondage, and by their
craft and toil in Brick-making, were not only the ease, and good of his
Subjects, but did much advance his Revenue; so that Moses was not only to
contend with Pharaoh, and his two great commanding lusts, his Pride and
Covetousness; but even also with the baseness, clamor, and outcries of his
People.
But Moses his Faith, had taught him to answer all these pretenses, and but
carnal reasonings, by opposing to them;

1. His Warrant from the Almighty, who sent him to Pharaoh, with Commission to
make and prosecute those demands; and this Moses well knew, was a
pleni-potentiary Power, from him, who is, had both Authority to command, and
strength to make good that Authority against all Rebellions opposers. 2. His
promise of Assistance from God, Exodus 3.17. God said; and if he says it, he
will perform. Moses therefore might easily reply to his grounds of fear; he had
for his security, Gods Power and truth assigned him, and this was infallibly
good: That by Commission; this by Promise: both by the Word of God, which
abides for ever. And this did only remove all distrusts and jealousies; But
it follows in the Words, (...), did animate, hearten and harden him; that as a
righteous man, he became bold, and venturous as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. not now to
Petition; but to Command: for he over-looked Pharaoh, heeded not his proud
look, high language, severe Edicts, great strength, or barbarous Soldiers; and
at last told his Highness in plain terms, he would see his Face no more,
treat no more, nor parley with him; but stand in open Hostility against him; for
he looked upon the invisible, he knew whom he trusted, whose Errand he went,
whose People he guided, who would be his Protector.
The Second Part.
1. Moses in the former Verses was represented to us as a President of
Mortification, severity, and strictness of conversation, in opposition to the
seducements and flatteries of the World, by the lusts of the Eye, of the Flesh,
and Pride of Life. Here in this Verse, he is proposed to us as a Pattern of
constancy, courage, and resolution, to encounter all difficulties, and
hardnesses, to struggle with all oppositions and violences, (...), Arist. 1.
Eth. He is a true servant of God, and faithful soldier of Jesus Christ, who
as he cannot be bribed or corrupted from his Profession and Allegiance; so he
cannot be afrighted, or offended with the dangers and oppositions he shall meet
with in the good fight of Faith, he approves his fidelity, by his constancy in
every Estate. It is a most true Rule, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis; some pretenders are of such soft and delicate frame, that they
cannot endure any hardness, storms, or trials, and these are apt to be
overcome with worldly fears, threats, and frowns, policies and powers of
Pharaohs, and the Sons of Anak; or else so far lovers of pleasure and ease,
that the apprehension of labor and travel, of sharpness and want, of a
Prison, or a Tyrants wrath, makes them basely faint and draw back, desert, or
give over their Profession; either the hardness of the Duty, or the fear of
the Enemy, or the love of the world, makes men Apostates, and either forget, or
renounce their Baptisme-Covenant. Some are of such base sordid minds, that for
hire, and the Wages of unrighteousness (as if their souls were salable as well
as their goods) will easily make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, even
to deny the Lord that bought them. It is our Duty to be most watchful, where
we are most weak, and therefore most subject to be overcome; to find out our
own tempers, which way our hearts are set and affected, whether more apt to be
seduced or afrighted; and to be careful, that neither false hopes, nor foolish
fears, make us either so base, or so mean, that we unworthily either decline,
or desert our Christian calling. 2. Moses before, feared and fled from Pharaoh;
now he fears him not. Peter once denied Christ; after he boldly confesses him.
Our Faith is not always at the same intention, or height; not always a like
active and operative: neither does God at all times afford the same supplies
and assistances of Grace. Great reason therefore to Watch and Pray, etc. even
to solicit the God of our strength, that when the Enemy pursues, our Faith
fayl not, we may be strong in the Lord, and the might of his power. Having put
on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of
the Devil, Ephesians. 6.10. till the 20. 3. Moses at the first feared, because God
had not as yet Authorized him to this Enterprise: Whatsoever is not of Faith,
is fin. If we cannot show Gods Commission for what we attempt, we rebel
against God; we must have his Authority, either in express words, or certain
consequence; a clear Revelation, or strong Reason from it. Neither will a
pretense of a good intention serve the turn; this is but a deeper fallacy, For
we must try all things, and hold fast to what is good, 1 These. 5.21. 4. Moses
first feared; the time which God had assigned for Isreal's Deliverance, was not
yet come: When that set time came, he feared not. When God will have his own
work finished, he supplies a commensurate power and strength to manage and
effect it. God has his time, and we must wait, Psalm. 62.1. And sometimes he
appears not till all seems to be at a loss; he commonly with holds, till the
Bondage of Bricks be doubled: we must not limit him, to the time and means of
Deliverance, that so the whole Glory thereof may redound to him. Look not then
in streights and servitude at the present state and condition of affairs, the
seeming indispositions and improbabilities of success; stay Gods leisure, if
he be pleased to change the Scene, all obstacles shall then be removed, all
means shall be successful, the counsel of the Lord shall stand; seeming
prejudices shall be furtherances, when the time is come; Pharaohs rage and fury
shall advance and hasten the expedition: If we impose on God, or will prevent
him, by taking our own time, and following our own ways, then all designs
shall be basted, and blasted; If Moses upon his own Head take upon him the
Deliverance of Israel, then, retro sublapsa referri; all will go wrong: But if
he fly, and wait till he receive Orders from Heaven, then every design shall
take, and every encounter be a Victory. 5. Moses fled, when he feared. To rush
headlong into dangers, and to provoke Tyrants, when neither strength to resist
to make the enterprise prudent; nor Authority to warrant, to make it Religious,
is a temptation. It was both Wisdom, and Piety in David, to decline Saul's
fury, 1 Samuel 21.1. and 22.1. and 27.1. and to save himself from Absalom's
Conspiracy; as in Moses here, to preserve himself at present, and reserve
himself for a better opportunity. Thus Elijah provided for his life, 1 Kings
19.3. So Vrijah. the Prophet, ler. 26.21. And when Jehoiakim the King, with all
the mighty men, and all the Princes heard his words, the King sought to put him
to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into
Egypt. So our Savior himself, Mat. 2.14. When he arose, he took the youg child
and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt. John 8.59. Then took they up
stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the Temple, going
through the midst of them, and so passed by. And so he licensed his Disciples,
Mat. 10.23. But when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into another. So
Paul, Acts 9.23. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took
counsel to kill him. Ver. 25. Then the Disciples took him by night, and let
him down by the Wall in a Basket. 6. This is the best remedy in a straightened
condition, To have God before our Eyes, to look upon the invisible, when we
come to such a pinch as Elisha's servant, 2 Kings 6.15. that we know not which
way to turn, and we cry for sear, Alas, how shall we do? then are we to Pray
to the Lord, look up unto him by Prayer, and so our Eyes shall be opened, to
see the mountain full of Horses and Chariots, to find God a present help: And
we shall receive this comfortable return, as Elisha's servant did, ver. 16.
Fear not: for he that is with us, are more then they that be with them. This
was David's course, and his confidence, Psalm. 16.8.9. I have set the Lord
always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my flesh also shall rest in
hope. 7. Moses his Faith was grounded on two sure Principles, Gods all
sufficiency, and truth; he was assured not only that God could, but he would
show strength with his Arm, to scatter the proud in the imaginations of his
heart: and to put down the mighty from his seat. And this also he would effect,
either by weak and contemptible means, an Army of insectiles, of Beasts of the
Field; or by a more glorious power, his Angels. God commends this consideration
to his People, Isay 51. from the 9. ver. to the 17. And this also he commanded,
Isay 41. from the 10. to the 21. 8. God by his Son Jesus Christ, has brought
us out of Egypt, delivered us from the Powers of darkness, tyranny of Satan,
the commanding and condemning strength of sin, that we should serve him in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke
1.74.75. 9. Its the Devils Method to assault us every way. Pharaohs Court a
temptation on one hand; his Power on the other. If Satan cannot gain us by fair
promises, and plausible pretenses; he will use threats, and menaces, to force
us to his obedience. If he cannot oblige, he will attempt to compel, (provided
we ought to be both for his love and hatred) that his dainties allure us not,
and his hostility storm us not from our integrity and innocence. 10. True
Valor is founded on Piety; we are therefore resolute, because Religious. The
commonly reputed current Valor, is temerity, or animosity, and sometimes folly
and madness: And the mistaken, mis-called Honor, is most times baseness; all
times sin. Man-like attempts are always rational, and Christian courage is
estimated by a good cause. He that undertakes a good cause, and follows it with
a good Conscience, must be a man of courage. Heat, daring, and adventuring on a
bad cause, is wildness and passion, in a moral sense, and so, not so much as
Heathenish fortitude; and in a Christian construction, is Murder and Stealth,
and so, far from any pretense to holy resolution. Wife Saint Aug. long since
resolved all the famous cried up, and too much imitated Roman Conquest, to be,
magna latrociuia, glorious robberies, because there was no solid Plea of
Justice for them, which both Reason and Religion exacts. Moses his resolution
and enterprise, was grounded on both those Principles: It was rational, for he
knew whom he served: And Religious, for he had Gods Warrant, a competent
Authority; and his peoples Deliverance, a just cause: Therefore he feared not
Pharah, because he feared God; therefore he went before the People, because God
led and guided him; therefore he spoiled the Egyptians, because God (the Chief
Proprietor) bad stated the spoils on the Israelites. Here was all the
requisites to an holy War; Lawful Authority, a just cause, Righteous
Prosecution of it, and these are sufficient to make the enterprise reasonable
and religious, and the undertaker stout and Valiant; according to that
Exhortation, 1 Chronicles. 19.13. Be of good courage, and let us behave our selves
Valiantly for our People, and for the Cities of our God: and let the Lord do
that which is good in his sight. And the Apostles Admonition, Quit you like
men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16.13. 11. Invisible; God is invisible, therefore no
visible, corporeal representation, or similitude of him, is to be fancyed or
framed. See him we may, as Moses here did, by Faith, trusting his Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, but not by sight; for he has no demensions, who is
infinite; no composition, who is most simple: And so, we are not to conceive
God to be expressed by any Figure, because, as a Learned Romanist condemning
the Opinion of some of that Party, and the Practice of that Church, praeter
hoc, besides this, that the most spiritual simple being, cannot be shadowed by
any Image, proxima occasio est, there is danger, simple people may be thereby
enduced to take God for a fleshly Father, and by his gray hairs, suppose him
mutable; Peers. Ajala edit. Paris. An. 1562. lib. 4. cap. 8. So also Durand.
Did. 9. lib. 3. quest. 2. and this is very consonant to holy Writ, which
therefore forbids any Image of God, lest we should conceive him visible and
corporeal, Isay 40.18. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will
ye compare unto him? Acts 17.29. Forasmuch then, as we are the offspring of
God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone graven by Art, and man's device. But most clearly, Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. Take ye
therefore good heed unto your selves, (for ye saw no manner of similitude on
the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire.)
Lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any
figure, the likeness of male or female. Where there is first a Prohibition,
ver. 16. and the Reason, ver. 15. and this Prohibition is backed with a Caveat,
ver. 23. Take heed unto your selves, lest ye forget the Covenant of the Lord
your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven Image, or the likeness
of any thing which the Lord thy God has forbidden thee. And this strengthened
with two Arguments; the one relating to the thing for which this Caveat is
entered, God has forbidden. The other to quicken and sharpen our care therein,
For thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God, ver. 24. the former is
grounded on Exodus 20. v. 4. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or
any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth. The latter on Exodus 20. ver.
5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me. Which Abulensis
observes on this place; as Rain. lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 33. de Romans Eccl. Idol.
12. Though God be invisible, yet he sees all things; this is truly to see the
invisible, when we believe he cannot be corporally seen: As, Tum digne
aestimamus Deum quum inaestimabilem dicimus, Min. Faelix. All that we can
comprehend of God here, is to believe him incomprehensible: All that we can see
of him, is, that he is invisible; yet all things past, present, and future, are
visible to him; the persuasion hereof, is a sure Foundation of Religion, and
the fear of God. For who dare sin, though in secret, who has a Conscience
within, (and, Quid prodest non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam?) and the
invisible Judge above and without him, who observes all our paths, the most
close and recluse, knows all our projects and contrivances, and understands
all our thoughts.
The Third Part.
O God, who are the great God only to be feared, and worthy to be praised, a
bountiful rewarder of those who diligently seek, and religiously observe thy
will. Thy will is our sanctification; Sanctify us, that thy will may be done.
Cause thou us to forsake Egypt, all false and wicked ways, to walk uprightly
in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation; that whereas the World lyoth
in wickedness, our course may be contrary, to keep our selves unspetted from
the World, that we fear not it is fears, nor be afraid of any confederacy of
Devils or men, who pursue our souls with deadly hatred. Be merciful to us (O
Lord) be merciful, and let our refuge be under the shadow of thy Wings, (for
thou will carry us as upon Eagles wings) until all tyrauny be over-past, that
thou be our fear, and our dread, to fear thee, and thy goodness, and to fear
nothing but thee, because thou art with them who fear thee only; because thou
art, and there is none else, there is no God besides thee: Devils are slaves,
and the breath of man is in his nostrills, and wherein are they to be compared?
wherefore should they be feared? but thou art the blessed and only Potentate,
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has immortality, dwelling in
the light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see
(for he is invisible) to whom be Honor and Power Everlasting. Amen.

MOSES his Festival.
Heb. 11.28. Through Faith he kept the Passe-over, and the sprinkling of blood,
lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them.
THere are certain praecognita, Principles in the Christian Profession, which
are not to be disputed on by the Professors, but believed. The first of which
are acknowledged by the more generous contemplative Heathen; as,

1. That there is a God, ens entium, an Eternal being, of and from himself;
the being of all things. 2. That this God is to be Worshipped as the
Sovereign, Infinite, Wise, Good, All-sufficient Creator. 3. That because he is
Infinitely Wise and Good, therefore he is not to be Worshipped Formally, but
Devoutly and Piously; Animadverto ipsos Deos (Plin. in Pan. ad Traj. Imp.) non
tam occuratis adorantium praecibus quam innocentia, and sanctitate laetari: And
he tells in the very beginning of that Oration, That it was an Institution, and
thereupon, a Custom among them, Vt rerum agendarum initium a precationibus
caperunt, quod nihil rite, etc. And thus far sober Reason and Nature may
conduct us. But then, holy Religion and Faith super-adds. 4. That the devout
holy Worship of God, is to Worship him according to his will, and Word, which
is the Revelation of his will; and that Part which concerns his Worship, we
usually term, his Ordinances and Institutions. 5. That those Ordinances and
Institutions (the Observation whereof, is the Worshipping of God according to
his will) being no dictates of Reason, nor determinations of Nature; but
Decrees of Gods Wisdom; we must not canvas nor dispute them, but reverently
and humbly perform them, Romans 9.20. 6. That the Dutiful, Reverend, Devout,
and hamble observance of those Institutions, God in his wisdom has
prescribed, is a most proper act of Faith: And it is observed of Moses here, By
Faith, or through Faith he kept the Passe-over, and the sprinkling of blood,
etc.
The first Part.
Q. How did Moses evidence his Faith in this Ordinance, and the observation of
this rite?

A. The Answer is obvious, and is branched into three resolves, any of which
will clear the Devotion, and Faith of this service.

1. Moses did what he had special warranty, and strong Authority for; he did
what for the matter, and how for the manner, as he was commanded: in which
respect, Moses is said, to he faithful in all his Masters house, Heb. 3.2. as
a trusty diligent servant, what he had order for, concerning either the
Commonwealth, or Church of the Hebrews; their rites and offices of Religion,
or the duties of policy, their sacred or civil affairs, he proclaimed,
enacted, celebrated, observed, and executed. 2. Moses having sufficient
security, and good assurance from God, that the Sprinkling of the Blood upon
the Deoreposts, would be a signal difference to the destroying Angel, that he
could not mistake in his design, staggered not through unbeleife; that is,
disputed not the improbabilities of the attempt, canvassed not the impotency of
the means, nor scrupled the success; but kept to his first hold and
principles, Gods promise and veracity. 3. Moses in this rituall contemplated
Christ, the true Passe-over; and this service was a Typical representation of
the Blood of Sprinkling, the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ, who is our Passe-over,
1 Cor. 5.7. This anser I rather approve, for these Reasons.
1. Because this suits most with the Apostles design, which was, To comfort
the Hebrews in their sufferings for Christ. And thus he seems to Argue, a
minore ad majus, from the less to the greater. If your former Fathers
(according to the Flesh, of whom you are come) by the killing of a Lamb, and
effusion of its Blood, rested, ascertained of Gods favor, and their
Deliverance from the Egyptian Captivity: then much more ought you, their
Successors, who have Christ the true Lamb of God Sacrificed for you, and his
Blood shed, to be strong in faith, and firmly resolved of Gods greater savor,
(who has supplied you with greater assurance,) and of your Deliverance from
your present pressures, and future Enemies; and from your last, and worst
Enemy, Death, and him who had the power of Death, the Devil; and so, this
corresponds perfectly with the more formal and direct argumentation, Heb.
9.13.14. For if the Blood of Bulls and Geats, and the ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh: How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God? 2. This Exposition seems to continue the Apostles allusion,
Heb. 2.10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings: where he represents Christ made perfect
by sufferings, as the firstborn of the Israelites, consecrated for the whole
Succession, and the Devil who had the power of Death, to the destroying
Angel. And then makes the parallel, and thus amplifies it; As the miraculous
preservation of the Firstborn, was to your Progenitors, an assurance of their
after Deliverance; so, the perfecting of Christ by sufferings, does at once
both sanctify and enoble your present sufferings, and secures you of an after
Redemption, and state of Glory. So that the result from these premised
suppositions, is this; You Hebrews have stronger grounds of consolation, and
greater expressions of mercy and grace, then was indulged or licensed to your
Predecessors, even in Moses his time, when God deals most powerfully and
mercifully with them, and was most free and full in the declarations of his
mercy: They had but the Sprinkling of Blood for a Testimony; You have the blood
of sprinkling given you, (for so this favor is called) Heb. 12.24. they the
blood of a Lamb out of the Flock; You the Blood of the Lamb of God, who is
also the great Shepherd of your Souls. They had Moses to Solemnize this; You
have Christ, the Mediator, (Moses his Lord and Master) in his own Person to
sacrifice this.
Q. But what was this Passe-over?

A. That Feast or Solemnity so called; or a memorial of the Passe-over. For at
that Feast, they did Eat the Lamb, in memory of the Angels passing by the
Hebrews in the fatal destruction of the Firstborn of Egypt; and then also
they departed thence. So that it either Denotes the Lamb then Eaten, or the
whole Feast; all the whole Sacramentall-action, is the Passe-over, Exodus 12.11.
and 27. And thus shall ye eat it: with your loins girded, your shoes on your
feet, and your staff in your hand: and ye shall cat it in have: it is the
Lords Passover. And ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover,
who passed over the Housee of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians, and delivered our Houses. And Ezod. 13.9. ver. And it shall be
for a figne unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes,
that the Lords Law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand has the Lord
brought thee out of Egyht. Thus (...), he kept the Passover, and the
sprinkling of Blood, that Feast and Solemnity of the Passover; and that
commemorative Rite or Sacraement of the Sprinkling of Blood.

Q. But how did Moses keep it? Did not the whole Congregation also observe it?

A. Thus, Moses by Authority from God, as the Chief Magistrate of the Jewish
Commonwealth, commanded it to be Celebrated, and by his Example did encourage
the People to its Observation: And so some renders the Word in the most common
notion. Fecit; he made the Passover, he from God Instituted this Office, and
caused it to be Celebrated; As good Josiah (after long dis-use, and
discontinuance) kept the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35.1. that is, by Authority he
restored, and commanded the Observation. Others, as the Vulgar Read it,
Celebravit, he Celebrated: For thus also it is used, 2 Chronicles. 35.16.17.18. So
all the service of the Lord was prepared the same day to keep the Passover,
and to effer burnt offerings upon the Altar of the Lord, according to the
Commandment of King Josiah. And the Children of Israel that were present, kept
the Passover at that time, and the Feast of unleavened Bread seven days. And
there was no Passover like to that kept in Israel, from the days of Samuel
the Prophet: neither did all the Kings of Israel keep such a Passover as
Josiah kept, and the Priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that
were present, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: where keeping of it, is the
observing of it; Moses kept it, by commanding the Priests, by preparing and
offering; the people, by attending and observing it: And so it is distinctly
observed of Josiah, he kept; that is, he commanded both Priest and People to
do their respective Duties in keeping it, in the second sense, that is in
Celebrating it, 2 Chronicles, 35.1. compared with the 2.3.7. and 8. Verses: which
further appears by that Clause. Put the holy Ark in the house which Solomon the
Son of David King of Israel did build: it shall not be a burden upon your
shoulders: serve now the Lord your God, and his people Israel, ver. 3. Where,
as Iunius observes, He gave license and commission to perform it not
clancularly, but conspicuously and publicly; as if he had said; Ne amplius
foris aut per demos; Do it not privately, as you find an opportunity; but in
the public appointed place, from which you were by Tyranny formerly
restrained, the Temple being shut up, and the Public Worship interdicted, or
suppressed, and concluded within private Walls; but do it Solemnly, with the
greatest pomp, and most eminent manner, according to the Writing of David and
Solomon, ver. 4. So then, Facere Pascha, i^ proper to Moses and Josiah, to give
order that the Worship of God be observed; Parare immolare seu mactere Pascha;
To kill, to flay, and roast the Passover, and offer that belongs peculiarly to
the Priests, and Levites; Edere, Celebrare, peragere Pascha; To Eat, Celebrate,
and observe the Passover, belongs jointly and severally to Moses, the Priests,
and Levites, and whole Israel, to Prince, Priest, and People, a Chron. 35.17.

The Second Part.
1. Its a special act of holy Faith to observe Gods Institutions, Rites, and
Ordinances; though the killing of a Lamb, and the Ceremonies of that Service
might seem contemptible, and ridiculous; or at least, no way essicacious or
useful to carnal reasoners, who judge by Flesh and Blood; yet Moses will see
this whole service performed: well he knew, that it is not the material parts
of a Sacrament, or Institution which makes it an holy Duty; but the efficient,
the Authority of the Institution, and our obedience to it: And it is the
greatest expression of Faith, to obey God in his lowest Orders. Moses further
did know, That Sacraments and Divine Institutions, communicate and derive their
virtues, not from themselves simply and abstractedly considered; but from the
wisdom of God commanding them, and his blessing and goodness attending the
Religious obedientiall performance of them; and that though God had not so tied
himself, and his blessings to them, that he cannot do otherwise; yet he has
so resolved, that commonly he will not bless, nor show himself in mercy, but
by them; at lest, he will not be merciful to the contradicters and
blasphemers, who neglect, contemn, and vilify them, and so impenitently
perfist; neither does God our Heavenly Father give his blessings upon the bare
formal use of them, but the obedientiall and dutiful, which is the keeping of
them in Faith: because these external exercises and offices work not
Physically by a strong and irresistible influence and causality, as natural
causes produce their effects; but morally, according to the qualifications and
capacities of the patient or subject. Thence that usual expression, that their
work is upon a patient, non ponentem obicem, who makes a religious application
of their proper ends, and uses, things of themselves useful and helpful (as
all those are, and so far only are necessary and upon this account) for the
attainment any designed end, lose their virtue, when neglected, slighted, or
formally and dully performed; but if diligently and faithful employed, then
they prove very successful toward their end, and the parties receive great
benefits and advantages by them, as might be severally instanced in each
Christian Institution. But I shall only endeavor to clear it, from that place
of Saint Paul, Romans 2.25. which will serve both for a proof and illustration;
Circumcision (says he) verily profits; Circumcision, an external outward
Right and Ordinance in the Jewish Church, verily profits, or is profitable;
as the Scripture is profitable, that which does much advantage a Christian
soul toward the reformation of his life, and perseverance in newness of life,
and holy obedience, if rightly made use of; but if he either dis-useth, or
abuses, (as many do, and have done, witness Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.16. which
they that are unlearned, and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures unto their own destruction;) they lose the happy furtherances, and
ayds of this very profitable instrument. So Circumcision is profitable, to
forward, and further (and so by perfect analogy, our Christian Institutions and
Sacraments, as Baptism, and the Euchaerist, Catechizing, Confirmation,
Liturgy, conference, etc.) their walking with God, if they observe it according
to the tenor of the Institution, which was to be an obligation of obedience to
God the Institutor; if not, it becomes null and void to them, because of their
ingratitude and unworthiness. The Sacraments, etc. then are as helps,
Auxiliaries; God the efficient, his preparing, preventing, and assisting grace
the cause of our conversion, and perseverance. And hence the position of the
Schools, Deus solum producit gratiam, ad presentiam Sacramentorum: and they
are such helps, if rightly used, to which God will concur with his Grace, to
make their uses good and effectual. And so Paraeus interprets this, (...), it
profits, that is, usum a Deo promissum praes^^t; it performs and fulfills
that use promised by God; all which is fully confirmed from the 27. verse,
Shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee,
who by the letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? that is, those who
have not those profitables, helps, and means as thou have, to enable to the
performance of the Law; condemn thee of negligence, ingratitude, and contempt,
by their endeavors to out go thee in obedience; yea, who outstrip, and
out-goe the being destitute of these forces; and therefore, thou having, but
not using them, art reproveable and inexeusable. In sum, no pious man will
unne cessarily neglect the means of Piety; as no good Husband the helps of
thriving. Every pious man will make use of assistances, to grow in Grace, and
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2. It is the Duty of the
Supreme Magistrate, to provide that the outward Offices of Divine Worship, and
the holy Ordinances be duly and decently Celebrated; and in ease of neglect,
by their Authority, to enjoin and command their Celebration. For the Chief
Magistrate is, Utriusque Tabula Custos and Vindex, as appears from the Example
of Hezekiab, 2 Chronicles. 29.5.21. and 30.1. compared with 2 Kings 18.4.6. and of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.3.4.5. of Ios^uah, Josh. 24.1. and 28. David, 1 Chronicles.
15.4.16.43.23.2.3.6. So Solomon, Iehoshaphat, Nehemiah; and so it was believed,
and received all along by the Christian Church, as is obvious to all, who have
any knowledge in Ecclesiastical Stories and Customs. 3. Nature, by it is
suppositions, does conclude against us, That we ought to Worship God. The
Egyptian Sciences brought Moses to the contemplation (...) of the Eternal
Being, if we may believe Saint Basil, Hom. 54. ad adolescentes; for Nature, as
blind as she is, does at long running, find an Eternal Power and Being, on
which all things depend for their conservation, because from it all derive
their Being, Creation, and production, (conservation being nothing else, but
the same act of Creation in fluxu, passing and going on from an instant to a
duration) and therefore of necessity, there must be intercourse between God and
Man, the excellency of the Creation and Masterpiece of all his works. But
Faith advances higher, having received a nobler light from Heaven, and
discovers how to Worship God acceptably, unto all well-pleasing, and by such
rites as may express our experience and thankfulness for former special
favors, and bespeak our hope and dependence for the future continuance of
them, and addition of better, according to his exceeding precious Promises; and
this is indeed to Worship, and keep a Passover, an holy Feast, through Faith,
to God. Nature discovers in gross, and darkly, where Faith proposes clearly
and distinctly; Nature might tell Moses a dark and dimne general, that God was
the preserver of mankind; but Faith particularly assures him what Reason could
not Eye, that in one Night, by a most terrible Execution, an Angel would make a
total destruction of all the Firstborn, in the spacious Country, and among
the numerous people of Egypt: And further yet, That in this so speedy and
universal ruin of them, he would distinguish the Habitations of the
Israelites (then mixed and sojourning among them) by the effusion of the blood
of a Lamb upon the Lintell, etc. This Moses believed, and therefore kept the
Passover: True Faith makes men devout, holy, to keep all Gods Ordinances and
Institutions. 4. Moses kept, etc. The Jews had their Passover; so have we
ours, 1 Cor. 5. For even Christ our Passover is is Sacrificed for us. Ecce
Agnus Dei, Behold the Lambo of God, John 1.29. They had an Altar; so have we,
Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the
Tabernacle. They a Circumcision; so we. Col. 2.11. In whom also ye are
Circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. We a Baptism; so
they, 1 Cor. 10.2. And were all Baptized unto Moses, in the Cloud and the Sea:
Christ the end of the Law to all Believers, both Jews and Gentiles. But of this
formerly. 5. Moses kept, etc. He Killed the Sacrifice, and Feasted on it: Here
was both, Sacrificium, and Sacrum epulum; always in their Sacrificing, they
did Eat with Mirth and Festivity on some parts of the Sacrifice, Exodus 18.12.
Deuteronomy. 12.6. to the 16. 1 Samuel 9.12.13. When we keep our Passover, let us
Feast, and be joyful before the Lord our King; It is very meet, right, and our
bounden Duty so to do. To appoint and observe a Fast, and prohibit all
Christian rejoicing and Feasting, on our Passover, our great Festival, the
Lords Day; is to confound a Day of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving, and to oppose
the practice of the Universal Church, and has by it been always adjudged a
Schism. Saint Faul has otherwise ordered the matter, 1 Cor. 5.8. (Therefore
let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice
and wickedness: but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth;) by his
illution therefore (...), solemnly Feast, says Calvin; Festum Celebremns, so
Erasmus, keep the Feast, make an holy day, not for Heathenish sports; but
Heavenly Duties, that as the Saints glorified have their Hallelujahs; so we our
Rejoycings, Triumphs, and Thanksgivings for the Resurrection of our Lord. 6.
Lest the Destroyer, etc. They who are in great tribulation, are for all that so
respected by the all Wise God, That the Destroyer of their Souls shall not
touch them; Psalm. 91.5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by Night: nor
for the Arrow that flies by Day: for God limits his Power, as he lays
commands upon the Sea; Hitherto shall thou go, and no further: Which is clear
in Jobs case, Job 1.12. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he bath
is in thy power: only upon himself put not forth thine hand, So Satan went
forth from the presence of the Lord.
The Third Part.
O Almighty God and Heavenly Father, who gave thine only Son to be our
Passover, and to be Sacrificed for us, as the Lamb of God; Grant that we may
keep the Peast, continue the memory of that Sacrifice with a Sacramentaell
Communion, and solemn joy and Thanksgiving, that so thou may be pleased, by
the effusion of the precious Blood of the Immaculate Lamb, to wash and cleanse
us from all unrighteousness; that though our sins be as red as Scarlet, yet
being bathed in that Blood, they may be white as Snow; and by the power of the
Death of thy Son, redeem us from the strength and sting of Death, and the
Destroying Angel (who bad the power of Death) that he touch us not. And
lastly, when the great Supper and Marryage of the Lamb shall come, we may sit
down with Abraham, Isaae, and Jacob, to Feast and Banquet with them, and the
Assembly of Saints in Heaven, before the Throne of God to all Eternity, for our
Passeovers sake, by whom we are saved, and for whom we bless and praise thee,
to whom with the holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, Amen.

The ISRAELITES Passage.
Heb. 11.29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land: which
the Egyptians assaying to do were Drowned.
HEre is another Passover; The former a Feast; this a Journey: The former
Sacramental; this real: The former, as a Memorial of the Angels passing by
Israel in the Egyptian Plague; in this, Israel passed from Egypt, the Place of
their Captivity, and advanced toward Canaan, the Land of their Inheritance;
For it was, By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, etc.

The First Part.
The only Term or Particle which in this Passage need^ Explication, (the rest
being a plain Narrative of matter of Fact) is that Relative [they] whether
this, take in it is circuit every individual Israelite which passed; or it
relates only to the Majority, and greater number of the Passengers; or it
belongs only to some few peculiar selected, and approved Persons among them,
whose Faith found and procured a Passage for the residue?

It is true, That in the greatest latitude, and largest extent, this (they)
must not be understood of every single Israelite; nor in the more restrained
sense, of the Major Part: but it must be conceived in the most narrow and
strictest acceptance, for some select ones; all Israel passed upon the credit
and Faith of a few of them; For though the Apostle express it at first with
the universal (...), all passed, 1 Cor. 10.1.5. yet, to prevent mistakes, he
passes an exception in that antithesis, ver. 5. (...), the many, the majority
of them could not pass for faithful ones, and be approved; For, for their
insidelity they were overthrown in the Wilderness all of them; only to make a
number, two were excepted, Ioshuah and Caleb, Numb. 26.65. all the rest fell
under Gods displeasure: though God was pleased to accept the Faith of those two
faithful persons for, and reward it with the Deliverance of the whole
Collective Body.

The Second Part.
1. Faith is efficacious to Beleevets, not only in their personal capacities,
as they are single Believers; but also in their Politic, as members of a body.
See 2 Kings 22.19. Isay 65.8. I will spare a whole cluster, for one or two
servants of mine. The Faith of a few, a small few, conduces to the advantage
of many; of a little part, two Persons, conveys influence on the whole: With
God, Denominatio non sumitur a majori, sed a meliori part; as the first fruits
consecrates the whole mass; a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; so a few
Saints, makes a whole Church, a Church of Saints, though the many among them be
wicked, 1 Cor. 1.2. The Church of Corinth a Church of God, though a mixed
Church; or else the Apostle had not taken cognizance of it, nor censured those
Tares among the Wheat; For he professes, He had nothing to do with them that
are without, Extra Ecclesiam, 1 Cor. 5.12. though many haereticall, many
wicked, contentions Schismatics in that communion; yet a Church of Saints,
cap. 1. ver. 2. even the very incestuous (judged by Saint Paul) a Member of the
Church, else he had not judged him; and his uncleanness no way defiled the
whole; for he says positively of the whole, but ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
even a Brother may be a Fornicator, etc. 1 Cor. 5.11. and so remains, till
censured by the Power of the Keys; and even then (because Excommunication is
not for Destruction, but for Edification; not for Excision of the Member, but
Medicine) if he reform, of a Brother from us, he is become one of us; not de
novo, being Created, but Restored after his lapse, and recovered.

2. When the Faithful are in straits, not knowing which way to turn; Faith
directs and conducts them: It says, Stand still, see the salvation of the
Lord, Exodus 14.13. Thy Rod, and thy Staff, they comfort me, says David, Psalm.
23.4. When Israel was pursued by Pharach, and opposed by the Red Sea, Faith
made a way through the great depths: And such was the resolution of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.7.8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the
King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more
with us, then with him. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord
our God to help us, and to sight our Battles. And the people rested themselves
upon the words of Hezekiah King of Judah. Faith opened the belly of the Whale,
and found Jonas a passage thence, Jonah 2. It opened the Iron Gates of the
Prison, Acts 12. and discovered to Peter a way to escape. The Vallyes and
Mountains shall be divided into Rivers and Fountains for Believers, Isay 41.18.
and these Rivers shall be for passes and safeties, Isay 4.1.2.3. God will
suspend the activity of the Elements, that the fire burns them not, ( Dan.
3.) the waters drown them not, as here. God stilloth the madness of the
people, the noise of their waves, Psalm. 65.7. Isay 17.12. stops their fury,
that they prevail not, (and like the enraged Sea, overflow not) and swallow all
up; for so these mighty waters would do, if like the Sea, they were not
bounded.

3. They passed, and their Passage was smooth and plain; they passed (...), as
by dry Land; to re-mind us.

1. That to the Almighty, all ways are equally feasible and easy, the Night
and the Day, Sea and Land are both alike, he has the same power over both; he
can provide for his people in the Wilderness, as well as Canaan. Thou which
have showed me (says David, Psalm. 71.19.20.) great, and sore troubles, (I
shall have thy pass and safe conduct;) for thou shall quicken me again, and
shall bring me up again from the depths of the Earth.

2. That the whole Universe is absolutely and arbitrarily subject to the
Almighty; our God is in Heaven, and he (says the Psalmist) has done
whatsoever pleased him, in the Earth, the Sea, and the great deeps. Job extends
his Sovereignty, and Supreme Jurisdiction beyond the circuit of the Sun and
Moon, to every quarter and corner, part and parcel of the worlds great frame,
Job 26.6.7.8.9.10.11.12. God is every where, and his power rules over all
Mountains and Valleys, Deserts and Champania's; if we be Israelites indeed, in
whom there is no guile, he will provide for us in the one, as well as the
other: Patria est, ubi^^nque vir fortis sedem eligerit, was the determination
of an honest Heathen; It is far more certain, every place is a pleasant,
comfortable, and acceptable seat to a sincere Christian; for the all wise God,
who rules all, is his God and Guide, he will never fail, nor forsake them, who
put their trust in him; Psalm. 125.1.2.3.

4. The Egyptians made the like attempt; yet they had not the same success,
their assault and enterprise proved fatal: so experimented is that of David,
Psalm. 11.5.6. The Lord tries the Righteous; they have their trials, and shall
first have them, 1 Peter 4.17. but they shall find a way to escape, though with
some difficulty; and then the Apostles inference there is Observable; And if it
begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? and
when their trials ends, then vengeance begins and overtakes the ungodly; For
it follows, Upon them he shall rain snares, fire, etc. vengeance shall meet
them, when they are pursuing revenge, and destruction shall fall on them, when
they are prosecuting their designs of interest and passion, with the greatest
eagerness and confidence.

5. Sicut in Mari alii pereunt, alii evadun^; sic in judicio unus assumetur,
alius relinquetur. This Passage, a lively Emblem of the great day of accounts;
The Israelites shall be taken, the Egyptians shall be left; the sufferers here
shall be Crowned then; the proud persecuters here shall then also be the
greatest sufferers; then shall the difference be made betwixt the righteous and
the wicked; betwixt him that Sacrifices, etc.

6. Observe here the temper and disposition of cruel Tyrants, and Persecutors;
they proceed from one wickedness to another, and incorrigibly persist, till
they run upon their own ruin. Here was mercy upon mercy declared to the
Israelites; judgment upon judgment extended and executed upon the Egyptians;
and in every mercy to the one, a Miracle; and in every judgment upon these, a
Miracle too; and yet no mercy can provoke them to an imitation, no judgments
divert their malice, no miracles of mercy or judgment work upon their enraged,
obdurate hearts. Hardness of heart, a certain forerunner of vengeance; Romans
2.5. But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self
wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. Beware we therefore of an evil heart. Heb. 3.12.13. Take heed, Brethren,
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And pray we to God, to
give us a tender, tractable, corrigible spirit, that we observe the ways of
his mercy and judgments; Psalm. 107. ult. Who so is wise, and will observe
these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

7. But not only the judgment, but the Manner and Method of Gods proceeding
with the Egyptians in judgment, is very considerable: The Plotters, Orderers,
and Executioners of that Decree, to Drown all the Male Israelitish Children,
are now by the Righteous Judge, doomed to be swallowed up of the Sea; As they
measured to others, they now receive from God: Facinus mensura poenae;
according to men's sins, so are their temporal punishments: For either, for the
evil deeds they have done to others, they suffer the same in kind: As in
Adoni-bezek, who felt and confessed this legem talionis, that exact Rule of
Justice wherewith God punishes offenders; Judges 1.7. And Adoni-bezek said,
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs, and their great tees cut off,
gathered their meat under my Table: as I have done, so God has requited me.
Pharaoh Decrees the Drowning of the Israelitish Males, Exodus 1.22. All the
Firstborn of Pharaoh, etc. Exodus 15.5. Seir rejoiced at the desolation of
Jerusalem; so shall I do unto thee: thou shall be desolate. O mount Seir, and
all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel.
35.15. Because Uriah fell by the Sword of David; therefore the Sword must fall
on David's House, 2 Samuel 12.10. The Chaldean spoylers, shall be spoiled, Habb.
2.8. or else they suffer something which has Analogy or Resemblance with their
sins. The Old World Drowned first in sin; then in the Deluge. Sodom first
burning in lust, then in fire. Israel forsook God; then God lest Israel: they
served not the Lord; then the Lord made them serve Shishak, 2 Chronicles. 12.6.7.8.
which is expressed by the recitation of the judgment, Jer. 5.19. And it shall
come to pass when ye shall say, Wherefore does the Lord our God all these
things unto us? then shall thou answer them; Like as ye have forsaken me, and
served strange gods in your land; so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is
not yours. Solomon went not fully after God; therefore he shall not have a full
Kingdom: he divided his heart betwixt God and Ashtaroth, (1 Kings 11.5.6.)
therefore his Kingdom shall be divided, (1 Kings 12.16. etc.) or else, if they
escape either, or both of the former ways of proceeding in judgment; yet that
there may be some Caracter in which men may Read their sins in their
judgments; either the subject matter of the judgment and sin agrees, that
wherein we have sinned, and that wherewith we are punished; As Adam sinned in
eating the forbidden Fruit; therefore he must eat the Fruits of the Earth in
sorrow. Thus was Korah and his accomplices served, Numb. 16. The Levites Wife,
to the twelve Tribes, Judges 19. Elies Judgment, 1 Samuel 3. and. 4. David's, 2 Samuel 24.10. etc. Hezekiahs, 2 Kings 20.12. etc. So the Jews cry no King but
Caesar, is punished with no King and Caesar; and their politic fears and
jealousies, which they strived to deposit, and prevent by all craft and
cruelty, did fall upon them, and their fears surprise them, John 11.48. For the
Romans did come and take away both their place and Nation: or else (God to
re-mind them, that he will pay them in their own coin, that they must drink of
that poison, which they filled for others) does often meet them in his
judgments, by such circumstances, as may discover their sin and demerit; the
time and place of the punishment, according with the time and place of the sin:
as that of the Spies, Numb. 14.33.34. And your Children shall wander in the
Wilderness forty years, and bear your Wheredomes, until your carkeises be
wasted in the Wilderness. After the number of the Days in which ye searehed
the land, even forty Days, (each Day for a Year) shall ye hear your
iniquities, even forty Years, and ye shall know my breach of promise. That of
Jezebel, 1 Kings 21.23. And of Jezebel also spoke the Lord, saying, The Dogs
shall eat lezebel by the Wall of Iezreel. And 2 Kings 9.36. This is the Word of
the Lord which he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the
portion of Iezreel, shall Dogs eat the Fesh of Iezebel, And the carcass of
Iezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the Field in the portion of Iezreel,
so that they shall not say, This is Iezebel.

8. Here we have many hazards to pass; Faith will make the passages easy and
comfortable: the great and last pass is Death, which is as a Red Sea in our
way to Heaven; all the Art of Life, is to learn to make this passage good; and
this we shall do happily, if we pass the time of our fojourning here in fear,
following the paths of holiness and righteousness, for then we have
assurance, that we shall pass from Death to Life, through Death to Eternity, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only,
but unto them also, that love his appearing.

The Third Part.
ALmighty God, which did safely lead thy people Israel through the Red Sea;
Behold, see we beseech thee, we are people, be thou our God, and guide, for our
help stands in thy name; lead us by the still Waters, in the paths of
righteousness, for thy names sake: And though the Devil, and the World pursue
our Souls with deadly hatred; yet send out thy truth and light, let them lead
us, and bring us to thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacle: and when we walk
through the Valley of the shadow of death, let thy right hand uphold us, for
our Souls follows hard after thee; let our passage to the Heavenly Canaan,
though through many tribulations, be easy, peaceable, religious, and
comfortable, that we be not condemned with the World, but we may pass from
death, to life; from Egypt, to Canaan; from the World, to thee, the lover and
Savior of Souls. And to this end, make us to pass the time of our sojourning
here in fear, that whatsoever may happen to us in the way; yet at the end, we
may so pass the Waves of this troublesome World, that we may come into the
land of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

JERICHO Taken.
Heb. 11.30. By Faith the Walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed
about seven days.
WE have done with the Acts and Sufferings of Moses: Now follows the feats of
Ioshuah, his Successor, and of Israel under his conduct; For then, By Faith the
Wall of Jericho fell down, etc.

The first Part.
The full Historical Relation is Penned, Joshuah 6. and is plain, beyond
exception; that which is to be examined, may be; What use the Hebrews (to whom
the Apostle presses this for an instance) could make hereof, seeing these
events were miraculous, and extraordinary; and they had no assurance God would
work extraordinarily, and miraculously for them: Could they fancy, without high
pride and presumption, that the Seas should divide themselves into a Passage
for them; or that fenced Cities should fall down as their approaches, or upon
their Beseigings: And the right determining of the case thus stated, may be
this.

It is true, we cannot expect, may not demand, what in particular their Faith
obtained; because they had a promise from God for these: whereas we have no
such Promises, and therefore cannot ask them in Faith, Romans 14.23. which
always pre-supposeth either express Praecept, or Promise in such cases: But
in general we know, That what we ask believing, we shall receive; that is,
what we ask by warrant and allowance of Gods Word, which is the potent
assurance, evidence, and record for our Faith: If any extraordinary Revelation
be indulged, then we may pretend to the like extraordinary successes, because
Gods power is still the same, always infinite; and when he will actuate (as I
may speak) that Power, then, Credenti omnia possibilia; nothing is impossible
to a Believer without an hyperhole, or excess of expression; nothing which is
an Object of Faith, and so far as it is so; nothing for which we have a
promise, provided, we keep within that compass, and the tenure thereof; for
God has restrained and stinted our desire; in Earthly things, and prescribed
bounds and limits to our Petitions concerning them. It is true, for our
spiritualities, we have an absolute word of Promise, as large as can be
desired, That our Faith can conquer Hell, and purchase Heaven, which is indeed,
every thing which can be hoped for: so that, if we will not lose, and cast away
our selves, God will save us, in despite of all opposition, and all the powers
of darkness. But for our Temporalities, the Promise is conditional, made up
with exceptions and proviso's, which confines our petitions, to suite for them
under a clause of submission, and expediency, in ordine ad spiritualia: for we
have his concessions and grant for them, only for so much, and so long, as may
tend to his glory, and serve for our spiritual concernments and interests.

The Second Part.
1. Jericho fell as the sounds and Alarums of etc. The Enemies of Gods Church
shall fall, and not be able to arise, not by the force of Arms, or prevalency
of the Sword, or any other humane assistances: but by the Voice of his
Messengers, and the Preaching of his Word, sounding like a Trumpet by them, and
the Prayers of his People; God shows himself the Almighty, by giving efficacy
and strength to his word, ( to cast down every thing that exalts it self
against the knowlodge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, a Cor. 10.4.5.) and to the spiritual weapons of his
Church, prayers and tears, he does great and wonderful things for her, not by
force, or an Army; but by his Spirit, Zach. 4.6. And when Antichrist shall be
confounded, and destroyed; God, to show the irresistible power of his word,
(...), will reduce, bring him to nothing, when he is in his Pontificalibus, his
greatest height of pride, consume him with his word; for it is (...), of great
efficacy, Heb. 4.12. sharper then any two-edged Sword, like Samuels Sword, to
cut Agag in pieces that he appear no more; to hew a way through all opposion,
and cut down all opposers. God needs not, will not have his Cause Managed by a
standing Army: Religion always loses by the Sword of Violence; and Force is
both unnecessary, and improper for the meek temper of Christian Profession.
That Cause is very bad, which has nothing but an Arm of Flesh to justify it,
and a few impertinent excuses, as insufficient to sanctify the design, As
Adams Figg Leaves were to hide his nakedness: And the reason is given by the
Captain of our Profession, My Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. is
neither erected, nor established by Worldly Power; those Arts of fraud and
force, which are practiced for a worldly Kingdom.

2. Though God might have done this immediately by himself, yet he takes in the
Ministry, and Hands of the Priests. In the great Affairs of his Church, God
brings about his own work by them: God the Efficient, they the Laborers, and
Workmen under him; (...), coworkers, under workers to him, who labor under
him, 1 Cor. 3.9. and 15.10. his Ministers under him for his people, 2 Cor. 3.6.
Christ's Ambassadors in his absence, and by his Commission to negotiate the
Affairs of his Kingdom, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you By us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. Never object against them, That they are but men, subject to
like passions, since Christ has made them his Commission-Officers, this is
enough to stop all cavills: God always made use, and still does of such
Earthen Vessels, that the power may be of God. And as he made use of a select
order of men, the Priests; so still he does: not any cut of the Flock, hand
over head; but some separated for this office, to got in and out before his
People: neither can it be reasonable to pretend, The People are gifted as well
as they, and so they may Officiate. Grant it, though it rarely prove so; and
God forbid their gifts should be either envied or denied: But yet, they have
not Authority, and that is as requisite to a subordinate Officer, as ability;
and the Reason is, Because God will have Order observed, even in his Church,
take it in which sense you please. And as it would be a mad confusion in the
Commonwealth, for every one who had, or rather should only pretend to have,
(or but barely fancy that he had) sufficient knowledge of the Law, to take upon
as a Judge, to determine the case, pass sentence, and exercise jurisdiction;
So would it be in the Church, if every conceited Zealot, or able Scholar, or
cathechised Brother, should presume to gather a Congregation: For if this
Objection of theirs have any force, it would have served the Israelites, to
excuse them for their attendance on their Priests in the expedition, or any
other of their Church observations: Every Israelite almost, might have
pretended, they could do as much as the Priests did here; they could kill a
Lamb, and roast it, and eat it as well as they; they could kill a Bullock, and
burn it as well as they; yet they durst not: And when any of them did, they
paid for their presumption, Numb. 16. for they knew, though they could carry,
and sound the Trumpets; yet they knew not that God would gratify their
officiousness; they had reason not to believe, but to suspect the event. They
knew they could kill a Lamb, but that Lamb would not be a Passcover, the
Priests Hand must be there to make it so. They knew they could kill a Bullock,
but they could not consecrate it a Burnt Offering to the Lord, (that the
Priests were to do) a sweet savor to him. Levit. 1.2.3. etc. let the
instruments, or means be never so unlikely to proud carnal reasoners, or the
easily deceived, and deluded Vulgar; yet if God order, and make use of the
Instruments for our good, it were madness to dispute our selves out of their
profit, and question his Instrument: And if he commands us the use of the
means, it were Rebellion to resist, and contempt to neglect them. It was
exstream folly in Naaman, to come to Elisha for his Counsel, and then in
anger, to quarrel with it, with an, Are not Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of
Damasens, better then all the Waters of Israel? May I not wash in them and be
clean? So he turned, and went away in a rage, 2 Kings 5.12. and therefore his
servants took him up sharply for it, ver. 13. And his servants came near, and
spoke unto him, and said, My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee dee some great
thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he says to
thee, Wash and be clean? Christ will have his Disciples to cast their Net into
the Sea, when he intended to fill the Vessel with Fishes. Though he raised up
Lazarus from the dead by a Miracle, yet he will call in his Friends to
assistance, to loose his napkin, and take off his grave clothes, John 11.44. In
the Ministry of the Gospel, though God give the increase, yet Paul is to
Plant, and Aposte to Water. Though the People may shout before Jericho, yet the
Priests have the charge of the Ark and Trumpets.

3. God would not have this work of Faith, one days work only, they must
Beseige it seven days. It is not enough to do well for a while, and give
over, we must hold out our Christian race till we obtain; fight, till we be
Crowned. The promised reward (Romans 2.7.) is to the patient continuers in
well-doing, who hold out, and that only upon hopes: The crown of life is
reserved for the faithful unto death. Christ's Throne is demised and granted to
the over-commer; And salvation is appointed, for the endurer unto the end.

4. Jericho a sinful City, whose iniquities were ripe, and fore neither the
watchfulness and valor of Inhabitants and Soldiery within; nor the works and
warlike fortifications without, could defend it from the battery of but seven
sounding Trumpets of Rams Horns, and the only shout of the Israelitish Camp.
When Nicephorus Phocas ( Cedren. Hist. page 542.) had built a spacious and
strong Wall about his Palace to secure it, and himself in it; in the Night he
heard a Voice, crying, (...), O King, though thou buildest up to the Clouds,
the Palace will not be secure, (...), the sin within will ruin it, and all
within it. Nothing subverts a glorious Church, and flourishing State; private
Persons, and their Estates and Families, but the wickedness of them that dwell
in the former; and the Personal crimes of the other; Psalm. 107.33.34. He
turns Rivers into a Wilderness: and the Water springs into dry ground. A
fruitful land into barrenness; for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. Nay, sin is of so destructive a nature, that it spoils, dishonours,
and overthrows a good cause; when wicked men take the right side; then, retro
sublapsa referri, then we see that side loft, and perish, by the criminousnesse
of the managers; A good Cause will never sanctify the wickedness of the
Undertakers. They were vain and lying words (The Temple of the Lord, etc) which
the Jews confided in, Ier. 7.4. such a pretense could not consecrate their
evil doings, nor prevent their judgments, ver. 3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. as long
as we incorrigibly persist in our wicked ways, never think to cover and secure
our selves under the pretense of the Temple of the Lord: If we would have the
Temple of the Lord, to be a glory, and to reside among us; a good Cause to go
on and prosper: then the respective pretenders, must be holy and good men. If
we would have our Church, and State to stand, their Walls and Bulwarks, Laws,
and Constitutions to hold out, and be undemolished; then let us adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; otherwise, (...), The Decree is
already gone, all shall be taken away, root and branch, Mat. 21.42.43. sin
within, being the prevailing party, will last all down; and as national sins
have this destructive power over the whole; so particular personal sins, over
parts and parcells thereof, private Estates and Families: Many men call their
houses by their Names; and their inward thoughts are, that they shall continue
for ever, and their dwelling places to all Generations, Psalm. 49.11. but even
here (...), Families and Houses falls, some suddenly, as by a marked open
judgment signally; others insensibly, piece after piece, but at length
totally, they having either their groundwork in blood, or their structure by
fraud, sacrilege and perjury, Zach. 5.3.4. Habb. 2.9.10.11.12. Ier. 22.13.
etc. If then we will have our Families to stand, and Houses to continue;
endeavor to demolish and pull down the (...), the Fortresses, and strong holds
of sin; cast down every imagination which exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God, break, and weaken the power of lust; otherwise still (...), the
unmortified sin will down with all: follow that counsel, Break off your sins
by Repentance, while we have the Priests of the Lord, lifting up their Voices
like Trumpers, and alaruming us thereunto: Deal with our sins as Joshuah with
Jericho, destroy all, leave none alive, no reserved, beloved bosom sin, no
accursed thing, lest the (...), fall on us, as on the Israelites, Josh. 7.13.
and as there was a curse upon the re-builders of Jericho, to which the Apostle
alludes, Gal. 2.18. If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my
self a transgressour. So, for fear of this curse, let not us destroy sin to
day, and build it up to morrow; repent to day, and call it in to morrow,
falling away afterward from Repentance, Heb. 6.5. turning from the holy
Commandment, 2 Pet. 2.21. but finish and perfect this work till we come to the
Hevenly Canaan.

5. As Jericho fell, and was destroyed by the sound of the Trumpets, and was
after burnt to nothing; so, at the last day, the whole World at the sound of
the Trumpet, and the Voice of the Archangel, shall be destroyed, and burnt
with Fire, 2 Pet. 3.10. and it is our part to remember the Apostles inference
there: ver. 11.12. Seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness. Looking for,
and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens being on
fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Let us
strive to escape, though it be (...), as by fire; 1 Cor. 3.13. that we be not
condemned with the world, let us now hearken to the Voice of God, and the sound
of the Gospel, denouncing woe to them who know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.8. calling us to repentance,
proclaiming to us pardon, if we repent, inviting us to obedience, and promising
us a great reward in Heaven; For which let us Pray.

The Third Part.
O Most holy Lord, who have made all things by an infinite wisdom in a most
wonderful and decent order; and by the same wisdom, and in the same order
has made thy self a Church among the sons of men, and therein instituted holy
Orders, Rites, and Offices. Sanctify those whom thou have called to those
Orders, and separated by thy truth, thy Word it is truth; and preserve them for
the carrying of the Ark, the government and guidance of the Sanctuary. Keep thy
holy Offices and Rites from contempt and profaneness; and when we address our
selves to thee in the dutiful observation of them, grant we may lift up holy
hands and pure hearts, we be diligent to entertain and welcome all
opportunities of holy living: and, while the Gospel calls us to Repentance, to
pull down the strong holds of sin and Satan, and to run with patience that
Christian race which is set before us, even to run so, and until we obtain,
even till we be admitted and received into the Heavenly Canaan. Make us
frequently and seriously meditate upon the day of death, and of judgment, that
we may apply our hearts to wisdom, that so we be not condemned with the World,
but may escape and be saved, for thy mercies O Lord God, and for thy merits O
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be Praise for ever and ever, Amen.

RAHAB Saved.
Heb. 11.31. By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed
not, when she had received the Spies with peace.
RAhab seeing the great Miracles of mercy which God had declared in behalf of
the Israelites; and hearing of those large Concessions and Grants which God had
demized to them, proved a Convert, and turned a true Israelite indeed: And God
was pleased to reward this her Faith with a Deliverance from that common
destruction which befell her fellow Citizens, and with a communion of those
blessings which attended her now approved and selected Party: For, By Faith the
Harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, etc.

The First Part.
And in this there are these following severalls to be considered, and cleared.

1. The Jews and Rabbines quarrel with the Attribute the Apostle gives here to
Rahab, of (...), the Harlot; conceiving the appellative and expression to be
odious, and dishonorable: and affirming, That the Word signifies not an
Harlot, but an Hostess; and this they confirm from the Version of the Chaldee
Paraphrase, Reading it, Rahab an Hostess.

But supposing the Hebrew word [Zonah] to signify an Hostess; yet it is most
certain, that in Scripture it is used most frequently in the worst sense, as
Ezekiel. 16.41. 1 Kings 3.16. and it is the Toar Foeminine Adjective from the root
(Zanah) which in the first sense signifies, to commit Whoredom, and is
indifferently taken for, Fornicari tam animo quam corpore; Spiritual and
fleshly Fornication, Deuteronomy. 31.16. Ezekiel. 16. Numb. 25.1. Lev. 19.28. and because
of both these acceptations of the word, though the latter be more proper;
Juneus interprets it, Meretricis cauponae, a certain Hostess an Harlot, or
Harlot Hostess; and so the Jews quarrel will in this, be but malicious, and
groundless. And for that other pretense, That this Attribute of disgrace,
should be a disparagement to those holy Persons, and that chaft Matron Sarah,
pre-mentioned in this Catalogue, this will appear to be vain also, and nothing;
If we remember,

1. That the Apostles did not conceive it any dishonor for Matthew the
Publican to be received into their Order; nor did they think much, that Paul
the Persecuter and blasphemer, was joined in Commission with them.

2. It is so far from being matter of envy or grief to any sanctified soul,
That an humbled penitent finner should communicate of that grace and mercy,
which it has received, that it is plentiful matter of joy and gladness; for
every true convert rejoices when there are supernumeraries, when there is
daily some added to the Church, and the number increased; both because every
such is an Advocate at the Throne of Grace for such, and it must be great
satisfaction and delight, to have their Petitions granted; and also because, If
there be joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.7. then in every
suitor for Heaven the same affection will be, see Acts 2.41. etc.

Q. But by what did she evidence her conversion, and demonstrate her Faith?

A. If we look upon the Record, Josh. 2.9.10.11. we will find her Faith plainly
and fully asserted; for that declares, She believed the true God, the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that this God was in Covenant with the Beseigers; that we
would dispossess their Enemies, and seat them in Canaan; and of this her
Faith, she gave an undeniable demonstration of her charitable affection, and
kind welcome of the Spies, entertaining them with all fidelity, respect, and
safety. So David made his delight in the Saints on Earth; an expression, and
remonstrace of his Faith in God, Psalm. 16.1.2.3.

Q. But how did it consist with true Faith, to take in the assistance of a lie,
for the management of her design?

A. It may be resolved, That though the sin were damnable, as every
transgression of the Law in rigor; yet she found releif and favor, both
because, as Paul obtained mercy, because what he did, he did ignorantly,
through unbeleif; so she did it through weakness, being but a minor in the
Faith; and new entered and matriculated Professor of the true God, an incipient,
or beginner in the saving Knowledge of Religion; whereas, if she had been
graduated, and fully enstructed therein, and of long standing in the Society of
Believers, her pardon would not have been sued out, and procured upon such
easy terms; nor grace and favor obtained, but by many acts of humiliation;
and also, because God considers our infirmities, and delights to do us good,
therefore he often rewards the action in what is good, and imputes not the bad
which is inherent to, and intermixed with the good; he will not be so extreme,
as to mark all that is amiss, especially if the offender be weak, and the
intentions sincere; whereas no pretense of a good intention will serve to a
careless, secure, or presumptuous transgressor: And so, though God may
sometimes justify an harmless Delinquent, who sins, not malo animo, in the
simplicity of his heart; yet God never allows designedly to do evil, that
good may come thereof.

Q. But how can this her hospitality be excused from treason? Was not this to
comply with the professed enemies of her country and people? And is not such a
compliance by all Laws judged falsnesse, and perfidiousnesse? And can falsnesse
be an act of Faith?

A. It is true, that all these interrogatories are to be resolved in the
affirmative, unless God otherwise declare; and if he interpose his command to
the contrary, then all obligations to a subordinate power is superseded. For as
I said before, in that ordered slaughter of Isaac, God, who is above all Law,
having passed his sentence, nulled the authority of any Law decreeing the
contrary: so here, God, who is above all Government and Governors, having
expressly declared a change of the then Government, and the substitution of
other Governors, did thereby license and authorize all practices tending
thereunto, and by his overruling supremacy, absolved those people from their
Allegiance to their then Governors. Now that God had done so, appears, Josh.
1.2.3. etc. and yet this can be no president, or Gospel case now, because
Christ has given rules for peaceable demeanor, none for disturbance of States.
God then would have the Commonwealth in the Church; now the Church is in the
Commonwealth; that is, Christ will have no man for his cause disseazed of his
right, deprived of his Estate, deposed from his Dignities; he settles his
Gospel in Kingdoms and States, without disputing their form or mode of
Government, he came to give an Heavenly Kingdom; he leaves earthly Monarchies
and Republiques in a quiet enjoyment of their powers and privileges.

The Second Part.
1. This Rahab, this child of wrath, (for so she was by her Education, and
after conversation, till she received this Intelligence and Revelation
concerning the true God) is now a child of God by her after faith and
conversion. There is infinite mercy with God, and plenteous Redemption for all
humble converts and penitents. It Is Gods glory to forgive sins, and his
greatest glory to forgive the greatest sinners repenting; Isay 1.16.17.18.
Ezekiel. 18.14. etc. he is always ready to welcome and entertain an humbled
sinner, as the Father his prodigal Son returning with all tendernesses and
endearments; he looks upon a convert, not as a sinner, (his iniquities and his
sins he will remember no more) but receives him as a Son, reconciled to him by
the Son of his love, Jesus Christ; he delights in, and cheerfully accepts such
opportunities of mercy. This is the remonstrance of the new Covenant, Christ
came to save what was lost, the relenting and confessing Prodigal; that poor
Samaritan sinner who had five Husbands; and she who had none; that notorious
branded Harlot, who washed his feet with her tears, and then wiped them with
her baire: Matthew and Zacheus two Publicans, both followers, and then
favorites of Christ, and for an assurance, that thus he would dispose of his
mercy for the future; when he went to Paradise, he took with him that theife,
the late convert on the Cross; Where sin abounds (if suitable repentance
follow) there Grace superabounds; the greater the distemper, the more excellent
the cure, the more skillful the Physician; the more potent the Enemy, --
(nullum memorabile nomen, Faeminea in paena, nec habet Victoria laudem) the
more glorious the Conquest; the stronger the hold of the Devil, the more
powerful is the Spirit of Christ storming him out, and dispossessing him; the
higher our debts and trespasses are, the more noble is the bounty and charity
of the releasor and acquittor, the higher the obligation of the releaser to
serve and love him, Luke 7.47. where the causall Conjunction (...), which we
read for, is equivalent to therefore; noting not Causam rei, but Argumenti;
from whence or what Topic soever the Argument and Answers be drawn. 2. By
Faith she believed (as is said) the true God, etc. The minimum quod sic of
Faith, is to believe that God is, and that he is a plentiful rewarder of those
who diligently seek him, and even this belief, God will reward by his
acceptance; This Primum fundamentale, served her turn to denominate her a
faithful one, and put her upon the Record, Faith in the least measure, and
first degree, obtains grace and favor, and increases by little and little
into knowledge and sanctity of life. God will not quench the smoking Flax, nor
break the bruised Reed; he will not stifle and crush the beginnings of Piety,
but will carefully nourish and cherish; Faith in Semine, will insensibly, as
good Seed (if sound) spring and grow up; first in the Blade, then the Ear, then
into full Corn; go from one degree to another toward perfection: As in the
extraordinary Faith of Miracles, that little, as a grain of Mustard Seed (Mark
4.27.28. 29.30.31.) can remove Mountains; so in an ordinary saving Faith, a
little, if sound, will receive a blessing to increase and multiply; a power to
remove evil habits out of the soul, contracted by evil Education, or
Example, by natural corruption, or compliance with sinful customs, and plant
and seed holiness there, which if it be diligently manured and managed, all
tares weeded out as they bud, will fructify to maturity: We have a promise for
it, Mat. 25.29. Habenti dabitur; to him that Husbands well, even the least
Talent, he shall receive an addition, and a plentiful one too; for he shall
have abundance, upon every improvement shall receive more, that he shall have
overplus, a sufficient stock of grace to employ, and turn his hand with, and
serve all his uses. 3. Rahab, a Cananite, a stranger from the Covenant of
Promise, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, is now admitted and
received into that Society and Communion, and made partaker of the same Grace
and Hope with Abraham and Sarah, by her Faith: She was one of the Primitiae
Gentium, an earnest of the after calling of the Gentiles, that they should be
no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow Citizens, Ephesians. 2.3. an exact
discovery of that great Mystery of Christ, that the Gentiles should he fellow
heirs, and of the same Body, etc. And so it is expressly mentioned of this
Rahab, That she became an Israelite indeed, Josh. 6.25. where she is said, to
dwell in Israel until this day, for she was Allied to the noblest descent and
extraction, being Married to Salmon, who begat Boaz of Rachab, Mat. 1.5. the
Progenitors of David, and of whom Christ came according to the Flesh. So that
here we may affirmatively conclude with Saint Peter, (Acts 10.34.35.) Of a
truth I perceive that God is no respector of persons. But in every Nation, he
that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. And with
Saint Peter, (1 Cor. 7.19.) Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. And Gal. 5.6. For in
Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avayleth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but
Faith which works by love. 4. Rahab believed, and therefore separated her
self from the company and communion of her hardened fellow Citizens, and joined
her self to the society of Gods people; and yet she was none of those sensual
separatists spoken of by Saint Jude 19. who walked not with the Church of God,
but after their own ungodly lusts, heaping to themselves Teachers, choosing and
carving for themselves, without the Order of Gods Church, and taking them on
heaps, either confusedly, or unsatisfactorily, when they have their own choice,
being never contented, put off one to day, and another to morrow, and so, if
possible, in infinitum; and all this from a malignant humor, an itching in the
ear, 2 Timothy 4.3. nor those Pharisaicall separatists, who divide themselves
from the Body of Christ, either upon a vain supposition of Pride, that they are
holier, and the rest prophaner; and therefore, Procul, o proeul ite, come not
near them, stand far from them, or upon as bad of uncharitableness, as if the
Congregation were not holy; and they, (good souls) are afraid to receive
infection from it; as if the true service of the true God, could be unholy and
poisonous, because some of the servants in that duty, are false and wicked: For
how can their supposed ir-reall, (it matters not in this case, but I will
suppose it real) nakedness, touch and defile me, when I abhor it for it self,
piety it, and pray against it in them; and I only join and communicate with
them in that which is confessedly good? But she was an holy separatist, who
forsook the service of false Gods, and betook her self to the Worship of the
true God; her Idolatrous Worship, she exchanged for the true, and divided not
from the Cananites, quasi homines, as men; but from their sins: For doubtless,
she desired, and wished their conversion; and it is a most just and lawful
separation, to depart from all iniquity, and to keep themselves unspotted from
the World, James 1.27. Rev. 18.4. And I heard another Voice from Heaven saying,
Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her Plagues. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.17. Be ye not unequally yoked
together with unbeleevers: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? And what
concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that believes with an
Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will rective you: and such was her separation; whereas daily
experience does evidence. That the other humerous separatists, are the greatest
manuonists, designers, plotters, and contrivers for the World in the whole
World and the greediest unsatiable pursuers of the things of the World;
devourers not only of Widows Houses, but of Kingdoms, Inheritances, holy
things, mixing and confounding all with most Heathenish Worldly Policies; not
considering, that the love of this World is enmity with God. 5. It was Rahab
the Heathen, the Gentile house-wife, who was the Harlot; Rahab the Believer,
the Convert, is joined to an Israelite in chaste and holy Wedlock: Fornication
is a Work of the Flesh, a pollution of our Bodies; Marriage is honorable in
all: Those may justly suspect their Faith, and distrust their conversion, who
indulge and allow themselves in those unclean satisfactions of the Flesh, and
Heathenish pollutions. Read that one Law of God, Deuteronomy. 23.17.18. There shall
be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the Sent of Israel.
Thou shall not bring the hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog, into the House
of the Lord thy God for any Vow: for even both these are an abomination unto
the Lord thy God. Consider what Saint Paul presses, 1 Cor. 6.15.16.17.18. Know
ye not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ? shall I then take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Member of an Harlot? God forbid. What,
know ye not that he which is joined to an Harlot, is one Body? for two (says
he) shall be one Flesh. But he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, etc.
And remember that direful judgment, Revel. 21.8. But the fear full, and
unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whorem^ngers, and
sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liar: shall have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. 6 Rahab believed,
and was saved: True Faith is the saving grace; Infidelity, the damnable sin;
because Faith is always attended with Obedience: Infidelity is still followed
with Impenitency. Indeed, Faith and Obedience, like Hippocrates Twins, simul
oriuntur, simul moriuntur, here in via at least; yet Faith is the firstborn;
and according to the Law of Primogeniture, and Birthright, it lays the claim
and title to Heaven, and gives the jus ad rem, Legal Right thereto; though the
actual possession thereof, the jus in re, be from Faith perfected by Works.
And hence in Scripture account, (howsoever Faith and Obedience are
Philosophically two distinct habits) they are the same; in as much as true
Christian Faith is Obedientiall, not merely Notionall; and all Christian
Obedience, is an emanation of Faith: For there we find one and the same Word
denoting both Infidelity and Disobedience, (...), is sometimes unbeleif, Acts
14.2. But the unbeleeving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds
evil affected against the Brethren. John 3.36. He that believes on the Son,
has Everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life:
but the wrath of God abides on him. Sometimes disobedience, undutifulnesse,
obstinacy, Ephesians. 3.2. Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course
of this World, according to the prince of the power of the air the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience. Col. 3.6. For which things sake
the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. 1 Pet. 3.20. Which
sometimes wore disobedient: when once the long suffering of God waited, etc. So
not providing for our Family, which in strictness of Language, is an act of
disobedience, because an omission of a prescribed duty, is yet made by the
Apostle, (1 Timothy 5.8) a bad piece of Infidelity; and men are said to be absurd
and wicked; because they have not Faith, 2 These. 3.2; and so (...), is not
only barely to assent; but also to obey, Galat. 3.1. and true sineere
conversion, is styled, Faith to God ward, 1 These. 1.8.9.10. and the keeping of
the Commandments, and Faith, are inseparably conjoined, Apoc. 14.12. And then
the Exhortation will be seasonable; What God has joined together, let no man
put asunder: what God has joined in praecept, let no man separate, either in
Dispute, Discourse, or Practice. For, 7. We find Rahabs Faith working by love,
and her love demonstrated by her Hospitality, [She received the Spies in
peace;] which the Apostle St James 2.25. urges as an instance to demonstrate
her Faith to be true, and truly Christian. Zacheus upon his profession of
Faith, promised restitution, and vowed liberality. The Convert therefore on the
Cross, even in those dying minutes, believed, and through Faith, confessed
Christ's innocence, and his own guilt; and in great charity, both reproves, and
exhorts his fellow sufferer. If we pretend to Faith, and have not Repentance
toward God, and love toward the Brethren (as the Apostle in another case, so
here) our Faith is in vain, we are yet in our sins. The love of the Brethren,
is a good expression of our love to God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: If
we receive our Lord by Faith, we will well-come and receive with kindness the
people whom he has chosen for his portion and Inheritance: and if we love God,
as the Sovereign; we must jointly love them whom he loves, and to whom he
communicates some share and measure of his fullness: 1 John 4.20.21. If a man
say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar. For he that loves not
his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? And
this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother
also. And no better or clearer expression of love, then Hospitality, and
honorable and liberal entertainment of strangers, and exiles; and therefore,
Brotherly love, and Hospitality, are conjoined as the antecedent, and the
consequent, Heb. 13.1.2. But, 8. Her Faith made her faithful to God and his
Church; having undertaken this Profession, she will hold it fast, neither to
desert it, nor to comply with its opposite, and enemy: If we fall away from our
holy Profession (though but by some secret compliance) to the contrary; we are
not so faithful, nor so clear as we ought to be; our Faith is not fincere, at
least suspicious: and Rahabs Zeal will either convince us of coldness, or
luke-warmnesse in a good cause. 9. Rahab perished not, because she upon Treaty
with the Spies had made her Conditions and Articles. Wicked faithless men, are
noted to be (...), who will prevaricate with their Word and Promise, though
solemnly Covenanted, Romans 1.31. Faith is to be kept, and Covenants to be
observed, even with Heretics and Heathens; such was Rahab at the Treaty. Thus
the Israelites kept touch with the Gibeonites, Joshua 9.18.19. And the Children
of Israel smote them not, because the Princes of the Congregation had sworn
unto them by the Lord God of Israel: And all the Congregation murmured against
the Princes. But all the Princes said unto all the Congregation, We have sworn
unto them by the Lord God of Israel; now therefore we may not touch them. And
because after, they and the House of Saul did prevaricate, God severely
punished them, 2 Samuel 21.5.6. And they answered the King, The man that consumed
us, and that devised against us, that we should be destroyed from remaining in
any of the Coasts of Israel. Let seven men of his Sons be delivered unto us,
and we will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did
choose. And the King said, I will give them. So he punished the perfidious
Moabites, 2 Kings 3.5, 34. and the falsehood of Zedechiab, Ezech. 17, 19. 10.
She perished not; but not only she, even her Relatives shared in this
happiness. God blesses the faithful and merciful man, in his Relations and
Posterity; The Generation of the Righteous shall be blessed: Never any
destruction so total, so universal; but a residue escaped, Isay 10.20.21. And
it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are
escaped of the House of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote
them: but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy One of Israel in truth. The
remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. Rev. 7.3.
Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Treet, till we have Sealed the
Servants of our God in their Foreheads.
The Third Part.
OAlmighty God, and most merciful Father, the giver of all grace, and Author
of all goodness, who delightest not in the death of a sinner, but rather that
he should turn and live. Turn thee unto us, and turn us unto thee, and so shall
we be turned: Convert thou us, and so shall we be converted. O let us not any
longer go a whoring after our own imaginations, nor be led by the
deceitfulness of sin; but having Faith to Godward, we may turn from Idols, to
serve thee the living God, and to wait for thy Son from Heaven; and in the mean
time, receive, and welcome him in our Hearts and affections with Peace, that
when he shall return to make inquisition for blood, transgression and sin, we
may by him, and that league and Covenant of Peace concluded with thee in him,
be delivered from wrath to come, and for him receive forgiveness of sins, and
Inheritance among them who are sanctified by Faith in him. O let us not have
our portion with unbeleevers, nor our part with the disobedient, for then we
shall certainly perish: but think upon us (O Lord) for good, that we may be
saved with that remnant, who have their Robes washed and whitned in the blood
of the Lamb, who have separated themselves from the children of Belial, and
Table of Devils, and keep themselves unspotted from the World; and so both
they and we may be presented in our Bodies, our Souls, and Spirits, holy,
blameless, and undefiled at the coming of our Lord. Holy God, keep as from
the contagion of sin, and sinners; preserve us in thy truth, and love, in the
Unity and Communion of thy one true holy Catholic Church, that having the
Seal of Gods Servants in our Forcheads, we may cry and sing eternally,
Salvation to our God who fitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb, Amen.

The CONCLUSION.
Heb. 11. from the 32. verse to the end of the Chapter. And what shall I say
more? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of
Sampson, and of Iephthah, of David, also and Samuel, and of the Prophets. Who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, etc.
THe Apostle now coms to a Conclusion, (...), by a pre^^^on, cutting short his
Discourse, and cursorily casting up the residue of the Faithful, which were to
be inserted in this Catalogue, even all the Succession of Believers, who lived
from the time of the Judges ruling under God in Israel, till that present Age
wherein he Wrote to these Hebrews, nominating only some, shortly touching
their works and patience, intimating only, and hinting at others by their acts
and sufferings; by which we may guess and conjecture at their Names and
Persons: And having thus completed his Design and Canon, he gives a full
Testimonial and Certificate of approbation in the two last Verses, both of
these thus in the close either expressed, or alluded to; and of those
foregoing, whom he had honored with a larger Narrative, and more distinctly
and aithfully insisted on, and more amply commended. I shall therefore here
leave my former Method, in the respective Observance of the Apostle; and
summarily, and briefly run over these subsequent Examples and Presidents of
Faith, as they lie here in their several order contracted; and so follow his
Abridgement, (...), as the words following in course.

And what shall I more say? If these Hebrews be of tractable and teachable
Spirits, enough is said already to establish and strengthen them in the holy
Faith: and what needs more then enough? sufficient is said, what is more, is ex
abundantia.

The time would fail me, etc. An Hyperbolicall expreson, importing thus much;
So numerous is the company of the Faithful Ancients, and so many their
Faithful Actions in the holy Registery, that a full enumeration of them, and
what is Recorded of, and concerning them, would exceed the bulk of an Epistolar
Exhortation, and Remonstrance, and rise into a large and exact History. These
here mentioned, will serve strongly to make good the Induction, and thereby
prove the Position, Faith is the substance of things hoped, the evidence of
things not seen, etc. and therefore it is unnecessary altogether to enlarge
further; and therefore also take them more succinctly, and compendiously.

Thus your Painters, being to deliniate a Croude, or a Thronged Multitude, do
not take them whole, and in full; but draws them out by the Pole, and presents
you nothing but the tops and crowns of their Heads, amassing their bulks
altogether.

Gideon, whose faithful expedition is Recorded Judges 6. and 7. whose
stratagem (with the number of three hundred men) struck a Panick fear into the
numerous Mideanitish Army, that they Fled, and killed each other.

Baracks Prowess and Faith was manifested, That with a small inconsiderable
Body, he durst encounter, and did totally Rout the vast, and well-provided Army
of Sisera, King Iabins Captain General, Judges 4. and 5.

Samson follows, whose Faith was greater then his admired and renowned
strength; admired it was, because it lay in those excrescences of his Body, his
Heirs, which in other Men are of the least use, and most weakness: Renowned
it was to a Proverb, and deservedly; for without any offensive, or defensive
Weapons, by his bare Arm of Flesh, he tore in pieces a Lion like a Kid, Judges
14.5.6. when his Hands were bound, he brake the Cords like scorched Flax; and
being loosed, with the law-bone of an Ass, flew a thousand Men, Judges 15.14.
etc. when he was Beseiged, and immured by the Philistines, he carried away the
Gates of the City, with the two Posts, Bar and all, Judges 16.3. and by
leaning upon the two middle Pillart of the House, the whole Fabric dissolved,
Judges 16.30.

Iephthah is the last mentioned of the Judges, though he was before Samson; as
Barack was before Gideon, who notwithstanding was first here nominated. You may
find the History of his Resolution and Noble Attempts against the Ammonites in
the defense of Israel, Judges 11. I shall refer you to the Text, and leave
them, after a not very impertinent Digression, and two Practical Observations.

The Digression aims at a Fact of Samsons and Iephtha's, and depends on these
following Quaeries.

1. Whether Samson in that his last mentioned Enterprise, was not Felo de se?
guilty of (...), of selfe-murder, which not only the Rule of Faith, but reason
it self condemns as sinful, and unnatural, Arist. lib. 5. Eth. cap. 11?

But to wave some men's conjectures; Saint Augustines Answer seems to me most
clear, who accounts this inter beroica, an extraordinary act, proceeding from
an extraordinary motion of Gods Spirit, in no wise or case imitable: For (says
he) lib. 1. de Civitate Dei, cap. 21. Spiritus latenter hoc jusserat, he had a
secret or private Order for it: And more fully, cap. 26. of that Book, Non
humanitas deceptus, sed divinitus jussus; nec arrans, sed obediens: It was not
a crime, but duty in him: And he adds this reason; Cum Deus jubet, seque jubere
sine ullis ambagibus intimat, quis obedientiam in crimen vocet? quis obsequium
pietatis accuset? If God command, and clearly intimates his command, this
supersedes the guilt, and absolves it from disobedience.

2. Concerning Iephtha's Vow, Whether it, in it self, were rash? Whether he
executed this rash Vow, and in the Execution thereof did sin against the Law of
God?

This in Saint Augustines judgment, is, Magna and ad dijudicandum difficilima
Quaestio, Tom. 4. quaest. sup. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 49. a great and hard
Quaestion; And therefore I shall not be Magisterially affirmative, determining
positively either in the negative, or affirmative. But I shall declare my
thoughts and grounds thereof, and, unusquisque abundet sensu suo, and let every
one choose what he judges most probable.

The Answer, if most Voices carry it, will I suppose pass in the affirmative.
Yet Iunius upon this place argues, That Iephthah did not Sacrifice his
Daughter, but only emanicipated her, and consecrated her a Nazarite unto the
Lord: and so he reads the words dis-junctively; Erit Iebovae, aut offeram illud
holocaustum; it shall be Lords, [not and, but] or) I will offer it, etc. that
is, as he himself expounds, I will consecrate it to God, and if it be proper
or legal for a Sacrifice, I will offer, etc. And agreeable, and with
consonancy hereunto he reads, what we commonly render (lament) ad
confabulandum, to talk with. But I conceive, with submission to better
judgments, and with leave of that great Person in the Church of God, that this
exposition does not at all acquit Jephthah from the suspicion of temerity and
rashness in his Vow; but rather deeply charge and accuse him: For his Vow was
in general, Quodcunque (as he himself reads it) whatsoever; and if so, how
could he have performed either part of the dis-junction, if an unclean Beast
had first been represented to him after his return: not the former part of it
in any sense, Erit Iehovae; for in his sense, he could not have devoted it to
God to be a perpetual Nazarite: Neither according to some others sense, or
rather fancies, could he have immured and Cloystered it up, that it should not
Marry, and be a perpetual Votary of Virginity; and much less could he
perform the latter part of the dis-junction, offer it for an Holocaust. And
the exception, Si aptum fuerit, is gratis dictum; there is nothing in the Text
to ground that conditional clause; and so by this Word whatsoever, In injuriam
Dei aliquid non solum illicitum, verum etiam conremptibile and socundum legem
immundum vovisse videtur, as Aug. if it be to be taken in the large extent, as
nothing appears to the contrary. For that reason which is alleged, Nobis
persuadet vera illius fides, etc. Heb. 11. he is Recorded a Believer, and
therefore we are not to believe any sush gross fault of him; The same Saint
Augustine fully answers loco cit. assuring the holy Scriptures not only
Records the Faith, but the Faults of Believers, as he instanceth and proves
also in Gideon, whose fault was certainly inexcusable; and yet, he as well as
Iephihah is in the List and Roll: And thus then he resolves it; Quia sancta
Scriptura, quorum sidem atque justitiam veraciter laudat, non hinc impeditur,
eorum etiam peecata si qua notit, and oportere judicat, notare veraciter. For
that other Reading of the Word in the fortieth Verse; grant that it signifies
(as is pretended) to parlee, or to talk; yet it may signify, to speak, or
talk of, as well, as talk with. And so Iunius applies it, Judges 5.11.
confabulentur de justis operibus, or justitias; our Translation with Hieromes,
Narrentur justitia; rehearse the righteous acts; or as others, Celebrate: and
then as the sense is good and clearer, [they shall speak or talk of the
righteous acts; not with] so the construction here will be current also, they
went to talk of, not with; that is, they went Annually to celebrate and
perform solemnly those Rites and Ordinances which were appointed for her
Memorial. That such there were, appears from the 39. Verse; and that Clause
seems to declare it a perpetual established Right or Ordinance which was not
to determine with her life, but was to continue after: However, this will mar
some men's conjectures from this Reading, that we never Read in the Old
Testament of any Cloystered for Virgins; or that Virginity was a more
Honorable, or more Religious state, then chaste Wedlock. And so I marvel
whence some of the Jewish Doctors affirm, That Iephthah made his Daughter an
House out of the City, where he kept her recluse and shut up from all Society;
when as the Targum Reads it as we do, to lament, and so they Interpret the
[Lethannoth] and sometimes they Interpret the Word, to speak of, or report
concerning: and sometimes transitively, to celebrate, and confess: Others Read
the words jointly, as by a Conjunction copulative, (and.) thus (it shall surely
be the Lords, and I will offer, etc.) or more plainly, it shall be Lords, I
will offer, etc. or rather, for an Offering. And if this hold, which is the
most received Reading, then we may consequently with the Targum render the
Lethannoth in the 40. Ver. to lament. And according to this construction, it is
most evident, that the condition of the Promise or Vow, was to offer it for a
burnt Offering to the Lord: Now a burnt Offering did necessarily require the
Death of the thing, or subject matter so offered, Levit. 1. in several Verses
of that Chapter; and that Iephthah did accordingly perform this Vow, and
observe the condition, express terms carry it, beyond all exception, in the
39. Verse, where it is said, He did with her according to his Vow. But that
which to me most strongly confirms this Opinion, is Iephtha's own Declaration
(in the 35. ver.) and Profession, I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I
cannot go back: which was as much as to say; My Vow is irrevocable, I cannot
commute it, I cannot avoid it: For to take away all doubts, let us remember
there were two sorts of Vows; There was a singular Vow without an Anathema, or
Interdict, and what was thus Vowed, might be redeemed by an apprizement, or
valuation, either according to the worth of the thing vowed; or according to
the ability of the Person vowing, as you may Read, Levit. 27.1.2. etc. till
13. etc. And there was a more solemn strict Vow, with an Anathema, or
Interdict, seconding and attending it; and for such as this, there was no
Redemption, every such devoted, must die, ver. 28.29. Like our Law of Mortmaine
in some respects, it cannot revert or return to the first Donor or Vower upon
any account: And that this Vow of Jephtha's was of this latter sort, is plain,
for the words of the Vow, Erit Jehovae, the form of Devotion by Anathema. They
who desire the question more fully canvassed, let him consult Ludovici Capelli
diatrib. de vot. Iephthe. The Observations now follow.

1. Hence we Learn, how far we are to imitate these Patterns. The holy
Scriptures holds forth the Faith of Gods People, for our imitation; yet
withal, shows their faults, for our caution. The holy Spirit is that
faithful witness, who approves their good deeds; but will not in any wise
justify their evil: Be ye followers therefore of them, yet only, as they are
followers of Christ Jesus. In the same Mapp you have both the Maine Sea
represented, wherein you may safely Sail: And you have the dangerous Rocks,
and Shelves of Sands Delineated, that you may avoid: So the holy Writ does
deeypher and approve what is exemplarily good in those God is pleased to
instance in, That their light might so shine before men, that they see their
good works, etc. That whatsoever things are lovely, or of good report; if there
be any virtue, or if any praise, to think on them, Phil. 4.8. and it sets forth
their infirmities, and prejudices, that we may learn to beware of them, that
we presume not too much on our own abilities, or on former assistances, lest
God substract his Grace from us, and leave us in our own hands, and then indeed
we shall be in a sad and miserable condition: Therefore let us in all humility,
be jealous and suspicious of our hearts, least they be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin; and consider our selves, as the Apostle fore-warnes,
Galat. 6.1. And let us thus reason with our selves, these though honored with
an infallible Testimonial, a Testimonial from Heaven for their Faith, have
fallen; therefore let us fear, and walk circumspectly, and be always on our
guard: Gedeon made an Ephah of Gold; Sampson defiled himself with Concubines;
Iephthah probably Vowed rashly, and performed it more sinfully. If these fell
so grossly, let not us flatter our selves with a conceit that we cannot sin;
but rather frequently and feriously consider, and re-minde the Apostles
Exhortation, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor.
10.12.

Secondly. We may learn hence, to pay our Vows unto the Lord; This Saint
Augustine has afforded us, Habet hie error aliquam laudem fidei, quia Deum
timuit, ut quod voverat redderet, etc. If any err in the simplicity of his
heart, fearing truly lest he should offend God, (as Iephthah feared to break
his Vow) and provoke him, I dare not conclude him wicked; but shall rather with
St. Augustine, pity and pray for his innocent mistake. God, when he declares,
that he will not be merciful to them who offend of malicious wickedness; does
thereby intimate, that an innocent error, and a well-meaning mistake, may
obtain mercy; If God did not take us with our pre judices and frailties, what
would become of us? how could we escape? but blessed be our good God, who will
receive the weak in Faith, he commends that to us, and that shows he will do
it; he remembers that we are but flesh, and in the midst of judgment
remembers mercy toward them who sincerely fear him.

The next in the Roll, is David, who in his Person was an eminent and
illustruous Instrument of Gods glory, and his Peoples good; and therefore had
that high Prerogative granted, besides the Charactar of his Faith, to be a Type
of Christ: And yet I conceive, that David is here to be undestood in his
Politic capacity, as he was the Chief King of Israel; and so under (David)
the Apostle comprehends, and by (David,) understands all the whole Succession
of Pious Kings and Princes, who were Nursing Fathers to Israel. By the way, I
shall shortly re-minde you of one great remarkable evidence of his Faith among
many; that when he had but small subsistence for himself, yet he carefully,
and bountifully provided for the House of God; when he was in great want, (a
shame to those who in their great fullness, let Gods Service sterve, and his
Place of Worship decay) and straits; yet nothing must be wanting (such was his
Zeal) to Gods House and Worship. You shall find the Record, 1 Chronicles. 22.14.
Now behold, in my trouble: as our commonly used Translation; in my poverty, as
the Genevah Bible; in my affliction, as Junius; in his trouble, poverty, and
affliction, he was Zealous to promote, and advance Gods Service; He would put
his Arm as far as it could stretch, he would not draw back upon common Pleas,
or pretenses, and as much as he could, he would do good to the House of the
Lord.

The last expressly nominated, is Samuel; and as under David, was comprehended
all holy Kings; so under Samuel, is contained all holy Prophets, who is
supposed first to Plant and Erect that Society; and then to Rule and Govern
it, from 1 Samuel 10.5. and 10. And for this reason, because he was the Founder,
and the Rector, or President of that College. Saint Peter reckoned the
ordinary descent of the Prophets from him, saying; Yea, and all the Prophets
from Samuel, and those that follow after, Acts 3.24. And upon the same score,
here it is said, Samuel, and the Prophets.

Caetera de genere hoc (adeo sunt multa) loquacem,
delassere valent -- ue te moror, audi
quo rem deducam.
You have seen the men; Now see their works: as were the men, such was their
strength; their strength in undertaking and performing noble Attempts and Acts;
and their strength in under-going and holding out against all, not only
difficulties and dangers; but also all sorts of sufferings and losses. Their
works follow them, which has both purchased for them glory in Heaven; but also
procured for them a never dying name and memory on Earth. O how great is thy
goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee: which thou have
wrought for them that trust in thee, before the Souns of Men! (Psalm. 31.19.)
glory and honor enough, even to satisfy the most boundlessely ambitious
spirit. But to begin with their Works, which thus followed them.

Though it cannot be verified, That every one of these mentioned Worthies did
all the mighty Works which are here Related; yet it is true of all of them,
that they did some one or other of these noble Acts; or what was equivalent for
worth or excellency to them; For,

Suppose that through Faith all of them did not subdue Kingdoms; yet some, many
of them did; as the Isaelites under the Conduct of Joshuah, and the Judges, (
Josh. 11.12. etc. and Judges throughout) and David, 2 Samuel 8.1. etc. reduced
thirty one Kingdoms in the Land of Canaan, subjecting them to their Laws, and
Governing them accordingly. And this was thus applicable to these present
Hebrews, if before the Israelites could be peaceably Possessed of Canaan, and
settled there, they must encounter many difficulties; then, Per varios casus,
per tot diserimina terum; then they may conclude it to be their condition, not
to be secure, that they should find no opposition in their way to Heaven; many
enemies to stop them in their way, and these not slight or contemptible; but
Potent, as well as Numerous: and if through Faith; then not by frand and force;
the Weapons of the true Israel of God are Spiritual; and the War they manage
against the rebel world, to reform, not to ruin it, is Spiritual, and so
has the truth and denomination of an holy war, 2 Cor. 10.4. for they subdued
Kingdoms not by injustice, but by Righteousness. Thus it follows,

They wrought righteousness; not by unjust, unauthorized invasions of others
Rights and Possessions, to which they had neither just Title, nor lawful
authority; For, toll justitiam, and quid sunt magna regna, nisi magna
latrociuia? as most of the Romans Conquests were, if ye will believe Saint
Augustine; but these Conquests were for the innocent defense of themselves, and
for the protection of the innocent, to preserve themselves, and rescue these
from Oppression and Violence: neither were they any designs of Covetousness,
Ambition, or desire of change; but of obedience to God, who first entitled them
to those Inheritances, and then commanded them to enter, and take Possession;
and this not by a pretended imaginary whisper, rather then suggestion of the
spirit; but by a Public Edict, Decree, and Voice from Heaven.

They wrought Righteeousnesse, discharged their trust in the Administration of
that Authority and Power which God had put into their Hands: operati sunt oa
quae justitia requirit: that is in plain English, They would do you Justice:
or, Exercuerunt justitiam; they Executed Justice impartially, and justly; not
by any Arbitrary Power, but by Rule and Law, and that an infallible one, being
a terror to the evil doers, and praise of the good, Romans 12.3. and so both in
their Personal and Politic caozeities, they wrought Righteousness.

But there is another notion of this Attribute, [they wrought Righteousness,]
exercuerunt justitiam; Justice in this sense imports, Mercy, and Almesgiving,
and so takes under it all the Acts of Charity. Thus its taken Psalm. 37.21.25.
The wicked borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous shows mercy,
and gives. I have been young, and now am old: yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. And Psalm. 112.9. He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor: his righteousness endures for ever: his
horn shall be exalted with honor. And from all these different sense, the
result is the same; That is the duty of the truly faithful, to oppose and
oppugn whatsoever is contrary to Piety and Justice, and to protect and
propugne what is conducing and subservient thereto; No War is good, but where
the Cause is good; No Conquest just, unless the Ground be just: Justice ought
to be administered justly, with a clear indifferency, without respect of
Persons; and all Justice should be tempered with Mercy, and executed to the
ends and purposes of Charity: And as he that does Righteousness, is Righteous;
so none but he that suffers for Righteousness, is a Christian sufferer. It is
not enough to consecrate a Man a Martyr, to suffer what they do; but to suffer
for the Cause of Righteousness, that makes a Martyr, 1 Peter 3.13.14. and
4.15.16. this is indeed the right, the good old way to obtain the Promises.

Obtained Promises; that is not, Semen promissum, for as yet he was not
exhibited; the fullness of time was not come: but terram promissam, 2 Type of
Heaven, they had seizure of the Land of Canaan; and this they obtained, because
they wrought Righteousness, and in their way captivated all opposition: no
coming to Heaven, but by observing the conditions whereon it is promised,
subduing our rebellious wills, and unclean affections, and by doing
righteousness, hac itur ad superos: The way to obtain Heaven, is to subdue
sin, and work Righteousness; the way is obstructed, when these are not in
conjunction: And thus Junius, Ex eo studio, eventus sequitur; they obtained
what they sought for, and required; because they did that which God commanded
and required of them, and all these they obtained not, simul and semel, at
once; but occasionally, as their respective exigents did require, some one way,
some another, as they found them in the days of their Pilgrimage: for some of
them were so hard put to it, that they were forced to stop the mouths of
Lions, lest their widened jaws should devour and enclose them.

[They stopped the mouths of Lions.] Thus Sampson rent the Lion roaring
against him, as he would have rent a Kid, Judges 14.5, 6. Thus David rescued a
Lamb from a Lion, and when he arose in revenge against him, he caught him by
his Beard, and smote him, and slew him, 1 Samuel 17.35. Of Beuaiah it is said, he
slew a Lion in the midst of a Pit in time of Snow, 2 Samuel 23.20. But most
signally and observably, this is held forth in Daniels great Deliverance, Dan.
6.22.23. And this was very considerable and useful to these present Hebrews,
and to all succeeding Christians. God many times stops the sury, rage, and
seircenesse of their most eruell and malicious Adversaries, putting hook: in
their noses, bridles in their lips, and turning them back, Isay 37.29.
restraining their violence, and settering their sury, and chaining up their
madness; when they are hot upon mischeife, he will either send his Angels, to
stop them in their pursuit, or divert them; or infatuates them, stricking them
with blindness, or an Army of Vermin to encounter them; or else with the rod
of his mouth, and the breath of his lips, he will tame and temper them, that
the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Lion shall eat straw with the
Ox, Isay 11.6.7.8. And as God will be a deliverer thus from unreasonable men,
whom in these respects our Savior calls Wolves, Mat. 10.16. David, Lions,
preying young Lions, Psalm. 57.4. and 58.6. Saint Paul, Beasts of Ephesus,
Dogs; so will our Lord Jesus defend us against the roaring Lion, the Devil,
who walks about secking whom he may devour, 1 Peter 5.8. This great one, who
has all the other Lions to prey for him, is so bafled with the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, that he may roar, but he cannot devour; he may assault, but
he cannot take, unless you yield: If you face him, he flies; if you resist, he
runs; though he be a malicious, implacable enemy, he is a spoiled, cowed, and
conquered enemy: Christ has overcome him for us; and so he may show his teeth,
but he cannot bite; he may assault, he cannot take you, unless you betray your
selves into his hands.

But they obtained, as much as this upon another account, they [quenched the
violence of Fire,] (...), Vim and impetum ignis, stopped the inseparable
property of fire, suspended its present power; and which was more, gave the
flames a distinguishing faculty, to consume them who were at a distance from
them, and to preserve them who were cast into them. The History is famously
known, Dan. 3.16.17.24.25. and so I shall not here add more, but how far it
concerned these Hebrews, and the after Christians; shortly it affords this
Observation: That if the Children of God be exposed to Tyranny, he will subdue
the spirits of Princes, and refrain the fierceness of men; he is the same God
in Power, his Hand is not shortened; fear not therefore, if thou art his, then
his promise is good to thee, When thou passest through the Waters, they shall
not overflow thee; When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flames kindle upon thee, Isay 43.2. Again, know assuredly,
That if by Mortification, and true Repentance, thou quench the fiery burning
flames of sinful lusts, and concupiscences; thou shall escape the scorching
flames of Hell fire, the portion of the wicked, Psalm. 11.6. and the everlasting
burnings thereof. These are the great deliverances: the lesser they follow; but
very considerable ones too. For it follows,

[They escaped the edge of the Sword,] the Destroying Bloody Sword passing
through a Land. This may be exemplified in several instances: David senced off
the stroke of Saul's Sword, 1 Samuel 26. Elijah the Sword of Ahab, 1 Kings 19.
Elisha the whole strength of the King of Syriahs Army, 2 Kings 6. But when they
could not escape thus; then they proved Valiant, and Victorious, for so well
were they exercised and experienced, that as it is expressed soon after.

[They waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the Armies of Aliens,]
Neque comitatu and legionibus sucoincti communem cum multis Victoriam, sed nuda
virtute animi singularem de perfidis retulerunt triumphum, Ambrose lib. 1. Off.
cap. 35. Not by multitudes and numbers, but by clear resolution and gallantry:
Both which are evidenced in Joshua: Gideon, and the succeeding Judges; In
David, Asa, Ichosaphat, Kings of Judah, 1 Samuel 14. 2 Chronicles. 14.12.13. and
30.24. If God arise, the most terrible preparations, deepest policies, and best
furnished strength proves invalid, Psalm. 68.1. Isay 8.9.10. But here is one
Deliverance more, which though we have over-leapt, yet we must not pass by it,
for its the ground of all the foregoing; And that is this:

[Out of weakness were made strong.] Some indeed Expound it, Of bodily
frailties, and infirmities, they have recovered from dangerous and tormenting
diseases; whereof Hezekiah is a strong proof, Isay 38. Convaluit de
infirmitate; A deadly distemper had seized on him, and nothing but Faith, and
the Prayer of Faith prevailed for his recovery; this saves the sick, James
5.15. Maet. 8.13. But I conceive it may justly be understood of all kind of
desperate straites, dissiculties, and hazards, when they were at a loss, not
knowing which way to turn; Faith finds them a way, directed and established
them. So Iunius enclines, and therefore (because so the word is used, Romans
4.20.) reads thus the words, In rebus infirmissimis divinitus fuerunt
confirmati: When all was thought to be gone, and the business done, Faith
failed them not, but supplied them with hope, resolution, and courage. And so
Saint Chrysostom refers this to the reduction of the Jews out of the
Babilonish Captivity, which was, when their ease was desperate, if we look
only at their then condition, their state and juncture of affairs, which the
Church also Celebrated accordingly, and acknowledged, Psalm. 126.1. When the
Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion: we were like them that Dream. And so
Theophilect in loc. applying hereunto Ezekiels Vision of the Dead Bones, Ezekiel.
37.1.2. etc. But,

Lastly, The last Enemy, Death, is yet to be destroyed; And this also Faith
has done, and that not by the Faith of the stronger party, but of the weaker
Vessel: For it thus lies,

[Women received their dead, raised to life again:] weak women, strong in
Faith, obtained great favors; witness the widow of Sarephath, or Sarepta, 1
Kings 17.22. Luke 4.26. for although this high favor might seem to be the
immediate effect of Elijahs Prayer, and this virtue to proceed from his
Devotion; yet the widows Faith acted her part, and concurred in the production
of this effect: And herein her Faith was evident, that it obliged her with her
small stock and pittance, to supply the Prophets present necessity, being
assured that God, even in that Famine, would relieve her, and recompense her
Charity: So that her Faith was the Causa protataretica, the external moving,
and primitively provoking Cause, that which both moved Elijah to entercede, and
inclined God to be more favorable to his Petition; even because she through
her Faith working by love, was subjectum capax, a proper subject to receive
such a mercy. And this also is seconded and confirmed by the Shunamites Son
twice received; Once when life was given him, 2 Kings 4.17. And then again when
restored to her, in the 36.37. Versos, after Death; her Charitable Devotion,
issuing from Faith, obtained this double Concession: This the Psalmist
declares, Psalm. 116.8. For thou have delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes
from tears, and my Feet from falling. And Saint Paul experimented, 2 Cor.
1.9.10. But we bad the sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves, but in God which rayseth the Dead. Who delivered us from
so great a Death, and does deliver: In whom we trust that he will yet deliver
us.

But good Works have usually the fate to be mis-interpreted, good men to be
flandered, and a good cause to be persecuted, and hated. Because I follow that
which good is (says David) therefore evil men pursue me with deadly hatred.
And the Apostle fully satisfies us herein, in that positive definition, or
Aphorism, They that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution;
that is, from absurd, and unreasonable men. The world hated Christ, and hated
all his; it persecuted them, and still persecutes them: In the World ye shall
have tribulation, was our Saviors prediction to his Disciples; not as they are
single Persons, but as Disciples: And hereupon it follows, That eminent
Professors, are eminent Sufferers, famous as well for their Passive, as Active
Obedience; and Recorded as well as made glorious by their patience and
perseverance in their most shameful and painful executions.

Q. But who were these [others?] Were they distinct Persons from the former
mentioned Worthics, or the same?

A. Indeed many conceive those [others] to relate to the several Prophets
succeeding Samuel, who was before nominated; and particularly instance in
Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.25.26.27. who was smitten by the false Prophet Zedekiah,
and after imprisoned by Ahabs order unto Amen the Governor of the City. And in
Jeremiah, who for the same imaginary Malignancy, suffered the like punishment
for the latter part of it, Ier. 38.6. And in Zachariah, 2 Chronicles. 24.2^. And in
Isaiah, whom the Jows report to have been sawne asunder, or in pieces, by
express order from Manasses; And those who are said here to have wardred, etc.
are upon this way supposed to be David, who is said to be hunted by Saul as a
Partridge in the Mountains, 1 Samuel 26.20. And Elijah, who upon Jezebels
threatening, fled to Beer-sheba, 1 Kings 19.3. And of those Prophets which
Obediah concealed, 1 Kings 18.3.

Yet with some other Interpreters, I rather believe, That the Apostle was more
methodicall in his Induction, then thus to go back and forth, off and on; And
these Reasons seems thus to persuade me.

1. The Apostle had formerly spoken of David, Samuel, and the Prophets; and
after the mention of them, this Relative Particle [others] follows; so that
this [others] seems necessarily to be others from them premised. 2. The Apostle
aiming in this induction to bring down the series of the faithful till the
present Age, must necessarily in this his induction, and deductions thence,
still descend from the first times pitched on, then the succeeding, till the
present be taken in; which course is both agreeable to an induction as such,
and to this scope and conclusion from it. Thus it is apparent, he begins at
Abel, and so passes to Enoch, his Successor in the Faith; So to Noah, Abraham,
the Patriarchs, the Judges, the Kings, and Prophets; and so downwards still to
the following Generations, which was the time of the Maccabees, they succeeding
the Prophets and Kings; and so I think that these miseries set down here,
relate unto these Persecution, which the Jews after their return endured
under. Autiochus Epiphanes, one of the Successors of Alexander the Great in
Syria, about two hundred years before the coming of the Messiah in the Flesh.
The Records of whose mischievous designs and horrid cruelties, are reserved in
the Books of the Maccabees; which because they have fallen under suspicion,
censures: and severities, I shall by the way (and the digression may perhaps be
useful) add something in rescrence to those Writings. And first I shall
suppose, and grant, That they are not any part of the Writings of Moses, and
Prophets, commended to us in the New Testament as the Oracles of God, and
Dictates of his Spirit. And secondly, That the Jews had not any such esteem of
them, and therefore never received them into their Canon of Holy Writ. But then
in the next place, it is most certain, That they have been, and still are
generally reputed, and taken for an History which may be very useful in the
Church of God, though not for the confirmation of any Article of Faith, or
deciscion of any controversy in Point of Religion; yet for the edification of
the Church, to bring down the Church Story after the Writings of the Prophets,
till Christ and his Apostles lived: And therefore the Church of God has judged
them worthy to be incerted in our Bibles, and annexed to the Books of the
Prophets, as a confirmation, and continuation of the Historical part of the
Old Testament, to acquaint us with the State of the Affairs of the Church
then, and as Christ's coming: And yet to prevent mistakes, have noted them with
the mark of Apocrypha, and by that Character has excluded out of the number
of Canonical Books. But 3. These times seem rather to be intended by the
Apostle, because even to that very time of his Writing, these Hebrews had a
continued fresh remembrance of the cruel miseries the Jews suffered under that
Antiochus.
Lastly. There is a very great and perfect resemblance in the punishments
inflicted by that Tyrant, with those here specified, which will the better
appear by taking a clear and distinct Cognizance, and survey of them; first
in General; then in Particular.

1. The Persecution was for Religion, as was pretended; it was Death for the
Jews to observe the Law of God; it was Death not to consorme to this Tyrants
Idol-service, 1 Maccab. 1. and all these Persecutions are usually hot and
violent, because men think they do God good service, when they manage with
sury the Devils cause; and then the highest and severest Punishments which
malice can invent or fancy, are but the innocent executions of justice; and
such were these Punishments of all sorts which have been discovered; for here
is mention of torments, contumelies, imprisonments, exiles, death it self, and
several sorts of dishonorable cruel deaths. For, 2. Here we find that some
were tortured, [(...),] that is beaten with Clubbs, or bastinadoed till they
died; a^ we Read of the good old man, Eleazar, for the indeed good old cause.
Gods Religion and Laws, 2 Maceabes 6.28.29.30. the punishment was to bind the
miscrable Patients to a great Logg of Wood or Timber, made (as I suppose) most
like a Ships windlesse, and for such an use, and there distand and rack them;
and when they were thus distended to a certain, and to the height, every part
was sesible of the Rack and Strappadoe; then they were beaten with Cudgells
till they dyed. Yet being thus tortured, it is further reported of them, [that
they accepted not deliverance.] That they, etc. They slighted those overtures
and conditions of dismission and liberty which were tendered them, depending on
Gods Promises for eternal life, not daring to hazard Eternity for a miserable
temporal subsistence, and being very willing to lose their life to save it.
[Others] had tryasts of erne^ meckings and seourginge; nothing was overseen or
omitted to render them odious and miserable; some will take a mock who will
not endure a stroke; others a stroke, who yet will not abide a mock; these
tormentors therefore to make sure work, tries them both ways, if the one
sail to provoke and distress them, the other will prove, and they are called,
cruel mockings, because nothing more piereing or pressing to a free and
generous spirit; for they are usually an affliction upon an affliction; it is
to overloade the oppressed, and to kill the wounded. Hence Ishmael^ mocking of
Isaas, ( Gone. 11.9.) is expressed Persecution, Galat. 4.29. David esteemed a
reproach, an oppression, a killing oppression, as with a Sword in his boxes,
Psalm. 42.9.10. And his great complaint ( Psalm. 44.13.14. and Psalm. 79.4.) was,
That he was a reproach, a scorn, and derision, to be a byword, and shaking of
the Head among the People. And the uttering and speaking hard things, is
^^iled, breaking his people in pieces, Psalm. 94.4.5. But if there be not
cruelty enough in mockings, there is smart and sname too, ignoming, sufficient
in scourgings; a punishment proper only to the baser and more contemptible
sort of Offenders. [Others] again, had trial of Bends and Imprisonment; that
is, cruel Imprisonments; not barely confinements or restraints; not only
close Imprisonment, but like Joseph's, their fect were hure with fetters, they
were laid in Iron, Psalm. 105.18. [They were stoned, they were sawne asunder.]
You shall find the barbarons execution of these, 2 Maceabes 7. throughout.
[They were tempted.] This finds some variation; for tempting sometimes imports
the most cutting piercing griefs and anguishes, such as not only carry with
them great pain, but a quick and subtle apprehension also of that pain and
sorrow; therefore great sorrows, or rather, the sharp sense and feeling of
them, is abstractedly called temptations, Heb. 2.13. He suffered being tempted,
that is, he sadly and passionately resented. So Heb. 4.15. He was tempted, that
it, as is evident from the precedent term of opposition noted by (...), he was
touched, touched to the quick, deeply with the feeling of our infirmities; and
then, according to this notation of the Word, the sense is, They had such a
sharps sense of their sad condition, that as Christ, so their souls were
sorrowful, exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death. Sometimes it signifies,
gaining and winning flatteries and seducements with fair words, and large
promises. Thus the Derill tempts; and so he tempted Christ, by giving him in
overture the Public Faith of his Kingdom, Matthow 4.9. and then thus they
were tempted; this Tyrant Antiochus, besides his menaces, torments, and arts of
violence, endeavored by flattering persuasions and proposalls, to seduce them
to a desertion of, and defection from their Laws and Religion; a method which
proves very successful, and never misseth, when directed to worldly, mean,
and vulgar tempers: Tell them but of great Estates and Revenues for their
revolt, etc. then per saxa, per ignes; every obstacle shall be removed; and
then too as Lalius in the Poet, they are fit for any enterprise; Pectore si
fratris, etc. Luc. Phars. lib. 1. And this way was attempted by Antiochus his
Executioners with that good old Jew, and their old acquaintance, Eleazar, a
Maccabes 6.22.23. and this sraud Antiochus himself practiced upon the seventh
Brother, 2 Maccabes 7.24. promising him both honor and profit, both tempting
baits; and this acception of the Word, I take to be most proper. Yet by the
way, let me give you notice of two conjectures of this word by two eminent
Modernes, Calvin, and Iunius; the former, he supposes this Word to be
superfluous added to the former from their similitudes, and sound, by some
unskilful Reader, who mistook the Word, (as such mistakes are ordinary) (...),
for (...); and so in process of time, both crept into the Text; and he tells
us, Erasmus also did thus conceive: For the latter, whom Piscator also
approves, he thinks the Word should be (...), for (...), they were burned, a
peculiar and distinct kind of Death from the former mentioned; And this seems
more probable then the former. But I shall add nothing but this, that
Bernardus non vidit omnia; and that either this latter Critical mutation of
the Word by Iunius; or the latter Nozation of the Word in the sense delivered,
seems to be the clearest Interpretation thereof.
But now, if neither mockeries, nor miseries; torments, nor temptations;
frowns nor favors will prevail to seduce, or affright them from their duty.
Then

[They were slain with the Sword;] Decollation, or beheading was then in use;
and it was crime enough to be either good, or great; that was the punishment of
them that remained. Yet others took another course: For,

[They wandered about in Sheep skins, and Goat skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented,] or punished for vagrants, because destitute, outlawed,
having no Law, or Ruler to protect them. They then that escaped the severity of
the Sword, were Exiled, and forced to fly, as excepted Persons; some of them
perhaps in an holy jealousy of themselves, suspecting their strength was not
sufficient, either to hold out against the Tyrants rage, or to resist their
Friends and Countries temptations, and so fearing lest their infirmities might
betray them to an unworthy compliance. Others in true Christian policy,
endeavoring to preserve themselves from this storm, and to reserve themselves
till God shall be pleased to cause a great calm; in the mean time to be
Fugitives, and endure all the inconveniences thereto subsequent; And this was
the condition of those Maccabees, or Chaschmauneans, who either hid themselves
(as in the 38. verse) in holes; or else took themselves to the wide (but
merciless hard) World; as you may find 1 Maecabees 1.53. for their words
imports, they fled to any place of succor, as Beasts of the Game hotly
pursued. Certainly, it is not only lawful to fly in time of Persecution; but
if the flying be Christian, upon such prementioned motives, it will pass for a
lower kind of Martyrdom; Otherwise Christ would never have permitted it, much
less preseribed it to his Disciples. Both Ancient and Modern Authors have
fully writ of this: Among the Ancient, Tertullian, and Cypryan: Of the Modern,
Abbot has Writ a particular Tract.

By the way, let us before we proceed, pause and breath, and from the whole,
let us see and observe the qualities and conditions of wicked men; The state
and condition of holy Persons. The wicked persecute the godly with deadly
hatred, and 'its often their lot to fall into the snares, and to be under their
Rod: Therefore the unworthy world hates, and that causelessely too, them of
whom the world was not worthy; the Heirs of Heaven, Pilgrims on Earth, that is
their best condition, often it is worse with them: they are fugitives, designed
Associates for Saints, and Angels, and Christ, are present companions with
Owls and Foxes, in Deserts and Cavarns; those for whom Christ dyed, are in
this life destitute, etc. who have an Estate of Glory; have no Portion, nor
mansion in the Earth; the Children of Light fly here to dismal and dark
recesses; and they who have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and are clothed with
the Garments of Salvation, are necessitated now to be covered with the
un-dressed Skius of Beasts; And yet here let us not take a superficial survey
of this their condition, and pass a sudden censure of them, and it; but
rather let us remember and consider what the Spirit says and determines
concerning them, and that is high and Honorable, [Of whom the World was not
worthy,] they are too good to be well thought on, or well used, by a had World,
though worthy for an unworthy World; worthy the testimonial and approbation of
the all-glorious, and graclous God; the Worlds fugitives, are his favorites;
its loathing, Gods love; its scorn, Gods delight; whom it brands, God
observes; whom it condemns, he honors, and therefore here bestows a note of
honor worthy of our strict observation; the World was not worthy of them: The
World says, Away with such fellows from the Earth, it is not sit they should
live, Acts 22.22. And that is the consure of the World, 1 Cor. 4.9. For I
think that God has set forth us the Apostles lest, as it were appointed unto
Death. For we are made a spectacle unto the World, and to Angele, and to Men.
But God otherwise orders the case; if they suffer, in all their afflictions, he
is afflicted; if they Fly, he is present with them: Solus non est, cui Christus
in fuga Comes: Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 6. if they be hence removed, it is to
prefer them to Heaven; or rather they were unworthy their company, and the
advantages might be received thereby, and therefore taken away from them. As
those, who received not the Disciples, they were to depart from them as
unworthy persons, lest they should participate of any comfort or benefit from
them, Marth. 10.13.14. And as Paul and Barnabas turned to the Gentiles, because
the Jews demeaned themselves unworthily, Acts 13.46. they were not worthy of
Paul and Barnabas, in the judgment of the Holy Spirit.

The result of what has been thus largely deduced and explained, is to
discover unto us the signal conquests of Faith: A Believer is always
Victorious, whether he Conquer by Prowess, or by Patience. If Faith teach not
his Hand to fight, yet it will teach his Body to suffer; it either acts
wonderfully, or endures nobly: And there is as much gallantry, nay truly more,
because greater magnanimity in cheerful undergoing of hardness, then
involuntary undertaking: For undertakers (and very forward ones too) many times
faint and flag, and give over; whereas a sufferer shows his resolution, and
clears all suspicion of falsehood, or inconstancy to his undertaking. Indeed, a
true Believer is the same in every contingency and state of affair, and is
equally resolved and disposed, both for prosperity and adversity; and when most
afflicted, his Faith is most glorious, for then it appears in those eminent
Graces of humility, meekness, resignation, etc. which otherwise perhaps had
been obscured. And so it is of very faithfulness, that God suffers the
faithful to suffer, even that the trial of their Faith might be much more
precious then Gold, though tried with fire, 1 Peter 1.7. The Devil, and the
World opposes to them the Passengers Argument to Christ on the Cross, If thou
be the Son of God, come down from the Cross, etc. (Mat. 27.40.) And is it not
a notable reply to answer with Christ in Prayer by Faith: Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: yet not my will, but thine be done? It
was a weakness in Gideon to argue thus with the Angel; If the Lord be with us,
why then it all this befallen (...)? Judges 6.13. A strange reasoning to a
considering man, to conclude, God does net love, because the World hates; this
certainly is an infirmity in Faith; and David acknowledges so much, though
withal, he acknowledges himself to have been overtaken with it, and so
continued, until he neut into the House of God, and diligently enquired after
the ways of Gods Providence; and there he found (though the depth of his
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out) what was obvious
and legible, That no success, or prosperity of the wicked, has power enough
to make them happy, or entitle them to Gods favor; no adversity or cross
emergent can make (without any sullen Stoicisme) a godly man miscrable; Psalm.
73. Because (and his Reasons are strong) the wicked man in his best estate has
no hold, hat what will fail him, when be most needs, and need he must; but the
Godly has a strong hold, which as long as he is godly will be a Sanctuary and
Protection to him, his dependence and hope in God, who never fails them who
trust in him. Saint Paul gives us an experiment of this truth, That God loves,
when he chasteneth; for we are (says he, 2 Cor. 4.8.9.) perplexed, (that may
very well be, and frequently it is so, because of impendent, or incumbent
sadnesses and disasters,) but not in despair; for we live by Faith, and our
hope is an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast: Persecuted we may be, we
must be; ( Ye shall have tribulation, says Christ, John 16.33. Shall suffer
Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12.) forsaken ye cannot be; For what can separate us from
the love of God in Christ? Romans 8.39. Cast down (humbled 2 little) but not
destroyed; not cast off, or rejected; and this condition is so far from being
miserable, that it is honorable and comfortable: The former is expressed in
the 10.11.14. Verses. The latter in the 16.17.18. Verses. Nay, an Ancient goes
yet higher; Quanto quis severius patitur, tazto melius coronabitur: the greater
their crosses, the more glorious shall be their crowns; the more their
crosses, the more their crowns. And agreeably to this, the Schoolmen have
assigned and assured to the Martyrs, the largest share and measure in the
accidentalls of Eternal bliss, what is over and above the essentialls
belonging to them, Aquinas Suppl. per 3. qu. 96. art. 12. How true this
supposition is, that there are such accidentalls of beatitude, and that they
are belonging to Martyrs, I define not: yet I believe this to be among the Pie
Credenda. But this I am sure of is an infallible Divine Truth, That whether God
chastise his Children with Rods, (as he does every Son,) or cherish them with
external additions, whether they be in adversity, or prosperity, he is equally
a Father to them in both estates, and equally a Father of mercies ( Hebr. 12.5.
etc.) to them: And as in all, so chiefly in these dispensations, he has ends
and purposes of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness; and God is pleased by these
unpleasant Providence, to manifest his own glorious Attributes, and his
servant eminent Graces: So they prove excellent Methods to set forth Gods
glory, and set forward man's salvation; for hereby God makes known his infinite
Power and Wisdom, by bringing light out of darkness, good out of evil,
extracting Cordialls and Restoratives out of Poison, curing desperate
distempers by corrections; his infinite goodness, suffering the Bush to burn,
but not to wast and consume; the Body to smart, but the Soul to joy; the Body
to be weak, but the Spirit strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might
sustaining their infirmities, and supporting in their greatest sadnesses, even
to a Miracle; Vt intelligeritis, neminem esse, qui ant sine ratione velit
poename subire, aeut tormenta sieve Deo possit sustinere, says Minutius Faelix,
Oct. None would suffer those torments Christians did, unless they had good
grounds for it; neither indeed could any suffer them, unless he had a good
God, an Almighty Father to hold him up, and succor him: And yet, as the same
Ancient; Quod corporis vitia sentimus, and patimur, non est poenae militia est:
Their sufferings are not truly punishments, they are exercises and conquests
over the World, the malice of men, and corruptions and rebellions of lust and
nature. But besides this, The patient submission, and resignation of Gods
servants under the Cross, discovering Graces, which otherwise would be
concealed and unknown. Had not Job contested with, and baffled the Devils
policy and pretenses by his dependence on God, in the greatest miseries the
Devil could invent, or inflict, his Faith and fincerity, had been either under
suspicion, or under a Cloud; his constancy and adhaerence to God in those great
conflicts and trials, both cleared and experimented his innocence; for in such
exigents, the case is cleared, That God is believed, loved, and obeyed in and
for himself, without any mereinary servile respects, Christ is followed for
his Doctrine, not his Loaves: The innocent sufferer, that endures for Gods sake
all the evils of the World, cannot be suspected to drive a secular design; it
is evident, he seeks for Heaven, and the enduring substance in that continuing
City; Times of suffering, times of trial, then we are Christ's probationers,
whether we be fit to be admitted into the society and number of his Disciples;
then Christ's Soldiers; and whether we be fit to be listed into the Roll, and
taken into their company, will certainly appear; Then the King of Heaven may
behold his faithful ones hazarding their lives and fortunes in his fervice,
and for his honor; and his pretenders, sitting down, deserting, or complying
with his Enemies; then he diffenceth his people, from Rebels, and newtralls.
Iugeniun^ singulorum periculis pensitat, as the same Ancient; He finds their
love and fidelity, or their falsehood and hypocrisy; then he understands them,
whether obedient to Authority, or refractory; whether a willing people, or
pressed Hirelings: and thus they grow famous for their fidelity; their
sufferings, their trials, and all at last shall be rewarded. Yet here, for the
most part, the Crosses exceed the Crowns, the proofs the rewards: Witness
the Jewish Church of God, long oppressed in Egypt; and though after its
removal, it was through many difficult passages, and by sharp encounters at
last, seated in Canaan; yet even after this seeming settlement, it had its
Vicissitudes, the changes and mutations of Affairs, and then again carried
into Captivity: and yet, after its Redemption, it was in a various state, till
the Christian Church was formed by Christ, and his Apostles: And even this,
upon the first Model, was hotly assaulted with Persecution: This Church no
sooner gained breath from under one, but she sobbed and sighed under another;
Nero, Domitiau, etc. glutting, and surfeiting with Christian Blood, and making
triumphs in their Murders, Paeul. Oros. lib. 7. Indeed, she had rest and peace
for a good space after Dioclesian, under Christian Emperors: But then Heretics
sprung up, and infected her, and she lay distressed under the jurisdiction of
Arrian Officers, and the invasion of Hunns, etc. See Salvian de gubernatione
Dei, not as if God had in any of those exigents neglected his little Flock;
but as Minutius well observes, Nobis Them neo non potest subvenire, nec
despicit, cum sit and emnium rector, and amator snorum: but because he will
show his Authority in Governing the World, and his love in searching his
Church: Or as the excellent Morney expresses it, Mala bonis, bona; Malis bona,
mala: Good things, or those rather which we commonly call so, are evil to
evil men, because they abuse them; their strength by intemperance, their power
by oppression, their Estates by luxury, and they have their reward, their
Portion. Evils of the World, or those which are so reputed, are good things to
good Men, because every thing to them works for the best, God has designed
them for Cures unto them, and has assigned a reward of those, eternal life to
those are cured and corrected by them. It would be endless to Gleane up what
the Laborers in Gods Harvest have left to our Hands, both Ancient and Modern,
especially the Ancients in their Apologies. I shall only take some remains
from one of them, as I find them gathered, and give you a taste of them; They
are six Conclusions which Saint Augustine has laid down from his own, and his
Predecessors Observations of the Divine Providence, in his promisenons
dispensation of outward things. You may find them, in 1. lib. de Civitate Des,
cap. 8.9. Whereof the first is, 1. Patientia Dei ad peniteutiam invita^ males:
The Patience and forbearance of God toward finners, is to move them to
Repentance; and sometimes, says he, it proves so, though if this method take
not, they then heaepe up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, Who will render to every man according so his
deeds, Romans 2.5. etc. And on the other side, Flagellium Domini, ad patientiam
credit bones: His Rods to the godly, are corrections and instructions; God
disciplines and tutors them to patience, meekness, resignednesse, etc. making
even to kiss the Rod: Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted: that I might learn thy Statutes. And Psalm 94.12. Blessed is the
man whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teach him out of thy Law. 2. Placuit
Divinae Providentiae, etc. God has provided future good things for the godly,
Luke 12.32. which the wicked shall not be capable of: And he has prepared
future evils for the wicked, which shall not touch the godly, Luke 16.25. etc.
3. 1st a vero temporalia, etc. God disposes of his temporalls in common, and
promiscuously, Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike to all: there is one event to
the righteous, and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and to the
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the
good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath. ver.
11. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men
of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens
to them all. Mat. 5.45. For he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. So that by them we
cannot understand whom God does favor, or hate: Yet by them this we ought to
learn; Vt nec bona cupidius appetantur; That those goods, or rather shadows
of good, should not be too sollicitously, or passionately coveted or affected,
whereof the most wicked are joynt-Tenants, and many times Principal
Possessors; Et nec mala turpiter evitentur; neither should evils, or rather
shows of evils, be basely and meanly declined, which God has often shared
out for the lot of the Righteous. 4. Ostendit tamen Deus saepe, etc. God in
these distributions, gives the World notice of his glorious Attributes; For, Si
omne peccatum, etc. If he should punish every sin with a notorions, palpable,
public judgment, that one might see the crime by the judgment, Nihil
ultimo, etc. men would never think of a future Account, nor of a Day of
Judgment; but would verily think, as some have thought, the Resurrection past
already, so that day of judgment. And if the reward of Righteousness lay
here, we should not fancy another state. And then the Apostle concludes, We
were miserable, 1 Cor. 15. But again on the other side, Si nullum peccatum,
etc. If sometimes the Punishment were not as open as the Fault, men might
dispute and cavil with Gods Providence. 5. Si Deus secundas res, etc. If God
give not to some of his Suitors a full and liberal share of Earthly things,
men would doubt whether he were the Donor and Benefactor of them, and suppose
them the gettings of their wit and policy, their labor and industry, and
sacrifice to their own nets: Et si omnibus eat petentibus; and if he should
gratify every Petitioner in the same kind, then men would conclude; Religion
were only a politic Engine to gain by, as the Devil argued against Job.
Does Job serve God for naught? so carnal minds would reason; They had reason
to serve God, who is so ready at every turn to serve them; Nec non pios, etc.
sed cupides, and avaros facere; This indeed were to make men not godly, but
Mammonists; not holy, but worldly. 6. Manet dissimilitudo passorum, etiane in
similitudine passionum; The several demeanors of the sufferers, makes a clear
difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. So the wicked fret,
murmr, ( Psalm. 59.15.) and repine; and sometimes fall into open blasphemy;
sometimes into secret hatred of God; instances enough of this kind: The
Righteous humbles himself, betaketh himself to Prayer and Praises; and
considers, that he is punished far less then he deserved; examines himself,
how the case stands betwixt God and his soul, and he looks unto the Hand
that smites him, and takes his Cross kindly, either as a correction, because
he has sinned; or as a caveat, not to sin; or as a trial of his Faith: And
so, Super totam materiam, that Father resolves; that though good and evil be
common both to the good and evil; yet both are not alike affected with them in
themselves, nor respected by God in them. A Righteous Person is neither passed
up with prosperity, nor abased with adversity. An evil man, is insolent, and
cruel; in an high condition, is mad; or desperate in a low Estate. The evils
which the good suffers, always betters, and reformes him: An evil man,
Felicitate corrumpitur; is first corrupted, then poisoned with good things,
Prove. 1.32. impunity is the saddest punishment; and Gods wrath is at the
height, when he will not afflict again, when he will strike no more, Isay 1.
J. Marima est ira, cum Deus non irascitur, says Saint Hierom; For then God
leaves him to himself, uses no further methods to reclaim him, and then, he
and his sin thrives, till judgment be executed against them. Indeed this
Father shows in the sour next following Chapters, particular instances of
Gods Wisdom, Justice, Power, and Goodness, in permitting the Righteous to be
troubled, and the great advantages they may receive thereby. But I shall only
propose to your consideration Jobs case, and offer to your observation the
series, and contrivances of Providence in Joseph, Reseue, Sale, Advancement,
his after Imprisonment, and again his high Preferment, and how in every or all
of these, you may see Gods Justice in afflicting his Wisdom in ordering those
alternative sorrows and joys, his mercy in moderating his Brethrens rage, and
his griefs; his power removing, and his goodness in rewarding, and even by
this uncouth way, providing for the necessities, and releife of his Father, and
Brethren who sold him. But now to draw to a conclusion of this so long insisted
on Observation; The Apostle seems here to persuade these Hebrews to run with
patience the race set before them, and to take joyfully whatseever shall befall
them in their way to Heaven, by an Argument taken from their forefathers
demeanor and behavior in the like case, and Gods gracious dealing with them;
which may be resolved into this, or such like Dilemma; In this your present
juncture of Affairs, and Persecution, either your Deliverance is expedient for
Gods glory, and your good, or not. If the former be supposed, and so resolved;
or in the affirmative; then certainly, as God in his time, prefixed by his
infinite wisdom, did deliver: and save your Ancestors; so (if the time be
come) will he deal with you, even deliver you, though a miracle be required
for the effectuating this mercy: For though God uses a liberty in the
circumstances of your deliverance, as to the time, quality, and manner thereof;
yet he keeps close and sure to the substance of that Rule he has prescribed to
himself; he will never fail nor forsake them that trust in him; the patient
expectation of the Righteous, shall find what they wait and attend for: He
that believes shall not be confounded; He that hops shall not be ashamed;
that is, bafled in his expectation: If the negative part of the dilemma be
conceited, then from the same Presidents, you have these encouragements and
arguments: There is nothing happened you, but what has befalne your holy
Fathers, Gods dearest Children; He loved them, when he chastised them; he now
chastises, and yet loves you: though the good hand of God did not deliver
them; yet the good Spirit of God sustained them, so will it you. 1 Cor. 10.13.
There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: But God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but
will with the temptation, also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it. They weited on Gods leisure, so should you, Faith will teach you to
do so. In all changes, the most changeable, unsettled times, he settled and
composed their spirits, though not their states: In all sorrows, his comforts
refreshed them: In all necessities, his presence supported them: In all
difficulties, his grace was sufficient for them; and what he was to them, he
will be the same to you, (for he changes nor) if you be to him what they were,
faithful. And now me thinks, the Argument runs not only a pari, but a
fortiori; not only in this respect, that this Father of mercies has a more
tender and indulgent respect for you, then them, having provided better things
for you, then for them, as it is in the last Verse of this Chapter; but also
upon another account, you have stronger motives to a faithful attendance on
God, then they; for they had only Promises, and Prophesies to live upon, to
nourish and cherish their Faith; you have not only what they had, even their
Promises, and Prophesies; for they were Written for your Instruction, 1 Cor.
10.11. and they belonged to you as well as to them, Acts 2.39. but you have new
Promises, and new Prophesies of better things; and which is more, you have the
examples and practices of all Beleovers, from the beginning of the World, till
this present day; and so besides Promises and Prophesies, you have experiments
to strengthen your Faith; and how powerful examples and experiments are to
provoke imitation, especially when the experiments are of the best sort, and
the examples drawn from them, whose memory we most honor, as of our Ancestors,
a short digression will easily demonstrate. Certainly examples are Rhetorical
Sillogismes, have a strong persuasive Power both with men of great judgment,
and weaker parts, for they insinuate (especially if they jumpe with men's
inelinations) more easily, and purchase more kindly men's affections, then down
right reason, argument, or demonstration, and are hereby a Topicke more apt to
gain imitation, then precepts backed with the most cogent reason, to procure
obedience. For the obligingness of a bare Precept, is either from the
authority of the commander, (and men are naturally rebels, uitimur in vetitum)
or the reasonableness of the duty; and 'its the hardest thing to effect
(considering how men are inclined to be drawn by sensual objects, and led by
customs) that reasonable men should be in their duty rational; or from the
assurance of reward; and how dull men are to apprehend and believe future good
things, and to live by hope; every one saying, Let me have it in my hand, and
so make sure work, is frequently experimented; and so this very consideration
is an abatement to the power of Precept. But Examples makes all these respects
and obligations good; for if the command run thus, Do this, not because it is
commanded; but because this is the practice of the wisest, and the best, or the
most honorable, they have done so before you, and been very successful in
their doings; what is thus exemplified and experimented, is readily and
faithfully observed, and most confidently (which is the quickening, and
forwarding of action) expected. Examples and experiments of this kind are many
and frequent; and indeed, 'its the chief end of all Historical Relations, and
the Writing of the Lives of the Jewish, Christian, and Gentile Worthies. For,
Mollissime suadetur exemplis; though Examples be not argumentative cogent
proofs to profound judgments, and strict disputants; yet to most men they are
most effectual, because more fit to persuade. And therefore Aristotle lib. 8.
Top. cap. 2. thus resolves, (...), an Argument, is more pressing proose; an
Example more obliging: an Argument draws the understanding; an Example leads
(and facilius dueimur quam trahimur) the affections; that indeed more
powerful, yet this more prevalent. Themistocles saw Miltiades Trophces, and
this occular demonstration did prevail with him for imitation above any either
precept or reason, but this one, to follow so brave a President; Achilles his
same, set Alexander on action; and Alexanders, Julius Casars; and Casars honor
has made many thousand adventurers since: And to come somewhat nearer and close
to our holy Profession; Has not Christ upon this score set himself for an
Example? Has not the Apostles proposed themselves subordinate Patterns under
him? and required us to look to the former times, and take the Prophets,
Patriarchs, etc. for Presidents to us, and our actions? And has not this very
Apostle brought in and summed up a Cloud of Witnesses to confirm an infallible
truth, and to provoke imitation? Nay, Does not the Christian Rule strictly
require exemplary Piety in all Believers? that they be not only burning,
(having Zeal in themselves) but shining lights, by their practice communicating
and diffusing it to others, give visible proofs of that hope is in them: For
thus runs the rule, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. And so, 1
Peter 2.11.12. Dearly beleved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you,
as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorisie
God in the day of visitation. And here we may see and admire the infinite love
and goodness of God toward man, that he, for a supply and succor to our
frailties and prejudices, seconds all his Precepts, with Promises, and impowers
these by Examples and Experiments; that whereas, as our God and Lord, he might
use only his Word of command, and strictly, and upon the severest penalty,
exact conformity; yet he is pleased to consider, that we are but Flesh, and
therefore not to make use of his absolute and Sovereign Power over us; but as
an Indulgent, to win and gain us over to himself by such Arts and Methods, as
have the greatest influence with weak infirm men; great Promises, and good
Examples; Promises, to encourage; Examples, to lead, even to lead, if we will
not drive: If Power prevail not, goodness may. Nay, God in this Instance,
has not only so far condescended to our infirmities, as to prove the
reasonableness of his dictates to us, to convince our understandings; but he
has, ex abundanti, afforded Promises, to whet and excite our wills, and
Patterns to guide and conduct our affections. And here also we may see and
admire the rare composition of the Book of God: the holy Scriptures, which not
only declares unto us the Will of God; but furnishes us with Arguments ad
hominem, strong perswasives to confirm thereto; it abounds with perswasives of
all sorts: So that we may justly take up Tertullians Devout Contemplation, and
expression, Adoro plenitudinem Scripturarum: So we, we adore the fullness of
the Scriptures: Its full of clear Prophesies, holy Praecepts, gracious
Promises, glorious Examples; Its full of Prophesies, and they are full of
truth; these forewarne us, to fly from evil to come: Full of Praecepts, and
these full of Piety, to exhort us to be fruitful in good works: Full of
Promises, and these full of mercy, and sweetness, to incline and move us, to
believe his Prophesies, and obey his Precepts. Full of rare Presidents, and
these full of Evidence, to ascertain his Promises; Prophesies to prepare,
Praecepts to command, Promises to encourage, and Examples to lead us the way
to the way, the truth, and the life. Prophesies shows us fully the infinite
wisdom of our Lawgiver, and that it is our wisdom to believe them, and none
else. Praecepts declare his infinite Power and Sovereignty, and that it is our
duty to observe them. Promises proposes his infinite goodness, in rewarding
us for our duty; and it is our Piety to hope for, and depend on them; our
comfort that we have them, and so good a God who will reward us far above our
deserts. Examples to evidence his infinite truth in performing his Word of
Prophecy and Promise to them who performed their duty in obedience to his
Praecepts; and it is our glory and happiness to partake of the benefit of
these experiments, by following exactly those good Examples.


Yet no Examples work so strongly, and leave such deep and lasting impressions,
as the Examples of those, whom nature teaches us to love and honor, to
imitate and depend on our famous Progenitors, from whom we have our extraction
and discext; and so, as we esteem it an honor to be of a Noble Family, either
civilly, or religionfly, or both, (as the Jews and these Hebrews took
themselves to be, and so their glory was, We have Abraham to our Father: and
their Rule was, Quod accidit Patribus siguum est Filiis:) so generally,
posterity strive to resemble their Parents in their qualifications, and are
ashamed to degenerate, as if they had no affinity with them: And hence it is
that we take all disparagements of our ascendants so unkindly, and every
reproach of degeneration, for the highest affront and indignity; because we are
so nearly concerned by a principle of self love in their honor and
reputation. Thus the Heathens; as for example, Priamus concludes from an
unworthy Villainy commiated by Pyrrhus, that he was none of Achilles his
Progeny, At non ille satum, qu^ it mentiris Achille, etc. And Aeneas resolves,
Dido was Nobly Borne from her honorable respects, Tanti talem genuere
Parents. And the persuasive to Ascanius for high attempts, was fetched from his
Alliance, Te Pater Aeneas and avnuculus excitet Hector. As for the Jews, any
who is acquainted with the History of the Old Testament, will find them to be
great honourers of their Families and Tribes; and so the Maccabees and these
Hebrews. And therefore the Apostle uses here this holy fraud, to catch them
with those Arguments, which would take and please, (Et prodesse volunt, and
delectare) and profit them. And here also I crave pardon to interpose a
conjecture, which is, That Job, that (Magnus Victoriaerum Dei artifex,) great
Pattern of Piety, though honorably remembered and enrolled by God himself in
the Book of Life, ( Ezekiel. 14.) as one of the three eminently righteous Persons,
is yet omitted in this Catalogue, for this reason; Because he was none of the
Jewish Race, or Hebrew Line, and so his Example would not have been so
pertinent, and effectual. And to come yet somewhat more home; as these Hebrews
had the practice and experience of the former Ages, to establish their Faith;
so have we, and more too; and therefore greater reason have we not to be moved
at the sufferings of Christians, nor to be ashamed of Christ Crucified, and to
perform our whole Baptismall Covenant, in as much as we have the advantage of
what examples they had: and besides, the Patterns of the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, famous in their Generations: We have the Acts, or rather
(upon perusal of that Book) the sufferings of the Apostles; and we have
Tradition all along, handing out to us the Christian Acts and sufferings of
Confessors, Martyrs, and several Religious People ever since, for the space of
1600. years, and all attested by Historians of undoubted fidelity, especially
those of the first six Centuries. Hence set days were customarily, and by
Order Appointed for the solemn Celebration of the Acts and sufferings of those
Primitive Saints in the Christian Church, the Apostles, and some Apostolical
(as I said) Persons, not so much for their honor, (certainly not for religious
worship of them by Invocation, Oblations, etc.) but for our Imitation, and to
bless God for such Instruments of his glory, and our good. For that their
sufferings were for this end, Saint Paul is express; The suffering of an
eminent principal member, redounds to the good of the whole body, ( Col.
1.24.) tends to its edification, and confirmation, Phil. 1.12. For although
Christ proposed himself to us for the grand Exemplar, Learn of me, And follow
me; yet we could no otherwise follow Christ, but as the Boy Ascanius followed
his Father, Non-passibus equis, by an uneven motion we cannot follow him
regularly, but we trip, and stumble, and often fall, (for he could not sin) and
it is he must lift us up. And as his Example is too high; so his lesson is too
hard, we cannot transcribe the Copy, but with blurring and crooking in and out;
nay, we shall be so far short, that we shall do nothing like, unless he lead
us by the hand; and even then, our hand may be easily known by its foulness,
as when he takes not by the hand to hold, we fall, the errors of our feet may
be easily marked; and so, though Christ be a more high and sure, being an
infallible Pattern for imitation then any, or all other holy men amassed
together; yet the Examples of these who were subject to the like passions as
we, are more suitable for our conviction, and condition, because we cannot do,
or suffer as Christ did, neither for the manner or measure; For in him all
fullness dwells: And the Spirit was given to him without measure, John 3.34. but
we may do and suffer as holy men did before us; for to them as well as to us,
and to us as well as to them, the Spirit is given by measure; and God accepts
according to what a man bath, and not what he has not. And hereupon this
practice has been observed, to commemorate the holy Saints, in Scripture
especially, (for they are infallibly such) as a duty of that part of the
Communion of Saints, as an help by their Example for our instruction, and
consolation. Thus much by the way, and the digression has been long, and
tedious; yet because as Travelers sometimes go out of the was to fetch in
Provision for their supplies, and comfort; and this course, though it retard
the way, yet makes it pleasant, especially to those who have long Stages: So
because this digression may be both delightful, and profitable, I have
insisted the longer, and brought in some additionall supplies for a further
refreshment. But now to return; The way of God in the dispensation of
temporalls, so far at is discoverable, is various; sometimes he takes one way,
sometimes another, as is evident in the precedent Presidents: Pascimur hic, and
patimur: God sometimes cherishes, and favors his Children; sometimes he
frowns on them, corrects, and chastens them, and that by sharp rebukes;
sometimes he suffers his little Flock to wander, and to walk through the Valley
of the shadow of Death; sometimes again he gathers them he feeds them in a
green Pasture, and leads them forth besides the Waters of comfort. Christianity
is compared to a warsare, and that is not a condition of ease, but of trouble,
hardness, and hazard; and so a Christian must have his Armor, even the whole
Armor of God; and he must endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ. The Church of God is compared to a Ship, which though sometimes she go
smoothly, and calmly; yet, for the most part, she is unquiet, as the Element
she moves upon; and many times she is tossed too and fro with strong gusts and
tempests, and either by the violence of the Wind, and the siercenesse of the
surging Seat, in danger to sink, or to ground on Sands, or split on Rocks, or
spring a leake, and so be swallowed and devoured: and the Disciples of Christ
are the Mariners and Passengers in this Ship; and sometimes in these great
tempests, Christ the Master sleeps, till the Disciples by Prayer awake him,
and then he arises, and rebaketh the Wind, and the Sea, and there is a great
calm. Saint Chrysostom compares the life of a Christian to a Webb so
marvelously woven and made up of trouble and comfort, that though the longer
threads reaching from our Birth to our Death, be all of trouble; yet the weft
interjected is all of comfort. So that from hence it is apparent. That these
their troubles and sufferings are not the effects of Gods vindicative justice,
acts of revenge, and so properly punishments, (as a cross or dangerous passage
by Sea, is not an Exile to a Mariner, (though it be to a Malefactor that flies
that way,) but it is in his Calling and Trade, a Traffic and Task,) but
effects of love, acts of Discipline; For, Poena in suo formali denotat quid
intrinseco malum: Every Punishment is truly from a Sentence of condemnation;
And there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. And we
are judged by the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor.
11.32. His judgments on the World, are indeed the Sentence of a Judge
condemnatory. His judgment to the Righteous, castigatory; they are chastened,
as by a Father; or cured, as by a Medicine from a Physician. Job 36.9.10. Then
he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded.
He opens also their care to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. Augustine cap. 124. in Ev. Ioh. gives us three grounds of this Gods
proceeding with them; Ad demonstrationem debitae misery; vel ad emendationem
labilis vitae; vel ad exercitationem necessariae patientiae: and the Righteous
are to make one of these uses of them, according to the quality and nature of
the dispensation: For if they be under Persecution from men for Christ and his
Gospels sake, which is properly to bear his Cross; then this is a trial of
our Faith, and Christian Graces, and because it conformes us to Christ, Phil.
3.10. it carries its joy and comfort along with it; he that thus suffers, has
abundant matter of joy, Acts 5.41. and yet ground of humility to us; because it
shows, That when we have done, or suffered what we can, we are but
unprofitable servants, its a state we have deserved to pass, though not from
them under whose hand we pass; if temptations or trials immediately sent by
God, then they have the same ends in respect of God inflicting them, to humble
us for our demerits, and to demonstrate how far we are from deserving any thing
from God, and how insufficient in our selves to secure our selves: Yet in
respect of us they have not the same use, for we the Patients are not herein as
in the former, to borrow our consolation from the temptation, or trial it
self; but from our deportment, and demeanor under this trial, if by the
Grace of God, we can sanctify him in our hearts, and glorify him in this
behalf, by justifying God, condemning our selves, Psalm. 51.4. Dan. 9.7. Psalm.
39.9. blessing God. Job 1.21. submitting to him, 1 Samuel 3.18. but if
chastisements from God, then they are evidences we have sinned against him, and
he is displeased with us, and they are severities for our cure and amendment;
and from these we cannot derive any comfort, but much ground of godly sorrow;
and all the comfort we can here depend on, is in a continued subsequent, and
present holy use of them to this end, of Reformation. Heb. 12.11. Now no
chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. In sum then; The wicked in their wicked enjoyments and
fullness, are not happy, though visibly prosperous, because there is a sentence
of wrath and vengeance irreversibly decreed against them; and the righteous in
their saddest calamities, though seemingly miserable, yet really are not,
because they have strong inward consolations, and great assurances of a Crown
of Glory. And who will not adventure, and endure for a Crown, especially when
they have security, that for the adventure, and a little sufferings, they may
obtain; and having obtained it, for ever enjoy it in a most peaceable
possession? Most excellently and truly Lactantius to this purpose, lib. 6.
cap. 22. Sicut ad verum malum per fallacia bona, sic ad verum bonum per
fallacia mala pervenitur: Counterfeit good things are the harbingers and fore
runners of real evils; and conceited evil things makes way for truly good.
And as this consideration affords plentiful matter to the righteous Patient of
instruction and comfort; Non si male nunc, and olim sic erit; so it yield:
great occasion of terror to the thriving triumphing impenitent, who is
reserved only (and fatted) for the day of slaughter: For upon this
supposition, That judgment begins at the House of God, the Apostle draws that
to them sad, dismal, and terrible influence; What shall the end be of them
that obey not the Gospel? 1 Peter 4.17.18. a judgment so fearful, and
terrible, that he seems afraid clearly to express; and yet by that
Interrogation, gives sufficient notice of it: for this Interrogation is the
same in effect with that Position of another Apostle, Vengeaxce is mix (says
the Lord) I will repay. And, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God, Heb. 10.30.31.

You see then here how forcible and prevalent examples, especially of those we
honor, or ought to honor; and that not only of Christ himself, whose example
ought not only to be an Argument to persuade, which force other examples of
holy men has; but it is a certain rule to direct, which power the others
absolutely, and abstractedly has not, John 13.4. 1 John 2.6. Hence that of
Bernard; Quid vobis cum virtutibus, qui virtutem Christi ignoratis? ubi number
quaeso verae prudentiae, nisi in Christi Doctrina? ubi vera temperantia, nisi
in Christi vita? ubi vera fortitude, nisi in passione? that is, What have you
to do with virtuous conversation, who know not the virtues of Christ? For
where, I pray you, can true wisdom and knowledge be found, but in the Doctrine
of Christ? Where true temperance and moderation, but in the life of Christ?
True valor and magnanimity, but in the Passion and Death of Christ? His Life
and Death was not only an Example, but a Directory to us, how to live godly,
and justly, and soberly, as the former sort of these [others] here prementioned
in this praecision; and how to die honorably, and to suffer patiently, as the
second sort of these [others] did. Let the Life then, and Death of Christ be
our Rule to direct us in every estate and condition; and let Christ's example,
and the examples also of others, be as arguments and enducerments to incline
and move us more forcibly and effectually to follow his directions and rules of
holy living and dying: and let us also be exemplary in our lives and
conversations, and by our exemplary living, adorn the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
provoking one another unto good works, that even others seeing our good works,
may glorify God in the day of visitation; that we be not only burning lights,
having zeal within; but shining also, holding forth our light to others:
Especially this concerns Magistrates, who have a civil relation to their
inseriours; To Pastors, who have a spiritual affinity with, and neernesse to
their Flock: And Parents, who have a natural tie to their Children; our
eivill, spiritual, and natural Fathers, as they are to be respectively
honored; so they are to walk as worthy of honor; And not only in relation to
their own welfare, but to the good of those under their charge whereunto they
powerfully administer by exemplary Piety. Christ has afforded himself and
others examples to us, that we for him, to his glory, and to others for their
good, might likewise be examples. It was an excellent expression of Fulgentius
in his African style, which he uses to show the power of examples in
Superiors; Conversio potentium, multum militat acquisitionibus Christi; that
is, The conversion of men in Authority (and such are all those several
capacities) fights powerfully for the possessions of Christ, or it purchases
much to Christ; for such as these (says he, it is in the 6. Ep. de Con. ad
Theed.) either ruin many with themselves, or else save; and therefore either
great punishments attend them, if they prove, Male imitationis laqueum;
Instruments of evil example; or else great Glory, if they be eminent in holy
conversation: For so he goes on, applying this to that particular case he
speaks on, and holds a perfect Analogy in the other; Quis non parvum, etc. Who
will not despise and neglect his poor Cottage, when he sees a Senator
neglecting his stately and spacious Palaces for Christ's sake? Who will not
forsake the World, to purchase Heaven, when he sees a Consul of Rome leaving
all to follow Christ; despise Earth, and make provision for Heaven? And now,
that the Example of these others, and many since may draw us to an imitation of
their Graces and Virtues; and that we may be exemplary to others to provoke
them, let us address our selves to the great exemplar for grace and strength,
both to lead others who are under, or equal to us, and follow Christ and
others who have gone before us: For, Hac itur ad superos; this is the way, walk
in it, even the way to him who is the way, the truth, and life. And therefore
let us Pray.

O Almighty and Sovereign Power, who by an infinite all wise goodness, do
Governc all things in Heaven and Earth, and have, and do order all, even the
worst things for the glory of thy Name, and the good of thy People. Be thou
favorable unto thy Church, thy little Flock; be thou a refuge to it, till all
tyranny be over-past, a sure defense and shield in peristous times to thy
People, that they may know how to be abased, and how to abound, how to be full,
and how to be hungry: learn them in every state therewith to be contented:
Under Persecution, make them resolved and joyful; under chastisements, make
them resigned and humble, submissive, and godly sorrowful, that they be
sanctified to them; under trials, make them faithful and constant,
considering and exercised thereby to bring forth the peaceable fruits of
righteousness; In prosperity and fullness, make them moderate, humble,
joyful, and thankful; abounding in every good work, make them great
Examples of Piety, provoking one another unto good works in an holy emulation:
And that both states and conditions of life may be blessed to them, make them
followers of Jesus Christ, the Captain of that holy profession, to walk in
the footsteps of his most holy life, though by unequal treadings; and to be
followers of the blessed Saints departed, Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, Priests,
Prephets, Apostles, Confessors, Martyrs, as they also of Christ, that we may be
partakers with them, and those that follow us, at the last of a glorious
resurrection to eternal life. Graent therefore, gracious God, that with all
purpose of heart, we cleave and adhaere to thee, with satisfied and contented
spirits in every state rely and depend on thee, evidencing our faith by
faithful actions, or constant sufferings: At all times to yield a ready,
sincere obedience to all the commands of Christ; And when it is our Child's
portion to be repreached, spoiled, tormented for the name of Christ; to
possess our souls in patience, and to wait continually on him. Make us to
conform to the Iustitutions and Disciplice of holy Jesus, and pursue the ways
of godliness with all passion and perseverance, that no worldly
discouragements; or sadnesses, no worldly hopes, nor carnal delights distract
or disturb us in the duties of our high calling; but that we add to Faith,
Virtue: to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge, etc. perfecting bolinesse in the
fear of the Lord, till we arrive with the Saints perfected, at the perfection
and glory with our Lord Jesus, the author and fiuisher of our Faith; to whom be
glory now and for evermore. Amen.

The Conclusion Confirmed, and Continued.
Heb. 11.39.40. And these all having obtained a good report, through Faith,
received not the Promise: God having provided some better thing for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect.
ALL these (...) from Abel, till your late Predecessors of this last Age, the
Maccabces; if the induction be good, it must be Universal; and therefore the
Conclusion is Univerfall, all, both expressed, and understood, all believers,
the totum aggregatum, the whole company of Believers, and every single
Individual of that company, have subsisted by Faith, and by Faith only;
Without Faith none could have pleased God, by Faith all did: Without Faith none
could look for a City, by Faith all did: Therefore the Induction helds, and
proves the first Hypotheset; Faith is the substance, etc. And without Faith it
is impossible to please God, etc. For, if there were another Principle of
subsistence besides Faith; if any other original Instrument of pleasing God;
or if any one instance could be produced to evidence the other part of the
contradiction, (viz.) That it can be proved, that any without Faith, did hope,
etc. or did please God, then the producing of any such Principle, Instrument,
or Instance, would altogether invalidate the force of the Induction, and it
could not be Argumentative to conclude these Positions thus affirmatively
asserted. But now, this Note of Universality [all,] clears the proofs, and
makes the Iuduction firm, and sure, to all intents and purposes; All who have
subsisted, etc. have pleased God, have done it by Faith; and none can be
brought, from the beginning of the World, till this present Day, to the
contrary. Therefore Faith is the substance, etc. And without Faith it is
impossible to please God. And for a confirmation of both premises, we have good
evidence; for all these were,

(...), Testimonio fidei probati; were proved, and tried persons for their
Faith; and they carried it, and passed, and were by an Instrument of
approbation, attested so to be, and by special order, their Faithfulness and
Piety was recorded, commended, and proposed to Posterity for imitation; and
this order was both from God, and his Church. And therefore Bezae reads,
Testimonium adepti: they obtained a full and just Testimonial: God, and the
Church of God, freely gave it them, and subscribed it. Certainly, they that
honor God, God will honor them, 1 Samuel 2.30. for he will make their Names
greater, then that of Sons, and Daughters; they shall not only enjoy the
advantages of common rights, and interests; but those who who have been
eminent, and highly exemplary for their piety and charity, and patience, shall
have higher Privileges, more honorable and glorious rewards for their
Portion. This our Savior declares, when he assures, That he that receives a
Fropket, qua talis, in the name of a Prophet; or upon this account, that he is
a Prophet, shall receive (a more then ordinary) a Prophets reward, Mat. 10.41.
that sure must be some special eminent reward, over and above what God bestows
on other men: Which seems also to be employed in that Prerogative Royal stated
on the Apostles, and settled on them, Mat. 19.27.27. and Luke 22.28.29.30. for
in both these places the peculiarity and eminency of the reward is expressed,
though the quality thereof be not. For supposing the twelve Tribes to be in a
condition of happiness; it will necessarily follow, That they who fit upon
twelve Thrones to Judge, that is, certainly to Rule and Govern them, must be in
an higher degree of dignity and pre-eminence, then those over whom they are
set, whatsoever that dignity or pre-eminence be, whether in the administration
of Christ's Church militant, or triumphant: the former of which St. Austin
inclines to; For as God has declared against all unbeleevers and hypocrites,
Deuteronomy. 29.29.20. that he will put out their name from under Heaven, make their
memories to perish, or to rot, and stink; so for all sincere converts, God
has assured an high, glorious, and honorable memory, Deuteronomy. 26.10. Thus it is
expressly reported of Jeshua, Josh. 6.27. and of David, 2 Samuel 7.9. I have
made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the
earth. Now, as God does honor his faithful servants living and dying; so does
the Church of God likewise: There may be Idolatry and vanity in giving unto
Saints, present, or departed that honor, or any part or parcel thereof, which
is due to God alone, as Invocation, and Adoration; It is but piety and duty to
speak honorably of the worthy acts and sufferings of Saints deceased, and keep
them in perpetual remembrance; such honor have all his Saints, to be
commemorated by succeeding generations, which it the certain ground of
Christian solemn Festivities, to praise God for raising up such. Instruments
of his glory, and his peoples good; and to pray unto God, that we may imitate
their holy Faith, and so to follow their holy examples, that we may be
pertakers with them of a joyful resurrection. Far he it from us not to allow
them that which God has granted, the mention and memory of their holiness,
and what the Church of God has thus practiced. The Jews, when they make
mention of any of their deceased Worthies, use a Form of honorable
remembrance, taken from that definitive Sentence of Solemon, Prove. 10.7.
Memoria justi sit ad benedictionem, vel in benedictione; The memory of the just
is blessed; and if we will rightly conceive what this blessedness means, or
wherein this blessing consists: The Septuagints Transtation will help to clear
unto us; for they thus resolve it, (...), the memory of the just is with
praises: And then the sense is obvious; the memory of the just is blessed; that
is, to be commemorated and remembered with praises, Thus Moses was remembered
(...), in their solemnt offices of praise, Eccl. 45.1. and so of these all, or
most of them, Eccl. 46.11.12. and so of Judas Maceabeus, 1 Macc. 3.7. Neither
has the Christian Church fallen short in this kind, and that in the better and
Primitive times; witness their anniversary remembrances of the Saints
departed; their Festival days, their Panegyricks, or commendatory Orations;
and that immemoriall custom, when the holy Communion was Administered, to
commemorate the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Confessors,
Martyrs; and all this, according to the Psalmists assertion, Psalm. 112.16. The
righteous shall be in everlasting remembranse; and that both with God and man:
With God to reward, with Man to celebrate; with God to glorify him, with Man
to declare his righteousness, as they wrought or suffered for righteousness;
so it endures for ever: they attested and gave testimony to saving Truths; the
Truth shall give Evidence for them, their Prayers and their Alms go up for a
memorial before God.

But from hence (to return) we may observe where the strength of an Induction
lies, not in some single seattered, or dispersed prooses, or instances; but in
a full body of them united together, especially if an Induction be made use of
in the concerns of Religion, and Religious Truths and Observances. For in this
case, those Truths and Observances are not sufficiently attested, nor
convincingly proposed, which have only the determination and approbation, the
good report of some one or more particular Churches; because a Church of any
one denomination is fallible, has no assurance that she may not sail, or that
the Candle stick should not be removed from her; no National Church has a
Promise for a perpetual existence; that is, though a Pure, Holy, Orthodoxe,
Catholic, and Apostolical Church at this time, should continue so unto all
successions and Ages, in the same purity and perfections. As for instance, we
may not conclude this observation to be a Catholic observation, or an
observation of Faith, because the Roman Church practices, and under curse, or
Anathema, exacts or imposes the observation thereof. For though some of her
observations and determinations in that kind may be truly Cotholique; yet we
are not so to esteem them barely upon her report; but because she holds them in
communi with the Catholic Church. For that the Roman and Catholic are
convertible, we are not bound to believe, because the Romanists believe so, and
give us their word for it; we may lawfully demand their proofs, and till these
he convincingly and cogently produced, we may lawfully leave them to the poor
fallacy of begging the Question. Neither may we resolve this Tenet of the
Romanists, is de fide, an Article of the Christian Faith, because they hold and
maintain it, and obtrudes the belief thereof under the sentence of
Excommunication; both because they are not the only Catholics, that is,
assertors of the Catholic Faith; their Church is not the Catholic Church,
but of a confined, limited Communion and Jurisdiction. And for them to pretend,
and assume their Church to be the Catholic, without proof, is still to beg
the Question; and because every particular, and so that Church may err, and de
fact, has erred, as well in her Tenets as Observations, and departed from
Catholic Verities, as well as Practices. But now, if the Tenet be
demonstrated to a Tenet of the Catholic Church truly so called; that is,
[all these] the people of God, believers of all Ages have thus taught and
believed, taught and practiced; this demonstration engages and commands our
persuasion, and obedience. For it is not imaginable, that [all these] being
qualified as the [all these] here in these words, (constant practisers and
faithful sufferers for their belief and practices,) should combine and
conspire unanimously to destroy themselves, and deceive others; both because we
suppose them holy men, and also men of admirable parts, of great strength, and
clearness of understanding: And as their holiness preserved them from worldly
designs, and contrivances in their profession, witness that high esteem they
had thereof, as even to suffer death for it; so their wisdom and learning
kept them from gross oversights of misunderstanding and prejudice in these
things they both professed and suffered; which was the diseipline of the holy
Jesus, who could and would highly and honorably crown their sufferings. And
hence it will undeniably follow [these all] Primitive Fathers and Christians,
(which is a very wonderful thing) notwithstanding their several tempers and
inclinations, their several Ages and Successions, their several distances and
Countries, yet did agree for the space of fifteen hundred years, constantly and
unanimously in all those things, which were revealed and recommended by our
Savior Christ, as important and necessary to salvation: (for if they were
ignorant of any Article necessary to salvation, how could they be saved?) it
follows (I say) by their such agreement, and consent, That this is an Article
of the Christian Discipline in what they held and observed, is a strong and
solid proof to all godly sober men, That Tenet so held, is a Catholic Tenet;
and that Observation so used, is a Catholic Observation; and to oppose, or
contradict either, is Heresy and Schism; or which is all one, an Heretical,
or Schismatic separation and departure, from the true Christian Catholic
Faith. Add to all this, That the differences in Opinions, and disagreements
among themselves in many Points of Religion, which are not de symbolo, of
necessary beleise; but truths only of an inferior natute, will to any
indifferent, unbiassed Persons, take off, and clearly acquit their consent and
agreement in the maine Fundamentalls, the Prims Fundamentalia from all
suspicion, that it proceeded from some combination, correspondence, or mutual
intelligence, and common cousultation; and withal, fully satisfy and
convince, that it proceeded out of a serious examination, and consideration of
the things themselves. And then secondly, as the concurrence of these all, is a
valid Testimony in necessary points; so in these points and means of salvation,
the general silence of the Ancients [these all] would be a very proper and
unanswerable Argument to prove the nullity or falsenesse of it, as this
Doctrine was not known or believed in the parest and Primitive times: therefore
it is not an Article of Faith, a Catholic verity; but a Novelty, or upstare
Opinion. As for Example, If we find nothing either in whole or in part, either
in gross, or in retaile, concerning the Monarchical Authority of the Pope, or
the supreme Authority of the present Roman Church, or concerning Purgatory and
Transubstantiation, among the Writings of the Fathers, and Records of the
Ancient Church; we may safely conclude, they are not such as they pretend them
to be necessary, such whereon our salvation depends; for if they be such, as
they would have us believe; it would be too great injustice to the Ancients, to
say, They knew nothing of them; or that knowing them, they would not speak any
word of them, and discharge their trust. And lastly, it hence also follows,
That in those unhappy controversies which are continued in this National
Church, it is not fair and ingenuous dealing in some of those Disputants, to
aver and avow the practice and persuasion of some reformed Churches in the last
Contury, or hundred; when others put in their Plea from the consent and
practice of the former fifteen Centuries: For what is this, but to oppose a
part against the whole? a part in one Centurie, against it self, and all other
Churches, for fifteen? a few against [all these.] But above all, they are
grossly absurd, who to [these all] have none to oppose but themselves; have no
Authority, but their power; no reason, but their fancy; no Testimony, but their
own approbation; and they themselves so inconsiderable, in respect of [these
all,] that they are not so much as the Gleanings of a full Corn Field in a
large Campania to the whole Cropp. And yet they deal subtly too; for they
take a safe course, that they shall never satisfy you; nor you confute them:
For their Argument and Evidence, is, their Conscience; and what that is, you
cannot, they will not know. And hence they are such Vagrants in their Faith,
you shall never know where to have them; and so they may justly be excluded out
of the Catalogue of [these all,] and be in the pack of Saint Judes Bruites;
They speak evil of those things they know not; and corrupt themselves in those
things they know naturally, Jude 10. And yet there is a third sort, who though
not so bad as these, yet bad enough, disparaging, and decrying the testimonies
of [these all] in the Christian Church, fleighting, and undervaluing their
Authority, and Writings, and rejecting them as useless; except the Apostles
themselves, and their Writings. The vanity of this misprision will presently
appear; if we remember, That the whole dispute is, what is Apostolical, or
not; what they practiced, or not: And then the result is obvious; Those Persons
who lived in, or immediately after the Apostles times, should know better their
usage, then we, at this distance of time can guess at; they who searched into
all Records, to discover what was Apostolical, and were after careful to keep
them, should know better, then they who care for no Evidences, Testimonies, or
Records; and all this upon no other pretense, but this; That the mystery of
iniquity then wrought, and since, notorious forgery has been used to corrupt
all Testimonies and Books; the former of which is most unjust, because even
then, though corruptions and Haeresies crept in; yet were they zealously
opposed, and punctually confuted by the Writers of those Times. The latter is
partly false, altogether impertinent: For the same Objection might be used
against the Canonical Books of holy Scripture, if in the instance it be
admitted good; and against all Records of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, that
from them, it were impossible to find out what the former Laws and Customs
have been; for in all these, there may equally be suspicion of Fraud and
Forgery, as in the other kind: And yet, no wise man, because the Discovery is
somewhat intricate and perplexed, and the business a work of difficulty, will
therefore conclude it altogether useless, and to no purpose. Certainly, they
who labor for the finding out the truth by the search of Antiquity, next after
holy Scripture, are more likely to discover it by that way, then any other. As
they, who would know our Laws and Customs, are more probable to find them out
by searching the Ancient Records, and Law Writers, then by consulting present
Authors; unless we take all upon trust, and at the second hand. But now, to
prevent mistakes, it may be worthy our enquiry, to examine what proofs are
Catholic, or not: Or how we may know, whether this Doctrine, or Observation
be truly Catholic, such as [these all] have acknowledged, and wherein this
Universality consists: And the rather, because it is confessed, both by the
Romanists, and Reformed, That that Church which can evidence it to hold that
Faith once delivered to the Saints, without Haereticall Innovation, or
Schismatic Violation, is undoubtedly the true Church of God. And it is
further acknowledged by the Reformed, De meliori notae, of the best Rank, That
the Title Catholic does most properly and fitly express, whether Christian,
or Christian Societies, which hold the common Faith without particular
divisions from the maine body of Christianity, in opposition to all Heretics
and Schismatics; But since the Church is divided, and rent by Heresy and
Schism; To whom should this Title be rightly appropriated? or who can be
truly called Catholic, but they who agree and join with [these all,]
Apostles, Fathers, Martyrs, (for what the Patriarchs, and the rest were to the
Hebrews; the Apostles, and their Successors, are the same to us) Believers, the
maine Body of Christians, the Universal Church? And for this, we must have
recourse to that approved Rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, lib. cont. Haret. cap.
3. Magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditam est, hoe est etenim vere and proprie Catholicum; We are to
take care, that we hold that which has been believed by all, in all places,
and at all times; for that is truly Catholic, which Rule in effect is no
more but this, that which should direct a Christian, or Christian company in
their examination of the Catholic Truth, or Points of Faith, is the
consenting Testimony of the Universal Church truly such, and that by this
Rule, is that which is Universal in all respects, in respect of Persons,
Place, and Time, and even the strength of this Apostolical Induction, depends
on these considerations; all your believing Ancestors have acted, and suffered
at all times, from Abel downwards to the present times; and of all Places, in
Chaldea and Egypt, as well as in Palestine: And these respects we shall declare
as follows.

1. The Testimony which is truly Universal, must be so in respect of Persons;
not as if there were not in the Church such who diffented from the generally
believed Truths: But this consideration, respects either the Universal of the
livers of the first Ages, bearing Testimony that such or such a Doctrine was
from the Apostles Preachings delivered to all Churches by them Planted, or
their general uniforme Testimony herein, without any considerable dissenters
producible; for even such Testimony is worthy of belief, and has been deemed,
and is sufficient for the rejection of any new Doctrine, Bibl. Patr. Tom. 1.
page 30. etc. and page 275. for as the general consent and practice of all
Nations, to adore, and set up a Deity as Divine Power, some one or other, has
been, and is an Argument of force and efficacy against the Atheists which have
appeared in any Age, inasmuch as nothing besides the ingraffed Notion of a
Deity, or Divine Power, could have inclined so many several Nations, of such
several tempers, and dispositions, of such contrary Principles in other cases,
of such several Educations, and civil Government, to affect and practice that
duty of Adoration, or Worshipping some Deity; even so, the Unanimous consent of
distinct Churches, agreeing in any Point of Faith, or that this was an
Apostolical depositum tradition derived from the Apostles, and their
followers, is a pregnant Argument to any impartial understanding man, of great
force against Heretics, and Heretical dissenters (who as Atheists desciverunt
a natura, have Apostated, and fallen away from Nature, and the Law of Nature,
and Nations: So these, desciverunt a veritate, have forsaken the way of Truth,
the Doctrine of Christ, and his Churches,) for their conviction and
confutation, and for the confirmation of all consenters, and adhaerents to that
universal agreement; inasmuch as nothing besides the evidence of Truth
delivered unto the Christian World by Christ and his Apostles, could have kept
so many several Churches in the unity of the same Faith; and in this case,
every particular Church is a competent and authenticke witness of every other
Church, and so of the Catholic Church, her integrity and fidelity in servando
depositum, in careful preserving the Truth committed to their special trust.
And to press this more fully, as it cannot be a prejudice to any Rule or
Custom grounded on the Law of Nations, because their have some dissenters,
though otherwise generally received, allowed, and practiced; so neither can it
be any prejudice to any Rule or Observation grounded on the Law of Christ,
because some have opposed and contradicted, though generally averred, believed,
and conformed unto by all Christians: And as it does not follow, this is not a
Law of Nature, ( viz. That there is a God, and that God to be Worshipped) or
Nations, because some have spoken against it, and acted too; so does it not
follow, this is not the Discipline of Christ, because some nominall Christians
have adjudged otherwise; this is not the common Faith, because some stragler or
wanderer has either wilfully deserted it or unwarily fallen out of it; this is
not that delivered to the Saints, because some who deliver themselves Saints,
and would be called so, have not liked it; or that it is not the Catholic
Faith, because some who have usurped, and would engrosse the Title, have so
determined contrary to the generality of all Believers. But then, as the
Civilians speak, In re consensia emnium Genttum Lex Naturae putanda est; The
consent of all Nations, is to be esteemed the Law of Nature. And, Quod
naturalis ratis inter omnes homines constituit, id apud omnes peraeque
^^stoditur, vocaturque jus Gentium: That which natural reason does constitute
among all men, is observed by all alike, and termed, the Law of Nations; not as
though every individual thus did constitute and consent, for many have
depraved Nature, and transgress natural right: so here, the common consent of
all Churches that this is Apostolical Tradition, or depositum, though every
single member do not concur. But the Common Law, or Custom of the World, in
which three circumstances are to be considered; Antiquity, Continuance, and
Generality; and thus as Nature is immutable, in abstracto; but not in concreto:
it is not changed; it is often transgressed: so Faith is immutable in it self,
semper eadem; but men often chop and change it, that is, violate it. To give
you an instance, to clear this the fuller yet; Arrius sprung an Heresy, had
many adhaerents, and those of great power and parts; yet is that Doctrine which
he broached, justly adjudged contrary to the Catholic Faith professed in the
Church of God, inasmuch as the several distinct Visible Churches of the
Christian World, by unanimous consent, communicating and exhititing their
several Confessions and Registers, Catechismes and Testimonies of their
forefathers Faith, and their own, to the Council of Nice, upon diligent
search and inquiry, found it contrary to the general belelfe of the whole
Chuch since the first Plantation. He who would take the pains for further
satisfaction herein, let him consult St. Austin lib. 7. de Baptis. cont. Den.
c. 53. Nobis tutum est in, etc. and l. 2. c. 4. Quomodo potait etc.

2. In respect of Place; for if the Doctrine have not received a good report
from all Places, it is not qualified for a Catholic, inasmuch as the same
Faith which was delivered and received in one Place, in any Apostolic
Plantation, was likewise found in all other Plantations, it being one and the
same Faith which all the Apostles taught all the World over; the same in
Germany, Britain, France, which was in Spain, Affricke, and Egypt, the middle
World; and in Asia, and the whole Orient, or East of the World, even as the
same Sun shines through them all. And to this Tertullian gives his Testimony at
large, lib. de Praefeript advers, Haeret. cap. 20. Statim igitur Apostoli, etc.
Presently therefore the Apostles having testified the Faith first in Judea,
(according to their Commission) they took their Journey over the World, and
promulgated the same Doctrine of the Faith to the Nations, etc. whereunto
accords fully his follower Saint Cyprian, lib. de Vnitate Eccl. Ecclesia Domini
luce perfusa, etc. The Church having received light from her Lord, diffused and
spread abroad his beams far and wide; Vnum tamen lumen est; and yet it is the
same light which is in every Church thus diffused. And the same Tertullian
seconds this also, in his following Chapter; Si haec ita sint, etc. making this
deduction; if these things be thus, then it is plain, Every Doctrine which
agrees with the Apostolical Churches, (as the Roman, Ephesian, Antiochian,
Alexandrian, Hierosolymitan) the Mothers (in respect of the Daughter Churches)
Metropoles, originals whence the Faith sprung forth and issued, is to be
adjudged true, as holding that, which the Churches received from the Apostles,
the Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God; Reliquam vere omnem Doctrinam de
mendacio prajudicandum, etc. and that all other Doctrine is under the prejudice
of being false, which is contrary to the truth of the Churches, of the Apostles
of Christ, of God: And so again in the 36. and 37. Chapters of the same Book,
where he proves, they are only the true Charches of Christ, who follow the
Faith of those Mother Apostolical Churches.

3. In respect of Time; not as if the true Faith had in all Ages been
Universally received, for then Haeresie had never prevailed, and got the upper
hand; (for Arrianisme did so in Constantine his time, and the Goths and
Vandals; Arrian Princes Ruled in the West; and Anastasius the Emperor of the
East, was an Eutychian Heretic:) but that this or that was received in the
first or purest, and though in after ages by one or more, it was opposed and
oppressed; yet even then there were such, who by having recourse to the first
Ages, have discovered these guilty of novelty, and have constantly asserted,
proved and vindicated the ancient Doctrines, and Christianly suffered for them;
and so by little and little, the Church at last recovered and gained the
possession of her former Doctrines. That then which by diligent search is to be
found in the Monuments and Testimonies of the first Age (for that is truly so
called Antiquity) has this qualification: but that which is of latter date,
falls short of it; that is a new Faith which commenced since the Faith was once
delivered to the Saints; and so that Church which has not the consent of
Primitive Antiquity, is in respect of those Doctrines wherein she varieth from
it, and does stand convicted of Heresy, and Schism, because it is not part of
the Depositum; Quod tibi creditum, non quod a te inventum, Vin. Lyr. cap. 27.
For no man, or Society of men, ought to commend any thing as a point of Faith
to Posterity, which cannot be evidenced from Antiquity derived from the
Apostles times; a proficiency, or growth in Faith there ought to be, so it be
in eodem genere, in the same kinds, issuing from the same root; but all
addition of after inventions, are the notes of Heresy and Schism. And having
thus far proceeded, let us see what Doctrines or Observations, or some of them
may deserve, or can challenge this Testimony of [these all] or all the
Christian Churches; so that we may conclude this to be the Faith and usage of
the Universal Church of Christ; and for the credenda (always supposing the
sacred Scriptures) which is the most certain and safe Rule both for Credenda,
and Agenda; points of Faith and practice, as having obtained the highest report
from [these all,] (nothing so universally attested and approved as they) it
will be hard to prove, or produce an universal Testimony for any Doctrine or
Point of Faith, besides those which are contained in the Creed; nay indeed
impossible, inasmuch as this has the repute of an abridgement, or full Epitome
of all Fundamental Truths necessary to be known or believed by all Christians
to salvation, composed by the Apostles themselves for the preservation of the
unity of the Faith, (nothing but this has Primitive Antiquity, and full
consent of all, called generally, Regula fidei una sola, immobilis and
irreformabilis; the one, only immovable and unreformable Rule of Faith) that
all might have a short sum of those things which are of mere belief, and are
dispersedly contained in the Scripture. So Valentia himself, 1. 2. Did. 1.
qu. 2. p. 4. in fin. and so probably conceived to be that (...), 2 Timothy 1.13.
That form, breviate, or summary of wholesome words, or sound Doctrine, that
depositum or trust Timothy received, 1 Timothy 6.20. that (...), common Faith,
Tit. 1.4. Pufillis magnisque communis, Aug. Ep. 57. ad Dard. See Davenant in
lib. De pace inter Evangelices procuranda, page 9.10. etc. Et in adhortatione,
cap. 7. throughout. And for the agenda, these either immediately relate to the
worship of God; or the Discipline and Government of his Church: And supposing
the Scriptures, as the standing Law, both for matters of Faith and Practice;
Use, which is the best Interpreter of the Law, is the best Directory for our
Practice; and when the Texts of holy Scripture are in these eases interpreted
by the perpetual practice of the Church, according to the premised
considerations, then the Interpretation is the more authentic, and worthy
beleise, and the proofs grounded thereupon, more cogent and convincing,
according to that determination of the Nicone Council, (...), let ancient
customs stand in strength, of this kind, is the observation of the Lords day;
Whereupon it is Observed by that Noble and Learned French Protestant Du. Pless.
lib. 1. de Missa. cap. 3. That the Apostles retained the pure worship and
service of God used in the Synagogue of the Jews, as far as they contradicted
not the Dispensation under Christ; and so, though they changed the Sacrifices
and the Sabbath, (Christ being the substance shadowed by them; and the Lords
Day being appointed to succeed this,) yet the service it self, in other
particulars, did continue; and this appears to be the practice of the Jews; for
we find their Confession (says he) Mat. 3.6. Mar. 1.5. Acts 13.38. their
Lessons, Acts 15.21. Acts 13.14. Luke 4.18. Their Psalms and Hymns, Ephesians. 5.
Col. 3. Their Sermons, and other such holy Offices, Et primi Christiani huie
Officis se accommedarunt, id. lib. 1. Demiss. cap. 4. the first Christians
confirmed hereunto, etc. So also the Observation of the Anniversary Festivalls
of the Church, of Baptizing Infants; and after, their Confirmation: The
admission of separated Persons to the Calling of the Ministry by imposition of
Hands: The different Offices of those so called, and separated, by the known
Titles of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; and this according to the received
Doctrine of the Universal Church for 1500. Years, without any considerable
opposition in Church censures: and that these were such practices of the
Universal Church [these all] who have gone before us, in the Profession of
that holy Discipline of out Lord Jesus, has been abundantly proved out of
their Testimonies and Records; And from these premised Grounds, we may take an
estimate, what Church or Churches, holds the truest and most perfect
correspondence with the Catholic. Certainly they who glory most in that
Attribute and Title, have the least Reason and Right, both because they have
not the good report of [these all] nor the Testimony of the Universal Church
for their Doctrines which they maintain; and also because the Universal Church
has defined against their Innovations, both in Faith and Practice: Witness
the Decree of the Council of Ephesus the third of those four, which are
generally received for undoubted General Councills; which runs thus: Nemini
licere, etc. It should not be lawful for any to Produce, Write, or Compose any
Beleise, beside that which was established by the Fathers at Nice, and that,
etc. Can. 7, And so Conc. Floren. Sess. 10 Now they who would Engrosse and
Monopolize this Title, have changed the Apostolical Creed, by making a new
one, which holds no Analogy with the old Apostles Creed; all which their
superadditions are extrinsecall to that Rule of Faith, and so no parts of the
Christian Religion: And this New Creed which they made is ratified by Bulla Pii
4. super forma juramenti professionis fidei: thus mixing the Tares of their own
inventions and policies, with the Wheat of Gods Word; and corrupting the mass
or lump of holy Faith, by the leven of the new additions; And their practice is
as gross and un-Christian, in dividing the Apostolical Communion, by
Excommunicating full three parts of the holy Catholic Apostolic Church. That
Church which holds the one Catholic Faith, holy and undefiled, holds the
truest conformity with the Catholic, which the Roman Church at present does
not; because she has defiled the Old Faith with New Doctrines, for which she
neither has the consent of Antiquity, nor of the Universal Church of this
Age; and those Churches which either in part or in whole, admit not the
Apostles Creed, or oppose any truth therein contained, or any of the
Explications thereof, by the four first General Conncells, are justly
adjudged Heretical; and so is the opposing any practice which is truly and
genuinely Apostolical, and so received by the Universal Church in all Ages,
heretical, and a voluntary separation from the Communion of that Church, which
requires nothing for matter of Faith, but the Apostolical Creeds, according to
the Decree of the Council of Ephesus, and nothing in point of practice, but
the observations of the Catholic Church since the Apostles Ages, the known
Worship and Service of God in the use of Liturgies, Prayer, the Word, and
Sacraments, the standing Government in the distinct and several Orders, and
Officers thereof; and the exercise of Ecclesiastique Discipline, is directly
Schismatic, as tending to the breach of the Catholic Communion, dividing
that body into two opposite parts, which should be whole one and entire: so
that according to the sore going Grounds which are confessed by the Roman
party, (and so will be evidence and proof against them) the English Reformed
Church cannot be guilty of Heresy, because She holds the Apostolical Creed
without addition or diminution. The Romish Synagogue, or Court is truly and
properly Heretical and Schismatic too, inasmuch as she has Composed a New
Creed, and so made an addition to the standing Rule of Faith; and has obtruded
the belief thereof to all other Christians under pain of damnation. And again,
the Reformed English Church cannot be guilty of Schism, because she holds
Communion with the whole Church in all her ancient Apostolical Catholic
usages and customs, and disclaims all which are not so, as to her practice;
but condemns not, nor censures any other particular Church, further then by
Apologizing and defending her self, to be truly Apostolical: and if herein
she be wanting to her self; yet she can produce the Testimony, and good report
for her Apostolicalnesse, of the best Reformed Churches, and indeed, the
Universal Church of this Age. But I have extended this digression further then
I intended, or may be adjudged by others convenient and pertinent: But sure I
am, not so far as the weight and importance of the subject does deserve; for in
such subjects there should not be a nonnulla desiderantur, somewhat more
expected; and yet here much more might be added.

A good report, and a good name, is better then precious ointment; and nothing
entitles a particular person to that, but his own Faith: he is too flat and
Stoicall, nay Cynicall, who cares not what others report concerning him;
especially if those others be in number of [these all] men of good report, and
fame. It is true, a good man will not be offended at a railing, cursing Shimei,
an evil man reporting false evil things; yet a good man will endeavor to
keep his credit with good men, as well as a good Conscience to himself. For
ordinarily, as Tacitus observes, (and it was well observed by an ingenious
Person, that it is pity St. Augustine said it not,) Contemptu famae
contemnuntur and virtutes; they that neglect the good opinion of others,
neglect those virtues which should produce, and beget that good opinion.
Therefore St. Hierome protests to abhor that Paratum de trivia, that vulgar
dunghill language; I care not what all the world says, so long as my own
Conscience checkes me not; for we (unless we will be debaucht) must study not
only to be, but to appear also virtuous. Let your light (says our Savior,
Mat. 5.16.) so shine before men: and we must follow things of good report,
(...), Phil. 4.8. For though it be true, that a good report and opinion of men,
be no good foundation to build upon; yet it is a good stone in the building;
and he that intends to raise a fair Structure, must not only have a good
Foundation, (that is for the most part invisible) but he must have fair
stones, which always appear; a good report is a good man's comfort, not his
confidence; that wherein he may rejoice, not that whereunto he must trust; and
he will seek it, not so much that he may find it, as it may follow him; not
because he affects it, but deserves it. Sequi debet gloria, non appeti: It is
servile to Court a good name; it is dessolute to contemn it. But though [these
all] obtained a good report; yet they obtained not the Promises, God having
provided, etc.

Not the Promises; that is, not the objects, or things Promised, or rather the
full draugth of what was represented in those Promises. For indeed, Promises
they had, and they received what was Promised in particular reference unto
themselves, as it is above expressed, ver. 33.34. But the general Promife, or
that happiness which concerned them as a community, or whereof they were
participate, as a full body or society, with all Believers, from Abel to the
end of the World, with all these their Predecessors, and all their Successors
in the holy Faith, they received not; inasmuch as this consisted in a state of
perfection which they could not receive, till they were incorporated into the
society of Believers, under the Dispensation of the Gospel, and New Testament,
for whom it was chiefly and principally intended; without whom, none of all
these were in a capacity to receive this perfect consummation, and bliss. So
that here, the enquiry will be; First, What was the Promise which they received
not? What the provision made for us? What the full perfection of all, both them
and us?

But because one Resolution will satisfy all these Demands, and
Interrogatories; And the clearing any one of the three, will be the decision,
and final determination of the rest: Therefore I shall return only one Answer
to the Quaeries; yet in order thereunto, I shall give you the several
conjectures and judgments, which I find in this instance; declare what I
conceive most rational and satisfactory, allowing to others the same liberty,
which I challenge to my self, to take what they like best, or ought to do,
according to the Rules of Art and Religion: And there are four several
Opinions in this Point.

The first, and in my conceit, the worst, as being merely conjecturall, and
fantastical, is the received interpretation, and common Tenet of the present
Romish Doctors, who affirm, That these received not the promise, because
immediately after death, they were not received into Heaven: But (as they
fancy) the separated fowls of these faithful ones, departed into a
subterraneous place, bordering upon the confines of Hell, or rather, the upper,
or higher Region of Hell, which they call, Limbus Patrum, where they were in
durance, and detained Prisoners, until Christ's Ascension into Heaven;
whereupon having received their liberato and dismission, they were received and
admitted into the Seat of Glory. Whereas Believers under the Gospel, have an
higher Privilege thereby, even to pass immediately after their departure into
Heaven,

This is their Resolution; But in truth, what measures or degrees of felicity
[these all] received by Christ's Ascension; or what immunities or liberties, is
not the postulate, or matter of inquiry here; For it will be granted, that they
received larger favors, then before were indulged to, or allowed them; and
that thereby their joys and felicities were increased and multiplied. For if
the Angels themselves obtained by Christ's coming into the World an addition
and augmentation of light and knowledge (and so consequently of glory and
happiness, as the Apostle very positively assirmes they did, Ephesians. 3.10. that
new, etc. then we need not scruple to give to the Souls of Believers some
accidental measures and increments of felicity thereby; neither can it be any
prejudice to the Faith, to acknowledge, that God would, and did perfect their
beatitudes and bliss at diverse times, and in different degrees, (for their
bliss was not completed, simul and semel, altogether, and at once,) and that
the most eminent, principal, and noblest perfection was reserved for this
great solemnity of Christ's Resurrection and Ascension: And yet further, it may
be granted as very probable, that the degrees of future happiness shall be
proportioned to the measures and degrees of Grace and Revelation which God has
respectively, and in several successions imparted to his Church. And if so,
then it will follow, That as confessedly God has exhibited greater abundance
of Revelation and Grace unto the Believers under the Gospel, then to those
under the Law; so those shall be partakers of higher Forms or Sears of
happiness, then [these all] could. Neither do these liberal concessions any
whit advantage the Romanists persuasion or conceit, because they no way
conclude or infer their Position; for they peremptorily exclude the Souls of
[these all] from Heaven; and not only so, but keep them under restraint,
confine, and shut them up in under ground, Vaults, and Cells, not far from
Hell. And this Position we reject, as contrary to an Old Testament Revelation,
Eccl. 12.7. the spirit returns unto God who gove it: Which words of the Wise
Man, though they do not in terminis terminantibus, express Language determine
whether their Souls return to God mediately or immediately upon their
separation; yet the context makes the meaning plain, and the Text a clear proof
of their immediate return; for as the dust, immediately after the departure of
the Soul, returns to what it was; even so the Soul after its divorce from the
Body, returns immediately to its Creator. And this is also agreeable to Gods
just and gracious dealings with his chosen in all Generations; to reward the
work of Faith, labor of love, patience of hope; to order and appoint to
Travelers, when at their Journyes end, their resting place; To Runners, when
their Course is finished, the Prize; To Crown his Soldiers, who have fought
the good fight of Faith, with Glory; To receive his Servants, when they
performed their duty, and done their work, into his presence, and to enter them
into their Masters joys; settle and possess his Children of their
Inheritance; which resting Place Prize, Crown of Glory, Glorious Presence,
Joys, and Inheritance, has been purchased and bought, and so demised and
granted to the [these all] in this place, as well as to the succeeding
Generations. For although then Christ had not actually suffered, and so they
not actually ransomed; yet even then (he being the Lamb slain before the
Foundation of the World) Legally, or in the Eye of the Law, or rather of the
just Judge and Sovereign Lord, he did suffer, and they were Redeemed; inasmuch
as God had Decreed, that satisfaction made on the Cross to his justice, should
be as available to them, as to us: and the merits of Christ's death as imputable
to them, as to us; And upon that account God accepted [these all] as his
Redeemed ones; Even as an honest Creditor will release his Debtor, when a
faithful Solvent, Surety, or undertaker makes satisfaction, or gives security
to content, and according to desire and demand. And as Jesus Christ was
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. so the virtue of his death, is
Eternal, both a part ante, and a part post, is from, and to all Eternity.
But besides all this premised, we have express Evidence for our Plea and
Cause; for the precedent Verses of this Chapter, where it is set down in plain
Language, that some of [these all] had passed from Earth to Heaven; and
particularly instanced in Enoch, and Elijah; and its said of Abraham, that he
looked for a City; and that sure, was a free Privileged Place, conspicuous,
eminent, and glorious; not a close dark hole or Prison; and of the Patriarchs,
that they aimed at, Patriam Caelestem, an Heavenly Country; and that jam tum
illis paratum, even then prepared for them, Heb. 11.10.16. And hereupon Haymo
thus concludes, Nunc vero quiescunt in animae, in heatudine Regui Caelestis,
ineffabili laetitia perfruontes: It seems this conceit of the present
Romaniscs, was not at that time a Catholic truth; or else he was mistaken.

The second is that of some of the Ancient Fathers, who referr this common
perfection to be received, solely to the day of the Resurrection; supposing,
That no Souls enter into Heaven, or enjoyes the beatificall Vision, till the
day of the general Resurrection. But although the souls be extinguished at the
time of their separation from the Body; yet they did lie in seeret receptacles,
in a profound, or deep sleep, until the Resurrection, doing nothing, suffering
nothing in the mean time, but only the delay of their Glory. For so some of
them conceive, That Heaven shall not be opened till the day of Judgment,
unless to a few privileged persons. And of this opinion was Irenous, Just.
Martyr, Tertull. August. Ambrose, John: 22. and the Greek Church still
maintains it. The Text upon which they ground this persuasion, is, Apoc.
6.9.10.11. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that wore slain for the
Word of God, etc. Indeed there are several Expositions of this place; Some
making it Allegorical: Others Figurative, etc. Whatsoever the true meaning is;
Certainly the Text strongly proves the Immortality of the humane Souls, by
their subsistence after separated: But whether their Conclusion, let others
judge. Indeed some later Divines, have moderated the supposition; Neither with
the Romanists, dooming their souls to inferior Vaults, if not infernal: Nor
placing in several resting receptacles; yet withal, allowing them no
residence in Heaven, the Throne of Gods Glory. But they pretend, they are
carried into Abraham's bosom; or (which is all one with them) to Paradise; thus
distinguishing Paradise from Heaven; which distinction they attempt to prove
from these following places of holy Scripture. First, from Luke 23.43. To day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: From which words, they thus argue, (how
concludingly, let others examine,) That Paradise must needs import a Place or
Seat of blessedness, because it is promised, as a merciful reward and
favor; and this reward, the enjoyment of the society of Jesus; yet Heaven it
cannot be, because that Kingdom of bliss was not opened, till Christ made the
first entry, and took Possession thereof at his Ascension, when he was solemnly
inaugurated intoch is Kingly Office: And so they Expound Christ's descent into
Hell, to signify a state of separation, or common receptable of Spirits; so
that with them, both are Seats of Glory; but the one far excelling the other.
And this they in the second place strengthen from, 2 Cor. 12. supposing Saint
Paul had two Revelations; One, When he was caught up into the, third Heaven:
The other, When into Paradise; which, (say they) was the place from whence
Laezarus his soul was called back: But that the chief and highest degree of
bliss, is reserved for the last day, they infer from Mat. 13.43. and 25.34 2 Timothy 4.8. But the now common received opinion (which is all I add by way of
censure) is, That all the souls of the saints departed, go straightwayes to
Heaven upon their separation. To this purpose, compare Heb. 10.19. with Heb.
12.22.23.24. which words seem to have this sense; The spirits of the just could
not be perfect, unless they were in Heaven, enjoying the society of God,
Christ, and the Angels; and by enjoyment of these, their being in Heaven is
concluded. So 2 Cor. 5.1. If our Earthly Tabernacle, etc. then (...), we have
immediately thereupon, a building of God, etc. as soon as the Tabernacle is
dissolved: Otherwise, the Apostle would not have said, [we have] but, we hope,
or expect; and to expect, is but in reference to a reversion; to have, supposes
Possession: For here, we hope for Heaven, we have it not; and here we desire we
may have. For so it follows, ver, 2. In this we groan, etc. Yet we would not
have desired to be uncloathed, ver. 4. but upon this account and assurance,
That as soon as we were uncloathed, we would be clothed upon, that mortality
might be swallowed up of life. And further yet, We are willing to be absent
from the Body, that we might be present with the Lord, ver. 8. of the same
Chapter. Hence St. Paul says, Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ. And St. Stephen, when he dyed, thus Prayed; Lord Jesus receive my
spirit, Acts 7.59. and he Prayed so, because he believed (for this was a Prayer
of Faith) Jesus would receive his Spirit. But super totam materiam, we shall
anon find, as has been proved, and shall be further, that waving the
supposition upon which this second judgment is given, it yet comes near the
mark, and the truth, if it be not the truth it self. And therefore we pass to
the third.

The third is that, which is commonly asserted by most of the Writers of the
Reformed Churches, who apprehend this promise to relate to Christ's Incarnation;
and with these, the words are thus Paraphrased [they obtained not the promises]
that is, The promised Messas had not in their times assumed the humane nature,
and become flesh: So Beza, Non obtinuerunt, they obtained not; that is, Eminus
viderunt Christum, they looked for Christ to come; they saw him, as Abraham
afar off: So Major, Non sunt consecuti promissionem, viz. promissum semen
mulieris; the promised Seed of the Woman: And so Calvin, Iunius, Piscator; and
certainly, their judgment herein is true; the dispensation under Christ, more
glorious, then that under the Law, and greater perfections received, and better
provision made by Christ's coming, then was before; insomuch, that our Savior
affirms the Disciples blessed, Because their Eyes saw, etc. Luke 10.23.24.
And Saint Paul tells us; God manifest in the flesh, is the great Mystery of
godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. Yet (under submission to greater judgments) I
conceive this not so full, and home, as to give desired satisfaction to a
punctual examiner, nor so pertinent to the Apostles Text; for though Christ,
who was perfected here himself, Heb. 7.28. and did perfect for ever them that
are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. 1 Pet. 1.11.12. did come to perfect what stood need
thereof. Yet somewhat more then Christ's Incarnation is required to our
perfection; and our perfection did not solely, not properly consist in Christ's
coming; but by those acts and sufferings he was fitted and prepared for by
assuming our flesh. And now we will consider the fourth.

The fourth is that of St. Chrysostom, and some Ancients; and followed also by
some later Expositors; They obtained not the promises; that is, the
Resurrection of the flesh: And so this falls in this respect with the second;
the only difference being this, That the second, supposed not the separated
souls to be in Heaven; this supposes them in Heaven: but to receive the
complement of bliss, at the day of the Resurrection of all flesh, which is the
perfection of the whole Church, and every particular member; who as before, at
the day of their death, had a private pardon; so at that day shall further
obtain a public promulgation thereof, whose souls though they be in a
condition of blessedness; yet, till then, they want their Consummatum est, the
consummation of this blessedness, both extensive, in respect of their entire
state, the body not till then, being reunited to the soul; and probably,
intensive too, in respect of measures and degrees of bliss, the soul not till
then having so clear a Vision of God, as it shall have hereafter; as may
appear by those prementioned places, Mat. 13.43. and 25.34. 2 Timothy 4.7.8. and
this we Pray for, when we say, Thy Kingdom come: or, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly: Or with our Mother the Church, That we, and all other departed in the
Faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation of blessedness in
thine everlasting Kingdom. So that with these, the provision here made, and the
perfection here assigned, is not present, but future; To which purpose, it is
observable, there is a twofold provision, or perfection of the Body, the
Church: One, (as I may term it) meritorious, which was the perfect oblation of
our Redeemer; and so this perfection and provision here was procured, and
purchased by the price of his blood on the Cross. The other is formal and
final, which is the seizure and possession of that purchase, and the happy
consequent thereof, the advancement of our being into the highest pitch of
perfection and excellency our nature is capable of; and this we obtain not,
till the last day, when both Souls and Bodies shall be completely glorified
with Christ our Head: The former is the perfection of the means; The latter, of
the End. And that this latter is here understood, we have these Reasons to
persuade.

1. The design of the Apostle in this Chapter, which was not to administer
comsort to their Souls against the guilt, of sin, and terrors of a tender,
Conscience, (for he had happily perfected this work in the foregoing
Chapters,) but strengthen and comfort them against those miseries and
calamities they endured for the Name of Christ. And the ground of this comfort,
he setcheth from their hope of glory and reward at the last, Heb. 10.34.36. and
38. ver. and ver. 1. of this Chapter; confirmed and illustrated by the Faith of
the Patriarks, ver. 16. and of Moses, ver. 26. all which show, that the
felicity here presented to them in opposition to, and remedy for their present
calamities, was a future eternal felicity. 2. The expression here used seems
also to imply this; for he has qualified this promise, by stiling it, a
promise belonging to our profession, to our patience, to the recompense of
reward cap. 10. ver. 23.25.35. and 36. and this relates not to his first
coming; but to his last, when he shall settle his Church in the possession of
his glorious Kingdom, and is formally expressed, the obtaining of a better
Resurrection, ver. 38. of this Chapter. Beza Annot. on John 14.3. 3. Other
places of Scripture ascribes the perfection, and grounds the chief hope of the
Church on the Resurrection; and the word here used [perfected] is in John
17.23. used to denote the most eminent and full felicity; and the Resurrection
is called therefore, the hope of the promise, Acts 23.6. and 24.15. but most
clearly Acts 26.6.7.8. ver. and so the hope of Israel, not to him (so called)
in his person only, but to all the Posterity; of Israel, (that is) all the
true Israelites; and upon this account, God styles himself, the God of
Abraham, ver. 16. of this Chapter, because by this Abraham yet lives; for God
is not the God of, etc. and thus [these all] are expectants, not enjoyers;
probationers, not possessors: for [these all] look for, but they obtained not;
yet hereafter shall. 4. We have a further confirmation of this, from these
following Reasons.
1. Man is a compound of Scule and Body; and so man, the suppositum cannot be
perfected, whilst they are both separated; but is to receive his perfection,
when they both shall be united; and this cannot be till the Resurrection. 2.
The Covenant of Grace is made to the whole man; so that the Scripture
comparatively seems not to esteem of that felicity which the separated Soul
enjoyes in Heaven; because, 1. One part of man, all that intervall, is under
the power of the last Enemy, Death. 2. The happinesses of the Soul, shall
probably be both multiplied and heightened, at the reunion of the separated
parts by a super-addition of glory, or degrees thereof, Rev. 19.6.7.8. Acts
3.21. then shall be the time of refreshing, of restitution; then [these all]
and all we since, shall be perfected, actual partakers of that fullness of
Glory, which is promised, and provided for the whole Body of Believers.

There is a fifth conjecture, which I lately met with in a Learned and
judicious Interpreter; The perfection here, was to have the Promise made to
Abraham, Genesis 22.17. made good to them in the utmost extent. The Jewish Church
was persecuted and destroyed; the Christian may be persecuted, cannot be
destroyed: that is, the Candlestick may be removed, the Candle cannot be
extinguished; the Kingdom of God may be translated, it cannot be conquered: But
I prefer the fourth, and leave the whole to Gods blessing.

The Prayer.
O God of all goodness, who have abundantly furnished us with matter of
Praise, with a rich treasure of Grace in Jesus Christ; make us followers of him
and of [these all] and all those who have fought the good fight of Faith, that
we may follow also their holy Faith, and with them be partakers of a glorious
Resurrection, to have our perfect consummation and bliss in thy Heavenly
Kingdom: Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: Amen.

FINIS.

