ADVERTISEMENT
WHEREAS His Sacred MAJESTY, by His Patent, has constituted Sir Robert
Sibbald, one of His Physicians in Ordinary, His Geographer for His Kingdom of
SCOTLAND, and Commands and Ordains him to publish the Description of the
Scotia Antiqua, and Scotia Moderna, and the Natural History of the Products of
His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND: These are earnestly to entreat all persons,
that they would be pleased freely to communicate their Answers to these
following Queries, or any of them, Directing them to the said Sir Robert
Sibbald at his Lodging at Edinburgh, or to Master James Broun at his house in
Harts-closs, who is Deputed by the said Sir Robert Sibbald, to receive and
Registrate them; or to Robert Mean, Postmaster at Edinburgh, to be sent to any
of them: Withal specifying in their Letters, the place of their Habitation,
that they may be again Written to, if Occasion require; And an Honorable
Mention shall be made of them in the Work, according to the Importance of the
Information.

General Queries, to which Answers are desired. I. What the Nature of the
County or place is? And what are the chief products thereof? II. What Plants,
Animals, Metals, Substances cast up by the Sea, are peculiar to the place, and
how Ordered? III. What Forests, Woods, Parks? What Springs, Rivers, Loughs?
With their various properties, whether Medicinal? With what Fish replenished,
whether rapid or flow? etc. The rise of the Rivers, and their Emboucheurs? IV.
What Roads, Bays, Ports for shipping, and their Description? And what Moon
causes High Water? What Rocks, and sholes on their Coast? V. What Ancient
Monuments, Inscriptions, graved and figured Stones; Forts and ancient Camps?
And what Curiosities of Art (...) have been found the^^? VI. What great Battles
have been there fought, Or any other Memorable Action or Accident? VII. What
peculiar Customs, Manners or Dispositions the Inhabitants of each County or
Town have among them? VIII. What Monasteries, Cathedrals, or other Churches
have been there, and how named? IX. What places give, or formerly have given
the Title to any Nobleman? As also, what ancient Seats of Noble-Families are
to be met with? X. What the Government of the County is? whether Sheriffdom,
Stewartry, or Baillery? XI. What Towns of Note in the County, especially Towns
Corporate? The Names of the Towns both Ancient and Modern? Whether they be
Burrows Royal, of Regality or Barony? The Magistracy of Towns Corporated, when
Incorporated? And by whom built? With the Return of Parliament Men? The Trade
of the Town; How inhabited, and their manner of Buildings? What Public or
Ancient Buildings? Their Jurisdiction? and c. XII. In what Bishopric each
County or any part thereof is? Who is Sheriff, Stewart or Baily? And who
commands the Militia? What Castles, Forts, Forests, Parks, Woods, His MAJESTY
has there? and c.
To the NOBILITY. What Sheriffdomes, Bailliries, Stewartries, Regalities,
Baronies and Burrows they have under them? What Command of the Militia? What
special Privilege, Dignity and Heritable Command they have? The Rise of their
Family, Continuance, and their Branches? What Forests, Woods, Parks, Loughs,
Rivers, Mines, and Quarries they have? What Fishing? and c. What Harbors they
have? What their Titles are? What Memorable Actions raised or Aggrandized their
Family? and c. To the CLERGY. What their Privileges and Dignities are? Their
Erection? The Bounds of their Diocese? Their Chapter? The number of their
Parishes in their Diocese? Their Jurisdiction, their Foundations for public
^^d pious Uses their Re(...) What Lands hold of them? Their Houses? and c. To
the GENTRY. What the Rise of their Family, their Privilege and Dignity? What
Baronies and Burrows under them? What Harbors, what Forests, Woods, Parks?
Their Houses, the Description and Names of them? The Chief of the Name and the
Branches? The Memorable Exploits done by them, and the Eminent Men of the Name?
Their Heritable Command and Jurisdiction? and c. To the Royal BURROWS. Of what
Standing? The Constitution of their Government? their Privileges, Jurisdiction
and its Extent? Their public Houses, Churches, Forts, Monuments, Universities,
Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, Manufactures, Harbors? What their Latitude and
Longitude is? and c. To the UNIVERSIT(...) (...)DGES. What Standing they are
of? Their privileges Jurisdiction and its Extent, their Constitution? The
Number of their Professors, their Names, what they teach? Their Salaries,
Foundations, and their Founders? Their Revenue and Dependencies? Their Houses,
Churches and Chapels, Aedifices and Monuments? Their Libraries, Curious
Instruments? The a^count of the famous Men bred there, or Masters there? What
are the Observations of the Masters or Students, that may be for the
Embellishment of this Work?
The Answers to these preceding Queries are to be Registrate, and to be Insert
in their proper places.

The Answers to these Queries is earnestly desired that no person may complain,
if what concerns them be not insert: For the Author is resolved to insert all
that he is assured of the Truth, and certainty of, as Informed.

Imprimatur

Jo: Edinburgen.

Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, at his Printing House in Bells-Wynd. Anno
1682.


