Mother Shiptons PROPHESIES: WITH ^ree and XX. more, all most terrible and
wonderful, Predicting strange alterations to befall this Climate of ENGLAND.
Viz.
^ Of K. Richard the III. ^ Mr. Truswell Recorder of Lincoln. ^ Lillies
Predictions. ^ A Prophecy alluding to the Scots last invasion. ^ Ignatius his
Prophecy. ^ Mrs. Whites Prophecy. 7 Old Sybilla's Prophecy. 8 Merlin's
Prophesies. 10 Mr. Brightmans. 9 Old Otwell Bins. 11 Paulus Grebnerus Pro. 12 A
Prophecy in old English meeter. 13 Another ancient Proph. 14 An other short,
but pithy. 15 Another very obscure. 16 Saltmarsh his Predict. 17 A strange
Prophecy of an old Welsh-woman. 18 St. Bedes Prophecy. 19 William Ambrose. 20
Tods Prophecy. 21 Thomas of Astledowne. 22 Saunders his Prediction. 23 A
Prophecy of David, Cardinal of France, etc.


depiction of Cardinal Wolsey. Wolsey.
depiction of Mother Shipton Shipton.
depiction of King Henry VIII K. Henry 8.
depiction of Mr Saltmarsh Mr. Saltmarsh.


LONDON, ^inted by T.P. for Fr. Coals, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Lamb in the Old-Ba^ly, near the Sessions house, 1663.

Note that this Prophecy was never exactly printed before.
WHen she heard that King Henry the (...) Wolsey should be at York she said
that Cardinal Wolsey shou^ never come to York, which the King and the
Cardinal hearing, being ang^ sent the Duke of Suffolk and the L. Darcy to her,
who came with their (...) disguised to the Kings house near York, where leaving
their men they went (...) Mr. Besly in York, and desired him to go with them
to Mother Shiptons house, where when they came they knocked at the door, she
said, Come in Mr. Besly, and those honorable Lord with you, and Mr. Besly would
have put in the Lords before him; but she said come in M^ Besly you know the
way but they do not. This they thought strange that she should kno^ them and
never saw them; then they went into the house, where there was a great Fire,
an^ they drank and were very merry. Mother Shipton said the Duke, if you knew
what we ca^ about, you would not bid us so welcome, she said, the Messenger
should not be hange^ Mother Shipton said the Duke, you said the Cardinal
should never see York; yea said she, ^ said he might see York but never come
at it. But said the Duke, when he comes to York tho^ shall be burned; we
shall see that said she, and plucking her Handkercher off her head, she threw
it into the fire, and it would not burn, then she took her staff and turned
it into the fire, and it would not burn, then she took and put it on again.
Then said the Duke, wha^ mean you by this? She replied, if this had burned J
might have burned, Mothe^ Shipton quoth the Duke, what think you of me? My
Lord said she, the time wi^ come The Duke was afterward Beheaded.
you will be as low as I am, and that is a low one indeed.

My Lord Piercy said, and what say you of me? My Lord said she, Shoe you^
Horse in the quick and you shall do well but your This proved true, for he
rose in rebellion in the North; and by not flying when he might, he was taken
and beheaded in York, where his body was buried, and his Head was stolen away
and carried into France, tempore Eliz. Reg.
body will be buried in York Pavement, and your Head sha^ be stolen from the
Bar and carried into France; At which they all laughed saying, that would be
a great lop betwee^ the Head and the Body. Then said the Lord Darcy, an^ what
think you of me? She said, you have made a great Gunne, shoot it off for it
will never do you any good; you are going to War, you will pain many a man,
but kill ^one: So they went away.

Not long after the Cardinal came to Cawood and going to the top of the Tower,
He asked where stands York and how far it was thither; And said that one
said, that he should never see York: nay said one, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. He vowed to burn ^er when he came to York. Then
they showed him York, and told him it was but Eight miles ^ence, he said that
he would soon be there; but being sent for by the King, he dyed in his way to
London at Leicester of a Laske. And Shiptons wife said to Mr. Besly yonder is a
^ne ^all built for the Cardinal in the Minster of gold, Pearl and precious
Stones, go and pre^nt one of the Pillars to King Henry and he did so.

^r. Besly seeing these things fall out as she had foretold, desired her to
tell him some more of (...) Prophesies, Mr. Besly said sh^e, before that This
came (...) pass; for ^ty steeple (...) York was blown down with a tempest,
and Owsebridge was broken down with a great flood; and ^at they did in
repairing the Bridge in the day time with the stone of the steeple, fell down
in the nigh^ ^ill they remembering this Prophecy, laid the highest stone of the
steeple for foundation of the bridg^ (...) then the work stood. And by this
was partly verified another of Mother Shipton: Prophesies, viz. ^at her Maid
should live to drive her Cow over Trinity steeple.
Owse-bridge and Trinity Church meet the^ shall build on the Day, and it shall
fall in the Night, until they get the highe^ stone of Trinity-steeple to be
the lowest stone of Owse Bridge.

That the day will come when the North shall rue it wondrous sore, but the
South shall rue it for evermore; when Hares kindle on cold hearth Supposed to
be meant by suppression of Abbias and other Religious houses, and at the Lord
Will: How^ds house at Naworth, a Hare came and kindled in his Kitchen upon his
hearth.
stones, and lads shall marry Ladies and bring them home, then shall you have a
year of pining hunger, and then a dearth without Corn, a woeful! day will be
seen in England, a King and a Queen.

The first coming of the This was fulfilled in K, Iam^s coming to; for such
multitude of People stood at Holgate bar to behold him, as that to avoid the
press, he was forced to ride another way
King of Scots shall be at Holgate Town, but he shall not come in through the
Bar, and when the King When K. James was at London, his children were at
Edenbrough, preparing to come into England.
of the North shall be at London, his tail shall be at Edinborough.

After this shall water This is verified by the conducting of water into York
streets through bored Elmes? and the Conduit house has a Windmill on the top
this draws up the water
come over Owse-bridge, and a Windmill shall be set on a tower; and an
Elme-tree shall lie at every man's door, and at that time Women shall wear
great hats and great bands.

And when there is a Lord Major A Lord Major whose house was in the Minister
yard in York, was killed with three stabs.
at York, let him beware of a stab.

When two Knights Sir T. Wentworth, and Sir John-Savill, in choosing Knights
for the shire, in the Castle yard at York, did so fall out, that they were
never well reconciled.
shall fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never be kindly all their lives
after.

When all Colton Colton hagge in her time was Woodland ground full of Trees,
which bore Corn 7. years, and the 7^h year after that was the year of the
coming in of the Scots, and their taking of Newcastle.
hag has borne crops of Corn, seven years after you shall hear news, there
shall two Judges In the year 1616. two Judges of Assize went out at a gate in
York, where never any Judges were known to go out before.
go in and out at Walmgate bar.

Then Wars shall begin in the Spring,
Much woe to England it shall bring:
Then shall the Ladies cry well away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then best for them that have the least, and worst for them that have the most;
You shall not know of the warte over night yet you shall have it in the
morning: and when it comes it shall last three years; between Cardon and Air
shall be great warfare, when all the world is lost, it shall be called Christ's
Croft. When the battle begins, it shall be where Near Leice^er where Richard
the 3 was slain in battle, there Col Hasting^ was one of the first in arms,
endeavoring to settle the commission of Array in opposition to others that
were settling the Militia.
Crook-back Richard ^egan his fray.

They shall say to warfare for our King, for half a Crown a day, but stir
not, (they will say) to warfare for your King on pain of hanging, but stir
not; for he that goes to complain, shall not come back again. The time will
come when England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall be
heard to speak: Then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snap, and when the
one is down they will go to London town: Then there will be a great battle
between England and Scotland, and they will be pacified for a time, and when
they come to Brammamore they fight, and are again pacified for a time, then
there will be a great battle between England and Scotland at ^tockmore: Then
will a Raven sit on the It is to be noted and admired, that this Cross (...)
^hiptons days was a tall stone Cross, which ever since has been by degrees
sinking into the ground, and (...) is sunk so low, that a Raven may fit upon
the top of it, and reach with her bill to the ground.
Cross, and drink as much blood of Nobles as of the Commons, then woe is me,
for London shall be destroyed for ever (...)

There will come a woman with one Eye, and she shall tread in many men's blood
to (...) knee; and a man leaning on a staff by her, she shall say to him, what
art thou? And he she say, J am the King of Scots, and she shall say, go with
me to my house, for there are the Knights, and he will go with her, and stay
there three days and three nights, then will En^land be lost, and they will
cry twice a day, England is lost. Then there will be three Knigh^ in Petergate
in York, and the one shall not know of the other;. here shall be a Child bo^
in Pomfret with three thumbs, and those 3 Knights will give him three horses
There is a Child not many years since born at Pomfret, with three Thumbs.
to hold while they win England, and all Noble blood shall be gone but one;
and they shall carry him to Sheriff- Huttons Castle, six miles from York, and
he shall dye there, and they shall choose there an Earl in the field, and
hanging their Horses on a thorn, will rue the time that ever they were borne
to see so much blood shed. Then they will come to York to besiege it, and they
shall keep them out three days and three nights, and a penny loaf shall be
within the Bar at half a Crown, and without the bar at a penny; and they will
swear if they will not yield, to blow up the Town-walls; Then they will let
them in, and they will hang up the Major, Sheriffs and Aldermen, and they will
go into Crouch Church, there will three Knights go in, and but one come out
again, and he will cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take
house, tower, or bower for 12. years, and while the world endures there shall
never be warfare again, nor any more Kings or Queens; but the Kingdom shall
be governed by three Lords, and then York shall be London. And after this shall
be a wh^ harvest of Corn gotten in by women. Then shall be in the North, that
one woman shall ^y unto another; Mother J have seen a Man to day, and for one
man there shall be a thousand women: There shall be a man sitting on St. James
Church-hill weeping his fill; And after that a Ship come sailing up the Thames
till it come against London, and the Mr. of the Ship shall weep, and the
Mariners shall ask him why he weepeth, being he has made so good a voyage,
and he shall say; Ah what a goodly City this was, none in the world comparable
to it, and now there is left scarce any house that can let us have drink for
our money.

Unhappy he that lives to see those days,
But happy are the dead Shipton wife says:
In the world old age this woman did foretell,
Strange things shall hap, which in our time have f^ll
A Prediction of K. Richard the Third.
IN the Reign of K Richard the 3. his Majesty with his army lay at Leicester
the night before the bat^ll of Bosworth field was fought. It happened in the
Morning as the King rode through the southgate, a poor blind man (by
profession a Whel-wright) sat begging, and hearing of his approach, said; That
if the Moon changed twice that day, having by her ordinary course changed in
the morning, K. Ricard should lose his C^owne and be slain; and riding over
the brige his left foot struck upon a stump of wood, which the old man hearing,
said; Even so shall his head at his return back hi^ on the same place, which
so come to pa^e: And a Noble man that carried the ^ for his colors revolted
from K Richard, whereby he lost that day his Life, Crown and Kingdom; which
verified the presagees of that poor blind old man.

Mr. Truswals Recorder of Lincoln.
The Lilly shall remain in a merry world, and he shall be moved against the
seed of the Lion, and he (...) stand on one side amongst thrones of his
Kingdom and Country. And there shall come the Son of (...) hearing three wild
Beasts in his Arms, which Kingdom is the Lord of the Moon, which is to be
dread throughout all the world with a company of People he shall pass many
waters, and shall come to the L^ of the Lion, looking for help, with the
beasts of his own Country. And in that year there shall come an Eagle out of
the East, and his wings spread with the beams of the son of man and that
year shall ^e de^royed Caste^ upon Thams, and there shall be great fears over
the whole world; and in a part of the Land there shall be great battles amongst
many kingdoms: This day shall be the bloody field, and the Lilly shall (...)
his Crown, and therewith shall be crowned the Son of man. And in th^ty year
many Batte^ (...) (...) world shall be stoopen, but the Son of man with the
Eagle shall be pref^ed, and there shall be an universal Peace over the whole
world: Then shall the son of man receive a mavelous token, and there shall
be great plenty of all manner of Fruits, and then shall he go to the Land of
the Cro^e.

Mr. Lilly in the 59 and 60 Page of his Astronomicall Predictions, fore-tels.
THat the Scots intend to invade us again, but shall not set a foot so far
as York, in a hostile manner: The Child is now borne that shall see that a
most flourishing City: If they come they must not expect so fair an Enemy as
Cromwell, nor so good Quarter as lately they ^ound; Jockey, Iemmy, and Moggie,
that the Soldiers must then to the Sword, fire, Famine and destruction,
following them to the walls and heart of Edinburgh it self.

A Prophecy of the Scots Invasion.
WHen you have had hard work to do,
And added Five to Forty two;
You shall perceive a goodly Play spoil,d,
And by unworthy Actors foiled:
The Scaen, tanspos'd the act confu'd,
The Poet shamefully abused.
The first intention of the Plot
By their confusion's quite forgot,
(...) them to Tragic acts designed,
Who entered with a Comic mind.
Some personating double parts,
With double tongues and double hearts;
shall from one side to to other run,
Till they are scorned of every one:
And by their means (when Peace seems near)
The troubles which did first appear.
(...) Thirty nine prolonged will^g
Till Fifty two and fifty three;
And now what courses will be took,
^hen those years wheel about. Go look.
Jgnatius his Prophecy.
(...) Eighty eight be past, then thrive
^hou may, till Thirty four or five:
(...) that E is dead a Scot
(...) govern there, and if a Plot
^ent him not, then sure his sway
^inue shall till many a day.
(...) Ninth shall dye young, and the first
^haps shall Reign; but (oh) accursed
(...) be the time when thou shall see
(...) sixteen joined Twenty three;
(...) then the Eagle shall have help,
(...) to catch the Lions whelpe,
^urt him fore, except the same
^red by the Maidens name.
(...) month of the same year,
(...) conjoynes with Jupiter.
(...) false Prophe^s shall arise,
^omer shall show his prize.
(...) to much alteration
^pen in Religion;
(...) truly; if then you see
(...) a Protestant to ^e.
Mrs. White a Welshwoman, Prophesied as follows, on the Month of May.
THe 25.th of this Month of May,
Shall be a sad disastrous day;
And they that Charles his part does take,
Shall dearly suffer for his sake:
And many of his Friends shall fly
Like dust before the Enemy.
But in the pleasant Month of June,
The Birds will sing another tune;
A glorious splendour shall appear,
And so protect our Sovereign dear.
Dieu cathee whee Guenthelin White; aged 112. year^

The Prophecy of old Sybilla.
WHen Scotlands hundred and 9 unconquered king
The sixteenth hundred Thirty and nine,
Into his age of thirty nine shall Reign,
Then shall the Papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire;
For Scotland shall that blessed work c begin
Then shall the whore of Babble had here
Be banishe quite, which Bishops did bring in.
Then thou brave England, which was led so blind,
By their perverse Episcopal pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed, who cruelly have cried?
So that, that sacred Prophetess Sybilla,
Shall shortly come to pass; she tells Tom Milla.
And Tom tells me, and I must tel't again,
Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France. and Spain:
Merlins Prophesies.
ON Borcas wings then hither shall be borne,
Through Week over Tweed, a Princely Unicorn
Who brought into the world his own far Creast
A rampant Lion figured on his breast.
And to his arms ^ix Lions more shall quarter
With six French flowers environed with the Garter
Joining by fates unchangeable dispose
The Northern Thistle in the Southern Rose?
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain
With pious zeal during his blessed Reign.
That Line^ was that London is and York shall be,
Brave London prays those days she never man (...).
(...) of Otwe^ (...) M. Smith, Vicar of Hudderfield 40. Years.
Then JAMES shall seek a second Crown,
In pulling Pope and Papists down,
But James shall vanish from their face
At half Eliz^beths Royal race.
Then using foreign Policies,
Grudgings and discontents arise;
Yet shall they assemble at the seat
Of Parliament for a work most great;
But strange Opinions there shall sow
Discentions that too high shall grow:
And Laodicea's Englands Church,
Of grace and beauty some shall lurch;
And Smiths of policy shall invent
To cast new molds of Government.
While vulger Birds of weaker wing
Grow ^out against their Eagle King;
Whose just integrous heart shall prove
The adamant of Supjects love.
Th^n pride shall some in Prison lock
And lop a head off on a block:
By honest power they shall bring down
An aspirer that ass'umed a Crown;
That he whose power did Laws contemn,
Might find a Grave no Diadem.
Some Comic scaenes shall then be acted
By vulgar Players much distracted;
The Gospel from a Tub or tun,
Shall preached by Mechanics run.
Petticoats shall in Pulpits preach,
And Women be allowed to teach:
And in those gloomy dogged days
They shall tread off the Muses bays
Thus strife and envy shall increase,
and Round beads shall disturb the Peace
Of Religion, while they it toss
In Blankets, and pull down the Cross.
The Brownists shall no old Prayers brook
(...) shall drown the Service Book;
Then all men in those times shall see
Great troubles and Calamity:
Then on the Irish bogs and heath
Many a man shall taste of Death.
The soulders wages shall increase,
Till wars at last in Conquest cease;
To such as are good Land lords known,
In hostile times some love is shown;
But for all such as have great store,
They are in less safety then the Poor.
Then twenty pounds of coin in hand,
Is worth so much of yearly Land;
From Ireland then there shall come one
Must lose his head upon a stone;
But when England shall swim in fl^ds
Of plenty, and grow proud of goods;
Then from their ^pe they shall be waked,
To know themselves both blind and naked;
Christ's Church (...) know some miser^
(...)
WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame,
Full of luke-warmeness, glory vain;
The worst in works and outward form,
And with contrary Factions torn.
When Romish Rights by reformation
shall be expelled out of this Nation;
Lord Beggar Bishops then shall come
To ruin and be overthrown.
The Priests shall be vile to each wight
Their downfall read with much delight;
For God will not the guiltless hold,
That have been neither hot nor cold.
The Scotch Church shall be in condition,
A Virgin free from superstition
They shall be joynd in Covenant,
Against which the world shall boast and vaunt;
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
until she truly her self Reform;
Such hurly burly, and such stir,
No form of church shall remain in her;
But Reformation must take breath
From the Reign of queen Ellzabeth.
Paulus Grebnerus his Prophecy, presented (...) Q. Elizabeth, anno 1682.
concerning those tim^
THat a Northern King shall Reign, Charl^ Name, who shall take to wife Mary of
the ^pish Religion, whereupon he shall be a most unf^nate Prince. Then the
People of his Dominion (...) choose to themselves another Co^mander for Gov^nor,
viz. an Earl, whose Government shall last 3. (...) or thereabout. And
afterward the same people (...) choose another Comander (or Governor) viz. a
(...) not of the same Family, or Dignity; And after (...) they shall choose none
at all.

Then after him shall appear the Cha^es ^scending from Charles the first, and
shall (...) his Fathers Kingdom wonderful happily (...) bear Rule far and
near; and shall be (...) then Charles the Great.

A Prophecy very ancient in old Me^.
IN the same year that fully shall expi^
The sixth great Wonder of the worlds (...)
Then Tyder^ i.e. Hen. Ed. Mar. Ph^. Eli^
HEMP shall end I ^are^ a read;
Then After Q. Eliz. K. James*
E shall fall, and J shall stand in (...) stead.
In the same year a great Plague shall (...)
The which a Thousand days it shall (...)
At Maryes Mass a Court they hold,
The which in bloody Ink shall (...)
There many a Plea shall pass with (...)
(...) back again appear:
(...) all many a ba^ell and brawle be
(...) a huge host shall pass over the Sea;
^ing a Peace but in this wise,
(...) C C. two L L. so long shall last two I I,
Another.
(...) all ^ be called the first of the Dice,
(...) ^ shall bear up,
(...) shall England be (...) Paradise;
(...) ^ and ^ be set on side;
(...) name of ^ shall spring full wide;
(...) when ^ and ^ drive out ^,
(...) ^ay England sing well away:
(...) is all shent,
(...) shall be another Parliament.
(...) shall up, and ^ shall under,
Then shall ^ bear the pri^e,
And ^ shall help thereto.
Another short, but pithy.
IN Germany begins a Dance,
Which passes through Italy, Spain, and France
and to Ireland is a Leaper.
There the Dance lies at a stand,
Till it ventures over into Scotland,
But England shall pay the Piper.
Another.
ENgland thy proper Native thee betraies,
Because all nations hate thee and thy ways,
Spain does undermine thee, France does grow,
Wales threats, the Irish thee by snares does awe.
Thy bravest men do on a sudden dye,
And thou thy self do wholly ruined lie?
Yet see it not, but under feigned Peace,
Do thine own misery still more increase.
(...) Saltmarshes Predictions declared to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and
the Council of his Army, the Motives that occasioned it; and the manner of his
Death.
I being at his house at Yilford in Essex December 4. 1647. told his Wife that
he had received a Command from God, to make known to the armies what the Lord
had revealed unto him, The like he said Sir ^. M. Knight, a Member of the house
of Co^ns, as soon as he arrived at London The next day be^ the Lords day, he
found some difficulty to procu^e a Horse, but after dinner he got one, and rid
alone ^ards Windsor, but missing his way, lodged at night 7 miles short, where
he declared, that the great (...) ^full day of the Lord is near, when all men
shall be judged by Jesus Christ, and then shall (...) ^ctions of all men
appear, etc. Early the next day December. 6. he again missed his way (...)
espying a house rid to it to demand his way, and there made known, That God was
p^ (...) ^ed and draw the Saints to himself, with much more; after which he
departed, and (...) came to Windsor; where Mr. A. an Adjutator saluted him, he
said M. A. depart from the (...) perish with them; for the Lord has revealed
unto me that he is angry with this army, (...) forsaken him; another a Captain
asked him how he did? to whom he replied, that (...) God to say to him, because
he had always been a (...) under specious pretense. The (...) another Officer,
he said he could not own him, for he was for destruction, Then going to (...)
where many Officers were met in expectation of the General he told them, That
he (...) to reveal the Lords command, that though God had done much for them,
and by them, y^ (...) and their councels because they had forsaken him; That
God would not prosper their (...), but destroy them by Divisions amongst
themselves, That formerly he came like a Lamb, (...) had raised in him the
spirit of a Lion, because they ha^ sought to destroy the People of God. (...)
that he looked like one distracted, and that he had been sick and was not well
recovered; to who^ (...), that he had been sick, but well in health then, and
sensible of what he said, and that should be (...) time that ever he should
speak to them. Afterward he went to the General, not moving his hat and
(...). That he had no command from God to honor him; that he had honored him
so much as he of^ded God in doting on his Person, and that God would no longer
prosper him, etc. Then going to the L. (...) asked him how he did? He without
any respect answered him, That God was very angry with (...) ^ing the godly,
and that the Armies falling from their first Principles, would occasion their
(...) destruction, etc. After which he departed, and on Tuesday December. 7. he
went again to the L. Genesis (...), that he was sorry to see such obstinacy in
him, and wished him to be mindful of what God (...) unto him: Afterward he
took his leave of the army and said, he had done his Errand, and (...) them
never to see the army any more. On Wednesday December. 8. he came to London and
took (...) friends to whom he recommended his Wife. On Thursday December. 9. he
went from London to (...) at Yilford not sick at all, and told his wife what he
had done. On Friday December. 10. he said he (...) course, and must go to his
Father; In the afternoon he said his Head (...) and laid hi^ (...) his Bed On
Saturday December. 11. he was taken spee^sse, and ^ut 4. or five of ^e clock
(...) D^ed

The (...)
A strange Prophecy of an old Welsh-woman lately deceased, found written in
her Trunk (...) showing (...) ruin of ^gland Castle, the Scots invasion and
destruction in the year 164^ that the Scots shall the next year 1650. make
another attempt to invade this Land, but aga^ beaten; but after that the year
following, they will come again with far more strength and the^ waste and
utterly undo many; but afterward they shall find such a terrible repulse, that
most of the (...) overthrown and vanquished.

S^ (...) says, Sin shall cause gaeat trouble in every Land, and right shall
not reign in his Inheri^ (...) sins shall be upholden; Falsehood shall proudly
stand, and black clouds of Ignorance stop the (...) of remembrance; Truth and
Equity down shall be laid; for men ^all their God forsak^ give (...) to
misgovernance, in heart great sorrow then shall awake, for ^bt of falling of
venge^ (...) ever worse and worse their life shall be, so that all Realms
shall speak of thee, with death and dea^ every Country, God shall so punish
this Nation with battles beyond sea, they shall be brought into desper^

William Ambrose says, Treason shall labor fast with all her might to keep
Right out of the Land; (...) Laws and Ordinances day and night, and no token
of true love shall be found, ranting Gallant^ (...) shall punish all about, and
then make a sentence in justice of Law, and cause many one to sta^ great doubt,
and after a cursed manner they shall ever draw, and against the Right they
shall ever man and they shall loose their Heads ever among, and they that bear
the Lanthorn shall lie in the mire, and People shall wade deep in sin; For the
Pastors of the Church shall rest and sleep in blindness and si^ and have great
Treasures in their Chests, and be secret with Ladies and others, and sport them
in Adu^ and say it is natural, causing many to sin, and their audacity shall
be great to cover the sin withal, (...) shall lead the blind till both fall in
the ditch, and many one shall go wrong for lack of (...) for where the
foundation is not sure, down it goes.

TO^ says, The great shall supplant the Poor and pill them daily, and keep
them full low, and shall ^pell them daily to know Falsehood, which shall be
called true and Right, and the great shall climb (...) all after their content
to set aside a Commonwealth. Wherefore you Saxons, think not thoug^ (...)
time, that the Normans and you both shall be driven away, the Brutes of the first
line shall enter ag^ (...), ye shall go from hence for your great sin; the
Brutes were the first, and (...) ^ing in the Land, and with them shall abide
all that is true blood (the Brutes were driven (...) and when they win least)
so shall the Saxons. Then holy men desired to know, (...) ^ld begin, and what
Battles should be, and ^w, who should lose and who should w^ (...) ^wered and
said] When all sin is favored without Correction, and Lords wed their (...)
God have no affection, when Priests and Lay people be all one in word and deed
wi^ (...) ^en shall not care what they do nor how they got their good, nor
where, and Innocen^ (...) ^wne shall wear; and this time of trouble continue
shall forty years ere it be ended ^

(...) ^edowne says, There shall be a deceitful Parliament, in the which
shall be showed (...) they can no longer keep in secret, which has of long
time been prevented; and there (...) ^versies in Opinions, that the Realm shall
be in four parts, and with that voice shall (...) of the World against us, to
punish us for the great abominable Heresies and whoredo^ (...) ^oly Orders.

Saunders Prediction for the year, 1659.
(...) the noting, That the 14. great Orb in which the Moon and Leo have
ruled, shall have its p^ (...) And then begins the 15. great Orb, in which
Saturn and Virgo shall predominant; which (...) the sign of the great
Conjunction before the coming of Christ, which shall produce g^ (...) in the
world, and principally concerns Mercurialists, who will then have more Rule in
the wo^ (...) ^der this there will be a King in England.

David's Prophecy, Cardinal in France.
CHarles mighty Monarch did the C begin
After whose Death Usurping C came in;
By will and force he some few years bore sway,
Nothing but blood his fury could allay:
Alas this hundred and his crooked Race,
Were like Usurpers, turned out of the place
Of honor, as they well deserved indeed.
And now the L. for fifty does succeed,
Stout Neptun's left and by the Monk so bold
Who does appear this riddle to unfold.
Right shall have Righ^; for in a little space
A hundred shall be of the hundred Race.
The M^k will join (as appearance shows)
The Exiled Thistle to the Happy Rose.
Who shall in Peace these Nations free from f^
Govern in safety for Three hundred year^
FIN.

