A RHETORICAL RAPTURE AS COMPOSED INTO A FUNERAL ORATION At the Mournful
Moving of His HIGHNESS Stately EFFIGIES from SOMERSET HOUSE.
By Mr. Slater.
Si mea cum vestris valuissent vota Britanni,
Non essem exiguus tanti ploraminis actor,
Tuque tuis Armis, nos Te potiremur O Cromwell.
HAd not our Sins over our Prayers prevailed,
We might have now for them, not Thee bewailed:
Thou thine own Arms enjoyed, we joy'd in Thee;
Nor had there been this grand Disparitie,
So mean a Muse mourn so Heroic Worth,
But our kind Angel brings Fame's Treasures forth.
Fame sounds the Victories which Thou bequeaths
Christendom, crowning Thee with Laurel wreaths:
Seventh Henry's Chapel may Thy Corpse entombe,
But for Thy Monuments the World's the room:
Seventh Henry's or Cromwell's Chapel, which you please
Call it; or, to Them Both, Chapel of Ease;
Or, Honors Cabinet; or, Valors Tent
To repose in, after the Day is spent,
To rise at sound of Trump, clad cap a pe
In bright Armor of Immortality.
But soft, Must CROMWELL to an Abbey go?
The name of Abbeys is to Cromwell's Foe:
It Is true, That Nobles zeal was very hot;
According unto Knowledge, Was it not?
Knew He not too-too-well the Tromperies,
The fond Fripperies of the Friaries,
Dull Abbey-lubbers glutt'nous Luxury?
Zeal qualified thus, though hot, is not dry;
Not so dry, to swallow them at a gu'p,
The Crimes of Abbeys did themselves eat up.
Go CROMWELL then, down to the Abbey go,
Down to thy mother bow: Thy Daughter (know)
Tolled thy Great Bell; the Prim-rose fading young,
The old Stock-Gilly-flower could not last long.
Go, Honorably down, to Thy long Home,
Thy Mother Earth has decked Thee up a room:
Ah! Kind Mother, that never forsakes
In life time Man of her Fruits partaketh,
And dead, into her Bosom is received;
Such kindness, not known, might not be believed;
Patient Grizels Passive Great Grandmother
We dare not in be-dull'd silence smother
Top of our Kindreds so stupendous Kindness,
Left Ingratitude blast us to Blindness:
To give thy children Bread, Thou suffering
Long furrows in thy Back, and they whistling
The while; and when that we (Clods of Clay) must
At length come to our selves, Dust unto Dust,
Thy very Bowels be dug up for us;
Why do Thou suffer? Why we serve Thee thus?
Like Agrippina art Thou upon it set
To cry Occidar modo Imperet?
To gain thy Dirt-Bloud Offspring Heavenly Crowns
Without a Tear courting their heavy wounds?
Go CROMWELL peaceably, to thy long Home,
There needs not any bustling to make room:
Divine Eliza's, and Sixth Edward's Dust
Deposited in rich Carcanets, in trust
Till glorious morn of Resurrection,
Will (in a Land-skip of the Ascension)
To congratulate thy Sereness, rise,
Flying quick into thy Followers eyes:
Whence such an Inundation of Tears,
That out-vied Thamesis, shrinking with Fears,
Glides ghastly to the Main-Guard for recruit:
The mobled Ocean (as its Natives, mute
At the Starting news) flows to the Funeral
Of his Great Master, and out-weeps 'um all:
The trickling Brine blazoning, All Strike-fail
To RICHARD; Oliver's Blazing Star, the Whale.
Flaming Comets Divination hold,
But Whales, extinct, Divinity unfold:
Jonah's Pulpit, (dead) turned Prophet, showed Thee
Thy Death, swallowed up into victory.
Trees six-and-sevens tossed: the Storm's Deep-witty;
While Sixty-six throws out the Seven-Hill'd City,
Grieved Tyber, crimsoned with Companions gore,
New-sleeks in her own wash Romes rivell'd Whore:
How Is Babylon Babel'd! Her Merchants cry;
Ruining Storm, ruined, echoes as I.
Go from this thy brave House of Somerset
To a braver, trimmed with Thee our Summer set:
Sun-like, Go down into thy Western Vault;
Our Great Generals Bride-chamber let us called;
CROMWELLS and Cromwellines True-Lovers-Knot,
Till to Glory waked, Their Gloomy Grott
To rest in, or the Suns cool-silent Shade;
Where, Worms do drive a very subtle Trade
In The Royal ' Change of (the Moons Hieroglyphick)
The Arched Vault; by the Mysterious trick
Of Bartering growing big as Burgesses,
Trucking their Snips of Prince-worn Taffeties
For whole pure Pieces of God-like durance:
But (see the Wit of Justice!) though to advance
Themselves awhile by gourmandizing gains,
They neither Day nor Night spare any pains,
But to Corpulentize ravenous Wembs
Anthropophagize even Royal Stems;
Vengeance at last does Covetousness repay,
All Merchant-worms quite Breaking on Doomsday.
Go to thy Monumental Home: it is our part
To attend Thee to thy Tomb; where each Heart
Entombing Thee our entombed Center,
We, New Monuments, amongst the Old shall enter
In doleful March, slowly to solemnize
Our bounden Loyalty in free-flowing eyes.
Stand there, like Cristal Cloud-pointing Pyramid
Carved by Angels for Great Britains David,
Providence second Sweetheart: There, Stand
Dictator (of the first word of Command)
To Englands Senators; who, to Her true,
Can (best knowing Caesar's and Senates due)
Dominion-debates make like That; unite;
Arm Hands abroad, not Heads at home to fight.
Stand a Mirror to Christian Magistrates,
A Terror stand to Popish Potentates:
Stand an Honor to Seventh Henry's Pile,
An Horror to Enemies of This Isle:
Stand, in thy fair Effigies, erect,
Admired Center of all Eyes: Reflect
The Royal rays of thy Majestic form
Calmly on thy Spectators; let no storm
Intwist thy Brow at an approaching Foe,
But seeing Thee he will a Convert go.
Go CROMWELL then, Down to the Abbey go,
Down to thy Mother Earth: From Heaven know
Honor keeps pace with Thee, unto thy Tomb;
Nor will it there forsake Thee (as with some)
And back go with the Heralds: but fairly
Hovering over Thee, out of thy memory
Brood numberless Protectors to this Isle,
Who shall make Babylon frown, and Syon smile.
The Worlds chief General, march to thy long Home,
March on thy Brave Hearse to the worlds chief Tomb;
Thy Elias-Soul long since marched away,
The Mantle falling on our Elisha:
Thy Souls march upwards was, thy Corpse march down;
Thy Soul has free Reward, Corpse due Renown;
The Angels Treble-Anthem That singing is,
Adam's Heavy Slumber debasing This;
But This to That shall rise, That welcome This;
Prerogative and Privilege join in bliss:
March, March away; March down to thy long Home,
Millions of Mourners sigh to see Thee come.
Ye pretty chirping Choristers of the Air,
Warbling wild Elegies, nimbly repair
To His Chariot: there, Melody-spent, die,
Out-doing Art in Natures Poetry:
But yet hold out, 'till ye have sung Him home,
To pick Him, out your Feather-beds, one of Down.
Great Grandmother of walking Worms, grave Earth,
Our Dry Eyes may portend deserved Dearth;
Admit our Plea, Only light Sorrows whine,
The Grandeur of our Groans does surmount thine:
But Dame, -- lest You gravelled with groans, falter,
All-a-row, Soldiers, row Him home by Water.
Phoenix of Princes Fame does OLIVER own,
And prophecy'ng thus, over the World's now flown;
An Angels Quill dipped in Babylons Blood
Shall make My CROMWELL fully understood:
Till then ( Muses, Rhet'rick, shortning thy rate)
OLIVER's own Acts CROMWELL best celebrate.
THE EPITAPH.
STay, Pilgrim, Stay; Tread gently; Mourn a while
Over that rests under, The Honor of this, Isle:
Englands PROTECTOR, Victorious OLIVER:
Europe's Arbitrator: The World's Wonder:
The Nine Worthies grace-chymickt Quintessence:
Diamond of Saints: Darling of Providence:
Amboyna's Blood-shed's Cure: A Pearl in the Eye
Of Romes, Spaines, Universal Monarchy:
Who broke the Irish-Harp: the Welsh new-strung:
Refined Parliaments: did old Scots new-dung:
Was wise Servant: a religious Master:
Provident Parent: Bounteous Lord: no Waster:
Captives Ransomer: poor Pilgrims Patron:
Champion against Gods Foes, Chaplain to his own,
Have, Pilgrim, Have; Trip nimbly hence, Be gone:
Lest free in Tears Thou freez into a Stone.
To be sold by Isaac Pridmore at the Golden Falcon near the New-Exchange. 1658.


