St. Ignatius's Ghost, Appearing to the JESUITS; Upon The KING'S Signing the
ACT Against The GROWTH OF POPERY.

A SATYR.

London, Printed for A. Baldwin. 1700.

St. Ignatius's Ghost, Appearing to the JESUITS; Upon The KING'S Signing the
ACT, etc.
SAD News the Court of Beelzebub Alarms,
And make the Guards of Hell stand to their Arms;
For Agents which into these Regions fly,
The Course of Humane Actions to espy,
Inform the King of Fates he will be in Thrall,
The main Supporters of his Throne do Fall
Since new Enacted Laws make you to fly
The chiefest place which Harbors Heresy;
Therefore Ambassador, I Am to you sent,
The Downfall of my Master to prevent.
We (who I thought could baffle Death and Hell,
And durst like them against a GOD Rebel)
From rocky Dangers into Coverts fly?
It is a Shame to my Society!
What Planet Envies us? We lose o'r Fame,
And shall be Branded with Eternal Shame.
You Jesuits, and dare not prop o'r Cause,
For fear of Suffering by English Laws?
No Blood of Roman Courage fills those Veins,
Which dare not rush though Prisons, Halters, Chains,
The Race of Heretics to Extirpate,
And think it Glory if you meet your Fate.
O! what a Glorious Sight was it to see,
Poor Massianello frighten Majesty,
And John of Leyden be a King declared;
Shall we by such mean Fellows be out-dar'd?
The very Offals, Rubbish of Mankind,
By-casts of Fortune; it disturbs my Mind!
If you will have your Names look Great, and swell
Big in the Rolls of Fame, and Lists of Hell,
You must be Daring, Resolute, and Bold,
By Blood the Sea-Apostolick uphold.
When you the Sword have altogether Swayed,
You Have Careless been, a sorry Harvest made;
Witness, when Mary rolled her Orb in Flames,
Which strove for Luster with the Sun's bright Beams;
But too too little was the waving Blaze,
To dimn the brightness of his Golden Rays:
Her Courage for her Highness was too Mean;
The Offering was too much beneath a Queen:
She flag'd in Fear, and buckled to Delay,
Her Martyred Sum for Faggots did not Pay:
The Twelve-score Number tantaliz'd my Thirst,
To greater Draughts of Blood I then did Trust.
A Massacre? It Merits not the Name,
The timorous Act's to Me, and Rome a Shame!
Had I ruled Heretics but half her Years,
Their Bones, for want of room, had reached the Spheres;
The Flames in Smithfield, like the Eternal Fire
The Persians used, never should Expire,
Till some great Change upon the State had came,
As Signal to put out the sacred Flame:
If She a Name Immortal strove to Gain,
Her Robes She should have Died in deeper Grain,
A Scarlet much exceeding Pilate's Deed,
Who made his GOD (to please the Rabble) Bleed.
If you true Jesuits intend to be,
You must in Mischiefs strive to equal Me;
Under my Banner Revel in such Crimes,
Which being Chronicled to after times,
Posterity Unborn may think them feigned;
And then the Fame you have loft will be regained:
Loath Scraps of Sin, in Sinning never lag;
But through unpity'ng Rage your Fury drag;
Gird Thoughts with Feuds, and show your hot Desire
Does [ Salamander like] reside in Fire.
The Powder Plot, (that greatest Strain of Wit)
Which English Calendars will never forget,
A brave Design it was, I ca'nt but own,
Because the aim was at a Lollard's Crown,
But may the spightsul Star which ruled that Night,
And brought a Plot so finely wrought to Light,
Never shine again; be banished the Sky;
And in Oblivion for ever lie:
Ah! Heaven I suppose did dread the Blow,
For fear the next had been their Overthrow,
Nay, had Suc^ess but crowned that high Intent,
Garnet, and I had Stormed their Element.
If Jesuits Launch out in Tyranny,
Do Deeds becoming that great Soul, and Me;
To all the Vices of the World be given,
And scorn a Friendship to Contract with Heaven:
Base Murders, Falsehood, Treasons, Perjury,
Deceit, Injustice, and Hypocrisy
The Clymax are, by which you must ascend
To Grand'ur; with these Weapons Hell defend.
Those Civil Wars which Right did overcome,
And brought a King to suffer Martyrdom,
I must acknowledge they were by you made,
By dressing up y'ur Plots in Masquerade;
O! had you, when those Tumults tore the State,
Attempted to have met the threatening Fate,
Perhaps they might have snatched from both the Realm,
And brought the Pope once more to sit at Helm;
In Blood have drowned that infecting Breed,
Which from apostate Monks did first proceed:
But Fear, or squemish Conscience did deprive
Them of that Rage by which great Actions thrive,
Which Scare-Crows should be chased from the Mind,
Because repugnant to great Sins designed;
Had Alexander boggl'd at his Trade,
Or in the least a timorous Scruple made,
Of spoiling Crowns, on which his Conquests leapt,
For scarcity of Worlds he had not Wept.
The Romish Ethics teach you better things,
It Is lawful to Depose, or Murder Kings,
The Doctrine's Orthodox, and Catholic,
Therefore in Haesities you need not stick;
The Tenets, Topics; all those sacred Rules
You learn at Doway, and St. Omer's Schools,
Do teach you to be Brave in what you act,
And raise y'ur Glory by a crimson Fact,
By Crimes which may infernal Hosts affright,
And startle Heaven at your Sanguine Sight.
By Fury, Brimstone, and the Porph'ry Chair*
That Act which seemed to Fire all the Air,
Might be compared to a Deed of mine,
Though ineffect'al to the main Design;
But yet it made the King of Hell to Smile,
To see Augusta made a Fun'ral-Pile;
O Sacred Blaze! Had it is surprising Light
But lit o'r Foes to Everlasting Night,
The Deed o'r Church had made a Sacrament;
Yet do I consecrate the brave Intent.
Again I own in that same Monarch's time,
Whose vast Profuseness deemed it not a Crime,
With helpless Orphans Money to maintain
Nell Gwin, and others, Scandals to his Reign,
Some nobly Acted; but a Curse on Oats!
Or else base Souls had broke through bleeding Throats
To Guard a King, whose Royal Ghost had been
The first great Offering for his Country's Sin;
Whole Hecatombs of Martyrs then had fell,
A Sacrifice to Popery and Hell.
But now I Am traced to such a Path of time,
That I must needs upbraid you with a Crime,
It was your fault that Fortune cross did run,
When She was pleased the Scale of Fate to turn;
How faintly you did go about the Cause!
In taking off the Tests and Penal Laws,
And showing something of dispensing Power,
By sending Stiff-neck Bishops to the Tower;
All this for Pope, nor Devil nothing won,
Nor Polton's Arguing with Tenison;
The greatest Wits of Rome must not pretend,
By Scripture, Law, or Reason to defend
A Church, that Grounds her Faith upon a Lie,
She must maintained be by Cruelty.
So long as you would the great Apostle's Sword,
You ought not to have scuffled with the Word,
The Bibles (Pillars to their Paper Creed)
You should have Burned, made their Admirers Bleed,
Those Books the Vatican should be expelled,
For they too long have Heresy upheld.
Unking-like Mercy marred the hallow's time,
And Peter's Bungling added to the Crime,
He Privy-Councellor! and did no more?
Cursed Memory! let Cowards it adore.
Had I been here when Charles had changed his State,
From that blessed Min'te fresh Glory I would date;
I Would sealed the sacred Cause with Blood, and Wounds,
Alarmed Rome with dying Martyrs Sounds;
My Noble Rage had made her to believe,
Her greatness from their Ashes I Would retrieve.
I Would decked the House of Death with bloody Scenes,
As strangling ravished Maids not in the Teens;
So great had been my Spleen, I should deflour,
Virgins which Lifeless lay, besmeared with Gore;
Laughed at young Infants springing from the Womb
To meet their Mothers in a flaming Tomb;
Vomited Flame upon the reaking Stage,
Without respect to Greatness, Sex, or Age,
Upon their Altars quenched the Heat of Lust,
And laid their Churches even with the Dust;
To see my Rage would pity'ng Heaven Weep,
Yet in the Road of Malice I shall keep:
I Would bravely sanctified Saint George's Day,
The Cross by that time should have borne the Sway,
Since from his Throne a King was tumbled down,
James should have swam through Blood to catch his Crown.
You Janissaries of the Sulfurous Lake!
And let y'r Order's Honor lie at stake?
You Firebrands and Ingineers of Hell!
No, from the high Preferment you have fell,
Y'ur Cowardice makes you Degenerate
From me y'ur Founder, who Quells Hell, and Fate.
Heed not the Sorbonists Theology.
It Is Politics must buoy Popery;
O'r League with Blood Cement, in Fury rake,
'Tween Good and Bad no Criticismes make;
They Are but the dull Conceits of idle Brains,
A true-bred Villain, God and Man Disdains.
If in a Plot you are Unfortunate,
And must y'ur Exit at a Gallows Date,
Nothing out of inglorious Fear confess,
That Is prejudicial to his Holiness;
Seal up y'ur dying Speeches with a Lie,
Yet God, and Angels call to Testify
Y'ur Innocence, to hide the Villainy.
A Baulk in Plots must urge you to engage
The next pitched Battle with a greater Rage;
You (who are taught to Spurn at Sovereignty,
And those profounder Rules of Villainy)
If one Plot's crushed, from Plotting must not cease,
Like frightful Hydra's Heads they must increase;
If you with Crimson would Great Britain Stain,
With Crimes as black as Hell, tempt Fate again,
Tempt her so often with some Hell-bred Deed,
That from y'ur Boldness begging to be freed,
She yields to let y'ur fell Designs succeed.
Through Furies, Devils, Blood, and Slaughter ride,
To raise y'ur Mother to her former Pride;
Great Souls for mean Employments were not born,
Therefore th'Impiety of Fortune scorn;
And if in y'ur Intrigues you cannot succeed
Hell yet will take the good Will for the Deed.
To Jesuits the King of Spirits bows,
Wherefore y'ur Souls to Villainy espouse,
To begging Friars, Prelates, nor Pope Joan
(Who left an Issue for the Papal Throne)
Find no Respect; we only they adore;
Because it is we maintain the Scarlet-Whore.
To serve Her, from no Mischiess have we shrunk,
With Blood of Holy Saints we have made her Drunk,
From our Rise, to busy Godfrey's Death,
With Gore we have almost stopped the Harlots Breath.
The Inquisition Butchers we out-brave,
In murdering Hugonets we feed the Grave,
Ah! if we could but kill their Souls as well
As Bodies we should quickly People Hell.
O! to o'r Glory be it, all the Gore
With which we have made Far the Gallick Shore,
The Belgic Coasts in barbarous Alva's time,
And when Rage reigned in the Hybernian Clime,
Had it but to one solid Mount congealed,
It had been high enough for us to have scaled
The Lofts of Heaven; the universal Flood
Rained not more Water, than we have Rained Blood.
Were but your timorous Hearts like mine, I dare
Attempt to set upon the Prince of Air:
In deeper Plots than what the Conclave hatch,
The great Divan of Hell I can out-match,
Therefore when Time's no more, by Plotting-art
His Government I Will study to subvert;
And if we fail, by force of Arms I Will try
To ruin, or usurp his Monarchy,
Thus Loyola durst Venture. --
If Miss'onary Crews who rove the Earth,
To give some great Design a Noble Birth,
The Sophy, great Mogul, and Prester John
Could but Convert, the looked for Work is done;
With aid from them these Kingdoms of the North
I Would Crush to pieces, lead their Monarchs forth
As T^^^erlain his Captive in a Cage;
I Would make them feel the Plagues of Romish rage,
The worst of all Outrages. --
You, as a Tribe which do in Sin excel,
Stand now for ever Registered in Hell;
There Is Honor for you, will you lose this Fame,
Ye dastard Wretches for a Coward's Name?
No surely, through Seditions, Treasons wade,
Make Factions, Massacres your common Trade;
O let a Jesuitick Rage inspire!
To torture Protestants with Sword and Fire.
Track Crowns through jelly'd Gore, lead Majesty
In Chains, and hang their Realms with Auarchy.
Knives, Faggots, Shackles, O those torturing Names!
Set my aetherial Substance all in Flames,
To use them, O I wish me Man again!
What baleful Streams of Blood my Hands should drain,
For, one day, ripping Royal Hearts I dare
The Pains of all the fallen Angels bear.
Undaunted Mutineers of Treachery,
Spit in the Face of Crowned Majesty;
Although a Roman, if he will not yield
To have what you desire be repealed,
Think what you are, then for the sake of me
Translate the Sovereign from Mortality:
With thundering Bulls keep Crowned Heads in awe,
And make what you think fit to be a Law.
Subjects for murdering their Kings absolve,
Plagues yet unknown on Heretics involve:
Geneva Storm; the Drunken Danes Invade;
Stab Swedes; and let the Dutch o'r Slaves be made;
Do this, and then right Jesuits you be,
Maugre the Shams of Heaven! follow me.
My peerless Courage for a Sample take,
And then the World you may to pieces shake.
But hold, brave Desperadoes, I Am too rash,
In one thing my command is somewhat harsh,
In bidding you to Venture (for o'r Cause)
To Kingdoms which torment with guelding Laws,
That Is worse than Death to rob you of those Tools,
With which you a^t as Onan in your Schools.
The Nunneries Seraglio's you make;
Say Mass by P^ed^ for a Harlot's sake;
Which I command you ^or, and when you burn,
For want of N^* let others serve your turn:
Ah! I when Humane felt the amorous Flame,
All Females kissed which to Confession came.
To Chastity you Swear, that is but a tie
From Wedlock, not from Whoring privately;
The Church allows you Strumpets, but a Wife
Shun as a Bugbear to a happy Life.
So for the present (Hectors) let alone
The State of Sweden, and the Danish Throne,
And push Plots forwards in those Countries, where
You are but only stifled in the Air,
If unsuccessful; that is better than
To go where they do Jesuits unman,
Endeavor to bring England to o'r force,
Then other Realms will come to us by course;
Through winged quickness Plotting some times hits,
So nimbly screw the Engines of your Wits,
And deepest Thoughts up to the very height
Of Envy, Malice, Fury, Rage, and Spite,
To curb this Isle, which now has made such Laws
Which may prove dangerous to the Romish Cause*
Although the threefold SENATE do agree
To stop the Noble Growth of POPERY,
On such Foundations aim to lay the Land,
That Reformation shall triumphant stand,
Yet at their Acts you must not be dismayed,
Fear humane Laws, and not of GOD afraid?
It is a Paradox to Hell, and Me!
By slighting both unfold the Mystery.
So now is the Time or Never that you must
No longer let this Island run in Trust,
Her Peter Pence she does forget to pay,
And Triple Crown she is bent to disobey.
O! rescue England from those wicked Hands,
That Monast'ries dissolve, and Abbey Lands;
The Laws as yet do hurt but in Estate,
Or Life; this will not Pop'ry extirpate;
So quickly rent the Realm in twain, for fear
The Damned Castrating Law should come up here,
Which if it should, the fatal Work is done;
To save y'ur Stones, you will all from England run:
But praying no such Bills may ever pass,
And that y'ur Plots will here establish Mass,
I bid you all Farewell, I must return
To Hell where Ghosts on Rocks of Fire burn.
FINIS.

