A short REPRESENTATION Performed before The Lord General MONCK.

AT GOLDSMITHS-HALL, Tuesday, April 11th.

By three persons, An Englishman, a Welsh-man, and a Scotch-man.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Morgan, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1660.

A short Representation.
OFFICER. HOW now Friended whither are you crowding so fast? Pray get ye back
again and wipe your shoos? Who invited you I wonder? If you are a hungry, stay
till the Scraps come forth, which will be about four or five hours hence.


Englishman. Pray good man Jack kold my staff, be good, in your Office.
Sirrah, We come to see the General; we have as much business with him as the
best of 'um all that has invited him hither.


Officer. He Will hear no petitions to day.


Englishman. Petition, we come not to Petition, Friend, he has done our
business without a Petition already.


Officer. He had much to do I warrant, when he did your business.


Englishman. Friend you need not be so Angry; we come not to defraud you of the
least bit, that you intend to carry home to your Wife, for her provision till
the next quarter Feast; For give me leave to tell thee, we have been as good
House keepers as some of your Masters, and kept better men then thou to wipe
our shoos, and now I hope we shall do so ^gain.


Officer. You are sufferers then in the times. Here Is one I warrant whose Catt
has died with eating a poisoned Ratt. Here Is another who is two Ducks and one
Drake used to sleep at his beds head, and he has now lost all by the
Maledictions of the old witch his Neighbor. Here Is another had but one torn
Shirt, which was stolen by a Gypsy as it hung upon a Hedge a drying, one
Saturday in the Afternoon. And as for your part Good Man Prate a pace what have
you lost I wonder? your Dogs Leather Hedging Gloves I warrant, or some such
precious piece of Treasure.


Englishman. The fellow would fain be witty before the Masters of the Company.
Alas! it would stand thee in little stead had we a mind to Retort; but that is
not our business. We are come to make our General Merry; for making us merry.
Sirrah, we have been at charges for a Pawet, and the Fiddlers, and therefore I
tell thee we will see our General, and sing him a song and give him thanks for
his care of us all.


Welchman. Sirrah if her will not let her see her Sheneral, and sing her a fine
song, which her ha paid her share for the making, her will preak her pusee
po^ie's pate.


Officer. I care not for your songs, you come not here unless I know better
who you are.


Englishman. Friend I am a Cheshire man, who had lost my tenure of a good Farm
for siding with my Landlord Sir George Booth; but I now have got it again,
thanks to our General.


Welchman. And her pe Shentleman of Wallis, and her lost her create fortune for
her creat loofe to her creat Landlord Sir Thomas Middleton; but her have cot
it a cain. her thank her cood Sheneral.


Scot. In troath noow they had gotten even aw; and aw for becose Ise ha sarved
my good Loard and Maisser the KING. But whare be those muckle traitors noow?
introath friend wee's come for nething else but to garr the General take notice
of our loove, tell him for his muckle pains and care of us and of aw the
Kingdom.


Officer. Well, stay there, and if the General will be troubled with your
impertiaencies, i will give ye notice.


Englishman. Now thou speakst like an honest fellow; do hear? if thou can
but get us in, we will give thee six pence a piece.

After a little pause the Officer returns.


Officer. Well, if your Song be good, you may come in; but be advised of that;
for if it ben't you will be soundly soundly laughed at; and for your Poet, tell him
from me, if he come off basely, the Company will not give him a brass token;
and so you I lose your Credit and he his labor.


Englishman. To the Tune of, The Grecian Army. No more good people, talk no more
Of what the Champion did of yore;
I care not a pin what stories forge
Of Bevis or of Great St. George,
Who Dragon did slaughter
To get the Kings fair daughter
For his wife;
Which was truly
And most duly
The bravest thing he did in his life.

Scotchman. To the Highlanders New Rant. Nor I'se ne care at aw
For Kiuntry man St. Aundrew,
Although he ware as good a swerd
As ever muckle man drew;
For though he did redum
The Ladies fair and breeght
Yet had the swains bin still
But for good Willy's Leeght.
Away then,
Stay not,
What gare's us be silent?
We Will feast our Monk, though now it be high Lent.

Welshman. To the Tune of, Fortune, etc. Nor for our old St. Taffie to I care,
Who slew a mighty shyant without laughter;
Yet for th'excessive pains he took that tay,
Fullfast He sleeped seven whole years after.

Englishman. To the Tune of, What you please. But our St. George has set us
free
From a base Rumps bold slavery
Poor England now shall bleed no more;

Welshman. And Wallis sal pe as her was before.


Scotchman. The War in Scotland first did swagger,
But there first ends, Jemmy put up thy dagger.
To the Tune of, The Grecian Army You base Excisemen and Commitee's as before.
That swaggerd over Towns and City's,
(While the sad Ploughmen plough'd in grief,
And yet poor Swains had no relief,)
Must now go down
And stoop to the abused Clown;
For like the Sun
In his glory,
In his story,
Monk is resolved not to be out don.

Scot. To the Tune of, The Highlanders New Rant as before. A Out out away
Phanaticks,
Who ken not what yee'd have;
Your Plots be aw discovered
The Nation to enslave;
Our Cities now ne mere shall pay
The hire of their Fetters;
Ne mere shall Major Generals
Now rant it ore their betters;
For Monk's come,
That Monck
Whom all men prize,
To heal up all our past Maladies.

Welshman To the tune of, Fortune. And now her tosted Cheeze, her eat and Sing,
And freely drink a health unto her King:
Ap Thomas ap Middleton give me thy hand
For now our Sister Chester's Walls shall stand.
Chorus.
To the Tune, Q. Dido. Brave Hero, then in thy brave rage
Proceed, which has raised up our Age,
To say you were from Heaven let down
To give the wronged Heir his Crown,
For well the ways of truth you take
The balance even now to make.
All our long differences ^end
Already to a settled end
For which we now must all agree
To give the style of just to thee.
Bequeathing unto, to after Story
The care of thy unblemish't Glory.

FINIS.

