INRI

Oh how ^^iable

When shall I come and appear before thee.



DIVINE Breathings: Or, A Pious Soul Thirsting after CHRIST.

The fourth Edition, very much Corrected.

Quid enim mihi est in Coelo, and a te quid volui super terram? LONDON, Printed
for Robert Pawlett, at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street, 1671.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER
WE know that Christ accepted the Widows Mite: This Orphan is to thee, the
zealous offering of its Parent, whose intention is, to furnish thee with holy
Desires, which are a Christians wings to fly to Heaven, and therefore
challenges thy acceptance. We have in Holy Writ the Psalms of David left us
for our Example, wherein we read his longing to be with God, desiring the wings
of a Dove, that he might fly away, and be at rest: and assimulating his
thirsting after Christ to the Heart, As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks,
so pants my Soul after thee O God!

Lo! Hear one that has learnt by David's rules, and fain would have thee
learn by his; and doubtless, in imitation of that holy Prophet, purposely
penned these his pious Ejaculations, to leave them for posterity, to be a
furtherance in the way to bliss.

And though the Authors name is not prefixed, his Piety these heavenly
Breathings speak: which being found by a Person of no mean degree, among the
writings of an eminent Divine, have been by him communicated only to his
dear^st relations as a celestial Dove to carry the Olive Branch of peace into
their Souls. It being my happiness to receive a Copy, my own affections for the
good of others instantly inflamed my desirs to publish it, and being seconded
not only by the approbations, but earnest solicitations of my friends, I have
assented, and here present it to thee; hoping thy devotions may be hereby
raised, thy holy desires increased, and thy Soul have a relish on Earth of the
unspeakable joys in Heaven; which that thou may have the fruition of, is
the hearty Prayer of

Thy Cordial Friend CHRISTOPHER PE^IN,

Divine Breathings.
I. MEDITATION.
MEditation and Prayer are like the Spies, that went to search the Land of
Canaan, the one views, and the other puts down, and both brings ^ome a taste of
the fairest and sweetest fruits of Heaven. Meditation like the ^ye views our
mercies, and Prayer like the hand reaches in those mercies; or, Meditation is
like a Factour, which lies abroad to gather in what we want; and Prayer like a
ship goes forth, and brings in what we desire, It is my misery, that I cannot
be so perfect, as not want; but it is my mercy, that I cannot be so miserable,
as not to be supplied. Meditation cannot find out-areal want, but Prayer will
fetch in an answerable comfort. Lord! If mercy be so free, I will never be
poor, but I will meditate to know it; never know it, but I will pray to supply
it; and yet not rest until thou shall do more for me, than I am able to ask or
think.

II. Meditat.
SAint Bernard sweetly compares Contemplation to the Eagle: For as the Eagle is
still fastening her eye upon the radiant beams of the beautiful Sun: So
Contemplation is still viewing the glorious beams of the Sun of Righ^eousness,
it is still con^ersant about the high and profitable things of Salvation: Or
else I may compare it to those Birds, of whom David speaks, who ^uild their
nests by the Al^ar of God. This is that ^elestial Bird, that builds her nest
about the Throne of Glory. This is the Be, which flies into the sweetest
Gardens, and sucks Honey from every Flower of Paradise. By Meditation I can
converse with God, solace my self in the bosom of my beloved, bathe may self
in rivers of pleasure, tread the paths of my rest, and view the mansions of my
eternity. What make thou then O my soul! in this valley of tears? Up upon the
mount and view the Land of promise. What make thou in this wilderness o^
trouble? Up upon the wing and take thy flight t^ Heaven; let thy thought be
where thy happiness is, and let thy heart be where thy thoughts are; though thy
habitation may be on Earth, yet thy conversation shall be in Heaven.

III. Meditat.
WHat art thou? O my Soul! a spiritual Essence, an Incorporeal substance, the
very breath of God, and Epitomy of Heaven. What satisfies thee, O my immortal
Soul! none but the immortal God, in whom all fullness dwells, he only ^can
fill the Soul, that fills Heaven and Earth; the insufficient creature may fill
the Soul with vexation, none but the all-sufficient God can fill the Soul with
contentation. O Lord, as no action of mine will satisfy thee without my self;
so no creature of thine will satisfy me without thy self; therefore O Lord,
take thou my heart, and give me thy self.

IV. Meditat.
WHat want thou? O my Soul! with what imaginable excellency would thou
cloth thy self? What desirable object would thou pitch upon? Is it beauty?
The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
wise as the brightness of the Firmament for ever and ever. Is it riches? Wealth
and riches are in the house of God, every one in his family shall have a rich,
a glorious, and incorruptible, and an eternal inheritance amongst the Saints.
What is it then? Is it honor? What honor like to this, to be a friend and a
favorite of God, and a spouse of Christ; to have a Crown of righteousness, of
life, and of glory? Yet more, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory
set upon thy head. Yet again, is it pleasure? The Just shall enter into their
Masters joy, and there are rivers of pleasures at his right hand for evermore.
In a word, What would thou have, Oh my flesh? A confluence of all the
glorious things, both in Heaven, and in Earth? Why, Godliness has the promise
of this life, and of that which is to come. If Heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, be the thing that thou do seek; both Heaven and Earth, with the
excellencies thereof, is that which thou shall find. Lord, make me holy, and
then I am sure I shall be happy!

V. Meditat.
WIse Agents do always propound their Ends before they set upon their Work:
And then direct their actions to that end they did propound. If the Mariner
launch, it is that he may get to such a harbor: Therefore he sayls by Compass
that he may compass that he sayls for. A Christian should have always one eye
upon his end, and the other eye upon his way. That man lives a brutish life,
that knows not what he lives for; and he acts but a fools part, that aims at
Heaven, and lives at random. A wise Christian his end of living is, that he
may live without end; and therefore his way of living is, that he may live
continually to spend his life in the ways of life; he is always walking in
those paths where he sees Heaven before him. O my Soul! What is it that thou
aim'st at? Is it a full enjoyment of thy God? Why, then whilst thou art
present in this body be always drawing near to the Lord; so when thou shall be
absent from this body, then thou shall be always present with the Lord.

VI. Meditat.
HOw apt many are at the sight of a rich Worldling to envy him for what he
has: But for my part, I rather pity him for what he wants; he has a Talent,
but it wants improvement; he has a Lamp, but it wants Oil; he has a Soul, but
it wants grace; he has the star, but he wants the Sun; he has the Creature,
but he wants the Creator. In his life he does but float upon a Torrent of
vanity which empties it self into an Ocean of vexation; and after death; then
take this unprofitable servant, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness; go set his Soul adrift for ever in an impetuous Lake of fire and
brimstone. Where now is the object of your envy? It is not his silver that now
will anchor him, nor his gold that shall land him, nor his friends that can
comfort him; therefore if he be worth the envying, who is worth the pitying? If
this be felicity, then give me misery. Lord! rather make me poor with a good
heart, than rich with a bad conscience.

VII. Meditat.
I Am frail, and the World is fading; but my Soul is immortal, and God is
eternal. If I pitch upon the creature, either they may take wings like an Eagle
that flies toward Heaven, or my Soul may take its way with the rich fool, and
go to Hell; but if I choose God for my portion, then mercy and goodness shall
follow me whilst I live, and glory and eternity shall crown me when I dye. I
will therefore now leave that which I shall soon lose, that so I may embrace
that which I shall always enjoy.

VIII. Meditat.
I See the wicked have their Heaven here, and their Hell hereafter; and on the
contrary, good men have their Hell here, and their Heaven hereafter. Dives had
his good things in this life, and Lazarus evil; now Lazarus is comforted, and
Dives is tormented, I will not therefore envy the prosperity of the wicked, nor
be offended at the affliction of the righteous, seeing the one is drawn in pomp
to Hell, whilst the other swims in tears to Heaven.

IX. Meditat.
AS there is a sad mirth, so there is a joyful mourning; look upon the
voluptuous man, however laughter may appear in his face, yet sadness ever
centers in his heart; his carnal delights are not only vain, but vexing; like
Music they play him into a melancholy fit: whilst the Banquet lasts, the
Sensualist sings; but when the reckoning comes, his spirit sinks, his burning
candle presently goes out in a stinking snuff, his shining Sun instantly sets
in a watery cloud. Solomon gives us the sum of it thus: Even in laughter the
heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. But now come to the
penitential person as his tears, are the joy of Angels, so they are the joy of
his heart, and the solace of his soul; the salter his tears, the sweeter his
comforts; the deeper his sighs, the fuller his joy; the beams of consolation
always shine into this house of mourning, so that his soul is in travel with a
Barnabas, and his labors bring forth the fruits of peace; insomuch, that I may
truly say, to mourn for sin, is to weep for joy. These pure and pleasant
streams of consolation (which is the worldlings wonder) that flow and run in
those Crystal rivers of eternal pleasure, at Gods right hand, they come from a
weeping spring. Why then is the mouth of wickedness opened against the way of
holiness? As if grace were the Calvary to intomb joy, and impiety the very womb
to bring forth felicity; but if experience may be heard, my soul has felt
both, and I find such damps of spirit in worldly pleasures, and such refreshing
of soul in the depth of godly sorrow, that I shall esteem one drop of such
spiritual joy, better than an Ocean of their carnal mirth.

X. Meditat.
WHere thine happiness lies, there thy portion lies: If thou place thy
felicity in a poor empty creature: If with Judas thy spirit run so low, that
thou can be content only to keep the Bagg, or with Reuben for some worldly
convenience to quarter on this side Jordan; Why then, unworthy Soul, take that
which is thine own, and go thy way: If thou will be put off with a breath of
honor, a blaze of pleasure, a snare of riches, or a parcel of vanity; Why then
go take thy fill, look for no more from God. Thou see thy all, when thou
go from hence, then farewell all, in the mean while remember this, that when
the breath shall be expired, the blaze extinct, and the soul for ever ensnared,
then thy eternity shall be spent in bewailing thy folly. But now, O precious
Soul! If thou place thy felicity in the highest excellency, thy portion lies in
the chiefest good: If it be thine happiness always to behold the beauty of
Gods face, it shall be thy portion for ever to behold the beauty of Gods
presence. Lord, let the Worldling then be sent away with some poor worldly
trifles; but for my part, since thou have made me capable of such heavenly
excellencies, I desire never to be put off with transitory vanities, my
happiness lies only in thy self: Therefore whatever I enjoy beside thy self, I
will take it as a blessing, but not as a portion.

XI. Meditat.
UNsatiable desires in temporals, make a poor man in spirituals; a right
Christian is only rich in outward things, when he is contented with what he
has. That man has nothing of heavenly things, that thirsts not after more.
Worldly desires they always leave us empty, either we get not what we covet,
or else we are not satisfied with what we get; but he that thirsts after
heavenly things, is always filled, and the more he receives, the more he
desires. The richest and choicest mercies that God can give, sincere Desires
will fetch them in. What a glorious improvement might we make of this
affection, if we did but divert the streams, and turn them Heavenward? How
many excellent mercies lie a ground, and only want this tide to bring them in?
Why then let I my desires run out in wast, I do but make my self poor, in
thirsting after more of the World, and more of the Creature; whereas I might be
rich, if I would but count more of Grace, and of Christ.

XII. Meditat.
USually when a worldling is dead, we ask, how rich he dyed? Oh, (say many) he
dyed rich, he has left a great estate: Alas! the poor man has slept his
sleep, lost his dream, and now he awakes, he finds nothing in his hand, where
lies his golden heap? Only the rust of that heap is gone to witness against
him; his Mammon fails him, only the unrighteousness of it follows him; others
have the use of it, only the abuse of it, he carries to judgment with him; he
has made his friends, (as we say) but he has undone himself, so that I may
justly write this Motto upon every bagg, [This is the price of blood.] Shall I
then treasure up the price of blood? No, Christ has entrusted me as a Steward,
therefore what I have, and need not, Christ shall have in his members that
need, and have not. So the transitory creatures, when they shall slide away,
shall not carry me with them; but when I shall pass away I shall carry them
with me.

XII. Meditat.
GOod Lord! what a miserable creature is a wicked man? His very Manna turns to
worms, his very mercies make him miserable; look upon him in his larger estate,
and you shall find, either he has not the benefit of enjoying it, (only the
danger of keeping it, and this adds not to his comfort) or else if he does
enjoy it, he does so miserably abuse it, that, as one says well, he makes that
which for use is but temporal, for punishment to be eternal. Alas! the
pleasures of it are quickly gone, but the pain of it lies in his bones for
ever. Lord therefore help me to improve thy mercies, or else thy mercies will
but improve my miseries!

XIV. Meditat.
Would thou know whether thy name be written in the Book of Life? why then
read what thou have written in the Book of Conscience. Thou need not ask,
who shall ascend up into Heaven, for to search the Records of Eternity; thou
may but descend down into thine own heart, and their read what thou art, and
what thou shall be. Though Gods Book of Election and Reprobation be closed and
kept above with God; yet thy Book of Conscience, that is open, and kept below
in thy very bosom; and what thou writest here, thou shall be sure to read
there: If I write nothing in this Book, but the black lines of sin; I shall
find nothing in Gods Book but the red lines of damnation: But if I write Gods
Word in the Book of Conscience, I may be sure God has written my Name in the
Book of Life. At the great Day of Judgment, when all Books shall be opened,
there I shall either read the sweetest or the sharpest lines; I will therefore
so write here, that I may not be ashamed to read hereafter.

XV. Meditat.
BE not curious to search into the secrets of God, pick not the Lock where he
has allowed no Key. He that will be sifting every Cloud, may be smitten with a
Thunderbolt; and he that will be too familiar with Gods secrets, may be
overwhelmed in his judgments: Adam would curiously increase his knowledge,
wherefore Adam shamefully lost his goodness; the Bethshemites would needs pry
into the Ark of God, therefore the hand of God slew above fifty thousand of
them; Therefore hover not about this flame, lest we scorch our wings: for my
part, seeing God has made me his Steward, and not his Secretary, I will
carefully improve my self by what we have revealed, and not curiously enquire
into or after what he has reserved.

XVI. Meditat.
NOthing is so sure as death, and nothing so uncertain as the time: I may be
too old to live, I can never be too young to dye; I will therefore live every
hour, as if I were to dye the next.

XVII. Meditat.
AS the Tree falls, so it lies; and where death strikes down, there God
lays out either for mercy or misery. So that I may compare it to the Red Sea,
If I go in an Israelite, my landing shall be in glory, and my rejoicing in
triumph, to see all mine enemies dead upon the Seashore; but If I go in an
Egyptian, if I be on this side the Cloud, on this side the Covenant, and yet
go in hardened among the Troops of Pharaoh, Justice shall return in its full
strength, and an inundation of Judgment shall overflow my soul for ever. Or
else I may compare it to the sleep of the ten Virgins, of whom it is said, they
slumbred and slept, we shall all fall into this sleep; now if I lie down with
the wise, I shall go in with the Bridegroom; but if I sleep with the foolish,
without oil in my lamp, without grace in my soul, I have closed the gates of
mercy upon my soul for ever. I see then this life is the time wherein I must go
forth to meet the Lord, this is the hour wherein I must do my work, and that
the day wherein I must be judged according to my works. I know not how soon I
may fall into this sleep: Therefore, Lord, grant that I live every day in thy
sight, as I desire to appear the last day in thy presence.

XVIII. Meditat.
WHat is said of the Mariner, in respect to his Ship, that he always sails
within four inches of death, that may be said of the soul in relation to the
body, that it is always in four inches of Eternity; if the Ship splits, then
the Saylor sinks; if our earthen vessels break, the soul is gone, plunged for
ever into the bottomless Sea, and bankless Ocean of Eternity. This is the soul
therefore that I desire to weep over, that shall preposterously launch into the
deep, before he knows whether he shall sink or swim.

XIX. Meditat.
IT was a sad speech of a dying King, Nondum caepi vivere jam cogor vivendi
finem facere, I must now dye before I begin to live. It is the sad condition of
many a dying man, that their work is to do, when their hour is come; when the
enemy is in the gate, their weapons are to look for; when death is at the door,
their graces are to look for; when the Bridegroom is come, their oil is to buy;
the pursuer of blood is upon them, and the City of refuge not so much as
thought of by them; In a word, the seven years of plenty are wasted, and no
provision for the years of famine; time is spent, and nothing laid up for
eternity. I will therefore now finish every work I have to do, that to dye
might be the last work I have to finish.

XX. Meditat.
THis impudent age of ours is grown so eminently uncivil, that it is now a
days counted one of the greatest shames to be ashamed of sin; but for my part,
I had rather be accounted the Worlds fool than Gods enemy.

XXI. Meditat.
WOrldling, thou deridest to see a Ceristian melting at the Word, trembling at
a sin; I tell thee, he is of a noble carriage, he can triumph in death, and in
judgment, it is not the King of fears that can appall him, or Hell it self
that can affright him; but as a Conqueror over both, he can leave the World
with a smile; O Death, where is thy Sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? That
is his triumphant valediction and farewell. But thou that gloriest so much,
because thou can silence Conscience, and outface sin; I tell thee, thou art
of a base cowardly spirit, let but a little sickness impair thy health, or the
thoughts of death charge upon thy spirit, and what quick retreatings are there
from thy bold resolutions? What heaviness clouds thy looks? What terrors shake
thy joints? What sadness sinks thy heart? So that a fancy frights thee, a
shadow startles thee, Nabal-like thy spirits dye, and sink within thee like a
stone. Therefore jeer on; for my part, I hold it better to fear while God
threatens, than to fall when God judges.

XXII. Meditat.
THe nearer the Moon draws into conjunction with the Sun, the brighter it
shines toward the Heavens, and the obscurer it shows toward the Earth; So the
nearer the Soul draws into Communion with Jesus Christ, the comelier it is in
the eye of the Spouse, and the Blacker it appears in the sight of the World: He
that is a precious Christian to the Lord, is a precise Puritan to the World: He
that is glorious to an heavenly Saint, is odious to an earthly Spirit. But it
is a sign thou art an Egyptian, when that cloud which is a light to an
Israelite, is darkness to thee: It is a sign thou movest in a terrestrial orb,
when thou see no luster in such celestial lights; for my part if I shine to
God, I care not how I show to the world.

XXIII. Meditat.
IT appears not what we are to the World, and it hardly appears what we shall
be to our selves; for did they know, that we are the jewels of God, the
favorites of Heaven, the excellency of the Creation, the beloved of Christ,
they would not mock and persecute us as they do: Or if we did but know, that we
should be glorified together with Christ, his happiness shall be as our
happiness, and that his joy shall be as our joys, and his glories shall be as
our glories, truly we should not be so much dejected as we are: when I
consider, that my life is hid with Christ in God, I wonder not to see the World
hate me; but when I consider, that when Christ shall appear, I shall be like
him, I wonder it does so much as trouble me.

XXIV. Meditat.
WHy should I fret my self at the prosperity of the wicked? Indeed, when I look
upon the spreading Bay, and forget the withering Herb; when I view their
Quails, and forget their Curse, my feet had almost slipped; but since I went into
the Sanctuary of God, I find that all the blossoms of their glory must
dis-flourish under the blastings of Gods wrath; and all their external felicity
does but only perfect the judgments of the Lord, and fill up the measure of
their misery; for what is their pleasure, but just like the deceitful salute of
Joab with Amasa? What Is their honor, but like Absolom's Mule, it only mounts,
and carries them to their Gallows? What is their riches, but like Jaels Present
in a Lordly dish, it only makes way for the fatal nail, for their sad account
at the day of judgment. This their. prosperity slayes them: Now who esteems
that Ox happy, that has a goodly pasture to feed himself for the slaughter?
Who envies that Malefactor, that has a fair day to ride to execution in? And
why is it that the workers of iniquity flourish? Is it not, that they may be
destroyed for ever? And the larger their pasture, the sooner they are fitted
for the slaughter. I therefore, for my part, when I see a sinner prosper in his
wickedness, will turn the flame of envy into a tear of pity.

XXV. Meditat.
THis is Heaven, to be for ever with the Lord; and this is Hell, for ever to be
without the Lord. You that can see no beauty in Christ, nor glory in Heaven, do
you likewise see no flames in Hell, no Hell in loss of God? You therefore that
cannot be taken with his presence, Oh tremble at his absence; and you that care
not to be with, Oh fear to be without him for this is Hell on Earth, Depart
from us; and this is Hell when we leave the Earth, Depart from me. Lord, thou
art my Heaven, and my happiness, unite me to thee, that I may be for ever with
thee.

XXVI. Meditat.
THat good which is in riches, lies altogether in their use, like the Woman's
box of Ointment, if it be not broken and poured out for the sweet refreshment
of Jesus Christ in his distressed members, they lose their worth. Therefore the
covetous man may truly write upon his rusting heaps, These are good for
nothing. Chrysostom tells us, Thas he is not rich, that lays up much, bu^
that lays out much; for its all one, not to have, a^ not to use: I will
therefore be the richer by a charitable laying out, while the Worldling hall be
the poorer by his covetou^ hoarding up.

XXVII. Meditat.
WHo will part with his God? I will part with my life, rather than with my God;
no marvel then the covetou^ man so hugs his Gold, i^ is his God; if you take
that from him, he may cry with Micah, when he lost his Gods, What have I more?
His Heaven is gone, his Happiness is gone, his All is gone, if God be gone; I
will not therefore wonder so much at the closeness of his hand, as at the
vainness of his heart: We count it singular wisdom to keep that God we choose,
but that is absolute folly to choose that God we cannot keep.

XXVIII. Meditat.
OH my Soul! Thou art spiritual in thine essence, immensible in thy desires,
and immortal in thy nature, so that there must be proportion and perfection of
what thou ^njoyest, with a perennity ^f both; or else no full content, no real
satisfaction: Now, were the universal World turned into a pleasant Eden, and
that Eden refreshd with the living springs of immortality, and thou seated in
the Throne of its choicest excellencies, crowned with the Diadem of its highest
felicities, swaying the Scepter of thy glory over all sublunary creatures; nay,
could thou give reins to the Sun, or guidance to the moving flames; did thy
Territories board upon the highest Heavens, and the revenues of thy Crown flow
in from the farthest parts of the Earth, yet what proportion does a material
World bear to an immortal Soul? Will a Lion feed upon grass? Or can the Soul be
satisfied with dust? Thou may as soon feed thy body with grass, as thy soul
with the creature; if it did bear proportion, yet it wants perfection: Could
the Devil turn a Chemist, and extract the very vital spirits and quintessence
of the purest and desirablest excellencies under Heaven, yet it is of such an
imperfect nature, that there is more lees than liquor, more thorns than
flowers, more smoke than fire, more sting then honey; so that that soul shall
be filled with a whirlwind of vexation, that thinks to be satisfied with an
object of imperfection: For it is impossible, that such a scanty excellency,
should any ways fill such an enlarged capacity. Yet again, were there
perfection, yet there is not perpetuity, it will fly away like a Bird from the
perch, or melt away like Ice before the Sun, and so leave the immortal soul to
sink for ever; so that the creature, will not only make thee restless, but
leave thee miserable: I see then, that I shall never rest, till I rest in God;
he that is the Father of Spirits, the Fountain of Bliss, the Ancient of Days,
he only is the adequate object for thine immortal soul, the rest of the
creatures is in its end, the end of the soul is its God. Therefore, Lord,
seeing thou have made me for thy self, fill me fully with thy self, or take me
wholly to thy self.

XXIX. Meditat.
Does Satan tempt thee, either by pleasures, dignities, or profits? O my soul!
Stand upon thy guard, gird on thy strength with such thoughts as these, What
can the World profit me, if the cares choke me? How can Pleasures comfort me,
if the sting poison me? Or what advancement is this, to be triumphing in honor
before the face of men here, an^ to be trembling for sham^ before the throne of
Go^ hereafter? What are the delights of the World, t^ the peace of my
Conscience, or the joy that is i^ the Holy Ghost? Wha^ are the applauses of me^
to the Crown prepared b^ God? Or what is the ga^^ of the World, to the lo^^ of
my Soul? The vanity the creature is far benea^^ the excellency of my soul
Therefore Satan, you a^^ I must keep at an everla^ing distance, for you bid me
loss.

XXX. Meditat.
A Black cloud makes the Traveller mend his pace, and mind his home; whereas a
fair day, and a pleasant way, wastes his time, and that steals away his
affections in the prospect of the Country: However others may think of it, yet
I take it as a mercy, that now and then some clouds do interpose my Sun, and
many times some troubles do eclipse my comforts, for I perceive, if I should
find too much friendship in my Inn, in my pilgrimage, I should soon forget my
Fathers house, and my heritage.

XXXI. Meditat.
There is a generation of men, that wi^^ praise and adore the Saint in Heaven,
and yet moc^ and afflict the Saint on Earth; so that were a^^ those Saints
alive again whom they so much honor in their day, I da^^ affirm, they would
persecute them in their person like the Jews, the can garnish the Sepulcher of
the Righteous, and yet pla^^ the Jew with the Person (...) the Righteous.
Dissembling World, thy tong^^ embalms a dead Saint, whilst thy hand strikes a
wound into the living Saint; and thou can praise God for those that are
departed in the faith, and yet persecute God in those that will not depart from
the faith. O foolish World! must thou needs condemn thy self, for thy praise
has lest thy practice without excuse.

XXXII. Meditat.
ALexander being asked where he would lay his Treasure? Answered very well,
Apud Amicos, Among his friends; being confident, that there it would be kept
with safety, and returned with use. What need thou enlarge thy Barnes?
Know not thou where to lay thy plenty? Make the friends of Christ thy
treasury, let the hands of the widow, the bowels of the poor be thy
storehouse; here is is sure, no thief can steal it, no time can rust it, no
change can lose it, and hear it is improved. A temporal gift is here turned into
an eternal reward; no ground so fruitful as the bosom of the poor, that brings
forth an hundred fold.

XXXIII. Meditat.
O My Soul! What make thou grovelling on the Earth? Every thing here below is
too base for thine excellency, too short for thine eternity; thou art capable
of a God, and must have a being, when these poor things are reduced to nothing;
the creature is too base a metal to make thee a crow of glory, too rotten a
bottom to carry thee through eternity. Oh fill thy self with God, so shall thou
raise thy dignity to perpetuity.

XXXIV. Meditat.
WHere any thing presents its self, think if Christ were now alive, would he do
it? Or if I were now to dye, would I do it? I must walk as he has walked, and
I must live as I intend to dye; if it be not Christ's will, it is my sin, and if
I dye in that sin, it will be my ruin: I will therefore in every action so
carry my self, as if Christ were on the one hand, and Death on the other.

XXXV. Meditat.
OUr life is but a moment of time, and yet in this moment of time we sow the
seeds of eternity, in this transitory hour I am framing to my self either a
good or a bad eternity. These words that now I speak, these works that I now
act, though they here seem to rot, yet they shall spring up to eternity:
Therefore, as the Poet answered one, upbraiding him for being three days about
three Verses, whereas he could make an hundred in one day; Oh, says he, At tui
ad triduum modo, mei in omne aeternum dur aturi sunt: Thine are but for three
days, as it were, but mine must continue for ever; according to my carriage
now, my Name must either rise or fall for ever: So may we answer this foolish
World, upbraiding us of too much strictness and preciseness; Oh! had not we
need to be exact indeed, when the works we are about, are not to be written in
sand, but in the records of eternity; the lines that now we draw, must run
parallel with eternity; and according as we carry our selves in this moment of
time, our souls must live or dye for ever. O Lord! help me so to improve the
brevity of my life, by the integrity of my actions, that I may turn this moment
of misery into an eternity of bliss.

XXXVI. Meditat.
THe Soul of man (says the Philosopher) is the horizon of time and eternity;
now if the Son of Righteousness be not risen in our horizon, we must expect
nothing but a clouded time, and a stormy eternity, gross darkness here, and
utter darkness hereafter for ever: But as for those blessed Saints, into whose
souls the oriental splendor of the Sun of Righteousness is shed abroad, how do
they live in his sight? What celestial excellencies! What reviving comforts!
What advancing principles are darted forth from the face of beauty into their
spirits! And as for the triumphant Saints, in whose horizon Jesus Christ is in
the eternal meridian of his glory, Oh what full beams of bliss and consolation,
without the least shadow of bitterness and discontent, warms and delights their
blessed souls to all eternity! Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance in my
horizon, so shall time be the morning, and eternity the noon of glory in my
soul.

XXXVII. Meditat.
THe World has many servants, because it gives present wages; where Christ
has but a few Disciples, because their reward is in another life: Most live by
sight, and therefore must have to satisfy sense; they had rather, with
Ishmael, be sent away with a small gift, than with Isaac to wait for the
inheritance; they had rather take their portion in this life, than to wait for
an inheritance reserved in the Heavens: Their unworthy spirits cry with Esau,
What profit will this birthright do us? We must have pleasure, and we must
have riches; and therefore with Lysimacus, they will sell their Kingdoms, and
themselves, for a draught of water. There are but few such elevated spirits as
the Disciples had, that can leave a possession, to live upon a promise; there
are but few have such heroic spirits as Moses had, that can despise the
treasures of this present World, out of respect unto the recompense of a future
reward; but there are many of such sordid spirits as Dives had, that would
enjoy their good things here; but for my part, Lord! give not me my portion in
this life, I had rather live by faith.

XXXVIII. Meditat.
WHat Rebel under Proclamation of mercy stands out, when he knows he shall be
fetched in by the hand of Justice? yet how many refractory sinners (with those
invited guests in the Gospel) deride the messengers of Peace, until they are
slain by the men of War. Indeed, had thou counsel, wisdom and strength for
the battle; could thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day that God
shall deal with thee, this were much; or could the Gods whom thou servest
deliver thee out of the hands of Christ, this were more; but alas! thou must
one day be brought under his regal power, either in favor or fury, either in
the praise of his Glory, or to the magnifying of his Justice; if thou hate his
Throne, thou shall be made his footstool; if thou will not have him to be thy
head, thou shall be trod under his feet; if he be not thy Jesus he will be thy
Judge; In a word, if thou will not touch the golden Scepter of his Mercy, thou
shall be crushed with the Rod of his Justice; and remember this, that this life
is only the time of displaying the Flag of Mercy, and the burning of the Taper
of Peace; if once the white Flag be folded up, and the burning Taper burnt out,
then look for nothing but the sad flourishes of the black Flag: As for those
mine enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither
and slay them before me; therefore now sit down, and see thy weakness, and
while the King is yet a great way off, send out the Ambassadors of thy prayers
and tears, and acquaint thy self now with God, and be at peace: For my part I
had rather come in a Favorite, than be brought in a Traitor.

XXXIX. Meditat.
SIn and Sorrow are two inseparable Companions, thou can not let in one, and
shut out the other; If thy moment be spent in mirth, thy eternity shall be
spent in mourning; if thou will not weep, whilst thou may have mercy to
pardon thee, thou shall lament heareafter, and yet have no eye to pity thee. A
bottle of tears may now quench the fire of Sin, but a cloud of tears shall
never quench the flames of Hell; therefore while the wicked go on laughing, I
desire to go on mourning. The Valley of Bochim will at length set me upon the
Hill of Sion; but the paths of rejoicing will at length bring into a hell of
weeping: for this is a truth, that he that swims in sin, shall sink in sorrow;
their laughter shall be turned into heaviness, while my tears shall be wiped
away. I will therefore ever weep, that I may not weep, for ever.

XL. Meditat.
THat way the Tree inclines while it grows, that way it pitcheth when it
falls, and there it lies, whether it be toward the North or South: As we are
in life, for the most part we are in death; so we lie down to eternity, whether
it be toward Heaven or Hell. Being once fallen, there is no removing: For as
in War, an error is death; so in Death, an error is damnation; therefore live
as thou intendest to dye, and dye as thou intendest to live. O Lord! Let the
bent of my soul be always toward thee, that so I may fall to thee, and ever
rest with thee.

XLI. Meditat.
JOrdan that famous River, no doubt runs through many a pleasant meadow, by
many a shady grove, and flowery bank, and yet at last is forced to empty it
self into a dead Sea; and not only so, but those fresh Crystal streams, that
made those famous brooks lose both name and worth, are turned into the dead Sea
themselves: Just so it is with a Weiked man, here he walks through the meadows
of Worldly pleasures and rests under the shades of earthly comforts, and
sports, and wallows himself amongst the flowers of worldly delights; but at
last runs himself out into a dead Lake, and is cast into Hell among the number
of those that forget God; and not only so, but his very Heaven it self, that
made up all his hapiness, is turned into hell, his beauty is turned into
horror, his honor into shame, his lusts into devils, his pleasure into
bitterness, his scarlet into flames of fire and Brimstone, so that that which
was his fresh Stream here, is his salt Sea there: Lord! Let me be a pure
Stream, that may end in Heaven! I care not what stony veins I run through here
on Earth, so I may but there lose the name of weakness and corruption, for
glory and pefection,

XLII. Meditat.
What Is a day to an age? And what is an age to eternity? And yet we know the
shortest day is part of the longest time, but the longest time is no part of
eternity; for where time ends, there eternity begins. Why are we then so
foolish, to heap up goods for mortality, to lay up riches, which at longest are
but for many years, perhaps not for many hours, and yet to provide nothing for
eternity? And why are we so careful to humor and uphold a mouldering piece of
clay, a frail and mortal body, which cannot stand above an age, perhaps not
above a day, and yet neglect our precious souls, that must endure for ever? Do
we all aim at a prosperous life? Why then let us labor for a glorious eternity.

XLIII. Meditat.
ALL men would have happiness for their end, but few would have holiness for
their way; all men would have the Kingdom of Heaven, and the glory thereof, but
few seek the kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof. As that Noble
man being asked, what he thought of the course of precise Puritans (as the
World terms them) or of the life of licentious Libertines? Answered, Cum is it is
mallem vivere, cum illis mori mallem: I had rather live with those, and dye
with them. So most men had rather live with Balaam, but dye with Israel. They
would willingly have the Libertines ease, but the godly man's end. But this is
certain, no soul shall go to God in death, but only that which draws near to
God in life; if the Kingdom of God be not first in us, we shall never enter
into the Kingdom of God; no soul shall rest in Heaven hereafter, but those that
walk in Heaven here; no soul shall enter into the gates of felicity, but only
that which treads the narrow paths of piety. Lord, make me holy, as well as
happy, that I may love as well to glorify thee, as to be glorified of thee!

XLIV. Meditat.
THere be many to morrow Christians, that set their day with God, at such a day
they will repent, and not before, as if they had the Lordship of Time, and the
Monopoly of Grace; whereas Time and Grace are only at Gods disposing. As St.
Ambrose says, Poenitenti indulgentiam, s^d dilaturo diem crastinum non
promisit: God has promised pardon to the penitent, but he has not promised to
morrow to the negligent. As Saint Augustine says, Qui dat poenitenti veniam,
non semper dabit peccanti poenitentiam: He that gives pardon to the penitent,
does not always give repentance to the sinner. If I put God off to day, he may
put off me to morrow: if I put off this hour of grace, I may never have another
gracious hour; to day if I put by his hand of Mercy, to morrow he may stretch
out his hand of Justice. It is true whilst I have time, I may come in; but it
is also true, when I would come in, I may not have time. This is certain, when
I repent, I shall have mercy; but this is as certain, when I would have mercy,
I may not find repentance. O Lord, thou have given me this hour of grace to
repent in! Give me grace in this hour to repent with.

XLV. Meditat.
GOod Lord! What a shadow is the life of man? What a nothing is it? The time
past, that is nothing, just like a Bird fled from the hand of the Owner, out of
sight. The time present, that is vanishing, a running hour, nay less, a flying
minute, as good as nothing. The time to come, that is uncertain, the evening Sun
may see us dead. Lord! Therefore in this hour make me sure of thee, for in the
next I am not sure of my self.

XLVI. Meditat.
ALexander when he had divided his wealth among his friends, and being asked,
What he had reserved for himself? Answered, Hope. He is a rare Christian
indeed, that can part with all for Christ, and live by faith; but when it comes
to this, that we must lose what we have here, out of hope to find it again in
Heaven, the running Professor stops, and goes back sorrowful. Crates in his way
to Philosophy, threw his goods into the Sea, to save himself, saying, Fgo vos
mergam, ne ipse mergar a vobis: I had rather drown you, than that you should
drown me: For he thought riches and virtue were incompatible. But how many
Christians are there, that in their way to Jesus Christ, throw away themselves,
and their souls, to save their gold? Before they will cast their bread upon the
waters, they will throw themselves into the Ocean; many that make such specious
shows of following of Christ, in this same turning you may know their Master;
but this is a truth, he has no part at all in Christ, that will not part with
all for Christ; and he lives but the life of sense, that cannot make a living
out of a promise. Therefore, Lord, of what I have, freely take thou what thou
call for; Christ is my portion and reward, I have enough to live on.

XLVII. Meditat.
WHen I look into the Treasures of men, perhaps I see Chests of Plate, Baggs of
Gold, Cabinets of Jewels, but this is the misery of it, that when he goes
abroad, he cannot carry them without a burden, or leave them without a fear.
But here now is the excellency of a Child of God, that his treasure is always
in him, and it is his happiness to carry it always with him, that as it is
transcendent for riches, being the fullness of God, so it is likewise permanent
for continuance, because he is filled with that fullness; insomuch, that you may
sooner rend his soul from his body, than take his treasure from his soul. This
was that which sweetened the loss of Country House and friends to Ovid in his
exile, the thoughts of his Genius, the riches of his ingenous spirit was beyond
the riches of Caesar's malice; and this is that which refreshes the spirit of
a Christian in all troubles and afflictions that he meets with in the Land of
banishment, he has the possession of Jesus Christ, whom he can never lose. Oh
the excellency of a Child of God! Though you cast him out of all, yet you
cannot cast any thing of this all out of him. But as B^as that Princely
Philosopher said, when he lost his City, and was put to flight, being asked by
those that fled with him, with their bagg and baggage, Why he likewise took not
something with him? Answered, Omnia mea mecum porto, I carry all my riches with
me; meaning his Wisdom, and his virtues: So a Christian, though you impoverish
him, banish him, and cast him out of all, yet he is able to say still, Omnia
mea mecum porto, I carry all my treasure with me; I have my Christ, my fullness:
And truly Lord, so thou will possess me with this all, I care not though I am
dispossessed of all.

XLVIII. Meditat.
LEgal days were but like winter days, dark and cloudy, sharp and stormy; and
yet how many of our Fathers traveled to Heaven in those days! But
Gospel Times they are like Summer days, sweet and clear, full of light and
beauty, so that we may truly say, that God has not been as a cloud of darkness
to us, for these are the days of grace, that are full of the beams of mercy;
yet how slowly and sadly do many of us go to Heaven? But which is worse, how
sadly and slightly do we waste these precious days, and neglect these golden
opportunities? Oh, what time shall that soul find to repent in, that shall be
hardened in these melting times! Oh, what days shall that soul find to go to
Heaven in, that shall idle away these Gospel-dayes! Oh, what grace shall that
man find for sin, that shall sin away the days of grace! Oh, to whom shall
that soul appeal, that shall renounce Jesus Christ! Oh, woe unto that soul for
ever: upon which the shaddows of death, and of the evening are stretched out,
and yet never set forth for Heaven! But wofuller is that man, to whom the
clearer and sweeter day, does only make the blacker and the sadder Hell. Oh,
what blackness of darkness is reserved for that soul, that shall walk in
darkness, in the midst and under such clearness of light! We are those that are
not only lifted up to Heaven, but Heaven is let down to us. Oh, how long shall
that man lie in Hell, that Heaven presses down! Oh, thou Gospel-Christian!
Thou art now under the clear demonstrations of Christ, the sweet invitations of
mercy, the large manifestations of love, look to it, thou shall go either to
Heaven or to Hell, upon the easiest or hardest terms.

XLIX. Meditat.
Methinks I hear six voices cry aloud: The first voice is of dying man. The
second is the voice of the Damned. The third is the voice of my precious Soul.
The fourth is the voice of Jesus Christ. The fifth is the voice of Evil times.
The sixth is the voice of the Day of Judgment. First, Methinks I hear dying
man breathing out these groans, Oh lose not a moment of time, for thy time is
but a moment! Oh now make sure of Heaven, for thou know not how soon thou
must leave the Earth! And then methings I hear the damned man roaring forth
these lamentations, Oh! Come and see the end of sin, in these that know no end
of sorrow! Oh, come and learn thy price of time, from those that must for ever
suffer for the loss of time! And then methinks I hear my precious Soul using
these expostulations, Oh my Body! What a fool am I to satisfy thy lusts, thou
art but for a moment of time, but I must endure for ever; when thou art wrapped
up in rottenness, where shall I spend my eternity? I might now get Heaven for
my Mansion, Angels for my Companions, God for my Possession, and do thou
think I will lose my felicity to satisfy thy dainty? Is it not better, that I
should carry thee to Heaven, than that thou should carry me with thee to
Hell? And then methinks I hear Jesus Christ using these invitations, Behold! I
stand at the door and knock, till my head is filled with dew, and my locks with
the dew of the night; here I stand weeping, knocking, begging and waiting, Oh
open to me! My tears beg, my tears knock, my blood knocks, my groans knock, Oh
open to me! My patience knocks and waits, Oh open to me! Let not sin lodge in
thy heart, and Christ wait at the door; let not damnation rule within, and
salvation wait without. And then methinks, Evil times use their invitations,
Oh now be living Christians, for these are dying days! Oh now be growing
Christians, for these are backsliding times! Oh now make Jesus Christ thine
own, for here thou know not what is thine own! And then lastly, methinks I
hear the voice of the Archangel, summoning the dead to come forth to judgment,
Arise ye holy and blessed Saints, take your places with God and his holy
Angels, to judge the World: Arise ye cursed naked Souls, and take your standing
in the sight of God, and of his blessed Saints, to be judged as you lived in
the World. Oh Lord, let me hear with fear the first voices, that I may not fear
to hear the last voice!

L. Meditat.
IN every choice, we cannot take, except we leave: That Soul that chooses life
and grace, refuses all things else. This is the heavenly breathing of such a
gracious spirit, Lord! Let vain man follow vain fashions, but cloth me with
salvation, and cover me with the robes of righteousness; let them be all
glorious without, but let me be all glorious within; let them crown themselves
with rose-buds, but crown me as thou do thy Church, with the Stars of Heaven,
these shall shine, when those shall fade. Let the wicked go away. with the
World; let them have all the sweetness, beauties, glories and excellencies of
the Earth, but let Jesus Christ be my portion, There all things else are
nothing at all, where Christ is all in all; therefore be serious, Oh my Soul,
for thou have none of Christ, until thou can truly say, None but Christ.

LI. Meditat.
THree things (methinks) should make the heart of a Christian to tremble.
First, To consider the brevity of their life. Secondly, The difficulty of their
Work, Thirdly, The eternity of their end. Our life is but a withering flower, a
flying cloud, a vanishing shadow, a perishing breath, the body returns to
the dust, and the soul goes suddenly to its long home, the night instantly
comes when no man can work: But now; What work is to be done in this short
inch of time? Great enemies to be conquered, Sons of Anach to be killed,
Principalities and powers to be over-powred, dear lusts to be subdued, right
eyes to be plucked out, right hands to be cut off, strict rules to be followed,
a narrow way and strait gate to go through; to sum it up, a long race to be
run with a short breath, a great way to be gone by a setting Sun: But then,
What are we to expect when this Taper is out, this breath is expired? Even as
we have sowed, so to reap; either to be eternally crowned, or eternally damned:
Now therefore, before the Sun be set, or the shadow of the evening be stretched
out, whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might: for there is
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou
go. Oh Lord, help me so to work for thee, in this moment of time, that I may
for ever rest with thee, when time shall be no more.

LII. Meditat.
YOu have heard of the bloody Seige of Troy, and yet it was said of Hellen,
that she was so beautiful, that she deserved ten years War more; and what was
Hellen, but a glorious heap of Clay? You have heard of the hard labors of
Jacob, yet Rachel was so amiable in his eyes, that he thought her worthy of
fourteen years service: If these deserved so much, Oh, what does Jesus Christ
deserve! who is altogether lovely; before whose shining glory, the beauty of
the whole Creation is but an indigested Chaos. Therefore be not discouraged, Oh
my Soul, though thine enemies be fierce, thy assaults cruel, thy resistance
even unto blood; thou fightest for a beautiful Christ, that deserves it:
Neither be dis-heartened, Oh my Soul? though rules be strict, duties hard, thy
labors great, thou servest for an amiable Christ, that will sufficiently
reward it. Look but upon the lovely beauties of thy Christ, think but upon the
glorious day of thine espousal, and these fourteen years will be nothing to
thee; Lord, let me always have thy beauty in mine eye, so shall I quickly find
no difficulty in my hand.

LIII. Meditat.
I Have formerly (with the World) accounted the spirit of a Christian, to be a
melancholy spirit; and the ways of holiness only unpleasant paths, leading to
the deserts of sad retiredness: But now I see they have hidden Manna, which the
World knows not of; glorious joys, which strangers do not meddle with; and the
closer and exacter they walk, the fuller and sweeter are their joys: Formerly
the very thoughts of parting with my pleasures and delights to embrace
soul-humbling, self-denying duties, were grievous to me; but now, I bless my
God, I can say with Augustine, Quam suave suavitatibus istis carere! Oh how
sweet is it to want my former sweetness! It is now my rejoicing to be without
my former joys, for now I see there is a Heaven in the way to Heaven, and that
one look of Faith, one smile of Christ, one glance of Heaven, one grape of
Canaan, one glimpse of my Crown of Glory, yields more sweetness, comfort and
content, than all the pleasures and delights the World affords; the very
gleaning of spiritual joy, is better than the vintage of carnal delights: Let
no man then stand off for want of pleasures, for here he shall not lose them,
only change them.

LIVE. Meditat.
SOlomon tried many Conclusions, but not one took but the last, the fear of
God. Oh my Soul. thou may tire thy self with varieties of Objects, but none
satisfies but this, the fruition of thy God; he only is the plenary and primary
goodness, he only is the efficient and sufficient fullness: As it was said of
manna, that it was the delight of every palate: so it may be said of Jesus
Christ, that he is satisfaction to every soul; Taste therefore and see how
sweet the Lord is. What Is the reason we wander after such variety of Creatures?
Because we cannot find sufficiency in one; were one herb as virtual, or one
flower as delectable, as the Collection, we would never trouble our selves to
gather many. Take up then thy rest, Oh my Soul, in the chiefest and choicest
good, which comprehends all other goods. Those golden rays of goodness, which
lie scattered in the Creature, are only to be found conjunctively in God: Those
pure ingredients, which go in to make up the highest excellency, largest
goodness, fullest perfection, are only to be found collectively in him.
Know thou any thing is profitable, delectable, or desirable in the Creature?
Thou may see it in thy God, find it in thy Christ. Art thou captivated? He
is thy Redeemer: Art thou wounded? he is thy good Samaritan: Art thou
brokenhearted? Go unto Christ, and he will bind it up: Art thou sick? He is
thy Physician: Art thou persecuted? He is thy refuge: Art thou hungry or
thirsty? He is the living bread, and the flowing stream: Art thou weary? He is
thy rest: Art thou in want or poverty? He is an inexhaustible treasury: Art
thou in disgrace or contempt? Why, he is thy honor: Art thou dull and heavy?
He is a quickening Spirit: Would thou have grace? He is the fountain;
Would thou have Heaven? He is the way, he shall guide thee by his counsel,
and after receive thee into glory. Let that man's name therefore be written in
the dust, that leaves the flowing Fountain, to quench his thirst at a broken
Cistern. Why should I tire my self, to gather drops of honey from so many dying
flowers, when I can satisfy my self with streams of sweetness in the living
Christ? Therefore Creatures in this you and I must part: for Christ out-bids
you all.

LV. Meditat.
A Christian may raise another Paradise here below, may make a lower Heaven on
Earth: for this is life eternal, to know thee, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent. To know Christ in the evidence of his love revealed to us, and Christ
revealed in us, is the very entrance of Heaven: for what is the perfection of
grace, but the fullness of this knowledge? And what is the consummation of
glory, but the blessedness of this fullness? Therefore Lord, be every day adding
to my knowledge, that so at my last day I may be perfect.

LVI. Meditat.
GOdly Sorrow, like weeping Mary, seeks Christ; Saving Faith, like wrestling
Jacob, finds and holds Christ; Heavenly Love, like the affectionate Spouse,
dwells with Christ; here it brings him into the chambers of the Queen, and
hereafter Christ brings the loving Soul into the chamber of the King, so that
it is an eternal grace always, lodging in the bosom of Christ. Lord, thou art
the desire of my soul, Oh that I could seek thee, find and love thee, that I
may for ever enjoy thee.

LVII. Meditat.
THe stream of sorrow, like waters, ascends no higher than the spring from
whence it came. We know that sin gives two bloody stabs, the first is at the
soul of man, the second is at the heart of Christ: And if the first stab only
grieve me, if I mourn for sin, as it only wounded my soul, it is a sign this
stream flows but from a natural heart, because it ascends but to a natural
height; but if I weep for sin, as it has wounded Christ, as it has shed that
blood that would save me, as it has pierced that heart that would love me,
then no question but the spring is in Heaven, because it rises to a
supernatural ascent. Lord, that my sorrow may be sound, pierce my heart for
sin: as it strikes through my soul, and pierces Christ!

LVIII. Meditat.
MY life; is sweet but my Christ must be sweeter to me than my life; my soul is
precious, but Christ must be dearer to me than my soul; my salvation is much,
but Christ must be more to me than my salvation; Christ must be loved above
all: Nay, were there no arms of mercy to receive me, no Heaven of bliss to
entertain me, no weight of glory to crown me, yet Christ must be loved above,
and without all these. As it is a sign of a carnal love, to follow Christ for
the loaves; so it is a sign of a base mercenary love, to seek Christ for a
reward; that is but an adulterate affection, that affects the present more than
the party; loves the Ring more than her Beloved; that choice cannot be cordial,
that aims only at a portion; that love cannot he real, that aims only at a
benefit. Lord, thou art amiable in thy self, Oh that I could love thee for thy
self.

LIX. Meditat.
I Must not venture on a Duty, unless I bring God to it; nor rest satisfied,
unless I carry God from it: Hear David's precept, Oh, seek the Lord, and his
strength, seek his face for evermore. Be sure thou rise not from duty, before
the countenance of God rise in mercy upon thy soul; it must be Christ that must
fit thee, and it must be Christ that must meet thee, or else it will be no
Ordinance of comfort to thee: What is the Chariot if thy Beloved be not in it!
Then here St. Bernard's practice, Lord! I never come to thee without thee, I
nerver go from thee, but with thee; Oh, blessed be that soul, that never
prays, hears, or receives, but carries Christ to all, enjoyes Christ in all,
and brings Christ from all. Lord! in all my approaches to thee, let me go out
in thy strength, and return in thy presence.

LX. Meditat.
OH my Soul! Thou art always striving, yet sin always stirring; thou fear
the truth of grace, because thou find the working of sin; but it will be
always thus; thou can not come out of Egypt, but Amalek will lay wait in
the way; the flesh will be sure to trouble thee, although it be never able to
conquer thee: He therefore, that sits down and is at rest in sin, it is a sign
that Satan is there the strong man, because his Kingdom is in peace: But where
there is any work with Christ, there will be always war with sin; I know that
while I live, sin will have its being in my mortal body; the Ivy will still be
twisting about the house, there is no destroying of it, until the wall fall;
Sin was the womb of Death, and only Death must be the tomb of Sin; God would
have my soul humbled, therefore, though he has broke my prison, yet he has
left the chain upon my feet; God would have my graces exercised, therefore,
though he have translated me into the Kingdom of life, yet he has left the
Canaanite in the Land; God would have my faith exercised, therefore Goliath
still shows himself in the field, that so I might make out to the Name of the
Lord: I will therefore unbuckle Readiness Armor, humble mine own abilities, and
betake me to the strength of Christ; so, though I cannot help the rebelling
power of sin, yet I shall always hinder the ruling power of sin: As it shall
be my grief, because sin will have its being, so it shall be my care, that it
may never have its thriving; though sin may live in me, yet I will never live
in sin.

LXI. Meditat.
I Must not pray simply against Temptations, though I may against the evil of
temptation, for a Christian my be tempted, and yet not overcome; a Castle may
be assaulted, and yet not taken; if Satan inject an evi! motion, and I reject
it, this is not mine, but the Devils sin; this shall be a shining jewel in my
crown of victory, and as an aggravating Item in his day of judgment. Why art
thou so terrified at the roaring of a Lion, as if he could not rage, but he
must devour; or as if grace and temptation would not stand together? As if the
same afflictions were not accomplished upon thy Brethren. This is an undoubted
truth, that spiritual wickedness is to be found in the heavenliest places; and
this is an excellent sign, that Satan takes thee for one that will tread upon
his head, when he is so violent to bruise thy heel; and this a comfortable
assurance, that if Jesus Christ be thy Captain to lead thee in, he will be thy
Champion to bring thee out; so that temptation shall be as a File to beautify
thy soul; and as a Sword to wound thine Adversary. For my part, I know Satan
will be always tempting, therefore I will be always watching, and what I
cannot hinder, that I will be sure to hate: So shall it be my joy to fall into
temptation, and the Devil's misery to fall into his own pit.

LXII. Meditat.
II was proudly said by Caesar, crossing (unknown) the Sea, being in a little
Barque, in a tempestuous storm, when they were ready to be swallowed up by the
waves, perceiving the courage of the Pilot to fail, Confide, scias te Caesarem
vehere, Fear not, for thou carriest Caesar. How truly may a gracious spirit say
in the midst of all dissertions, afflictions and tribulations, Fear nothing, O
my soul, thou carriest Jesus Christ. What though the windows of Heaven be open
for a storm, or the fountains of the deep broke up for a flood, dissertions
from above, afflictions from below, yet God that sits in Heaven will not cast
away his Son, Christ that lives in me will not let me sink; the swelling waves
I know are but to set me nearer heaven, and the swelling deeps are but to make
me awake my Master; prize thy Christ, they cannot drown thee, therefore shall
not daunt me: For while I sail with Christ, I am sure to land with Christ.

LXIII. Meditat.
IF Satan cannot hinder the birth of graces, then he labors to be the death of
graces; this is too ordinary, to see a Christian lose his first love, and to
fall from his first works; his love that was formerly an ascending flame,
always sparkling up to Heaven, is now like a little spark, almost suffocated
with the Earth: The godly sorrow, that was once a swelling torrent, like Jordan
overflowing his banks, is now like Job's Summer brook, which makes the
Traveller ashamed; his proceedings against sin once furious, like the march of
Jehu against Ahab, but now like Sampson he can sleep in Dalilahs lap, whilst
she steals away his strength; before he could not give rest to his eyes, till
God had given rest to his soul, but now he can lie down with sin in his bosom,
and wounds in his Conscience: At first his zeal did eat him up; but now his
decayings has eat up his zeal: How is thy excellency, O Christian! departed
from thee? How is thy crown fallen from thy head? What a dangerous breach have
thou made for the entrance in of sin and sorrow? Temptations find thee wracked,
and leave thee wounded; thy graces that were once like the Worthies of David,
that could break through an^ host of enemies, and draw water at the wells of
salvation, are now like the Soldiers that follow Saul, they are with thee
trembling; thou have potent enemies, but impotent graces; often assaulted, but
easily conquered; and as thy glorious Sun is setting, so are dismal Clouds
arising: Thou, O Christian! art decreasing in thy graces, and God is declining
in his favors: Thou drawest off Communion with the Saints, and God draws off
Communion from thy soul; Thou offerest up thy sacrifices without the fire of
zeal, and he answers thy coldness with the fire of wrath. In a word, thy spirit
has no delight in God, and Gods soul has no delight in thee. And as there is
bad news from Heaven, so there is sad news from Conscience. What tremblings of
heart! What astonishment of soul! What disputes against mercy! What
questionings of salvation will thy wounded conscience and bleeding spirit
raise! What flashes of lightning! What claps of thunder will break out upon thy
soul, when the hot pangs of death shall be wrapped up in the cold and chill
scruples of salvation! As I will therefore draw out my soul to praise God for
grace implanted, so also will I put out my strength to serve God by grace
improved; that as every hour sets-me nearer my grave, so every action may set
me nearer my haven.

LXIV. Meditat.
AN Hypocrite is the Devils servant in Gods livery, and therefore out of favor
both in Heaven and Earth; for man sees his livery, and therefore hates him;
and God sees his heart, and therefore will not own him; Men see his outward
sanctity, and therefore deride him; and God sees his inward hypocrisy, and
therefore abhors him: so that he travels in the Wilderness, and yet shall never
rest in Canaan; when he comes to cast up the sum of all his labors, this he
shall find to be the sum of them, in stead of that blessed sentence of
approbation, Well done good and faithful servant, he shall have that direful
sentence of detestation, Who has required this at your hands? He that so
cunningly deceived others, does at last as foolishly beguile himself. in a
word, he is a man that steals his Damnation, and sweats to get to Hell, so that
the openly profane, and cunningly hypocritical, meet both there at last, only
with this difference, the way, the one goes through the Gate, and the other
steals through the Postern. Lord! Therefore whiles the Hypocrite clothes
himself with formality, cloth me with sincerity. It may be men will hate me,
but I care not so God love me; my duties may be full of imperfection, but yet
they shall never want a gracious acceptance; my way may be in trouble, yet my
rest shall be in glory.

LXV. Meditat.
AS great serenity of weather is a presage of an Earthquake and Whirlwind; so
great security of life is a great and sore prediction of the souls earthquake,
of trembling and astonishment of spirit; he that takes up formality, and sits
down in security; he that lays his foundation in the sand, and there raises
his building, the fall of that house will be great; and you may observe, that
Christian that is only brought out of open profaneness, into outward
profession; that has taken down the frame of his gross iniquity, to set up a
superficial form of piety; that has covered his face with a surface of
Religion; no soul so subject to fall into the sleep of death, as such a soul;
for while he thinks himself well, he seeks not to be better; so that he
slumbers away his time' until the cry at midnight' and then he startles, and
awakes, and sees nothing but the bridge of mercy drawn up, and the gates of
Heaven shut in. See with what confidence these Formalists in the Gospel come
unto Christ, they come under the relation of Servants, and therefore they call
upon him as their Master: Lord, Lord, Have not we prophesied in thy Name, and
in thy Name cast cut Devils? etc. They made no question of salvation, but show
their works, as if they would command it for their wages: But hear Christ's
answer, Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you. What, Lord! Never knew
us? That is strange. Have not we heard thy Word, received thy Sacraments, and
relieved thy Members, and spoke for Thee, and prayed to Thee, and done many
things in thy Name; and yet did thou never know us? No, says Christ, I never
knew you, but with an utter and absolute rejection: I never knew you, I never
did approve you in all your specious ways, and glorious shows, wherein you did
so pride your selves; because all was in formality, and nothing in sincerity;
therefore depart from me. They little thought of such a sad expulsion, such a
direful separation. And thus the outside Christian, because he has reformed
in many things, and does conform to many duties, therefore with Agag he
concludes the bitterness of death is past; so he clothes himself with smooth
imaginations, and deceitful apprehensions, till he is hewn asunder before the
Lord. I will not therefore in the least duty be formal, or in the least duty be
secure; but with the blessed man be always fearing, for I had rather tremble
here, than startle in Hell.

LXVI. Meditat.
Does Sin present it self, look upon it, as it must be with tears, or shall be
in torments; if thou committest the least sin, and dyest impenitent, thy soul
is lost, and thy redemption cease for ever: Or, if thou committest this sin,
and do repent; yet what cloudings of the face of God? What breakings of the
bones with David? What bitter pangs? What painful throws? What shadows of
Death? What terrors of Hell may seize upon thee, before thou can make thy
peace, or settle thine assurance? Will thou give way to sin, because it is
delectable? or because it is pardonable? Who loves poison, because it is sweet?
Or, who drinks poison, because he may have an Antidote, seeing it will work to
his trouble, if it work not out his life? I have a precious soul, shall I lose
it for a lust? I have a gracious God, shall I venture him for a sin? No, I will
always reject that for which I am sure to lose my peace, likely to lose my
soul.

LXVII. Meditat.
WHat Heir traveling to take possession of a rich inheritance, either lets a
green Meadow, or a pleasant Garden detain him, or a black Cloud, or a foul way
dishearten him? O my Soul! Thou art traveling to take possession of a glorious
inheritance among the Saints, will thou turn aside to crop every flower? Will thou stand still to hear every melodious sound? Will thou leave thy way to
drink of every gliding stream of carnal pleasure? What is this, but to view a
Meadow, and lose a manor? For a dying Flower, to part with an eternal Crown?
For a flying vanity, to lose an immortal felicity? To forsake the way of Sion,
to gather one of the Apples of Sodom? Or else, O my Soul! What if thy way be in
tears, and thy days in sorrow, all clouded, and a swelling Sea, so that not
only the lading of the Ship, but thy very life is in danger; yet here is enough
to comfort thee, that a good Father, and a large portion, a sweet rest, and an
everlasting refreshment, will make amends for all. Therefore, Vain World,
promise not, for I Will make no deviation, because my way lies to purer
comforts, and surer glory; Vexing World, threaten not, for I will make no
retarding, because I am traveling to my Fathers, to my Country, to my
Happiness.

LXVIII. Meditat.
AS the heart is, so is the estate; riches are but ciphers, it is the mind that
makes the sum. What am I the nearer for a great estate, if I am not contented
with it; desires of having will quickly eat up all the comforts and delights in
possessing. Therefore that Alexander that wants content, is worse than Digenes
that is contented with his wants. It argued a rich mind in the Philosopher,
when walking through a Market and beholding varieties of good commodities, yet
could say, Quam multis rebus ego non egeo? How many things do I not want? But a
richer mind in the Disciples, that with a sweet complacency of spirit, could
acknowledge, that as having nothing, yet possessing all things. I see all would
be well, if my heart were well; I will therefore form my heart to my estate,
so shall I have an estate according to my heart.

LXIX. Meditat.
When I remember, says one, Job sitting on the Dunghill, John hungering in the
Wilderness, St. Peter hanging on the Gibbet, then I think how severely will God
punish hereafter those Reprobates whom he loathes, if he deals so sharply with
his Children whom he loves; if he do so much to his intimate friends in the
time of Grace, what will he do to his professed enemies in the day of Judgment?
You therefore that deride the miseries of the Saints, Oh turn your jeers into
fears, for Hell sparkles out on Earth. On the contrary, Lord! When I consider
Herod in his pomp, Haman in his honor, Ahasuerus at his feast, etc. Then I
think, if God drop so much into a vessel of wrath, what will he pour into a
Vessel of mercy? If God do so much for a Slave on Earth, what will he do in
Heaven for a Son? Therefore, ye holy ones, that are so offended at the
flourishing of the wicked, Oh, leave your envy, and see your glory! for Heaven
lies above ground; As the adversity of the Saints shall therefore give me a
glimpse of Hell, so the prosperity of the wicked shall give me a glance of
Heaven.

LXX. Meditat.
GOd has made all things for his elect, and his elect for himself: All is
yours, and you are Christ's. I will therefore serve my God in all things, my
self in nothing.

LXXI. Meditat.
THe Creature has a goodness in it, no further than it stands in reference to
the chiefest good; if you cut the stream off from the fountain, it will quickly
lose its sweetness and pureness, and it self at length; the comforts and
enjoyments of the wicked, because they flow not from the spring of love, they
are but like dainty Channels mudded and imbittered with the wrath of God,
fading Brooks which at length will make the soul ashamed; so that he which only
enjoyes the creature in it self, shall lose the creature and himself. The
purest and the sweetest mercies only run in the rivulets which are fed by the
upper celestial springs of mercy; Therefore, O Lord! Whatsoever I enjoy, let it
stream from the fountain of thy love, and flow to me in the blood of thy Son.

LXXII. Meditat.
AS the Rivers which flow from the Sea, run back again into the Sea: So those
blessings which come from God, must always be employed for God. What I have
received from God in his mercy, he must have it back again in his glory:
Therefore, Lord! Whatever I enjoy, let me find thee in it, and serve thee with
it.

LXXIII. Meditat.
LOve should always be the life of motion: Amor meus pondus meum, eo terror
quocunque terror; That soul goes true that has true love to way it, and that
soul loves truly that has a true object to center it; a gracious spirit loves
the Lord, not because he does good, but because he is good; I will not weigh
that friends affection, that loves a fluent sweetness, before an inherent
goodness; that soul that loves Christ for himself, though you take away all
weights else, yet there is strength enough in love to move and constrain the
soul. O blessed be that Saint, Lord! that is so taken with thy love, that can
truly say, Were there neither Heaven nor Hell, yet sin should be my Hell, and
holiness my Heaven.

LXXIV. Meditat.
TO speak the truth, our Life, what is it, but a vital death? The Poet being
asked, What he did? Answered very well, Paulatim morior, I dye by little and
little: We do but then begin to live indeed, when we begin to live to God; our
life before is but a race to the sepulcher; but when we live to God, then we
are in our way to eternity. As Alexander, when he reckoned up his age, counted
not his years, but his victories; so when I take an account of my life, I will
not reckon up my time, but my duties.

LXXV. Meditat.
O Thou precious Saint, thou gracious Soul! Three questions calls for thy
answer, thy answer for thy praise: 1. What wast thou? 2. What art thou? 3. What
shall thou be? 1. What wast thou? A Rebel to thy God, a Prodigal to thy Father,
a Slave to thy Lust, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel. 2. What art
thou? The Son of God, the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
begotten of the Immortal Seed, born of the Blood Royal of Heaven, made free
among the Denizens of Sion, written among the living of Jerusalem. 3. What
shall thou be? A glorious Saint, a Companion of Cherubins, a triumphant Victor,
a crowned King, and an Attendant on the Lamb wheresoever he goes, a spectator
of those soul-ravishing and ineffable excellencies that are in God, the
beholding of the King of glory face to face, and enjoying immediate communion
with Jesus Christ; Nay more, made one with Jesus Christ, clothed with his
excellencies, enthroned with his glories, crowned with his eternity, filled
with his felicity: The glory which thou have given me, I have given them. Oh!
Stand amazed at free grace; and seeing God has made thy soul a vessel filled
with his mercy, make thy self, thy life, a spring flowing with his praise.

LXXVI. Meditat.
THe Soul takes its rise from every creature to Heaven: When I see the Stars,
Lord, I think, if one Star be of such magnitude, what are the dimensions of
those Heavens in which so many are fixed? Nay, how immensible is that God, whom
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain? When I see the Sun, I think, if one Sun
make such a glorious and lustrious day, what a glorious Heaven will that be,
wherein every Saint shall be a Sun, and every Sun so far brighter than this,
as this is brighter than our bodies? And yet all these Suns are but a shadow to
the Sun of righteousness. Again, when I consider the rising Sun, how by the
perfection of his beams, he puts beauty, life and joy upon the face of the
whole Creation, paints the Flowers, guilds the Corn, puts a flourish upon the
Plants, chears and exhillarates the Birds, and makes the Valleys shout for joy;
I then think; what shall be the shining beauty, and soul ravishing delights of
that soul, upon which the brightness of thy glory shall fully rise and rest,
and into which the glorious splend our of thy beauty shall clearly shine to all
eternity? And when I consider the Air, this is my thought, That as here I
cannot think at all, unless I draw in this Air; so I cannot think well at all,
except thou puts goodness into my thought; Lord! When I view the variety of thy
Creatures, and see one excel in beauty, another in strength, another in
wisdom, another in love, and of others in swiftness; Lord, I think these are
but beams of thy brightness, and streams of thy fullness; as they had only their
being from thy hand, so they have only their perfection in thy essence; here
they are mixed, but there they are pure; how happy then shall that soul be, that
enjoyes all perfection in God, and God infinitely above all? Lord! I see
stately buildings, shady groves, and crystal brooks and pleasant meadows, and
yet perhaps a wicked man the owner; why then I think, if Simeon goes away with
such a mess, what will Benjamin's portion be? If the Children of the Concubines
have so large a gift, what shall be the inheritance of a Son of Promise? Again,
when I look upon my self, in temporals, Lord, I bless thee, that I have a
convenient sufficiency, a goodly heritage, my tents are by the wells of Elim,
my portion is from the hands of thy wisdom; and though corruption may think it
of the least, yet wisdom it self knows it to be best: Now Lord, if thou give
me so much in the time of my vanity, what will thou do for me in the day of my
glory? But above all, that sweet communion I enjoy with God, those glorious
rays which shine from the face of Christ, those ravishing joys that flow from
the wells of Salvation, sets me upon the top of Nebo, and gives me the largest
view of my happiness. For if the Lord give me so choice a mercy for my earnest,
how rich a blessing shall I have for mine inheritance? If this be the first
fruits, what shall be the full harvest? If the Lord let me have such a glorious
beam in my Prison, what a glorious Sun shall shine in my Palace? If there be
such a joy in the expectation of what I shall be, what a happiness shall there
be in the consummation of what I shall be?

LXXVII. Meditat.
ANaxagoras being asked, What he thought he was born for? Answered, Vt Coelum
contemplar, That I may meditate upon Heaven: Oh my Soul! what do thou think
thou wast re-born for? Is it not that thou may live in Heaven? God has made
thee to enjoy communion with himself, thou need not stay one hour on Earth,
but with Enoch spend thy days with God, walk and converse with Jesus Christ in
the galleries of his love, with Moses live on the mount of glory. Why then, my
dear Soul! art thou one hour out of Heaven? Oh live so strictly, and walk so
closely with God, that thou may say with David, Whether I awake in the
morning, or whether I walk abroad in the day, I am ever with thee.

LXXVIII. Meditat.
LOrd! How near will thou bring me to thy self? Must I abide in thee and thou
in me? Must we be of one soul, and of one spirit? Is it not enough, that I must
always repose my self in the bosom of thy sweetest affections, that I should
always be enclosed in the embraces of thy choicest love, that I should be ever
wrapped up in the bowels of thy tenderest mercies? But must I so dwell with thee,
and will thou so dwell in me, as to be made an equal sharer in thy bliss, a
partmer in thy glory? What is man, that thou should so regard him? What am
I, that thou should so remember me? Lord, let thy mercies so constrain me,
that all my affections may run out unto thee, and all my strength may run out
for thee.

LXXIX. Meditat.
EVery real Christian is the spiritual Temple of the living God: Worldly cares,
and earthly desires, are the buyers and the sellers that pollute this Temple:
Now what an unworthy part is this, to make the House of God a Den of Thieves?
what an Idolatrous sin is this, to set up Dagon by the Ark, a Lust by Christ?
Again, Every Member is a Vessel of that Temple: Now, what a debasing thing is
this, to take these golden Vessels, with that drunken King, and employ them to
a sordid use? To take that Heart, which should be filled with God, and fill it
with Lust? Those Ears, which should be always ready to hear what God shall
speak, to lay them open to a detracting tale, a foolish jest? That Tongue, that
should be setting out the praises, and must hereafter be singing, forth that
sweet triumphant Hallelujah, for to defile it now with idle speeches, lying
words? What a sacrilegious thing is this, to let forth Gods vessels to sin, and
Gods rooms to lust? O Lord, therefore, what thou take to be thy own, own,
rule, and use it as thy own.

LXXX. Meditat.
MY Duties are then upright with God, when they turn me into the very nature of
themselves. It was St. Jerome's praise of Nepolitan, That by his continual
reading, and daily meditation, he made his breast the very library of Christ.
This is the praise of a Christian, when he shall see here, that the word
abides in him, it is as it were incorporated into him; when he shall so read,
as that he shall make himself a living Epistle, so that the world may read
again in his life, what he has read before in the World; when he shall so
bless God, as to make himself his praise; when he shall so pray, as that every
petition shall, as so many living veins, run through his practice; when his
duties shall be the fire, and his life the incense, this is the only sweet
acceptable sacrifice; till worship is distilled into practice, it is but an
empty cloud; till duties are as vitals in our walkings, they are but dead
performances; Lord, therefore, let my duties receive life from thy Spirit, and
let my walkings receive life from those duties.

LXXXI. Meditat.
I Read of Bazil, that he persuaded himself, if he were in the Wilderness, free
from the company of men, he should be happy and serve God more devoutly; but
when he came there, he said, I have forsaken all things, but yet I retain my
old heart. I have often sought the privatest place for duty, and have often
pressed to hear the best men, and to enjoy the best means, thinking to have
gained much ground in the advantages of the Place, and of the Ordinance; and
yet, Lord, I have got but little good, because I still carry with me a bad
heart; this is the that Remora that stays my Ship in its course to Heaven. So
that I find, it is not he (with St. Bazil) that treads the paths of
retiredness, that grows in grace, but he that (with that Father) walks first
into the cloisters of his own heart, in the secret places and crooked turning
of his own spirit; it is not he that comes to the pure Ordinances, that
advances his Communion with God, but it is he that brings a pure heart. Lord! I
have often searched my heart, and still my heart deceives me in the search;
Oh! come and fit my heart for every duty, that every duty may fit for thy self.

LXXXII. Meditat.
PRinces combat with flesh and blood, Christians wrestle with Principalities
and Powers; their wars give days of truce, ours not a minute of Cessation;
Conditions of peace there may cause retreat, nothing but death here can raise
the siege: Kings, if overcome, may save themselves by flight; but Christians
may as soon fly from themselves, as from their enemies; whatsoever may make a
battle dangerous, here it is, whether policy, potency, cruelty, or perpetuity:
Not only the powers of Earth, but all the forces and stratagems of Hell, are
always charged upon thy soul; so that a Christian is not in a Garrison of
rest, but in a Field of conflict, and he cannot let fall his hands, but Amalek
prevails: Not to be a conqueror, is to be a prisoner; not to winn the field,
is to lose the soul; security wounds thee, yielding kills thee, nothing but
victory crowns thee; therefore watch as for thy life, sight as for thy soul;
the time will come, these enemies thou see to day, thou shall see them no
more for ever; when thou shall lay down thy Sword, and take up thy Palm, and
solemnize thy victory in glory to perpetuity. A certain man rehearsing a sad
Oration to Aristotle, in Praise of those that were slain in the Wars by the
Lacedaemonians, received this answer from him, Quales igitur nostros esse putas
qui istos vicerunt? If those were such brave and valiant men, what do thou
think that we are, that overcame those? What though now we read a sad relation
of the potency and policy of our enemies, and find the heavy experience of it;
yet how glorious and victorious do thou think we shall one day be, when in
the strength of Christ, we shall have overcome those enemies? What though my
assaults be many, my enemies mighty; if God strengthen me, I have enough to
comfort me: for the greater my enemy, the more glorious my victory; and the
more glorious my victory, the more triumphant my glory.

LXXXIII. Meditat.
I Have seen some Christians, that for ordinary losses have been inordinate in
their mourning, as if not only the Stream, but the Fountain had been exhausted;
whereas, if the understanding part of the soul did truly act it self, it would
reason thus: What, must the stream of my sorrow run altogether in this channel?
Is there no mourning to be made for sin? What, shall I suffer my heart to swim
away in tears? Are there no duties to be performed for God? And do I not know
that a sad heart cannot serve a good God? I have lost the Creature, but I must
keep my God; I have parted with an outward comfort, but I shall meet it again
with advantage in Jesus Christ: I have lost something, were it more, were it
all, so that I were not the owner of any thing, yet enjoying Christ I should be
the possessor of all things: The failing Stream shall but therefore send me to
the flowing Fountain. Thus did the soul put forth it self, it would quickly
sweeten those bitter waters, and presently turn those tears into duties: For my
part, I will mourn for the loss of the Creature, but it shall be in the Cause,
which is Sin; so shall my sorrow be godly, and not worldly; and I will never be
satisfied, till I make good the absence of the Creature, but it shall be in the
Fountain, which is Christ; so shall it be a gain, and not a loss.

LXXXIV. Meditat.
It Is observed as a point of wisdom in Husbandry, to set those Plants together,
that have an Antipathy in their natures, and draw several juyces out of the
Earth; therefore it is thought, a Rose set by Garlic is sweeter, because the
more fetid juice of the Earth goes into the Garlic, and the more odorate into
the Rose: I am sure it is true in spirituals; therefore I wonder not, why
afflictions are the portion of the righteous, for I see prosperity is too
strong a sucker to exhaust and steal the spiritual sap and celestial vigor of
the Soul, and so to debilitate the principles of growth and life: Whereas
adversity has a contrary extraction, it only draws out what may be malignant,
and leaves behind it what may be for nourishment; it takes the dregs, and
leaves the spirits, whereby the soul is elevated, and made more fruitful in the
works of holiness. Therefore, Lord, so I may but grow, if the Flowers of the
World be too succulent, transplant me among the Briars.

LXXXV. Meditat.
WHen I look up to Heaven, how often do I both see the Sun shine and set? When I
look down into my soul, how often do I see my comfort rise and fall? Eye but that
Ship which now seems to touch the clouds, and you shall see it in the depth
anon, as if it would be swallowed by the waves. One while a Christian is upon
mount Tabor, and has a glance of Heaven; another while lies in the valley of
Bochim, weeping because he has lost the sight of his Country. Joshuah's long
day is many times turned into Paul's sad night. God would quicken our
affections, therefore now and then he gives us a glance of Heaven, that so we
might be in love with what we see; and now and then he draws a black veil over
that bright vision, that so we might not loath what we did love: He suffers our
happiness here to be imperfect, that so we may be pressing on to that place
where we shall be perfectly happy. Lord! when thou show thy self, let me
love thee; and when thou withdrawest thy self, let me follow thee; and under
all these changes here, let my soul be always breathing, panting, longing, and
reaching after thee, till I shall so perfectly enjoy thee, that I may never
lose thee.

LXXXVI. Meditat.
WHere the King is, there is the Court; and where the presence of God is, there
is Heaven: Art thou in Prison with St. Paul and Silas? If God be with thee,
thou will sing thy Hallelujahs: Art thou at the Stake with blessed Martyrs? As
the beams of the Sun puts out the fire, so the beams of Gods Countenance puts
out the flames, and turns their troubles into comforts; so that it is but
winking, and thou art in Heaven. Therefore that soul that enjoyes the Lord,
though it may want the Sun or Moon to shine in Creatures comforts, worldly
delights to solace it, yet it needs them not, for the glory of God does
enlighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof; God himself irradiates it with
the brightness of his beauty, and Christ himself fills it with joy unspeakable
and full of glory. This God brings his Heaven with him; and that man that
enjoyes God, carries Heaven about him; so that here is his happiness, cast him
in a Dungeon, in a Furnace, when you please, yet he is still in Heaven.
Therefore, for my part, Lord, give me thy self, and then deal how thou please
with me.

LXXXVII. Meditat.
MArk the wicked man, though his Intrat may be Comical, his Exit is always
Tragical. Belshazzar in his first Scene is revelling out his time in sin and
pleasure, feasting and carousing with his Concubines in the vessels of the
Lord; but view him in the Catastrophe, and you shall find the hand writing and
him trembling; Darius rending away his Kingdom, and Death snatching away his
Life. If you look upon the entrance of a wicked man, his gates are riches, his
seats honors, his paths pleasures; he goes delicately, fares deliciously every
day, he has more than heart can wish: But wait his going out, and see a sad
conclusion, in a moment he goes down to Hell: The man is cast out from God, as
an everlasting curse: Destruction closes her mouth upon him, and his place
beholds him no more: His body is wrapped in the dust, his soul is buried in the
flames, and his name is covered with darkness. But now, behold the perfect man,
it may be thou may see a few tragical Scenes, the World hating, mocking,
persecuting him; but the end of that man, is peace. Though he may come forth
weeping, yet he goes off rejoicing: Though he come forth combating, yet he goes
out triumphing; so that the Saints and Angels clap their hands for joy. When I
therefore judge of a happy man, I Will wait his end, I care not for his entrance.

LXXXVIII. Meditat.
EArthly riches, were they true riches, yet they are not ours; or were they
ours, yet they were not true, because they are unuseful to the soul; Nay, for
the most part, our golden heaps are but the miserable spoils of precious souls:
Dives aut malus est aut haeres mali. And then, they are not ours, because we
cannot carry them with us, when we leave the World. Thou fool, this night shall
thy soul be taken from thee, etc. And then thou shall quickly know whose thy
soul shall be, which thou have by these things so sinfully abused; but thou
shall never know whose these things shall be, which thou have so miserably
provided: When we awake at the last day, we shall find nothing of all those
things in our hands. Those things that are of the World (says St. Ambrose) we
shall leave them behind us in the World, only virtue is the companion of the
dead; these things shall fail us, but our good works shall follow us, and abide
with us for ever. Would thou be truly rich? Be not only in getting of goods,
but in doing of good; raise virtue out of vanity, so shall thou lay up goods
indeed for eternity.

LXXXIX. Meditat.
I Have not far to my home, therefore I need not make much provision for my
way, food and raiment will be sufficient for my journey, superfluity will but
prove a burden. While Jacob had only his staff, he went on freely in his way;
but when he had his flocks and herds, he drives but slowly. We see it daily
that rich men either lose their paths, or ^^d but little ground; while poor men
run the ways of Gods Commandments. I am well enough, if I have but enough to
carry me well to Heaven: I will therefore desire no more, than what will mend
my pace, and serve me in my journey.

XC. Meditat.
WE must not presume upon the means without God, nor upon God without the
means: Not upon the means without God, because the Pipe cannot convey, except
the Spring communicate; not upon God without the means, because the goings
forth of providence are always in the paths of diligence: Therefore, in the
assault of Amalek, whilst Moses goes to prayer, Joshua must go and fight; so
in the proceedings of Christians, Faith should always be upon the mount, and
Industry in the valley: While the heart is lifted up, the hand shauld be
stretched out; He only may rest in God, that has been restless in the means:
He that can fully lay out himself in Gods way, may confidently lay up his faith
in Gods providence: I must sow my seed, and wait upon the clouds; do my work,
and leave the event to God: I must neither be idle in the means, nor make an
Idol of the means. I will therefore henceforth lay my hands to the means, as if
they were all in all; and yet raise my eye above the means, as if they were
nothing at all.

XCI. Meditat.
CIcero spoke at random, when he said, Ad decus and libertatem nati sumus, We
are born to liberty and honor. It is thou, O regenerate Soul! that art born a
Child of Love, and Heir of Glory: Thou art he, O excellent Saint! that art
clothed with the Sun, and crowned with the Stars, and reckoned among the
Angels of God: O think upon thy dignity, and consider, Will an Emperor live
like a Beggar? Is it a becoming thing for those that are clothed in Scarlet to
embrace a Dunghill? Am I born of God, and shall I live like a man? Has God
raised my Spirits with the highest excellencies, and shall I stain my Nobleness
with poor empty vanities? May I feed upon a Christ, and shall I feed upon Dust?
Shall I sit to judge the World, and shall I be a Drudge to the World? Has
Christ prepared for me a Mansion in the Heavens, and shall I be grovelling in
the Earth? Am I a Child of light, and shall I commit the works of darkness? No,
(as Seneca says) I am born to great and higher things, than to be a slave unto
Lust, or a drudge unto the World.

XCII. Meditat.
PUre Love runs clearly out of it self into the bosom of the object that is
beloved; heavenly Love centres no lower than Heaven it self; it is only God it
loves, and it is only in God it lives; if it loves a beam, it is only as it
stands in reference to the Sun; if it loves the creature, it is only as it is a
step to advance it nearer God. Lord! I would not care for Heaven, were it not
for thee; neither would I love my self, were I not in thee.

CXIII. Meditat.
HEaven is the very Element, and Christ is the Center of every gracious soul;
Heaven only is the breathing place, and Christ only is the resting place;
there is the place of its respiration, and here is the seat of its repose; it
cannot live out of that Element, and it cannot rest out of this Center: it is
always struggling till it gets to Heaven, always rolling till it comes to
Chirst: Return unto thy rest, O my Soul! says David. Lord! let me draw no
breath but that which I fetch from Heaven; and never let me rest, till I rest
in thee.

XCIV. Meditat.
I See Man is not only contented with a being, but is still aspiring to an
eminency in that being; as Plants are continually growing up, till they come
to that maturity, which makes them perfect: So Man, he is always pressing
forward, till he comes to his proposed end, he thinks will make him happy. O my
Soul! God is the end and excellency, and thy happiness lies in moving forward,
till thou come to thy perfection. Be thou always rising, until thou come to
rest in the bosom of the Lord.

XCV. Meditat.
THe closer association that we have here with Christ, the nearer assimilation
we shall have to Christ: Moses did but talk with God, and how did his face
shine with a beam of God? You may quickly know a soul that does converse and is
familiar with Jesus Christ, you shall see it shining forth with the glories of
Christ; as Wisdom makes the face to shine, so Jesus Christ he makes the soul
to shine; so that he that judiciously looks upon him, can divine that soul has
met with, and seen the Lord. I see by the strong reflects of the beams of
righteousness, that he has been long in viewing of the Sun of righteousness;
he carries the very Image of Christ upon him, and the very beauties of Christ
about him; he looks like Christ, speaks like Christ, walks like Christ, he
lives like Christ, he is just like Christ, and knows he comes from Christ. That
soul that is always beholding the glory of the Lord, shall be changed into the
same Image from glory to glory. If that soul be so glorious that beholds God
darkly, reflectively as in a glass, and enjoyes God at a distance; how glorious
shall that soul be, that shall see him clearly and directly face to face, and
enjoy his immediate communion with Jesus Christ? We shall then be like him
indeed, when we shall see him as he is; our bodies shall be like his, our souls
shall be like his, our glory shall be like his, our eternity shall be like his,
who is the God of beauty, excellency and sweetness, concord, happiness and
eternity. Oh Lord! let me have such clear visions, such sweet fruitions of
thee, that I may not only hereafter be happy as thou art happy, but may
likewise now be holy as thou art holy.

XCVI. Meditat.
THe life of Faith is the noblest, richest, contentedst, easiest, truest life
of all: It is the noblest life, for it takes the Soul out of the house of Adam,
and carries it into the household of God; it makes the Soul forget her Fathers
house, and espouseth it to the King of Glory: And then it is the pleasantest
life, it lives upon the choicest excellency, and highest felicity, often wrapped
up in the third Heaven, to take its repast in inexpressible glory; it walks in
the paths of pleasantuess, and under all the heats of troubles and afflictions,
it shades it self under the Arbor of Paradise: And then it is the richest
life, if our desires be according to our wants, it is impossible we should want
above what we desire. Tantum quisque habet quantum credit, Every man has
(says a Father) according to his faith, And be it unto thee according to thy
faith, says Christ: And then it is the contentedst life, it carries the fading
creature, and lays him upon Christ; and under all mutabilty, still holds fast
all sufficiency, and so sits down contentedly: Then is it the easiest life;
Faith looks not on the strictness or difficulty of duty, but on the power and
strength of Christ; therefore if it meet with a hard precept, it dissolves it
into a sweet promise; it carries it to a loving Christ, pleads it out till he
has drawn out a proportionable strength to facilitate and make easy the duty.
In fine, it is the truest and the onlyest life, for he is dead in sin, that
does not live by faith; therefore, as one said, Non vivere, sed valere, vita
est: Not to live, but to be well, is life; So may I say, Not to live well only,
but to believe, is to live, and to live well indeed.

XCVII. Meditat.
IF God be the highest perfection in himself, and the highest good to the
creature, then it is the highest wisdom of the creature, to choose him, and
the highest piece of his duty to live in observance of him; If all creatures
must certainly appear before this great Majesty, and bow unto him, I admire the
wisdom of the godly, and wonder at the folly of the wicked. And seeing this
certainly, and of necessity must be, Lord! let me be of the number of those
that choose thee here, so as for ever hereafter I may enjoy thee; and not as
the number of those that refuse thee here, and must for ever hereafter, be
separated from thee.

XCVIII. Meditat.
GRaces are the very Courtiers of Heaven, those wait upon Christ in his privy
Chamber; Honor, Riches, Credit, and the like, may do much below, you may keep
out your betters here; but in the Palace of the King of Glory, you must stand
by for ever: It is only Faith, Love, Humility, and the like, that shall have
admittance into the Presence Chamber; moral virtues you must likewise walk
without. All that go bravely, are not qualified for such a Presence; you are
but Splendida peccata, beautiful Abominations, base Hearts wrapped up in brave
clothes, Parts and Gifts; you may stay and wait at the gates, but I can tell
you there is a special Command gone forth, that none but Grace, and Holiness
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore you may receive your answer,
if you please, only these are welcome to the King of Glory, only these are
familiar and conversant with Jesus Christ. Therefore, as the Queen of Sheba
said of the servants of Solomon, so may (...) say of the Graces of Gods Spirit,
which are only the retainers of Jesus Christ. Oh! happy are these thy men, and
happy are these thy servants, O God, which stand continually before thee, and
hear thy Wisdom, and see thy Glory. True love does not only preserve every
heavenly motion of the Soul, but raises the Soul ^t self to the highest
perfection. The more I love, the more I shall be beloved, and the fuller
participation shall I have of him, who is altogether lovely. St. Bernard speaks
fully to it, Summum bonum amare, est summa beatitudo: To love the chiefest
good, is the greatest happiness. The purest and the fullest love, shall always
wear the weightiest Crown of glory. Lord! perfect this Grace in me, that so I
may be perfect in loving thee.

XCIX. Meditat.
THe Israelites must first pass over Jordan before they can land in Canaan; but
no sooner did the feet of the Priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant, rest
in the water, but the proud waves saw it and fled, and the swelling streams
were driven back, and laid in heaps, to make them pass over safe and well: So
every child of God is like an Israelite in the Wilderness of this World,
traveling to the Land of Promise; Death is that Jordan that runs between this
wilderness and our Canaan, it is that swelling stream that over-flows the banks
of every mortal creature, it is that last River which must be passed over: But
this is the happiness of a Child of God, That Jesus Christ our High Priest,
that bears the everlasting Covenant on his shoulders, has already dipped his
feet in the brims of this water, insomuch that the streams of bitterness are
diverted, the sting of death plucked out, the water of the salt Sea is dried
up, and the power of the curse cut off, so that death is but a sure step unto
glory. Why then am I afraid to dye, the channel is dry, and I see the footsteps
of my Savior in the bottom, and Heaven and Happiness on the other side, so
that the waters shall not go over my Soul, they may go over my sins, they may
go over my miseries, they may go over my troubles, but my Soul shall go over
to its rest. Lord! therefore fit and sanctify me for my removal, and then take
down my Tent, I cannot be too soon with thee.

C. Meditat.
HEre the Vessel is too capacious to be filled with all the pleasures and
delights the world can lay together, but hereafter our pleasures and delights
shall be too full for the most capacious Vessel to comprehend; our Glory shall
be so great, that power as well as goodness shall come forth from God himself,
for to renew and enlarge these Vessels, that so they may be capable to receive
and retain that glory, strength and love, shall go forth together for to
prepare and raise our dispositions, that they may be suitable for such a
transcendent and high condition; We are too weak for such a weight of glory,
therefore God will bear us up, that we may bear up it; and because our joys
cannot fully enter into us, we shall fully enter into them. Who would then set
so large a Vessel as the Soul under a few drops of carnal pleasure, and neglect
the spring and spouts of everlasting joy? Oh my soul! What a glorious day is
there coming? When the Vessels of mercy shall be cast into the Ocean of mercy,
and be filled to the brim with mercy! When the Sons of pleasure shall drink
their fills at the torrents of pleasures, and be set for ever at rest in the
rivers of pleasure! When the soul that is sick of love shall lie in the bosom
of love, and for ever take its fill of love! When the Children of God shall
have a full fruition of God, and be for ever satisfied with the presence of
God; the joy of which glorious presence, the fullness of which joy, the
sweetness, of which fullness, the eternity of which sweetness, the heart of man
in its largest thoughts cannot conceive. Lord! Let the thoughts of the joy and
glory which thou have prepared for me in the Heavens, turn away my Soul from
the pleasures and delights which are presented to me on Earth, that so
neglecting them, I may be pressing to thee, and be breathing forth, with thine,
Oh! When shall I come and appear before God!

POSTSCRIPT, By A READER.
AND now, being Refreshed with these fragrant leaves, what shall I say? Blessed
Author, Art thou yet alive? Breath longer in this fruitful Air, and extract
more out of so Rich a Stock. A Scribe so well Instructed, cannot have spent
all, but must have new or old to bring out of his Treasure. Do not hide, but
Improve thy Talent. Be not only a good and wise, but faithful Steward; and
yield us more of thy pleasant Fruits. Thou have begun well, who, what should
hinder thee? Thy present (were there no succeeding) Reward, is spurr enough to
future Work: Religion is Recreation; and Heaven is the way to Heaven; Good men
are there on this side the grave; Thy Longing Soul was still peeping into it,
and sending thy Thoughts as Spies to view this promised Land. But art thou at
Rest from thy Labors, this (among others) thy work follows thee; and has here
Erected thy Lasting Monument. Where ever thou were Buried, Obscurity shall not
swallow thee: Every good Heart, that knew thee, is thy Tomb; and every Tongue
writes thee an Epitaph; Good men speak well of thee: But above all, God
delights in thee. Thy Thoughts were still fluttering upwards, Richly fraught
with Divine Breathings, and ever Aspiring, till unladen themselves in the
Bosom of thy Beloved: We are hugely Thankful, that a few dropped from thee, for
the Comfort and Example of fainting sluggish Mortals below. Thou lived Indeed,
while most live only in Show; and have changed thy Place, but not thy Company.
Blush, and be ashamed, my Drowsy Soul, at Sight or Thoughts of such Active
Christians: These are Redeeming Times, whilst thou art Mis-spending it; These
are working, and thou loytering; These are Conversing with God, whilst thou
art following or trifling in the World; These are Digging in Scripture Mines,
whilst thou passes over them, as Barren, Empty Things; Backward to Read, slow
to Hear, most averse to ruminate on the Word. David meditated day and night,
but thou scarce day or night. Shall God be to thee hereafter All in All, and
here as nothing at All? Have all thy Thoughts then, and be afforded so few now?
Is he thy Portion, and will thou live no more upon him? Thy Treasure, and thy
Heart so seldom with him? Is there so much in God, and his Attributes; in
Christ, and his Offices; in the Spirit, and his Workings; in the Law, and its
Exactness; in the Gospel, and its Sweetness; in Grace, and its Excellency; in
the World, and its Vanity; in the Guilt of Sin, in the Beauty of Holiness, in
the Preciousness of the Soul, in the Paucity that shall be Saved, in the
Frailty of Life, in the Certainty of Death, in the Torments of Hell, in the
Happiness of Heaven, in the Vnalterableness of Judgment? And art thou barren
in so fruitful a Soil? Only a Cumberer of the Ground, notwithstanding all the
Cost bestowed upon thee? Oh see thou be not only alive, but a lively Christian:
Can thou think of an eternal weight of Glory, and rest contented with a
little work? Who ever served God for naught? Has he not passed his word to
make thee amends for all thou can do or suffer for his sake? What Harm is
there in a Heavenly, Life? What Dishonor in Adoring thy Maker? What great
Danger in being strictly Religious? What Discomfort to live and dye in the
sense of Gods favor? Where is thy best friend? What is thy chief Interest?
What will thou wish upon a dying bed? Who does, or can do most for thee? What
into another World will accompany thee? O live in the sense of Dreadful, Happy
Eternity, and of the difference to stand with boldness before the Judge, when
the careless World shall stand trembling. Let Heaven be always in thy eye, the
World under thy feet; Christ nearest thy heart, the last Trump in thy ear; the
Work, the Word of God in thy hand, and his Praises continually in thy lips.
Listen, what Yellings under thee; Hark, what Acaclmations over thee; Look
round, what Snares are laid for thee; Behold, whose eye is upon thee, what have
Death makes toward thee, how near thy course is finishing; See, who stands
holding thy sparkling Crown; how the wicked would die like thee; how the Devils
for Envy grinn at thee; how the Angels rejoice over thee, stand round thee, and
long to be carrying thee; thy Father will be no longer without thee. Yet a
little while, and God shall wipe away all Tears, turn every Holy Desire into an
Embracement, every Prayer into a Song of Praise, every Sigh into an Hallelujah,
every Tear into a Pearl, every Stone of Reproach into a Diamond in thy
glittering Crown, Reflection into Possession, Faith into Vision, Hope into
Fruition, the Glass into the Face; for we shall see him as he is, to whom be
glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

