The St. Giles's Broker.
Showing how he was cheated in buying a Green Goose, with an Account of several
sorrowfu^ Circumstances which followed thereupon.
To the Tune of Ladies of London.
Licensed according to Order.





There was a wealthy old Broker of late,
Whose Wife was an absolute Beauty,
But he so often did kiss his Maid Kate,
he seldom did Family Duty,
Every night she might tumble and toss,
she is nothing but Dreams to inflame her,
So at the length she was desperate cross,
but tell me what Christian could blame her.
But as it fell out upon his Birthday,
some two or three Friends he invited,
There to take part of a Green Goose they say,
but yet that civil Wife whom he slighted,
She to the Market then would not go,
he must trudge himself if he would feast her,
Yet a good Green Goose this Spark did not know,
so well as his Dog knew a Tester.
Yet he declared that he well understood,
a Goose when he came to the Woman,
For when she showed him one both white and good,
he swore he would be cheated by no man,
Saying to her, Dame what do you mean,
I would not have this if you would give't me,
I Will have a Goose that is delicate Green,
a wiser than you cannot cheat me,
Now when she see his right ignorant skill,
and being resolved to please him,
She pulled out one that was at Turners Hill,
this into his hand straight she giv's-him,
A Green Goose there is not in Town,
it being one of mine own killing,
The First I showed you was but half a Crown,
for this I must have full Three Shilling,
Tell me why did you not show this at first,
which seems to be greenish all over,
With that he streightway did down with his Dust,
said he, of Green Geese I Am a Lover,
Home to his house he strutted in state,
and there of his Bargain he boasted,
Then gave it into the hands of young Kate,
and said it must streightways be roasted.
But it sent forth a strong dainty Perfume,
when being a while at the fire,
Kate called her Master straight into the Room,
and said Sir, I strange and admire,
You should buy this, it is not worth a souse,
no one would be able to eat it,
Nay, it will stink us all out of the house,
I vow and protest you are cheated.
Prithee said he let another be bought,
and go thy self Kate I entreat thee,
And cast this same in some secret Vaut,
and likewise take care they don't cheat thee,
Honest poor Kate the innocent Maid,
she did as her Master adviz'd her,
And as the Goose down the Vaut she convey'^
some two or three Women surpised her.
Then to a Justice they haul'd her with speed,
concluding some child she did smother,
That she might suffer for that wicked Deed,
and called her a Murderous Mother,
Yet she declared it was but a Goose,
but Justice nor none would believe her,
Telling her, that was an idle Excuse,
to Gaol she was sent, which did grieve her.
For her returning he waiting did stand,
And seemed to be highly offended,
At length a Letter came to his Wives hand,
which showed the Maid was apprehended,
Reading the same, she to him did run,
with railing his Ears she surrounded,
See what your impudent Gillian has done,
an innocent Brat she has drounded.
Then to the Justice he trott'd amain,
and told him a sorrowful Ditty,
When the whole story he then had made plain,
his case he did presently pity,
Kate was released then home they did go,
her Master did lovingly hand her,
Now ever since those that do him well know,
they call him the Cunnig Old Gander.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and I. Back.


