(...) OR AN ELOGIUM Consecreated to the Right Honorable Sir Robert Viner Lord
Mayor of the most Ancient and most Flourishing EMPORIUM of the World the
Honorable City LONDON For this Prsent Year 1694
GReat Wise, and Pollitick, to you it is,
The Lord of Albions rich Metropolis:
To you, our matchless Parents Eldest Son
And you, great Senators, of this new Rome
^from Apollo's lofty Mount am sent
With Bays to Crown your civil Government:
From whose more wise than Greek, or Roman Souls,
Laws Stand prescribed to the Remotest poles.
In each of you, this day, seems to take rest
A Solous Soul, and deep Lycurgus Breast,
Comprising in your Sage Election,
The Epitome of their perfection;
In framing which, Nature, and Prudence both
Combined, his better Genius to set forth
This Jubely (by an excess of Joy
Transported) to Reiterate, this day
Our Ancient City, Just and unanimous,
Does consecrate her self, to you, her Spouse,
Commanding me, in verse to entertain
You, and your Senatorial-Scarlet train.
Behold, her Household Gods presented stand,
At every door ready at your command,
And richest Chariots (as in Triumph) crowd,
Whilst Streets are filled with acclamations loud.
S^e how the Silver-Flooded Thames del^ghts
To Ty^^ you in; Proud of her glorious freights,
Swell's and grows big: whilst, in a greatful train;
Each Vess^l ploughs her fresh and curled Maine.
Here fiery Mars, breaths from his Iron lungs
In thundering Tones, smart Sulphur-uttering Songs;
There from his Brasty, thin, and warbling Throat,
A softer strain, and more melodious Note.
The Western-Minster first, by their command,
Saint Martin next, then Clement in the Stand:
Southern Saint Mary, on the other side,
And Dunston by the Temple; as you glide,
All, with a loud but pleasant Music Note
Ring in your welcome Golden-Stemmed Boat.
And when arrived, Repleat with aged pain,
Decrepid Paul, tinkles his portick strain,
Troubled that younger Steeples should out-vy
Him, in their Loud and lofty Harmony
Yet Phoenix like, in the ruins of his fire,
(The only relic of that Heavenly Ire)
Hatched your Zeal, he hopes in better shape
From older Obsequies new birth to take.
Old aged Father Lud, next leads you on
To ^eat you in his Cituation:
Gear C^arles his Monument amazed to see,
And Lumbards Temple, lately built by thee:
Whole multitudes on each side crowd the way.
To view their Father; and observe his day;
Not much unlike to that Elated glory,
Read in the Roman, or Athenian Story;
Who, when the Body politic, made choice
Of Emperors; cleaned to the public voice,
And by that universal acclamation
Established Governors to rule each Nation;
Justice presents you with het balance Blind:
But justly equal as your upright mind:
And whilst, severity, to temperate
With her and sweet Harmony, you moderate,
In merciful, and yet in even Zeal,
With this, you strike the stroke, with that, you heal
Diviter(...) your peerles^ piety
The sober Citizens, your Charity,
The Court, and Camp, by you have favor had
The good a Crown, their Just reward the bad,
Your prudent wisdom bears an equal share
With Fortitude: when Judge of all you are:
For this gives courage, whilst the other stands
Firm in resolving to dispense commands.
Here Crowning Virtue, there correcting Vice,
You, in this bounty, in that Avarice,
Check, and encourage; with an open hand,
Feeding the needy which before you stand,
So are your laws by prudence fortified.
By Mercy, Zeal, and Justice magnified:
In Virtuous Vigilance limitless,
In Charity, and bounty Fathomless,
Go on, Great Prator then, thus qualified
With moral Virtues, and thus ratified
With Reasons laws: Go on undaunted, stout:
And steer this Citty's helm your Course throughout:
Live, whilst your Monuments to Church, and King
In mortal stand: may after Ages sing
Your glorious deeds: and Poets more divine
(Filled with the Juice that flow's from your rich Vine)
Whole Volumes write, and deck with Golden vein
Of their rich Verse, and Silver Muses strain,
That when cold Fate shall close your mortal Eyes,
And Angels guard your Soul to Paradise,
Bright Albiones chronicles with matchless fame
M'Embalme th'Story, of your Immortal Name.
Sic vaticinatur appre^aturque Poeta
And your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servant E. S i e. Elkanah
Settle.


