THE Complete Courtier: OR, CVPID's Academy.

Containing An Exact and excellent Collection of all the newest and choicest
Songs, Poems, Epigrams, Satyrs, Elegant Epistles, Ingenious Dialogues, Quaint
Expressions, Complemental Ceremonies, Amorous Addresses and Answers, in a most
pleasant and pathetick strain, fitted and prepared for all capacities. And
humbly recommended to the perusal of all young Gentlemen, Ladies, and others,
who are inclinable to recreate themselves with harmless mirth.

By J. SHURLY

LONDON, Printed for W. T. and are to be sold by Joshua Conyers, at the Black
Raven in Duck lane. 1683.

TO THE READER.
GEntlemen and Ladies, of what Quality, Sex, or Condition soever, I have not
thought it amiss to spend some hours in composing and collecting such choice
Rarities, as, I hope, will serve for the first course in the Banquet of
Delight, nor can it be amiss to usher in better Recreation; nay, may serve for
an Antipendium to Love: for certainly when it was written, Cupid himself so
well approved it, that not a Winter storm was seen upon his brow, but all was
calm and serene as Summer noontide Air: Beauty her self sat smiling 'twixt his
Silver Wings, with fresh blooming Roses in her Cheeks, and often cast an
amorous look ascance, rejoicing to behold her self portrayed so near unto the
life, whilst Venus whispered from her Myrtle Bower, where naked she lay
expanded on a Bed of Violets, and bid the proceed to raise a Colossus that
might Grace her Empire, if ever I hoped to be successful in Loves blessed
Elyzium. These, and some motives induced me to rifle all the Gardens in Love's
Paradise of the choicest Flowers, to adorn with Garlands of Pleasure and
Delight, the goodly Effigies; nay, all the Muses, who warble forth soft lays,
and charm with tuneful numbers, lent their helping hands. Death and Despair
were banished, and nothing but their names used now and then, to fathom the
depth of deep dissimulation, or scare parlying Beauties into a compliance. In
fine, Ladies, for your sakes, more than for any other motive, this Cabinet was
unlocked, and I hope is capable of entertaining you in all seasons with such
varieties as you best can relish. Therefore under your protection I leave it,
and remain,

Ladies, The Admirer of your Sexes Virtues, J. SHURLY.

THE PROLOGUE Spoken by CUPID.
Roused by a gale of sighs from Cyprus fair,
Upon expanded Wings through gentle air,
Ladies I Am come to thaw your frozen Hearts,
And to revenge the long-unpitied smarts
Of sighing Lovers, whom your Eyes distress,
Yet when they sue, find you quite pitiless.
How comes it that this Cruelty I find
In Britain's Isle, where all is by nature kind?
Can it be ravished from my Empire now?
No, by fair Venus Star-like Eyes I vow.
I Will spend ten thousand shafts, nay, all my store,
But I Will bear rule as strongly as before:
Make coldness, coyness, and disdain submit,
And give Love scope, as I my self think fit.
I Will Tyrannize no more, unless it be
To punish those that boast of Cruelty.
My Sea-born Mother thinks it is but just
To punish them that mis-employ their trust.
Under Love's Torrid Zone I Will make them fry,
That Cy^ick-like my great commands deny.
Then Ladies look you to it, for I am stored
With Fire-tipp'd shafts, such as no rest afford:
If once they wound the Rebels to my Laws,
Then be you kind, and stay my angers cause.
When Lovers sigh, and swear their flame is true:
Kneel, kiss your hands, and all Loves symptoms show.
Then though your Beauties, like the Rosy Morn,
The wondering World with chearing Rays adorn;
Though your transparent Eyes dart-beams of Light,
That can the sable Goddess put to flight:
Yet be you kind, or Beauty soon will fade,
All Womenkind at first for Love were made:
And when they Love, decline no more they are fair
But prove misguiding Lights men's thoughts to snare:
In Myrtle Groves to spend the harmless day,
And Turtle-like, soft murmurs to convey
Into each others Souls, tell tales of Love,
With languid looks, with equal transports move;
Whilst the winged Choristers fly round about,
And in harmonious notes still warble out
The happy Union of kind Lovers blessed
With Inward Joys, that cannot be expressed.
This is a Paradise, this, this must be
The only consort that can sort with me.
Those that so act shall in my Palace dwell,
And like the Sun, Heavens numerous fires excel.
When without Love, all in Creation's Hell.
But hark, my Mother calls, I must away,
What I have said, remember, and obey,
Love's business will admit of no delay.
The Lovesick Shepherdess: A New Song.
1.
AH, what can mean that eager joy
Transports my soul, when you appear!
Ah Strephon, you my thoughts employ
With all that is charming, all that is dear:
When you your pleasing story tell,
A tenderness invades each part,
And I with blushes, own I feel
Something too melting at my heart.
2.
Each sigh my Reason does surprise,
And I at once both wish and fear,
My wounded Soul mounts to my Eyes,
As if 'twould prattle stories there.
Take, take that Heart, that needs will go,
But Shepherd see it kindly used:
For who such presents would bestow,
If this, alas, should be abused?
3.
I feel the powerful God of Love
Already Conqueror in my breast;
Ah me, his flames too fierce they prove,
And bid me yield, or never have rest.
Then Strephon take your conquered prize,
Delia resigns her self to you:
You, you have charmed those killing Eyes,
Which none before could e're subdue.
A young Gentleman to his Mistress, who is kept under strict restraint by her
Parents, to prevent the Marriage, finding a private way to convey his Letters
to her hands, may thus write.
Divine Lady,
NAtures Masterpiece, and the wonder of your Sex; from whom to my unspeakable
grief, the cruel Destinies, or the lowering influence of my inauspicious Stars,
have so long detained me, but yet am I not absent, by reason my better part is
always attending on you: my ever chaste and constant thoughts are all employed
to serve you. No Walls of Stone nor Brass-ribb'd Gates can exclude nor impai^
the eternal motions of the Mind; not Continents nor Worlds, where Love by his
uncontrollable Laws, links Hearts, can keep them asunder. Nothing in me has
been wanting to mollify the obdurateness of your cruel Father, who cold to
Love, as December frost^ feels not the flames that without intermission, fee^
upon our Breasts, and make our eager Souls their fuel. Nothing, Divinest
Creature, but an escape can perfect our happiness, and render us a full
fruition of our mutual Loves; to effect which I have imitated Jove, who in a
Golden shower wrapped the Beauteous Danae from Argos Brazen Hold, in which the
jealous King, her cruel Father, like yours, had confined her. Your chief
Guardians are already bribed and naught but your consent is wanting; perhaps
you will object, you owe obedience to your Parents* I grant you do; but
Almighty Love, that all-commanding Monarch, dispences with the tie of Nature;
better so small a crime (which penitential tears can wash away) were
perpetrated, than both to languish under the Torrid Zone of fierce desire, with
our a prospect of being fanned by cooler gales. Having said thus much, hoping
you will consent, I shall leave the management of the business to M. L. your
Gentlewoman, whom I have firmly engaged to our Interest; and wait for the
success, on which depends my utmost happiness on this side Heaven.

Your Virtues Admirer, and constant Slave, J. S.

The Letter having been with much difficulty delivered to the Lady, she
resolves upon an Escape, and returns this Answer.
Sir,
THink not but I am as impatient of my confinement, as you are of being
restrained from visiting me; and have long since contrived all means not
prejudicial to my Honor, whereby I might be freed from it; but such is the
harsh nature of my Father, that he always has a watchful Eye over ^^e; nor is
my Mother less against my matching with you, both being the rather desirous
that I should ^oyn in Wedlock with old age and infirmity, to be Joyntured in a
great Estate, than any ways to procure my content; but my Vows to you are past,
and shall never be recalled: All the tormenting Racks, scourging Whips or
Circling Flames, should they meet to make one torment complete, should never
force me to a recantation; and it were a sin to doubt you less constant;
therefore I resolve to put your counsel in practice, though I were sure it
would prove fatal to us both. About ten in the evening I shall expect you
provided with Horses under the Great Oak: Fail not as you tender my Love and
Honor. Pardon my abrupt breaking off; what more is requisite I hope to tell
you by word of mouth, e're Phoebus with his morning rays, from the portals of
the Eastern Skies, gilds the flowery Plains: Till when, not doubting your
constancy, I remain

Yours by Vows in the sight of Heaven, M. G.

A Letter sent to his Mistress, with a pair of Gloves for ^ Token, on which
commenting, he expresses his Amors.
HOw happy are these skins that license have
To kiss those hands, and fold those fingers brave
Which to salute even Jove himself desires,
Longing with such warm snow to cool his fires.
These are too trivial Ornaments to shroud
Those hands, over which a bright refulgent cloud
Thrown from the clear reflection of your Eyes,
The which the Sun and moon do equalize.
Ever adorns, and obvious to the view,
Proves Juno's anger, and Minerva's too.
Vouchsafe (dear Saint) what time you draw on these.
To think upon the dire perplexities
Your Votary endures, and now at last,
As those do clip your hands, let him your waste.
An Epigram on an old Woman, desirous of a young Husband.
HOw fain thou beautiful would seem to be,
How do thou Drink and Dance audaciously:
How unto wanton Cupid do thou seek
With Palsy note. He in the beauteous cheek
Of the now freshly-coloured Northern wench,
That well is skilled in Prick-song does entrench.
For hasty he over the dry Oaks flees,
And runs from thee, because thou'st rotten Teeth:
Because that those thy wrinkles, and the Snow
Upon thy head do antiquate thee so
That Tyrian Pearl, no nor Precious Stones,
Can fetch again those times to thee which once.
The winged day has very firmly closed,
In memorable Register deposed.
Now lusty youths behold with mirth enough,
Thy long Light Taper wasted to a snuff.
Think on thy Grave, in which one foot does tread,
And dream not Wanton of a Bridal bed.
Loves Conquest. A New Song.
SEe what a Conquest Love has made
Beneath the Myrtle Amorous shade,
The charming fair Corina lies
All melting in desire,
Quenching in tears the flaming Eyes
That set the World on fire.
The Politic Lady to her Gallant, upon her Husbands suspicion of too much
familiarity.
Dear Love,
NOtwithstanding the prying Eyes of a Jealous Husband have in some Nature
discovered our Amorous Intrigues, yet such is my affection to you, though with
the preservation of my Honor, that nothing shall totally divide us, or hinder
the mutual Joys which have been conceived since our hearts were linked in the
eternal bonds of Love: But the better to color the business, whilst the
storms of Anger and Jealousy are blown over, as you render my Honor, let me
conjure your absence, lest the coals that are now scarcely kindled, be blown
into such a flame, as will be exceeding difficult, if not altogether impossible
to extinguish; but in the mean while be constant and assured of my love, for
though my body may be exposed to my Husbands use, yet you shall ever be sole
proprietor of my affections. Even i^ the midst of caresses and embraces my
heart shall b^ with you. Therefore, Sir, as you tender my love and reputation,
be constant till time will admit of (...) further happiness, which I doubt not
in a short time to bring about; till when, Sir, I remain

The better part yours, E. I.

His Answer.
Divinest Mistress,
ON whom all my thoughts have been employed how shall I in Gratitude express so
many thanks, and shower so many blessings on you as your care and love
deserves: Know, thou beauteous treasure of my Soul, on whose perfections I am
still intent, that I Will rather make my bed on the cold Alps, leap into fiery
Aetna's Thunder-belching Jaws, or be hurried roun^ the Ocean in the belly of
some monstrous Whale, that do ought that may procure you a moments disquiet,
your commands my Good Angel, shall be obeyed, though like the Widow Turtle,
I Will your absence mourn, and fill the World with gales of sighs, to cool the
flames that scorch despairing Lovers. As soon will I doubt the Creation of the
Universe out of rude and undigested Chaos, as your Constancy: for it is most
certain Love has molded both our Hearts in one, our hearts are inseparably
linked, never to be divided but by death, nor then, for our concordant Souls
freed from their clayey mansions, by attractive Fire, like Quicksilver put
asunder, will prove restless till they meet. Therefore, thou Center of my
Happiness farewell, be swift in what you undertake, for being thus divided by
accursed Jealousy, each moment will prove a day till we meet in loves happy
Elysium, but till then, like laboring Mariners, I Will contend with all the
Storms, roar they never so loud, ^eing the happy Haven stands in view, and will
be ^oon recovered.

Madam, eternally yours, G. B.

Love cured by disdain, or the Scorner scorned.
PRoud Woman know that I am now above
As much thy sordid anger, as thy love:
I once did madly think thou had a face;
But when thou next shall take thy Looking-glass,
If thou can see at least through so much Paint,
Thou Wilt plainly see thou art no more my Saint.
Thy Eyes, those glowring unmatched Twins shall be
No more the false mis-leading fires to me.
Hope not you longer shall continue bright,
For with sharp Satyrs I Will eclipse your light.
But this perhaps would signify me vexed,
And so perchance thy triumph might be next;
And thou rejoice to think how I do rage,
Know worthless thing, I Will laugh thee into Age:
Strike wrinkles on thy scornful brow, and not
Within my self discard one pleasant thought.
Thus wretched, thou in vain shall wish to dye,
But long ever thou attain it: then will I
Sport on thy Tomb, with Pasquills blast thy name,
As never worthy to be breathed by Fame.
A Dialogue between two Country Lovers, viz. Ralph and Margery.
Ralph. MArgery, Vaith well met, Ise was ganging to your Vathers house, Ise had
a plaguey mind to buss thee ever since last night Ise see thee zitting in
Gammer Grumble's Chimly-corner, Ise vaith Ise had, but Ise am such a plaguey
zhame-faced Dog, if Ise should ha been hanged, Ise could not find in my heart
before vock: But now Ise ha met thee all aloane, Ise ^ol buss thee and tell
thee Ise love, nay, by my fathers ^outed shoon, Ise zware Ise will, nay, thou
zalt be my wife too, if thou woo't.


Margery. Alas Ralph, what can this tend to, it cannot be that you should throw
your fection on me, who am of such mean birth and fortune; should your father
but once imagine it, he would certainly bestow when he die^ all the Cows,
Sheep, Hogs, Geese, Ducks, Hens, and other housholdstuff on your Brother Hodg,
and leave you as poor as my self, and then many a long Winters night would you
spend in cursing me, as the cause of your poverty and contempt.


Ralph. Zouze and foot, if my Vather give all away Ise care not this
black-berry, vor Ise ha got enough of my ow^ to maintain thee like any Lady:
Ise ha vorty good Sheep my Uncle left me, besides two Cows and a Horse; and if
the worst come to the worst, Ise work for ten-pence a day. Yes, my Vather would
ha me gang and smuggle Joane Crople, but Ise swear she is such a nasty Clownish
Jade that Ise am ready to zpue when Ise think on her, nay Ise would not buss
her for vorty good zillings, no fac Ise wooed not.


Margery. Alas Ralph, her mother can give her a good portion, and money you
know is in this age superior to beauty; for an old Widow of fourscore, that
has had five Husbands, if she be but rich, shall have twenty Sweet-hearts, when
many a plump Lass in the Summer season of her youth and beauty is fain to lie
by, no body so much as asking what shall be done with her.


Ralph. Zouze Margery, if thou will believe me, I am of another mind, for by
the Coulter of my Fathers Plough, Ise zware Ise have a plump bit of flesh if
Ise have any, and if thou wilt have me, say so. In good fac^we's gang to morrow
to the Parson, and he is buckle us, and then a fig for my old father, let him
gnaw the thong in sunder if he can.


Margery. Nay, but prithee Ralph let me advise you, be not so hasty, but if you
love me as you say you do, first ask your Fathers consent, perhaps you may take
him in the humor; and then if you will swear you will love me as dear as your
own Eyes, I shall be at your command.


Ralph. Well, let me buss thee -- so. Ise meet thee here again to morrow, and
in the mean while my dad shall be quainted with the business, till when, dear
Margery farewell. But stay let me buss thee again, or thou will say I Am a mere
Clown -- so now fare thee well.


Margery. Farewell dear Ralph, I shall think it long till I see you again, I
find a yielding in my Breast, your pretty discourse has overcome me.


Ralph. Vaith Ise glad on it; but to morrow, to morrow, remember to morrow my
pretty Pigs^ies: And till then Adieu, adieu.


Margery. Your servant, Sir.


The Rhapsody.
WHat have I lost my sense, that I should love
Frail mortal things, neglecting those above?
Can man whose nobler Soul ascends on high,
To pierce the Arches of the starry Sky;
And view the sacred mansions of the blessed,
Where all is Joy, Peace and Eternal rest,
Look down on Womankind, who first betrayed
The Worlds great Lord, and him a Subject made
To Sin and Death, who ever tyrannize
On the destructive beams of Female Eyes?
Song.
AS I late was sitting
Beneath a Myrtle shade,
Good Cupid with his Silver Wings
Did hover round my Head:
And whilst I gazed upon his Plumes
A Shaft he did let fly,
Which like Lightning pierced my Heart:
And I that did defy
Him and his conquering Arrows,
Full soon was forced to yield;
And soon became his Captive
When he had won the Field:
And now I do in Fever fry
For him I did disdain,
Then Venus bring him to my Arms,
And ease me of this pain.
A passionate Dialogue between Damon and Phillis.
Damon. REproach not those follies in me, Lady, which you your self cause me to
commit, I am reduced to such extremity, that Cupid himself (stern Tyrant as he
is) could he but see, would Pity me.


Phillis. Sir, I understand not what you mean by what you express.


Damon. Would Heaven you did, oh that the immortal powers would vouchsafe to
ingrave it on your Heart, it would save me many a tear, and keep in those gales
of sighs that must attend my utterance, in the relation of what is now swelled
big as a Tempest in the deep Caverns of my Soul, struggling to free it self,
then know divinest Lady, I come to accuse you of Injustice, you first begot my
passion, and were content (at least you seemed so) that it should live, yet
since would not deign to nourish it with one mild and gentle smile, but let it
languish almost to despair; quickly you lifted me above the Sun, but when I
supposed my self to be nearest the Heaven of Happiness, you threw me down again
to Earths deep Center.


Phillis. Alas Sir, why labor you thus to make me guilty of an injury to you,
which if it be one, all mankind may be alike engaged, and by the ways you now
do seek redress.


Damon. Madam your reproof is just and seasonable, upon my wretched self the
fault shall ever lie: O that I had been blind e're I had gazed upon such
perfection, e're through those Optics such rays of Beauty shot into my Soul,
but yet let me hope to live on Camelions food, for Heavenly Bodies of
themselves have no malicious influence, but by the disposition of the subject
on which they operate: Then tell me, thou brightest of the Creation, thou that
art Kindred-mould to Heaven, speak, nay whisper it, if you answer in the
affirmative, lest the dismal sound leave me ruined like some shivered Oak,
whose sturdy Trunk opposed the force of Heavens glancing fire: Do you, I say,
design to marry my Rival, must he enjoy the blessing I so long have sought in
vain?


Phillis. Pardon me Sir, I see my presence disturbs you, I must be gone, my
Parents expect me, and my obedience hastens me hence.


Damon. Stay my brightest Sun, obscure not thy luster till I Am past this Maze,
this endless Labyrinth of confused thought. Oh I read it in thy Eyes, those two
bright wandering fires, that lead me into Loves wide Wilderness, where
Hermit-like, I must spend the remainder of my days. O that such Beauty should
be made a sacrifice to Parents wills.


Phillis. No more Sir, I must be gone, and to put you out of doubt, he that you
term your Rival, is the man who must and shall enjoy me; therefore henceforth
cease your fruitless addresses.


Damon. And is it so? farewell for ever, then farewell; yet I must wear thy
Chains: Nor by having such a treasure is his life free from danger; by all the
Gods, he that has traduced me in my Love shall fall a Sacrifice to my Revenge,
and next I Will dye my self; yet for thy sake me thinks I could put up a thousand
wrongs, therefore I must not stay le^t I relent.


Phillis. Farewell angry Sir, go spend your rage elsewhere, your Rival dreads
you not, your feeble power is ill wedded to your will, and know for this,
henceforth you never shall behold my face unless transient.


A doubtful discovery of passionate Love.
Lady,
I Doubt not but that you have discerned some alterations in me, and that the
goodness of your disposition has made you partaker of my sufferings, but the
way to relieve (I fear) is otherwise than you imagine, and if I fail now of
your assistance, there is no hope of remedy for me but in death. I assure my
self you cannot but wonder at this language, and that it is not to be questioned
but you will demand an explication; but if you had never known what it is to be
in love, you may well think I would never have acquainted you with my passion,
lest it should have moved you to laughter: But well knowing you are not
ignorant of their sufferings who languish under the Torrid Zone of Cupid's
Indignation, I shall not spare to tell you I love you, and will expect from
your fair lips the Sentence of Life and Death. In expectation of which I remain
between Hope and Despair,

Divine Lady, your ever Adorer, J. L.

Her Reply.
Sir,
I Received your Letter, and for some time considered the contents; and indeed,
as you intimate, I could not but wonder that you, being altogether a stranger
to me, should make your first address by way of Letter, and that you should be
in love with one with whom you never had the least converse; yet if your intent
be virtuous, I would not have you altogether despair, for my doors are never
shut against such whose pretensions are founded on Virtue.

So I remain Virtues admirer, E. G.

The Invocation.
A Rise my Cloris from thy shady bower,
The rosy Morning purples over the World,
And Flora raises every drooping flower,
That sable night on the Earth's bosom hurled,
The Birds in Amorous Descant through each Grove
In sweetest notes thy praises warble forth,
And do incite thee to be kind and love,
Whilst I extol thee for thy wondrous worth.
Song.
CAlm was the Evening, and clear was the Sky,
And new budding flowers did spring,
When all alone went Amyntas and I
To hear the sweet Nightingale sing;
I sat and he laid him down by me,
And scarcely his breath he could draw,
But when with a fear
He began to draw near,
He was dashed with a ha ha ha.
2.
He blushed to himself and lay still for a while,
For his Modesty curbed his desire,
But strait I convinced all his fears with a smile,
And added new flames to his fire.
Ah Sylvia, said he, you are cruel,
To keep a poor Lover in awe:
Then once more he pressed
With his hand on my Breast,
But was dashed with a ha ha ha.
3.
I knew 'twas his passion that caused all his fear,
And therefore I pitied his case,
I whispered softly there is no body near,
And I laid my cheek close to his face,
But as he grew bolder and bolder,
A Shepherd came by us and saw,
And just as our bliss
Began with a kiss,
He burst out with a ha ha ha.
A short Letter in verse.
Divinest Mistress,
WHom the powers above
Have made and fashioned only fit for love,
Pity the man, who wounded by your Eyes,
Does languish, and without relief soon dies.
No power can save, if you with frowns will kill,
For Life and Death depend upon you still.
Yours till Death, E. G.

Madam,
LOng have I courted you, but I fear in vain, for my Love has been still
returned with scorn, which makes me with reason suspect that my happy Rival
enjoys the blessing which I so long have humbly requested, though without the
recompense of one smile: If it be so, Lady, keep me not in pain, but let me
know my doom, pronounce the fatal word, that like a Thunderbolt, can crush me
into Atoms; for by the hope of your favor alone I live, and in the very
moment am ascertained to lose it for ever, I shall be no more desirous of Life,
but willingly acquiesce to slumber in the Grave. In expectation of your Answer,
Divinest of the Creation, I remain

Yours to command, J. S.

Song in two parts, between Damon and Daphne.
Damon. COme my Daphne come away,
We do waste the Glorious day:
It Is Damon calls. Daphne. What says my Love.

Damon. Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
Where Venus shall prepare
New Chaplets to adorn thy hair.

Daphne. Damon were I shut in a Tree,
I Would break the bark to follow thee.

Damon. My Shepherdess make have,
The Minutes fly too fast;
Let Us to those cooler shades where I,
Blind as Cupid, in thine eye,
Betwixt thy Breasts will ever stray.

Daphne. In such warm Snow,
Who would not lose their way?

A Health to Bacchus.
1.
THis Bumper to Bacchus, we'll drink it all round,
Whilst our cares in the streams of our pleasures are drowned,
And our heads like the Glasses turn equally round.
Damn your Ale and Tobaco, it is nothing but Wine
Inspires a man's Soul, and makes it Divine,
It will sacrifice us at fair Venus's shrine.
2.
Let the Porters carouse in black Pispots whilst we
Drink naught but the juice of the sacred Tree;
To Bacchus and Venus we'll votaries be.
Let every man stand with his Bottle and suck,
Hang the man that does sip, let him drink like a Duck,
And when we are all Drunk we will range like a Buck.
A Dialogue between Thasminus and Corina.
Thasminus. THink you my dearest it is those little jealousies and fears, joy
mixed with doubt, and doubt revived with hope that crown love with pleasure?
no, these are but like waking in the morning and find our expectations
frustrate, when all night our fancy has with various prospects of Happiness,
pleasing Ideas.


Corina. No, though those make love the more delightful, for curious pictures
at a distance resemble the living party whom they represent more exactly than
when we take a nearer view, for love once kindled, without restraint, wastes so
lavishly, that its Taper soon expires.


Thasminus. Alas, then you would have Love seed like Camelions, only live by
Air, can you imagine so great a Prince can be contented with such slender diet?


Corina. No there is not a greater Epicure on Earth, Sir I have been conversant
with his Steward, and have seen his Bills of Fare, such costly ones as made me
wonder at his greatness.


Thasminus. As how, sweet Corina?


Corina. Why at his Table Hearts new slain, fresh bleeding from the wounds the
shafts late gave, are served up whole at his Table: Roses and Lillies strew his
way, each striving to outvy each other; and all his Parlours are enclosed with
Eyes, that like another firmament, give light to those he entertains; his last
course is Mamalade of Lips, perfumed with breath sweeter than Arabian Spices in
their bloom, whose odours born by the gentle wind, cheer many a league at Sea
the laboring Mariners.


Thasminus. Rare, and what drink to all this meat, Lady?


Corina. Nothing but Pearl dissolved Tears flowing from Lovers Eyes, and cooled
with gales of sighs, arising from the whirlwinds of Inquietude and anxious
thoughts.


Thasminus. A rich proportion, but I believe Lady, this is but his common fare,
when his Cooks Liking and Opportunity are absent, for when he feasts to the
purpose, it is where the wise people of the World did place the Virtues, in the
middle, sweet Lady.


Corina. Nay Sir, you talk strangely now, I see it is time to leave you.


Thasminus. Only a jest or so Lady, I hate obscenity as much as any living. Be
pleased that I may wait upon you to your Chamber.


Corina. As you please Sir.


Thasminus. You oblige me, sweet Lady.


A Letter from a Gentleman beyond the Seas, to his Mistress.
Sweet Lady,
THough the envious waves divide our Bodies, yet though Seas, guarded Seas,
nay, Continents or Worlds should they interpose, cannot divide our Souls, for
mine is ever waiting on you, as well when gentle slumbers close my Eyelids, as
when waking Virtue is prompting me more deeply to ingrave (if possible) your
dear remembrance on my Heart. Therefore, thou only center of my happiness, be
not dejected at my tedious absence) which (to my grief) the Tyrant Business has
occasioned, for e're the Moon has twice more waned her Silver Orb, I doubt not
but to be present with you in person as now in thought I am. Till which happy
time I remain

Your constant admirer, and faithful Lover, G. L.

KNow, cruel Woman, murdress of mankind,
That in your shackles I Am no more confined:
My tortures have been too too much to bear,
Yet in the midst of pangs I Have broke the snare.
No, thou death dealer, cruel'st of thy Sex,
Thy smiles nor frowns shall neither please nor vex.
The man whose Eagle flight can soar above
Thy dull disdain, and scorn thy foolish love.
Lay baits for such (if you must cruel be)
Whose Souls are lulled by fatal flattery,
To lodge upon a Towering Precipice,
When every puff can hurl them down from bliss.
One who has been ungratefully dealt with by a proud and scornful Mistress, may
thus revenge himself.
Proud Disdainer,
THough I have been for a long while so unfortunate to dote upon a painted
Puppet, and with such eagerness to gaze upon the Devil, inshrined in Crystal,
yet at last I have found my Error, and enjoined my self a strict penance in
expiation of my former folly, and thank my better Stars that I had not the
opportunity of enjoying my foolish desires, which if through inadvertency had
so fallen out, I had by this time been of all mankind the most deplorable. And
therefore am bound to render diurnal thanks to Heaven for such an extraordinary
deliverance, when as my rashness had driven me to the brink of ruin, where I
wanted but another push to have plunged me into an Ocean of misery; but now my
Eyes are open, like a night-belated Traveller, look back with fear and
admiration on the dangerous Wilds through which I Have passed secure from harm,
when as a thousand lay in ambush to entrap me. So I remain,

No longer yours, but my own, R. W.

The Melancholy Lovers Complaint.
HEnce loathed Melancholy,
Of Cerberus and blackest midnight born,
Amongst horrid shapes and shrieks and sights unholy,
In Stygian Caves forlorn,
Find out some dismal Cell
Where the Night-Raven sings,
And brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings:
There (ragged as thy Locks)
Under those gloomy shades, and low-brow'd Rocks,
In sad Cimmerian darkness ever dwell.
A Catch.
COme boys Drink away, merry set it round,
It is a wet and rainy day, then let our Cups abound.
Let each man charge his Glass, to Tom let it pass,
And next unto Will a lusty brimmer fill,
Let each man take his Cup, and turn it all up,
And he shall pay for all, that presumes for to spill.
Repentance too late, or the Ladies laments for her Lover, killed by her
Disdain.
TEars I do shed, yet are they shed in vain,
Nor can they call him back to life again:
Yet sigh I will to wake him from his sleep,
Thus whilst he sleeps in Earth, on Earth I Will weep:
And since the World will not by fire be gone,
I Will drown it in a fearful Inundation:
Or since he perished by my Cruelty,
I here will turn a weeping Niobe.
The Countrey-mans Letter to his Sweetheart.
IN good Vaith Joane, after my Hearty Commendations, my service remembered unto
thee, my Love I should a said, but it is no matter for Complements, thou know
my mind: In good vaith Ise had a woundy mind to woo thee any time this
vortnight, but Ise could never come to speak with thee thou art so plaguey shy,
but zince I ha written to thee, Ise hope all will be well again, for Ise intend
in very short time to send thee a pair of Gloves, if it cost me two Groats.
This being all Joane, till I send you more, I shall content my self to be

Your own Sweetheart, Hodg the Plowman.

A Dialogue between Jenny the Chambermaid, and Betty the Cook-maid.
Betty. WEll Jenny what think thou of Ralph the Gardener, can you fancy him?
methinks he is a dapper fellow.


Jenny. Truly Betty, I know not well what to think on him, yet he presses me
hard to marry him.


Betty. And will you not consent to it?


Jenny. Faith I know not what is best to be done in that case, I am e'n between
Hawk and Buzzard, as the old saying is.


Betty. Why let me tell ye, you are growing into years, and a stale Maid is fit
for nothing but to make sport for Foot-boys, therefore if you would be ruled by me,
I would not have you cast him off.


Jenny. Indeed to tell you the truth on it between our selves, I have had a
great mind to have been married any time this seven years: Lord, when our Pegg
was married to Will, you cannot, imagine now I tumbled and tossed that night,
nay, I bit the corners of the Pillow, and tore the Sheets for madness.


Betty. Nay, I my self was troubled with no small itching that bout, for how
could it choose but vex any Maid alive, to see such a dirty drab get so pretty a
fellow, whilst another ten times her betters would have been glad of a worse?


Jenny. And then to see how proudly she jetted it, as if, as the old saying is,
her Arse had ground Ginger.


Betty. Well, but this is nothing to the business in hand, Ralph has entrusted
me to bring him answer whether you will have him or not.


Jenny. Why is he so hasty then? it cannot be.


Betty. Yes truly I believe if you give him a denial, he will have Moll Jenkins,
for I Will promise you I see him kiss her, and give her Apricocks the other day.


Jenny. Ha, nay rather than he shall have that Draggle-tail, go and tell him I
am contented to be his Wife, and that on Sunday next we'll go to Pancridge, and
there be married. Ha, be married, for my beauty begins to decay.


Betty. Well, I shall obey, and hope you will be as sollicitous to Hodg on my
behalf, for I have a tickling mind to be married too.


Jenny. What I can do, you shall command.


Song.
A Stella bright, I saw her sit
By a smooth River side,
Her Beauties light adorning it,
Whilst on the soft waves glide:
She sighed and cried, make haste away,
(Then morning blushes rose,)
I Would sooner tried if known the boy,
And then a smile did close.
A Shepherd heard, his crook laid by,
And to her did resort,
No long debate he need to try,
They soon began the sport.
Till tired with bliss they gave it ore,
And then to kissing fall,
She sighed at this, craved for,
Still still for more did call.
Not satisfied till Loves free stream
Was quite exhausted, then
Forced to part with Loves stem,
But rallied soon again,
And with fresh joys renewed the bliss,
Whilst over them shades were spread:
So love decoyed with Happiness,
To win a Maidenhead.
A Dialogue between Coridon and Sylvia.
Coridon. FAith Sylvia you're unkind, of late hard-hearted grown
And with your frowns you all my blooming joys dethrone.

Sylvia. Sir, I have often told you that I cannot love,
And yet in spite of all, you troublesome will prove.

Coridon. If that you cannot love, why carry you those Eyes
Whose pointed rays of course poor Lovers hearts surprise.

Sylvia. Is that my crime? the fault does on your selves depend
Must I be blinded then, because my Eyes offend?

Coridon. No, no, you brightest Star of the whole Creation,
Those Stars eclipsed, Loves Empire would be out of fashion

Sylvia. Why do you tempt me then, seeing I cannot yield,
Since I by struggling long from Love have gained t^^ Fields

Coridon. If you have won the Field, yet let poor Lovers try
Their yet inglorious fates, to gain the Victory.

Sylvia. You may, but never must expect to win the price.


Coridon. Well if I miss, bright Star, I Will fall thy Sacrifice.


Song.
ARise my sweet Phillis, and let us to the Grove,
And there in shades solace, and tell of our love
There none shall o're-hear us, there envy shan' come.
And there for Love's pleasure we shall have large room;
Whilst over our Heads the kind Myrtle shall spread,
We'll make the soft Grass, and sweet Violets our bed.
2.
The Music of Nightingals there shall us charm,
Whilst we lie folded soft all arm in arm.
Arise then, my fairest, and let us away,
For, Hark the sweet Lark does now summon the day:
Come, come my best Love, it is Philander does call,
In mighty Loves name that should still command all.
The Scotch Intrigue. A pleasant Song.
JOcky and Jenny one evening late
Gang'd to the Pease-mow, and there sat
Talking of Love, when as Jocky spies
Something by Moonlight, 'twixt Jenny's Th --
Alas, dear Jenny, prithee what is this:
Nothing but what should be, by this kiss.
It Is, dear Jocky, a little Fish Pond,
Where you may angle with your muckle wand.
2.
With that Jocky laid his Bonnet by,
And off went's Plad this pastime to try,
Whilst Jenny kissed him in muckle sort,
And welcomed her dearest to the sport:
Who cast in his bait, and it soon took,
But at the end on it there was no hook.
And therefore though he did angle long,
He could catch no Fish, though they bit ding dong.
The Jealous Cuckolds Complaint.
DId I not catch her in the very act? shall I no^ believe my Eyes? Curse of
Wedlock, what folly possesses mankind, that they cannot live free, but that
they must throw away their Liberty to nooze themselves with a thing called
Woman, and put their Honor in jeopardy every moment to be shipwracked by her
levity. O that I had been wiser that I might have foreseen the fatal
consequences tha^ attend on Matrimony; Horns are intailed to it by an
irrevocable destiny; and as for mine they are of such a monstrous size, that
the very Boys in the streets point at 'um: The Baggage cannot be conten^ to
gallant it abroad, but she must bring 'um home with her, and make me pay for
Coach hire: O it su^ferable! Judge, judge I say, my Brethren and fellow
Citizens, whether this is to be born. No, had I the patience of Job, such
scurvy tricks would wear it ^l out. Nay, in good faith I Will e'n carry her hom^
again to'ther bout to her Father and Mother, no^ will I take her again for a
hundred pounds, as I di^ last time; no, in faith, if I must wear Horns, I Will
have 'um tipped with Gold, I Will warrant you 200 l. shall be the least this bout,
fac I will.

Of Virtue and Vice in Women.
A Virtuous Woman is an Angel bright,
A Vicious Woman black as gloomy night.
A Virtuous Woman is her Husbands joy,
A Vicious Woman does his Peace destroy.
A Virtuous Woman is a Pearl of price,
A Vicious Woman Pluto's Merchandice.
In Virtuous Women every thing excels,
In Vicious Women all that is evil dwells.
An Old Country Farmers Reception upon his address to a young Gentlewoman.
Mistress. BLess me, Heaven! what a mad medley of Creation's this, this cannot
surely be the man my father told me was to come this morning to pay a visit;
pray Jane, go and ask him his business.


Maid. Truly Madam, I believe this is he that is to court you, for by the
description I have had of him, it can be no other; yet it is good to know: pray
friend, who would you speak withal.


Countryman. With Mrs. Mary, sweetheart, the Gentleman's Daughter of the
house, here are Letters Credentials from her Father, for admitting me to speak
with her.


Maid. If you must speak with her, that is the Lady.


Countryman. Oh my little Pigs^yes, how blessed am I to see thee; nay,
there is no more to be said, I Will have thee my Girl, for I like thee at the
first blush.


Maid. Ha ha ha, Sir, the Hob-nails in your shoes spoil the boards.


Countryman. Hold your Tongue you little Baggage, come, there is a Groat for
you. Madam, your most humble -- nay, why do turn away?


Mistress. What mean you Sir, what is your business with me.


Countryman. Cocksbodakins, my business, why don't you know my business? Why
to woo ye, I thought your Father had told you my business long since.


Mistress. To woo me, I think you said. Pah.


Country man. Yes to woo ye, kiss ye, marry ye, lie with ye.


Mistress. Heiday, the man's in a fit sure, pray Jane fetch a little cold water.


Maid. No Madam, he has only made so much haste that he forgot to serve his
Hogs, which makes him press his suit more earnestly, that when he has
dispatched this business, he may do the other.


Countryman. Ha baggage, did not I give you a Groat to hold your tongue, and
will you still be prating: Mind her not my dear, but come sit down upon my
knee, and I Will tell you more of my mind.


Mistress. Stand off Sir, I conjure you touch me not, I say, can you be so
sottish to think I Will be handled by a Hobgobling?


Countryman. Ha, a Hobgobling, ha, what can this mean?


Maid. Madam, he speaks from behind a board, like a Chimney-sweepers broom.
Here take your Groat, 'twill serve to pay your Barber.


Countryman. Say you so Gossip, say you so? Ho Jack, saddle my Horse again:
Farewell ye scornful tits, good buy to ye; next time I come here again you shall
learn more breeding, you baggages you shall, you shall.


Mistress. Farewell old Clod pate.


Maid. Good buy old Hobnails, make haste home, there is a Hog in the Cupboard, ha
ha ha ha.


A New Song.
1.
HEnce idle fears, let jealousy vanish,
The trouble of Life we quite will banish.
Gentle as Infant nature we'll sleep,
Though we were tossed on the Ocean deep.
Disquiet hence, and troubles be gone,
And leave my Love for to rest alone,
2.
Until the Sun from the Eastern Skies,
To gild the Earth, does gloriously rise;
Then to the Grove we will strait take our way,
And see how the pretty Birds do play;
Then imitate their happy billing,
In such delights as are past telling.
Upon the presentation of a Ring.
LAdy, as endless is my Love as this,
Still circl'd round with hopes of happiness:
The Posie's deep, engraven on my Heart,
With the sharp point of Cupid's flaming Dart.
Yet fairer would this Golden Hoop appear,
If that a Jewel was but glittering there.
So you in Love's great Sphere would shine most bright,
If less severe, and proner to delight.
To his scornful Mistress.
MAdam, think you for scornful frowns I Will bow?
No, no, my Vows of Love are cancelled now.
Disdainful thing, not worth my meanest thought,
You who so many have to ruin brought:
Know my just scorn of thee, shall pay thee back
That foolish pride that late my Soul did wrack.
With whilwinds of Despair I now have found
Armor that is proof, Love has no power to wound
A Breast so strongly fortified as mine,
Nor Venus make me offer at her shrine:
Those foolish fancies that so late possessed
My daring Soul, and robbed me of my rest,
Are vanished into Air, quite lost their power,
And never more from me shall charm an hour.
Your Beauties are grown dull, no more I Will dote
On your false Image, it is so small of note,
That still I cast it from me, and despise
The Picture, in whose like such falsehood lies.
A Letter from a person whose inequality in years render him obnoxious to the
Lady he is in love with.
Madam,
IT is true, time has silvered my Locks, and, as you say, rendered me a relict
of Antiquity, yet the mind remains unchanged; the eternal faculties of the Soul
are still the same, and what I want in Youth you may assure your self I shall
make up in Experience. Gold, that powerful Charmer of Mankind, I have in
abundance, fortune has plentifully opened her hand, and endued me with her
lavish store; all then that you can object, is deficiency in performance of
conjugal dues; as for that, if it so be, I am not altogether to be rejected,
nor my ability doubted, being in green old age: For Lady, know a man of sixty,
not decayed by distempers, is as capable of pleasing a young Lady, as a youth
whose virility is wasted by perpetual intemperance. Therefore, young Mistress,
in expectation of your better respect to him who is your servant,

I rest till you take further consideration, E. G.

Her Answer.
Sir,
I Can but wonder that a man in his declining years should be so much overseen
as to court a Virgin in the summer season of her Youth and Beauty; as well may
July and December admit of a contracted union as we. Can you imagine that I so
little regard the sweets of Life, as to pine all my days, whilst other
Virgins, perhaps my Inferiors, surfeit on Love's charming repasts. No, I value
not your Riches, true content is all my desire, and without that all things are
ineffectual: Therefore Sir, I would have you leave off your suit, and ease your
self of those disquiets that are evermore attendant upon courtship, for the
sake of your own repose; for certain it is, I will never marry to age, and
consequently infirmity, though my friends should importune me never so.

Your friend if you desist, E. M

The Lovesick Youth to his Mistress.
Madam,
I Love you: often my Eyes have told,
The scorching fevers that my heart infold;
No powers of Art can cure my great distress,
All Arts have left me now quite remed'less.
Like famed Achilles Spear, it is only you
That gave the Wound, can give the Balsome too.
Knew you what dreams my nightly slumbers break,
What direful thoughts my daring Courage shake,
So easily you would not resent my pain,
And let me thus in fruitless Love complain.
Alas, What have I done, that thus you make
My torments such as Lovers Tongues cannot speak?
What is my fault, bright Angel, say my crime?
Have I delayed, or over-slipp'd my time?
If so, upon the swiftest wings of Fame,
With hasty flight I will retrieve the same.
Torment me not not before my guilt be known:
To me, bright Star, too well your charms are known.
No more you need to blazonize your power,
For it is but you amongst all, that I adore.
Song.
1.
HEnce idle fancies, perplex me no more,
I Have loved now too long, and it is time to give over.
Those Joys they are fruitless, and ever deceive,
Which from the feigned blessings of Love we derive.
Disdain I Have long courted, but will do no more,
I Am now too well skilled to be gulled as before.
2.
All idle fancies are vanished away,
And I benighted, at last have found day:
All idle conceits that breed Love are now gone,
And Wisdom, the Scepter does sway all alone.
Nor ever shall folly persuade me to love,
Unless't be those Joys that are placed above.
Upon a Letter sealed with a Heart.
BRight Mistress, when the outside I beheld,
And saw a Heart, I thought it had been killed:
But looking further, 'twas not mine I found,
Because on it there was no mortal wound.
Mine all bestuck with Darts, I soon had known,
Cupid has killed it for to feast upon.
On a Diamond in a Ring.
LAdy, the World's a Ring, yet that would be
Without a Gem, of little use to me.
You are the Diamond, and it is for your sake,
That I so long do of this World partake.
Were you but gone, I Would scorn the trifling Joys
With which mankind his serious fancy cloys.
It Is you alone that are the Gem below,
On Earth no Pearl of price besides I Will know.
All trifling Glory of the World I scorn,
It Is you alone the Worlds great Orb adorn.
It Is you make Paradise, it is you give rest
To those that are on Loves wide Seas distressed.
Then brightest of Creation, yield one smile
To him who for your sake does daily toil
In endless thought, and in a maze of care:
Hoping at last my blessed relenting fair,
With thee the Joys of boundless love to share.
An Epigram.
THough black my Mistress seem unto the eye,
Yet those who do her constitutions try,
Say they mistake that think she is kin to night,
Assuring us that she is all over Light.
The ill Starr'd Lovers Complaint.
HEnce idle fancies, wandering shades away,
You Ghosts and Faries, whose feigned names afright
The Traveller, that does by Moonlight stray,
And makes him fancy every shade a Sprite.
Go, go I say, you that disturb my rest.
With black Cimmerian darkness ever dwell,
That gentle Somnus to the man oppressed,
May bring soft slumbers from his drowsy Cell,
E're Love distracts me with ten thousand fears
Of losing her who links me in a Chain;
Who lets me languish, pities not my tears,
But takes delight to hear me tell my pain.
How long, ye Gods, shall I this Tyrant love,
This beauteous Tyrant who my torment sees,
Yet nothing can her flinty Nature move
To pity me, or give my torments ease.
O Man, my Reason, why should I adore,
On that my service does (Ungrateful) scorn.
Muster ye powers of Manhood, tell wherefore
I being free, her triumphs should adorn.
No, no, I am not free, 'twas a mistake,
But like a Lion in the Hunters toil,
The more I strive the fatal cords to break,
The less unable am I to recoil.
Twixt death and her there is no mean I see,
Sleep hears not my complaint, my sighs nor cries:
Then Terrors King haste thou, and set me free,
And with eternal slumbers seal my Eyes.
A Wormwood Lecture for Contented Cuckolds, or Billingsgate Rhetoric.
HA, have I found out your haunts, Sirrah? Was it not sufficient, you Runagate
pitiful inconsiderable Rascal, that I took you to be my Husband (such a one as
you are) with never a shoe to your foot or a shift to your back, you lousy
Rogue; but that now I have put you in a condition to live like a man, you must
be gadding abroad, spending what I have carefully taken pains for, on every
gill-flurt. Come, come sirrah, I Will make you turn over a new leaf, it is a brave
World indeed, that you must sit at the Alehouse with a pox to ye* and I must
lie slaving at home to maintain a fa^ Hostess: Get you home, I say, sirrah, and
that quickly too, or I Will beat the pot about your ears; nay, I Will make the
windows fly with a Devil to 'um, if you don't be jogging: What will not ye stir
yet? Get ye home ye dog, or I Will kick you home before me. Faith Women may be
made fools on, I see, if they hold their tongues.

The Shepherds Invitation.
COme lovely Nymph, the Winter now is past,
The bleak East wind, and freezing Northern blast,
Are close barred in their Caves, and Zeph'rus brings
The dew, restoring flowers on gentle wings.
The Sun with Aries rides, and his brightways
Reflecting on the Golden Fleece displays
To cheer the World, blithe Nature smiles to see
Her self from Hyems cold embrace set free.
Each Grove, my fair, invites us forth to view
How they their late cast Robes with pride renew.
To hear the winged Choristers repeat
Their notes harmonious, whilst our flocks do bleat,
And on the flowery plain the young kids play:
Come then, my fair one, let us trace the way
That leads unto delight, in Venus Grove,
Crowned all with Myrtle, let us reveal our Love,
Where Beauty's Queen with young Adonis strove
There let us in dear embraces panting lie,
Melting in joys the World did never try.
The Shepherdesses Reply.
I Hear thy voice my Strephon, Love commands,
And I commit my self into thy hands:
I Will not be coy, but yield you love for love,
Heavens Thunders blast those that unconstant prove.
A Gentleman fearing a competitor in his Mistresses Affections, thus writes to
persuade him from any further addresses.
Sir,
WEre you but sensible of the sincere Affections that are between the young
Lady A. G. and my self, and could but discern the inseparable bands that unite
our Souls in Love, you would cease your vain attempting any further addresses;
you may perhaps conceit she has some kindness for you, because she permits you
access: Know therefore Sir, that such civil favor is upon no other account
than your being first introduced by me as a friend; and if you prove your self
otherwise, it is in my power to punish your Ingratitude; therefore let me
friendly admonish you not to give occasion to break that knot of friendship
that has so long continued between us, by your troubling her with any further
addresses, for know that by the laws of God, and with the irrevocable consent
of her parents, she is and can be only mine. Having thus advised you, I leave
the rest to your discretion, and remain

Your friend as you use me, J. B.

A Letter to a coy Mistress.
Divine Mistress,
SInce it is my fate to be thy slave,
Render such pity as thou would crave,
Were it thy fortune so to be,
To him that courts his destiny.
My moans sufficient were to melt
A flinty Heart, who love never felt:
Yet all those tears they prove in vain
To quench Loves scorching Fevers pain.
'Twas those Magnetic Eyes that drew
My heart to wander at first view.
If then to love thou were the Womb
That gave it Life, be not the Tomb.
If thou be'st pleased, exile delay,
Danger attend a tedious way.
Few are the words that may combine
Our Hearts, it is only say, You Are mine.
But if another have possessed
Those joys that should have made me blessed,
Be speedy in thy doom, and I.
By death am freed from misery.
Your languishing Lover, J. ^.

A Dialogue between Antonius and Labinus.
Antonius. TRuly Sir, I was a fool to imagine that only death kept the doors of
ill requited, since I now plainly find that disdain or black Ingratitude can
give us a free Passport.


Labinus. Right Sir, and were I as you, it should trouble me no more, I Would
banish those fancies from my Breast, and be proud I had shaken off my Chains.


Antonius. Nay, you go too far, my Chains are not yet sundered; for should I
behold her matchless Beauties, I should again relapse. Oh she has all the
Virtues of her Sex, Chaste, unsullied, as first opening Lillies, or the
untouched Snow.


Labinus. Chaste! Why do you honor me because I throw not my self from the top
of some airy precipice? It is her ruin to be otherwise, for though we blame
those that kill themselves, yet we seldom take so much thought as to praise men
for keeping themselves alive.


Antonius. Nay, when once she appears, her Virtues are so triumphant, that I
imagine I have as many Rivals as beholders.


Labinus. All that increases but your pain, jealousy is the very spawn of
Hell, cast abroad like a deadly poison to infect the World, and kill man's true
felicity. But alas, if it trouble you before you possess the object that causes
it, what will you do when you possess the center of your desire?


Antonius. Dull and insipid as thou art, why, then I shall have no more cause
to suspect, but will lodge my thoughts securely on her Virtues, not in the
least doubting that a disloyal thought can harbor where so much Virtue lies;
but now ten thousand fears of Rivalty afflict my restless mind. Sure Sir,
crowned Conquerours are but Types of Victorious Lovers, who possess the reality
of what others not so blessed, enjoy only in a dream; therefore come what will on
it, I Will run a dangerous hazard for such a prize.


Labinus. As how?


Antonius. Why, I Am resolved to send a Challenge to the man I suspect she loves
more than me.


Labinus. Do and be ridiculous; give her occasion to hate you worse, and your
Rival to make sport at your rash Ignorance; for a Lover in favor is like a
fortunate Gamester, the more you set him, the more he wins: Nay, it is the
humor of Women to imagine some hidden Virtue in the man who is envied by his
Rival, and it consequently induces them to love him better.


Antonius. Death and Ruin, it shall be so, come what will.


Labinus. Nay, if you're resolved Sir, take your course.


A New Song.
1.
AS by a River side I passed
Corina fair was sitting,
And about her pretty waste
A Rush Green Girdle sitting.
Whilst that her naked Breasts lay bare,
And obvious to each Eye,
Upon her shoulders flowed her hair
In ringlets curiously.
2.
Which made me to advance with speed,
And though she did seem coy,
Yet I to kissing did proceed,
And calling her my Joy.
Till melting she fell in my arms,
She could resist no more,
So I amidst a thousand charms,
Rifled her Virgin store.
The Essay.
HAil, sacred Sisters, who in Triple Trine
Sing pleasing numbers, warble Songs Divine
Who 'twixt Parnassus double spires do sit,
And charm the World with wondrous themes of Wit:
^ you invoke to aid me in my flight,
That I may soar, and reach the Towering height
Of my Ambition, sing the worthy praise
Of my bright Angel, which no Pastoral lays
Could ever reach: No lofty Cleo, thou
Must be my Patroness, and here I vow,
The Port once gained, I Will crown thy Sacred brow
With Laurels that so justly are thy due:
And yearly my Oblation will renew.
Then say, shall I proceed? -- O no it is vain
With thy crazed Bark to venture on this main,
With wa^en wings to soar against that Sun,
Whose Rays can melt them, e're thy flight's begun;
Or should thou swiftly rise, in the middle flight,
Her luster lust would over power thy weaker sight,
And leave thee in a Maze of thoughtless night.
Must I desist then? -- Yes, it is just you s^ou'd,
For such perfections cannot be understood.
Rest then my Quill, no more my thoughts aspire,
Yet what I cannot reach, I must admire.
A New Song.
1.
HIgh thoughts and honor to others impart,
But give me thy Heart,
That treasure, that treasure alone,
I beg for my own.
So gentle a love, so fervent a fire,
My Soul does inspire.
2.
That treasure, that treasure alone,
I beg for my own,
Your love let me crave,
Give me in possessing
So matchless a blessing,
That Empire is all I would have.
3.
Love's my Petition,
And all my Ambition,
If e're you discover
So faithful, so faithful a Lover,
So real a flame,
I Will die, I Will die, and give up my name.
Song.
GEntly, ah gently Lady touch the wound
Which you your self have made;
That pain must needs, must needs be very much,
Which makes me of your hand afraid.
Cordials of pity, pity give me now,
For I too weak for bleeding grow.
For I too weak for bleeding grow.
Song.
1.
BY Jove I Will tell her boldly that it is she,
Why should she ashamed or angry be,
To be beloved by me?
The Gods may give their Altars over,
They Will smoke but seldom any more,
If none but happy, but happy men, but happy men
Must them adore.
2.
The Lightning, sturdy Oaks in vain oppose,
To strike sometimes do not disdain
The humble shrubs that spread the plain,
She being so high and I so low,
Her power by this does greater show,
Who at such distance gives so sure a blow.
3.
Compared with her all things so worthless prove,
That naught on Earth can toward her move,
Till it be exalted by her Love.
Equal to her alas there is none,
She like a Deity is grown,
That must create, or else must be,
That must create, or else must be alone.
A Letter to a Scornful Lady.
MAdam, must I be still your sacrifice,
And yet you will not vouchsafe to cast your Eyes
On the wreckt Victim that does bleeding lie
On Love's great Altar, you to Deifie.
Oh how could Heaven destruction frame so fair?
Yet bright as you destroying Angels are.
But must I blame you? No, it must not be:
What then, must I still court my destiny?
Alas, what gales of sighs sent from my breast,
The calmest air with whirlwinds have oppressed.
How have I wept, and strove to quench in vain,
The scorching anguish of my feverish pain:
But like a man who deadly poison drinks,
And when it flames, to coolest River brinks
With speed does haste, and there with greedy Jaws,
Hoping for ease, the Water freely draws.
But ah, alas, that does increase his pains,
Rousing the sires that feed upon his veins
Into a ten-fold rage. So when I strive
The wounding passion from my Breast to drive,
Your fair Idea your Remembrance brings,
And Cupid shafts more swift than Lightning slings.
What must I do then, say, can you not love?
If not it is Death, or Life if you approve
Of him who is your Slave; do as you please.
Give Life or Death, for either brings him ease,
Who has resolved himself yours, or his Graves, J. L.

A Letter from a Gentleman in the City, to his Mistress in the Country.
Dear Mistress,
TAke it not amiss though I am sensible that you think my absence tedious:
Assure your self I am as much troubled that some unexpected affairs have
unfortunately detained me from enjoying the felicity I so often have been
exhilarated with during my conversing with you; but be not any ways dejected,
neither attribute absence from any wilful neglect, for certain it is, no
earthly creature is more happy than I in being ascertained of the constant
affections of so divine a Lady as your self; therefore it shall be my diligence
speedily to dispatch my most urgent occasions, and then will fly to you with
all the wings of eager Love, till when ten thousand joys and blessings shower
upon my Divine Mistress.

Your constant and loyal Servant, never to alter till Death, J. B.

An Ode.
MIraculous, what love me one whole day!
I do expect thou wilt antedate thy vow
To morrow, and wilt say,
I find that even now
We are not those we were,
Or that a Lover may forswear;
For as true Deaths true Marriages untye,
So if you will dare the truth to justify,
Love's contracts like to those
Bind but till sleep, Death's Image does unloose:
^aving thus purposed falsehood, you
Can never be true,
Practice thy worst of change, I Will alter too.
Perfect Beauty.
1.
SO looks the Virgin Rose,
When cherished by the Genial truth,
Her Crimson Beauties do disclose,
As do the Ruby portals of her mouth.
2.
Which When she does unfold,
Two bright transparent Rows
Of Pearl you may behold,
From which a breath of Amber flows.
3.
A more than Tyrian Purple
Does o'respread
Her Lips, which softer are
Than the Swans down, and smoother far.
4.
The costly juice that dwells
In Oriental shells
To them looks pale,
That are so purely red.
5.
Fair Cheeks, that look
Like blushing Roses placed
In purest Ivory,
Or Coral within Snow inchac'd.
6.
The Glory of the spring
Grows pale and languishing,
For Envy so out-shin'd
By her to be.
7.
Powerful Triumphant Eyes,
That in two Crystal Prisons do contain
Death in a frowns disguise: How gladly would I dye,
To be by those Eyes slain.
8.
Delightful Cruelty of those all-charming Eyes,
Who daily try
Their potency,
Yet gently Tyrannize.
A pleasant Letter sent to a person upon the Death of his Wife, to divert him
from Melancholy.
FAith Tom I lately was acquainted with the good News of thy slipping out at
the backdoor of Purgatory, which thou never could have done, had not Death
befriended thee by charming thy Guardi^ness into a perpetual slumber. How
could thou propose to thy self any felicity whilst thou cohabitedst with
storms and Tempests? Why man thy house might have been really termed Boreas's
Cave, for whilst she lived, all thy affairs were a heap of confusion and
disorder, nothing but struggling whirlwinds murmured within thy habitation, and
whenever they broke loose, disturbed the neighboring Villagers at so rude a
rate, as if a Hurricane had been amongst them. Well, I think thou may count
this thy year of Jubilee, and keep an Anniversary in commemoration of thy
deliverance: But if you say, though she was bad, yet the ties of Love and
Nature oblige you to grieve for her, and thou will suffer Penance for her sake,
imitate the Widow Turtle, never marry again, lest your second folly upbraid you
more than the former.

Yours Tom, wishing you a merry Life, and to continue free from care, D. P.

In veneration of Age.
HEnce you profaners of all sacred things,
Let them be blotted, let Fame's nimble Wings
Never bear their praises, who dare Age despise.
Age that is still the glory of the wise
Which is esteemed for ever: What can be
More venerable than Antiquity?
The World's more prized the older it does grow,
In it more Wisdom, Riches, Strength do flow.
Age leads us to Heavens everlasting Gate,
Where Snow-hair'd Patriarchs and Apostles wait
For to convey us to the Throne of bliss,
Surrounded with Eternal Happiness.
A Dialogue between two Lovers, Pandolphus and Astella.
Pandolphus. BRightest of the Creation, how long must I languish e're you will
cast on me a pitying Eye?


Astella. Sir, I know not your meaning.


Pandolphus. My meaning, my good Angel, if without offense I may explain it, is
to know how long I must love ever I shall obtain your love in requital. In
requital did I say? O pardon my presumption, Madam, for all ^^at I can do, is
too mean an oblation to make satisfa^tion for the smallest of your favors; but
since it is ^awful for Subjects to petition Princes for things la^^^l to be
granted; so I am bold to ask your love enough should you over-bless me by
bestowing it o^^e, I have nothing to make requital, but a constant will and
obedient resolution to serve you.


Astella. Alas Sir, I am yet in green years, and am ignorant that Love means,
and must be better instructed in that affair, by taking counsel of those that
are wiser ^^an my self.


Pandolphus. Ah Madam, Love himself is the greatest master in ^^e Universe, and
consequently best able to instruct (...), would you but listen to him.


Astella. No, I dare not, for I have often been told that he ^^^s all manner of
Cruelty toward his Disciples, by ^^^icting them with strange Imaginations,
tormenting ^^^rs, wracking Jealousies, Despair, and a thousand ^^ch like
insufferable tortures.


Pandolphus. O you mistake Lady, or at least have heard the bu^^ness but by
halves, for that is never but when you ^^^dles are cruel to mankind that Love's
severe; for ^^en you prove gracious, and like giving powers ^^ed your smiling
influences on us, there is not in the ^^eation such a blessing as Lovers hearts
united.


Astella. Alas, I dare not try, nor dare I longer parley, for I feel something
trembling at my Heart.


Pandolphus. Nay, leave me not, my bright Star, by whose Light I steer my
course, hoping, my relenting Fair, at last to Anchor in the Haven of my
Happiness.


Astella. Pardon me Sir, I Am indisposed, and must retire.


Pandolphus. And can you leave me, my good Genius? Can you withdraw that
Heavenly face, without affording (...) one smile, by gazing on which I enjoyed
so much felicity? Do, and give me Death.


Astella. No, you must live: Ah I feel a yielding in my Breast, I am betrayed
by an Enemy within.


Pandolphus. And must I live then? and have thou smiled upon me, and revived
with thy sweet influence, my drooping Soul? Blessed, for ever blessed be the
moment wherein you showered such a favor on the meanest of your Slaves. O may
this moment last for ever, or at le^ be eternized in the registers of Fame.


Astella. Pray Sir leave off these Rhapsodies, and for the time we must part,
though I forbid you not to hope what another meeting may produce. Sir, for thi^
time fraewel.


Pandolphus. Go then, my brightest Sun, since thou leavest behind thee such
blooming hopes of happiness, and may ten thousand blessings wait on every step
thou make, till the happy time we meet again; till when I Will riot on those
pregnant hopes thou have lavishly bestowed upon me.


A young Gentleman debarred from the sight of his Mistress, thus confers with
her by Letter.
Divine Mistress,
HOw justly have I cause to term my self unhappy, since I find my self cast
down from the height of felicity before I had perfectly attained it; for no
sooner had I been blessed, after much difficulty, by conversing with you, and
enjoying your charming presence, the center of all my worldly joy, but by too
suspicious and cruel Parents you were snatched from me, and confined, I fear
for my sake, to streighter reclusements than are pleasing or suitable to so
much goodness; but if so, Lady, then think at the same time what a matchless
grief it is to my heart, what inexpressible sorrow overwhelms me, not only to
consider the Inconveniences you sustain, but likewise to think the time of
seeing you is not limited; but however like the mournful Turtle, I wait with a
constant patience, and in the mean while contrive all means for your
deliverance: Hoping you will return a Letter, to satisfy my longing Soul of
your estate and welfare; till when, and for ever in hopes of your speedy
deliverance, I remain

Your unalterable Lover, C. R.

Her Answer.
Sir,
I Received your Letter, though with some difficulty, and was not a little
over-joyed to understand your constant resolution, and the continuation of your
affections toward me, as you in return may be assured of mine; hoping this
trouble will in a short time be blown over, that undisturbed we shall enjoy
each others society; to procure which shall be my daily study: And in the mean
while I would have you rest contented, and assured of her affections, who is

Wholly yours, A.D.

A Maid or Widow being about to be forced by her Parents to wed the Man she
cannot affect, may thus expostulate.
Dear Parents,
ALthough my sorrows and afflictions are such, that I am far more capable to
weep and sigh, than to express my Souls deep Imaginations in any other dialect,
yet I hold it my duty, not my disobedience, to acquaint you, that because
Marriages are first made in Heaven, and then contracted and consummated on
Earth; therefore it being my unrepented happiness first to fix my love and
serious affections on ^. T. marvel not that I cannot alter my determination,
which stands as fixed and immovable as the center, not doubting but the Powers
Divice have ordained him for my Husband; therefore in all pity, prostrate on my
knees, I beseech you not any ways to oblige me to marry any other; or should I
be so inclinable, yet the man you propose could never find place in my Heart;
therefore as you tender my quiet and happiness in this world and that to come,
I humbly implore you not to go about to make me break my vow, for it is
impossible to wrong me and not your selves, by attempting to enforce me,
contrary ^o my Inclination; but if yet you will not be sensible hereof, I call
God to be a just Witness between us of your Cruelty toward me, and the candor
of my innocence toward you, and the man who in the sight of the great Judge
and omnipotent Creator of all things is my betrothed Husband, etc.

Upon the presentation of a Picture.
BEhold in this, thou mirror of thy kind,
The beauteous Emblem of thy self confined.
^air Ve^us Image lively is displaid,
Here charming Beauty is in colors laid.
It Is here quite senseless, but in you 't has life:
Exceeding far the Thunderers fair Wife.
Whose Eyes in brightness do the Sun exceed,
And in whose cheeks fresh Roses still are spread:
Whose Neck is Ivory, and whose Breasts are Snow,
And all is perfection that is hid below.
Upon the presentation of a Looking-glass.
MAdam, in this your beauties you may see,
Those charming Beauties that enchanted me:
Whose force, beyond the power of Magic art,
Through empty Air, have bore away my heart:
Or Lodestone like, by their attractive force,
Have power to draw the steely Hearts by force:
For I that never loved nor begged before,
Am forced to love, and suppliant-like, implore
Your pity, me from ruin to restore.
A young Gentlewoman having married against the will of her Parents, may thus
make her submission.
Ever Honored Parents,
FRom whom next Heaven, I derived my being and whose tender care supported my
infant year from the infinite casualties and dangers that attended them: Pardon
I most humbly beseech you, the error of your disobedient Daughter, who blinded
with Love, and over powered by affection, has thus d^red, contrary to your
express commands, to enter into a Marriage-state; but if showers of tears and
gal^ of melancholy sighs are able to atone for an offense of this Magnitude,
they have already been offered^ Sacrifice to your just displeasure; the sense
of lyi^ under your anger has still attended on my midnight dreams, and
terrified my broken slumbers with the shadows of those severe Judgments the
disobedient may justly expect: Therefore if Repentance ^^ wash away my guilt,
and restore me to your favors and good opinions, all the business of my life
shall be thought insufficient to expiate my rash folly; but ^ you still resolve
to persist thus obdurate and unmoved, and will not deign to cast a pitying Eye,
to e^^ the torments I endure, then casting off all further thought of Life,
I Will seek for quiet slumbers in the Grave.

Your now most obedient and sorrow Daughter, A. L.

The Fathers Reply.
Daughter,
I Have received your pretended submission, and communicated it to your Mother,
who disobedient as you are, finds a yielding in herself to pity your
overweening folly and rashness, and has so far prevailed upon my good nature by
many persuasive arguments, that in hopes your future obedience will make some
amends for that which had well nigh brought my gray hairs with sorrow to the
Grave, I have cancelled my resolves, but will you upon pain of incurring my
further displeasure, not to enter my doors till you obtain my leave; yet be of
good comfort, for I am still your Father, as you prove your self obedient.

J. G.

The Scorner scorned. A Song.
1.
MAdam, no more I ask your love,
Your charms I all defy,
Paint nor Perfume no more shall move
Me to such fond Idolatry.
Cupid, thou God of Troubles, hence,
Thou Enemy to rest,
Against thy shafts I have a fence,
To guard my wary breast.
2.
That Woman should suppose disdain,
Scorns, taunts and coyness are
The way our services to gain,
And take us in their snare:
It Is nothing so, for these are things
That ever set us free:
Ingratitude it always brings
Loves Captives Liberty.
A Dialogue between Philander and Celia.
Philander. WEll met, my lovely Nymph, beneath this shade,
This happy Grove at first for Love w^^ made*
Lie down, my Joy, upon this flowery Bed,
Which is with Violets all inamelled.

Celia. And what must then be done, my blushes rise,
And Love begins over me to Tyrannize:
Nay, kind Philander don't a Nymph surprise.

Philander. Alas, why now so coy? How long shall we
Discourse of Love, and own his Deity?
Yet like dissenting Subjects disagree,
When all in's Empire should be harmony?

Celia. Could I but think you true, I Would entertain
The pleasing shaft that seeks to wound in vain,
And freely give you leave to ease your pain.

Philander. True! doubt not, my lovely Nymph, 'twere sin,
Beyond the scope of Thunder's punishing,
Should not I ever ever constant prove,
And bow to naught but you and conquering Love.

Celia. Then thus I yield to my Philander's Arms,
No more I Will dread nor fate nor fortunes harms,
But blushing lie amidst a thousand charms.

Philander. Blessed moment, happier far than Infant time,
When our first Parents in their blooming prime,
In Eden's sacred soil, under each shade
To charming Love the Rights of Nuptials paid.

A young Gentlewoman whose Parents earnestly press her to marry the man she
loves not, writes to him she loves to free her from the temptation by a speedy
Marriage.
Sir,
SInce I saw you last, great has been the trial of my constancy to you, through
the incessant solicitations, nay, commands of my Parents to marry with B. W.
but such is my unalterable resolution not to break the vows made to you before
the sacred powers of Heaven, that still when they urged me, I answered with
nothing but tears and sighs: Yet seeing all flesh is subject to frailties, as
you tender my welfare and your own, contrive a way by which I may be delivered
from these temptations, which cannot be effectually done but by a speedy
Marriage, which will put an end to your Rivals hopes, and give us the mutual
satisfaction we so long have wished for. Sir, in expectation of your Answer I
remain.

Your constant Friend, M. B.

His Answer.
Dear Lady,
IN whom do center all thy joys, most to be admired of thy Sex, whom neither
Riches nor the gaudy gloss of Honor can tempt to break thy vows, what
recompense am I able to return, capable of meriting one adorned with the
richest gifts of Nature, and made complete by the lavish hands of Virtue and
Wisdom, they having trusted thee with all their choicest store; but since our
Souls are indissolvably united, words are of the smallest erficacy, therefore
as your request shall (ever the bright coursers of the Sun have circled round
the Universe) be performed, I hope well to your satisfaction; till when, and
ever after, ten thousand blessings wait upon the Divinest Mistress of him who is

Your Virtues Admirer, J. S.

A Song.
1.
JEnny come away, Jocky does call ye,
Our kine they do stray, and lost will all be,
Unless thou Jenny, come to the Field,
Where Ise win thee if thou'st yield.
2.
Come, my bonny Lass, the morning invites,
Smiling on the Grass, to Love incites:
Geud Faith Ise love thee many a day,
But could not move thee Love to repay.
3.
Jocky Ise hear thee, and will come to thee,
Yet Ise do sear me thou will undo me,
But if thou'st do, Ise tell my Mother,
And she you know will tell thy Father.
4.
Prithee sweet fear nor, Ise will be kind,
Jealousy wear not, for thous wilt find
Jocky constant; yes, and so loving,
That by this same kiss, he is never be roving.
The true Symptoms of Love.
IF when thy Stomach calls to eat,
Thou cut'st thy fingers 'stead of meat;
And with much gazing on her face
Do rise an hungry from thy place,
By these acts thou do discover
That thou art a perfect Lover.
2.
If when she appears in the room
Thou quak'st, and presently art dumb:
And in striving this to cover,
Do repeat thy words twice over:
Thou by this do plain discover
That thou art a perfect Lover.
A Dialogue between Cupid and Somnus, the feigned Gods of Love and Sleep.
Cupid. Drowsy wretch who buriest the World in sloth, and like thy elder
Brother Death, stealest away those joys that are assigned for mortals happiness
below, how dare thou enter my Palace to rob my willing Lovers of those
Delights, which thou art never capable to give? Haste hence, by my all
conquering shafts I thee command; fly, I say, to humble Cottages, where moiling
Swains, tired with the tedious labor of the day, covet thy drowsy embraces.


Somnus. Thou troubler of the World, and enemy to rest, thou have not power to
limit my universal Empire, all Creation owes me homage, nor can Natures self
withstand my force; the wakeful Warriers, though surrounded with continual
danger, own my charming force, and lulled by me, repose on the cold ground as
easy as upon Beds of Down; when thou distractest mankind with strange desire
tormentest him with anxious thoughts, ten thousand fears and jealousies daily
wait on thee, death and ruin are frequently thy guests, ushered in by lust,
stolen embraces, breach of Wedlock, Jealousy and Despair.


Cupid. Thou hold Detracter hence, or by my Mother Venus starry Eyes, my winged
shafts, pointed with scorching fevers, shall destroy thy drowsy Monarchy,
turn thy securest sleeps to broken slumbers, and with ten thousand frightful
dreams distract thee, till thy Subjects fly thy yoke, and willingly hasten to
thy Brothers Death for his protection.


Somnus. By the Worlds sweet Repose, I fear not all thy force, but laugh thee
still to scorn, and it shall henceforth be my business to join with Bacchus to
the ruin of your feeble Empire.


Cupid. Thy power's too weak, nor are thy charms of force With sleep, a
Lovesick fever to divorce.


The Shepherds Address.
LOvely Maid, best of any
Of our Plains, though thrice as many
Vail to Love, and leave denying:
Endless knots let fates be tying.
Such a face, so fine a feature,
(Kindest, fairest, sweetest creature)
Never yet was found but loving,
Oh! then let my plaints be moving:
Trust a Shepherd, though the meanest,
Truth is best, when she is plainest.
Love's not Love, with Vows contesting,
Faith is faith, without protesting.
Time, that all things does inherit,
Renders each desert his merit.
If that fail in me as no man,
Doubtless time never won a Woman.
Maidens still should be relenting,
And once flinty, still repenting.
Youth with youth is best combined,
Each one with his like best twined.
Beauty should have beauteous meaning,
Ever that hope eases 'plaining.
Unto you, whom Nature dresses,
Needs no comb to smooth your tresses.
This way it may do its duty,
In your Locks to shade your beauty.
Do so, and to love be turning,
Else each Heart for you will be burning.
A short and passionate Epistle.
WOnder nor, Lady, that in verse I write,
Since you more fair than my bright Muse, incite
My ravished Soul to muster all its power,
And at the shrine of your bright self, implore
The mighty favors that your bounties give,
To those that by your smiles do own they live.
Pardon my boldness then, that I request
You Would bid me hope, To make me ever blessed:
For on your will both Life and Death depend,
Smiles to Elysium, frowns to death can send
Your devoted Servant, G. L.

An observation on Love.
He Is frantique sure that truly says
That he can love a tedious hour,
I mean not love in such short time decays,
But that it every moment shifts its Bower;
Who would not laugh at me
If I should say,
I saw a flash of Powder
Burn a day?
2.
For Love, like Lightning's hot and cold,
It comes and goes both at one time,
It Is in a moment bought and sold,
And ever-fading in its prime.
It Is got, it is lost, it is got
And lost again;
And for a moments joy,
Gives days of pain.
The Invocation.
ECho sweet Nymph, that live unseen
Within thy Airy Cell,
By slow Meander's Margent Green,
And in each fair inamell'd vail,
Where sweet Harmonious Philomel,
Nightly to thee her ravishments does tell.
2.
Can thou not tell me of a gentle pair,
That bright as thy Narcissus are:
Oh if you have
Hid them in some flowery Cave,
Tell me but where,
Sweet Queen of Parley, Daughter of the Sphere;
So may thou be translated to the Skies,
And give resound to Heavenly Harmonies.
An Epigram.
SIllius has brought from strange and barren Lands,
A black and swarthy Wench, with many hands;
The which he does in Golden Letters say,
That she is his dearest Wife, not stolen away.
He might have saved, Heaven knows, with small discretion,
The Paper and the Ink, and his Confession;
For none that does behold her face and making,
Would judge she ever was st^^n, but by mistaking.
A Gentleman being reduced to the point of Death, by his Mistresses disregard
of his passion, may thus express himself, to move her pity.
Divinest Mistress,
I Have sent you in this Paper a gale of sighs to kindle the flames of Love in
your Breast, though I would not have them equalize mine, who know no mean, but
make me all a Torrid Zone, frying in a continual Fever, whose heat has near
dried up the springs of Life, and will at last prove my Funeral Pile, where
Phoenix-like, I shall in self-kindled flames expire, unless you by sympathizing
do abate their ardour; you whose Eyes, like Burning-glasses, first inflamed my
Soul at a distance, can only give me rest; therefore, fair Lady, as you tender
my Life, and would be eternized in the Book of Fame, for raising him from the
brink of the Grave, whom all Apollo's cannot secure from death. Let your Mercy
over balance your rigor. And so, Lady, in expectation of your commiseration,
I remain

Your languishing Lover, J. B.

A short entertainment of Love: In a Dialogue between Calidon and Celia.
Celia. YOur Complaints, which trembled through my Ears, have had the power to
alter both my will and mind, so that I am now resolved to give your services
their recompense. And if my angry Parents will openly permit the celebration of
the joyful ceremony, I am resolved to marry you in private, and to permit you
to rifle all the stores of Love, whilst your intended Rival, failing in his
expectation, languishes and feeds on empty thought.


Calidon. Bright soul of Love, Mistress of all perfection, Nature's
Masterpiece, and Earth's unvaluable Jewel, what recompense can worthless me
return for such an inestimable favor? nothing but an endless and boundless
Love can make the least return of Gratitude; therefore be assured my Life shall
be but one great study, and that shall be in considering how I may in some
measure recompense your goodness.


Celia. Why all these ceremonious Complements and quaint expressions? you know
long since you have been sole proprietor of my affections, and now nothing but
the sacred tie of Wedlock remains to complete our mutual felicities, and that
shall be performed whenever my love pleases.


Calidon. To morrow then be thou the happy day, may Ph^ebus from the East
ascend with smiles, as on the Infant World, and may each propitious Star from
his Eternal Sphere shed all his influence on Mankind, and Edenize the Universe:
To morrow, my dearest, and till then a thousand blessings wait upon my Love.


Celia. To morrow, my only joy, shall those bands be tied, which shall render
our joys as perfect as our first Parents were in Paradise; and till then
farewell, thou sole possessor of my heart.


Calidon. Farewell, my only joy, and highest hope on this side Heaven.


A Sonnet.
1.
COme away, blessed Souls, no more
Feed your Eyes with what is poor,
It Is enough that you have blessed
What was rude; what was undrest;
And created with your Eyes,
Out of Chaos, Paradise.
2.
These Trees no Golden Apples give,
Here Is no Adam, here is no Eve,
Not a Serpent dares appear,
Whilst you please to carry here.
Oh, then sit and take your due,
These the first fruits are that grew
In this Eden, and are thrown
On this Altar, as your own.
Song.
1.
STrife, hurry and noise that fills the lewd Town,
Sure at last it is time to give over,
And in the calm shades of the Country alone,
Blessed quiet and ease to recover.
2.
Smiling hopes, idle fears, and restless desires,
Are the busy man's constant attendants;
What he vainly pursues, the mind that retires
Already is come to an end on it.
The excellence of Virtue. A Poem.
HEnce gaudy Beauty, outside fairness hence,
All thou can do is but to please one sense;
But Virtue centres in the Eternal mind:
It Is such a Mine as India never confined,
Nor Tagus Golden Sands, could yet compare
To that rich treasure which the Virtuous share.
It Is all Elysium, the pathway to Heaven,
That best of gifts that was to Mortals given.
Song.
1.
WHen busy Fame over all the plains
Parthenia's praises rung,
And on their Oaten Pipes each Swain
Her matchless praises sung:
The envious Nymphs were forced to yield,
She had the sweeter face,
No emulous disputes they held
But for the second place.
2.
Young Coridon, whose stubborn Heart
No Beauty ever could move,
But smiled at Cupid's Bow and Dart,
And braved the God, the God of Love
Would view this Nymph, and pleased at first
Such silent charms to see,
With wonder gazed, then sighed and cursed
His curiosity.
Song.
1.
SMiling Phillis has an Air
So enchanting, all men love her,
But her hidden Beauties are
Wonders I dare not discover:
So bewitching, that in vain
I endeavor to forget her,
Still she brings me back again,
And I daily love her better.
2.
Kindness springs within her Eyes,
And from thence is always flowing,
Every minute does surprise,
With fresh Beauties still a blowing.
Were she but as true as fair,
Never man had such a treasure,
But I die with jealous care,
In the midst of all my pleasure.
3.
Free and easy, without pride,
Is her language and her fashion,
Setting gentle Love aside,
She Is unmoved with any passion.
When she says I have her Heart,
Though I ought not to believe her,
She so kindly plays her part,
I could be deceived ever.
An Apprentice who has left his Master to ramble, and finding his folly, may
thus solicit by Letter to be again received into favor.
Sir,
NOt without abundance of sorrow and remorse do I think of the happy state from
which my youthful ^ollies have transposed me, nor am I unsensible of the
^iseries I have sustained since I left your service; therefor, though with
shame and confusion of face, I implore you once more to receive your wanderer,
and ^ay double diligence shall I well hope make amends ^^r my neglect, and
great offense. So resolving to ^hrow my self at your feet, and undergo such
punishment as you shall think fit to inflict upon me, rather than live thus
miserable. I shall second my Let^er with my presence, and till then I remain

Your Penitent Servant, L. B.

A Dialogue between John the Butler, and Dorothy the Chambermaid.
John. WEll, my pretty Dolly, you know I have a long time born you good will,
now I hope you will requite me with love for love.


Dorothy. Truly I know not how to believe you, though, I must confess, you have
often told me so.


John. How, not believe me, my precious? O be no longer diffident, but if thou will still torment me by being hard-hearted, I Will soon convince thee of the
sincerity of my affections, by making an Exit into the other World.


Dorothy. Ha, how do you mean?


John. Why, in plain English, I Will kill my self rather tha^ endure the
tormenting pains of Love without hope of ease or intermission.


Dorothy. Nay, talk not of Death whilst there is business for Life, all this
seeming Cruelty was but to try thy patience and constancy, and now I find them
both proof, I Will cease the Combat, and yield you the Victory.


John. O happy sound, speak those words again, nay, let some Angel with a
Golden Trumpet sound them to the World, this very moment recompenses all my
care; but will thou be mine, speak, or do I dream thou saidest it?


Dorothy. I will be yours, therefore use me as you please.


John. The joy's too big for this place longer to contain: come my Joy, let us
haste to consummate out happiness.


Dorothy. What you please.


A Dialogue between an Apprentice, and his Masters Daughter.
Pre^tice. MIstress Mary, since your Father and Mothers absence gives us
opportunity, why may not we ^alk of Love?


Masters Daughter. To what end?


Prentice. Why truly to the same end that all young Men and Maids do.


Masters Daughter. As how?


Prentice. Why, tending to the happy Joys of Marriage?


Masters Daughter. Marriage I think you said, nay, first serve your time ^ut,
and then 'twill be soon enough to discourse of that affair.


Prentice. Nay, my best Mistress, do not frown upon me, for it is for your sake
only that I have undergone so much slavery as I have.


Masters Daughter. For my sake, how can that be? Are you not bound to do what
you do?


Prentice. Alas, those bonds would have proved far too weak to have held me,
had I not been fast fettered in the chains of love, laid by your perfection to
inslave my soul.


Masters Daughter. Fie upon it, how you talk now: Well James, be observant to
your Master, and when you are out of your time, I Will tell you perhaps more of
my mind, and in the mean time I do not forbid you my company at convenient
times.


Prentice. Ten thousand thanks, my Divinest Mistress, for so lavish a blessing;
as for you, I would not grudge to exceed the Patriarchs service for his
much-loved Rachel.


On Honor.
1.
Honor's a blast, a bubble, naught but air,
Which at a distance only can look fair,
And still attended is with doubts and care,
Which fail not to bring forth black despair.
2.
By Death it is often achieved, and seldom stood,
Unless at some time it were marked with blood:
Its Sea's Ambition, on whose boundless flood
It Is often, often tossed, till all is lost that is good.
Song.
1.
MY Love she is fair, although she is cruel,
And never does spare to make my Heart fuel:
Her Tresses like Gold do glistering flow,
And her cheeks they infold both Roses and Snow:
Her breath is perfume, beyond Asia's sweets,
Or Arabian Gum, when Phoebus it heats.
2.
Her lips and her Teeth to Coral and Pearl,
To each one that sees, still are parallel:
Her Neck, like the Swans, so white does appear,
Her Breasts and her Hands they sure have no peer.
Her Belly, and what is below, my Muse cannot paint;
Nor no man shall know those rare parts of my Saint.
The Country-mans wooing. A New-Song.
John. FAith Bessy you know that I long have loved you,
And to be my Wife full often have moved you,
But you have looked scornful; yet now tell me true,
What is it, my Sweeting, you mean for to do?
If that you will have me, deny me no more,
For I of Complements have spent my store:
Then say, shall us wedded be? Nay, Love, blush not,
For I Am resolved to know the very upshot.

Betty. Are you in earnest then? nay, if you be so,
Ise mun ask my Mamma before Ise con go:
Ise warrant she will glad be, when once she hears on it:
Ise often hear you talk, but never ween'd you would a don't:
But if we mun be married: Ah! be married,
Ise will be to the Kirk on Horseback carried;
And then we's have a feast made of Curds and Cream,
Where Ise am resolved for to watchel mine weam.

John. Then art thou so willing, my pretty Pigsnies,
The only Jewel that Jony ever did prize:
Then to thy Mothers House speedily let us gang,
For to be tickling of thee, faith I do lang:
We'll dally on the Pease-mow, sport it merrily,
And all the pretty arts of Love there will try:
I will clip thee in my Arms, with soft kisses,
Such as Gentlefolk give to their kind Misses.

Love's force despised. A New Song.
1.
A Way foolish Boy,
I Will not endure
Love, that simple toy,
For to procure
To me the least annoy.
Away with your Quiver,
Your idle Dart
Shall never, never
Procure my smart,
But I Will brave you ever.
2.
Oh! that men should be
Afraid of one
Who could never see,
And at his Throne
Still to bow the knee.
Whom folly impowers
For to bear sway,
When as idle hours
Us do betray,
To sleep in his Bowers.
The forsaken Damsel.
1.
BLue Thetis, Goddess of the raging Sea,
Whom all the Beauteous Nymphs obey,
From whose dread anger all the Tritons haste,
Scowring through Amphitrite's wast,
Which is calm when you smile, but when you frown,
The mounting surges Nations drown.
Haste, great Goddess, haste unto my aid,
Who by false man am now betrayed.
2.
Who with my spoils does triumph on your waves,
Proudly the God of Love he braves.
Enslaved my Heart, and then from me did fly;
Which is the worst of Tyranny.
Sink him with Winds, his Ship with Lightening burn,
Or speedily force his return.
For I have such a fever in my Breast,
That he or Death must give me rest.
The Loyalists Delight. A New Song.
1.
GReat Charles, our blessed Sovereign,
At last has subdued
The murmuring faction,
That strove to intrude
Into matters of State,
For to embroil the Nation:
Sedition no more
Shall be made a vocation.
2.
But under the Reign
Of so bounteous a King,
From whom all Virtues
And goodness does spring.
Good Subjects shall flourish
In plenty and peace,
Whilst faction now blasted,
Shall ever decrease.
A Song.
1.
HArk how the Drum beats,
To the Wars let us go,
Dub a dub a dub Boys,
Ay is it so?
Then come my Lads along, come
There Is Honor to be gained,
We are all true English men,
Our Courage never was stained.
2.
But if we first carouse it,
We shall be more than men,
We shall fight like any mad,
One of us will beat ten.
The lusty Dutch, so famed at Sea,
Whilst sober ever shrunk;
But fought like Tigers for their prey,
When they are soundly drunk.
3.
Then fill each bowl up to the brim,
'Twill make us for Mars more fit,
'Twill strengthen our arms against all harms,
And sharpen our dull Wits.
Tan-ta-ra-ra-ra the Trumpet sounds,
Of nothing but War we now must think;
Yet do nothing rashly,
First let us drink,
Yet do nothing rashly, etc.
The Milk maids delight. A New Song.
1.
IN the morning betimes we dabble in the dew,
And though our smock's wet, what is that to you.
The fragrant fields us Nosegays do yield,
And the Lark she does sing, to welcome the spring,
Whilst the Kine they cry Moo-moo-moo.
2.
Full Udders we stroke, and make Curds and Cream,
And with good Sull^bubs watchel our weams;
Or make our selves happy, with Ale that is nappy,
Filled in a brown Bowl, or trip round the May Pole,
Whilst each takes the Lad she esteems,
3.
From cares and debate we ever are free,
And there is none lives so happy, so happy as we:
Let 'um talk what they will, we best lives lead still,
No care nor strife does trouble our life,
And when we want husbands, our Loves soon agree.
And when, etc.
To his Mistress, upon her recovery from a fever.
AH! whither fled are all those Roses-fair,
That lately in your cheeks fresh blooming were?
Cruel Disease, that dares drive from its place
That Star-like luster that adorned your face.
Your grief was short, yet you may feel by this
What Loves tormenting, burning fever is.
And learn to pity Lovers when they lie,
Self- Phoenix Martyred in Loves agony.
And as time will restore each blush again,
So likewise let it ease my feverish pain;
Restore with kindness him you have almost slain.
The Welsh-mans Complemental Letter to his Mistress.
Hur pretty Pigsnie,
HUr having seen hur some two tay^^aco, hur had a whole fortnights mind to
sp^ak with hur, but hur has such a plaguey sight of pisness that hur cannot find
in hur heart to spare tim^, for if hur cud, plut hur was come and play a game
with hur a^ Whiphershine, for hur is seldom without Tice in hur Poke. If hur
was know what hur was, hur was tell by St. Taffe hur was a Shentleman of Wales,
and a creat Trafeler, for hur has peen a top of Penman-Mower. If hur was know
hur estate, cot hur was worth two pound year Land, beside hur have seven Goat,
two Cow, (plut was have cousboby enough) four Sows-babies; nay, hur was richer
than her was thought hur was, for hur have six Robin Run-holes in hur Pingle,
cot all hur none coods, if hur was cetch 'um: Nay, hur was not tell all yet,
for hur has a crate many of hur nown cozins, hur have Hugh ap Danie, ap Shon,
ap Shin^ing, ap Shoane, ap William, ap Tomas. And if hur was enquire for hur,
as hur said before, hur was Shon a Morgan, Shentleman of Wales. And so hur was
pid hur farewell till hur sees hur, for Cot let hur take notice hur was come
shortly and give her a visit: Till then hur will let hur alone, and mind hur
pisness.

This, this from hur nown Sweetheart Shon a Morgan, Shentleman of Wales.

A Caution to Prodigal Lovers.
IF long you would have the Worlds wild females love,
Beware that they too costly do not prove.
A thousand ways they have youths to beguile,
And win your Treasure with an empty smile.
Some silently into your Purse will creep,
And jesti^gly will snatch things they will keep:
And by some slight and pretty wanton suit,
^' enrich themselves will leave you destitute.
If by the Shops she goes, she spies fine toys,
And strait she enters for to make her choice:
Looking on each, then asks thee thy advice:
Which when she does, to answer still be nice.
Though she with kisses tell thee she does need
Lace, Silk or Gold; to answer her take heed:
For by feigned kindness, she will draw you on
To pay for what her fancy's fixed upon.
It Is cheap she swears, the like she never could buy,
Then wishes she the wear of it might try.
If that w^n't do, she say; it is her birthday,
And for some present on the same she will pray:
Which got, when ever she wants she will be sworn
It is her birthday, she was that day born.
Sometimes she will feign a passion, seem to weep,
Alleging some sad loss, much seeking keep,
As she had something of great price let fall,
And say her friends her to account will call
For such a Jewel, though the price were small.
Then chearing up, she smiling in thy face,
Will beg thee buy another in its place;
Or lend her Money, she will it restore:
Beware of that, what is lent is thine no more.
These, and a thousand Arts lewd Women have,
Unskilful Lovers strangely to deceive.
But when all is gone, you will them disdainful find,
No more they will love, no more they will be kind,
But fly your converse swift as Eastern Wind.
The Misers dreadful Vision.
A Miser having set his Heart on Gold,
Adores his wealth till sleep his Eyes infold,
But broken slumbers for a time possessed
The drowsy portals of uneasy rest:
At last God Somnus with his sleepy Bows
Sprinkling his face, a deadly sleep insues.
Dreams and strange fancies dance about his Bed,
Ten thousand Proclamations fill his Head.
Full Chests and Coffers crammed he seems to see,
To tell strange Coin he seems intent to be.
Placing of Jewels, whilst he sparkles round
With Earthly Stars, when in the midst a sound*
Dismal as dying Groans, bid him prepare,
And then a dreadful Image did appear,
And shaking a bright Dart, before him stood,
His Scarlet Robe, still dropping wet with Blood.
When strait his Wealth a whirlwind puffed away,
And he to air dissolved, nor did he stay,
But snatched by a black Guard, and hurried thence.
Into dire darkness, dismal to the sense.
Hea^ but no fire, vapors of sulphury smoke
From ugly Demons nostrils hourly broke.
When on a sudden there did pierce his Ear
Such sad laments as Mortals never did hear,
When Widows, Orphans, and Self-murtherers hi'd,
And such as had by Execution died,
Or starved in Prison, all undone by him:
And seizing on him, forty tug'd each limb,
And haled him soon before a Demon grim:
Who asked the cause, and had it told him strait,
The Miser caused their untimely fate;
By cozening some, he made them take the Road,
And so at Tyburn make their last abode.
Widows unhous'd, with cold and hunger di'd,
Orphans to Sea forced, perished by the Tide.
Others by him imprisoned, lost their breath,
And died a languishing and tedious death.
To these known truths himself had naught to say,
But promises that he would all repay.
But that sufficed not for the mischief done,
For he his dismal doom received soon,
The Gold and Silver he unjustly got.
Melted, in flaming Crucibles was brought,
Whilst on his Back he lay, stretched wide his Jaw,
They poured into his insatiate maw.
Which scalding torture, waked him from his dream,
When pondering on the dire and dreadful theme,
^^ vowed for to grow honest, and agree
To give his Captive Debtors Liberty:
Renounce Extortion, never take a bribe:
Forsake the ruinous ungodly Tribe
Of Hell-hound Usurers, and thus by thought
The Devil has a Reformation wrought.
The Monsieurs Letter to his Mistres^.
ME very well Love you, your pretty tempting face does invite me to do so, me
very well know that you be a very fine Gentlewoman, be Gar Madam me do;
therefore me being but a stranger in Englont, me would very fain have you teach
me ver boon English, and me will instruct you all-a-mode the France, Parle
Francois, Madam -- be Gar, if you cannot, me will come to your Bed side and
teach you; nay, me will so instruct you, so that you shall never forget your
lesson, besides me show you the high Gambole, the low Gambole, the
Lavalto-al-a-mode. Faith me tickle you twice in a place, Madam, if you will let
me, for me be a ver-boon Companion; but me fear me trouble you too much if me
write any more, therefore me will leave the rest till me come my self and see
you.

Madam, your tres humble Serviteur, Monsieur Rague.

A Letter from the Son to his incensed Father.
Sir,
IF penitential tears, and all the low submissions of a Slave could rebate the
sharp points of your anger, nothing has, nor shall be wanting in me. Sincere
Repentance is all that Heaven requires for sin: Remember Sir, the best of
Masters has enjoined forgiveness, as we our selves expect to be forgiven. If I
have unadvisedly married contrary to your will, impute that crime to a too
prevalent passion and youthful inclination; yet I hope my choice is such,
setting aside the want of a portion, as can no ways be objected against: She is
one that is adorned with all the perfections of Nature that can render a Woman
tempting and lovely; and for her Soul, it is the very center of virtue; her
deportment modest and affable; all so charming, that your self could not have
beheld and conversed with her, as I did, without some feeling sparks of desire.
Therefore let not your anger burn against her; but if no entreaty or submission
can atone for this one disobedience, heap all your wrath on me, let me be the
wretched mark to aim your fury at, and be not displeased with her, whose good
Nature was wrought upon by my prevailing Rhetoric to enter the sacred bands of
Wedlock. And so Sir, hoping time will waste your displeasure, I remain.

Your dutiful, and hereafter obedient Son, till Death, T. G.

The Ingenious Lovers admonition to his Mistress.
BRight Beauty, you chief Idea of my mind,
Prove like the Gods, mild, bounteous, patient, kind:
That then your Virtues may be raised so high,
That their bright tops will reach the glittering sky:
Let Cruelty be banished from your Breast,
Let all be love, and that will make you blessed.
For Cruelty and dire disdain procure
Scorn, though your Lovers martyrdom endure:
For who can love that thing whose Cruelties,
Our wounding passions can with ease despise:
Who is it that owns the name of Man that will
Court a Basilisk whose dire sight can kill.
In whose bleak aspect death and ruin lies,
Who has the power to murder with her Eyes.
Then prove you kind, if you would secure my Love,
If you're once cruel, I Will disdainful prove:
I Will scorn the scorner, till with just disdain
The cruel Murtheress with her weapon's slain.
The unexperienced Lovers: A Dialogue between Philaster and Phillada.
Philaster. ALas what can mean this eager Joy, my Philada, that transports me
even to a ravishment when you appear, sure some mighty motion stirs my Soul by
sympathy to move in tune, and number with yours, for I have often observed you
as much concerned.


Phillada. How it comes to pass I know not, but sure I am when from your eyes
you cast an eager gaze, methinks you shoot me to the Heart; the pointed beams
you send wound insensibly, nay, fire my Soul, but how or which way I know not,
therefore it is best to avoid you; absence may cure the burning fever of my
Soul, and give you rest.


Philaster. Alas, my pretty Nymph, I am all tenderness, and would not hurt so
bright a Creature; no, my rude hands shall never offend you, if my Eyes have
done it, it was more than I was willing they should have done; but to talk of
leaving me, that fatal sound wounds more than all the glances from your Eyes,
for methinks I could, Phoenix-like, be well contented to suffer Martyrdom in
such a gentle fire. O remove not without me, my bright Sun, lest the remainder
of my days be clouded with Egyptian blackness.


Phillada. Alas, what good can come of gazing at each other, what avails it to
stand like two Burning-glasses, insensibly giving fire to each internal faculty.


Philaster. Yes, it is mighty pleasing, for it keeps off the rage of cold
December frosts, and yields a mutual warmth, yet something within tells me
there is more in it than we are aware on, and I have heard there is a thing called
Love that operates insensibly, and is of wondrous force.


Phillada. And this perhaps may be that thing, therefore it is time we part;
for, O dreadful! I have heard my Mother say, it is a dangerous thing to be in
Love -- Ah, I cannot leave you.


Philaster. Fear not, my little Angel, for sure there is nothing can be harmful
that at a distance promises such Joys, I seem already on the confines of an
endless bliss, and fain wou^d proceed, but fear to err and lose my way.


Phillada. Let Us venture both together then, and if we are lost, I Will be content
to wander with you in whatever Maze you tread, methinks we are inseparably
linked, but by what chains my Eyes cannot discern; I cannot leave you if I
would -- Sure some secret power has fettered us with charms.


Philaster. Charms indeed, such as the God of Love uses to tame Rebellious
Hearts with, and make them p^^able to his commands. But let us go, our Parents
call, and at a fitter season, freer from discovery, we'll implore the Sacred
Oracle to unfold the cause of this our pleasing pain.


Phillada. I Will be wholly guided by your dire (...)


Philaster. Then thus we move, two Bodies and one Heart,
Both wounded are, yet hug the wounding Dart.

A Song.
1.
AH Cel^a arise,
The Birds they do sing
Upon every bud,
For to welcome the Spring;
The day it looks fair,
Let us haste to the Grove,
And there we'll lie down
And triumph in our Love.
2.
The pride of the Woods,
And joy of each plain,
Is my fair Celia,
She charms every Swain:
Whilst drooping they hang down
Their Heads, and pass by,
She wounds them full soon
With a glance of her Eye.
3.
Yet it is my happiness
To have her favor,
Which is a treasure
That blesses me ever.
Then come away, come away,
All the World over
I Would travel, I Would travel,
Such Joys to discover.
The Usurers Letter to his Mistress.
Fair Lady,
DEspise me not because I am old, for I have that which renders most Mortals
young in the Eyes of Love, as the World goes now adays* though Time has snowed
over these Locks, 'th charming Gold, thou pretty darling of my affections, thou
alone shall be my Joy, and feast thy eyes on bags of Treasure; nor shall any
thing be want^^^ to please thy appetite that your thoughts can form if there be
a possibility of procuring it; in Winter thou shall be clad in Ermins, to
secure your delicate body from cold Winters rage, and in Summer shine in Silks
and Gold: therefore be not coy nor disdainful, but since your parents have
given their free consent, do you likewise give yours; which ever makes him
happy, who is

The admirer of your Beauties and Virtues, G. I.

Her Answer.
Sir,
I Cannot but admire, and at the same time be sorry that you should give your
self the trouble of importuning me by Letters, when as I thought I had given
you such ample satisfaction to your demands. Ca^ you once imagine that I (who
have the World at will, and live in the height of all earthly felicity, free
from care, envy, and the frowns of a Jealous Husband) will in the prime of my
youth wilfully make my self miserable, by throwing my self into the arms of age
and impotency; no, but rather continue as I am to the last period of my days:
Could your doarage be so foolish to think your bags of Treasure could be of
force to prevail against my absolute determination: alas, the force of Gold,
that Soul of Usurers, is not of power sufficient to employ my meanest thoughts.
You allege, my parents are willing, but how? It Is if I consent freely to like
and love the man they propose, otherwise, such is their tenderness toward me,
which I with all obedience own, that they will not in that nature lay the least
commands upon me, that is any ways disconsonant to my inclination. Therefore,
Sir, rest your self content, and be assured that you never shall prevail with
her in the way of Marriage, who in friendship, for your intimacy with my
Father, wishes you well to fare,

And rests her own, E. S.

A Letter to a Quondam Mistress, newly Married.
Lady,
THat night Fame reached my tingling Ear
With idle stories that I would not hear,
I sent her back as an unwelcome guest;
But she would not go till she the tale expressed:
Which when I heard, I laughed aloud, and cried,
Then is she gone, Joy greet the gentle Bride:
But when she urged that you, having laid by
All Virgin blushing, bashful Modesty,
Courted my Rival, ^iced him to your Bed,
As weary of your ponderous Maidenhead;
I could but wonder how my active mind
To such mean Courtship ever was confined.
But looking o'r my Legends, there I found,
Your worthless name was not of force to wound;
And that you served to pass the time away,
When leisure hours bid me keep Holiday.
The Loyal Health. A New Song.
COme away Boys, let us drink it
As soon as we think it,
Set it round, set it round,
Come let it round pass,
Fill each man his Glass,
To the brim, to the brim,
To the King let it go,
And to the Duke also,
Till our Wits they abound.
Come, come away with it,
Let none delay it,
Till in Nectar we swim.
The Shepherds Delight. A New Song.
1.
ALL day I wander o'r the Plains,
My tender flocks to feed,
And sport amongst my fellow Swains,
Tuning a tender reed,
To sing my Jenny's praises forth,
And her rare Beauties tell.
Who can comprize my harmless mirth,
Which others Joys excel.
2.
I scorn the bravery of the Court,
Where Tempests loudly rear,
Those Cedars are to Winds a sport,
Whilst shrubs they still pass o^re.
^in my Cottage take more joy
Than Kings in Princely pleasure:
Is love and freedom all have I
That Earth or Sea does treasure.
The Authors advice to his Heroic friend, upon bis unmanning himself, by
doting upon a disdainful Beauty.
HAste, brave Amyntas, to the Chase, for see
Diana's Boar is followed hastily:
The loud mouthed Hounds follow the foaming Beast,
Take, take thy ^avelin, meet his fiercest rage,
It Is far less dangerous than Love to engage.
To pine for one that is scornful, proud, unkind,
But meanly suits wi^h such a mighty mind,
As in thy Breast, fierce Warrior, is confined.
Thou that have faced Jove's Thunder, when it roared
On Lightning's Wings, and the vast Mountains goar'd.
Waded in Blood through Mars's dismal field,
To gather Laurels from the heaps you killed.
Who in the midst of dangers looked so brave,
As quelled thy foes Courage, thy Soldiers gave
Can thou, can thou brave England's Mars, can thou
Thy Glorious Plumes to nothing-woman bow?
For shame rouse up, the World will laugh to see
Her great Alcides humbly bend his knee,
Weep, sigh and cringe to a detested thing,
Inglorious Woman, whence his wo^s do spring.
No, lift up thy Victorious Head, and shake
Off these dull Chains; thy Captive Fetters break:
Come, be thy self, and loud in thunder speak.
War be thy Language, spread destruction round,
And let thy Music be the Trumpets sound.
To his innocent Mistress. A Poem.
FAir, pretty Creature, who in tender years
Wound'st many Hearts, and stir'st up tides of fears
Yet ignorant art of thy too potent charms,
Which equal are to Mars's Murdering Arms.
For who can see such beauty in the bloom
Fragrant with Virtues, that can never consume,
And not desire; though should they ask, 'twould be
A strange request, they must explain to thee.
How often has thy quaint discourses won
My serious thoughts to give attention
To thy fine tales, spun out in threads of Gold,
Such as Penelope her Lovers told.
But yet my hopes are vain, the fruit's too green,
But will be ripened by Loves charming Queen:
And then to taste it, if it be my Lot.
My wishes shall be in their center shut.
A Catch.
LEt Vulcan blow the bellows,
Nay, let him sweat, swear and be jealous:
With Venus all night I will lie,
Though whimpering Cupid should cry,
Yet at her I Will go,
With so full a blow,
As shall enter between each thigh.
Upon the presentation of a Nosegay.
MAdam, behold these fragrant flowers that crown
Their limber stems, with leaves incircled round;
Glorious at present, but in time will fade,
And lose the luster they some time have had:
So youth a while will flourish, but times breath
Will turn't to age, and age will hasten death.
Therefore, Divinest Mistress, whilst time lasts,
^ake use of it, before your Beauty wastes:
And when these flowers obtain a License free
To kiss your Lips, then Dear, remember me,
Who sigh and languish in a pleasing strain,
Hoping one day I shall such favor gain
As that Loves God will ease my lingering pain.
A Dialogue between a Page and his Lords Daughter, under the names of Cleonel
and Calista.
Cleonel. MAdam, the silent language of my Eyes have often spoke my strong
desires, though my faultering tongue was unable, till your kind ^spect
unloosen'd the Magic string, that in spite of my utmost power, hindered it
from performing its office: But not to be tedious, the end of my motion, Madam,
is Love --


Calista. Love -- Saucy fellow, stand off, how dare you say this to me? Is it
possible your presumption can soar so high; if it is, 'twe^ (...) your wings
were clipped.


Cleonel. Ah Madam, pardon my rashness, impure not this boldness to me, but to
all-conquering Love, that mighty Deity, whose all-commanding force it is not in
the power of any mortal to resist: So fair, so virtuous, and so admirable a
Creature should not be cruel to the humblest of her Slaves, whose Breast i^
tortured with a restless fever, whose mouldering fires those bright Eyes have
kindled. I know my distance, Divinest Lady, and therefore fall prostrate at
your feet, humbly imploring you to pardon my presumption in that point,
consider me only as a Lover, and cure those wounds you made.


Calista. Away, I Will hear no more: Hence from my sight, and as you tender being
banished the family for ever, trouble me no more with this impertinence.


Cleonel. O, I Am thunderstruck: Your words, like Arrows pass quite through my
Soul, and by the way ring lo^^ Deaths dismal knell -- Hear no more -- Yes,
bright Star, you shall be obeyed. I will go, but it is to death! Death, death
shall ease my troubled mind, and secure you in your command.


Calista. Stay, rash fool; to death for what?


Cleonel. To ease my misery, and put an end to all the tortures of my mind, for
none but your self and that grim King carry the Balsom that can cure my wounds.


Calista. I charge you live, and yet I charge you let me hear no more of Love.


Cleonel. You command impossibilities, if I live, you cannot be obeyed, and
fain I would be obedient; therefore, thou wonder of thy Sex, if you will not
vouch safe to pity me, yet envy me nor, by hindering me from sweet repose. To
slumber in the Grave is better than to live in torment*


Calista. Live and hope. (Exit.)


Cleonel. Hope! Blessed sound! The echo of some Angels ^oice: Music exceeding
all the Worlds sweet harmony. Ha, what is she gone? Bright Angel stay and cheer
me with your luster: Yet since you have been pleased to scatter Balsome, I Will
be content to live a while, though on Camelions fare.

Despair be gone, Hope gives me life, and I
With Eagle flight am mounted to the Sky.
He seldom wins, that fears for Love to die.

Song.
HAste, fair Daphne, haste away,
Great Apollo here does stay.
Great Apollo here does stay.
The God, the God of Sacred Songs,
To whom each sacred art belongs,
To whom each sacred art belongs,
Come away, come away,
And we'll revel night and day.
Song.
1.
IN Oceans of Pleasure,
That mortals cannot measure,
We will swim for ever,
And sorrow shall never
Disturb our sweet rest:
Let care still be flying,,
We'll still be enjoying
What shall make us blessed.
2.
Vain fancies shall not fright us,
Nor troubles incite us
To leave off our loving,
That still shall be moving
With warm desire.
For love it is charming,
There Is naught in it harming;
So gentle is the fire.
The Melancholy Virgin. A New Song.
1.
AH me, that ever I was born,
To be thus tortured in my mind,
To be thus left, thus left forlorn,
Alas I can no comfort find:
And yet I know no cause of pain,
That should afflict me with such grief;
To Rocks and Woods I still complain,
But woe is me, have no relief.
2.
It Is sure my former Cruelty,
When I unmoved, so often could hear,
Whilst sighing Lovers sued to me,
And languishing 'twixt hope and fear,
Died at my feet, yet I would yield
No saving Cordials to restore,
Nor them from Death's Convulsions shield,
Though they with tears did often implore.
3.
Therefore the God of Love repays
Me for my cruelty and scorn,
And to my charge those Victims lays,
That did my triumph late adorn.
My mind ten thousand tortures seize,
Strange visions still disturb my rest,
And tell me I shall never have ease,
Till with a Marble Tomb I Am pressed.
A Lady to her perfidious Lover.
SIR, when I first saw your bewitching face,
Reason to strange and strong desire gave place*
Rashly I loved, thinking you would Love repay,
Which when you vowed, your heart still went as^
You smiled on me, and yet another loved,
And when I thought you sure, perfidious proved.
Therefore I banish you now from my Breast,
No more I Will grieve, no more I Will break my rest,
For thee Ungrateful, once beloved the best.
My mind shall be as calm as Halcyon Seas,
No storm of passion shall at all displease:
No sorrow shall my peaceful Life disturb,
Thy hate I Will scorn, and all my grief will curb.
Cruel ungrate, could you but once suppose
The brave disdain my Breast does now enclose,
To scorn thy faithless, and the faithful love,
'Twould you to either shame or anger move.
I soon perceived your drift, that black design,
My chaster Honor for to undermine.
But, thank my Stars, in vain were all such wiles,
With which perjured mankind maids beguile.
See me no more Sir, as you would shun your fate,
But at a distance level all your hate:
Whilst I forget I ever saw your face,
And for your sake slight all of mortal race.
The Welsh man's Adventure. A Song.
1.
HUr was tell hur a trick,
And hur was tell hur a thing,
Hur went cood fortune to seek,
Until hur had like to swing.
Cots plut, was see some Gold,
And then hur was think her rich,
And with it hur did make bold,
For sadly hur fingers did itch.
2.
But when hur had cot it up,
And with it was trudging away,
Plut hur was cry, stop, stop,
And then hur was forced to stay:
Then was carry hur to cr^te house,
From thence before Lord Shudge,
Where was burn her arm adzouse,
And bid hur home to trudge.
Song.
1.
HArd by a River, close under a shade,
Fair Celia and Strephon one evening were laid,
The youth pleaded strong for the fruits of his Love,
But Honor had won her his suit to reprove.
^he cried, where is the luster when Clouds shade the Sun,
Or what is the brisk Nectar, the taste being gone.
^^ongst flowers on the stalk, sweetest odors do dwell,
But the Rose being gathered, it loses the smell.
2.
My dearest of Nymphs, the brisk Shepherd replied,
If ever you will argue, begin on Love's side.
In matters of State let all reason be shown,
But Love is a power will be ruled by his own.
Nor need the coy Beauties be counted so rare,
For scandal cannot touch the chaste and the fair.
So scarce are the Joys Love's Alembeck do fill,
And Roses are sweetest, when brought to the Still.
The merry Topers. A Song.
1.
TO Bacchus we drink,
Come fill't to the brink,
Let a rummer go round whilst we are merry,
Let Misers take care,
We never will spare,
But round let it go till we are weary,
O it is brisk Wine
That makes us divine,
Then fill up a Bumper of Sherry.
2.
Round, round let it go,
Above and below,
Whilst Stars they the Skies do bespangle:
The Moon she gives light,
Whilst we pass the night,
And scorn all such Sots as will wrangle.
Here Will here is to you,
Gra' mercy true blue,
No care shall our thoughts now entangle.
A Dialogue between a Country Justice and his Cha^ber-maid.
Justice. BEtty, Is It not almost Supper-time?


Betty. Yes Sir, the Bell has just rung seven.


Justice. Well, then there is an hour good, eight is a seasonable time; but hark
Betty, what haste are you in? Pray stay a little, nay you shall stay -- Yes,
and sit down by me; nay, nay, ye little baggage I am resolved to touze ye.


Betty. For Heavens sake Sir, what mean you? Fie, fie Sir, oh, oh you hurt me:
Nay Sir, pray Sir, be ci^il Sir, or I Will cry out; upon my Maidenhead, Sir, I
will.


Justice. Ay, ay, thy Maidenhead, why faith ye little Rogue, that is the thing
I Would be upon too.


Betty. Ay Sir, that I believe, but there is but one way to come at it.


Justice. All that I know very well, and that way I Will soon find if you will let
me but alone.


Betty. Nay Sir, but you mistake my meaning, my meaning is Virtuous, and you
suppose otherwise.


Justice. A pescods on Virtue, don't talk of Virtue now, for that is a thing
that this age has turned out of doors, but prithee seeing thou have a meaning,
let us have it.


Betty. Why Sir, the way to my Maidenhead must be through the fore-door of
Matrimony.


Justice. Matrimony! Cunning baggage, will nothing less than three thousand a
year purchase it then?


Betty. No Sir, no less than your self and all your Estate can signify any
thing as to that particular, and the bargain perhaps may be worth it; for
though I shall bring no equal portion, yet you shall have all my Love, and be
all my care, and I Will be as saving as you can wish.


Justice. Well thou art such a piece of temptation that I must purchase thee,
let it be at what rate it will; and since I find thee Virtuous, here are twenty
Broad pieces to provide you with necessaries, and let Thursday next be the day.


Betty. Yes Sir, and thank ye too ten thousand times! O how how I shall dream
and long whilst Thursday comes. Pray Heaven Sir your mind don't alter.


Justice. No, ye pretty Rogue, by this kiss it shall not; but at this time I
must to my Closet, in the mean while see things set in order.


Betty. Doubt not my diligence. Ha, three thousand pounds a year, and lie with
my Master to boot: these are brave things. Well, now had I been an easy fool,
and suffered him to have rifled my Warehouse beforehand, it would never have
been; but I perhaps when my Belly had begun to wamble, had been packed off into
some far Country with five or ten pound.


Therefore young Lasses that advanced would be,
Keep close your Legs till Hymen makes you free
To act, and then you joyful days may see.
An old Woman to her youthful Lover sends this Epistle.
Sir,
SInce your vows of Love, and serious protestations have grafted you into my
good opinion, your neglect and disrespect toward me has been no small part of
my grief; if you could not have fancied me, why did you use so many powerful
arguments to rouse my dying embers of desire into a flame? Sure it is that my
treasure might be sufficient to cover the imperfections of Nature, if any such
your prying eyes have found, or if any thing else has been the cause of
estranging you from my company, at least be so kind as let me know it, and if
it cannot be removed to your satisfaction, I Will be content to undergo your
scorn, and bear my sufferings with patience; therefore hoping that you will still
prove kind as at first, and perform your vo^^ I rest

Your perplexed friend, and admirer, M. I

The Christmas ramble.
IN Cold December, when sharp frosts invade
The shivering World, Nature's decrepit made
By Winters Icy hands, all things seemed dead,
Each Plant and Tree hung down its drooping head;
Then through the streets as I was wandering late,
A brisk young Lass there standing at a Gate
Took pity of me, kindly called me in;
Yet 'twas a place where never before I Would been:
No sooner entered was I, but a fire
Raised by a World of roasting Apples higher,
The first thing was that came unto my view:
The next was brisk good nappy Ale, it is true.
Then down I set me by my Mistress side
In loving sort, and found she was a Bride,
And yet a Virgin: for it was her hard fate
To match with one that could not pass the Gate,
No further than the Porch, and there in vain
Fluttering, gave her just cause for to complain.
Which when I knew, I pitty'd her hard case,
And softly laid my cheek unto her face,
When she with low whisper in my ear
Told me she longed, she longed, ay for an heir,
And to procure one she no Gold would spare.
I liked the motion, absence gave me scope,
And boldly to her Bell I fixed my Rope,
And rung her such a Peal she well was pleased,
And all her grievances were quickly eased,
In such good sort, that Angels filled my purse,
And then in loving wise we did discourse.
After a long Carouse, the Cuckolds health
Went freely round, who dreamt not of Loves stealth.
But time still wasting, we at last must part,
Although she left me with a bleeding heart.
Begging I Would call whene'r I came that way,
To lend her Lambs-wool, and she would Gold repay.
Loves force. A Poem.
WHen happy time in Eden first began,
Heavens choicest blessing was reserved for man,
Glorious as Sunbeams from the Orient Skies,
Virtue and Beauty did at once surprise;
His dazzled Soul ten thousand blessings met
^n one bright female, there before him set.
Love conquered him who did the World command,
On Loves firm Basis Crowns and Scepters stand:
Each haughty Monarch yields unto his power,
His Deity all Mortals must adore.
Bright Angels sing before the Eternal Throne,
His Songs unto the sacred Trine in One.
Then he has power: Yes power beyond degree,
To captivate us when we seem most free.
Such strange Enchantments as do baffle art,
^lake Monarchs yield, and pierce the warriors heart,
Which none but those that feel them, can impart.
The angry Lady to her unconstant Lover.
Sir,
KNow I loved you once, and prized you far above all mankind, but since you
prove perfidious, I ^low you from me like a bubble to wander in the ^airy
fancies of your own extravagant imagination: Could you suppose such an open
affront and dishonor as you were pleased to put upon me, could rest long in
obscurity; if you did, you were deceived, for I am still so conversant with
fame that not the meanest of your actions can escape my knowledge: But take
your admired Mistress, your Cloris into the Clouds, it shall never disturb the
least motion of my mind, I will rest as calm as Halcyon Seas, the least breath
of discontent shall not rouse my sleeping rage, for I protest by all that is
good, were all the race of mankind extinct except your self, and should you
Lord it over the female World, I would not vouchsafe you a smile; nay, though
you sue, and in the humblest wise fall prostrate at my feet, your sighs should
only beat the empty air, not floods of tears should cause the least relenting
in me, but I Would continue more obdurate than Adamant, that you might be fully
sensible of the just resentments of a woman wronged in Love, who was all
kindness, soft as infant nature in its bloom, till you by your perfidious
dealings molded me into this harsh temper, out of which, as to your self,
never expect me to be recovered, but to rest

Your implacable Enemy, A. D.

An admonition to perjured Lovers.
FAlse flattering men, who make it your chief pride
Poor easy women's passions to deride,
When you have got your ends, then you disdain,
And triumph over them when they once complain:
Though you have sworn you would ever constant prove,
And that you would center upon endless Love.
How often with lifted hands, exalted eyes,
Have you sent Imprecations to the skies,
To call down vengeance on your guilty head?
Invoked loud thunder strait to strike you dead,
If that your Hearts and Tongues did not agree?
If what you vowed, should not observed be?
Yet in that moment it was your intent
For Perjury, excuses to invent.
But know, though dull deceiving Poets feign
Jove's bags unbottom'd Lovers vows contain;
That Great Jehove does note the mighty crime,
And though delay does give repenting time;
Yet home-charg'd vengeance will at last make known
That the dire mischief will prove all your own,
And with sad groans make you confess that sin,
That now you scoff at, and dare glory in.
The Parsons observation on the word Woman.
A Parson preaching in a Pulpit late,
The harsh word Woman chanced to repeat,
And there he paused, as if he was struck dumb:
But having that deep silence overcome,
Alas, beloved, says he, the word's compound,
Woe-man, Woe-man, O that dismal sound,
Its very Echo does my bosom wound.
I cannot tell, Beloved, what yours may be,
But sure I am mine proves a woe to me.
Directions to woo a Widow.
YOu that in Loves great mystery are rude,
And yet into his Sacred Courts intrude,
This one advice hear, and observe it well,
Love's business various is, few all can tell:
Some Maids affect, some Widows love to court;
But if you with a Widow fain would sport,
Come listen now, and I Will directions give,
Such as my self once gladly did receive,
And found them prosperous. If she is young and gay,
Witty and Beauteous, as the Pride of May,
Observe your seasons, come when she is undrest,
Eye when she eyes you, like what she likes best;
Be brisk and kiss her often, swear that you love,
Tell her you will have no nay, and often move
For her consent; tickle her, and feel her knees,
Clap her soft cheeks; such roughness best will please*
Coach her abroad, and never let her rest
Until that she has yielded your request.
And yet beware you do no weakness show,
No imperfection in you let her know:
Widows still hate those that to court are slow.
If she be old and rich, and you would admire
Her for her Wealth, or Wealth alone desire,
Then be you saving, a good Husband seem,
If you intend to gain her good esteem;
Treat her not high, and yet genteely too.
And when at any time you closely woo,
And in your Breeches something stiff does prove,
So place her hand that she may feel it move,
It Is a temptation that will gain her love:
If It don't speed, then venture next at all;
Though she resist, if you persist, she will fall;
And though she blames you, let you do the feat,
Which if you once do as you should, complete,
Her heart surrenders, all she has is yours,
She ill your absence after that endures,
Less cause of Jealousy her passion cures.
The Scholar to his Mistress. A Complementing Letter.
Fair Lady,
DIvinest of your Sex, Natures chief Masterpiece, and the Worlds greatest
wonder, most accomplished of Virgins, and the only boast of the Creation, I
have (though with all submission) dared to aspire to so high a pitch of Love as
to have a passion for no less than your self. How you will resent my boldness,
I know not; but this I am assured of, I shall be racked with ten thousand
doubts and fears till I can be certain whether you will receive my devotion
with smiles or frowns; for as nothing can more exhilarate me than the former,
so nothing can thunder-strike me like the latter. I am indeed as yet in my
minority, and therefore you may object that I am not so capable of choosing now
as when mature years shall better instruct me by improving my understanding.
Assure your self, Lady, if so happy a choice fall to my lot, I shall ever bless
the wisdom of my youth, and think my self more happy than if I was heir of a
King. Kind Lady, therefore in expectation of your Answer, I remain

Yours both in Person and Estate. J. G.

Song.
HOw happy are Lovers
Where Hymen discovers
A Joy that is lasting, that never will fade!
Where Hearts are united, and thoughts undivided,
Love's Deity there the sweet union has made,
There Envy and Jealousy shall be derided,
And tributes of Blessing shall hourly be paid.
2.
Such Oceans of pleasure
As Angels scarce measure,
Shall banish all languishing thoughts and sad care,
It Is Heavenly in fancy twice more in fruition,
For those that Love well do a Paradise share,
Their portion is large, and they need no addition,
But have blessings, have blessings, ten thousand to spare.
3.
Where charms are still growing,
Thence bliss will be flowing,
And all the choice blessings a Lover would have,
A fancy so ample that nothing is greater,
Nor can fond Mortals beyond it ought crave:
What blessing, what blessing's like a charming creature,
That with a glance can our passion inslave?
A Recantation Letter.
Lady,
COuld you conceive how little I esteem your anger, you would not vex your self
so much, thereby to imagine you molest me. No, assure your self I smile at your
want of power, and laugh to see you torment your self in vain. I once, it is
true, permitted my self to be afflicted by your scorns and disdain; but
perjured and inconstant Woman, your Ingratitude has cured those wounds your
seeming Virtue made; I have broken the cords, and safely escaped the snare into
which, if ever I again entangle my self, let me bea^ the brand of folly and
madness to the utmost moment of my life; no, your charms are so slight that
they have not power to attract one gaze; or if they do, 'twill be but to admire
how I could be so much overseen as to dote upon such imperfection of body, and
worse of mind:

And so, Madam, I continue (but no longer your Admirer) G. B.

A Dialogue between a Scotch man and a Welsh-man, and of the adventure in their
way to London.
Scotch-man. IN good faith m^n well Ise overtake thee, whether away so fast?


Welsh-man. Hur was trafling to London Town, where hur was to recese a crate
^eal of coods; if hur was know what hur was cot, let hur take notice hur was a
Shentleman of Wales.


Scotch-man. Wey marry that Ise well wot not, but Ise be glad of yeun company,
for Ise gang to London Town auso with at least sum matter of twenty boadles in
my wallet.


Welsh-man. Well, by S. Taffe, hur is glad of hur cood company, and hur likes
her: So well does hur mind her, that if hur had hur none Country, plu^ her was
give hur a quart of Wiggan, with a crate deal of Cousepoby.


Scotch-man. Ise thank yeun, by S. Tandrew Ise do with au nline heart; but pray
what news, for Ise hear there is the Dele and au to do, Kirk and Covenant is in
a woeful pickle if Ise be we informed.


Welsh-man. Plut was her talk of hur Couffenant, pray what Countryman was hur.


Scotch-man. Ise a muckle Scot, Ise yeaun'd at Abberdene.


Welsh-man. Ay, was hur so? Nay, then hur was smoke hur, hur has swallowed the
Coffenant hur was warrant hur, plut was show hur a Welsh trick py and py --
Well was coe into you house and spend hur two Doits.


Scotch-man. Yen marry, Ise won gang in good faith, for Ise well choke.


Welsh-man. But now (...) ^ink on it, hur has hur none Cozen Live tree, (...)
off, hur name was Sha^^ ap Shinki^^ (...) corn, and was have a creat Peartret
before hur ^oer, if hur was leave hur wallet, and tell hur none Cozen was peak
with hur, hur was sure hur was prink a crate teale of Souse, so that was live
merrily.


Scotch-man. Good Faith say yeun so, then Ise gang, for Ise plaguey hungry. Here
is mine wallet, pray yeun have yone care of my Boadles.


Welsh-man. Plut was hur mistrust hur.


Scotch-man. Neo, neo, but Ise fear 'um may drop away.


Welsh-man. Was hur gone, well hur will be gone too; let hur find hur Cozen if
hur can; plut hur will show hur a trick for swallowing the Coffenant, and
longing for Souse. Plut hur is rich now, hur has got a new stock. Fare hur well
False loon, hur can stay no longer.


The Despairing Lover. A New Song.
1.
DArkness does now the World surround,
And silence every where is found;
Each Shepherd with his Shepherdess,
Long dallying in Loves excess,
Sleeps at last between her Breasts,
And void of care, securely rests.
2.
The flocks they now do cease to stray,
And only Stars keep on their way,
And silent Ghosts who haunt the Tombs,
And vanish with the dismal glooms,
But I, poor I, with love possessed,
Must languish, and can have no rest.
3.
What is it that I have not done?
What sighs, what showers of tears, what moan
Have I sent, have I shed and made?
Yet still with scorn I am repaid.
Since Virtue here no rest can have,
I Will haste to slumber in the Grave.
The Grievance of the Nation discovered.
1.
A Pox of disturbers, let us rout 'um,
Too long they have pestered the Nation,
And we should be happy without 'um;
Then Honesty would have its station,
And Loyalty once again flourish,
The Kingdom will soon have a blessing,
If Faction and Schism once perish,
For Union will spread past expressing.
2.
Our Joys they will then be abounding,
Fledged Victory will then come flying,
With her Golden Trumpet loud sounding,
Reviving our Courage that is dying;
Whilst amongst our selves we are divided
By Canters that still seek our ruin,
Are Jesuits, or Oats has belied it,
That ever have sought our undoing.
3.
By setting, with specious pretenses,
The simple rude Rabble a madding,
To pull down the Governments fences,
That they may in rapine be trading;
But thank our blessed Stars, they are detected,
The mists they did blind us with, vanish,
And now we have wisely rejected
All Jesuits, Genevian and Spanish.
The Invocation. A New Song.
1.
HAste, haste, thou powerful God of Love,
Whilst in Mystic Dance
We do advance
To Venus consecrated Grove,
Beneath the Myrtle Bows
To pay our Vows,
And all our eager Joys to prove.
2.
Fan with thy Silver Wings the Air,
And scatter Roses round,
Whilst that I wound
With thy loved shaft the charming fair,
And let our transports be
Felicity,
Beyond what Mortals yet do share.
The Fancy or Echo to Melancholy Love.
AH my Love why stayedst thou so?
Alas, because I did not know
That you were here.
How, not my Dear?
No truly, had I known,
Through fire I Would gone
To find you here alone.
Ah, pretty sweet,
That we should meet,
And no man see it.
No man nor woman ever shall see
The love that is betwixt thee and me,
As silent as the night we'll be.
Come then, my Dear, let us lie down,
When you shall all my wishes crown;
Nay, my Corinda do not frown.
Not I, my Love, you shall possess
All that you now call happiness,
And all that can a Lover bless.
To the Morning.
AUrora fair, whose Rosy cheeks adorn
The opening Windows of the Eastern Skies,
Whilst Hesperus bright gives luster to the More,
Till Phoebus from the blushing Ocean rise:
Thou see the Lovers languish in Despair,
Thou hear'st their sighs when sadly they complain,
Thou view'st the beauteous, the thrice happy fair,
For which poor I, poor wretched I complain.
And thou alone can witness my sad grief,
And tell the sorrows of my tortured mind.
For her alas that will yield no relief,
For her alas that is the most unkind.
But witness Eastern Queen, you Sacred Dawn,
That I will love her, though she cruel prove.
Though from me she ten thousand sighs has drawn,
Yet still I the hard hearted fair will love.
Song.
1.
A Lovely pair, endued by Fate,
With Wealth and Beauties whole Estate,
At the sweetest game had been,
You know, you know what I mean.
You know, etc.
2.
For Kisses first these Lovers played,
The pleasant sport provokes the Maid,
To that height, she growing mad,
Almost played for what she had,
But the Maid was not so mad,
But, etc.
3.
She Will ask her Fathers leave, she swears,
Then she will play for what he dares.
Leave is had, and to it they go,
What I mean you know, you know.
What I mean, etc.
4.
To deeper Play they now begin,
The Young-mans happy Hand is in;
And now they have staked all their joys,
She Is the loser, for she cries:
She Is the loser, etc.
5.
And now she wins, a tempting sight,
Has won her Lap full of Delight;
To deeper play she urges on,
But alas! his stake's all gone:
But alas! etc.
6.
And now she locks her Cabinet,
But he will play another set;
And now his hand is in again,
You know, you know what I mean.
You know, etc.
Song.
1.
GOddess Minerva, Wise, austere,
Sober, Valiant, Chaste, and Fair,
We bring thee here
A kind, a young, a lovely pair:
Who beg thy leave to join their Hands
In Chaste and Holy Marriage Bands.
2.
Oh let him be active Fire,
Ever Burning in Desire:
Ever free, ever free, ever free
From any smoke of Jealousy;
Let her be Water soft to all his touches,
Ever Hot when he approaches:
When he takes away his Eye,
Ever froze with Chastity:
When he takes, etc.
3.
Mild and humble let her flow,
Never let Tempest curb her Brow;
Love possess her Tender Heart,
And never let Love and Beauty part.
Love possess, etc.
The Goddess great now join their hands,
In Chaste and Holy Marriage-Bands.
A Catch.
COme Boys, fill us a Bumper,
We'll make the Nations roar;
She Is grown sick of a Rumper,
That sticks upon the old score:
Pox of Fanatics, rout 'um,
They thirst for our Blood:
We'll raise Taxes without 'um,
And Drink for the Nations good.
Fill the Pottles and Gallons,
And bring the Hogshead in;
We'll begin with a Tallen,
A brimmer to the King.
Song.
1.
JOy to the Bridegroom, fill the Skies,
With pleasing sounds of welcome joys;
Joy to the Bride, a lasting bliss,
And every day may prove like this.
2.
You that enjoy the beauteous fair,
Be true to Love, and eke take care;
For that which plagues a Woman most,
Is when her expectation's crossed.
3.
Never was Marriage Joys Divine,
But when two does in one combine;
He that proves false, himself does cheat,
Like sick that taste, but cannot eat.
4.
What is a Maidenhead? O what?
Of which weak fools so often prate?
Oh it is a Virgins pride and boast,
That never was found but when 'twas lost.
Song.
OH Love thou art a Treasure,
Should Constancy remain;
But for an hour of Pleasure,
We feel an Age of pain;
How eager is the Lover,
But when his joys are over,
Poor Women do discover,
The Vows of Men are vain.
Song.
1.
HAil to the Myrtle shades,
All hail to the Nymphs of the Field,
Kings will not here Invade,
Though Virtue all Freedom yield:
Beauty here opens her Arms,
To soften the languishing mind,
And Phillis Unlocks her Charms,
Ah! Phillis so fair and Unkind.
2.
Phillis the Soul of Love,
The joys of the Neighboring Swain:
Phillis that Crowns the Grove,
And Phillis that gilds the Plain;
Phillis that never had the skill
To paint, and to patch, and be fine,
Yet Phillis has Eyes can Kill,
Whom Nature has made Divine.
3.
Phillis whose Charming Tongue
Makes labor and pain a delight;
Phillis that makes the Day long,
And shortens the live-long Night:
Phillis whose lips like May,
Still laugh at the sweets that they bring;
Whilst love never knows decay,
But thence flows Eternal Spring.
The Muses Seasonable Advice to a hopeful couple upon their entering into the
State of Matrimony.
WHen Infant Nature had the World arrayed,
And Heavens Eternal Wisdom all had made,
Earth flourished fragrant, and the gaudy skies,
SPangl'd with shining fires, that fall and rise,
As the Creator bid: the boundless main,
Stored with bright Fish, Beasts sported on each plain,
When lightly plumed through tracts of fluid air,
The Fowl themselves on out-stretch'd pinions bare,
And all Creation smiled to be so fair;
Then Nuptial Joys in Eden first began:
Heavens choicest blessing last reserved for man.
The Worlds first Virgin did his Soul surprise,
And artless Beauty wounded with her Eyes,
Then Love was Nature, Art no room could find
To discompose the motions of the mind,
Then Jealousy, and all the puny cares,
That now wrack Lovers with ten thousand fears,
Were uncreated, all was Peace and Love,
Their Souls in equal balances did move,
And sympathiz'd with the blessed Joys above,
By springs of Nectar, in Ambrosial shade,
The first dear pledge of Sacred rites was paid,
And Nature's dictates were with Joy obeyed.
Amidst ten thousand transports which the whiles
Danced on soft kisses, glances, whispers, smiles:
Nor was the Worlds sole Lord at all renowned,
Ever he with such transcendant Joys was crowned.
Then you that are their Offspring, imitate
The Worlds first Parents in their happy State.
Calm be your minds, smooth as the Halcyon Seas;
Let Loves Eternal Monarch rule in peace.
Let Winter storms never lodge on eithers brow,
Banish suspicion, let pale envy bow:
And all her hissing snakes for grief expire,
Because they cannot quench Loves sacred fire,
Nor by their thousand ways gain their desire.
Be ever kind, give Love still larger room
To plant new Joys that are as yet to come.
Your hearts in concord now so firmly bind,
That dire harsh discord may no entrance find.
Stop all the passages but that to Love,
Let your kindness still transparent prove,
In that blessed path the brightest Angels move.
So you of Heavenly Joys may taste on Earth,
For all in Heaven is Love and Sacred Mirth:
So may your numerous Offspring tell your praise,
And high as Pyramids your virtues raise,
In The Brass leaved Book of Fame which never decays.
The surprised Lover to his Mistress.
FAir Mistress, ah! see sighs attend my Quil^;
Silence and sighs are Loves Preludiums still,
Ghost-like Love-wanderers, where its treasure lies,
Speak would it fain, but anxious thoughts denies,
And all it can,'s the language of the Eyes;
Whilst through those Optics pointed Beauties find
Swift passage soon into the Eternal Mind,
And there a thousand sleeping passions rouse,
To all of which our better Genius bows;
So whilst that in mystic ways I trod,
Gazing about in Loves precarious Road:
Struck by the Lightening of your Eyes from far,
Soon found I all within was Civil War.
The greater faculty strong lodged, long strove,
But all at last bowed to Victorious Love,
Who from the Conqu'rer now has won the field:
And I who rarely did submissly yield,
Finding, like India's Natives heretofore,
I Have strove to purchase Glass with Gems and Ore.
But thank my better Stars, those hours are past,
And I have found the Pearl of Pearl at last.
The disappointed Ladies Letter to her Gallant.
Sir,
HAve I thus long maintained you upon the spoil of my Husbands Estate, fed you
with delicates beyond Roman luxuries; and can you for all this prove
Ungrateful? think you that I am ignorant of the cause of your neglect; no, I
know the new Venus you adore, and (unless a speedy reformation be wrought in
you) am resolved to prosecute you both with the utmost malice that a Woman's
Inveteracy is capable of inventing, or that Despair and Jealousy can bring to
light, though to the ruin of my own reputation, that so you may know what a
wronged Lover provoked, is capable of doing; therefore as you tender your own
fame, mine, and hers who detains you, and robs me of my right, keep firm to
your first vows, and suffer me no longer to be neglected. This day, Sir, my
Husband went out of Town, therefore about eight in the evening I expect you at
my House, of which fail not, as you value your future quiet: And till then I
rest

Yours as you use me, A. ^.

His Answer.
Madam,
CAn you believe that I wilfully neglect you (...) the embraces of another;
alas, that you should harbor so mean an opinion of your Servant wh^ doats upon
you even to an ecstasie, and lives not be to breath your name; how can I at any
time think^ those many dear enjoyments that have passed between us, and not
extend my desire wider in the Field of Love, and oftener pant between those wa^
hills of Snow, whose gentle risings would tempt Cynick to desire, and search
for hidden treasur^ promised by those silver Mounts. Madam, assur^ your self I
am and ever will be the humblest of yo^ Servants, now and at all times ready to
obey yo^ commands, did not the Tyrant Sickness hinder That, that was the only
Mistress that charmed (...) (by power you're insensible how great) from yo^
which otherwise nothing could have done, but ^ sooner can Nature shake off
those hard Chains, b^ I Will willingly commit my self to the Fetters of yo^ more
soft and gentle arms; and till then must entre^ you by all the ties of Love,
and those transporti^ Joys which have mutually possessed us, not to less your
esteem of him who is

More yours than his own. J. ^

On Virtue.
Virtue's a lasting treasure, never fades,
He Is only wise that for that Jewel trades:
It Is that which renders Mortals still complete,
It Is that alone which does adorn the great;
Gives luster to the brightest Diadem,
And is on Earth the only sparkling Gem.
Virtue adorns green youth, and bending age,
And baffles still the proudest Tyrants rage.
It makes men humble, wise, complacent, just;
And still secures us, when things are at worst.
On a Happy Marriage. A Poem.
HAil blessed pair, whom Love and Nature joins,
Whilst they are brooding still on great designs,
To make you happy, ever make you blessed,
Whilst naught but Peace and Joy shall fill your breast,
And you shall be of all that is good possessed.
In soft embraces, 'midst a thousand charms,
Panting with pleasure in each others arms,
Whilst Love, chaste Love, your joining bosoms warms.
Boundless may those Joys be, and may they haste,
Till Death unloose the knot you have tied so fast;
Death, that grim Tyrant, that does all things blast.
On his Mistress neat tiring her hair.
BRight Beauty, on whose every part does rest
A sight so lovely, that who loves you's blessed:
If but to gaze, much more such Joys to taste,
And sip the Nectar from your fair lips pressed.
But what amongst the rest to me seems rare,
Is the neat tiring of your Golden hair,
That not of Cupid, set for to ensnare
All that behold you, thence Enchantments flow;
Who comes Spectator, must a Lover go.
Nay, such the force, that e're he thence can part,
He must be forced to leave behind his heart,
Bleeding with wounds made in it by Cupid^s Dart.
Then since your power is such, you must be mild,
And then you will be the Worlds chief wonder styled.
A Song.
1.
NOw, now the Fight's done,
and the great God of War,
Lies sleeping in shades,
and unravels his care;
Love laughs in his Rest,
and the Soldiers Alarms,
With Drums and with Trumpets,
and struts in his Arms:
He rides with his Lance,
and the Bushes he bangs,
And his brave Bloody Sword
on the Willow-Tree hangs.
2.
Love smiles when she feels
the sharp pains of his Dart,
And he wings it to hit
the great God on the Heart;
Who leaves his Steel Bed,
and his Bolsters of Brass,
For Pillows of Roses,
and Coaches of Grass:
His Courser of Lightning
is now grown so slow,
That a Cupid on's Saddle
sits bending his Bow.
3.
Love, Love, is the Cry,
Love and Kisses go round,
Whilst Phillis and Damon
lie clasped on the ground:
The Shepherd too soon
does his pleasure destroy,
It Is Abortive she cries,
and does Murder my Joy;
But he rallies again
by the force of her Charms,
And Kisses, Embraces,
and Dies in her Arms.
Song.
1.
Here Is that will challenge all the Fair,
Come buy my Nuts, Damsins,
my Burgamy Pairs;
Here Is the Whore of Babylon,
the Devil and the Pope,
The Girl is just a going on the Rope:
2.
Here Is Dives and Lazarus,
and the Worlds Creation,
Here Is the Tall Dutch Woman,
the like's not in the Nation.
Here is the Booth where
the High Dutch Maid is,
Here are Bears that Dance like any Ladies.
3.
Tat* tat, tat, tat, tah,
says the little Penny Trumpet;
Here Is Jacob Hall that does Jump it, Jump it.
Sound Trumpet, sound, for Silver Spoon and Fork,
Come here is your dainty Pigg and Pork.
Song.
1.
FOols to themselves do Riches prize,
some Dazzling Greatness Blind;
Beauty alone can Charm our Eyes,
and Love delight our Mind.
Beauty alone, etc.
2.
What is the use of Wealth or Power,
by which we Men subdue,
If not in order to gain more,
and vanquish Women too.
If not in order, etc.
3.
Beauty the Fame of all Delight,
without loves life were vain,
The ambitious Toil, the valiant Fight,
for this, for this Kings Reign:
The ambitious Toil, etc.
4.
Who e're in these place his Desires,
goes right in Natures way;
All others are but Wandering Fires,
which lead Mankind astray:
All others are but, etc.
Song.
1.
ADs-Zous my dear Jone,
When I meet thee alone,
It Is then my design for to buss thee;
By my Fathers old Shoon,
Or the Light of the Moon,
I swear thou shall not be Crusty.
2.
No, if I should touse thee,
And lustily rouse thee,
Nay, though I should clap thy black hole:
For I tell thee Uds-sut,
It Is for love of thy Scut,
Which resembles a Cat or a Cole.
3.
Which makes me design
For to yoke my self thine,
For I long for a smatch of the same;
Oh! then let thy black Cat
So bemumble my Rat,
That we never may Repent the Old Game.
Song.
1.
SOmnus thou God who easest cares,
soft slumbers dwell upon thy brow:
Brother to death, which nothing spares,
but to his fatal shafts all bow:
Haste, haste, and close my waking Eyes,
let these tormenting thoughts no more
My Languish'd Soul with fear surprise,
but waft them to Oblivions shore.
2.
Let no fond Visions terrify,
nor whining Lovers Ghosts appear;
Lest I again with Love comply,
again to bow with cringing fear;
Once more to be by Females crossed,
Court base-born Beauties for disdain;
And be in Loves dark Abyss lost,
for those that let me suffer pain.
Song.
1.
CAn Life be a Blessing,
That Is worth our possessing?
Can Life be a blessing if Love were away?
Ah no! though our Love all night keeps us waking,
and though he torment us with cares all the day:
Yet he sweetens, he sweetens, our pains in the taking
there is an hour at the last, an hour to repay.
2.
In every possessing,
So Heavenly a blessing,
in every possessing the fruit of our pain:
Poor Lovers forget long ages of anguish,
whatever they have suffered and done to obtain:
It Is a pleasure, a pleasure, to sigh and to languish,
when we hope, when we hope to be happy again.
3.
For Love is a Blessing,
That Is worth our possessing,
great Love is that Blessing for which we contend:
Incircled in pleasures, to charms that are lasting,
how happy are Lovers that mutually bend:
Oh to manage, to manage, their loves without was^ing
those Heavenly, Heavenly, moments to spend.
Song.
1.
SO Ravishing fair, is the Nymph that I love,
As spotless and Chaste as an Innocent Dove,
Adorned with bright Virtues, and all that we prize,
Which first made me yield to her conquering eyes:
Such glorious perfections in a Mortal somet,
May charm the high Jove, and his Juno defeat;
Her Smiles are so powerful, they melt me like snow,
And make the strong Tides of my passion o're-flow.
2.
But Oh! she proves cruel, for when I request,
She turned away blushing, whilst silence expressed;
That a Cloud of displeasure o're-cast her bright face,
Which otherwise Angel-like, Nature did Grace*
So she makes me despair, and lament my hard fate,
Whilst a thousand fond fancies my thoughts do create.
Oh! she stabs me with fears, when I think on the power,
She has to destroy me, over whelmed in Loves tower.
Song.
1.
WHither away my own Dick,
And whither away so la^e?
I Am going to see my Nelly,
so weel as I know the Gate:
So weel as I know the Gate,
but better I ken the Gin;
For let me come early or late,
my Nelly will let me in.
2.
No sooner he was got in,
a black-Pudding's by the Fire;
Not one bit Dickey would Eat,
till Nelly had done his desire:
For Dickey he knew the way
to open his Nelly's Ginn;
And if he came early or late,
his Nelly would let him in.
3.
Then Dickey he wooed his Nelly,
and she did begin to smile;
He stroak'd her over the Belly,
and Nelly he did beguile:
For Dickey was grown so cunning,
to open his Nelly's Ginn,
And when he came early or late,
his Nelly would let him in.
Song.
1.
SAwny was tall, and of Noble Race,
and loved me better than any e'ne;
But now he ligs by another Lass,
and Sawny will never be my Love again:
I gave him a fine Scotch Sark and Band,
I gave him House, I gave him Land,
I let him Angle in my Fish Pond;
But Sawny will never be my Love again.
2.
I robbed the Groves of all their store,
and Nosegays made to give Sawny e'ne;
He kissed my breast, and fain would he more,
geud faith I thought him a bonny e'ne:
He squeezed my Fingers, grasped my Knee,
And carved my Name on each green Tree;
He sighed and he languish'd to lig by me;
Yet Sawny will never be my Love again.
3.
My Bongrace and my Sun-burn'd Face,
he praised, and also my Russet Gown;
But now he dotes on the Copper-Lace
of some lewd Queen of London Town:
He gang'd and he gave her Curds and Cream,
Whilst I poor soul sat sighing at h'eme,
Ise never joy'd Sawny, but in a Dream;
And Sawny will never be my Love again.
Song.
1.
SMiling Phillis has an Air,
so engaging all men Love her;
But her hidden Beauties are
wonders I dare nor discover:
So bewitching that in vain
I endeavor to forget her;
Still she brings me back again,
And I daily Love her better.
2.
Beauty springs within her Eyes,
and from thence is always flowing;
Every minute does surprise,
with fresh Beauties still allowing:
Were she but as kind as fair,
never Earth had such a Creature;
But I Dye with jealous Care,
And I daily Love her better.
Song.
1.
HOw Unhappy is my Fate,
forced by Honors proud alarms;
To storm Ambition does create,
and leave Dorinda's softer Charms.
Instead of Days and Nights of Love,
lulled upon peaceful Beds of Down;
Must through a Thousand dangers rove,
and though I Conquer, be overthrown;
For when Dorinda I must leave,
For time has nothing more to give.
2.
Pleasant Groves and parting Streams,
made for Lovers kind Repose;
Songs, and Kisses, and sweet Dreams:
all these Blessings I must lose.
When Drums and Trumpets Ring my Knell,
and every footstep is my Grave;
Then my Dorinda, then Farewell,
and pity him, Love could not save.
Though Fate opposed, his Heart was true,
And dying, sighed, and thought of you.
Song.
1.
MAn that gains a Married Treasure,
Puts himself in Debt to Pleasure;
And by sordid Repetition,
Palls his Fancy in Fruition:
Household cares will always be distracting,
Women Mutinous and Exacting,
More than Husbands can allow'um,
Let them have their wills
Abroad, in Bed, at Board,
Or you undo them.
2.
Beauties Empire like the Cressant,
Should be Youthful, Airy, Pleasant;
They that love but for enjoying,
Feed their Lusts with Loves destroying:
Virtue should be still admiring,
Always constant and aspiring;
When they lose their Native freedom,
And their Beauties decoyed,
Enjoyed, Destroyed,
Fate ill does lead 'um.
Song.
1.
BLush not Redder than the Morning,
Though the Virgins give you warning;
Sigh not at the chance befell you,
Though they smile, and dare not tell you:
Sigh not at the, etc.
2.
Maids like Turtles love the Cooing,
Bill and murmur, in their Wooing:
Thus like you they start and tremble,
And their troubled joys dissemble.
Thus like, etc.
3.
Grasp the pleasure while it is coming,
Though your Beauties now a blooming;
Lest old Time your joys do sever,
Ah! ah! they part, they part for ever:
Lest old time, etc.
Song.
1.
THis Bumper to Bacchus we'll drink it all round,
Whilst our cares in the streams of our pleasure are drowned,
And our heads like the Glasses turn equally round.
2.
Damn the Ale and Tobacco, it is nothing but Wine
Inspires a Man's Soul, and makes a Divine,
It will Sacrifice us to fair Venus's shrine.
3.
Let Porters carouse in black Pispots, whilst we
Drink naught but the juice of the sacrificed Tree;
To Bacchus and Venus we'll Votaries be.
4.
Let every Man stand with his Bottle and suck,
Hang the Man that does sip, let him drink like a Duck
And when we are all drunk, we will range like a Buck
Song.
1.
STrife, hurry, and noise, that fills the lewd Town,
sure at last it is time to give over;
And in the calm shades of the Country alone,
blessed quiet and ease to recover.
2.
Smiling hopes, idle fears, and restless desires,
are the busy man's constant attendants;
What he vainly pursues, the mind that retires,
already is come to the end on it.
Song.
PHoebus God beloved by Men,
At thy dawn every Beast is roused in his Den;
At thy Setting all the Birds of thy absence complain,
And we dye, all dye, till the morning come again.
Phoebus God beloved by Men,
Idol of the Eastern Kings,
Awful as the God who flings
His Thunders round, and Lightning wings;
God of Songs and Orphean strings,
Who to this Mortal Bosom brings
All Harmonious Heavenly things,
Thy drowsy Prophet to Revive,
Ten thousand thousand Forms before him drive,
With Horses and Chariots all, O Fire awake him,
Convulsions and Furies and Prophecies shake him;
Let him tell it in Groans, though he bend with the load,
Though he burst with the weight of the terrible God.
Song.
1.
HAil mighty Venus! at whose Shrine,
To offer up, is my design,
A Virgins Rose, which blooming long,
Has raised those wishes, Love made strong:
And now I dare no longer stay,
But must thy great Commands obey.
2.
Oh! see the Youth, whose conquering Charms,
Have made me yield unto his Arms;
He comes, he comes, I can no more,
Yet in Loves Field must not give over:
Methinks that glance shot from his Eyes,
Confirmed my Soul Loves Sacrifice.
3.
Oh me! I Sigh, but all in vain,
Till Loves strong Cordial ease my pain;
Then gallant Youth make haste away,
What means this slight Delay?
That unregarded Sacred Fire,
Upon Loves Altar must expire.
4.
Oh! now methinks I have him fast,
And we transporting moments waste;
Methinks we in each other breathe
Our mutual Souls, and so bequeath
The mutual portions of fair Love,
Yet Oh! methinks too weak they prove.
Song.
1.
A Maid they say is an easy thing,
and by Youngsters will quickly be led
With fair pretenses, as in a string;
to play at Balls with her Maidenhead:
Putting the Raiser in with her Hand,
And when she has it within Command,
Then by her Art conjure it to stand:
And yet let it never suffer Pain.
2.
When she has ordered all things fit,
and by her Liker contentment found;
Twice in a place the Raiser she will hit,
catching the Balls at an equal Rebound:
Puffing and Panting Fold on the Game,
Till she has made her Play-mate tame,
And worsted, hang down his Head for shame:
And yet let it never suffer pain.
3.
Therefore let all Youngsters know,
although it should be as they say;
Yet they must yield when they charge us below,
for Three to One we can hold 'um in Play
Whilst our Courage active appears,
We make them still to us in Arrears,
Yet leave them nothing stiff but their Ears:
Notwithstanding they dare not complain.
Song.
1.
Farewell Ungrateful Traitor,
farewell my perjured Swain;
Let never Injured Creature,
believe a Man again:
The pleasure of possessing,
Surpasses all expressing,
But Joy's too short a Blessing,
and love too long a pain;
But Joy's too short, etc.
2.
It Is easy to Deceive us,
in pity of your pain;
But when we love, you leave us
to Rail at you in vain:
Before we have Descried it,
There is no Bliss beside it;
But she that once has tried it,
will never love again:
But she that, etc.
3.
The passion you pretended,
was only to obtain,
But when the Charm is ended,
the Charmer you disdain:
Your love than ours was easier,
Till we have lost our Treasure;
But Dying is a pleasure,
when living is a pain:
But Dying, etc.
Song.
1.
AS on his Deathbed gasping Strephon lay,
Strephon the wonder of the Plains,
The noblest of the Arcadian Swains,
Strephon the noblest, wittiest, and the gay:
With many a sigh and many a tear, he said,
Remember me ye Shepherds when I Am dead.
2.
Ye trifling Glories of the World adieu,
And vain applauses of the Age,
For when we quit this Earthly Stage,
Believe me Shepherds, for I tell you true:
Those pleasures which from virtuous deeds we have
Procure the sweetest slumbers in the Grave.
3.
Then since this fatal hour will surely come,
Surely your Heads lie low as mine,
Your bright Meridian Sun Decline,
Beseech the mighty Pan to guide you home:
If to Elysium you would Happy fly,
Live not like Strephon, but like Strephon Dye.
Song.
1.
WHy how now Rogue, what make you here?
Won you ware your penny for a flaggon of beer?
Good faith with all his heart, if I could but tell where.
2.
Ween you gang to yond Wheather which hangs by the middle?
So we'll Fuddle our Noses, and Drink to Old Sibyl,
And says we would Dance if we had but a Fiddle.
3.
Hoy Hostler, hoy Hostler, are you within?
Ods-flesh he is Drunk, which makes him so grim.
You are welcome kind Sir, will you please to walk in.
4.
Come fill us a Flaggon of the best in the House,
And bring us some Bread, with a great deal of Sowse,
Or else for the Shot we'll not give you a Lowse.
5.
Come Honest Rogue, and sit by the sire,
A pox of the Devil, the Pope, and the Friar;
To have settled Times is all we Desire.
Song.
THink not dear Love that I Will reveal
Those hours of pleasure we two steal;
Nor Eye shall see, nor yet the Sun,
Descry what thee and I have done:
Nor Ear shall hear of Love, but we
As silent as the Night will be:
The God of Love himself, whose Dart,
Does first wound mine, and then thine heart;
Shall never know what we can tell,
What sweets in stolen embraces dwell.
Song.
1.
GReat Monmouth's a Duke,
so flushed with Renown;
Though Fortune rebuke,
he fears not her frown:
His Conquering Laurels
are green on his brow;
Though Fate with him quarrels,
his Vertue'll never bow.
2.
Brave Conduct in Arms,
and Glory in Field;
Like Mars in alarms,
his Sword he does wield.
Brave causes attend him,
where ever he goes;
Victoria defends him,
in the midst of his foes.
3.
So dreadful in War,
a Prince of such Fame;
That none can compare
with his Victorious Name:
Then let him for ever
in happiness dwell;
And may the Fates never,
against him Rebel, etc.
Song.
1.
LIve long the great Caesar, and long may he reign,
His Throne let the Sword of bright Justice sustain;
And Jehova protect with his powerful Arm,
And guard him secure from all dangers and harm
Of daz'ing Angels, let Legions surround,
And let him with Conquests and glory be Crowned.
2.
Let Majesty shine with its sparkling Rays,
On his Sacred Head let the flourishing Bays
Of Triumph and Honor, for ever be green,
And let his proud Foes in Confusion be seen
To fly from his face: Let Rome no more date,
To send forth her Agents, a Prince to ensnare.
3.
In whom all the Graces are jointly combined,
Whom thou as a pattern, have set to mankind;
But let the vile Pope and his Jesuit Train,
Be silenced in Darkness, whilst Caesar does Reign:
Oh! let his proud Foes be consumed in their pride,
Whilst under his Scepter we safely abide.
Song.
Honors a Toy,
it is Virtue is all,
Without it, the other
is nothing at all;
Or at the most
is wanderous small.
Pleasure and treasure
admit of a seizure,
But Virtue to casualties
is not at leisure.
Song.
1.
TRiumphant Queen of Beauty,
Ah you whose Lightning Eyes
Make me express my Duty,
That once did Love despise;
No force had all its Charming,
Fond Cupid I disdained,
And smile to see him Arming,
To make me feel Loves pain.
2.
But now alas your features
Have Charmed me; Soul of Love,
Excelling Mortal Creatures,
O let some Pity move,
To the Conquered be not Cruel,
Dart, Dart some kindly Rays;
Let not my Heart be Fuel,
That evermore must blaze.
Song.
1.
COuld Man his wish obtain,
How happy would he be?
But wishes seldom gain,
And hopes they are in vain,
If fortunes disagree.
Pity ye Powers of Love,
Our Infelicity.
2.
Why should the Fates conspire,
To frustrate my desire,
Since Love's the gentle fire,
That keeps the world alive;
^ut me it puts to pain,
My wishes are in vain,
Nor promise any hopes to gain.
Song.
1.
WHen gentle Slumber closed
My long long-waking Eyes,
And I on Down reposed,
Methought ten thousand Joys
Had wrapped my Soul; for then
I did suppose my Love
Fast in my arms had been,
And I her Charms did prove.
2.
Transported with the thought,
I fancied none so blessed,
But 'twas a shade I caught,
And only air I pressed,
Which waking, wounded more
Than Mortal can express,
And to the Stygian shore
Fled all my happiness.
Song.
1.
ALL hail to the Pleasures of Love,
All hail to the amorous Charms,
Where a chaste Passion does move,
The embrace of each others soft arms,
Where kisses do usher Love on,
Soft Sighs and sweet Murmurs invite,
Whilst panting they pause, and then soon
Afresh they begin their delight.
2.
Then who'd not enjoy such a bliss,
To pass away Winters long shade,
With Beauty, to Toy, Clip and Kiss,
And on her soft bosom be laid,
And like the kind Turtles be billing,
To call on new pleasures apace,
And striving to see who is most willing,
Again and again to embrace.
A Catch.
TO the Wars, to the Wars,
To get Honor and Fame,
Let us banish all fears,
To create us a Name,
The grim Tyrant outface,
And his Terrors despise,
For by that we take place,
Amongst Stars in the Skies.
Song.
1.
ARise ye Winds from your rough Caves,
And rouse, O rouse the swelling Waves,
O drive my Love again to Shore,
That I may see his Face once more;
Who flies from me on the broad back
Of the Salt Ocean, through the track
Of yielding Floods, whilst left alone.
I sigh, and tell deaf Rocks my moan.
2.
Cruel, O cruel, how he swore,
He me for ever would adore
Next to the Powers Divine, but see
Ye Powers of Love, Men's treachery;
Too easy my beliefs betrayed,
And all my hopes just blooming, fade;
Grief, grief come on, to thee I^ll wed,
And on this Sea-bank make my bed.
3.
Come Sea-Nymphs from your Coral Caves,
Arise blew Trytons from your Waves,
Revenge my Death, O close my eyes,
For wrong^d in Love, a Virgin dies,
Witness the Fires that burn so bright,
Witness the Tapers of the night;
Witness the Spring and Groves she cried,
And then she laid her down and died.
Song.
All how pleasant are the Charms of Love,
Which like streams are always flowing!
Ah how pleasant are the Charms of Love,
Which like Streams are always flowing!
So my Passions still a growing,
Nothing but Celia's Eyes can move,
So my Passion's still a growing,
Perfect and Immortal as the Joys above.
Song.
1.
ONe Moon-shiny Night, as I walked out late,
I saw a pale Image, and sadly it sat,
At first I did think it might be some sad Ghost,
That lately had strayed from Elyziums Coast;
But I found my mistake, for alas 'twas not so,
But a sad Female that once I did know,
She bewailed her hard Fate, and loudly she cried,
When I believed Man first, I wish I had died.
2.
For ah my Virginity that is no more,
Too easy I credited all that he swore,
But when he would undone me, and got his desire,
Oh then 'twas he Fled, and no more did admire.
Therefore ye Young Damsels, who bloom in y^^
Prime,
Beware how false Man in your thoughts too high clim^
Who dares to Invoke the bright Powers all above,
To Witness his Constancy, Passion and Love,
3.
How to us Devotion for ever he will pay,
When as he our Honors designs to betray,
Which being once done Oh no more he proves kind,
But leaves us, and seeks a new Object to find.
When we lament may our unhappy State,
But then it avails not, for oh it is too late,
What Is done cannot be undone, then prove not too k^^
But take my Advice, for I speak as I find.
Song.
1.
HA now I am Married, let others take care,
I Have one to provide for me, and I Will not spare;
I Will take me a Coach, and away to Hide-Park,
There I Will be Courted by every spark:
There Is none shall go finer whilst that it does hold,
My Gown shall be Tissue, all spangl'd with Gold.
2.
My Jewels and Rings, and whatever beside,
I will have, that may but conduce to my Pride;
If Husband dare grumble, I Will graft such a Crest,
As it shall soon make him be known from the rest,
Whilst I with fine Gallants do take my delight,
We'll Revel all day, and we'll sport it all Night.
Song.
1.
BY Yea and Nay, now I am moved,
Come Rachel come, you must be proved;
The Inward Man has plainly said,
When Satan's up, he must be laid,
And now I say to thee he is stiff,
Prepare thy Vessel with the Cliff;
Yea, Buffet him till he is down,
By Yea and Nay you must not frown.
2.
The Wicked shall not see it done:
Nay, now the Raging sit comes on,
The outward man does strongly rise,
O hold him fast between thy Thighs,
Nay, till he is Tame, let him not go,
Although he struggle never so.
So, so, it is done, and now I say,
Gods Lambs together thus may play.
Song.
1.
AS through the Woods I roved,
A Nymph there Naked lay,
Whose Charms so powerful proved,
That they enforced my stay:
Diana sure said I
Does sweetly here repose,
The Goddess of the Sky,
Who her pale Mantle throws.
2.
Over the Darkest shades,
Pardon bright form I cried,
For Love my heart Invades,
And to her then I hi'd;
No longer could I hold,
But clasped her in my Arms,
Who struggling in that Fold,
Produced a thousand Charms.
Song.
POwers on high,
From the Sky,
Cast an Eye,
And espy
The Flames that do Consume my Soul;
Tyrant Love
He does move,
And does prove,
Fierce as Jove,
Whose flaming Thunders shake the Pole;
Cruel fair
Cause of care,
Beauteous snare,
O yet hear,
And do not all my Joys control.
Song.
1.
JUgg what zaist thou, shall we be married?
For in good troth we's long have tarried:
Oh at thy Lips Jugg to have a smack
Is not all, thou have something that is black,
That better will please me, for I long
To have a Buckle fit for my Thong;
Then say Jugg, say Jugg, shall it be so?
And Ise unto the Parson will go.
2.
O kind Hodg, I fear you do but jest;
But if in Earnest, I think it best
That you my Grannums good will do get,
And then we soon will forwards set;
For why you know, she is a good old Trot,
And may give us the Devil knows what;
As for Flittermilk and Whay, I am sure
We shall not want whilst she has store.
3.
By my Fathers clouted Shoon you are right,
And I Will unto the old Jade this night,
And then Jugg to morrow for the sport,
When Ise shall use thee in muckle sort,
Buss thee and hugg thee till thou do sweat,
When in thy smock I once do thee get;
O the fancy does make my Chops water,
To think when married what will come after.
Song.
1.
HArk how the loud Trumpets they shrilly do sound,
And Drums they do Rattle, whilst Echoes rebound,
The fierce Prancing Steeds, whose Nostrils breathe^ flame,
Stand champing their Bits, whilst that Eagle winged ^ame,
Spurs on the brave Warrior, Deaths fears to deride,
And where Battle rages, in Arms to abide.
2.
Whilst Leaden Thunderbolts sing round his Head,
And the Crimson Fields are bestrowed with the Dead
The clashing bright Swords, and the shaking of Spears
Are the best music that sounds in his Ears;
Such is brave Monmouth, the dread of whose Name
Made Monsieur to tremble, Scotoh Rebels did tame.
A Catch.
WHen Jove to fair Danae in showers of Gold,
Made first his Addresses in the Brazen hold,
The Virgin she blushed and admired, till at last
The glittering Ore in a trance had her cast,
And then he Embraced her, for scarce is it said,
That any holds out, when such Batteries are made;
Brisk Lasses oft-times to an Incubus wed,
If he but with Gold, and with Silver be sped.
Song.
1.
TOrture me no more you pangs of Love,
I Will not endure your Cruelties:
Alas that Virtue it should prove,
Of force too weak for Woman's Eyes;
That the keen glances those Orbs send,
Should through our Souls a passage gain,
That man his thoughts should solely bend,
To seek for that which causes pain.
2.
Indulgent folly, hence away,
Beauties bright Beams I will rebate,
Its Charms no more shall me b^tray,
Nor will I court my rigid Fate;
Love's God, your Shafts keep in your Quiver,
For Virtue shall their force repel:
I once have Loved, but more will never,
Never such languid Torments feel.
Song.
1.
Two bonny Lads were Sawny and Jockey,
But Jockey was Lo'd, and Sawny unlucky;
Yet Sawny was tall, well favored and witty,
But Ise in my heart thought Jockey more pretty:
For when he viewed me, su'd me, wooed me,
Never was Lad so like to undo me:
Fie I cried, and almost died,
Lest Jockey would gang and come no mere to me.
2.
Jockey would love, but he would not Marry,
And I was afraid that I should miscarry;
For his cunning Tongue with Wit was so gilded,
That I had a dread my heart would a yielded:
Daily he pressed me, blessed me, kissed me,
Lost was the hour methought when he mist me:
Crying, denying, and sighing I wooed him,
And mickle ado I had to get from him.
3.
But unlucky Fate robbed me of my Jewel,
For Sawny would make him fight in a Duel;
Then down in a Dale with Cyprus surrounded,
Oh! there in my sight poor Jockey was wounded:
But when he thrilled him, felled him, killed him,
Who can express my grief that beheld him?
Raging, I tore my hair to bind him,
And vowed and swore I Would ne^r stay behind him.
Song.
1.
AH! Jenny Gin, your Eyn do kill,
you will let me tell my pain;
Geud Faith Ise loved against my will,
but would not break my Chain:
I ^ance was called a bonny Lad,
till that fair face of yours,
Betrayed the freedom once I had,
and all my blither hours.
2.
And now, weys me, like Winter looks
my faded showring cyn;
And on the banks of shaddowing brooks,
I pass the tedious time:
Ise call the streams that glide soft on,
to witness if they see
On all the banks they glide along,
so true a Swain as me.
3.
No, none could e're so faithful prove,
no love can mine exceed;
Yet in this Maze Ise still must move,
where hopes are all my feed:
Then Jenny turn thy eyes on me,
O turn thy blushing Face;
Let Jockey now some comfort spee,
or else he dees apace.
4.
My Flocks they all neglected are,
and stray in yonder Grove;
Whilst here Ise court my pretty fair,
and fain would have her love:
Then Prithee Jenny be not coy,
for a more constant Swain,
Never did bonny Lass enjoy,
upon this flowery Plain.
The Farewell.
LOvers farewell, our pastime's at an end,
Speak as you find, yet flatter not your friend.
The pleasure's yours, the trouble once was mine,
But were it ten times more, could I refine
Love's mighty business, that no Critics Eye,
Though Eagle-sighted, could a fault espy;
Ladies, I Would do it, and lay it at your feet,
And only beg that it one smile might meet.
That, that should recompense for all my pain,
That should be all that I would hope to gain.
FINIS.

