Unto his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner and the right Honor able
Estates of parliament, The PETITION of Captain John Slezer
Humbly shows,
THat there is a Petition to be presented to your Grace and the right
Honorable the Estates of Parliament, craving that the Tunnage-money imposed
Anno 1695, toward defraying the Charges o^ the respective Works undertaken by
Mr. Adair and your Petitioner may be taken off, in respect they pretend there
is sufficiently collected to do the Business.

As to which Captain Slezer humbly represents in the behalf of himself, that
all the Draughts relating to his Work are drawn, and most of them also
engraven, and the Description part wants only to be revised by a Committee of
the Privy Council, which their Lordships did lately judge proper to be done
before the Work should go to the Pries^ And both Volumes (now lying upon the
Clerks Table) will testify the forwardness of the work; By which also it does
clearly appear how faithfully, yea and far beyond what could be expected, your
Petitioner has followed out the Design of the Act of Parliament.

Notwithstanding of this forwardness, and that their Lordships of the privy
Council have by their Act 28. June last, found that your Petitioners
Debursements upon this Work do amount to 1590 lib: ster. yet all he has
received is but 350 lib. ster. in Money, and 130 lib. ster. by precepts still
unanswered; whereby it is evident that there is not sufficiently colected. And
till the contrair be made appear, it is hoped that either this Fund will be
continued, or some other granted in favors of your Petitioner, who has
paunded even all his Credit, and has hazerded the Ruin of himself and his
numerous Family, having nothing now left him to bestow upon the breading of his
many Children, who are of Age to be put to Employments: And all this he has
done upon the public Faith of this Act of Tunnage, which expressly declares his
work to be very much to the Honor, Advantage and Reputation of the Kingdom;
Yea, the Encouragement he had for prosecuting of the Work was such, that the
Committee of Trade anno 1695, (to whom the matter of your Petitioners Work was
remitted) were so sensible that the Design ought to be encouraged, that by
their Report to the Parliament, upon which the Tunnage Act was past: They did
declare, that rather than a Fund should be wanting toward reimbursing your
Petitioner, and finishing this Work, that a Weeks Cess should have been laid on
for effectuating this so Noble and Honorable Design, as the Report does
express it: Upon the faith of which, your petitioner has so cheerfully, and
with all the Fidelity and pains imaginable, gone on in the Work and brought it
to its present Condition.

You petitioner begs leave further to represent, that albeit the Cash-keeper
and Hugh Brown have been most exact and diligent in their endeavors to bring
the several Collectors to give a faithful account of their Intromissions with
this Fund, yet there are considerable Concealments and Malversations amongst
some of them, and others as they go off, detains exorbitant Sums, upon pretense
of their pains, without any Warrant, and contrair to the Design of the Act of
Parliament. It is therefore humbly proposed, that the bygone Rests detained and
concealed of this Fund not paid in to the Cash keepers, may be put to a
public Roup, at the sight of the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, and
that for the encouragement of those who intend to bid, it be furthwith ordered
that all Collectors be obliged to expose their Books, whereby no doubt these
Rests will turn to a very good account, and the like Abuses discouraged in time
coming.

And since Mr. Adair your petitioners Partner in the Tunnage Act is cleared of
his whole bygone pretentions of pains as well as Debursements, amounting to
22127 lib. scots, including what he charge that it will cost him for
navigating the West Coasts of Scotland, and the Islands adjacent thereunto;
That therefore the product arising from the Farm of of these Rests be applied
at the sight of the Lords of the privy Courcil, toward payment protanto or
your petitioners Balance of Debursement, whereby he may get Credit, and be put
in a Capacity to finish what is begune; which Balance being paid in to him,
your petitioner obliges himself to finish and print both the Volumes, which
otherways would be impossible for him to do. But when done, he shall demand no
farther Encouragement but what any ensuing Session of Parliament, or his
Majesty's privy Council shall think the Work deserves.

These two Volumes when finished (could not be sold by any private undertaker,
under seven or eight pound Ster. Yet if his Balance of 1240. lib. Ster. be
paid to him, it will enable him to go to London and Holland as is necessar,
that he may (toward the dispatch of the work) distribute amongst the
Ingravers, these Draughts which remain uncut, and likewise order the printing
of both Volumes, and provide what paper is most proper for the use; Which when
done, your petiitoner ingadges himself for the benefit of the public, to put
at least two hundred Coppies of both Volumes, in the hands of such persons as
shall sell them, at no more than 20 sh. Ster. for each Volume, to such of the
Nobility, Gentry and Burrows as shall be desirious of them, and subscribe their
Names with in six weeks after the passing this Act now desired in your
petitioners Favors. And no person subscribing shall pay in any Money, till the
Volumes be delivered to him; The Captain demanding Subscriptions only, that he
may the better know what number of Coppies to provide.

May it therefore please your Grace, and the Right Honorable the Estates of
parliament, either to continue the Tunnage till your petitioner be Re-imbursed,
or otherwise to grant him some other Fond for the same; And toward making
effectual what is collected, that your Grace and the Right Honorable the
Estates of parliament, would be pleased to cause the bygone Rests and
Concealments, and the Detentions of this Tunnage Money not paid into the Cash
keeper, to be rouped at the sight of their Lordships of the privy Council, and
in the mean time, that all Collectors expose their Books, whereby such as are
desirous may be put in a condition to bid. And since Mr. Adair is already paid
of his whole Accounts and Claims, extending to 22127 lib. Scots partly in
money, and partly by precepts, to be paid out of the first and readiest which
is als good as money; That therefore the product of this Roup may be applied
only toward the clearing of your petitiones Balance of bygones amounting to
1240 lib. Ster. and if this Fond fall short of what is due to your petitioner,
your Grace, and the Right honorable the Estates of parliament would be pleased
to lay down some other Fond for making up the remander, Whereby your petitioner
may be enabled to finish his work, and he and his Famimay no be exposed to
ruin by having thus far advanced this work, upon the faith of so clear an Act
of parliament, and so lately past in his favors, And your petitioner shall
ever pray.


