AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST POISON.
Composed of some Remarks upon the Paper printed by the direction of the Lady
Russel, and mentioned to have been delivered by the Lord Russel to the Sheriffs
at the place of his Execution.
THe Publishing of this Paper as the last Speech of a dying man, cannot but
surprise all Persons who were present at the Trial of the Lord Russel, to read
such Reflections upon the Judges, the Kings Council, the Sheriffs, and the
Jury; the Fact so untruly represented, and the Offenders Innocence so strongly
asserted, when they can all attest to the fairness of his Trial, the respectful
Treating of him by the Kings Council, as far as was consistent with their Duty,
without any strains upon the Evidence, to the favorable Demeanor of the Court
toward him, not in the least aggravating the Crime beyond the Evidence, and to
the fullness of the Evidence upon the Proofs produced: And therefore those who
heard the Evidence, must acknowledge, that tlat Paper is so far from containing
the whole truth of the Lord Russel's Case, that what of Fact is therein
infected, is wholly disguised, and untruly and unfaithfully set down. Neither
does the Lord Russel, in his Speech to the Sheriffs, aver all contained in that
Paper to be true, nor the Paper to contain the whole truth of his Case, only
says, he had set down in that Paper, all that he thought fit to leave behind
him. No doubt he might have as well said, All that his faithful Confessor
advised him to leave behind him.

For whosoever strictly peruseth the Paper, will not find the Ingenuity,
Sincerity, or plain style of a Dying Gentleman, but may discover the peculiar
Dialect of an Artist, accustomed to shadow Truth with doubtful and ambiguous
Expressions; and the Paper artificially contrived and designed, to gratify a
Party, by a colorable asserting the Innocence of the Criminal, condemned by
the Law for High Treason, and laying a Malicious Imputation upon the
Government, for an unjust Prosecution of an Innocent Person to Death.

Whether the Paper does truly state the Crime, upon the Fact proved, for which
the Lord Russel was Condemned?

And whether it contain any plain denial of that Fact? will best appear by
truly stating the Crime charged upon him by the Indictment, and the Fact proved
upon him at his Trial

The Lord Russel with others are charged by the Indictment with High Treason
for Conspiring, Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of the King,
and raising of a Rebellion within the Kingdom.

And the Overt Acts wherewith they are charged, are their Meeting together,
consulting and agreeing to raise an Insurrection and Rebellion, and to seize
upon the Kings Guards.

At the Trial of Colonel Rumsey did swear that there was a General Rising
intended in October and November last, and that he was engaged therein. And
that the Earl of Shaftsbury, who was likewise engaged therein, in November last
acquainted him, that the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, Lord Russel, Sir
Thomas Armstrong, and Mr. Ferguson were to meet at Mr. Shepherds house in
Abchurch Lane, and sent him thither with a Message to them; that accordingly he
went thither, and found the Lord Russel and the rest there, and delivered to
them the Message from the Earl of Shaftsbury; which was, that it was high time
to come to some Resolution about the Rising: That answer was returned, that Mr.
Trenchard had assured them that in four hours time one Thousand Foot, and two
or three Hundred Horse should be ready at Taunton. But now Master Trenchard
required two or three days notice of the Rising, and therefore they could not
go on at present; and that my Lord Shaftsbury must be contented.

He said the Answer was pronounced by Mr. Ferguson, and the Lord Gray spoke to
the same purpose. And being interrogated whether the Lord Russel were so near
as to hear the Message, he said he was so near, and could not but hear it. And
being asked by the Lord Russel, whether he consented to the Answer, he declared
upon his Oath, that the Lord Russel did consent. And that they then treated and
consulted of the General Rising. And both Colonel Rumsey and Mr. Shepherd did
swear, That the Lord Russel and the rest did consult at Mr. Shepherds about
seizing of the Kings Guards. And having at a former Meeting appointed some of
their Number, viz the Duke of Monmouth, Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, to
view in what posture the Guards were, they made Report to the rest there, they
found them very remiss in their Duties, and might be easily seized. Mr.
Shepherd swore that their meeting at his house was not casual but appointed by
themselves, and that they came late in the Evening, and that my Lord Russel
mentioned not any private Business to him; neither had he then any private
Business with the Lord Russel. But the Lord Russel pretending he came to taste
some Sherry which he had bespoke of Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Shepherd denied upon his
Oath, that the Lord Russel had bespoke an Sherry of him, or mentioned any such
thing then to him.

The Lord Howard gave in Evidence upon his Oath, that there was a design of a
General Rising, both in October and November last: and that the Earl of
Shaftsbury then acquainted him, he had Ten thousand brisk Boys ready. And after
the Departure of the Earl of Shaftsbury, it was thought necessary, for the
preventing of Confusion, and more orderly managing of the Rising, that a select
Council should be held for that purpose: And accordingly the Duke of Monmouth,
the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hamden junlor, and
himself, met in January last at Mr. Hamaens House in Russel street, and debated
certain Preliminaries to the Rising. Amongst others, Whether the Rising should
be in London first, or in the Country first, or in both at once: and the major
opinion inclined to have the Rising both in London and the Country at one time.
That soon after they held a second Meeting at the Lord Russels house; where all
the last mentioned Persons were present, and where they again debated of the
Rising, and then came to this Resolution, That some Person should be sent into
Scotland to invite some Persons thence, from the discontented Scots to treat
with them, That they might be assured of what Assistance they might expect from
the Scots. That that matter was committed by them to the special care and
conduct of Colonel Sidney. And that Colonel Sidney acquainted him he had sent
Aaron Smith into Scotland accordingly; and that he had given him threescore
Guineys to defray the charges of his Journey.

The Lord Howard interrogated by the Lord Russel, whether he said any thing in
those Debates, declared upon his Oath that though his Lordship never used to
speak much, yet he did speak in those debates, and consented to what was done.

This was the substance of the Evidence, though delivered by the Witnesses more
at large, as will appear by their Depositions when they are printed with the
Trial. A clearer Evidence to prove the Facts charged of Meeting and Consulting
to raise a Rebellion within the Kingdom, and to seize the Kings Guards, I
believe the most experienced person in the Laws can never show was ever
produced at the Trial of any Traitor. To the greatest and strongest part of the
Evidence, which is that of the Lord Howard, and so much of Colonel Rumseys
which relates to the General Rising, of which the Witnesses make full proof,
the Paper gives no answer at all. With what confidence then can the Author of
that Paper introduce a dying man, asserting his own Innocence, and charging the
Jury with forwardness and injustice, when the Criminal cannot deny the Facts
upon which the Jury gave their verdict. But these Facts, whether true or false,
the Criminal would not examine. And if he could not, or would not assert them
to be false, no man of any common Ingenuity can doubt them to be true, when
sworn by credible Witnesses, and found by a substantial Jury. Yet to satisfy
the Conscience of a dying Man, and to cover the Scandal of so great a Crime
from vulgar or partial Eyes, these Consultations and Conspiracies to raise a
Rebellion, and foment a General Rising, are represented to the People only as
some Discourses about some Stirs. They may be in Scotland some Stirs, but in
England they are and ever were styled Rebellion.

As to the other Branch of the Overt Acts of Consulting to seize the Guards,
which the Paper makes the only Crime for which the Lord Russel was condemned;
this account is given by the Paper, That the Lord Russel was at Mr. Shepherds
house with that Company but once, and there was no Undertaking then of securing
and seizing the Guards, nor none appointed to view or examine them some
discourse there was of the feasiblenesse of it, and several times by accident
in general discourse elsewhere

This account which the Lord Russel gives of this matter, is rather a
Confirmation of the Testimonies of Colonel Rumsey and Mr. Shepherd than an
avoidance thereof. He admits the feasibleness thereof was then discoursed of,
and at other times likewise. They swore that the Persons appointed to view the
Guards, reported then they found them to be very remiss in their Duties, and
might be easily seized. The Lord Russel remembers he was at Mr. Shepherds house
but once, Shepherd swore he was there with that Company twice, and at the last
time the Report was made after viewing of the Guards.

The seizing of the Guards was not the only nor Principal Fact upon which the
Lord Russel was condemned, as appears by the Proof stated; but it was one of
the Instances to make out against him the general design of raising a
Rebellion, as one of the properest ways to secure the General Rising, and was
sufficiently proved by two Witnesses to have been consulted upon to that
purpose.

Indeed to what other purpose can any man imagine the L. Russel and his
Accomplices, who appeared to have been engaged in a design of a general
Insurrection, upon such proof as the Criminal could not deny the Fact, should
so often discourse of the feasiblenesse of securing the Guards, as is confessed
by the Lord Russel, than in order to facilitate and secure their design of the
General Rising? And the Discourse the Paper owns to have been at the Lord
Shaftsburies touching the same matter, who throughout appears to be a principal
Agent in the Design of the General Rising, proves the seizing of the Guards to
be part of that Design. And though the Lord Russel then expressed a tenderness
of shedding cold blood, as a thing detestable, and so like a Popish practice;
yet that Deluge of Blood which must necessarily have insued in the heats of a
General Rising, which is evident he pursued to his last, did not at all affect
him, because this might become any Heroic Christian drawn in Armor by the
Pensil of the Author of Julian: and is not unlike to the practices of the
ancient Christians, so shamefully disguised by the same Author.

If then the Facts whereof the Lord Russel was found guilty by the Jury upon
such pregnant proof be so evident, how is it possible for a dying man before
God and men to assert his Innocence with such assurance, and so frequently
repeated in his Speech to the Sheriff, though short, yet twice repeated; 1. God
knows how far I was always from designs against the Kings Person, or of
altering the Government. 2. I profess I know of no Plot, either against the
Kings Life, or the Government.

In the Paper delivered, it is thus expressed; Whatever apprehensions I had of
Popery, and of my own severe and heavy share I was like to have under it, when
it should prevail, I never had a thought of doing any thing against it, basely
or inhumanely, but what could consist with the Christian Religion, and the Laws
and Liberties of this Kingdom. Again, I have always loved my Country much more
than my Life, and never had any design of changing the Government, and would
have suffered any extremity, rather than have consented to any Design to take
away the Kings Life. In another place he thanks God his part was sincere and
well meant, and affirms his Crime to be but Misprision of Treason at most; and
Infers, so I die innocent of the Crime I stand condemned for; also he says, I
know I was guilty of no Treason. In the last place he concludes, As I never had
any design against the Kings Life or the Life of any man whatsoever, so I never
was in any Contrivance of altering the Government.

Half an eye may see their strokes are all drawn by the same hand with all
Imaginable Skill, to quiet the Conscience of a dying Criminal, and at the same
time by casting a mist before the eyes of the unthinking Multitude, to possess
them with the Innocence of the condemned Person and the cruelty of the
Government toward him. Let it be considered with what careful Restrictions and
Limitations his Innocence is ushered in: That he knew of no Plot or design
against the Person of the King, or to Kill the King, or to alter or change the
Government; That he never had a thought of doing any thing basely or inhumanly,
but what could consist with the Christian Rellgion, and the Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom; That his Crime was but Misprision of Treason at most, and so
he is innocent of the Crime he stands Condemned for. What need of all these
cautions, restrictions and evasive circumlocutions to a plain man at the hour
of his Death to express his Innocence by? If it had been real, a few plain
words would have done it better. viz. That he was not engaged in nor knew of
any design of making an Insurrection or Rebellion within the Kingdom. He heard
the proof made and knew that was the Crime laid to his charge, which is High
Treason both at Common Law and within the first branch of 25. Ed. 3. But that
was too clear a matter for a dying Man plainly to deny; his Conscience must
have controled him.

And to let every Man understand the Subtilty of that paper in declaration of
the Lord Russel's innocence with such restrictions: It is necessary to be known
that there were two parts in this horrid Design, one was a general R^sing
managed by a select Council, wherein the Conspirators according to their
different Principles had their different ends, some were for a Common Wealth,
though the fewer in number; others were for continuing the Monarchy and
Government, but with Exclusion of his Royal Highness. Of this latter sort were
the Duke of Monmouth, and the Lord Russel, who plainly sets down in the Paper
the Duke of Monmouth's Opinion of him, that they were both of a temper. And the
Lord Russel gives his Opinion of himself, That his earnestness in the matter of
the Bill of Exclusion, had no small influence in his present Sufferings, though
spoken by him with great Reflection upon the Government, yet it truly seems to
have been the natural cause of those Extravagancies he was led unto; his zeal
in that matter transporting him to seek that by force, which the King had
before denied in a course of Parliament.

The other part of the Plot was downright Assassinating of the King and the
Duke of York; this was managed by a Council of Ruffians, who according to their
Principles judged this the most expeditious and safest way to secure the
General Rising, and render it more effectual. This was made out beyond all
peradventure by many Witnesses at the Trials of Captain Walcot and Hone, the
latter whereof, besides the proofs against him, confessed himself to be one of
the Number who had engaged themselves to kill the King. For this latter horrid
Fact of Killing and Assassinating, the Lord Russel was not accused thereof, nor
any proof offered to make it out,

And therefore his frequent professions of his innocence as to any Plot or
Design upon the Kings Life, or to Kill the King, or his knowing any thing
thereof, and of his abhorrence thereof, as an inhumane, base, vile, and
barbarous Act, which Epithits the Paper gives to that soul Fact, are no plain
declarations of his innocence, as to the Crime charged and proved upon him, of
Conspiring, and Consulting to raise an Insurrection within the Kingdom.

And t's evident by the Lord Russel's restraining the expression of his
Innocence to the design upon the King's Life, and to Killing of the King, and
omitting to mention the general Rising, which was fully proved upon him; that
the Lord Russel intended only that Crime for which Hone, and Walcot were
condemned of Assassinating the King.

The other restriction of his Innocence, as to any design for Alteration, or
Change of the Government, which he esteemed the best in the World; which
amounts to no more than that he had no design himself, nor knew of any to throw
off Monarchy, and to introduce a Commonwealth; which was never charged upon
him, and may easily be presumed to be such a Government, as was no ways
agreeable to his height of Spirit.

But this is no denial of his being engaged in any design to make an
Insurrection, though his end in such Insurrection were far short of Killing of
the King, or Changing the Monarchy.

Let it be supposed to be only to overawe the King, that a Parliament might fit
to pass the Bill of Exclusion, and other Bills, for the security of the
Protestant Religion, or other specious pretenses whatsoever; which is the best
Construction can be put upon the Lord Russel's Case.

That he had a part in the Insurrection, is evidently proved, and not denied by
him: But he says his part was sincere, and well-meant. What that sincere
meaning was, he does not plainly tell us; which becomes a Dying Man to do: But
leaves us to conjecture from the other parts of the same Paper, what his
sincere purposes were. His zeal for the Bill of Exclusion, and Detestation of
Popery, which accompanied him to his Death, argue, his sincere intention in the
Rising, to be something that was for the promoting of the Bill of Exclusion,
and the utter Extirpation of Popery. Yet he professes, that notwithstanding
all his zeal against Popery, that he never had a thought of doing any thing
against it Basely, or Inhumanly, but what would well consist with the Christian
Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

This again renders the matter difficult, to guess at his sincere meaning in
the Design. But the Compiler of the Speech, has so ordered the Composition of
the Sentences by the discretive Particle, But, that room is left for the Dying
Person, to intend nothing to be inconsistent with the Christian Religion, and
the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, but what was base and inhumane, as the
Assassination of the King and Duke is judged to be; and that an Insurrection
only to compel the King to pass such Bills, as His Protestant Subjects
conceived necessary for the Preservation of their Religion, was no base and
inhumane thing, and therefore not inconsistent with the Christian Religion, but
for the support of it; nor with the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, which
allow in the opinion of too many, both more ancient and modern Fomenters of
Rebellion against Princes, a Liberty in the People to acquire that which they
apprehend to be their Right, and for their Preservation, by force, which they
cannot obtain from their Princes by fair means, upon the account of a Supreme
Law for preservation of themselves, and their Religion, inherent to all
Governments.

To this purpose was prepared and published that venomous Book of Julian, so
much hugged and applauded by the Conspirators, as a fit Pl^ister composed of
Ancient Christian Practices, for such Consciences who might entertain the least
scruple against Infamous Lybelling of their Prince, or using any Force or
Coersion upon the Government. To the same purpose have been Printed, and
Reprinted of late, diverse Seditious Books and Pamphlets; and another was
preparing for the Press, by one of the Conspirators: To assert a Supremacy in
the People to determine for themselves, against their Prince.

The Northern Climate has of late furnished us both with Doctrines and
Examples of the same Batch. The Compiler of the Speech, was without question
acquainted, if not infected with those Doctrines, Tenets, and Examples, and
therefore may be presumed to lie under that great Delusion, that it was lawful
for Subjects to procure from their Princes by force, whatever they judged
necessary for the preservation of their Civil, or Religious Rights; so in the
doing thereof, their parts were sincere and well meant.

When nothing is clearer by the Laws of this Kingdom, than that to raise a
Rebellion, or make an Insurrection, be the design or intent thereof never so
speciously good, is High Treason: And it is apparent, that the Lord Russel, or
the Author of that Paper, was misguided in two principal and plain Points of
Law.

First, That Meeting and Consulting to make an Insurrection, and in order
thereunto to Seize upon the King's Guards, which the Paper calls Stirs, is not
Treason within the Statute of Edward 3.

Secondly, That the Lord Russel's being present at the several Consults for
managing the Insurrection, and his part therein amounted only to Misprision of
Treason, and so concludes himself innocent of the Crime he stood Condemned for,
which was High Treason, for compassing the Death and Destruction of the King,
by Conspiring to raise a Rebellion within the Kingdom.

These mistakes of the plainest points in Law, are the only supports of the
Lord Russel's Innocence, whereby he comforted himself at his Death, and may
mislead others into the same Ruin.

To prevent which, it is conceived seasonable upon this occasion, to state
clearly what the Law of the Land is upon these Points, to the common
understanding of every Subject.

As to the first Point, The Meeting and Consulting to make an Insurrection
against the King, or raise a Rebellion within the Kingdom, be the end thereof
never so specious for Public Good, though the Rebellion be not actually
raised, is High Treason by the Laws of this Land. It was so at Common Law, by
the consent of all the Books of Law that Treat of that Matter, and no one
Authority against it. It is so since the Statute 25. Edw. 3. Cap. 2. within the
first Branch of that Law against Compassing and Imagining the Death of the
King. The Death of the King in the Law, is not restrained to the Killing of His
Natural Person, but extends as well to Civil Death as Natural. To Conspire to
Depose the King, is equally High Treason with that of Killing the King: So for
Imprisoning of the King, or seizing, or taking of him into the power of his
Subjects, or for laying any Force or Restraint upon him, until he do what his
Subjects would have him. These are all High Treason, for compassing his Death,
either Natural or Civil; and all Overt-Acts, which declare the intent of
effecting any of these Crimes, as all Meetings, Consultations, and Argeements
to rise in Rebellion, and to seize upon the King's Guards, which are his
defense against Force, and invite the aid and assistance of the King's Subjects
of any other of his Kingdoms, plainly are Overt-Acts, of compassing the King's
Death; and so have been adjudged in all Times, when ever such Case came into
Judgment.

In the 2. 3. Phil. and Mar. one Constable dispersed diverse Bills in the Night
about the Streets, in which was written, That King Edward the 6 was alive and
in France; and at another time, in Coleman street, pointed to a young Man, and
said, He was King Edward 6.

These things tending only to Depose the Queen, were adjudged High Treason, for
compassing her Death; and Constable was thereupon Indicted, Attainted, and
Executed. The Case is cited in Calvin's Case, Co. 7. Rep. Fol. 106. 13. Eliz.
Dyer, 298. Doctor Story practiced with the Government of Flanders, to Invade
the Realm with Force, and declared by what means, and in what manner and place
the Invasion might be; No Inva^^o^ following, it was referred to all the
Judges, to consider what Crime it was, who resolved it to be High Treason;
Because an Invasion with Power, could not be, but of necessity it must tend to
the Destruction, or great Peril of the Queen.

1. Jac. The Lord Cobham Conspired with Sir Walter Raleigh, and other the Kings
Subjects, to make an Insurrection within the Realm, in order to set up the Lady
Arabella Steward to be Queen: And to this purpose, Treated with the Ambassador
of the Archduke of Austria, for procuring Money from the King of Spain, and
persuaded the Lady Arabella to writ Letters to the King of Spain, for his
assistance with Forces, and Letters sent accordingly, though the Insurrection
did nor follow, but a Discovery made before it was put in Execution. The Lord
Cobham, and others of the Conspirators, were Indicted of High Treason, for
Compassing the Kings Death, and the several Meetings and Consultations for
making the Insurrection, and procuring the Invasion laid in the Indictment. The
Lord Cobham was Tried by his Peers, Attainted, and Executed. The Lord Hale, in
his Pleas of the Crown 13. takes notice only of the Overt Act of writing the
Letters to a Foreign Prince, inciting an Invasion, which he allows to be a
sufficient Overt Act of that Treason which was laid in the Indictment, for
Compassing the Death of the King.

In the same Year of 1. Jac. the Lord Gray, and other Conspirators, met and
consulted to make an Insurrection, whereby they designed to seize the King into
their power, until he should grant them a Pardon for all Treasons, a Toleration
of the exercise of the Popish Religion, and the removal of Twelve of the Privy
Council, and should make the Lord Gray Master of his Horse; and several others
of the Conspirators, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, and other great Officers.

They were Indicted for Compassing the King's Death, and raising a Rebellion
within the Kingdom, and no other Overt-Acts laid in the Indictment, but several
Meetings, Consultations, and Agreements between the Confederates, to raise a
Rebellion for the purposes foresaid.

The Lord Gray was tried by his Peers, and had Judgment to be Drawn, Hanged and
Quartered.

In Sir Henry Vanes Case, Meeting and consulting about Treason, were held
sufficient Overt Acts.

In Plunkets Case lately in the Kings Bench; the Indictment was for High
Treason, in compassing the death of the King; the Overt Acts alleged against
him were Consulting to raise an Insurrection in Ireland, and bringing of the
French into Ireland, and Collecting money in Ireland, and holding
Correspondencies in France for that purpose. There was no proof of any design
upon the Kings natural Person, which was in England; yet he was attainted, and
executed for High Treason, though no Insurrection or Invasion followed; so that
there can be no Question at this time of day, but that Meeting and Consulting
to raise a Rebellion; though it be not an actual levying of War within another
Branch of the Satute of 25. Edw. 3. yet they are Overt-Acts of Compassing the
Kings Death, within the first branch of that Statute.

The other gross Mistake is, that the Lord Russels Crime was only Misprision
of High Treason.

Misprision of High Treason is the Concealment thereof by a person who had a
bare knowledge of the Treason, without any mixture of his consent. But if the
person be present at the Debates and Consultations, though he say nothing, if
he do not immediately reveal, but continues to meet and be present at their
Debates, he is a principal Traitor. Where a Person was not present at the
Debates and Resolves, but is afterward acquainted with them, and give his
Consent thereto, it is High Treason, and not a Misprision barely.

This was the Case of George Brook, to whom the Lord Cobham related the whole
Conspiracy of setting up the Lady Arabella, who consented to the same, and was
Indicted and Attainted as a principal Tratour in that Conspiracy. Now the Lord
Russel, as he puts his own Case of being present at several Meetings, where
seizing of the Guards were treated of, and horrid things spoken, argues himself
guilty of High Treason, though he make a false Conclusion from those Premises
that 'twas but Misprision. But the Witnesses proving his reque^t Meetings and
Consults, and the last of them at his own house, and his express consent to the
Matters debated and agreed upon, do put it beyond a Question to any man that
desires not to be wilfully deceived, that the Crime of the Lord Russel was not
a bare Misprision of Treason, but High Treason in the highest degree, being to
raise a Rebellion against the King, the Consequence whereof, in all
probability, would have been the destruction of the King, and subversion of the
Government, if not the desolation of the whole Kingdom.

I after this plain Account of the Lord Russels Case, any persons be so hardy
to think the Compiles of that P^per of greater skill in the Laws of the Land
than the Reverend and Learned Judges, who have judged his Crime to be High
Treason, the utmost comfort he can expect for his being deceived, is, that he
shall have the like comfortable Speech prepared for him upon the like occasion.

FINIS.
EDINBURGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. 1683.


