AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning those most Famous Cathartique and Diuretique
PILLS. Being an Incomparable Medicine in all Chronical and Dangerous Diseases;
Wherewith was Cured The late Lord General MONCK Of the DROPSY: Some hundreds
before, and many since, having received absolute Cure thereby. And it is also a
most certain Remedy against the SCURVY, with all other sharp, salt, and watery
Humors. It Purifies and sweetens the Blood, and prevents Infectious Distempers.

Prepared only by WILLIAM SERMON Doctor of Physic, and one of his Majesty's
Physicians in Ordinary.

The Fourth Edition Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1671.

Dr. Sermon's Cathartique and Diuretique PILLS.
Friendly Reader,
HAving through the wonderful Goodness and Mercy of the Almighty God, by long
experience in searching the great Volume of Nature, by a diligent inspection,
observing the property of each Distemper, with the nature and occult quality of
Metals, Minerals, and Vegetables; some years past arrived to the sublime
preparation of this most excellent Medicine, whose transcendent Virtues (of
late) have been know to many persons of great worth. A Medicament so exceeding
rare as admits no Rival for the performance of the foresaid Cures, etc. the
want of which every year causes great numbers of Men, Women, and Children to
descend untimely to their Graves.

Therefore I conceive it a duty highly incumbent on me, to let the World share
with me in the dispensation of so Divine a Blessing: and so having consequently
taken upon me to give this Advertisement, to the intent my Countrymen may
understand how ready and willing I am to communicate what I have received from
the Author of all good things.

To speak much in the praise of these Pills, were but to give jealousy, and
indeed occasion to undervalue them; this being the product and result of my
Travels, and Lucubrations: I would not be censured so over-fond to persuade the
World it is worth Reception, since it is more proper I should refer you to others
to be informed of the Virtues thereof, which few instances shall serve for all.

I here omit to make mention of the persons I have cured of the Dropsy, and
Scurvy in the City of London, 1662. 63. and 64. and shall only insert some
remarkable Cures performed of late years in the City of Bristol, before I was
sent for from thence to Cure his Grace the late Lord General Monck, who by the
virtue of my Pills in 28 days, evacuated by Stool 12 Gallons of Water, his
Swellings all abated, and he became perfectly Cured, as you may understand by
what follows, being a True Copy of the Certificate under his Hand and Seal.

These are to certify all whom it may concern, That Mr. William Sermon,
Professor of Physic, was the person, by Gods Blessing, who did perfectly Cure
me with much ease, and in a short time. Given under my Hand and Seal at
New-hall this 12th day of July, 1669.

Albemarle.


In this Edition I have omitted to insert the Case of the Duke of Albemarle, as
it was found in Dissection, Jan. 4. 1669. believing all sober Persons are well
informed, that his Grace was perfectly Cured by my Pills, and that at last he
died not of the Dropsy, as many Enviously still report.

However if there be any that are not satisfied of the truth thereof, I refer
them to read the Life and Actions of General Monck, Page 246. 454. 476. written
by that Reverend Divine Dr. Thomas Gumble, Chaplain to his late Grace.

Mr. James Perry, living at the White Lion in Broadstreet in the City of
Bristol, was sorely afflicted with the Dropsy, his Belly, Thighs, and Legs
extremely swelled, and very hard; insomuch that he could not go: he had a great
Cough and Suffocation of the Lungs, loathed his meat, who for the space of
seventeen Weeks used all means imaginable, and and had the advice of fifteen
Physicians; some caused him to be Cupt, others used Scarification, etc. but
took no effect; so they all left him off for a dead man: Yet by Gods Blessing
with two or three Boxes of my Pills, which caused him to evacuate by Stool at
several times about 16 Gallons of discolored water, besides, forced Urine
freely, all his Swellings forthwith abated, his Ulcers (unskilfully procured)
healed, and he was perfectly cured in 36 days. This was effected in November
and part of December, 1666.

Mr. Robert Lisson, living about the middle of the Shambles in Bristol, was
very far gone in the Dropsy, and had a Cough that sorely vexed him, was cured
by a box of Pills that exceeded not twelve shillings.

Upon Whitsunday 1667. I was called to one Mr. Will. Kinton Copper-smith,
living at the Red-Lion in Castle-street, who was troubled much with that
Dropsy called Ascites, which is when much watery humor is heaped up between
the skin, or that film called Peritonaeum, and the Bowels: he had a great
Cough, left by all hopeless, and had been at a vast charge; was cured by two 8
shilling boxes of my Pills. With the said Medicine was cured Richard Chandlor
near the Pity-gate.

Also Richard Davies belonging then to the Sugar-house in Temple-street, very
far gone in that Dropsy called Anasarca, which is when the humor is dispersed
throughout the whole Body, that the Flesh does appear altogether moist, and wet
like a Sponge. This cure I effected in February 1667.

Mr. Peter Grant, living at the sign of the Angel in St. Mary Port-street,
Bristol, being brought exceeding low with the Dropsy, who also had a violent
pain in his stomach, his breath very short; his Relations and Friends giving
him over, having no hopes of his life, aged near 60: he at last making use of
about 16 shillings worth of my Pills, was in a short time perfectly Cured.

Also Ann Estridge aged near 22, in St. Peter's street, in the City aforesaid,
for want of her monthly sickness, fell into a Dropsy, and so extremely
swelled, that her belly, thighs and legs were ready to split, who for sometime
lay speechless, yet by Gods blessing and my Pills was perfectly Cured.

One Phyllis, in Wind-street in the same City, aged near 50. her monthly
courses had left her, and she being full of excrementitious humors, fell into a
violent Dropsy, etc. very much swelled and in great pain, whom I cured in few
weeks.

And for the future to prevent such Accidents, I advise the Female Sex about
the time that those are leaving them, to take some of my Pills (as directed in
this Book) for certainly it has been found, and still will be the best
Medicine under the Heavens in such cases, not only to prevent the Dropsy, but
several distempers that beget Mortality before the appointed time; which none
shall pass, neither can then Physic take the least effect.

The Wife of Mr. Arthur Baker, in the Parish of Cromwell in the County of
Gloucester, afflicted much with the Dropsy, and sorely tormented with a
Spasmus, a disease in which the sinews are drawn and plucked up against the
Patients will, was cured by my Pills, though in the winter time, and very much
frost and snow.

Mr. James Russel in Bath, I cured with one Box of my Pills.

Mr. William Underhills Son, in the Parish of Bitton, five miles from Bristol,
afflicted with that Dropsy called Tympanites (which is when much windiness and
superfluous vapors is gathered in the aforesaid places of the belly, was cured
with two or three boxes of my Pills.

Since his Grace the late Lord General received a perfect cure in June and July
1669. by my Pills, several persons of great Honor are ready to subscribe to
the Worth of this great Arcanum, having received benefit thereby.

Also Mr. Edmund Saunders Barrister of the Middle Temple, inclinable to the
Dropsy and Scurvy, had help thereby, after which being at Gloucester sent for a
12 s. box of my Pills, and gave them freely to the Wife of one Watkins in
Wotton near the City aforesaid, by which means she was soon cured, though far
gone in a Dropsy. I could wish all (with him) that are able to be charitable
to the poor.

Likewise Captain Anthony Langstone, Captain Wedlow of the Sun-Tavern in
Bishopsgate street, Mr. Ford, Secretary to the Lord Roberts, received help by
the Medicine aforesaid.

Mr. Lewis Reme, Painter to his Grace Christopher Lord Duke of Albemarle, much
troubled with the Dropsy, had help by my Pills.

Captain John Wharton, in George-yard in Kings street Westminster, much
troubled with the Dropsy and Scurvy, became very weak, was perfectly cured
with two or three Boxes of my Pills.

Mr. Christopher Brenam, at the sign of the Christopher in Duffins Alley in the
same street, had speedy help by my Pills.

Mr. Thomas Refould, and Mistress Ann Refould his Wife: living at the Prince of
Orange in Cannon-Row Westminster, were both cured of the Dropsy with my Pills.

Mr. Baggot, Yeoman-Porter to the Gate and Park-stairs at White Hall, aged 80
odd, troubled much with the Scurvy and Dropsy, by taking 10 or 12 doses of my
Pills was cured.

Mr. Day, living at the Coffee-house in Chapple-street Westminster, violently
afflicted with the Dropsy, and full of salt sharp humors, his belly and
members extremely swelled, was with seven 4 s. boxes of my Pills cured.

Mr. Arundel, a Bricklayer, near the place aforesaid, afflicted with the
Dropsy, was also cured in a short time with 3 or 4 boxes of my Pills.

Sergeant Granger, in Bishops-head Court in Grays-Inn-lane, was cured of the
Dropsy with two twelve shilling boxes of my Pills.

Corporal Davis at the five Bells in the same Lane, long afflicted with the
Dropsy, and had a violent Asthma, etc. by reason of a warry humor got into
the Lungs, yet by Gods blessing was perfectly cured with my Pills.

Mr. Shipton at the Horse-shoe over against Clarendon House.

Mr. Thomas Harrison at the Meermaid in Red-lion-fields, near Holborn.

Mistress Dobson at the Jacob and 12 Sons in Redcross-street, were all cured of
the Dropsy with my Pills.

Also Mistress Ann Buckridge of Stockwel, within two miles of Lambeth.

Mr. Ryves, at the Golden Anchor, the Corner house in Lumbard-street, having an
indisposition of body, at last fell into a Dropsy, Scurvy, etc. But taking it
in time, was cured with one box of my Pills.

Mr. Richard Mills his son of Enfield in the County of Middlesex, within 10
miles of the City of London, aged about 14 years, his belly, and members, etc.
very much swelled, his father sought all means imaginable but found none, till
he took of my Pills, with which he received a perfect cure.

Mr. Joseph Haylock, servant to Mr. Alderman Gray in the Town aforesaid, most
violently afflicted with the Dropsy, and had a great Cough and suffocation of
the Lungs, etc. He spet abundance of corrupt and foetid matter, and was left
off by all for a dead man, and at last I cured him for three and twenty
shillings, though in the midst of his Cure (as many have been to their utter
ruin) was persuaded against me, and my Pills, so that in plain terms he left
me off for six weeks, but at length begged me to take him again, being very
unwilling (when he had got a pair of Spectacles) to be persuaded to his Grave.

For this medicament is always effectual if taken before the Liver and the
rest of the principal bowels are putrified, or nature decayed (which soon
happens in some constitutions) and sometimes it pleases God to afflict men
with such diseases, as no man shall heal (as you may read at large in the Holy
Scriptures) but where diseases are curable, this medicine with Gods help most
certainly prevails; therefore you that mind your own welfare, take it in time,
and my life for yours, you will have no cause to repent.

Another Cure effected upon a person of the Female Sex, being (...) troubled
with sharp humors (...) upon (...). Eyes and Palate, her threat very sore,
insomuch that she could not speak: I desire her to open her mouth, I found her
Palate eat off, and the root of the Tongue ulcerated; the Nostrils very bad:
with much ado she confessed that she had been under cure, and was salivated; it
cost her eight pounds, but to no purpose: in 28 days she was perfectly cured
with two 12 shilling Boxes of my Pills, and the use of this Gargarism made as
follows.

Take Vine-leaves, or the tops when the leaves are not to be had, one handful;
Roch-Allum, Ginger grossly beaten, of each half an ounce; Album Graecum one
ounce; boil all these in one quart of Spring water to the consumption of the
third part, add thereto half a pound of the best Honey, let it boil two or
three walms, strain it, and gargle the Mouth and Throat therewith, and with a
Syringe cast some into the Nostrils warm: this done, with the use of the Pills,
will both preserve the Nose and Palate, etc.

I shall here insert but only two or three Letters directed to me (though I
have many more by me to the same purpose) together with a few more of the most
admirable Cures lately effected by my Pills; the Medicine so much (by some)
snarled at.

Sir,
I Received yours, with the three boxes of Pills; one of which I disposed of to
Deborah Jones, living in Kings Wood near this City, aged 60 odd, who was in
Cure when you were commanded from Bristol to wait upon the Duk of Albemarle, in
the beginning of June 1669. but ever since she has languished under these
distempers, viz. the wind Gout, Scurvy, and Dropsy; but now it has pleased
God, by the means of your Pills, and Bolus, wonderfully to restore her beyond
expectation; it has brought from her by vomit a filmous substance forth of her
stomach the length of your hand; and she also voided much water by stool, as I
am credibly informed by her Son, whose name is Thomas Jones, and it is thought
that one box more of your Pills will Cure her. No more at present but my true
desires to God for your health, etc. I rest

Yours in all I may Jo. Cox.
Bristol, Feb. 8, 1670/1.

Another Letter as follows.
Doctor Sermon,
I Have a long time desired to write, but feared to be troublesome; but
understanding your Candor and Ingenuity to all, I took this boldness upon me; I
am not able to describe my own distemper, but as I can I shall give you thus:

I have been three or four years under a sore affliction that took me, as a
violent Ague, shaking me an hour or too, then a violent burning continued
twenty four hours, which I suppose stirred up those Hidropical humors that lay
near the skin, for they would be very sore, and swell, and I had no remedy but
Plasters to draw them: but hearing of your Pills this Winter, I took them,
which brought abundance of water from me; I have taken four boxes of them, and
this effect I find, my fits are now so little, that I scarce know when they
come, but only by stirring the Humor. They did formerly take away my strength,
that I was not able to stir at all, or to turn my self in my bed, but now I
lose no strength (praised be the Lord) so that I hope I am near Cured.

Sir, I have commended your Pills to a Kinswoman of mine, who I perceived was
under a sore hidropical Humor, and had used much means, but to no purpose. And
with one box of them is recovered; after she had taken two, then three, she
vomited; but coming to take four, and after that five, it brok a cake,
congealed in her body, which came forth by stool, since which time she is very
well recovered; her mother came to me, and desired me to acquaint you with this
miraculous Cure, and returns her and her Daughters hearty thanks.

I have many Friends that visiting me have sent for your Pills, and find very
great good thereby. I have been bold to give you this trouble, which pray you
pardon, and take the tender of my thankful gratitude to God and you for all the
good I find; and shall rest

Your ever loving and thankful Friend, Isaac Rey.
Neyland in Suffolk, Feb. 20. 167^.

Since the receipt of the former Letter, I received another, dated March the
seventh, 167^. that informs me that those most sad and terrible fits had quite
left Mr. Rey.

Another.
Worthy Sir,
I Have received yours, and do much desire that the great Cure which (by the
blessing of God) your Pills have effected on my Wife should be made known to
the World; she was very far spent in the Dropsy, and Scurvy, and extremely
swelled all over her head and face, arms, body, thighs, and legs, and the
swelling very hard; her legs were swelled in bigness above half a yard about;
and sometimes her eyes were swelled up that she could not see; she was likewise
troubled with a violent Cough, and a rising in her throat, which would stop her
up, and many times take away her speech; she was also troubled with a violent
pain in her head, and many times distracted with it.

Her Condition was so dangerous, that she made use of all the ablest Physicians
that we could here of, without finding the least benefit by them; and they had
all left her off, and said that she could not live many days. And it pleased
God that she heard of your Pills, which Cured her perfectly in two months, viz.
in June and July, 1670. which was a great and miraculous Cure, and a wonder to
all that knew her. Thus with, my humble service and hearty thanks to you I
remain,

Sir, yours whilst I am John Jones.
Brantham in Suffolk, near Ipswich Feb. 25. 1670/1.

Mistress Anne Brinley, the Wife of Mr. Alderman Brinley, in the City of
Worcester, most horribly afflicted with the Dropsy, and Scurvy, her belly,
thighs, and legs, extremely swelled, and almost deprived of breath; she had
made use of many eminent and able Physicians, (who questionless used their best
endeavors) yet to no purpose, and so left by all her nearest Relations for a
dead woman; but accidentally hearing of my Pills, and making use thereof
according to directions, forthwith evacuated abundance of water by stool, etc.
her swellings all abated in a short time, and she became perfectly well to
admiration. This great Cure was effected about Midsommer last, 1670. Since
which time many more of good quality, in and adjacent to that City, have found
wonderful good thereby.

Mistress Seawell, in Well-yard in little St. Bartholomews, very dangerously
afflicted with that Dropsy called Tympanites, her belly extremely swelled; she
had lost her appetite, and was very weak; but through Gods mercy, by taking of
my Pills was perfectly restored to her former health.

Mr. John Walker, Attorney, living over against the sign of the Whale-bone in
Lothbury, sorely troubled with violent straining, and every morning subject to
vomit; also tormented with vapors arising from his stomach, etc. which did
much offend his head, but never received benefit by any Medicine, before he
took my Pills.

The Daughter of J. P. in the County of Gloucester, near Bath, Aged 37. for
seven years troubled with an ill distemper, which she called the Whites; also a
great weakness and pain in her back, sharpness of Urin, etc. and broke forth
over all her body much like to a Leprosy; the humor salt and sharp; by taking
my Pills one Spring and Fall was perfectly cured. The days she took no Pills I
advised her to drink the Decoction of Plantain, Yarrow, Knotgrass, and the
middle bark of Elm. And sometimes she anointed the sores with the ointment
made as follows.

Take Oil of Roses three ounces, the white Ointment with Camphir two ounces,
Sal. Prunellae one ounce, Crude Antimony reduced into very fine powder half an
ounce, mix them all together, and keep it for use.

A good old woman, formerly a Soldier in the Wars of Venus, not living many
miles from the place aforesaid, forely afflicted with the Scurvy, etc. with a
kind of a pocky humor in her Eyes, and a filthy stinking Ulcer in her throat,
by reason of which she could not speak, and when she went to drink, it would
run out at her Nostrils, was at last perfectly Cured by taking four 4 s. boxes
of my Pills, with the use of the Gargarism, page 11.

Another woman, Aged about 60. living near the City of Bristol, troubled long
with an Ulcer in her throat, and had violent nocturnal pains in her Legs, etc.
was cured in a short time by the Means aforesaid, only she took of the
following Bolus three times, and sweat as directed.

How to prevent and cure the Gout (especially where it is not hereditary or
long contracted) with all other violent pains in the joints, by my Pills and
the following Bolus, which I have often proved to be true.

Take Venice Treacle one dram, the powder of Virginy Snake weed, Gascoign
powder, Diaphoretick Antimony, of each 10 grains, Saffron, Salt of
Scurvy Grass, Wormwood, and Salt of Ash, of each 5 grains, make it up into a
Bolus with the syrrup of Ground Pine; take it about 4 or 5 of the Clock in the
afternoon, by it self, or with hot Sack, etc. being in bed covered warm, sweat
as you are able to bear it, and rub your selves with warm clothes, and be sure
to take no cold. The very next morning take three or four of my Pills, more or
less, according to the strength of your bodies; thus do two days in five, the
Bolus may serve the weaker sort twice. I judge this method sufficient to cure
many occult and dangerous distempers, (especially where the body is not
maciated, etc.) The Bolus you may have made up by any Apothecary.

I could give you an exact account of several other great Cures effected by my
Pills, upon many persons of good quality, with the least charges imaginable
(and upon the Poor for nothing, it ever being part of my practice so to do) not
only in the City of London, but in several other Cities, and parts of England
and Wal^s, which here to ^^sert their names and dwellings, would well this
beyond my present intentions. But if any are curious in this particular, I ^m
ready to produce Letters from hundreds, therein I have thanks given me, etc.
for the ^dmirable Cures done by them when left void of help by any other means;
and I know nothing to the contrary why all may not receive Cure thereby, if
they will follow taking these Pills for some time according to directions; But
God knows many are fickle-minded, and (as aforesaid) are persuaded to expend
their moneys upon undigested, crude drugs, by every blind direction, till too
late; and then, to the grief of my soul, I have heard them cry out, Oh that I
had never seen such and such, for they persuaded me against your Pills, when at
first those poor people (that I have turned away giving them nothing, except 6
d. to buy (...) glass of Wine to comfort their dying spirits might have
received a perfect Cure by God blessing, with two or three boxes of m^ Pills.
But let such as will be thus deceived acquiesce in their own Ignorance, it is
indifferent to me.

I advise all Hydropical and Scorb^tical persons, during the time of taking the
Pills (though usually very dry) to drink little as possible, except of the
Liquor man as follows: Take the Bark of Elder, (...) Sage, Ground Ivy, or the
Herb called A^hoof, Smallage, Fennel roots, Scurvy-gra^^ Parsly-roots, of each
half a pound, of(...) best Juniper berries one pound, Ginger (...) an ounce,
cut and bruise all these, and tie them up in a thin cloth, and hang them in an
earthen Stein, and pour thereto 8 Gallons of new Ale; so let it work together:
when it is fit to drink you may drink a good draught first in the morning, and
last at night. And if there be an appetite, eat any thing of light digestion,
though the Pills have not done working; and in warm weather walk about your
occasions; for in this Medicine there is no danger; they are so safe, that it
is my custom to take them at any time of the day; they retain their virtue for
many years, and are of excellent use for Mariners, and for such as travel long
Journeys by Land; for it does not only cure sudden Accidents, but prevents
Diseases, that oftentimes happen to the utter ruin of the Patient.

But some scandalously report, that these Pills are dangerous in the working,
being too strong for any person but one of extraordinary strength of Nature.
Secondly, That I have no skill in the Art of Physic; and that I have no other
Medicine but this particular Receipt or Composition. But let all know, these
are mere scandals, raised upon me by persons of an envious spirit; and
especially by some of the same Faculty; who are afraid that this Medicine may
in great measure eclipse that mercenary repute which they have gotten by fraud
and several Artifices. There being nothing more certain and confirmed (by the
experience of all persons that have made use of my Pills) that no Physic works
with more facility, neither is there any that is more suitable to every one,
even the weakest constitutions: and it is well known, that I have with good
success cured all sorts of Diseases (though most difficult) with as great
expedition as any Physician whatsoever. However I do not publish this with
design to create a benefit to my self (for it is sufficiently known I need it
not) but heartily and really to promote the common good, to help chiefly (as
well as the rich) the meaner sort of people, who are not able to be at that
great expense in Doctors Fees, and long courses of Physic; which do not only
exhaust the purse, but macerate and weaken the body.

Moreover, these Pills are good against violent pains in the head, breast, and
stomach, extreme stoppage and windiness thereof; they are also most excellent
in all sudden surfeits, caused by excess either in eating or drinking, which
commonly violent Fevers follow, and many times death, if not prevented: which
this medicine taken in time (with Gods blessing) will at once help; it likewise
opens the obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and expells all superfluous
humidity, and that from the Womb, being oftentimes the cause of non-conception;
it never hurts, but works only upon the humors offending, so certainly
prevents the worst of diseases incident to humane bodies. It is the only
medicine to purge the Reins, it provokes Urine, hinders the generation of the
Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys, strengthens the vessels spermatick, and are
well known to help the Gonorrhea of all kinds, (without the use of astringent
medicines) being most safe; according to that authentic Aphorism, Sublata
Causa tollitur Effectus. They also are of excellent use for such as are
plethorick, and inclineable to overmuch fat.

In the DROPSY, and SCURVY, by a magnetic virtue, it attracts or draws all
watery humors forth of the Blood, and all other parts, by the pores into the
intestines, so carries it off by stool. It strengthens the Liver, from the
coldness and weakness of which all Dropsies proceed: it operates by Stool and
Urine; a large dose, which is 5 small Pills, causes sometimes the Patient to
vomit; it is like a diligent and active Beadle, it waits upon all malignant and
extravagant humors, never leaving them till they are out of the Corporation.
In a word, it cures when all other medicines fail, though administered by the
most learned and long experienced Physicians. To the ingenious I write; for
others that can relish nothing but what they do themselves, I value them not,
believing my medicine beyond their censure and malice.

The manner of taking these Pills, is as follows.

A Child between 6 and 10 years of age, may take one; the weaker sort of people
two or three, the stronger four or five, etc. In the Winter take them about
four or five of the clock in the morning, and sleep thereon. In the Spring and
Summer, going to bed at night, or how you find them best suit with your
Constitutions; swallow them in the pap of a roasted Apple, or with any warm
liquor. You need not drink Posset, or Broth, as with other Physic; but if dry,
what you please, as Beer, Ale, White Wind, etc. They may be taken every day,
every second, or third; the greater occasion, the oftener, if strength will
permit. They operate with much ease, and only upon peccant humors, by which
means some are Cured in a very short time, others not so soon, according to the
Constitution and habit of the body, etc.

Therefore all may not expect perfect Cure by two or three small boxes of these
Pills, (though many have enjoyed that great felicity) but if need require take
more; and be not inveigled (by persons of a base selfinterest) against that
Medicine which with Gods help will absolutely cure this pernicious disease (
viz. the Dropsy) when all others fail, as by dady experience does appear; So
let me advise the Ingenious not to prolong time, as many to their utter ruin
have done, otherwise there need not have died of the Dropsy in this City (last
year) nine hundred and nineteen.

These Pills may be safely taken at any season of the year; if they chance to
grow hard, before you take them, then roll them a little between your fingers,
and they will work as well as if newly prepared, though you have had them by
you seven years.

The boxes are sealed up with my own Seal: The 4 s. Box contains 20 Pills, The
8 s. Box 40 Pills, The 12 s. Box 60 Pills. which are disposed of by my trusty
Friend Mr. Edward Thomas, Bookseller, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain,
whom I have solely deputed under my hand and seal to make sale thereof; and he
to appoint others also to sell them, not only in the City of London, but in all
other parts of the Kingdom, etc. And are at present to be had as follows:

At Major Nath. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange.

Mr. George Calvert's at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane.

Mr. Edward Brewster at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Mr. John Place next Furnivals-Inn-gate in Holborn.

Mr. Allen Banks, and Mr. Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce in Fleetstreet.

Mr. William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

Mr. William Cadman Bookseller at the entrance into the New Exchange.

Mr. Thomas Parkhurst at the Golden Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near
Mercers Chapel.

Mris. Anne Michel in Westminster Hall.

Captain William Newman at the Anchor in Seething Lane, near the Navy Office.

Mr. John Massam Stationer, at the sign of the George in Cow-lane near Holborn
Conduit.

Mr. William Wild under the Cross-Keyes near Hicks's- Hall in St. Johnsstreet.

Mr. John Christmas over against the Cock in Suffolk street, near Charing Cross.

Mr. Thomas Thomas, in the City of Bristol Bookseller.

Mr. Alexander Davis over against the golden Heart in South-gate-street
Gloucester.

Mr. John Jones Bookseller in the City of Worcester.

Mr. Isaac Purss in Walton Cardiff, near Tewxbury in the County of Gloucester.

Mr. William Newton Bookseller in Blandford in the County of Dorset.

Mr. William Wombwell at the Coffeehouse in Coney-street in the City of York.

Mr. William Callis an Apothecary in Leicester.

Mr. Robert Harford Stationer at the Hand and Pen upon the Point in Portsmouth.

Mr. John Jones in Brantham in the County of Suffolk near Ipswich.

Mr. William King in Leominster in the County of Hereford.

Mr. Tho. Salmon Bookseller in Bath.

Mr. Robert Eveleigh in the City of Exeter Bookseller.

Mr. William Thorpe in Westchester Book seller.

And at my house in Eastharding-street, a the two Black-Posts near the sign of
Gold smiths Hall between Fetter-lane and Shoe lane London, where by Gods
assistance (...) am now settled for the remaining part of m^ Life. And
certainly, besides the Dropsy (according to the best method of Physic) Cures
any other difficult and dangerous distemper, in the shortest time, and with the
greatest ease imaginable.

And for such as desire (in any disease) (...) private Cure, may be
accommodated at m^ own house, where without fraud shall soo^ have their desires
accomplished.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgot to let the discreet Reader know, that there are many
malicious and Idle Empericks, daily persuading the harmless to their graves;
telling them, they understand the Composition of my Pills, etc.

These are therefore to advertise all persons to beware of those fraudulent
Impostors who with no less Arrogance than Ignorance falsely (to ruin others)
pretend to the acquisition of this excellent secret (through Gods mercy of my
own Invention) wholly locked up in my breast, incommunicable to any, my Wife
only excepted, to whom I have made known the whole preparation thereof, that if
it please God she survive me, it may still be prepared for the benefit of my
Country.

FINIS.

