The young Man's Resolution to the Maidens Request.
A witty Dialogue between a young Man and a Maid.

Wherein she asks him when he inteads to marry,
And he resolves her how long he will carry.
To the tune of, In Summer time.


AS I was walking under a grove,
within my self as I supposed;
My mind did often times remove,
and by no means could be disclosed:
At lenght by chance a friend I met,
which caused me long time to tarry,
And th^n of me she did entreat,
to tell her when I did mean to marry.
^weet heart quoth I if you would know,
that mark these works and I Will reveal it;
Since in your mind you bear it so,
and in your heart you do consent it;
She promise me for to make no words,
but of such things she would be wary,
And thus in brief I did begin,
to tell her when I meant to marry,
When Shrove-tide falls in Easter week
and Christmas in the midst of July.
And Lawyers for no fees will plead,
and Tailors they deal just and truly.
When all deceits are quite put down,
and truth by all men is prefered;
And Indigo dies Red and Brown,
O they my love and I Will be married.
When Safron grows on every tree
and every stream flows milk and honey,
And sugar grows in karret fields,
and Usurers refuse good money:
When Country men for Judges fits,
and Lammas falls in February,
And millers they their Tole forgets,
O then my Love and I will marry.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.




When men and beasts In The ocean flows
and fishes in green fields are feed
When musele shells In The streets do grow, (my,
and swans upon dry rocks are breeding,
when Cockle shells are Diamond rings,
And glass to pearls may be compared;
and Gold is made of the gray goose wings,
O then my love and I Will be married.
When summer does not dry up mire,
and men on earth do leave to flatter;
When bakers they do use no fire,
and brewees they do use no water,
When mountains ar^ by men removed,
and England into France is carried
And all maids prove true to their Loves,
O then my love and I Will be married.
When Hostesses do reckon true,
and Dutchmen leave off drinking brandy.
When Cats do bark and Dogs do mew,
and Brimstane's tok for Sugarcandy,
Or when that Whitsuntide does fall,
within the month of January,
And a C^bl^r ^ without an a^^le
O then my Love and I will marry.
When women know not how to scold,
and Maids of sweethearts ne'ree ar thinking
When men ith fire comlain of cold,
and ships on Salisbury Plain fear sinking
When horse-cours^rs turn bonest men,
and London unto York is carried
Or when you out of one can take ten,
O then my love and I Will be married.
When Candlesticks do serve for Bells,
and frying pans are used for Ladles,
Or when in the Sea they dig for wells,
and porrige pots they make for cradles,
When maids forget to go a maying,
and a man on his back an ox can carry
Or when the mice with the cat be playing,
it is then my Love and I will marry.
Good Sir, since you have told me when;
you are res^lved for to marry;
I wish with all my heart till then,
that for a wife you still might tarry:
For if all young men were of your mind,
and maids no better were preferred,
I think it would be when the D^vil is blind
that we and our Lovers should be married.
By J. S

FINIS.
London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, in little St. Bartholomews Court is
West-Smithfield.


