The SAINTS Jubilee, OR The fullness of Joy to the sweet Singers of Sion.
-- olim haec meminisse juvabit.
WHen first Petitions newly penned did fly,
And Loyal strafford, head did bleedingly.
To satisfy the Peoples Cruelty,
Our joys did then appear.
When pious Laud unto the Tower was sent,
And Commons House the King did circumvent,
Obtaining a Triennial Parliament,
Our joys did then increase.
When Commons pushed the Bishops off their seats
And by their Artifice and juggling feats,
Filled up the House with pious frauds and cheats.
Our joys, etc.
When Pym with many more as good as he,
Made us deny our Ancient Liberty,
And bid defiance to his Majesty,
Our joys, etc.
When Plotting Presbyter preached in the Nation,
And snuffling through the nose was all in fashion,
And Frenzy was mista'ne for Inspiration,
Our joys, etc.
When zealous Brethren gave their Silver ware,
And holy Sisters all that they could share,
And all to fight the Beast called Common Prayer,
Our joys, etc.
When it was voted for a foolish story,
And Non-conformists (zealous of God's glory)
Did all conform unto the Directory,
Our joys, etc.
When Cromwell led his men with canting words
Fight, Saints, the Battle, now it is the Lords,
Your weapons are long Prayers, but longer Swords,
Our joys, etc.
When from his Offices at first but small,
Out witting Essex, Fairfax, and 'em all,
He did advance himself to General;
Our joys, etc.
When Cobler-Hewson ran beyond his Last,
First cleaned his waxen thumbs, then buckled fast
His Sword about his Sanctified Wast.
Our joys, etc,
When Crop-ear'd Peter's first set up to preach,
Whose Lungs to Twentiethly Beloved could reach
Did from his Tub the Factious people teach,
Our joys, etc.
When the debate of No Lords, first arose,
No House of Peers: No, we will have no Laws,
Our Magna Charta is the Good old Cause.
Our joys, etc.
When we our Ancient Liberties forsook.
And made the Covenant our Statute-Book;
Our Oracles were Bradshaw, Ireton, Cook.
Our joys, etc.
When Commons (they who durst do any thing
Because the Lords submitted) did begin,
Bold desperate Votes, and voted out the King.
Our joys, etc,
When Vote for Non-addresses made no stay,
But most Victoriously did make its way,
The Crown was staked for which the House di(...) play
Our joys, etc.
Another Vote! A new unheard of Court,
High Court of Justice! All the House was for it;
For here they knew would be the greatest spor
Our joys, etc.
Here was the Head a second Prize laid down,
Bradshaw soon will not and took it up; as soon,
We had five hundred Heads instead of one.
Our joys, etc.
When Toleration for all Sects began,
And Conscience was a Slave to every man,
To Quaker, Independent, Puritan,
Our joys, etc.
When leave was given to act all Villainy,
I Would kill my friend, another should rob me,
And neither of us ever questioned be.
Our joys, etc.
When there could be no breach of Privilege,
When Saints could sin by License, and allege,
That Robbing Churches was no Sacrilege.
Our joys were then at fu(...)
Faelix quem faciunt aliena Pericula cautum.

