THE Wonderful Prophesies of Old Mother SHIPTON, In the time of King HENRY The
Eight.

Together with several other very strange PROPHESIES.

I. By Ignatius. II. By Sibylla. III. By Merlin. IV. By Brightman. V. By Mr.
Truswels, Recorder of Lincoln.
EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year, 1685.

The wonderful Prophesi^s of Old Mother Shipton, in the time of King Henry the
eight. Together with several other very strange Prophesies.
WHen she heard say that King Henry should be King of the Seath, and Cardinal
Wolsey King of the North, and dwel^ at the Manor at York; she said nay,
Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York. Of this King Henry and the Cardinal
hearing, they were angry. So the King s^nt to see if she would stand to her
words, the Lord Duke. Lord Piercy, and Lord Darcy, (who cam^ with their men
disguised to Ring=houses, a mile from Y^^k l^aving their men there) went to
York late at night to Mr. Beasleys house in Conny street, and desired to speak
with the Master, who came, and they whi^p^red in his ear to go to Shiptons wife
with them, and ^hey went and knocked a^ the door, and she said, come in Mr.
Beasley, and these honorable Lords with you. And then Mr. Beasley would have
put the three Lords before, and she said, come in Mr. Beasley, for you know the
house, and they do not. This is a strange thing (said they one to another) that
she knows us, and never saw us before. And they came in (there being a good
fire:) And Mr. Beasley said, by your leave Mother Shipton, and she said, you
are welcome Mr. Beasley. Then the other three Lords said the like: And she
called them all by their names, and bid them welcome, and bid them sit down,
and bade her maid fetch some ale and cakes, and she did so. And they all drank
and were very merry. Then said the Lord Duke. if ye knew what we came about,
you would not make so much of us. And she said, the M^ssenger mu^t be either
headed or hanged. Mother Shipton (said the Duke) Cardinal Wolsey says, you
said h shall never see York. Yes, I said he might see York, b^^ never come at
i^. The Duke said, when Cardinal Wolsey comes to York thou shall be burnt. We
shall see that (says she) and she had a kerchief on her head, which had a yard
of cloth in i^; and she took it off her head, and her head was white as wool.
And she spread it on her kn^e, and threw it in the fire, and let it be in there
a great while; and when she saw that it would not burn, she took her staff and
turned it in the fire, and it would not burn, then she took it out of the fire
and shaked it; and put it on her head again. Now (said the Lord Duke) mother
Shipton what mean you by this? She said if his had burned, I might have burned
also. Mother Shipton (said the Duke) what must I do? My Lord (said she) the
time will come when you shall be in as low an office as I am in, and that is a
low office indeed. Then said the Lord Piercy, Mother Shipton, what must I do?
My Lord, said she, shoe your horse in the quick, and you shall do well, if not
your body shall be buried in York pavement, and your head shall be stolen from
the Bar, and carried into France. And they laughed and said, this is a great
hop indeed between the head and the body. Then said the Lord Darcy. Mother
Shipton, what must I do? Ye have made a great Gun (said she) shoot it off, for
it will never do you good, you are going for warfare, but you will pine many a
man but kill none. So they drank and gave her money, and went to Mr. Beasleys
house and lay there all night. The next morning they went up to the King. Soon
after the Cardinal came to Cawood and stayed there three days and three nights:
and the third day the Cross of the house top sell down, and brake the Stewards
head. The Cardinal hearing of it, said. I fear a greater cross then this. In
the afternoon the Cardinal went to the top of the house, and many Knights with
him. He asked where stood York? And they showed where it stood. How far is it
thither, said he? And they answered, seven miles. Says he, one said, I shall
never see York. Nay my Lord, said one of the Knights, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. Then he made a vow he would burn her and the
Priests that boarded at her house, if they lacked their vestments. The Priests
hearing of this were sore afraid, and she bade them keep themselves content,
and they should have twenty to morrow if they would. Then at night the Cardinal
supped, and after supper he charged that no man should come in. And when the
company was gone that supped with him, the Lord Piercy came to the gate and
knocked. The Porter asked who was there? Saying that no man might come in. The
Lord Piercy thereupon changed his name, for one of the kinsfolk of the
Cardinal, and so got in. And when he saw the Lord Piercy, he said, mercy, my
Lord Piercy. No, traitor, said the Lord Piercy, thou shall to London. And they
set him upon a horse; and rode for London with him. And hiptons wife said to
Mr. Beastry, youder is a goodly stall made for the Cardinal in the Minster, of
gold, pearl, and precious stones; go and pull down one of the pillars and
present it King Henry: and as she bade him so he did. Now the third day as the
Cardinal was going toward London, he poisoned himself, and so he died. Mr.
Beasley came again to Mother Shipton, and said. I pray you tell me some of your
Prophesies. Mr. Beasley, said she, Owzeb^idge and Trinity Church meet.

They shall build in the day, and it shall fall down in the night: Unless they
get the highest stone in Trinity Church to be the lowest stone in Owzebridge.

The day will come when the North shall rue it sore,
But the South shall rue it for evermore.
Then the Hares shall kinale on the cold hearth stones,
And Lods shall marry Ladies and carry them to their homes.
Then ill shall be in the North, one woman shall say to another, I saw a man to
day for there shall be a thousand women for one man. Then shall you have a year
of pining hunger.

A dearth without any need.
And a death without dread,
A joyful day shall be seen,
In England of a King and a Queen.
The first coming of the King of SCOTS, he shall come in at Boothan-Barre
unknown. The next time ^e shall go through Holgate Town, and not through
Holgatelane. And when the King of the North shall be at London Bridge, his tall
shall be at Edinburgh. After this shall water come over Owzebridge: and when
there is a Lord Major in York Minster-yard, let him take heed of a stab.

And when two Knights fall out in the Castle-yard, they shall never love kindly
while they live again. When all Colton hag has born seven years corn: then
seven years after you shall hear news.

When warfare begins at the spring,
Much sorrow to England shall it bring.
Then shall the Ladies cry well aday,
That ever we lived to see this day.
The Prophecy of old SIBYLLA.
WHen Scotlands hundred and ninth unconquered King,
The sixteen hundredth thirtieth and ninth year:
Into his age of thirty nine shall reign,
Then shall the Papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire.
For Scotland shall that blesied work begin,
Then shall the Whore of Babel we had here,
Be banished quite, which Bishops did bring in.
Then thou brave England which was led so blind,
By their perverse Episcopally pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed, who cruelly have cried,
So that, that sacred Prophetess Sibylla,
Shall shortly come to pass, she tells Tom Milla,
And Tom tells me, and I must tell't again,
Through Scotland, England, Ireland, France, and Spain.
MERLIN'S Prophecy.
ON Boreas wings then thither shall be born
Throw Week over Tweed a Princely Unicorn,
Who brought into the world his own fair Crest,
A rampant Lion sigur'd on his breast.
And to his Arms six Lions more shall quarter,
With six French flowers environed with the Calter,
Joining by Fates unchangeable dispose,
The Northern Thistle to the Southern Rose.
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain,
With pious zeal during his blessed reign.
Master BRIGHTMANS Prophecy.
WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame,
Full of luke-warmness, glory vain.
The worst in works, and outward form,
And with contrary factions torn:
When Romish Rites by Reformation
Shall be expelled out of this Nation,
Lord beggar Bishops then shall come
To ruin, and be overthrown.
The Priests shall be vile to each wight,
Their downfall read with much delight;
For GOD will not them guiltless hold,
That neither has been hot nor cold.
The Scottish Church shall be in condition,
A Virgin free from superstition,
Then well is them that have the least,
And woe is them that have the most.
Thou shall not know of this warfare at night, but you shall have it in the
morning. But when it comes it shall last three years ere it give over.

Betwixt Cadron and Air,
Shall be long warefare
When all the world is a-loft.
It shall be called Christ's croft.
When the first battle of this warfare begins, it shall be where crooked
Richard made his fray. They will say to warfare for your King, and you shall
have half a Crown a day, but stir not: Then they will say to warfare for your
King, upon pain of hanging, but stir not.

For he that goes to complain,
Shall never come again.
At that day England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall
be h^^rd to speak. Then will the Dra^on give the Bull a great map. After this,
when the first is down, they will g^ t^ London. Then woe is me for London, for
London shall be de^troyed for ever after. Th^n t^ere will be a great battle
between Scotland and England, and they will be p^cified for a while. Then they
will come ^o B^ammamoore an^ fight, and then they will be pacified for a while.
Then there will be a great battle at K^a^ismi^e near York, and they will be
pacified for a while. Then there will be a great battle between Scotland and
England a^ St^^k^. (...) Ravens sit on the Cross and (...) of (...) N^bles as
of the Commons Then there will come a woman with one eye, and she shall tread
in many man's blood to the knee, until she come to a man who shall be leaning on
a staff and she will say who art thou? and he will say, I am the King of the
SCOTS. And she will say to with me to my house. And be will go with her, and
they will stay with her three days; Soon after will England be lost, and twice
in one day will they cry, England is last. There will be three Knights in
Peter-gate, and one of them will not know of another. And there shall be a
child born in Pomsert with three thumbs, and those three Knights will give him
three horses to hold whilst they win England again. And all the noble blood
will be gone but one, and they will carry him to Sheriff Huttons Castle, and he
will die there. Then they will chu^e three Earls in the field: And then, They
will hang their horse on a thorn, and rue the time that ever they were born to
see so much b^ood ^hed.

Then they will come to York and besiege it, and York shall keep them out three
days and three nights: and a penny loaf within the Bar shall be half (...)
crown, and without the B^rr a penny. And then they will swear that if they will
not let them in they will blow up the walls. Then they will let them in, and
they will hang up the Major, Sheriffs and Alderm^n. And there will be three
Knights go into Crowch Church, and there shall but one of them come forth, and
he shall cause Proclamation to be made, that any man may take house, tower or
bower, for 21 years, for while the world endures there shall never be war
again. Neither shall there be a King or Queen any more: but this Kingdom shall
be governed by three Lords: And then Tork shall be London. And after this shall
be a white harvest, corn shall be gotten in all by women. After this a ship
shall come in the Thames, till it come over against London, and the Master
shall weep to think what a goodly City that was, none in the world comparable
to it, and now he shall wish there may be any house that will but let them have
drink for their money.

Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be
The choice and chiefest City of the three.
IGNATIUS Prophecy.
IF eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may, till thirty four, or five,
After the E. is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
Prevent him not, then sure his sway
Continue shall till ^d^y.
The ninth shall dye young, and the first
Perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be that time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three:
For then the Engle shall have help,
By craft to catch the Lions whelp,
And hurt him sore, except the same
Be cured by the Majdens name.
In July month of the same year,
Saturn conjoyns with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall have his prize.
And sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion.
B^^i^ve this truly, if then you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be.
The rest of Brightmans Prophecy.
They shall be joined in Covenant,
Against which the world shall boast and vaunt:
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
Until she freely her selt reform,
Such hurly burly, and ^uch stir,
No form of Church shall remain in her,
But Reformation must take breath,
From the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Mr. Turswels, Recorder of Lincoln.
THe Lilly shall remain in a merry world, and he shall be moved against the
seed of the L^on, and he shall stand on one side amongst thorns of his Kingdom
and Country: and there shall come the Son of man bearing three wild beasts in
his arms, which kingdom is the land of the Moon, which is to be dread
throughout all the world, with a company of people, he shall pass many waters,
and he shall come to the land of the Lion, looking for help with the beasts of
his own country; And in that year there shall come an Eagle out of the ^a^^
and her wings spread with the beams of the Son of man: and that year shall be
destroyed Castles upon Thames, and there shall be a great fear over the whole
world; and in a part of the land there shall be great battles among many
kingdoms: That day shall be the bloody field, and the Lilly shall lose his
Crown, and therewith shall be crowned the Son of man. And in the fourth year
many battles shall be for the faith, and most of the world shall be slooped,
and the Son of man with the Eagle shall be preferred; and there shall be
universal peace over the whole world: then shall the Son of man receive a
mavelous token, and it shall be great plenty of all manner of fruits, and
then shall he go to the land of the Lilly.

FINIS,

