SEVERAL VOTES and ORDERS of the House of PEERS Against Sir John Maynard (one
of the Eleven Members, Impeached of high Treason) on Saturday last, when he was
brought to the Bar, to answer to his charge. WITH His Plea, and refusal to
be tried, and what further Order was made therein. ALSO His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Conference and promise to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, in behalf of the City and whole Kingdom, on Friday last, at which time
his Excellency and many of his Officers dined in London.

LONDON, Printed for R. J. 1648.

THE VOTES and ORDERS OF THE LORDS On Saturday last, against Sir John Maynard,
when he was brought to the Bar of the House of Peers.
Die Veneris, 4 Feb. 1647.
IT was Ordered by the House of Peers, that Sir John Maynard (one of the
eleven Members of the House of Commons lately impeached of high Treason,
Crimes, and other Misdemeanors should be brought to trial, and answer to the
charge against him on Saturday next, And for that purpose, an Order was sent to
the Lieutenant of the Tower, to bring the said Sir John Maynard to the Bar of
the Lords House, to hear his charge at the time aforesaid. And Sir John having
notice of the said Order, sent a Letter to the Speaker of the House of Peers,
directed thus:

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore.
My Lord,
HAving received Order to appear at the Bar of your House to hear the Charg
against me of high Treason, high Crimes, and other Misdemeanors, which he
conceived brought him in question for his life, he thought good to make his
plea why he conceived he ought not to be tried before the Lords, but by way of
Indictment in the Kings Bench, where he might be tried by his Equals, and
pleaded Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, alleging that as he was a
freeborn Subject, and lately a Member of the House of Commons he ought not to
be tried by his Peers, etc. Subscribed,

Jo. Maynard
Dated at the Tower the 4 of Feb. 1647.

ON Saturday last the 5. of February (according to the Order before mentioned)
Sir John Maynard was brought to the Lords House, and after they were sat he
was called in, to hear his Charge and to plead for himself, and when he came
to the Bar he carried himself very obstinatly, refusing either to hear what
was charged against him or plead thereunto, and besides other strange carriages
and speeches. He pleaded that he ought to be tried at the Kings Bench by a
Jury of 12 men of his Country, etc. Hereupon he was commanded to withdraw, and
diverse Members of the House of Commons came up to maintain the Charge against
him; and two of the Judges (one of the Kings Bench, and another of the Common
Plea then sitting) were sent for to declare their opinions in that business
and assist their Lordships, and after debate thereof Sir John was called into
the House again, and several Votes and Orders passed, concerning him to this
purpose.

1 That the said Sir John Maynards Plea, Speeches, and behavior, was in
contempt of that House.

2 That for his present contempts, etc. he should be fined five hundred pounds,
to be Estreated into the Exchequer.

3 That he shall have foureteen days further liberty to plead.

4 And lastly, That House Ordered him to stand committed to the Tower, whether
he was carried again accordingly.

The manner of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and many of his chief Officers
entertainment at the Lord Mayors of London, on Friday Feb. 4. 1647.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, and many
other of the Chief Officers of the Army were solemnly invited by the Lord
Mayor of London to dinner on Friday last the 4 of February, and about one of
the clock the same day His Excellency came thither accordingly attended with
the Leiutenant General and many other of His Officers, There also met Him the
Speaker of the House of Commons and several Members of the House of Commons,
and some Lords.

At Dinner the General sat next to the Lord Mayor and demeaned himself with
much gravity, giving Civil respect unto all.

After Dinner the Lord Mayor and some of the Aldermen had some discourse
together for about three quarters of an hour or there about, His Excellency
giving them great satisfaction of His Good affection toward the City, and His
care so far as can stand with the safety of the City and Country to preserve
the whole Kingdom; the supernumeraries disbanding. And He has promised to have
a further care to ease the People not only in respect of the Soldiery, but
other burdens which have layne upon them.

FINIS.
Feb. 5. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot


