The Delights of the Bottle: OR, The Town-Gallants Declaration for Women and
Wine.
Being a Description of a Town-bred Gentleman, with all his Intreagus,
Pleasure, Company, Humor, and Conversations,
Gallants, from faults he cannot be exempt,
Who does a task so difficult attempt;
I know I shall not hit your features right,
It Is hard to imitate in black and whight,
Some Lines were drawn by a more skilful hand,
And which they were you will quickly understand,
Excuse me therefore if I do you wrong,
I did but make a Ballad of a Song.
To a most Admirable New Tune, every where much in request.




THe Delights of the Bottle, and charms of good wine
To the power and the pleasures of love must resign,
Though the night in the joys of good drinking be past,
The debauches but till the next morning does last;
But loves great debauch is more lasting and strong,
For that often lasts a man all his life long.
Love, and Wine, are the bonds that fasten us all,
The world, but for this, to confusion would fall:
Were it not for the pleasures of love and good wine,
Mankind, for each trifle, their lives would resign:
they would not value dull life, or would live without thinking
Nor Kings rule the world, but for love and good drinking.
For the Grave, and the Dull, by sobriety cursed,
that would never take a glass, but for quenching his thirst,
He that once in a Month takes a touch of the Smoke.
And poor Nature up-holds with a bit and a knock,
What ever the ignorant Rabble may say,
Though he breaths till a hundred, he lives but a day.
Let the Puritan preach against wenches, and drink,
He may prate out his Lungs, but I know what I think
When the Lecture is done, he will a Sister entice,
Not a Letcher in Town can Out-do-him at Vice:
Though beneath his Religion, he stifles his joys,
And becomes a Dabauch without clamor or noise.
'Twixt the Vices of both, little difference lies,
But that one is more open, the other precize:
Though he drinks like a chick, with his eye balls lift up,
Yes I Will warrant thee boy, he shall take off his cup:
His Religious debauch, does the gallants out-match,
For a Saint is his Wench, and a Psalm is his Catch.
The Second part,
to the same Tune.
FOr the Lady of Virtue, and Honor so strict,
That who off^rs her Guinneys deserves to be kicked
Who with sport by her self, does her fancy beguile,
That Is ashamed of a jest, and afraid of a smile:
May she lie by her self, till she wear out the stairs,
Going down to her Dinner, and up to her Prayers.
But let us that have Noble and generous souls,
No method observe, but in filling our bouls:
Let us frolic it round, to replenish our veins,
And with nations divine, to enspire our brains,
It Is a way that is Gentile, and is found to be good,
Both to quicken the Wit, and enliven the blood.
What a pleasure it is to see bottles before us,
With the women among us to make up the Chorus?
Now a Jest, now a Catch, now a Buss, now a Health,
Till our pleasure comes on by insensible stealth,
And when grown to a height, with our Girls we retire
By a brisker enjoyment, to slacken the fire.
And this is the way that the wiser do take,
A perpetual motion in pleasure to make:
With a flood of Obrian, we fill up each vein,
All the Spirits of which love's Limbeck must drain:
While the soberer Sot, has no motion of blood,
For his fancy is nothing but puddle and Mud.
He Is a slave to his soul, who in spite of his sense,
With a Clog of his own putting on can dispense,
For he Fetters himself, when at large he might rove,
So he is tied from the sweets of good drinking and love,
Yet he is satisfied well, that he is thought to be wise,
By the Dull and foolish: I mean the precise.
For my part whatever the consequence be,
To my will and my fancy, I Will always be free,
They are mad that do wilfully run upon shelves,
Since dangers, and troubles, will come of themselves,
For whoever desires to live like a man,
He must be without trouble as long as he can.
And these are the pleasures true Gallants do find,
To which if you are not, you should be inclined,
If you follow my counsel, you take off the curse,
And if you do not, we are never the worse:
Yet none will refuse but a Beggar or Cit,
Who to carry on the humor, wants Money or Wit.

