The Wonderful PROPHESIES Of Old Mother Shipton, In the Time of King HENRY VIII
Concerning Scotland and England. With several STRANGE PROPHESIES.

By IGNATIUS, SIBYLLA, etc.

royal blazons of coats of arms of Scotland, England, France and Ireland

Printed in the Year, 1700.

The wonderful Prophesies of old Mother Shipton, in the time of King Henry the
eight. Together with several other very strange PROPHESIES.
WHen she heard say the King Henry should be King of the South, and Cardinal
Wolsey King of the North, and dwell at the Mannure at York; she said nay,
Cardinal Wolsey should never come to York, Of this King Henr and the Cardinal
hearing, they were angry, So the King sent to see if she would stand by her
words, the Lord Duke, Lord Piercy, and Lord Darcy, (who came with their Men
disguised to Ring houses a Mile from York. leaving their Men there) went to
York late at Night to Mr. Beasleys house in Cunny street, and desired to speak
with the Masters, who came and they whispered in his ear to go to Shiptons Wife
with them, and they went and knocked at the Door, and she said come in Mr.
Beasley, and these honorable Lords with you, And then Mr. Beasley would have
put the three Lords before, and she said come in Mr. Beasley, for you know the
house and they do not, This is a strange thing (said they one to another) that
she knows us and never saw us before, And they came in (there being a good
fire;) And Mr. Beasley said by your leave Mother Shipton, and she said; you are
welcome Mr. Beasley. Then the other three Lords said the like: And she called
them all by their names, and bid them welcome, and bid them sit down, and bad
her Maid fetch some Ale and Cakes, and she did so. And they all drank and were
merry: Then said the Lord Duke, if ye knew what we come about, you would nor
make so much of us. And she said the messenger must be either hanged or headed.
Mother Shipton (said the Duke) Cardinal Wolsey says, you said he shall never
see York. Yes I said he might see York, but never come at it The Duke said when
Cardinal Wolsey comes to York. We shall see that (says she) and she had a
kerchief on her head, which had a Yard of Cloth in it: And she took it off her
head, and her head was as white as wool, and she spread it on her knee, and
threw it in the fire, and let be in there a great while? And when she saw that
it would not burn she took her staff and turned it in the Fire, and it would
not burn, then she took it off the fire and shaked it, and put it on her head
again. Now (said the Lord Duke) mother Shipton what mean you by this? she said,
if this had burned, I might have burned also; mother Shipton (said the Duke)
what must I do my Lord (said she) the time will come when you shall be in as
low office as I am in, and that is a low office indeed. Then said the Lord
piercy Mother Shipton, what must I do, My Lord said she shoe your horse in the
quick, and you shall do well, if not, your head shall be stolen from the Bar,
and carried into France. And they laughed and said, this is a great hop indeed
between the head and the body. Then said the Lord Darcy Mother Shipton, what
must I do? ye have meade a great Gun said she shoot it off, for it will never
do you good, you are going for warfare, but you will pine many a man but kill
none. So they drank and give her money, and went to Mr Beasleys house and lay
there all night. The next morning they went up to the King: Soon after the
Cardinal came to Cawood and stayed there three days and three nights: And the
third day the Cross of the house top fell down, and brake the Stewards head,
The Cardinal hearing of it said, I fear a geater cross then this. In the
Afternoon the Cardinal went to the top of the house, and many Knights with him.
He asked where stood York? And they showed him where it stood. How far is it
thither said he, and they answered, seven miles, says he, one said I shall
never see York, Nay my Lord, said one of the knights, she said you might see
York, but never come at it. Then he made a vow he would burn her and the
priests that boarded at her house, if they lacked their vestments, the Priests
hearing of this were fore afraid, And she had them keep themselves content, and
they should have twenty to morrow if they would. Then a night the Cardinal
supped, and after supper he charged that no man should come in. And when the
company was gone that supped with him, the Lord piercy came to the gate and
knocked, the porter asked who was there? Saying that no man might come in, The
Lord Piercy thereupon changed his name for one of the kinsfolk of the Cardnial,
and so got in. And when he saw the Lord Piercy, he said, mercy, my Lord Piercy:
No, traitor, said tho Lord Piercy, thou shall to London. And they set him upon
a Horse; and rode for London with him. And Shiptons wife said to Mr. Beasley,
yonder is a goodly stal made for the Cardinal in the Ministers of gold, pearl,
and precious stones; go and pull down one of the pillars and present it King
Henry; as she bad him, and so he did. Now the third day as the Cardinal was
going toward London, he poisoned himself, and so he died. Mr Beasley came
again to mother Shipton, and said, I pray you tell me some of your prophesies.
Mr. Beasley, said she.

Before Owzebridge and Trinity Church meet

They shall build in the day, and it shall fall down in the night, unless they
get the highest stone in Trinity Church to be the lowest in Owzebridge.

The day will come when the North shall rue it sore,
But the South shall rue it for ever more:
Then the Hares shall kindle on the cold hearth stones
And Ladieshal marry Lads and carry them to their home:
Then ill shall be in the Norrh, one woman shall say to another, I saw a Man to
day, for there shall be a thousand women for one Man. Then shall you have a year
of pinning hunger.

A dearth without any need,
And a death without dread,
A joyful day shall be seen,
In England of a King and a Queen.
The first coming of the King of the Scots, he shall come in at Boothan Barrae
unknown, The next time he shall go throw Holgate Town and not through Holgate
lane, and when the King of the North shall be at London Bridge, his tail shall
be at Edinburgh. After this shall water come over Owzebridge: And when there is
a Lord Major in York Minister yard, let him take heed of a stab.

And when two Knights fall out in the Castleyard, they shall never love kindly
whilst they live again, when all Calton-hag has born seven years Corn; then
seven years after you shall hear news, When warfare begins at the Spring,
Much care to England shall it bring.
Then all the Ladies cry well away,
That ever we lived to see this day.
Then well is them that have the least,
And woe is them that have the worst.


You shall not know of this warfare at night, but you shall have it in the
morning, but when it comes it shall last three years ere it give over.

Betwixt Cadron and Air,
Shall be long warfare.
When all the World is a loft,
It shall be called Christ's croft.
When the first Battle of this warfare begins, it shall be where crooked
Richard made his fray. They will say to warfare for your King, and you shall
have half a Crown but stir not: Then they will say to warfare for your King,
upon pain of hanging, but stir not.

For he that goes to complain.
Shall never come again.
At that day England shall tremble and quake for fear of a dead man that shall
be heard to speak. Then will the Dragon give the Bull a great snip. After this
when the first is down, they will go to London. Then woe is me for London, for
London shall be destroyed for ever after, there will be great Battle between
Scotland and England, and they will be pacified for a while. Then they will
come to Brammamoore and fight, and then they will be pacified for a while. Then
there will be a great Battle at Knavesmoore near York, and then they will be
pacified for a while. Then there will be a great Battle at Stockton-moor. Then
will the Ravens sit on the Cross and drink as much blood of the Nobles as of
the Commons. Then there will come a Woman with one Eye, and she shall tread in
many Man's blood to the knee, until she come to a Man who shall be leaning on a
staff, and she will say, who art thou! And he will say, I am the King of the
Scots. And she will say go with me to my House, and he will go with her, and
they shall stay with her three days. Soon after will England be lost, and twice
in one day will they cry, England is lost. There will be three Knights in
Petergate, and one of them will not know of another. And there shall be a Child
born in Pomfert with three thumbs, those three Knights will give him three
horses to hold whilst they win England again, And all the Noble blood will be
gone but one, and they will carry him to Sheriff Huttons Castle and he will die
there, Then they will choose three Earls in the field? And they will hang their
Horse on a thorn and rue the time that ever they were born to see so much blood
shed,

Then they will come to York and besiege it, and York shall keep them out three
days and three nights and a penny loaf within the Bar shall be half a Crown,
and without the Bar a penny. And then they will swear that they, if they will
not let them in, they will blow up the walls. Then they will let them in, and
they will hang up the Major* Sheriffs and Aldermen. And there will be three
Knights go into Crowch Church, and there shall but one of them come forth, and
he shall cause Proclamation to be made, that any may take House, Tower or
Bower, for 21 Years, for while the World endure, there shall never be War
again. Neither shall there be a King or Queen any more. But this Kingdom shall
be governed by three Lords: And then York shall be London. And after this shall
be a white harvest, Corn shall be gotten in all by Women. After this a ship
shall come in the Thames till it come over against London and the Master shall
weep to think what a goodly City that was, none in the World comparable to it,
and now he shall with there may be any house that will but let them have drink
for their Money,

Lincoln was, London is; and York shall be
The choice, and chiefest City of the three
Ignatius Prophecy,
IF eighty eight be past. then thrive
Thou may till thirty four or sive,
After the E is dead a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a plot
Prevent him not, then sure his sway,
Continue shall till many a day
The ninth shall die young and the first
Perhaps shall reign but oh! accursed
Shall be that time, when thou shall see
To sixteen joined twenty three.
For then the Eagles shall have help,
By craft to catch the Lions whelp.
And hurt him sore except the same
Be cured by the Maidens Name.
In July Month of the same Year,
Saturn conjoyns with Jupiter.
Perhaps false Prophets shall arise,
And Mahomet shall have his prize,
And sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion,
Believe this truly if then you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be.
The Prophecy of old SIBYLLA,
WHen Scotland hundred and ninth unconquered King
The sixteen hundred thirty and ninth year,
Into this Age of thirty nine shall Reign,
Then shall the papal overthrow appear,
Which all the Arts of Europe shall admire,
For Scotland shall that blessed Work begin,
Then shall the whore of Babel we had here
Be banished quite which Bishops did bring in
Then thou brave England which was led so blind
By their perverse Episcopally pride,
And Irelands shameless superstitious sin
Shall be suppressed who cruelly have cried,
So that, that sacred Prophetess, Sibylla,
Shall shortly come to pass, she tells Tom Milla,
And Tom tells me, and I must tel't again,
(...) much Scotland, England, Ireland, ^race and Spain.
Merling's Prophecy.
ON Boreas wings then thither shall be born,
Throw Week, over Tweed a Princely Unicorn,
Who brought into the World his own fair Crest
A rampant Lion figured in his breast,
And to his arms six Lions more shall quarter,
With six French flowers environed with the Calter
Joining by Fates unchangable dispose,
The Northern Thistle to the Southern Rose.
He shall the true Apostolic Faith maintain,
with pious Zeal during his blessed Reign.
Mr. BRIGHTMANS Prophecy.
WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame
Full of lukwarmness gloty vain
The worst in works, and outward form,
And with contrary factions turn:
When Romish Rites by Reformation,
Shall be expelled out of this Nation.
Lord beggar Bishop then shall come
To turn and be over-thrown:
The Priest shall be vile to each weight,
Then down fall read with much delight;
For God will not them guiltless hold:
The Scottish Church shall be in condition,
A Virgin free from Superstition;
They shall be joined in Covenant
Against which the World shall boast and vant:
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
Until she freely her-self reform,
Such hurly burly and (...) stir,
No form of Church shall remain in her,
But reformation must take breath,
From the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Mr. TURSWELS Recorder of Lincoln.
THe Lilly shall remain in a merry World and shall be moved against the seed
of the Lion, and he shall stand on one side amongs^ thorns of his Kingdom and
Country: And the^ shall come the Son of Man bearing three will beasts in his
Arms, which Kingdom is the Lan^ of the Moon, which is to be dread throughou^
all the World, with a Company of People h^ shall pass many waters, and he shall
come t^ the Land of the Lion looking for help with the beasts of his own
Country; and in that yea^ there shall come an Eagle out of the East, an^ her
wings spread with the beams of the Son o^ man: And that year shall be destroyed
Castle^ upon Thames, and there shall be fear over the whole World? and in a
part of the World there shall be great Battles among many Kingdoms. That day
shall be the bloody field, and the Lilly sha^^ lose his Crown, and therewith
shall be Crowned the Son of Man, And in the fourth yea^ many Battles shall be
for the Faith, and most o^ the World shall be stooped, and the Son of Man with
the Eagle shall be preferred; and ther^ shall be universal peace over the whole
World then shall the Son of Man receive a marvelou^ token, and it shall be
great plenty of all manne^ of fruits, and then shall he go to the Land of Lilly^

FINIS.

