Solomon's Sentences.
Being in Excellent Ditty, showing the sage Sayings and Wise Sentences of
Solomon.
The Tune is, Wigmore's Galliard.


Those that will run a Virtuous race,
and learn the Precepts of the Sage,
Those that true wisdom will embrace,
and learn to live in youth and age:
Let them approach hereto with speed,
And to my Lessons give good heed;
For bearing well these things away,
The Lord will bless them night and day
My Son, said Solomon the Wise,
if thou true wisdom wilt obtain,
Then fear the Lord that rules the skys,
for so the Scriptures teaches plain:
Embrace his word, and him obey,
This is the chief and only way;
For they that do these things despise,
Are fools to God, though worldly wise.
Unto the Father honor give,
and thou shall surely blessed be,
And be obedient while you live,
and to thy Mother Courteous be,
Then God will send thee evermore
Sufficient wealth, and treasure store:
All things shall prosper in thine hand,
And long thou shall enjoy the Land.
The blessing of the Father dear,
does cause his Childrens good success
But where the Mother does appear,
to curse her Childrens wickedness:
Their whole foundation does decay,
Like withe^ed leaves that fall away.
Then all good Christians learn by me,
To love your Parents faithfully.
Set not thy mind on worldly wealth,
nor put the confidence therein,
For riches does consume by stealth,
and Covetousness is counted sin
For whilst thou live on the earth,
Thou art uncertain of thy death;
And when that death does stop thy wind
Then thou must leave thy goods behind
Be friendly unto every man,
but unto few familiar be,
And try thy friend if that thou can,
His inward thoughts to prove and see.
And if thou find him just and true,
Change not an old friend for a new*
For many promise much indeed,
But clean forsake them in their need.
If thou have Sons, instruct them well
and on thy Daughters never smile:
Their wanton ways do far excel,
let not affection thee beguile:
With due correction love them still,
And give them not their wanton will;
For if that they do stubborn grow,
They will not then their duty know.
Give honor to the aged sort,
and to thy betters always bow,
So shall thou have a good report,
for God himself does it allow,
Of hateful Pride always beware,
And have an Eye to after care;
Be not too wrath in any thing,
For that will soon repentance bring.
Lend not thy goods to mighty men,
whose countenance passes thy degree
For they are hard to get again,
as now by daily proof we see:
For other men give not thy word,
No further then thou can afford;
Left afterward thou chance to rue,
And pay the debt when it is due.
With him that is a Magistrate,
in any wise go not to Law,
Lest thou repent the same too late,
for he will hold thee still in awe:
Be always wary of thy words,
For spightful words are cruel swords
And look to whom thou do impart
The thoughts and sec^ets of thy heart
Be never jealous of thy Wife,
least she therefore mischief learn,
And thou thereby do purchase strife
then wisely do each thing discern.
And not evil occasion give,
But lovingly together live;
We see when man and wife do hate;
The curse of God hangs at the Gate.
On Harlots cast not thou thy mind,
lest thou thereby thy self consume;
And waste thy riches with the wind,
whilst thou in fancy fret and fume:
Their soul inticements brings death
And poison comes out of their breath;
Their eyes are wandering too and fro,
And every one their fashions know.
Praise no woman for beauties sake,
nor discommend no man ny sight;
And with thy tongue no lying make,
fulfill thy promise just and right:
Be merciful unto the poor,
And God will thee reward therefore;
Keep not thy Laborers wages back,
And comfort such as comfort lack.
Grieve not the heavy hearted man,
nor joy not at thy enemies harm;
Rebuke thy Brother friendly then,
against no man use open charm;
Credit not thou a Tale in haste,
Lest trial make the matter waste;
And from all slander keep thy tongue;
And work for age whilst thou art young
3 things there are that God does hate
as holy Scriptures does declare;
A man too proud in Beggars state,
a rich man for to lie and swear.
To see an old man given to lust,
These things of God are sure accursed,
The lying tongue the soul does quell,
But pride and lust throw down to hell.
Whilst thou art living, call for grace,
thy life is like a fading flower;
Death comes stealing on apace,
thou can not know the day nor hour
Thy Speech at all times may not last
Use well the same that now thou have;
And from repentance do not stay,
Thou can no time with death delay,
If thou consider well the same,
and bear these Lessons in thy mind;
And thereunto thy self do frame,
great comfort thou shall quickly find
Plant well these sayings in thy heart,
And from these Precepts never start;
So shall thou live in perfect peace,
And God will bless thee with increase.
FINIS.

