The Royal ADVOCATE: OR, An Introduction to the Magnificent and Honorable
Laws of Jehovah the Lord Christ, now contaminated and despis^d by the present
Armym^n of this NATION.

Asserting and Controverting the Holiness, Righteousness, Perfectness, and
Vniversallity thereof, of Divi^^ Right: In opposition to the Heathe^ish, and
Antic^ristian Laws, Traditions, and vain imaginations of the past and present,
pretended Christian Magistrates of this Na^^^n which they yet so much dote upon
and endeavor ^^ ^upport against the alone Law giver, Lord o^ heaven and earth,
God of Gods, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Published by John Spittle-house, now a prisoner for his Testimony ag^i^st the
Idolatry and Tyranny of the present Army men, Priests, L^wyers, etc. For the
Information of the followers o^ the Lamb, now appearing as the Lion of the
tribe of Judah.

Mat. 15. 7, 8. Ye Hypocr^^es, well did El^^^h prophecy of you, saying, This
people draws nigh unto m^ wi^h their mouth, and honors me with their li^s,
but their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men. (whether in things Civil or Spiritual.)

Mat. 23. 13, 14. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up
^he Kingdom of Heaven, against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in: Therefore ye shall receive the
greater damnation.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Popes-Head-Alley, 1655.

To the now contaminated Saints and Servants of God and (yet faithful
followers of the Lamb in this crooked and perverse generation) under the notion
of the fifth Monarchy-men, and enemies of all Magistracy and Ministry, with all
others whom it may concern.
Dear Brethren and Friends,
THe Providence of God is not unaptly compared to the wheels of a Clock, which
albei^ they run variously, yet they agree harmoniously to the producing of that
end, to which they are appointed; and therefore notwi^hstanding the affairs of
this Nation, have for some time had a contrary motion to the general
expectation of the people of God, which probably has been the cause of all the
flaggings, and secret murmu^ings and repinings among them* as though the Lord
had forgotten to be gracious, or to perform his peromises; yet if we search
narrowly into the mind and ^ill of Jehovah, we shall prove no better by our
incredulity, than the Disciples of our blessed Savior, Luke 24. 25. i. e.
fools and and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets, and the Lord
Jesus and his Apostles have spoken shall come to pass in the last days; as
for instance, the present Apostacies of the Army, and several of the foolish
(though) virgin Churches in this Nation, (in point of external ordinances) i.
e. those that have lately subscribed their approbation of this present
Government we now live under, to be of God, and such as ought to be complied
with, as the Saints have formerly done to the Governments of Heathen
Potentates, (without the least consideration of the prohibition which the Lord
Jesus has made and appointed against the worship of the Beast and his Image,
o^ that receives his mark in his forehead, or in his hand or his Name, or
number of his name, and that under the pain and penalty of drinking of the wine
of the wrath of God powered out without mixture into the cup of his indignation,
and that they shall be tormented wi^h Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the
holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and that the smoke of their
torment shall ascend up for ever and ever, and that they shall have no rest day
nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, etc. Rev. 14, 9, 10, 1^.) has
doubtless been a great stumbling block in the way of Gods people, ^o what they
are now in expectation of: and therefore to the end that all men may see and
know, that the present Government runs parallel with the Beast, and that the
sa^^ ^^pro^^^^, (^^^one presumptuously) are guilty of the aforementio^^^
punish^^^^s ^or so doing will appear,

1. From the engagement of the Army against the late King, and his Monarchy, as
one of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints.

2. By the joint con(...) of those very persons whom it is to be feared have
now presumptuously worshipped the Image of the Beast, etc. witness their
preaching, praying, fasting and fighting against that Government, the image of
which they now so much hug and embrace, and are now grown so shamefully
impudent, as to declare the same to be of God.

3. By the Descent of the present Government from the fall of Adam, i^ having
run through the veins of all the Idolaters and Tyrants that have been unto this
day, as in the ensuing Treati^e will appear, and that by the Testimony of the
Grand new ^^^at^^ Doc^our of the times Mr. John Owen, who has been very much
assisting unto me in the proof thereof, as you will also find.

4. By the clear Testimony of Mr. Tillinghast in his Epistle to his late Book
titled the Knowle^^ of the times: so that the apostacies of the aforenamed
person and persons (if rightly used) may rather conduce to the great advantage
of Gods people, and to the strengthening and confirming of the faith and
confidence of those that hold fast their integrity, i. e. that the Great day of
the Lord is at hand, and that judgment is now begun at the house of God, that
the Lords fire is now kindled in Sion, and his furnace h^ating in Jerusalem,
that the Refiners fire is now melting away the tin and dross from (...)s
jewels, that the Fullers soap is now scowring up the garments of the Saints,
making them white and clean (i. e. by a pure and unspotted life and
conversation, that they may now be as a City set upon the top of an hill, or as
a Candle put into a Candlestick, to give a light to the inhabitants, that they
may approve themselves children of the light, and of the day, that their light
may so shine before men, that they may see their good actions, and so be a
means to stir them up to glorify their Father which is in heaven) for our
blessed Savior has foretold that it shall be in the last days, or time of
his coming to judgment, as it was in the days of Noah, Mat. 24. 37. etc. at
which time it is clear from Genesis 6. that there happened a very great apostasy in
those persons, who went under the Notion of the sons of God, v. 2. by means of
which the sins of that world became ripe for judgment, every imagination of
the thoughts of their hearts being then evil, and that continually, v. 5. and
therefore seeing the said Proph^sie is now so evidently fulfilled before our
eyes, both in reference to the Army (only a few cordial and thrice noble
Commanders, who rather than they would become a reproach and scandal to what
they had so publicly declared for, or an occasion to the enemies of God and
his Christ to blaspheme, have disserted their employment and commands in the
Army, as Major General Harrison, Colonel Rich, Colonel Okey, etc. and some like
noble Heroes now prisoners for their disrellish of the present apostaci^s of
the army, as Major General Overton, Cololonel Allured with several others upon
the like account) as also of the now worse than Merosh Churches before
mentioned, who have been far from helping the Lord against the mighty, as that
quite contrary-wise, they have helped the mighty against the Lord, by their new
strengthening the hands of the adversari^s of the truth, to persecute the
faithful followers of the Lamb; and therefore to the end, that all that hear
or shall hear of these their Diabolical actions, may henceforth learn to take
warning by them. I have writ these lines, as also that they may learn with the
industrious B^e to gather honey from that gall of ^itternesse, and bond of
iniquity, those poor souls have involved themselves in, by such their
con^ederacy against Christ and his Government, (as by this Treatise will
appear) as also that the faithful witnesses of the truth may be hereby
encouraged to act for Christ, as the other have done for Antichrist, for God;
as the other have done for the Devil, being such as are probably of that
number, that will erelong cry, Lord, Lord, have we not fought in thy name? and
conquered in thy name, and preached in thy name, and baptized in thy name? and
yet shall receive for answer, Depart from me, I know you not, etc. Such, whose
damnation slumbereth not, witness the present Hurlyburlies among them, all
their affairs lying as it were in a Chaos of confusion, and doubtless will do
every day more and more, until his Government be set up whose right it is to
govern the whole world by his Holy, Just and Perfect Laws and Ordinances
contained in the Scriptures of truth, which if once embraced by the people of
this nation, will, I dare be bold to assert, free the Inhabitants thereof from
these following burdens and oppressions they now (Asse-like) ly under, Genesis 49.
14. 15. i. e.

1. Of the charge of a standing Army, (and so it may be at liberty to fight the
Lords battles against his adversaries in foreign parts, upon the Lords
account, and spoil of their enemies, and not like Drones to live upon the
labors of the industrious Be^^, (or High-way-men to rob one another) which at
the rate of 120000 pounds per mensem, according to the Soldiers Month of 28
days, will save 156000 pounds per annum, or nere upon.

2. From Excise, and the vast charge thereof.

3. From Customs, especially of our own nation, and the great charge thereof.

4. From the vast charge of Lawsuits.

5. From Tithes, and several other things of like nature, and therefore worthy
to be seriously considered, not only b^ those, who do really and cordially
desire the promotion of the Law of God, as they do the good of their own souls,
as do the fifth Monarchy-men (and not of any carnal design, as is falsely
suggested of them by the enemies of the truth) but also of the self-interested
men [Not that I urge this Royal Law or Government in the least upuon a carnal
account, but that carnal men may see what benefit there is to be had under the
shadow of it] of this nation, who are in love with their money in that what one
way, what other, it would in a short time double their present estates by
saving th^se annual expenses, which are scrued from them, lit will also concern
younger brethen to ruminate hereof; for whereas it is the Custom of this
Nation, to make the elder son a Gentleman, etc. and the rest half beggars, this
Just and Righteous Law does alot the eldest son a double portion, and the rest
to have all equal portions, Deuteronomy. 21. 17.

6. By advancing this law, we do thereby own Jehovah to be our God and
Legislator, which now we cannot, but are such in a Civil sense, as (the Apostle
says,) are without God in the world.

7. By promoting the law, all the v^st civil breaches of this Nation would be
made up, for by covenanting to be conformable to this Government, we shall
the^eby be all made Brethren, and so should forget all former injuries* and
also it would be a fair way to make us one in a spiritual Relation) which
otherwise will never be done.

8. By exalting this law, we shall be freed from the Curse which we now lie
under, For cursed is every one that continues not in the words of the Law to
do them, Deuteronomy. 37. 26. and John 7. 49. This people that know not the Law are
accursed.

9. By magnifying of this Law, we shall have Justice done speedily, and upon
all occasions, as well upon small as great matters, Judges being appointed in
all the gates of the Cities in the Nation. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. to do Justice and
Judgment without wresting, Exodus 23. 6. Deuteronomy. 24.. 17. without
unrighteousness Levit. 19. 15. Without respect of persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.

10. By submitting to this Law men shall not be condemned to Prison, etc.
before they be heard, Deuteronomy. 9. 15. John 7. 51. as is the practice of the
present Governors of this Nation, and which I can speak by experience, having
been formerly kept by their means seventeen weeks a prisoner, having not a word
to say unto me, either before, or during my imprisonment, being never called
before any man, or examined or charged by any during that time, or at all, but
only told me I might be gone: and now again, they have also kept me fi^teen
weeks, knowing not in the least wherefore, not yet having been called or
questioned before any, so that they have been more cruel than the Pagan Romans;
for Festus thought it a thing unreasonable, (and consequently Brutish) to send
a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crime laid against him, Acts 25. 27.

11. By exalting this Royal Law, every knowing man may plead his own cause, it
will be laid down so plain, and stated so clear, in the words of the Text, and
therefore needs not to be seven years apprentice to Moses, as that blasphemous
Rabshakeh, Needham has scoffingly spoken of Moses and the Law. Who then that
is rational, would not rather forsake those muddy streams of Justinian,
Gratian, and other blind and ignorant men, (and such as the Prophet says,
turns the needy from Judg^ment, and takes away the right from the poor,
that makes widows their prey, and rob the Fa^herlesse, 1 Samuel 10. 2.) for
those pure streams of Justice and Judgment that comes out from God, and
rises in him; who would not, that looks upon himself as a Christian, rather
submit to that judgment that is Jus Divinum, than that which is a Traditional
Jus Humanum, from all the Idolatrous and Tyrannical Governors that have been
in the world.

12. What Liberty would this Law bring to this Nation, what freedom from
expense, from unjust imprisonment of men's persons, from being deceived in their
causes, and from being overborn in their Judg^ments by delay of Justice,
whereby potent adversaries have great advantage given them to corrupt Judges,
hinder Justice, and get false witness, many guilty persons by this means
scaping unpunished, and many innocent persons undone (by imprisonments) in
their estates, families, and repute among men, which would not be done, had we
but Judges, as at the first, and Rulers as at the beginning of the
Commonwealth of Israel, i. e. Men fearing God, and hating covetousness, and
valiant for the truth, to put this Holy, Just, and Perfect Law in execution,
not fearing the face of any, knowing that the Judgment is the Lords, the
accomplishment whereof, that the Lord would in much mercy hasten, is the
earnest desire of him, who is now a prisoner at Lambeth for the Testimony of
the truth as it is in Jesus, which he is ready to vindicate with all that is
near or dear unto him.

John Spittlehouse.

Errata.
REader, the Author not having had a sight of this printed Copy before it was
wrought off, throu^h the Correctours negligence, these following Errors have
happened, which are not only very many, but some also very gross, the matter
being left out in some places, so that without correcting thereof with thy pen,
before thou read, it will be troublesome to understand what is printed.

Page 3 line 15. read See, and in the Margent r. be, p. 8. l. 29. r. covet, p.
10, l. 2. r. heard, l. 4. r. commending, and in marg. r. were, l. 26. r. hence,
p. 11. l. 11. r. hence, p. 11. l 12. r. Restoration, and for commanded r.
commended, l. 16. r. hence, and in margent against l. 25. place figure (4.) p.
12. l. 3. r. Jam. p. 14. l. 24. r. whether, l. 31. r. denounced, p. 15. l. 2.
r. that they, l. 5. betwixt saying and in r. he has, and betwixt term and that
r. affirmed, l 8. r. Civil, l. 3. betwixt many and after r. wise, p. 17. l. 5.
r. enemy, l. 27. r. over all, 31. r. cares, l, 32. r. then, p. 18. against l.
31. place figure (4) in marg, p. 22. l. 1. r. declined, p. 23. l. 20, r. those,
l. 28. r. their, p. 24. l. 14. r. quiet, p. 29. l. 36. dele^ by, p. 32. l. 14.
r. it. l. 27. betwixt at and bringing r. the p 39. l. 8. r. thence, p. 40. l
35. r. contrivers. p. 43. l 2. r. a^pectable. l. 28. ^novel- p 49. l. 29. r.
intended, p. 56. l. 1. r. such, l. 15. betwixt of and Nation r. this, l. 36. r
judges, and betwixt of and Antichrist, r. the, l. 37. r. his, p. 58. l. 13. r.
desired, p. 62. and l. 31., r. and not that it is.

THE Royal Advocate, etc. Asserting,
That the Contents of the Royal Law of Jehovah, the Lord Christ, was planted
in Mankind by Nature.
first Parents were created in the Image of God, which consists in
Righteousness Genesis 1. 26, 27. Ephesians. 4. 24
and true holiness; yet were not they thereby made Lawless Persons, as
appears from the Testimony of the Apostle Paul, Romans 2. 14, 15. where he
says, The Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained
in the Law, these having viz. the written law
not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work Or, operation, or,
effects of the law.
of the Law, written in their Hearts, their Conscience also bearing them
witness, and their thoughts, in the mean while accusing or excusing one
another. And hence the Apostle says, I have lived in all good Conscience
before God, Act. 23. 1. vid. 24. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 19. 2. Tim. 1.
3. Heb. 13. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 16. 21. From which I Argue, that seeing Mankind in
The conscience is as a thousand witnesses.
their adulterate and depraved estate, had the operations of the Royal Law of
Jehovah written in their hearts by Nature, as also a Conscience accusing or
excusing them in point of obedience or disobedience thereunto. It must needs
be, that they had the same much more in their Virgin and pure estate, when they
were in their Innocence and Integrity before their fall.

And this does clearly appear from Genesis 3. 6, 7, 8. Where no sooner had our
first Parents violated the divine precept, by means of the suggestions and
delusions of Satan, but immediately their eyes are said to be opened, and that
they saw their nakedness, and went and sowed fig leaves together to make
themselves Aprons: As also in that as soon as they heard the voice of the Lord
in the Garden, they went to hide themselves among the Trees of the Garden.

All which does clearly denote unto us, that their Consciences had testified
unto them their disobedience, as also condemned them for what they had done,
and therefore they are said to be afraid, as in v. 10. If our Conscience
condemn us, God is greater than our Conscience, and he shall much more condemn
us. Vid. Heb. 9. 14.

Royal Law, so planted in mankind by Nature, is comprehended in two grand
Principles, i. e.
1. To love God above all.

2. To love our neighbor as our self.

Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all
thy might.

Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, etc.

Lev. 19. 17, 18. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer fin upon him. Thou shall not
avenge or bear grudge against the children of thy people, but, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self.

I am the Lord.

That this Doctrine was ratified by Jesus Christ.
Mark 12. 28. Then one of the Scribes, (that was a Lawyer Mat. 22. 35.) coming
unto him, and asking him, which was the first Commandment (or great
Commandment in the Law, Mat. 22. 36.) of all. Jesus answered him: The first of
all the Commandments, (or the Great Commandment in the Law, Mat. 22. 38) is,

Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with
all thy strength.

This is the first and Great Comm^ndement.

And the second is like unto it, namely this.

Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

There are no other Commandments that are greater than these.

Mat. 22. 40.

On these Commandments, hang all the Law, and the Prophets.

That this Doctrine was taught by the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, under the
dispensation of the Gospel-state.
The Characters of a right 5th monarchy man.
Gal. 5. 22. The fruits of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, faith, Meekness, Temperance, Against which there is no
Law.

And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts thereof, if we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the spirit, Let us not
be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another.

Jam. 2. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scriptures, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, thou shall do well; But if ye have
respect to persons, ye commit sin and are convinced of the Law as
transgressors; for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and offend in one point,
He is guilty of all.

Do not commit Adultery, said also Do not kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery,
yet if thou kill etc. thou art become a transgressour of the Law.

1. Pet. 1. 22, 23. Seeing ye have purified your selves in obeying the tr^th
through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren; so that ye love one
another with a pure heart, fervently.

Cap. 3. 8. etc. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another: Love
as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering railing for railing, but
contrary-wise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit a blessing. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that he speak no guile. Let him
eschew evil and do good, let him seek peace and ensue it. Read the following
words.

1 John 3. 14. We know we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren, v. 27. whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need
and shuts his bowels of compassion Bar Quakers in this particular.
toward him, how dwells the love of God in him. My little children, let us
not love in word, neither in tongue but in deed and in truth, etc. v. 33. And
this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment, and he that keeps
his commandments dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

Cap. 4. 17. Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God, and every
one that loves is born of God, and knows God; he that loves not, knows
not God, For God is love, etc.

Ecclesiastes 12. 13. Let us hear the con^lusion of the whole matter, Fear God
and keep his commandments, For this is the whole duty of man, etc.

That in process of time these two general Principles were branched by the
alone Lawgiver, into ten Precepts or words, commonly termed the Decalogue or
Ten Commandments.
Exodus 20. 1. etc.

God spoke all these words, saying,

I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and out of
the House of Bondage.

1. Thou shall have no other gods before me. 2. Thou shall not make to thee any
graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. Thou shall not
bow thy self to them, nor serve them. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of
them that love me and keep my Commandments. 3. Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vain; For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his name in vain. 4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: Six
days shall thou labor, and do all thy work, thou nor thy son, northy
daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
strangers, that are within thy ga^es; For in six days the Lord made heaven
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it. 5. Honor thy Father and
Mother, Reason, That thy days may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. 6. Thou shali not kill. 7. Thou shall not commit Adultery. 8. Thou
shall not steal. 9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his Manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his
Ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Mat. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets -- I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, (for verily) I say unto you, till
heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle in no wise shall pass from the
Law, till all be fulfilled, wherefore, whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
heaven. But whosoever shall do and teach them, shall be also called great in
the Kingdom of heaven.

That the Apostles of our blessed Savior did establish this Law under the
Gospel.
Romans 2. 11, 12, etc. For there is no respect of persons with All the world
liable to be judged by Gods Law The Law not made void through faith.
God, for as many as have sinned without Law, shall perish without Law, and as
many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law.

Rom, 3. 19. etc. Is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also of the
Gentiles, yea, of the Gentiles also, seeing it is one God which shall justify
the Circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith, Do we then
make void the Law through faith, God forbid, Yea, we establish the Law:

That the Law, which God gave unto Moses in Mount Sina, were of three sorts, i.
e. the Moral, the Judicial and the ceremonial Law.
The Contents of the Moral Law.
The Moral Law prescribes a perfect Rule of righteousness, discerning things
that are Right and Just, from the contrary, both toward God and man, both in
reference to external and internal duties, requiring obedience under pain of
everlasting death.

The Contents of the Judicial Law.
The Judicial Law belonged to the Civil State, and were such Ordinances, The
Judicial consists of Rules of Equity and Justice.
as contained rules of equity for the judging and deciding of civil
controversies, and questions, decreeing punishments for the transgressions of
the Moral and Ceremonial Laws, and consequently the very Bond of them Laws,
keeping the people in order and Obedience.

The Contents of the Ceremonial Law.
The Ceremonial Law concerned such Rites and sacrifices, as belonged to the
external worship of God, prescribed to the people of the ^ews, in reference to
the promised seed of the woman, which was to bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3.
14, 15. and to typifie his coming to this end, as also to distinguish them from
other Nations in the world, and to be signs and Symbols unto them of the
Spiri^uall graces of the New Testament, to be fulfilled by the Messiah.

The Ceremonial Law utterly abolished.
As touching the Ceremonial Law, it is utterly abolished, so that there is no
place for them under the Gospel. Neither can they be revived without derogation
to the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle says, if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing, Gal. 5. 2. for when the body is come the shadow must
be done away, but the Cremonies were shadows, the body is Christ, Col. 2. 17.

1. Their Temple signified the body of Christ, in his Church their Holy place
HEAVEN, or the bodies of the Saints, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your bodies
are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, etc. their sacrifices the
passion of Christ. Heb. 9. 26. 28. their expiation the Remission of sins,
Heb. 22. etc. these things then being fully verified and fulfilled in Christ,
have no more place in the Church.

2. These Ceremonies served only for that carnal people, which were as
children kept in Bondage under the Elements and Rudiments of the world, Gal. 4.
3. But now we are no longer under Tutours and Governors, the time appointed of
the father being expired, but are set free and redeemed by Christ.

3. A third Reason for the abolishing of them, is in respect of that people to
whom they were prescribed as a mark and Cognizance to discern them from all
other nations. But now this distinction also being taken away, and the wall of
partition being broken down, Jew and Gentile, being now made all one in Christ
by faith, that also is abolished, which discerned them from other people.

For the Causes being changed, for the which the Law was made, there must needs
be also an Alteration of the Law it self.

The Moral Law remains in full force, in point of obedience.
The Moral Law remains yet in full force, and is not abrogated in respect of
obedience, which thereunto is still required under the Gospel. But in respect
of the Curse Christ has only taken away the Curse and malediction of the
Moral Law.
and malediction, which Christ has taken away (so that it is most true which
our blessed Savior Says, He came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it,
Mat. 5. 17, 18 19.) he has fulfilled it; first, in his own person, in keeping
it; 2. in paying the punishment for us, which was due by the Law to the
transgressors thereof; 3. inabling us by his grace, to walk in obedience to
his Law.

Why it pleased God, to give his written Law into the World.
1. God did not give the moral law in writing, in that he was either mutable in
changing his first determination, or that in process of time, he had found out
a more profitable way then he knew before, as some have wickedly objected of
old; and now revived by the The Ranters and Quakers Tenent.
Ranters and Quakers of this Apostate Generation, saying, that by the light of
Nature before the Flood, Men discerned good from evil, just from unjust, so
that the old world sinning against the law of Nature was justly punished, it
being imprinted in their hearts, they showing the effects of that Law written
in their hearts, their consciences also bearing them witness?

Answer. 1. But because the law of Nature was now much obscured, and almost
quite obliterated by reason of the Idolatry and Tyranny that was then spread
over the earth, which flowed from the corruption of nature. Therefore the Lord
thought it needful to give it forth by a Visible writing thereof in two Tables
of Stone: To his then only peculiar people, who from that very cause, was
selected out of the world, Genesis 17. 1, 2, 4. Exodus 15. 26. and 20. 2, 3. Deuteronomy.
5. 1, 2, 3. and 6. 12, etc.

2. Least men should complain, that somewhat was wanting in the heart;
therefore to take away all pretext of ignorance, the Lord gave his written Law;
so that all men in general are left without excuse.

3. Because it was to prepare and make way for the Gospel, to show that we have
not strength in our selves to fulfill the law, in reference to the spiritual
part thereof: and so it was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.
24.

4. It was given as a supply of the weakness and ignorance of man, that whereas
there was no certain rule before to know what was good and what was evil; but
men according to their blind fantasy and carnal imagination, placed
happiness some in one thing, and some in another, the written law was to
correct their erroneous opinions, and to teach one constant and certain rule of
truth and virtue.

Civil and Politic matters, the esteemed wise among the Heathen, by their
depraved light of nature and experience had attained to some degree of
knowledge therein; yet they were utterly ignorant of the true knowledge
thereof, and worship which God required therein: all which is explained in the
law, with the statutes and judgments annexed thereunto.

So that in doing of this, the Lord is said to commit the greatest treasure in
the world to mankind, as Moses affirms, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. What Nation is there so
great that has Statutes and judgments so righteous as all the Law that I set
before you this day.

The fourfold use of the moral law in the fourfold State of man.
First, As man was in his creation and state of Innocence, he received two
benefits by the knowledge of the law, which was grafted in him by creation. For
1. thereby he was made conformable to the image of God. And so directed, as
that he should not have swerved from the will of his creator: 2. He had
assurance so long as he walked in obedience thereunto of certain eternity,
never to have tasted of Death, Corruption, or Mutability.

For he that keeps the Law shall live thereby.
Secondly, in Man's corrupt and decayed estate, the law served to restrain the
evil, (i. e. the written Law) and therefore the Apostle says, that the Law is
not given to a righteous man, but to a lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1. 9. as
also to discover unto them their sins; and hence the same Apostle says,
without the law sin is dead, Romans 7. 8. i. e. sin was not known to be sin, for
says he, I had not known Lust, except the Law (i. e. the written Law) had
said, Thou shall not commit, verse. 7.

Here then that Soul-destroying notion of Quakisme is confuted, The Quakers
opinion confuted.
which alloreth men that are in this corrupt and decayed condition of nature
(viz. evil and unregenerate men, to look to the light of nature within them,
for their guidance and direction, and not to the revealed will of God, in his
word, or at least rather; notwithstanding the Apostle does positively declare
all such light to be absolute darkness, even darkness in the Abstract: As in
Ephesians. 5. 8. where he tells the Church at Ephesus, that they had been sometimes
darkness, and that at such time they walked according as other Gentiles
walked, in the vanity of their minds, according to the course of this world,
according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that works in
the children of disobedience, etc. as also that they were by Nature, i. e.
since the fall; for it cannot be meant of Nature in Adam before his fall, for
it was then good, and so good, as that it is termed the image of God, (as before
mentioned) the children of wrath, even as others. Now I would gladly know, what
light of Nature these Ephesians had, when they were even Darkness it self,
etc. and when they were without Christ, and strangers from the Covenant of
promise without hope, and without God in the world.

If the Quakers reply that Christ is that Light, which lighteneth every man
that comes into the world.

I answer and demand of them, how he had enlightened these Gentiles, which the
Apostle compared the Ephesians unto (as aforesaid) Again, if Christ has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, in their sense, then the
Apostle Paul was a vainglorious person, who terms himself a spiritual
father to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 15. and that he had begotten them through
the Gospel; for if the Light of the Gospel had been naturally in them, how
could Paul be said to be Gods instrument of conveying that Gospel Light unto
them. Again, if so, wherefore do these persons make use of Prayer and
preaching, if it be not advantageous to illuminate their Auditors, and if they
be illuminated thereby, then those so illuminated, cannot attribute the Light,
they so receive from others, to themselves; and say that they had not received
the same instrumentally from their brother Quakers: It will therefore
unavoidably follow, that the Quakers practice does destroy and confound their
accursed Principle, of holding forth that dark Lanthorn of the depraved light
of Nature to light men that are merely Natural into the ways of truth and
righteousness.

When one came to enquire of our blessed Savior what he Jesus Christ was no
Quaker.
should do to obtain eternal life, he did not (as these Quakers) send him to
the Light within him, but asks him saying, what is written in the Law, how
read thou? Luke, 10. 26, etc.

Again, speaking to the Sadduces, who say there is no Resurrection (and so full
Cousin germans to these Quakers) says, that they erred in not knowing the
Scriptures, Mat. 2. 29. Mark 12. 24. clearly implying that the Contempt of the
Sacred Scriptures is the Original of Error, as has been too evidently made
manifest by the Ranters, who since they have despised the Scriptures, have run
themselves into the very height of wickedness. The Apostle Paul in such cases
does therefore exhort Timothy to beware of evil men and Seducers, and to
continue in the things that he had read, and had been assured of; knowing of
whom he had learned them, The Scripture more holy in Paul's esteem.
commanding him in that of a Child, he had known the Holy Scripture, which was
able to make him wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ
Jesus, affirming that all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God The
excellent use of holy Scripture.
, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction
in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, in man's regenerate condition, the Law or Scripture, (the gospel being
only the Spirit of the Law) is a perfect Rule of righteousness, witness the
Prophet David, who speaking of the Law of God, says it was A Lanthorn to his
feet, and a light unto his paths, Psalm. 119. 105. and Psalm. 19. 7. he says,
the Law of God is perfect, converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is
pure, and enlightneth the eyes, etc. more to be desired than gold, yea, than
much fine gold, sweeter also than honey, or the honey comb^; moreover says he,
'by them is thy servant taught, and in keeping of them there is great reward.'
Again, Psalm. 119. 24. Thy Testimonies also are my delight and my Counselors,
by all which it is clear that godly David did not run to a Notion within him to
be his counselor, but to the Law and to the Testimony, knowing that whosoever
walks not according to that Rule, it is because they have no light in them.
Isa. 8. 20.

Again, how it is the Lord threatens his people, for that they A lesson for
the Ranters and Quakers.
had forsaken his Law, which he had set before them, and did not obey this
voice, neither walked therein, but walked after the imagination of their own
hearts Jer. 9. 13, 14, 15.

Our blessed Savior also tells his Apostles, saying, By this ye shall know
ye are my Disciples, if ye observe whatsoever I Command you: he does not send
them to the Dictates of their own fantasies, but what he had commanded them.

The Apostle Paul also affirms, that whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our Instruction, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scripture might have Hope, Romans 15. 4.

The Apostle Peter also exhorts the people of God to be These Commandments
were not Notions.
mindful of the words which were spoken before, by the Holy Prophets, and of
the Commandments of them the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 3. 2. as also
that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, and that
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but that Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. We are not then
to imitate these Quakers, to leave a certainty for an incertainty, the written
word for a whimsie in the brain, making their phansies their Scripture and rule
to walk by, no says the Apostle speaking of the Holy Scripture, as many as
walk by this rule, peace shall be upon them, etc. what will befall such then as
walk not according to this Rule, but tribulation and wrath, etc

Secondly, in man's regenerate condition, the written Law teaches the true
knowledge of God, and how it was that the Apostle Paul commanded the Bereans,
because they tried his Doby the Touchstone of the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11.
Those of Berea were more noble than those of Thessalonica, etc.

Thirdly, it assures a man that walks therein of his Election, and how our
blessed Savior says, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them,
John 13. 17. as also the Apostle Peter, If ye do these things, ye shall never
fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Fourthly, it shows what benefit we have received by Christ, i. e. the
renewing of that image wherein man was first created, (the Scriptures being a
Lanthorn and a Light to that purpose, as David h^th acknowledged) Col. 3. 10.
Having put on the new man which is created in knowledge, after the image of him
that created him.

In the state of Reformation of all things, the Law shall have that use which
it had before man's fall, to show the conformity of mankind in their holy
obedience, with the blessed will of their Glorious Creator, Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, blessed for ever, Amen.

Of the Judicial Law.
The Judicialll Law flows from the Moral Law, which is the Fountain and
Foundation thereof; and as the Moral Law is fixed in the Heart and Conscience
of every man by nature, Romans 2. 14, 15. so the Judicialls appertaining
thereunto, flow from the same Fountain, and therefore seeing no Commonwealth
can stand without a Civil and Judicial Constitution; the Lord therefore having
provided the Law that binds in Conscience, so here he sets forth the pena^ll
laws, whereby the obstinacy of men may be restrained; for if men were left to
themselves, there would be few that would not rather live as they list, as the
Ranters, etc.

1. Therefore because it might so fall out, that all would not be Why the
Judicial Law was given.
obedient to the Moral Precept, it was necessary that the alone Lawgiver,
(Romans 4. 12.) who is only able to save and to destroy, to prescribe what
Punishment every transgressour of the Law should be liable unto.

Of the word Judgment.
As touching the word Judgment in the Singular, it does not signify as
Judgments in the Plural; for Judgment in the Singular does for the most part
signify condemnation, but in the plural it signifies as well the revenge and
punishment of the guilty, as the defense of the innocent.

2. The word Judgment is taken three ways, as first it signifi^s the Act of
Judgment and understanding, which determines what is meet and convenient to
be done, and so it is the fountain and beginning, whence good Laws do proceed.

For the Law is made good out of Judgment.

So that the Judicial Law is in effect as if the Lord had said unto Moses,
whereas I have already given the people General Rules of serving me, as also
how to dem^an themselves one toward another, now upon a full and deliberate
consultation and Judgment given I shall deliver their particular demeanor
touching the same; as also the punishment that shall be inflicted upon the
violatours thereof, whether toward me, or toward one another.

2. The word Judg^ment is taken for the Administration of Justice, which is the
executive part of the Law.

3. It is taken for the Law it self, according to which Judgment i^ given.

The Judicial Law of three sorts.
1. They either were such as were annexed to the Moral Law, as the statutes and
Judgments touching the Contemners of the Moral Law in General or in
particular, as in Blasphemy, Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, etc.

2. Or such as were appendent to the Ceremonial Law, as the Statutes and
Judgments touching any dead thing, or that were prohibited and the like.

3. Or such as appertained to the particular Policy and State of the Jews
Commonwealth, as concerning the year of Jubilee, raising ^^ seed to the brother
departed without issue, by marrying his wife, etc.

The two last of these are abolished, one with the Ceremonies on which they
attended, the other as being only peculiar to that Government, is now decayed
and determined with it.

The Great Controversy now to debate, is whether the first of of these, i. e.
the Statutes and Judgments annexed to the Moral Law be as Binding to all
Nations, as the Moral Law it self.

In r^ference to which, I take the Affirmative part, and say, That the Judicial
Laws, annexed to the Moral Law, is as Binding as the Law, and ought to be put
in practice by the Magistrates of ALL the NATIONS in the whole world.

This great Argument controverted.
It is acknowledged that the Moral Law, is obligatory, universal, The
Adversaries confession.
and eternal; for that it is agreeable to the Law of nature commanded by God to
Moses, revived and ratified by Jesus Christ in the Gospel: and therefore may
really and truly be termed the Law of Christ, and the Royal Law of Jehovah,
binding ALL NATIONS.

But as for the judicial Law, it ended with the Jews Common Their Objection.
wealth, for which it was intended; and therefore until it can be shown, when
and where it was renewed and imposed upon all Nations Mounseir Needham the Court
Parrasite and Pensioner, that scoffing Ishmaelite and blasphemous Rabshakah of
the times says he will not believe it.

Royal Law of Jehovah, i. e. the Moral Law, and as touching the other, I answer
and say.

That the Judicial Law annexed to the Moral Law, is no more ended or
determined than the Moral Law it self. Neither can be, And that for these
following Reasons, i. e.

1. For they are as I have said, conclusions and rules of justice, Moral Law,
or Royal Law; and were not appointed to prefigure any thing, but merely
grounded upon the law of Equity and Justice; and therefore can nor ought to be
laid aside any more than those precepts of equity and justice, to which they
are so inseparably annexed, as that the one cannot suffer detriment without the
other, and consequently neither the law, statute, or judgment, but by an open
and apparent contempt of Jehovah the Lord Christ, the God of equity and
justice, who has established and ratified them to be his laws to such purpose,
and so not judaicall, or peculiar only to the Jews, but to all that are under
the verge of the Moral Law.

2. For that the breach of the Moral Precept, (or Law is the same before the
alone Lawgiver) in one part of the world, as in another, as to kill a man
wilfully, or by Accident, is now the same sin before the eyes of God in
England, as it was then in Canaan, and consequently of any other transgression
of the Moral Precept; and therefore in such cases, the great and singular
Lawgiver has declared that one Law should be for the stranger, (i. e. the
Gentile) as for the home born, (or Jews themselves) Exodus 12. 49. Lev. 24. 22.

And therefore unless this Changeling, will undertake to prove Jehovah the
Lord Christ, such an one as himself, as to prefix one punishment in Canaan for
the violation of a Moral Precept, (whether General or particular) and another
sort of punishment for the same Transgression in another Country, as in
England, etc. (which blasphemous Assertion he is as like to maintain as any I
know, for a Stipends sake) he cannot avoid, but must per Force subscribe, that
the said statutes and Judgments, are of as large an extent, as the Moral Law
it self acknowledged by him, i. e. Obligatory, Universal and Eternal, and
Binding all Nations.

better Government of themselves, according to Prudence and Discretion,
provided they be not contrary to that Royal Law.

Prag. I here challenge thee, and all thy Mast^^s, which in Court, City, or
Country, Universities or Innes of Court, by what names or titles so ever,
dignified or distinguished, to show me one Text of Scripture that grants any
such latitude to Magistrates, by the alone Lawgiver, as they are (or ought to
be) his Ministers or servants, to put his Laws in execution, but contrary-wise
such Actions are so abominable in the eyes of Jehovah the Lord Christ, as that
he has denoted a curse against those that do take upon them, either to add or
detract, that either swerve to the right hand or the left, from those Laws,
Statutes and Judgments prescribed by him: for proof hereof see Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Gal. 3. 10. No Monsieur, Prag. those that are Dispensers of Iehovahs laws,
must not make Laws for him, whether in reference to Statute or Judgment, he is
as able to prescribe his punishment, as his Law, without their help or
assistance.

And therefore it was that our blessed Savior so much inveighed against the
Scribes, Pharisees, hypocrites, of his time of abode here on earth, (like unto
Needhams forementioned Masters) for that they had not only transgressed the
Commandments of God, by their vain Traditions, (or Expositions) but he had
even made them thereby of none effect, Mat. 13. 3, 4, 5 etc.

So that I affirm that Clause in Needhams Objection, (i. e.) For the better
Government, etc. to be absolute blasphemy, for that by so saying in plain
terms, that his (aforesaid Masters, are Wiser than the Great God of Heaven and
Earth, in reference to the composing of all Government for the sons of men;
and therefore according to the Statute and Judgment appropriated by Jehovah in
such Cases he ought to be put to death, vid. Lev. 24. 11. 15. 23. as also for
his scurrilous expressions against Moses and the Laws, given by God unto him to
communicate to the people; for he that despised Mose's Law, was to dye without
mercy, under the testimony of two or three witnesses, which Judgment will
doubtless fall upon the heads of Needham, etc.

In so saying, he clearly gives the Apostle Paul the lie, who asserteth, That
the foolishness of God is wiser than the wisdom of men, 1. Cor. 1. 25. The
meanest of the Divine Orders, being far beyond the wisest of his or his Masters
vain imaginations: so that by such their deceived foolish hearts, they only
contract to themselves that Heathenish Character, i. e. by professing
themselves Romans 1. 2, 2.
wise, to be Downright Foolish; for in such Cases the Apostle does positively
affirm, that the wisdom of the world, (viz. Athenian like Wisdom) is
foolishness to God; for it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise
(whether in Civil or spiritual matters) I will bring to naught the Councels of
the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer (or
Needhams) of this world? has not God made Foolish the Wisdom (or politic
carnal wisdom) of this World? and therefore he concludes, that not many after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called by God to be made
Instruments in his work or service (whether in Civils or Spiritualls) but
contrariwise has made choice of that which is Foolish in the esteem of Needham
and his Masters (whether in reference to persons or things) to confound that
which they esteem wisdom, that no flesh might glory in his presence, vide Rev.
27, 28, 29.

1. I do therefore hereby affirm, that God that gave life and limbs unto men,
etc. has only power to dispose of them, and none else; and that he that
takes away either the life or limb of any man, other wise than God himself
has appointed, or given direction (in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament) either by general rule, or particular precept, is a Murderer and a
Tyrant.

2. I do also hereby affirm, that whosoever does not take away life or limb, in
such cases as the alone lawgiver has appointed is an unjust Judge. And that
he will be punished by Jehovah the Lord Christ for so doing:

Reason, For he has said Ye shall do no unrighteousnes in judgment, thou
shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty,
Levit. 19. 15.

But in Righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor.
(A text that ere long may be urged against those that have urged it against
others, vid. Abridg. Remonst. Albans page 10. with several other scriptures to
such purpose.) And hence it was, that Moses charged the Judges of Israel,
saying, Hear the cause between your brethren and judge Righteously, between
every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him; and ye shall not
respect persons in Judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well as the
great, you shall not be afraid of the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16, 17.

Reason, For the judgment is Gods.

3. That in all other cases, the Magistrate being the Minister or servant of
God (or at least ought so to be) Romans 13. 4. ought to execute justice, as the
alone Lawgiver their Lord and Master has prescribed, which they cannot do
otherwise than by putting his laws in execution, according to those statutes
and judgments established by God himself (and not according to their own lusts
and humors, as our present Magistrates do at this day, punishing several
things by death, which the alon^ Lawgiver has appointed other punishments;
and several things with other punishments, for which the alone Lawgiver has
appointed death.

Reason. For it is required in a disposer, that he should be found faithful, 1
Cor. 4. 2.

But Gods will otherwise appears not, then in his word or law. Therefore who
so does not accordingly, does not perform the will of the alone Law giver, in
his word or Law, and consequently of the number of those Magistrates mentioned
by Solomon in his book titled Wisdom, cap. 6. 1. to whom he says, by way of
rebuke and admonition, Hear therefore O ye Kings and understand, learn ye
that be Judges of the ends of the earth; give ear you that rule the people, and
glory in the multitude of Nations, for power is given you of the Lord, and
sovereignty from the highest, (i. e. the Constitution of Authority or
Magistracy, Romans 13. 3, 4. and that according to the Armies own construction of
that place, in their Abridgment of the Remonstrant Albans, wherein page 6. they
say, that Paul speaks in that place of Authority, etc. Magistracy in its
constitution, not of a Person abusively exercising it to be Gods instrument of
Good to every one, and an incourager of good in every man, and an envying to
evil) who will try your work (or policy) and search out your Counsel: then
Counselors look to your selves, you had need then to treble your guards about
you.

judged right,) nor kept the Law? What will become of those Magistrates then
that have neither kept the Law, i. e. that have not judged according to the Law
of the alone Law giver; neither have judged according to their own Laws, surely
the following judgment will fall with a Witness upon such Magistrates.) Nor
walked after the Counsel of God (no nor of good men neither, but of a company
of fawning Parrasites, the Frogs, Locusts, Caterpillars, and Cankerworms of
Nations) horribly and speedily will he come upon you: For a sharp judgment
shall be to them that are in high places, for mercy will pardon the meanest
(such as may not properly be termed the makers and judges of Heathenish Laws,
i. e. the pettyfoggers of the Laws and governments of man, i. e. such as are
not Commissionated to such purpose) but mighty men shall be mightily tormented.

Lord Oneral shall fear no man's person (How?) not the person of O. P. etc.
Neither shall he stand in aw of any man's greatness (but sure he dare not
meddle with his Highness, that is, a degree above greatness) for he has made
the small and great, and earth for all a like, (how, for all alike? that's a
strange saying indeed, surely, the Lord will be a leveller with a witness)

But a sore trial shall come upon the mighty: Let her alone until that day,
The Fox fares b^st when he is threatened most. These are but
Bug-bear-expressions to frighten children, valiant Heroes fears them not, me
vive fiat, says Nero and his Comrades, let this day of judgment come in their
time, so much do they fear it; tush, they are only mock-beggers, and
scar-crows, they see by reason and experience that all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation, let a company of dreaming Prophets say
what they will, does God take notice of idolatry or Tyranny, as the simple
vulgar term it? Tush, he sees no such thing, there is no such knowledge in the
most high, and if he do know, yet doubtless he hides away his face, and will
not see it; For surely otherwise he would not have suffered it so long to have
been practiced as he has done; away therefore with all such Fancies, and let
us look after our present work to suppress such saucy insolent fellows, that
dares to cite such Treasonable Texts, to the and they may affright us. What!
does not our Prognosticatours tell us, that our Government is permanent, and
will not admit of alteration for many hundreds of years? what then ought we to
give heed to such bablers.

Unto you O Kings (says Solomon) do I speak, that Ye may learn wisdom, and
not fall away. (How now Solomon, do you give us this Counsel, surely this book
was made when you were in your doling condition, when you began to have one leg
in the grave, it was not so with you when your Government lashed your brethren,
as with whips, when your provision for one day, was thirty measures of fine
flower, and threescore measures of meal, ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of
the pasture, besides Hearts, and Robucks, and Fallow-deere, and fatted fowl,
when you had forty thousand stalls of horses for your Chariots, and twelve
thousand horsemen; when you had seven hundred wives, and three hundred
concubines: No, this was when you began to surfeit of your pleasures, and
therefore to cry all is vanity and vexation of spirit, well, when we have taken
our fill of pleasure as you did, we shall peradventure take your advise, in the
mean time give us leave to satisfy the lusts of our own hearts, and if not,
know, we will take leave, and so farewell Solomon.

Seeing that which is not of of faith or firm persuasion is sin, Romans 14. 23.
and faith must be grounded upon the Word, as being wrought by the Word, Romans
10. 16, 17, 18. The Magistrate cannot justify his Acts of Justice in the sight
of God, unless he can warrant the same from the word of God: and what word is
there for taking away the life of a man for simple theft, etc. with several
other things now acted by the present Magistrates of this Nation, as I shall
undertake to prove, if ever providence call me thereunto.

5. In as much as God has created man in his own Image, Genesis 1. 26. etc. which
Image is in Man's Soul, animating his body: This Image I say, ought not to be
defaced and dissolved, but by warrant and direction from the word of God, and
consequently in all other Cases, where the Great Lawgiver has as well
prescribed the Punishment, as the Offense, i. e. the judgment or punishment,
as the Precept or Statute, and that who so does not so, is a Rebel and Traitor
to the alone Lawgiver, whose servant he ought to be in all faitfulnesse, and
not an Usurper of his Masters Authority or Legislatorship, as our present
Magistrates are at this day.

Mordecay and Daniel, having place of Government under the Babylonish and
Persian Kings, did no doubt administer Justice according to the Laws and
Customs of that Country.

Therefore the Laws of the Heathens were assented unto by godly persons.

far different, for those Emperors or Kings were Heathen, but the present
Magistrates of this Nation, are at least in pretense Christians, and therefore
for them (above all other) to act by and according to those Heathenish Laws and
Customs does render them to be Worse than the very Heathen.

Heathens did make and act by such Laws, meere^y out of blind ignorance, Acts
17. 30. and therefore God is said to wink thereat, but since has commanded All
Men every None then can plead excuse.
where to repent of such their wickedness, because he has Appointed a day in
which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, which can be done by no other,
than his own Holy, Just, perfect and Righteous Laws, by the Man whom he has
ordained, etc.) but the present Magistrates of this Nation, or Supreme power,
which I take (with Mr. Feak) to reside in the Army or Chief Officers thereof,
they do it Presumptuously, witness their Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. in
which they have Notoriously proclaimed to All the World, that they have fought
to set up the Lord Jesus Christ to be King or Legislator in this Commonwealth,
as also vowed obedience unto him upon his Own Terms, and that they would admit
Him Only to the exercise of his Royal Authority, ^and in order thereunto have
affirmed, that the Law that was put into the hands of which was no other than
the statutes and judgments depending upon the Moral Law Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19.
Ioash at his Coronation, to be a Law from heaven, as also a Rule for all
Rulers, and that whosoever is not under those Laws, owns not his Subjection to
God. So that what the Apostle says of the Heathen, Romans 1. 21. i. e. (That
when they knew God, they did not worship him as God, but became vain in their
imaginations, their foolish hearts being darkened, and so professing themselves
wise became fools, and thereby left themselves without excuse) I may fitly
apply to the late actions of these Army men, yea, and that in a Greater
measure, in reference to the Law of God; Jehovah has not afforded many of the
Heathen that privilege, as to have either the Letter or true sense of the Law,
Romans 2 14. But these persons have both the Letter and true sense of the Law,
and yet wilfully refuse to put them in practice, and consequently receive this
great grace and favor of God in vain, choosing rather with Turks and Infidels,
to be a Law unto themselves.

And what is this less in a Civil Sense, than the Quakers and Ranters Tenent
in a Spiritual Sense, the one thinking they have No need of the Touchstone
rule, or Standard of the Scriptures of the New Testament, to guide them in
their Spiritual condition, or Inward Man, living merely upon the dictates,
figments or Notions of the wild Fancies of their frisking brain. The other that
they have likewise, Reason and light of nature enough within them to govern
themselves and their Vassals in reference to the outward man, and therefore
like the other, will not make use of the Old Testament, for that purpose, but
esteem them as things base and despicable for such wise and Profound Persons,
as Mr. Needham and his Masters, the now great Courtiers are.

And thus betwixt them do they complete that Body of Iniquity and And have
filled up the measu^e of the wrath of their pred^c^ssours in iniquity* and
consequently ripe for judgment, which sleeps not.
Transgressions, and therefore with the Heathen may properly be said to be
without Law, and without God in the World, and consequently at the very
threshold of entering into that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, which
is defined to be a resisting of the known truth, which can be no other than the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, not of infirmity, or for fear or
favor, but of more Malice and Hatred against the written Word, i. e. the LAW
and the Gospel (the one trampled under foot by the Ranters and Quakers, and the
other despised and contemned by Need^am and his Masters, witness his
scurrilous pamphlet, tituled the Observator) notwithstanding they are the very
dictates of the Spirit of God to Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, as I have
proved.

And therefore ought to be of as much value and esteem among the people of God,
as if the same words were now inspired into them by the same Spirit: so that by
having the benefit of the Holy Scriptures, it is as much as if we had Moses and
all the Prophets, with Jesus Christ and his Apostles now Extant with us, with
all the Miracles which were wrought by them for the Confirmation thereof, John
20. 31. and consequently do thereby enjoy God, Christ and the blessed spirits
breathings, as if the same were now breathed upon us, in reference to our
guidance and direction in the duties required of us by God, either as to
himself or our Neighbor, so that where it is prophesied, that in the latter
days, we shall be all taught of God, I affi^m, it is meant of no other
teaching, than that of the Old and New Testament which shall then be the Only
Rule and Square of our Actions, whether in reference to things spiritual or
Civil; for it cannot be other than Blasphemy to assert, that the blessed spirit
should teach Contradictions, to teach one Rule in Scripture, and another Rule
in Notion, and if so, then all Notions whatsoever these Ranters, Quakers, etc.
pretend unto, which are not as agreeable with the Letter of the Scriptures, as
a pair of Indentures agrees with one another, and even as face answers face
in a glass, I say, and do testify that they are of their Father the Devil.

And therefore the words of the Apost^e, may fitly be applied to these men,
Heb. 4. where speaking of such as were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
good word of God, and the power of the world to come, says, that it is
impossible for such if they shall fall away, to be renewed again by Repentance,
seeing they have crucified to themselves the Son of God, and have put him to an
open shame, as also those words in Cap. 10. 26, 27, etc. where he says, If we
sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful loo^ing for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. Again, if he that despised
Moses Law died without mercy under two or three witnesses, of how much greater
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has done despite to the spirit of grace, such ^^ now term the same
spirit, the spirit of the Devil, which they have all along hitherto (during the
time of their Straits and Low Condition) owned for the Spirit of God; and the
sole guider and director of their Actions, Simile. Vid. Epist. Jud. v. 10, 11,
12, 13, etc.
much like the Apostate Sons of God in the old world, who having once declared
their holy profession, through the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, became the most desperate wretches that were in that
world, running themselves headlong (like a horse into the battle) into all
manner of Excess and Riot, neither fearing God nor man, which abominable
wickedness was the occasion of the destruction of that world. And our Lord
Jesus has foretold, that as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be at the
coming of the Son of man.

Implying that a great Apostasy shall happen at that time among the Professors
of the truth, which this day is too evidently fulfilled both in the Eyes and
Ears of all that truly fear God, and keep his Commandments, to do them, but to
the thing in question.

2. If Mordecay and Daniel might have had their will, they would doubtless
have promoted the Royal Laws of their Jehovah, with the Statutes and
Judgments annexed thereunto, as clearly appears by the practice of good
Nehemiah, Cap. 8. 1, 2. who no sooner had the Gal. 6. 10 As we have opportunity
let us do good.
Opportunity put into his hand of magnifying the Law of God, and making it
Honorable, but forthwith put it in practice, which sad experience teaches, our
Army-Men have not, albeit, all their opportunities, vows and protestations to
that purpose, as before expressed, whereas it is the mind of God, that if a man
vow or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond that he break not his word,
but do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, Numb. 30. 2. Again
Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou shall vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack
to pay it; for the Lord thy God shall surely require it of thee, and it will be
sin to thee: again Ecclesiast. 5. 4, 5, 6. When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools. Pay that which thou have
vowed, better it is thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and
not pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou
before the angel that it was an error; wherefore should God be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thy hand, All that your Swords have gotten you.
Godly David tells God, that he will pay the vows which he made to him when he
was in trouble, but it seems our Army-men, are content with Nebuchadnezzar to
proclaim the God of Daniel to be worshipped in their Dominions, provided he
will be content to have it done after the Baylonish fashion. Otherwise they
have no more to say unto him.

Again, it is worthy our observation, what notabe Jugglers Instance.
the Kings or Tyrants of the earth have ever been with God, as for instance in
Dan. 2. 47. we find Nebuchadnezzar (having lately received a favor from
Daniels God, in reference to the knowledge of his dream, openly declaring, that
of a truth Daniels God was a God of Gods and a Lord of Kings, and a revealer of
Secrets, and yet notwithstanding all this, in the third verse following, we
find the same Nebuchadnezzar er^cting an image of Gold, and compelling the
worship^ers of Daniels God, to fall down and worship it. An Act not much
unsuitable to the present actions of our Army-men, who having formerly
proclaimed Jesus Christ, as aforesaid, Comparison.
(by way of thankfulness for their wonderful preservations from so many
eminent dangers, and to exalt and magnify him only, and that by his own Way,
or Rule of Worship, in and by his own Laws, and Ordinances, contained in the
holy Scriptures, that they would suppress whatsoever was contrary thereunto,
both in Church and State) but the Nine Days Wonder being over, forthwith cast
all their Engagements behind their backs, and instead of performing thereof,
turn direct Antipodians, or Retrogradians, by setting up an image of some
things that had been destroying, and not only so, but also commanding
obedience thereunto, witness the late Gooernment they have erected.

3. Albeit Mordecay and Daniel did act according to the Laws and Customs of
that Country, during their captivity in that place, that does not in the least
argue or conclude that the Laws of the Babylonians and Persians should now be
promoted among us.

Laws, without their Idols, for their Laws were their Religion, by which they
worship Flesh, God or King, or Tyrant, at whose Lust and Pleasure, the lives of
men were sacrificed to appease his wrath, or their graven and molten gods, with
the Rites and Ceremonies appertaining thereunto.

Therefore in as much as we do at least pretend, that we do not worship their
gods, what use have we of their Laws or Religion? whether in reference to their
idolatries, or Tyrannical worship required by them?

So that the necessary Consequent of what has been said will be, that so many
of this Nation, as own that God, which made his own Law in Mount Sina, by which
he will be worshipped, as also how his Subjects shall demean themselves one
toward another and which was established and ratified by his son, and our
Savior (in Mount Olivet) and also by his Apostles, (as has been proved) That
they henceforth endeavor the promotion of those Holy, Just, and perfect Laws,
with all their might and power, and contrary-wise to suppress all such persons
and things that are opposite thereunto, whether in Church or State.

Caesar, and the Apostle enjoined obedience to the higher powers, which does
bear the Sword, and that for conscience sake, Romans 13. all which gives
Approbation to the Laws of Nations.

Heathen Magistrates; and therefore to the end they might procure unto
themselves a great and peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty, 1 Timothy
^2. 2. Our Lord Jesus and his Apostles, admonished them in such cases, not to
oppose or resist them, and indeed who would not feed a hungry and greedy Lion,
rather than to be torn in pieces, and devoured by him. But all this does not in
the least prove, that the Laws of Caesar, or the Image thereof, are better than
the Laws of God, or that the people of God, having now under God freed
themselves from the Dominion of Caesar, should now by force be brought back
again to worship and adore the image and Superscription of Caesar, under a
Cesarian Habit, that they should submit to the Laws, Customs and Traditions of
those false gods they have Conquered, and Neglect the Laws, Statutes and
Judgments of that God by whose might and power they have conquered these false
gods, and their worshippers; for if so, what is it other than to imitate those
disobedient Israelites (who joined in league with the Canaanites, whom the Lord
signed for destruction) and with them to worship Baalim, and the Groves, Judges
3. 6, 7.

Therefore such whom the Lord has made isntrumental, either by word or sword,
to extirpate the name and person of Caesar out of this nation, ought doubtless to
persevere therein until they have as well extinguished and blotted out his
Image and Superscription, in whomsoever, and whatsoever they see or find it to
be fixed in, and that to All Ends and purposes;

For without all Controversy, the one is altogether as lawful, if not More
than was the other, yea doubtless, it is a far less resisting of Magistracy
to destroy the Image and Superscription of Caesar, than it was to destroy His
Name and Person, but the Army affirmed, it was no resisting of Magistracy to
destroy the person and name of Caesar, therefore it will be no resisting of
Magistracy in the other, to destroy the Image and Superscription, in
whomsoever, and whatsoever they find it.

For in such Cases the Army has concluded it as a Maxim, that it is no
resisting Note.
to side with just Principles, i. e. in such Cases, whereupon the life and
death of True Religion, whether in reference to God or our neighbor does
depend) and that in such Cases, men are bound in duty and conscience both to
God and their Neighbor, (where no effectual help does from elsewhere appear)
not to be wanting in any thing, they can either do or say, to hold off
impending Ruin from an Honest People and a good Cause, but that as in public
fires all ought to lift up their Voice and Hand, bringing what Ladders,
Buckets, or what other assistance they can (vid. Abridgement, Remon. Albans p.
1.) as did (say they) part of the people in Arms, or an ARMY interposing
against the Standing Authority, for the life of good Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 45.
And the People said unto Saul, shall Jonathan dye, who has wrought this great
salvation in Israel? God forbid, as the the Lord lives, there shall not one
hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this day. So
the People rescued Jonathan that he dyed not.

From which (with several other Presidents in the said abridgement) it is
clearly apparent, that an Honest and just cause, does justify the Means that
may accomplish it, as also the instruments that acts therein, what then is
there wanting, but the sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon, to destroy all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of man from off the face of the earth, and
to erect those holy, just and perfect Laws, Statutes and Ordinances of Jehovah
the Lord Christ, instead thereof.

Moses, as in Mat. 5. 38. where he says, ye have heard that it has been said,
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, (as in Exodus, 21. 22, 23, 24, 25.
Lev. 24 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 19. 20,) but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

abrogate the Statute nor the Judgment, depending on that precept, Thou shall
not kill, but only freeth the same from the Traditions, and interpretations of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites of those times, who took and gave liberty
to foster and follow private revenge, and therefore in as much as vengeance is
Gods, and in that he says he will repay it by his instruments, i. e. by such
Magistrates as shall put his Laws in execution). The Lord Jesus does hereby
rebuke them for taking on them to revenge their particular and private
injuries, and so to arrogate to themselves that power that belonged to him, and
consequently to his Lawful Deputies, the Civil Magistrate, and not that he
does here in the least take off the punishment that God by Moses had appointed
in such cases, i. e, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, etc.

unavoidably follow, that every man that lists may strike out the eyes and
teeth of his Neighbor at pleasure, as also that the person so offended should
be so far from seeking revenge on the offender, as that he is engaged by our
Savior to provoke the offender to do him more mischief, by turning unto him
the other cheek to be smitten: and if this be not the meaning, then I would
gladly know what course men should take in point of such injuries offered unto
them. That may be collected from this expression of our Savior before mentioned.

If it be replied that complaint is to be made to the Civil Magistrate, to the
end he may do Justice therein on the person offending.

by what Rule, for it is clearly evident to all that are rational, that those
words of our blessed Savior, will bear no such construction, but quite
contrary-wise, that the person so injured, should endeavor to provoke the
offender to do him more mischief.

Again, put case that an Appeal is to be made to the Civil Magistrate, if that
Civil Magistrate, to whom the Appeal is made, be an Administrator or
Executioner of the Laws of the alone Lawmaker, and giver, what other punishment
ought he inflict, than that which he finds prescribed in his Masters Laws, so
that in such case Magistrates must either of necessity wholly omit any
punishment for such like offenses, or they must judge by the standing Rule
prescribed in the Law of God, contained in the five books of Moses.

So th^n without all Controversy, where Jehovah has as well prescribed the
punishment as the offense, it ought not to be altered by any Magistrate
whatsoever; and therefore for any Magistrate to assume the impudence to
dissolve those things, that God has so joined together, by the dictates of
their own fantasy or light of Nature within them, is no other than by
professing themselves wise to become fools. Again, the Apostle James affirms,
That there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: It is
therefore an absolute usurpation of Gods Legislative power, to save or destroy
by any other means or rule, than that great and only Lawgiver has
prescribed. Again, in point of common sense, to whom can it rather refer to
give rules of direction, for what offense man's life shall be saved, or other
punishments to be inflicted; and for what his life shall be taken away, then to
that holy, just, and righteous Lawgiver, who is the Author and giver of life,
and at whose will and pleasure man's life and limbs ought to be taken away, and
not otherwise.

And therefore I do hereby aver, that whosoever shall henceforth contaminate or
despise the aforesaid statutes and judgments does directly derogate from Gods
Authority and subjection, who is the only and sufficient Lawgiver, as also
from the sufficiency of his Laws, which is ten thousand times more perfect than
any other constitution whatsoever, and will thereby bring upon themselves an
unavoidable destruction.

And it is well worthy our observation, that whilst the present Army owned
those judicials, I plead for, to be from heaven, and a rule for all Rulers; and
that who so was not ever under them owned not his subjection to God. They urged
no other rule of justice to try the late King by, as is cl^erly manifest in
that paper titled the Abridgment of the R^monst. Albans, where they cite
multitudes of presidents out of holy writ, to prove him guilty of death: but
not one statute law of the Nation: No, they were then out of date with them:
but now temporamutantur, etc. And the world is run round again since that time.

Object. Jesus Christ and his Apostles never commanded the practice of the
Judicial Laws you speak of, therefore not to be urged under the Gospel.

Respon. I have proved from Jesus Christ himself, that he came not to destroy
the moral percepts, and consequently, not those statutes and judgments which
are in separably annexed thereunto, and have no dependence at all either upon
the Ceremonial Law, or their pollitick constitutions, but are as I have said,
conclusions and rules of justice, grounded merely upon the Loyal Law; and
therefore Jesus Christ, could not destroy the one without the other. But
Needham himself has confessed that Jesus Christ did ratisie the Royal law:
Ergo, those judicial precepts before mentioned.

Resp. 2. That the Apostles of the Lord Jesus taught the use thereof, appears
from Paul's 1 Epist. to Tim. 1. v. 9, 10. where he says, the Law is made for
unholy and profane persons: For murderers of fathers and murderers of
mothers, for manslayers, for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with
mankind; for men stealers, for liars, for perjured persons: and if there be
any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine, according to the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God, etc. From which words it is clear, that the
Judicial Law, (I stand for) was to be in force under the Gospel.

Reason, For several things here numerated by the Apostle, are not found in
the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, or Royal Law, but are deductions there
from, i. e. part of those statutes, which depend thereon as the Five Books of
Moses will sufficiently testifi^: For the Royal Law, only says Thou shall not
kill.

It does not particularise killing of fathers or mothers, or manslayers, etc.
Again, it also says in a g^neral expression, Thou shall not Commit Adultery.

It does not particularise Whoremongers, or such as defile themselves with
mankind.

Again, in point of Theft, it only says in a general term, Thou shall not
Steal.

It does not particularise Man-stealers, etc. and so in the rest: There can
then be nothing more clear than that the Apostle does here speak of the
Judicial Law, annexed to the Moral precept, which he affirms to be good and
lawful to be practiced amongst Christians.

Therefore it may be safely concluded, that the Judicial Law annexed to the
Moral precepts, is as well to be practiced by Christians under the Gospel, as
before among the Jews, and that to all ends and purposes, which I collect from
these words; if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine, i.
e. Loving God above all, and our neighbor as our self; that also says the
Apostle, ought to be determined by those Statutes and Judgments.

1. Because God has given no other rule to govern the world by; who are all
under the Royal Law, as has been proved, from Romans 3. 9. 29. and consequently
under the other, i. e. the Statutes and judgments.

2. In that Jesus Christ did not destroy the one more than the other.

3. In that the Apostle ratifieth the one as well as the other: As then it was
Moses and Aron before Christ, so now Moses and Christ in the Gospel State (as
Mr. Brain well observed.) God is said to judge the secrets of men's hearts (i.
e. the inward man) by or according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. And the things
done in the flesh (i. e. the actions of the outward man) by the Statutes and
Judgments aforementioned, as has been showed, as also from 1 Timothy 5. 17. where
the Apostle says, The sins of some are open before hand, and go before to
judgment, i. e. before the Civil Magistrate: Others follow after, and so
under the Judgment of Christ in the Church. And this is further illustrated,
from Romans 2. 2. we are sure that the judgment of God, is according to truth,
against them that commit such things, which things if you would know read cap.
1. and you will find them to be idolatry and false worship, as in making images
of men, and birds and four footed beasts or creeping things, as also in vile
affections as of men and women, changing their kind, fornication, etc. all
which appertaining to the judicial precepts. Again, 1 Cor. 5. the Apostle does
make a clear distinction betwixt them that are properly under the civil and
spiritual government, i. e. the external and internal, of Moses and Christ, as
in verse. 12, 13. where he says, What have I to do to judge them that are
without, do not ye judge them that are within? But them that are without God
judges: as if he had said, Men are now to be judged in things civil, by the
civil law of God, committed to the Magistrate, and that not only by the men of
the world, but members of Churches also; for the Apostle does not blame the
Corinthians cap. 6. of that Epistle, for that they brought their civil
controversies to be decided by the civil Magistrate.

Reason 1. But because those civil Magistrates did not judge by the law of God,
and therefore could not give a just judgment.

Reason 2. As also in that they were such Judges, as were not rightly fixed or
qualified, for such a purpose: the latter is evident by the title, which the
Holy Ghost puts upon them, verse. 1. viz. unjust Judges: the former is also
evident, by the place of their abode viz Corinth, the Magistrates thereof being
unbelievers, v. 6. i. e. Heathen Judges, judging by Heathenish Laws, as are all
that now Govern as they did. And in things spiritual by the censures of the
churches, as the before mentioned expressions do clearly evidence. Again, our
blessed Savior himself, does clearly manifest that judgment of external acts
against the Law of Moses, was left to Moses, Luke 12, 13, 14. where the man
coming to have the inheritance divided, Christ gave him this Answer: Man, who
made me a judge and divider over you?

Again, in the case of the woman taken in the Act of Adultery, John 8. 3, 4, 5,
6. Jesus Christ would neither accuse or condemn her, so that the woman was
dismissed, not absolved; Shiloh being now come, the Scepter was now departed
from Judah, and a Lawgiver from between his feet, Genesis 49. 10. The Jews at
this time being then under the dominion of the Romans, had not power to put any
to death, by their Law, as clearly appears by comparing the 7 v. of John 19.
with v. 31. of cap. 18. where the Jews tell Pilate, they have a law to punish
blasphemers by death: And yet the case was then such with them, that they could
not put any to death thereby.

And hence I conceive it was that the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites brought
the woman taken in the act of Adultery to our blessed Savior, to entrap him,
i. e. to see if he would take upon him to put their law in execution, and that
if he had, then to have accused him for intermedling upon the privilege of
Caesar, as is clear from John 19. 12. Where they tell Pilat, that if he let
Jesus go he was not Caesar's friend.

put our Laws in execution (without the approbation of Caesar) speaks against
Caesar, Mat. 22. 15, 16, 17. etc. All which temptations our Savior then
avoided, because the time was not yet come, that his Kingdom should be on the
earth, he being before that time to become a sufferer, both in his own person,
and in his Members, by that Roman power then in being, at the end whereof, i.
e. at the expiration of the Little Horns Dominions Dan. 7. it shall arise out
of the ruin thereof, and so by gradation spread it self over the face of the
whole earth, as in v. 25, 26, and 27 of that chapter.

Severity of Mose's Judicials, ought not to be practiced under the Gospel, as
the continual practice of the Church shows, as Paul wills the incestuous
person only to be excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5. there was then no Law in force to
put such to death.

Manichean Heresy; for in making of difference in the proceedings of Justice
under the Law, and under the Gospel against one and the same Transgression,
they thereupon laid a foundation for the setting forth of two gods, the one
severe, and the other merciful, whereas the Lord Jesus does rather aggravate
than mitigate the punishments of the Judicial Laws, as in the explication of
that Precept. Thou shall not kill.

He to show the latitude, or complement, or full extent of the mind of his
Father therein, says, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of Judgment, and whosoever shall say to his brother
Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say thou fool,
shall be in danger of hellfire: hence John says, He that hates his brother,
is a murderer in Gods esteem. Again v. 27. in his Exposition of that Precept,
Thou shall not commit adultery.

He says, that Whosoever looks after a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. etc. And hence the Apostle
Peter speaking of lascivious persons, says, They have eyes full of adultery, 2
Pet. 2. 14. In which expressions, Christ shows that the Moral Precept
extends as well to the inward as outward man, and that he will punish the
transgressions of the one, as of the other, the one by the Civil magistrate,
and the other by his Church, and not in the least mitigateth the punishments of
the fruits of the flesh, i. e. Theft, Aultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Withcraft, etc.

And as touching the incestuous person, I have laid down a sufficient Reason
why the Church could not punish him with death, they having not the power to
put the Laws of God in execution, as also in that their Civil Magistrate did
not act by Gods Laws, but were unjust Judges: so that it may as well be argued
and concluded from Paul's expression elsewhere, i. e. Let him that stole steal
no more, but rather let him labor with his hands, etc. That Theft under the
Gospel, is to be no other ways punished by the Civil Magistrate, than by an
admonition to steal no more; therefore those that affirm that the punishments
of the Judicial Law is mitigated by Christ and his Apostles under the Gospel,
would do well from the mouth of God, to show in what it is mitigated, or to
whom, and whether to all or to some sins only, and why not all as well as
some, and how it can be in some particulars, and not in all, or each of them,
or how it can be under the Gospel, and not declared by Christ, and if by him,
then how can he be said to establish the Law, and yet destroy all in part, and
whether Idolatry, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. be not the same in
Gods esteem now, as formerly in England, as in Judea, and if so, then why not
the same punishments here, as there, for the violation thereof; with much more
that might be urged to this purpose.

Civil, and Ecclesiastical.

appointed and determined shall come to pass at bringing in of the Kingdom of
the Man-child, who is to rule all Nations with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2. 9. and
72. 8. Rev. 2. 27. and 19. 15. and therefore for the further clearing up of
this Assertion, I shall set before you.

1. Who are the professed Ant^gonists of the Man-child, with the matters or
things, whereby they have all along resisted and opposed his government, and
Subjects.

2. The determinate purpose of the Man-child, (i. e. the Lord Jesus) to subvert
and destroy those persons and things, which have and do so confront him and his
Members, i. e. his Church or people.

3. The manner how he will effect it in all the Nations of the earth.

4. The persons by whom he will effect it.

And first of the first, in order to which I Assert.

Assert. That the Kings or Tyrants of the earth, have in all ages been the
Grand Antagonists to the Kingdom and Government of the Lord Jesus, and that
both in things spiritual and Civil, in the things appertaining to our duty
toward God, and our Neighbor, comprised in the two Tables of the Moral Law.

But before I proceed to the proof of this Assertion, I shall in the first
place give you to understand, that I take these two Tables of the Moral Law or
ten Commandments, with the Statutes and Judgments before mentioned, to be the
Royal Law or Government of Jehovah the Lord Christ, and that those Statutes and
Judgments, are that Civil Law, by which he will rule the Nations with a rod of
iron, in that they produce the sword of Justice in the hands of the Civil
Magistrate, which sword of Justice, I say, is that iron Rod, formerly
mentioned, and no other thing, and hence it is, the Saints are said to have a
two edged sword in their hand, as well as the high praises of God in their
mouths, Psalm. 149. the one edge offensive, and the other defensive.

I also take the Gospel or New Testament to be the Spirit of the The Gospel the
spirit of the Law.
Law, and this Assertion our blessed Savior himself confirms, Joh. 6. 63.
where he positively affirms, that the Words which he spoke, they were Spirit,
and they were Life; which is also confirmed by the Apostles in v. 68. where
they say, whither shall we go from thee, for thou have the words of eternal
life, etc. But the Gospel or New Testament is the Counterpain of those words so
spoken by him and his Apostles, which they have left unto us, ratified by
signs and miracles, to be a Lanthorn to our feet, and a light unto ourpaths,
in the things that the Lord Christ expects to be done by his body, the
Church: so that the Doctrine of the New Testament, I likewise take to be
Christ's Golden Scepter, which he holds forth to all Nations, and especially
unto his Spouse, the Church, which with the Ordinances contained therein, I
take to be the two edged sword of his mou^h, mentioned Rev. 19. 13, 15, 21.

Having thus given you my thoughts touching the two grand Principles of nature,
in reference to our duty to God and our neighbor, I shall proceed to the two
Direct Opposites thereof, i. e.

1. Idolatry, or false worship, as to God.

2. Tyranny or Inhumanity, as to our Neighbor.

Which two Principles I do hereby aver to be of and from the Devil, and
consequently, that those that put them in practice, are the Servants or
Ministers of the Devil, and professed Antagonists to the Government of Jehovah,
the Lord Christ, which he has appointed to govern the sons and daughters of
men by, whether in reference to himself or their Neighbor.

Now for proof of the forementioned Assertion, I shall give a brief Narrative
of the first Original of Idolatry and Tyranny after the Flood.

Jehovah having destroyed the Old world with a Deluge of water (by reason of
the Abominable Apostacies of the sons of God, or Professors of Gods worship)
Noah and his family only excepted: yet notwithstanding that so notorious
president of sin and punishment, no sooner was the present world repopulated,
and that in a small measure, but the depraved light of Nature (the Ranters, and
Quakers present adored light, which is no better than the darkness of hell, or
bottomless pit, notwithstanding the voluntary humiliation of the Quakers at this
day, to color it over, the Devil having now put his angel of light's habit
upon the Ranters back or Principle, i. e. an external show of holiness, or
voluntary humility, as in Col. 2. 18, 19. where he exhorts the true body or
Church of Jesus Christ, saying, let no man beguil you of your reward in a
voluntary humility, (or self-denial in the things of this life) or worshipping
of Angels, (or figments or Notions of the mind) intruding into those things
that they have not seen, (notwithstanding all their pretense of seeing) Vainly
puffed up with a fleshly mind. Pure Quakers, as can be spit out of the Devils
mouth, as woeful experience will shortly teach them, they being (as I hear Mr.
John Goodwin lately and truly characterised them) The last born of the Devil.
The Quakers Tenent is the Devils last game he has to play


The Devil, as I have said, having put upon their accused Principle, his most
beautiful robe of delusion, which the Lord preserve all good people from.

I say, no sooner was the present world repopulated, and that in a small
measure, but the aforesaid depraved light of Nature, now so rampant, and
idolized among the Apostate Professors of these days) in mankind became
subject to the like temptations, and delusions of Satan, which brought them
into the like abominable practices of violating the two forementioned grand
Principles of nature, by practicing Idolatry, and Tyranny. The original of
which defection or wicked practice (after the Flood) upon a public account, is
by Historians fixed on Nimrod.

The ground of this their Assertion, they take from Genesis 10. 8, 9, 10. Where
Cush is said to beget Nimrod, and that he began to be a Mighty one in the
Earth, and a mighty hunter before the Lord, and the beginning of his Kingdom
was Babel.

1. Hierome in Tract. Genesis says, that Nimrod was the first man after the
Flood, that exercised Tyranny, which before was not practiced.

2. Josephus says, he provoked men to pride and contempt of God, teaching them
to ascribe their Happiness to themselves, and not unto God.

3. Hugo Annot. in Genesis says he brought in Idolatry, teaching men to worship
the ^ire that was so commodious unto them, which practice (says he, the
Caldeans followed.

4. Whereas Nimrod is styled a Mighty Hunter before the Lord, Augustine
rendereth it against the Lord, but the proper meaning is, that it is spoken by
a Metaphor, because he hunted men, as Beasts are chased (in which sense David
says, that Saul hunted him, as Partridges are hunted in the mountains) and
that in the very sight and presence of God, he practiced Idolatry and Tyranny:
so that from Nimrods Idolatrous and Tyrannical Dominion, it grew into a
Proverb, to resemble an Idolater and cruel oppressor to Nimrod.

Behold then, all ye Idolaters, (or false worshippers) and Tyrants, (or cruel
oppressors) the Root from which you had your Sap and Growth, from that time to
this present day. B^hold also, the first Metropolis, or City of refuge, that
this your great Grandsire prepared to secure himself from danger, the Greatest
Tyrants, ever providing the greatest security for themselves, knowing they are
neither in favor with God or good men; and hence it is they ever fortified
themselves with strong Cities, etc. being afraid, even of their own shadows,
witness the Handwriting upon the wall, which made Belshazzars countenance to
change, yea, put him into such anagony, (and that in the height of all his
jolily) as loosed even the very joints of his loins, so that his knees smote
one against another, Dan. 5, 6. yea, it put both him and his Nobles in such a
fright, that it was high time for them to call aloud for their Astrologers,
Caldeans and southsayers, and yet all to no Purpose, Lillies Art was then
nonplust with its Albumazar, as also in Nebuchadnezzars Dream, touching the
Fifth Monarchy, which shameful disparagement, to their diabolical profession,
makes them they could never endure a dreaming Prophet since, and especially if
it savours of that fifth Monarchy Dream, as expounded by Daniel, cap. 2. 34,
35, 44, 45. which Dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure, maugre
all the Diabolical instruments in the world, by what name or title soever they
are called.

And hence it is, that all the Tyrannical and Idolatrous Governments The Rise
of Pagan Babylon.
that were from Nimrod to Constantine the Roman Emperor, (which I term the Old
Pagan state or Government) had their Rise and being from Nimrod and that City
and Tower of Babel, and therefore commonly called in Scripture the Queen or
Mother of Idolatry, and Inhumanity, and consequently of all Idolaters, and
Tyrants, the issue of that hellish spawn.

And in like manner, I also take the Rise of that Autichristian The Rise of
Antichristian Babylon.
Babylon, tituled in Rev. 17. 5. Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of
harlots, and abomination of the earth, to be meant of Rome in point of
situation, and the Nimrod thereof to be Constantine, who after he had swallowed
up the floods of water, cast by the Dragon after the woman, Rev. 12. from v.
13. to ult. (which (I take to be by his Conquest over the persecutours of the
Christians,) he is said to give unto the Beast which rose out of the waters,
cap. 13. 1, 2. his power and seat and great Authority, by which act of his
became the mixture of Iron, and Potters clay, together in the images feet,
foretold by Daniel, cap. 2. 33, 41, 42, 43. which I^on, and Potters clay, I
take to be the mixing of the Civil and Ecclesiastical powers together, which
from that time have been continued to this present day.

Having thus stated the Rise both of the Pagan and Antichristian Babylon, I
shall in the next place enlarge my self a little in reference to each of them,
to the end, that by a better knowledge th^reof, the people of God may be more
induced to abominate and detest them, as also to execute the Judgment upon
them and their supporters and adherents, as it is written, Psalm. 149. with
multitudes of other Scriptures to that purpose, and first of the first A brief
Narrative of Pagan Babylon.
(viz.) of Pagan Babylon, with its Adherents.

As to what this Nimrod was Who Nimrod was.
, some take him to be the same which Foreign stories call Belus, and that he
was the first founder of the Idols in the Eastern Countries, who were derived
from him, as Belial, Beelzebub, Belphegor, but it will appear by what follows,
that Nimrod was before Belus.

2. Touching Babel, the beginning of Nimrods Kingdom, it Of Babel in general.
was so called, not from Belus, as some would have it, but from the Confusion
of Languages, as the ancient Saxon word Babel does seem to import, which word
was usually men^ioned by them to such persons, as spoke confusedly, to whom
they would say, why Babel ye, or why confuse ye the true etimology of the word,
being why Babel ye, or why do ye imitate those persons at Babel, who spoke so
confusedly, as that they could not be understood by their Auditors: but to put
all out of doubt, the Scripture does clearly testify as much, Genesis 11. 9. in
these words, therefore is the name of it called Babel, because there the Lord
confounded the Languages of all the earth, and from thence did the Lord scatter
them abroad upon the face of the earth.

3. Touching the building of the City of Babel or Babylon, the Of the City and
Tower of Babel.
first Metropolis of Idolatry and Tyranny, Quintus Curtius ascribes it to
Belus, lib. 4. Berosus cited by Josephus to Nebuchadnezzar, lib. 1. cont.
Appian. from Dan 4. 30. where Nebuchadnezzar is presented saying, is not this
great Babel which I have builded for the House of the Kingdom, the might of my
power, and the honor of my Majesty. Berosus Arrianus, makes all three
builders of Babylon,

As 1. That Nimrod began the Tower, anno 131. after the Flood.

2. That Belus built the City, who says he reigned after Nimrod 65 years, and
that he himself (i. e.) Belus reigned 56 years.

3. That Semyramis the wife of Ninus, which reigned 24 years, much enlarged the
City, and fortified it.

After all this, when the Assyrian Kings had made Niniveh the imperial seat, so
that Babylon was much neglected and decayed, at last, Nebuch^dnezzar having
conquered the City of Niniveh, re-^dified Babylon, (as before mentioned) and
hereto agrees Josephus O^osinus lib 6. and August. lib. 16. de Civit. Dei,
cap. so that the beginning and Foundation was laid in Nimrod, as in Genesis 10.
10. which says, That the beginning of his Kingdom was Babel.

4. As touching the way and means, this Nimrod took to set How Nimrod became a
Monark.
up his Idolatrous and tyrannical government, I shall likewise set forth, to
the end that the present Idolaters (or false worshippers) and Tyrants or civil
oppressors of the times) may compare their present conditions and actions with
their predecessors, at the erecting of their great grandmother Babell. Nimrod,
having by his craft and policy wound himself so into the affections of the
people, as to be made their Captain General: Or, Ringleader of that company;
and calling to mind how the old world was drowned and destroyed for Idolatry
and Inhumanity which design he had now in his heart to practice (as his
predecessors of the old world had done before him) though covertly; and
therefore under a Nimrods Policy.
pretense of making themselves famous in the earth to all posterity: And
thereupon stirred up the rude multitude (under this plausible pretense) to
build him a City and a Tower, that might not only free him from the danger of
men; but also from fear of any thing that God could do unto him, as also that
he might with more boldness effect his wicked and ungodly enterprises. And
this he did in One tyrant takes example by another.
imitation of the Tyrants of the old world, i. e. the Giants or Apostate sons
of God, of whom it is reported, that they had a City called Enos in the
Mountains of Libanus, that ruled over the whole world. But it is to be
understood that this Nimrod could not fortify his City, Tower, and Palace with
Demi Cannon and such like Artillery: for the use of such engines of cruelty
were not then found out; but since the Devil, for the better encouragement of
servants, has now supplied them with plentiful store thereof for such
purpose, etc.

I shall now in large something in reference to the Tower, in the attempting
and erecting whereof these following sins concurred, with which I shall also
mentioned, to the end the present Nimrods, or Idolatrous tyrannical
Babel-builders of the times may ruminate thereon, and consider how far short
they now are (if any) of Nimrods then condition.

1. In the building of this Tower, his impiety appeared, in attempting it in
despite of God. As the Prophet Isaiah, according to The impiety of tyrants.
this pattern brings in the King of Babylon vanting himself saying, I will
ascend unto the clouds; I will be like the Most High.

2. His vanity appeared, in seeking to be made famous on earth, and not by good
actions to be made glorious in heaven: he thought to Their vanity
exalt himself by building, and not by loving God above all, and his neighbor
as himself.

3. His disobedience appeared, in that it was Gods ordinance, Their
disobedience.
that the earth should be replenished by them, and yet they wilfully oppose the
Counsel of God, by resolving not to depart from them, as in v. 6. where they
say, Let us build a City and Tower, whose top may reach to heaven, that we may
get us a name least we be scattered.

4. Herein his impudence was also discovered: For whereas Their impudence,
pride, and voluptuousness.
he should have been convicted in his conscience for his pride and arrogance,
Romans 2. 15. he openly proclaimed his ambition, voluptuousnes, etc. to all
posterity, proceeding to such a violence therein, that nothing could now
restrain him, as neither the fear of God, nor the fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation (2 Pet. 3. 10.) to be poured out upon him, as in
Heb. 5. 26, 27. But contrariwise, whatsoever, he had proudly devised, he would
as impudently practice. The confusion of their language was therefore a fruit
of their pride: as in Pride brings confusion
Prove. 16. 8. Zeph. 2. 10. so that whereas they looked to gain credit, they
found shame and confusion.

Like as when Saul had thought he had made a goodly place for Simile.
himself, as triumphing for his late victory over Amaleck: Even then he was
rejected for being King (1 Samuel 15. 28) for his not obeying A warning for
tyrants.
the command of the Lord, against his professed enemies. All which one would
think to be fair warnings to the like disobedient Saul's of the times. (And in
particular at Black-hall) the Lord give them grace to consider thereof, if they
be not past repenting.

Again, That the Kings of the earth were the original or root of Idolatry and
Tyranny, is also asserted and proved by King Solomon, in his book titled
Wisdom cap. 13. 14. where speaking of this Kings the Original of Idolatry and
Tyranny.
subject, he says:

That the devising of Idols were the beginning of spiritual fornication, and
the inventions of them the corruption of life, for neither were they from the
beginning, neither shall they be for ever. For by the vainglory of men, they
entered into the world: And therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

For a Father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he had made an Image of
his child,

soon taken away: Now honored him as a God, which was then a dead man: And
delivered to those that were under him, Ceremonies and Sacrifices.

Thus (says Solomon,) in process of time an ungodly custom grown strong, was
kept as a law: And graven images were worshipped by the commandment of Kings
or Tyrants, whom men could not honor, because they dwelt far off. Therefore
they took the counterfeit of his Visage from far, and made an express Image of
a King, whom they honored (or worshipped) to the end that by this their
forwardness, they might flatter him that was absent, as if he were present:
Also the singular diligence of the Artificer did help to set forward the
ignorant to more superstition.

Reason For he paradventure being willing to please one in Authority, forced
all his skill to make the resemblance of the best fashion; and so the multitude
being allured by the grace of the work, took him now to be a God; which a
little before was but honored as a man. And this (says he) was an occasion to
deceive the world.

Reason

For men serving either Calamity or Tyranny did attribute to stocks and stones
the incommunicable Name. Moreover (says Solomon) this was not enough for them,
that they erred in the knowledge of God; but whereas they lived in the great
war of Ignorance, these so great plagues called they peace: For whilst they
slew their children in sacrifices, and used secret ceremonies, or made
revilings of strange rites.

They kept neither lives nor marriages any longer undefiled: Note, The violation
of the first principle of Nature leads to the breach of the second.
But either one slew another treacherously, or griev^d him by Adultery: So that
there remained in all men, without exception, blood, manslaughter, theft and
dissimulation, corruption, unfaithfulness, tumults, perjury, disquieting of
good men; forgetfulness of good turns, defiling of souls, changing of kinds,
disorder in marriages, adultery and shameless uncleanenesse.

Argum. For the worshipping of Idols (of what sort so ever) not to be named, is
the beginning, the cause, and the end of all evil.

But the Kings of the earth were the Authors, Cont^mners and promoters of
Idols, and Idol-worship: as has been showed:

Therefore the Kings or Tyrants of the earth were the beginning, the cause, and
the end of all evil.

And thus I have proved, and that by the testimony of ^ King, that the
Principles of the Kings or Tyrants of the earth, are directly opposite to the
two Grand Principles of Nature, i. e. To love God above all, and our Neighbors
as our selves.

And this Doctrine is also plentifully confirmed by the Apostle Paul in Romans 1.
from v. 18. to ult. which is well worthy also of perusal, as to this
particular, and now I shall proceed to the Second particular in order, i. e.

Assert. That Jehovah the Lord Christ is determined to have a general
reckoning day, with those persons, and things that have so confronted him and
his Laws, i. e. these two Principles of Nature, with the Decalogue and
Statutes, and Judgments depending thereupon, as has been showed.

And this is also proved by the testimony of King Solomon, in the aforesaid
book cap. 13. and cap 14. where having treated of the two sorts of Idolatry, i.
e. of worshipping of the creature, and likewise of the Image of the creature,
he concludes, That the ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike hateful to
God; for that which is made, shall be punished together with him that made it,
Look to it then Idol-makers; for black will be your day, when the only wise
Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, shall by his Saints bring your
actions to the touchstone of the Scriptures.

But least they shall say, this Testimony of Solomon's, (which I have cited the
rather, because he is a bird of their own feather in point of Title) is
Apochrypha, I shall commend unto them the testimony of that Grave Orthodox
Divine, new created Doctor, and singular Dean in England (for you must
understand all the rest were Popish, and superstitious) which I have done, the
rather in regard of that great repute he has for a learned Rabby, to the end,
what is said by him, may gain the more credence with his Masters and
fraternity, with the rest of the Rabble Rout of Locusts, Caterpillars and
Canckerworms of the Nation.

And for their better attention, I do also hereby give them to understand, and
that the expressions, I shall mention, are extracted out of a Sermon preached
by him, before no less persons than the House of Parliament, from Heb. 12, 26,
27. i. e. Whose voice then shook the earth, but he has promised, saying, yet
once more, and I shake not the earth, but the heavens also, and this word yet
once more signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things
that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. In the
Explanation of which words, he uses these following expressions, i. e. as the
Apostle here applies part of the Prophet Haggai, so that Prophefie, even in the
next words gives light into the meaning of the Apostle, look what Heavens and
Earth the Prophet speaks of, of this, and no other speaks the Apostle. The
Spirit of the Lord in the Scriptures, is his own best interpreter, see then the
order of the words, as they lie in the Prophet Haggai, cap. 6. 7. I will shake
Heaven and Earth, I will shake all Nations, God then shakes Heaven and Earth,
when he shakes all Nations, that is, he shakes the Heaven and Earth of the
Nations. I will shake Heaven and Earth, I will shake all Nations, is a
Pleonasme.

For I will shake the Heaven and Earth of the Nations: these are the things
shaken in my Text.

Query. The heavens of the Nations, what are they?

Resp. Even the Political heighths and glory, i. e. these Forms of Government,
which they, (meaning the Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrates, whether under
Pagan or Antichristian Babylon,) have set up for themselves (not for Christ)
and their own Interest (not Note.
for the Interest of Christ and his sanctified ones) with the grandeur and
luster of their Dominions.

The Nations Earth is the multitude of their people, their strength and power,
whereby their Heavens and Political Heighths and Splendour of the Popular
Multitude, and Strength of the Nations of the earth, that are to be shaken, as
in Rev. 12. 16. and 21. 13. where by an Earthquake, great Babylon receives a
fatal blow, and Isa. 51. 15, 16. and 34. 4. All the Host of Heaven shall be
dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all the
Hosts shall fall down as the leaf falls from the Vine.

Now these dissolved and rolled Heavens, are no other than the Powers and Note.
Heighths of the popular Nations. Their Government and Tyranny: As both the
foregoing and following verses do declare, the Lords wrath (says the Prophet)
is upon the Nations, and his fury upon their Armies: he has delivered them to
the slaughter, etc. vid. Ezekiel. 3. 2. 7. You may take it (says this learned
Rabby) for a rule, that in the denuntiation of the judgment of God, throughout
all the Prophets, Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the like acceptable
beauties of the Heavens are taken for Governments, Dominions in Pollitick
States: As in these Scriptures, Isa. 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer. 15. 9 and 51. 25.
Isa. 13. 13. and 60. 20. Psalm. 68. 8. Joel 2. 10. Obad. 4. Mat. 24. 29. Luke
21. 25. Rev. 18. 12, 13. and 11. 12. and 20. 11. and 6. 12, 13, 14, 15. The
wasting and destroying of the Pagan Roman State, and the plagues and commotions
of the people; the dethroning of idol worship; the destruction of persecuting
Emperors, and Captains, with the transposition of Powers and Sovereignty from
one sort to another is held under this Grandeur of words, being part of the
shaking of Heaven and Earth in my Text, vid. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 9. c. 8.
10. Lib. 8. cap. 17. de Vet. Constan. lib. 1. cap. 50, 51, 52.

Add hereunto (says the Court Chaplain) the promises of the restoration of
Gods people, into a glorious condition after all their sufferings. How now
Doctor, take heed what you say, for these words are petty Treason, if your
Masters come to hear thereof; But I pray what is that Restoration and glorious
state you here dream of; for I will assure you the Court counts such
expressions but dreams and phansies and such a thing as will never be: And
therefore pray let us see what ground you have in scripture, for such a
restoration and glorious estate as you speak of.

Doct. It is perpetually in the Scriptures held out under the same terms
(meaning of Heaven and Earth) and you have a plentiful demonstration of this
point (How Doctor) is there such a plentiful demonstration in scripture, of a
restoration of Gods people into a glorious state and condition after all their
sufferings? Pray what scriptures are those, they will be Novelists at Court,
for they can entertain no such Phansies, therefore pray lets have them.

Doct. See Isa. 65. 17, Behold, I creat new Heavens and a new Earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into my mind: Doct. how ever this is to
you, I am sure it is a new and strange doctrine at Court, what man? Must all
the political government in the world with the grandeur and luster of them, be
so shaken and done away, ^^ that they shall not so much as be remembered, nor
come into the mind of God and his people? Indeed Doctor, you must preach this
doctrine no more at Bethel; for now it is the Kings Chapel: I will assure you
there is now treason in such Texts. But certainly Doctor, you judge this
glorious government to be within us; not visible in the world. See v. 18. Be ye
glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create.

Reas. For behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy: (But
Doct. the Court will tell you that this Jerusalem, which God will so create, is
meant of Jerusalem within man, and not of a Jerusalem without man, or visible
as that Jerusalem, in which the Jews did inhabit in Canaan: And therefore for
our better understanding of this particular, we will if you please, take a view
of the following expression of the Prophet: which are these. And I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more
heard in her, and the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an infant
of days, nor an old man, that has not filled his days: for the child shall
die, an hundred years old; but the sinner that is an hundred years old shall be
accursed: what think you of these word^ Doctor? Is all this meant to be
fulfilled within the people of God? but if we have no more than this to say for
the Fifth Monarchy without or under the Heavens, Mr. Cardell one of the late
Fifth Monarchists will tell us, that all the four Monarchies, three of which,
are past and dissolved, viz. the Babylonish Meads and Persians, with the
Greatian Monarchy have been all within us, and that the fourth Monarchy, viz.
the Roman Monarchy is now within us, and is in like manner to be dissolved
within us: And therefore it is far less to have Infants and Old men within us
at one and the same time, as before mentioned: therefore we must yet proceed to
the following verses, and see if we find any thing that the Quakers cannot so
well digest, as old men and children to live and die; as aforesaid, we shall
therefore proceed to v. 21, 22. etc. where the Prophet says:

They shall build houses and inhabit them; they shall plant vineyards and eat
the fruit of them. (Surely, the Quakers has divellish wide weasands, if they
swallow down all these particulars: as Houses and Vineyards, with their
builders and Planters; but they do these things only when they are in their
Quaking fits: But Sir, this Text puts me in mind of your brother Doctors,
Master Thomas Goodwins Sermon upon Rev. 5. 9, 10. where speaking of the
glorious estate and condition that the people of God shall enjoy after all
their sufferings, cites this very text to prove his Assertion, i. e. That they
shall enjoy a Kingdom upon earth, for says he, they shall build houses, and
plant vineyards. O, to see how good wits will jump, for he uses even your own
words, i. e. A glorious condition after all their sufferings; and therefore
Gentlemen, seeing you are both convinced of this truth: See if you can conquer
the Soldiers with your rhethorical Artillery. But in the interim, let us lay
before them the following words of the Prophet, v. 21. They shall not build and
another inhabit, they shall not plant and another eat; for as is the days of a
Tree, are the days of my people. And my elect shall long enjoy the works of
their hands: (It appears then there must be Mechanical persons in this
glorious state, which the two learned Doctors assert is to be; for the
following words says, They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth trouble.

Reas. For they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their off spring
with them (they are then to procreate children under this glorious estate and
condition, vid. cap. 66. 22. And it shall come to pass^ that before they shall
call (says the Lord) I will Answer: And whil^st they are yet spealing I will
hear (there is then to be the use of Ordinances under this glorious state and
condition) and pray, etc. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the
Lion shall eat straw with the Bullock; and dust shall be the Serpents meat, i.
e. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says the Lord.
They shall then beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more:

Gentlemen you will stand in need of all your Rhethorick, when you go about to
convince the Soldiery of putting this Doctrine in practice.

But if this scripture be fulfilled, and this glorious time is now under this
present Government; Why do they not, as it is here directed by the spirit of
God to be done? And now Doctor, I shall proceed to your confirmation of this
grand doctrine, from the New Testament, to which purpose, I find you to
instance 2 Pet. 3. 13. Where the Apostle having before in that cap. put the
people of God in mind by way of remembrance touching the glorious kingdom and
state, which you and your brother Doctor has affirmed must be, and which I am
sure yet is (...).

Reas. For the Soldiers swords are not yet (...) to Plow-shares, nor their
Spears into Pruning-books, etc. (witne^^^ the intolerable taxes yet to support
them.) The Apostle I say, having put the people of God in remembrance of the
words, which are spoken by the Holy Prophets, and likewise of the commandment
of them the Apostles of the Lord Jesus to such purpose, and that they should
not be danted touching the accomplishment thereof, notwithstanding scoffing and
mocking, and blasphemi^g of the scoffing Ishmalites, and railing and
blasphemous Rabshakahs, that should happen to be near the time of its approach:
Who walking after their own lusts, will say, where is the promise of his
coming: for since the fathers fell asleep, all things have continued as they
were from the beginning: For this they are willingly ignorant of, that by the
word of God, the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing out of the waters,
and in the water, whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water,
perished. But the heavens and earth, which are now by the same word, are kept
in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of
ungodly men, but beloved, (faith the Apostle) be not ignorant of this one
thing, that one day is with the Lord, as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day; for the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slacknesse, but is long-suffering to us ward, not wiling that any should
perish, but tha^ all should come to repentance; but the day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth also
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness, looking for and hoping unto the coming of the day
of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat. Nevertheless we according to his promise, look
for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, not Idolatry
and Tyranny.

Now for the better understanding of the Rabbis meaning t^^ching the new
Heaven and new Earth here mentioned, I shall (...) another passage of his in
page 12. of that book, where he having asserted that it is not to be meant of
the material Heaven and Earth, produces this Scripture to prove the same, i.
e. Isa. 51. 15, 16. I am the Lord that divided the sea, whose waves roared, the
Lord of Hosts is his name, and I have put my words in thy mouth, and have
covered thee with the shadow of my hand, that I might plant the heavens, and
lay the Foundations of the Earth, and say unto Sion, thou art my People.

In these words says the Doctor,

by a Repetition of what he has done, he establishes his people in
expectation of what he will do.

And 1. He minds them of that wonderful deliverance from an Army behind them,
from an ocean before them, by his miraculous preparing dry paths for them in
the deep. I am the Lord, who divided the sea, whose waves roared.

2. Of his greatness, acquainting them with his mind, i. e. his Laws and
Ordinances at Horeb, I have put says he, my words in thy mouth.

3. Of that favorable and singular protection afforded them in the
wilderness, when they they were encompassed with enemies round about. I
covered thee with the shadow of mine hand.

Query, Now (says the singular Dean) etc. to what end was all this?

Resp. Why says he (meaning the Lord by the Prophet) that I might Plant the
Heavens, and Lay the Foundations of the Earth.

Query. What of those material, visible Heavens and Earth, 2460 years before,
at least, were they planted and established.

Resp. It is all (says the Rabby) but making of Sion a people, which before
was scattered in distinct Families.

Query. And how was this done? quoth the Doctor?

Resp. Why the Heavens are planted, or a glorious frame of Government, and
Policy is erected among them, and the multitudes of their people are disposed
into an orderly Commonwealth, (Note) to be a firm Foundation, and Bottom for
the Government among them: So that from what the Doctor has here asserted, it
is as clear as the Sun in its brightest Luster, that the Frame of Government
for the unmovable Kingdom, or Jesus Christ, or the fifth Monarchy.

Are those Laws, Statutes and Judgments, which were given by Jehovah at Horeb
and revived and ratified by the Lord Jesus at Mount Olivet, Mat. 5. For those
are they the Doctor terms the firm Foundation, a firm Foundation for an
unmovable Kingdom?

And this Doctrine is also ratified by the Prophet Malachy c. 4. where speaking
of the dissolution of those old Heavens and old earth, formerly treated of, i.
e. the Political Frame of Government, which men have made for themselves, etc.
i. e. of those Heavens, and Earth, which the Apostle Peter says, are to be
burned and consumed by fire, as also of that new Heaven, and new earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness, I say the Prophet speaking of that Great and notable
day of trial by fire, tells us by way of explanation what is intended by the
Holy Ghost, in such manner of expression, says, Behold the day comes that
shall burn as an oven, Note, and all that are proud, and all that do wickedly
shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up says the Proud
and wicked persons must be this fire.
Lord, and it shall leave them neither Root nor Branch: but unto you that fear
my name, shall the Son of Righteousness appear with healing in his wings, and
ye shall go forth and grow as calves of the stall, and ye shall tread down the
wicked, for they shall be as ashes under the soles of your feet (Note) In that
day that I shall do this, says the Lord, Remember (what?) the Law of Moses my
servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb with the Statutes and Judgments.
Ergo That Law, Statutes and Judgments, shall be put again in practice that day.

Again the Doctor does further confirm this Doctrine from Rev. 21. 1. I saw a
new heaven, a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were passed
away, And there was no more sea.

Here says the Doctor, the Heaven and earth is restored, but the sea shall be
no more.

Those gatherings together of many waters, (says the Rabby) Rivers from all
places, or Pretended Clergy men from all Nations into General Councels, which
were the sea or many waters, on which the Whore sat, shall have no Note.
place at all in the Churches restored Conditions (Reader, you must understand
the Rabby did not then dream of the Court of Tryers now at Whitehall, or else
you must (if you can) conceive them not to be pretended Clergymen, or a general
Council, no you must take them to be only an image of such pretended Clergy men
and general Council, and the like you know, is not the same (a pure Juggle) But
I conceive the Learned Doctor is out in the Exposition of that forenamed Text
in Rev. for the holy Ghost does not there speak of the Restoration of any of
his Political Heavens and earth so much already treated of; for the Text says
plainly, they were passed away, and the Prophet Isa. says, cap. 65. 17. that
they shall not be remembered, nor come into the mind of God or his people;
therefore there can be no expectation of any restoring of them, it must
therefore be unavoidably meant of the aforesaid Laws, Statutes and Judgments,
which the Doctor himself calls the firm foundation for the unmovable Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and hence it is the Lord by Malachy puts his people in mind
thereof, at that notable day, saying, Remember ye the Law of Moses, etc. as
aforesaid, and therefore whereas it is said, there shall be no more sea, I do
understand there shall be no more use of the Leviticall Priesthood, that being
now abolished by our blessed Savior, shall be no more. No more use of the
type, when the antitype is come, no more use of the shadow when we have the
substance, which myst^rie the Prophets saw but darkly, as appears by their
writings, few of them seeing a Change of the Leviticall Priesthood, which I
conceive to be the great stumbling block to the Jews from Christ's abode on
earth to this present day.

But nevertheless, the Prophet David does most excellently foretell the change
thereof under the Gospel Dispensation, as in Psalm. 40. where speaking in the
person of Christ, (for it is impossible it should be understood of himself
says, sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou
opened, burnt-offerings and sin offerings have thou not required. Then said I,
Lo I come, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me, that I should do thy
Will, O God, which Text the Apostle Paul does clearly expound of Christ, Heb.
10. 8. saying above, When he says, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offering
for sin thou would not, neither have pleasure therein, which are offended by
the Law, (i. e. the ceremonial Law) Then said he, Lo I come to do thy will, O
God.

He takes away the first, that he may establish the second, he takes away the
shadow, that he may establish the substance.

Now where was it prophesied of David that he should have a body given him to
do away Sacrifice, or to put an end thereunto: it must therefore be meant of
some others, and what other than he that has born our transgressions, and by
whose stripes we are healed, vid. Isa. 54. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. and 52.
13, 14. 15. in both which places also the Prophet speaks of another person,
and not of himself, i: e. Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the pro(...) for
our sins, Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. and 4. 10.

The Learned Doctor having thus proved for me what is meant by the Old
Heavens, and the Old Earth, as also the New Heavens and the New Earth, i. e. by
the Old Heaven and Old Earth, all the Old Forms of Government since the
Creation, that have been made by Political or Humane invention, as also the New
Heavens, and new Earth to be that Constitution or Government made by God
himself, and ratified and confirmed by Jesus Christ, (i. e. the two grand
Principles of Nature, afterward branched forth into the Deoalogue or ten
Commandments, with the Statutes and Judgments unneued thereunto, and the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ in the New Testament, which is the Spiritual,
Ecclesiastical, or Gospel-part thereof) I shall in the next place bring the
present powers and Constitutions of Government in the Nation to the test or
touchstone of the Scriptures, and in this particular also Mr. Owen shall say
for me in the forementioned Sermon, p. 21. i. e. That the Kings of the Earth
have given their power to Antichrist, endeavoring to the uttermost, to keep
the Kingdom of Christ out of the world, or that we term the fifth Monarchy.

What I pray, has been their main business for 700 years and upward, even
almost ever since the Man of sin was inthroned, The Doctors Queries to this
purpose.
How have they earned the Titles of eldest son of the Church. The Catholic and
most Christian King, Defender of the Faith and the like. Has it not been by
the blood of Saints? Is there not in every one of these Kingdoms the slain and
the banished ones of Christ, to answer for in particular? etc. Have not all the
Kings round about washed their bands and Garments in the blood of a thousand of
Protestants? and do not the Kings of all these Nations as yet stand up in the
room of their Progenitors, with the same implacable enmity to the power of the
Gospel?

And is there not a cry for all this? How long Lord, holy and true, do thou
not avenge our blood on them that dwell in the earth, Rev. 6. 10. Does not Sion
cry, the violence done unto me, and my children be upon Babylon, and my blood
upon those heavens of the Nations; and will not the Lord avenge his elect, that
cry unto him day and night? will he not do it speedily? will he not call the
fowls of Heaven to eat the flesh of Kings, and Captains, and great men of the
Earth, Rev. 19. 18. Will he not make the Heavens like the wood of the Vine,
etc. (and what of all this Doctor?

The time shall come to discover her slain, and not the simplest Heretics, as
they were counted, shall have his blood (...)enged: Neither shall any
atonement he made for this blood, or expiation be allowed, whilst a Toe of
the image, or a Bone of the Beast, is left unbroken.

Again p. 13.

No kind of government in Europe, or line of Governors so ancient, but that the
Beast is as old as they; and had a great influence into their constitution, or
establishment, to provide that it might be for his own interest, where the Pope
has not expressly bargained for his own interest, and provided that he should
have the chief place, in all the Oaths and bonds that were betwixt Prince and
People, either by pretended collation of Right to pacify the Consciences of
blood-thirsty Potentates in the undertaking, and pursuing their unjust
Conquests, or foolish Mitred confirmations of sword purchases, he has got them
framed to his own end and purpose, which was to bring in all these Nations into
subjection to his Babylonish usurpations: Which those Kings finding no way
inconsistent with their own designs, did willingly promote, laboring to
enforce all Consciences into subjection to the Romish Sea.

Hence it is, that such an interposition was made of the rights of Holy Church:
That is, Babylon the Mother of Harlots, in all the Types, Oaths, and Bonds
between Prince and People, and for the advancement of the righteous judgments
of God. That the sons of men may learn to fear and tremble before him. And it
may be observed, that that which does, and shall stick upon Potentates to their
ruin, is not so much their own, or any other interest, as the dregs of that
Papal Antichristian interest, thrust into their Oaths and Obligations, for no
other end in the world, but to keep the Lord Jesus out of his Throne. And this
is a reason, why the Lord Jesus by his mighty power, at the bringing in of his
unmovable Kingdom, will shake the Heavens and Earth of the Nations.

Reas. Even because in their present constitutions, they are directly framed to
the interest of Antichrist, which by notable advantages at their first moulding
and contrived insinuation, ever since has so rivited it self into the very
fundamentals of them, that no digging nor myneing with an earthquake will cast
up the foundation stones thereof, etc. Because as is their Interest, so is
their Acting. The present powers of the Nations, stand in direct opposition to
the bringing in of the Kingdom of Christ. At which time, says the Doctor) Two
things there are that will be confessed incumbent on him in this day of his
advancement.

1. The bringing home of his ancient people to be one fold, with the fullness
of the Gentiles; raising up the Tabernacle of David, and building it as in the
days of old: In the accomplishment of innumerable promises, and answer to
millions of prayers. (Doctor in this, you and your brother yet has not cut a
thread:) but proceed Doctor. Now there are two main hindrances of this work,
that must be removed, the first whereof is:

1. Real,

The great river Euphrates, the strength and fullness of those streams do yet
rage so high, that there is no passage for the Kings of the East to come over,
wherefore this must also be dried up as other waters were, for their
forefathers of old, Rev. 16. 12. and doubtless this is spoken in allusion to
Abraham's going over that River into Canaan, when the Church of God in his
family was there to be erected: whence he was called the Hebrew: that is the
Passenger, i. e. over that River, Genesis 14. 13.

And then it may well enough denote the Turkish power, which proud as it is at
this day, possessing in peace, all those Regions of the East: yet God can
quickly make it wither, and be dried up: Or to the deliverance of the Jews in
Babylon, when it was taken and destroyed, by the drying up of the streams of
that river; and so the yoke of her tyranny broken from the Churches neck, Jer.
51. 31. etc. And so it can be no other, but the power of the Romish Babylon,
supporting the Kings of the Nations. Which must therefore be shaken and dried
up.

2. Moral,

Or the Idolatry of the Gentile worshippers: The Jews stick hard as yet at
this: That God should abolish any kind of worship, which himself instituted.
But that he should ever accept any falsworship, which he had once strictly
prohibited, and no where to this day appointed. To this they will never be
reconciled: Now such is all the invented idolatrous worship, which the Kings of
the earth have sucked in, from the Cup of Fornications held out unto them in
the hand, and by the Authority of the Roman Whore. This still they cleave close
unto, and will not hearken to the Angel preaching the everlasting Gospel; that
men should worship him, who made the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and
the fountains of Water, Rev. 13. 6, 7. i. e. The God of Heaven in Jesus Christ,
according to his holy, just, and righteous laws, statutes, judgments, and
Ordinances as before mentioned) in opposition to all their Jeonolatry,
Artolatrys, Hagiolatry, Stanrolatry, and Mass abomination. This then must also
be removed: And because (as it has been said) it is so rivited and cemented
into, and with all the Orbs of the Nations, Heaven and Earth, i. e. the
politic or humane Frames of Government, which they have made for * themselves
and their interests) they therefore must be shaken and brought to destruction
before it can be effected.

The second thing he has to accomplish is the Tremendous total Destruction of
the man of Sin, and all his adherents, that are not obedient to the Heavenly
call, Rev. 18. 4. etc.

Doct.

Pray, what is your meaning by the adherents of Babylon? Resp.

Are not most Potentates tied by Oath, or other compact, either to maintain the
whole, or some part of the old Tower, under the name of Right of Holy Church,
Prelates and the like: (true Doctor they are?) Query

It is clear then, that you include all sorts of Governors, and Governments to
be adherents to the Papal power (or mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of
Harlots, and abomination of the the earth) who support Prelacy. But what is
your meaning by those words or the like: Resp.

He that thinks Babylon to be confined to Rome and its open Idolatry, knows
nothing of Babylon, nor of the New Jerusalem, the depth of that subtle
mystery, Rev. 17. 5. does not lie in gross visible folly: It has been
insinuating it self into all the Nations for 1600 years, etc. And is now become
as the marrow in the bones, which before it can be shaken out; The Heaven must
be dissolved and the Earth shaken. Query

It seems then Doctor, you conclude that all Governors and Governments, that
do support the Prelatical part of the Papacy, are adherents to Babylon, and
therefore must be destroyed with it. Resp.

The late King had learned a saying from his Predecessors, No Bishop, No King;
Hence he supposes his main interest to lie in holding fast Prelacy: What ever
he seems to part with all, that he will not let go? that's his main interest.
Query And what is this Prelacy?

Resp.

A mere Antichristian encroachment upon the inheritance of Christ: Christ
coming to take his own, shakes the other in pieces. Query Well said Doctor, and
so he has done blessed be Jehovah for it. But what think you of Presbytery? Is
not that it you meant where you said Prelacy, or the like? Pray Doctor tell me
your mind freely, what you think of the Presbyterian Government, and that
Civil, Political Power that does supoort it?

Resp.

Those who would have been our oppressors in Scotland, but that God has
crushed the Cockatrice in the shell; and filled the Pit with their dead bodies,
which they had dug for us: They also had prepared a Procrustes bed, a heavy
yoke; a Beast, that had it grown to perfection, would have had Horns and Hoofs;
and in maintaining this, they think their great interest to lie: And in holding
this fast, are they after all their associations broken in pieces. Query I
plainly perceive that this Presbytery would have been a hellish Bondage to have
been confined unto; for you have painted it out in very notable significant
characters; but pray what was the design of the Scots if they had prevailed?

Resp.

The corrupt design of these in Scotland was to have set up a Son of Tu^eal in
England, and themselves to be great under him: that they and their partakers
might impose upon the residue of the Nation: Especially in the things of God.
Their great desire that things should be thus, corrupts their minds to think
that it ought to be so, and shall be so: Hence ambition to rule, and to have
all under their power, Even in Conscience, I^ quickly mistaken for zeal to the
Kingdom of Christ. Re-inthroning of Tyranny is Royalty, and all according to
the Covenant, etc. Thus men's minds and judgments are distempered by their Just
and interests, which makes them frame a way for God to proceed in, which when
he does not, How are they surprised? Thanks (noble Doctor) you are then clear
of opinion, that Presbytery, and the Civil Magistrates and Governments that
support it, are also Adherents to the beast or Papacy, and consequently, that
they also are to participate of that Tremendous, Final destruction, and total
amotion, as you have declared to fall on Babylon.

But I pray, is there no hopes of taking off the Civil Magistrate from joining
hands with the Horned and Hoofed Beasts of the Presbyterian judgment?

Resp. Can any expect that such as these, i. e. Civil Magistrates of Political
Governments, such as they have made for themselves and their interest, as the
Doctor has formerly mentioned) should take up the despised quarrel of Christ
against that Flourishing Queen. Doubtless, no such fruit will grow on these
trees, etc.

No sooner is one Carnal Form shaken out, but they are ready to cleave to
another, yea, to warm themselves in the feathered nests of. unclean Birds, all
Fleshly Dominion (therefore) within doors, and Civil Dominion, that opposes
without doors shall be shaken.

Now these things are so glewed also to men's earthly Possessions, the tallons
of the birds of prey, having firmly seized on them, that ^hey also must be
shaken with them, and therefore from them also will be have us (meaning the
Saints and people of God (to be loosed, vid. 2 Pet. 3. v. 12, 13.

I Perceive Doctor, there is then but one way to be taken with the Papal,
Prelatical and Presbyterian Magistrates, and Ministers, that will not be
obedient to the Heavenly call, (as you have formerly hinted) i. e. a final
destruction, and total amotion of them together, and so Needhams Objection is
answered with a witness, and fully verified, i. e. That the erecting or
instituting of the Statutes and Judgments, annexed to the Moral Precept^ will
and is appointed by God to be the overthrow of all the Political Governments in
the world, and so I shall proceed to the third particular. But now it comes in
my mind, I shall before I enter thereupon, desire to compare our present
Government with your Text, to the end we may see whether or no it be in the
Black Bead-roll, that is, to receive the final destruction and total amotion
you say must happen unto them. And for better Order sake, I shall once more
recite the words of your Text Heb. 27.

And this word once more, signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, us of things that are made, that those things that cannot be shaken may
remain.

Argum. Now in these words it is notoriously p^ident to every Rational Man,
that all such Heavens and Earths, (or Political Forms of Government, which men
have made for themselves, as before mentioned by you) as are made (by such
means) shall be be shaken and removed, (i. e. by a fi^al destruct^^n, and total
^^^^tion, as you have also affirmed.)

But the present Government of this Nation was made his State Policy or Humane
Invention.

Ergo according to Mr. Owens Assertion and Attestation, the present Government
of this Nation, is to receive a final destruction and total amotion.

Proof. That the present Government of this Nation was made by State Policy or
Humane Invention, I appeal to every rational man, sure I am, it was neither
made in Mount Sina, nor ratified in mount Olivet, unless the Learned Doctor
can prove the Cockpit to be the one, and the Parliament House to be the other,
(which I believe will strain his Logic to the highest key.)

Argument. Again from this Text it is also undeniably evident, that all such
Governments as may be shaken, must be also shaken and removed, and that upon
the Account of being made as aforesaid.

But the present Government of Nation, is such a Government, as may be shaken.

Therefore according to the Doctors Assertion, the present Government of this
Nation, is to receive a final destruction, and total amotion.

Proof. That the present Government of this Nation is such as may be shaken, I
refer to the alterations, which the late Parliament, if they might have had
their wills, would have made therein, and if it may be shaken by them, then
consequently by others, therefore a Government that may be shaken, etc.

Argument. A third Argument may be drawn from the Doctors own Assertions, who
says, that such Magistrates as are either tied by Oath, or other Compact to
maintain either the whole or some part of the old Tower, under the Right of
Holy Church-Prelacy or the like, (by which word like he intends Presbytery,
as has been showed) that such a Magistrate and Government, is to be enumerated
among Babylons Adherents, and consequently to receive that, final destruction
and total amotion as before mentioned.

But the present governors and government of this nation does provide for the
maintenance of the Presbyterian Ministry of the nation, which the Doctor
looks upon and judged as a part of Antichristian Hierarchy, witness the
terming them a Procrusts bed, a heavy yoke, etc.

Therefore the present Governors and Government of this Nation according to
Mr. Owens Assertion, is to be enumerated as aforesaid, and likewise to suffer
as aforesaid, and thus I shall proceed to the third particular, i. e. How, or
in what manner, the Lord Christ will effect this final destruction and total
amotion of all Politic, or Humane Forms of Government, and in this particular,
the Learned Rabby shall plead for me in that notable Simile, which he has
culled out of the Scriptures to that very end and purpose, i. e. Now as
Sampson. intending the Destruction Vide p. 27 upon Heb. 12. 17.
of the Princes, Lords, and residue of the Philistines, who were gathered
together in their Idol-Temple, he effected it by pulling away the Pillars,
whereby the building was supported, whereupon the whole frame topled to the
ground. So the Lord intending the Ruin of that mighty Power, whose top seems
to reach Heaven, will do it by pulling away the Pillars and Supporters of it,
after which it cannot stand one moment. -- Sic transit gloria mundi.

Query. Doctor this has been a strange sort of Language, and dangerous I will
assure you, I wish you be not called in question for it, but what are the
Pillars of that fatal building, which must thus be ruinated with it.

Doct. Resp. Are they not the Powers of the world, as presently stated and
framed (implying they are) Pull them away, and alas what is Antichrist? It is
the Glory of Kings put upon her, that makes men's eyes dazzle on that Roman
Harlot, otherwise she is but like the Egyptian Deities, who silly worshippers,
through many glorious portlets and Frontispices were led to adore the Image of
an ugly Ape.

Well Doct. Seeing you have in brief given me so full and ample satisfaction in
this particular, I shall proceed to the other, i. e. The Persons by whom he
will effect it.

To the knowledge of this particular the Holy Ghost does plentifully inform us,
i. e. By the most despicable instrument, as will appear by these following
instances.

When the Israel of God must be delivered from the Egyptian bondage, Moses must
be preserved by an Ark of Bul-rushes, and so bred up to that purpose. Again,
when they were in great distress by the Midianites, the Lord made choice of
Gedeon, a man of a poor Family in Manasseh, and Gedeon the least or meanest of
that Family, Judge. 6. 15. etc. After this, David the son of Jesse must be
brought from the flock to vanquish Goliath, and the Army of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 17.

And thus the acting of Gods providence, in carrying on of The Priestly
interest of Chi^st how managed.
the interest of Christ, as the Doctor says, will be exceedingly unsuited to
the Reasonings and expectations of men in these days, as it was in the laying
of the foundations of the Gospel, or Priestly Office of Christ, where quite
contrary to the expectations of the Jews, who then expected outward Glory,
Beauty, Deliverance, Carnal Power and Dominion, God inste^d thereof produces a
poor man, that had not where to lay his head, (followed by a few Fishermen and
simple women) that had neither Form not Comeliness, that he should be
deferred, persecuted, Mark 1. 16, 19. and 2. 14.
despised, crucified, from the beginning to the end, quite another thing than
they looked for, and thus he laid the foundation of the Gospel in the person of
his son, by frustrating the expectations of the most of men, The stone, which
the builders refused became the head of the corner.

Again, seeing Salvation is of the Jews, the rod of Christ's strength to be out
of Sion, and that living waters were to flow The prophet (...) inte^^st of
Christ how ma^aged.
forth from Jerusalem, the Gospel being from thence to be published through the
world. Who did the Lord choose to do it? Did he make use of the learned of the
Nations? the high Priests, learned Scribes, devout Pharisees, that might have
won their Message some Repute and Credit in the World No, but quite contrary
John 14. 16. and 25. 26, 27. Luke 24. 48, 49. Act. 1. 4, 5. and 2. 1, 2, 3, 4,
etc.
to all the wisdom of the flesh, he sends his Propheti^al Spirit upon a few
ignorant, weak, unlearned Fishermen, despisd upon all accounts, and commits
this great work to them, and accordingly out they go, friendlesse, helpless,
harbourlesse unto their employments, Acts 4. 13. 1 Cor. 1. 20. 26, 27, 28. The
like instrument has the Lord Christ also for the most part employed in making
an entrance upon the great work of casting down false worship and idolatry. How
the Kingly interest of Christ shall be brought into the world.


And now in reference to the bringing in of the Kingly interest of the Lord
Jesus into the world (which is to be accomplished in the ruin and destruction,
both of Pagan and Antichristian Babylon, with all their adherents, whether in
reference to their Civil or Ecclesiastical governments, as has been
plentifully treated of) which must be done with might, power, and strength,
with Armies and Blood, Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. (where by the
Iron Rod is meant the material sword, yea, even that material sword prophesied
of Psalm. 2. 9. and 72. and 149. 6. Rev. 2. 27.) who will now the Lord make use
of? will it be of Kings, Potentates, Nobles, and Great ones of the earth, no it
is contrary even to common sense that he should; for as the Doctor has well
observed, it cannot be expected those men should take up the despised quarrel
of the interest of Christ, and that for these Reasons.

1. Because they are such as have given their powers and states, and strength
unto the Beast, or to maintain Idolatrous or false worship, Rev 13. 1, 2. and
17. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. without which their Tyrannical Government cannot be
keppt up.

2. In that they have committed fornications with the Beast, as also their
Subjects, Rev. 17. 1, 2.

3. It is by them that she is supported at this day, as has been proved.

4. For that it is declared by the Holy Ghost, that at the Ruin of Babylon,
the Kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived delitiously
with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, Rev. 10. 9. 20. as also the
Merchants of the earth, as from v. 11. to v. 20. as also the Harpers,
mufitians, pipers, and Trumpeters of Babylon, i. e. all her dependents, and
therefore it is contrary to common sense, that they should be active in her
destruction, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.

5. In that this Supper of the Lamb, or the day of Christ's power, the fowls
that fly in the midst of heaven are invited to eat of the Flesh of Kings and
the flesh of Captains, and the Flesh of mighty men, and the Flesh of Horses,
and them that sit on them, and the Flesh of all men, both free and bond, small
and great.

Therefore it is impossible, that they should be instrumental for Christ
against Babylon, but contrary-wise, antagonists thereunto, which with the
former Reasons given by the Doctor, does clearly hold forth, that the Lord
Jesus will not make use of any of the present authorities or powers of the
world, to bring this utter desolation upon Babylon, for in so doing, they
should fight against themselves.

Object. The Text says peremptorily, that the ten horns shall hate the Whore,
and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her Flesh, and burn her with
fire, which manifestly implies, that the horns shall continue till her
destruction, if not longer, and that they shall be the notable instruments that
God will make use of in her Ruin.

Resp. The spirit of God in the Scriptures, does not clash against it self in
this particular any more, than where it says, we are justified by works and
not by faith only, Jam. 1. 24, 25. as also by faith without the deeds of the
Law, Romans 3. 18. as also freely by grace, v. 24, Tit, 3. 7. the first being a
visible or demonstrative Justification, the second a Justification in a man's
own Spirit, and the third a Testification of the Spirit of God, evidencing or
witnessing the truth thereof, wrought by Christ to that spirit of man, Romans 8
16. So in this particular, where the ten horns are said shall hate the Whore,
etc. I say, is impossible it should be meant of these very horns, that I have
mentioned for those Reasons I have laid down, and therefore it must unavoidably
be meant of some other Horn, (viz. powers) as by the Lords assistance I shall
prove from Rev. cap. 17. in v. 12. of which chapter it is said, The ten horns
which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, but
receive power as Kings* one hour with the beast: these shall make war with the
Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them. Gedeons number from 32000 to 300. Read
Judges 1. etc. and see if you be Lappers; for the Lord will save Israel by no
other. Such as have burning Lamps in their earthen pitchers, in the earthly
tabernacles of their flesh


Reas. For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him,
are called, and chosen, and faithful, etc.

Note 1. The three characters of the Lambs army, least any presume to come to
the Marriage Supper, to eat the Flesh of Kings and Captains, Rev. 19. 17, 18.
without a wedding garm^nt, vide Luke 14. to this purpose, from v. 15. to v. 25.
Mat. 22. from v. 1. to v. 15, for many will be called, but few chosen, they
must be such as will forsake all to follow the Lamb where ever he goes, you
see what became of the Merchants, Farmers, and effeminate persons, they must be
such, as if they have not a sword, they must sell their coat and buy one, Luke
22. 36. they must be such, as will leave the dead to bury their dead, Mat. 8.
22. such as will beat their plow-shares into swords, and their pruning hooks
into spears, such as of weak, are made strong, Joel 12. 3. etc. but to the
matter in hand.

I say, that by the before mentioned Scripture it does clearly appear^ that the
Battle betwixt the Kings of the earth, and the Lamb and his Army, is to be
fought, before they are said to hate the Whore, etc. as in v. 16. until which
time God has put it into their hearts, to fulfill his will, and to give their
Kingdom unto the beast, until the word of God shall be fulfilled, v. 17. So
that I gather from hence, That as the Conquest of the Lambs Army extends it
self over the Dominions of the Beast, and her supporters, (viz. The Civil
Governors, and Governments of the earth, with their people and multitudes
employed by the waters on which the whore sits) v. 15. 1. and that the Laws,
Statutes, Judgments and Ordinances of Jehovah the Lord Christ is planted
instead thereof, by so much the said Nations or earthly powers, shall be said
to hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire, that is, they shall see so much excellency in those Laws,
Statutes, Judgments, and Ordinances, beyond all what they enjoyed under their
former Governments, as that they shall abhor and det^st both their Governors
and Governments, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, the one surmounting the
other, as far as the light of the Moon excels the smallest star.

1. When they shall have Judges as at the first, and Rulers as at the
beginning, Isa. 1. 26. Not the Arbitrary powers of the Kings of the Nations,
which were brought into the Commonwealth of Israel, contrary to the mind of
God, 1 Samuel 8. as for Saul to take their sons, and appoint them for himself,
for his Chariots and for his Horsemen, and some to run before his Chariot (or
to make footboyes of free born Israelites) to appoint Captains over thousands,
and Captains over fifties, to ear his ground, and to reap harvest, and to make
his instruments of war, to take their daughters to be confectionaries, and to
be Cooks and to be Bakers, to take their fields and their vineyards, and their
Olive-yards, even the b^st of them, and give them to his servants, to take the
tenths of their seed, and of their vineyards, and give them unto his Officers
and to his servants, etc. No, the Israelites knew no such servitude in Samuels
days, if they had, Surely Samuel would not have set that Government before them
as so strange a thing: No, honest Samuel (who could say in the integrity of his
heart, whose ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have Y
defranded) used no such Tyranny, Good man he could govern the people without
any of these Kickshaws, neither do we read of any of the Judges of Israel, that
ever kept a standing Army, notwithstanding they were environed with enemies on
every side, but that when need required they unanimously joined themselves
together for the defense of each other; and so freed themselves from expense in
that kind: neither do I ever read of one Tax that ever was laid by the Judges
of Israel.

2. When violence shall be no more heard in the land, nor wasting or
destruction within our borders, when the walls shall be called salvation, and
the Gates praise: Isa. 60. verse. 18. when Jerusalem shall be a quiet
habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the Stakes
thereof be removed; neither any of the cords thereof broken, when the glory of
the Lord shall be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go
no Gally with Ore, neither gallant ship pass thereby: (no need then of the
Romish Merchants, or Factors, for no m^n will then buy her Merchandise any
more, Rev. 18. 11.)

Reas. For the Lord is our Judge, The Lord is our Lawgiver the Lord is our
King, He will save us.

3. When our officers shall be peace, and our exactors Righreousnes Isa. 60.
18. when they shall be such as fear God, and hate covetousnes; men of truth,
that will not respect persons in judgment, but shall hear the small as well as
the great, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. when the judgment shall not be man's, but the Lords:
when the people shall say, The Lord bless thee, O habitation of justice, and
mountain of holiness, i. e. the Civil and Church Government. I say when the
Nations who are now under the Dominions of the Antichristian Babylon, shall
once see and find the difference betwixt this Governments, I have here given a
small glimps of, and the present Idolatrous and tyrannical dominions they are
now slaves and bondmen unto; they shall then begin to hate the Whore, and make
her naked and desolate, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: And
note that is to be rationally conceived, that the ten horns shall all at once
stand looking upon the City of Rome lamenting over it, to see it on fire, and
yet to have a bond in that her destruction: which conflict betwixt the Lamb and
the Beast, I conceive does take its rise at the Dominion of the little Horn,
Dan. 7. 8, etc. and shall be determined at the Armageddon battle, Rev. 16. 13,
14, 15, 16. at which time we are to expect the coming of Christ as a thief in
the night.

Again, That the Instruments, which the Lord Jesus will make use of in this
great design, shall be poor contemptible persons, s^e Isa. 41. 14, 15, 16.
fear not thou worm Jacob, etc. I will help thee says the Lord, etc. Behold, I
will make thee a new threshing instrument, having teeth, thou shall thresh the
mountains and beat them small; thou shall make the hits chafe, thou shall fan
them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirl-winde shall scatter
them. And that this has an allusion to Giddeon the Thresher, and his army.
Read Isa. 10. Where the Lord speaking of the deliverance of his people from the
Assyrians, or Babylonish bondage or servitude, says, v. 24. Thus says the
Lord God of Hoasts, O my people that dwells in Sion, be not afraid of the
Assyrian, he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against
thee after the manner of Egypt: For yet a very little while, and the
indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction: And the Lord of
host shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of Median, at
the Rock Oreb, etc. And it shall come to pass In that day that his burden
shall be taken off from thy shoulders, and his yoke from off thy neck: and the
yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

Again, Dan. 2. 34. Thou saw till a stone was cut without hands (or which
was not in hands) which smote the image upon his feet, that were of Iron and
clay, and brake them in pieces: Then was the Iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver, and the gold, broken in pieces together, and became like the chafe of
the summer threshing floor; and the wind carried them away, and the whirlewi^d
scattered them, etc. Again, that these despicable persons shall be the Saints
of the most high, vid Psalm. 149. Let the Saints be joyful in glory; let them
sing aloud upon their beds: Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and
a two edged s^ord in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and
punishments upon the people; To bind their Kings in chains, and heir Nobles
with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgment written: This honor
have all his Saints, praise ye the Lord, Amen.

Again, Dan. 7. 17, 18. These great beasts, which are four Kings, which shall
rise out of the earth; but the Saints of the most high, shall take the
Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever and ever. Verse. 21, 22. I beheld,
and the same horn (viz. the littlehorn, Dan. 7. 8.) made the war with the
Saints, and prevailed against them, until the ancient of days, and judgment
was given to the Saints of the most high, and the time come that the Saints
possessed the Kingdom. Verse. 25. And he, (i. e. the little horn) shall speak
great words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints of the most
High, and shall think to change times and laws, and they shall be given into
his hands, until a time, and times, and the dividing of time, (which I
conceive to be, 3 years and a half, i. e. from the first entrance of his
Dominion, at which time) Judgment shall sit (i. e. at the end of the 3 years
and a half:) And (then) they (i. e. the Saints) shall take away his dominion,
To consume and destroy it, unto the end. Verse. 27. And the Kingdom, and
greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole heavens (the Quakers will have a
large Gut, to hold this Kingdom and Dominion) shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most High; whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey him.

Isa. 60. 12. That Nation and Kingdom, which will not serve thee shall be
broken in pieces, that is says the learned Doctor: All the Nations of the
earth, not a known nation, but the blood of the Saints of Christ is found in
the skirt thereof; and yet all this (says he) shall be transacted with so much
obscurity and darkness, Christ not openly appearing unto carnal eyes, that
though many shall be purified and made white, yet the wicked shall do wickedly,
and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand Dan. 12.
10.

There shall be no such demonstration of Christ presence, as to open the eyes
of hardened men, but at length having suffered the poor deceived wretches, to
drink of the Cup prepared for them: He appears himself gloriously, cap. 19. 13.
in a more e^inent manner than ever before, to the total destruction of the
residue of opposers, and this will be the utmost close of that dispensation,
which he now begins to stir up the hearts of his Saints unto, i. e. to
execute the vengeance written, and to which purpose he has also commissionated
them, Rev. 18. 6, 7, 8. But before I speak to the Commission, it is worthy of
our best observation, to take notice of the just and righteous dealings of God
unto the inhabitants of Babylon: for I say before he gives out his Commission
to his Saints, (who are to judge the world) 1 Cor. 6. 2. and to be the rod of
his strength, Psalm. 110. 2. His battel-Axe, weapon of war will break in pieces
the horse and his rider, etc. Jer. 51. 20. 21, etc. he does in the first place
send his Messengers from his Churches with great power to enlighten them with
his Glory, crying mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every soul
spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

Reas. For all nations have drunk of the wrath of the wine of her fornication,
and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
Merchants of the earth are waxen rich through the abundance of her delicates,
and this I take to be by way of Aggravation, to show her abominations, and how
ripe she is for Judgment and executions, as also to strike a terror in the
hearts of the people of God, that are yet in her, of what rank soever: which
having done in 4. and 5. v. he sends other Messengers to call the people of
God out of her, saying, Come out of her my people, God has his people in
Babylon.

Reason. 1. That ye do not partake of her Sins.

2. That ye receive not of her Plagues.

Those then that partake of her sins, shall rrceive of her plagues.

Reason. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquity after which fair warning he forthwith gives his Commission to his
Saints, in these words, Reward The Saints Commission against Babylon and all
her adherents.
her as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in
the cup which she has filled fill to her double: how much she has glorified
her self, and lived delitiously so much Torment and Sorrow give her.

Reason. For me says in her heart, I sit a Queen and am no widow, and shall
see no sorrow, Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, (viz. this day of
vengeance) Death, and mourning and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with
fire.

Reason. For strong is the Lord God that judges her, so, that it is clear,
this Judgment and Vengeance is to be inflicted upon Babylon and her adherents
by way of recompense, for the further confirmation whereof, see these following
Scriptures id est, Psalm 2. 4, 5. He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the
Lord shall have them in derision, then shall he speak unto them, (viz. to the
Kings of the earth and the Rulers, v. 2.) in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, Psalm. 139 8, 9. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be
destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us, happy
shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones, Isa.
54. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven, (viz. in the Pagans and
Antichristian heaven or Church) Behold it shall come down upon Idumea and upon
the people of my curse to Judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with
blood, it is made fat with fatness, etc. and the Unicorns shall come down with
them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls, and their Land shall be soaked with
blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.

Reason. For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense,
for the Controversies of Sion, etc. (the remainder of that cup) Isa. 47. 1, 2,
3. Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin, daughter of Babylon, sit on the
ground, there are no thrones, O daughter of the Caldeans, for thou shall no
more be called the tender and delicate, take the Millstone and grind meal, and
cover thy locks, etc. Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall
be seen, I will take vengeance, etc. vid. cap. 49. 26, Jer. 50, 35, 36. A sword
upon the Caldeans-saith the Lord, and upon the Inhabitants of Babylon, and upon
her Princes, and upon her wise men, a sword is upon their liars, (viz. her
Astrologers, etc.) they shall dote. A sword upon her mighty men, (her Army-men)
and they shall be dismayed. A sword upon their Horses and their Chariots, and
upon all the mingled people, good and bad that shall be found in her, Rev. 18.
4.) and they shall become as women (there will be no fear of Laodiceans, the
Merosh As in the Epistle.
Churches, that has one word for God, and another for Baal, of those that halt
between Christ and Antichrist, that can swallow a Parsonage, etc. and yet be a
Church-gatherer, in the world, and not of the world, the Hocus Pocus Christians
of the times) A sword upon the Treasurers and they shall be robbed, (it will be
an ill day with Treasurers it seems, let them therefore look to it) A drought
upon her Waiters, i. e. her Clergy men of all sorts and sises, vid. Rev. 18.

Reason. For it is a Land of graven Images, (i. e. either of Idolatry or
Tyranny) and they are mad upon their Idols,

Jer. 5. 30. 31. Therefore the wild beast; of the Desert, with the wild beasts
of the Island shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein, and it shall
be no more inhabited for ever, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to
generation, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrhah, and the Neighbor Cities
thereof, says the Lord, so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of
man dwell therein. Again, the Lord speaking of his people, (Jer. 51. etc)
says, I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of Caldea all
these evils they have done unto Sion in your sight, says the Lord, Behold I am
against thee O destroyinng Mountain, says the Lord, which destroyest all the
earth, and I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the
Rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain, [ Note] and they shall not take of
thee a stone for a corner, nor for a foundation, (not the least grain of humane
invention, either in things appertaining to Babylon) whether in its Civil or
Ecclesiastical estate, where the Lord has given a c^ear and express command
himself, But thou shall be desolate for ever, says the Lord. Zach. 12. 2.
Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all people round about
it, etc. and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone, for all
people that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it, in that day, says the
Lord, will I smite every Mat. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1. 2.
horse with astonishment, Note.
and his Rider with madness, (no great fear then of such Horses and Riders,
for it seems both Horse and Man will be confounded to move against the Holy,
just and perfect Laws of Jehovah the Lord Christ) if they do, woe and sadness
will be unto them, yea, it had been better that a Millstone had been tied about
their neck, and that they had been cast into the bottom of the sea, than to
offend one of those little ones, that shall be made isntrumental for Babylons
destruction.

Rev. 6. 12. etc. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo there
was a great earthquake, and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the
Moon became as blood and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a
fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken with a mighty wind,
and the heavens departed as a scroll, that is, rolled together, and every
mountain and Island were moved out of their places, and the Kings of the earth,
and the greatmen, and the rich men (Weep and howl you rich men, for the
miseries that are now coming upon you, for your riches are corrupted, and your
Garments moth-eaten, your gold and silver is canckred, and the rust of them
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were with fine,
Jam. 5. 1 etc. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days, etc.) and
chief Captains, (i. e. Generals, Lieutenant-Generals, Commissary-Generals, etc.
and Colonels of Armies,) and the mighty men (whether in point of honor or
estate) hid themselves in the dens, and in the Rocks of the mountains, and
said unto the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the wrath of
the Lamb.

Reason. For the Greatest day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand: (Repent therefore, that your sins may be blotted out at the day of
refreshing of the Lords people from himself, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you, and know it will be a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the great God of heaven and earth, the Lord in much mercy set
these these things home upon your hearts and souls, lest you be found fighters
against the Lord of Hosts, the God of Battle, who is able to consume you with
the blast of his nostrils.)

Lastly, as to the means whereby these great transactions shall be accomplished
by the poor, weak, few, and contemptible number of the Army of the Lamb, the
Learned Doctor Owen has given us a brief and full answer, (i. e.) Such as are
the things shaken, such must their shaking be, i. e. Spiritual, if Spiritual,
Natural, if Natural, Civil if Civil, and hence it is, that the great Champion
of the truth is discovered unto us, by these following characters, i. e. And I
saw (says John) and behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon him, was called
faithful, and true, (note this fifth Monarchy-man) and in Righteousness does
he judge and make war, his eyes were as a Flame of Fire, and on his Head were
many Crowns, and he had a Name written that no man knew, but himself, and he
was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is called the Word of
God.

Note. The Word of God must then be the Rule and Sinew of all the Actions of
the fifth Monarchy men, they must only execute the Judgment written, bringing
all the actions of Babylon and her Adherents to the Touchstone of the
Scriptures, as for example in reference to the Political Government of the
World, they are to produce Jam. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save, and to destroy; and from thence demand of the Civil Magistrate, by what
Rule or Authority he makes his own Laws, seeing he petends himself a Minister
or Servant unto the alone Lawmakers, and consequently to put his Laws
in-execution, and thus they will be struck as dumb as door nails, for in this
case they have nothing to plead, but the authority and custom of their
Ancestors, and their Ancestors from Nimrod, and Nimrod from the Apostate sons
of God in the old world, and they from the Corruption and vain imaginations of
fallen man, and fallen man from the suggestions and delusions of Satan, and so
primarily from the Devil.

Again in point of Ecclesiastical Government and Doctrine, the fifth
Monarchy-men are to produce, Mat. 15. 8. In vain do ye worship me, teaching for
doctrine the Traditions or commandments of men, and so keep them close to the
word of God, and not to suffer them to continue as they are, i. e. partly Jure
Divino, and partly Jure Humano, as the Presbyterians do acknowledge their
Government to be, and so down with it even to the ground, for being found in
Babylon, they and their Government must be destroyed with Babylon, as the
learned Doctor has asserted, and clearly proved, and so consequently to all
other false worships, or Governments whatsoever: and hence it is, that the
Lambs followers are said to be clothed in white Linen, white and clean, all
their Acts will be done in truth and righteousness, the white Linen is the
righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19. 8. 2. And out of his mouth goes a sharp
sword, that with it he should smite the Nations, and he shall rule them with a
Rod of iron: here we see, the word makes way for the material sword, which the
Rod of iron does clearly import, so that as the Doctor says, the Civil part
of Antichrist must be conquered with the iron Rod, and the Ecclesiastical part
with the sword that proceeds out of the Lambs mouth, (viz.) the Holy
Scriptures, and this does further appear from Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. as also
from the following words of the afornamed chapter of Rev. 19. i. e. v. 17, 18,
19, 20. which must unavoidably be applied to the Conquest of the material
sword, in that (the other, i. e.) the remnant are said to be slain, with the
sword of him that sat upon the Horse, which sword proceeds out of his mouth,
as in v. 13. as also in v. 16.

And therefore O Babylon, whether Pagan or Antichristian, I do hereby in the
name of the Lord Jesus bid defiance to thee, in whomsoever thou refidest,
whether by Idolatry or false worship, or whether by Tyranny or cruel Dominion,
being in opposition to the two grand Principles of nature, i. e. of loving God
above all, and our neigbours as our selves, and consequently to the bringing of
the unmovable Laws and Ordinances of the unmovable Kingdom of the Lord Jesus
upon earth, and now in daily expectation by his Saints, and therefore I advise
thee, (as the Lord did Niniveh by the Prophet Nahum) to consider, Art thou
better than Populus No-Ammon that was situate among the Rivers that had the
waters round about it, whose Rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the
sea, Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite, Put and Lubim
were the helpers, yet was she carried away, she went ino captivity, her young
children were also dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets, and they
cast lots for their Honorable men, and all her great men were bound in chains,
thou also shall be drunken, thou shall be hid, thou also shall seek strength
because of the enemy, and all thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the
first ripe figs, if they be shaken they shall even fall into the mouth of the
eater. Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women, the gates of thy Land
shall be set wide open unto thine enemies, the fire shall devour thy Bars. Draw
the Waters for the Siege, fortify thy strong holds (with Demi Canon, etc.) Go
Into clay and tread mortar, make strong the Brick-kil, there shall the fire
devour thee, it shall eat thee up as Cankerworm, make thy self many as the
Canker-worm, make thy self many as the Locust, yet for all this, before two
years be expired, the Laws and ordinances of Jehovah the Lord Christ, shall be
magnified and made Honorable in this Nation, and Idolatry and Tyrany shall be
extinguished, even so Amen.

FINIS.
Postscript.
I Am desired to give the people of God to understand, that the last news-book,
published by one Walker an Ironmonger, and a notorious lying Pamphleter (and
yet an approved Preacher by the High Court of Tyers, i^ lieu of his large
obedience to the Beast now up) comprehended seventeen or eighteen large Lies in
fourteen or fifteen Lines in his passages, relating to Mr. Rogers and the
Members of his Society, which were lately sent for to O. C. and that Mr. Rogers
was so far from being put to silence by O. C. as Walker does impudently assert,
as that he gave a full, undeniable and pregnant Testimony, to the very faces of
those that are got into power, against the Apostacies of the Army, their Breach
of Declarations, Blasphemy, lying, persecution ^^lf-see^ing, and other crying
sins, proving that the now prisoners of the Lord, suffer for an essential
truth, and fundamental point of faith, which Mr. Rogers challenged to dispute
with any man, upon even ground^ and that this lively, testimony was continued
in the strength of the anointing, to the very last, keeping and gaining C^ound
upon the Antagonists.

Thus much is thought meet at present to undeceive the people of God, in City
and Country, until the truth hereof do more largely appear.

J. S.


