AN EXPOSITION UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's PREFACE.

Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes, ANGLUS, COSMOPOLITA.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain,
MDCLXXVII.

An Exposition UPON THE PREFACE OF Sr GEORGE RIPLEY, Canon of Bridlington.
TO pass over his Prologue which is Adhortatory to the desirously studious of
this Art, and the beginning of the Preface, which is his Address to God, who is
the only Giver of Wisdom, to bestow upon him true Understanding, that he might
lead his sinful Life to the glory of him, being over-swayed from what he was
naturally, by him who is the Fountain of all Goodness; I shall take up his
Pattern for a Precedent rather of Imitation, than a Subject of Exposition.

And first, as touching those who shall bend themselves to this Science; Let
them resolve that they undertake a most admirable piece of Work, in which
(though far be it that I should think that God bestows upon any of us what we
enjoy for our own Merits, but of his free Grace, yet withal) let me exhort any
one who shall set his Studies this way, to address himself to the Author and
Fountain of Goodness for his help, that he may have grace to honor God in the
use of so great a Talent: For I persuade my self, that whomever God shall
appoint to be Heir of such a Talent, that he will give him a heart to improve
it aright; or else he will add to his Judgment for the abuse of so great a
Blessing.

For whoever shall be wanton and dissolute, and live without the fear of God,
what may he not do with such an Art? unless God restrain him, as certainly he
will, hiding this Secret from him, or making it to him a snare and trap to
betray his Life into the hands of covetous men of the World, as many have found
it by sad experience. Therefore the Lord give both me and thee that grace, that
he may be continually before our Eyes, The Alpha and Omega of our Thoughts,
Words and Actions: Even so Amen.

In the Beginning, when thou made all of naught, a globous matter, and dark,
under confusion, by him the beginning, etc.
FIrst then cast thine Eyes upon the Works of God, and behold that work of his
hands: Consider how the glorious work of Creation was begun by him, even by
Christ, for whose sake this very Science is communicated unto the Sons of Men,
as Bernardus Trevisan witnesses, who in his Epistle to Thomas of Bononia,
says of this work, That it is done (Christi Gratia) for Christ's sake.

Consider how out of one Mass the Lord God by his powerful Command made all
things to appear that are in Heaven or in Earth; the heavenly Bodies with their
Influences above, and the earthly Matter below; which by the Rotation of the
Heavens produce all sublunary products, through the word of his Mouth.

Above all which and in all which God is, he is the Maker and the Lord of all,
above all, blessed for ever, who has purchased to himself a People, and
redeemed them, and they shall reign with him for ever and ever.

For as of one Mass was made all things, right so in our practice must it be.
APply all this to the work of this Mastery Analogically and Allegorically: for
as the Lord made all the works which we see, so he did lay them all under his
powerful word of Command, by which they continue to be what they are, and are
carried with an uniform motion to that first Pattern or Draught of things.

All our Secrets of one Image must spring.
AS then out of one mixed confused Mass all things had an actual existence
according to their several kinds, so out of one Image all these Secrets must
flow: Truth does not consist in Heterogeneity, but in Unity; for God is one,
and his works uniform; and the more Noble any thing is, the nearer to
Simplicity.

As in Philosophers Books, whosoever list to see.
TO this the Sentences of the Philosophers concur, as many as have truly
understood the Secret, as Morien often and plentifully witnesses, Geber,
Trevisan, and many others: The thing is but one in kind, though two in number;
and though more things are used, yet till they be all brought to an oneness of
Nature, they are not fit to enter into this work.

Our Stone is called the Lesser World.
ANd therefore our Stone is resembled to Man, who although he have a Wife
different from him in Sex, yet one with him in kind; in which sense it is
called the Microcosm, or Less World: for indeed, next to Man, who is the Image
of God, it is the true little System of the Great World: I shall not
particularize here how, for in its place it will fall in seasonably.

One and Three.
THis Stone is also called Trine or Trinity in Unity, from the Homogeneity of
the Matter, as Trevisan says: Our Stone is made of one Root, that is, of two
Mercurial Substances, etc. This Trinity is discerned in the Components; for
first there is the Body, which is Sol, and the Water of Mercury, in which
besides its Mercuriality, there is a spiritual seed of Sulphur, which is the
secret Fire. This is the Trinity, these are called the Body, the Soul, and the
Spirit; the Body is the dead Earth, which increases not without the celestial
Virtue; the Spirit is the Soul of our Air or Chameleon, which is also of a
twofold composure, yet made one inseparably; the Soul is the Bond of Mercury,
without which our Fire never appears, nor can appear, for it is naked, it
inhabits the Fiery-Dragon, and it yields his Soul to the true Saturnia, and is
embraced by it, and both become one together, bearing the stamp of the most
High, even the Oriental Lucifer, the Son of the Morning: This Soul is Chalyb's
Magical Volatile, and very tender, the true Minera of Sol, out of which Sol
naturally proceeds, which I my self know to be true, and have spoken of it in
my little Latin Treatise, called Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis palatium:
This is true Sulphur, which is imbibed by the Mercuriality of Saturnia, and
notes it with the Regal Signet, and being united and revived into a Mineral
Water by the Mediation of Diana's Doves, it is the sharp Spirit which in the
Water moves the Body to putrefie. Thus is the Trinity proportionable, to wit,
three Natures in the first Mixture, the Work is carried an end to perfect
Complement distinctly, according to the Virtue of a Body, Soul, and Spirit: for
the Body would be never penetrative, were it not for the Spirit, nor would the
Spirit be permanent in its super-perfect Tincture, were it not for the Body;
nor could these two act one upon another without the Soul, for the Spirit is an
invisible thing, nor does it ever appear without another Garment, which Garment
is the Soul. In this it exercises its virtue: this Soul, as it is drawn from
the Saturnia, solid and dry, is named our Air, or rather the Chameleon, which
is an airy Body, changing its hue according to every Object it beholds, so our
Air is of an astonishing Nature, out of which I know all Metals may be drawn,
yea even Sol and Luna, without the Transmuting Elixir, of which in my little
Latin Treatise (which was the Congest of mine own experience) I spoke fully.

This Air being dissolved into Water Mineral, has in it two of our Trinity
united so really that in a short digestion the spiritual inhabiting invisible
Sulphur will without addition congeal the Mercury in which it is, and make a
visible congelated substance of Luna and then Sol.

Thus this Trinity is indeed Unity, one being Gold mature, fixed, and digested
in act, the other Gold volatile, white, and crude, yet (in posse) to be made
most fixed and solid by naked digestion. It is not then a delusion that
Philosophers speak and write, for trust me (Viderunt nudam fine vest Dianam;
sciens loquor) I know I speak true, which the Sons of Art do know, and can
testify with me.

Magnesia also.
THis Stone is by the Philosophers called their Magnesia, their Adrop, etc.
with many more names, and is indeed their Stone in the first true mixture of
the true matter; for it is the true seed, and will produce, with the
cooperation of external Fire, in a patient expectation of the time of Nature,
which is not long to him that understands it.

Of Sulphur and Mercury.
FOr that which is done by Nature in many years and ages, in the bowels of the
Earth, decocting Mercury alone, without addition; Art, to make the work short,
first impregnates Mercury with a spiritual seed of Sulphur, by which it becomes
powerful in the dissolution of Metals, and then adds to it mature Sulphur, by
which the work is shortened; and out of these two Parents of one Root is
brought forth a Noble Son of a Regal Offspring, that is not simply Gold, but
our Elixir, ten thousand times more precious.

Proportionate by Nature most perfectly.
YEt all this Work of the Artist is only to help Nature; we can do no more, yea
we have professed and will profess, that we do only administer unto Nature
herein: for all the Works of God are entire, we can but behold them and admire
them; and therefore we seek our Principals where Nature is, and amend Nature in
its own Nature. Nor do we make the simple believe, which is the Trade of
Sophisters, that we by our Extractions and Manual Operations upon Vegetables,
Minerals, Urines, Hair, or the like, intend to make our so highly prized
Elixir; but out of such things in which Nature has put it, we by Art do make
it appear by revealing what was hidden, and hiding what was manifest.

But many one marvelleth, and marvel may, and museth on such a mavelous thing.
WHereas those who work upon other matters than the true, do betray their
ignorance herein most foully, that they do not consider the possibility of
Nature, but work after their Fancy; as though out of combustible substances
filthy in their nature, and made up of Heterogeneities, might be produced a
pure perfect Metallic Substance, by reason of its unseverable Unity
invincible, and by virtue of its transcendent Excellency cleansing and fixing
all leporous and fugitive bodies in the Mineral Kingdom, and reducing them to
the Anatical proportion of perfectly digested Sol or Luna, according to the
quality of the Medicine. When therefore their Principles are not sound, their
Conclusion is always deceitful, and then they not knowing Nature in her
Operation, but interpreting the words of the crafty and envious Philosophers,
according to the Letter, do stand admiring at the Unconformity of their Work to
the Promises of the Philosophers, at least as they understand their Books; they
admire what this Stone is, if it be a Truth, or a Conceit; and why they (as
well as any) do not attain it if possible: Such meditations usually fill the
minds of unsuccessful Alchymists, who though they be (as they esteem
themselves) very Judicious, yet cannot stumble upon this unhappy Stone.

What is our Stone, etc.
THey marvel at the uncouth difficulty of the thing, nor can they almost tell
what to judge of what they read; forasmuch as all Philosophers say it is a very
easy thing.

For Fowls and Fishes to us do it bring, every Man it has: And it is in every
place, in thee, in me, etc.
ANd in very deed the Ancient Wise Men have so written, and do still write the
same; as to wit, That it is found in a Dunghill, according to Morien; and for
the easiness of the charge, they all write plentifully; so that in respect of
time and cost, Artophius and Flammel say it is but the play of Children and
work of Women; and therefore one Excellent Philosopher, writing of this
Mastery, titles his Treatise, Ludus Puerorum; that is, Childrens Play.

To this I answer, That Mercury it is I wis.
YEt trust me, though the wise men thus write, and it be true, there is
notwithstanding something to be added to their Sentence, according as the
Author of Novum Lumen well observed, as namely, That this Art is easy to him
that understands it, as Artephius plainly expresses; but to him that is
ignorant of it, there is nothing can appear so hard; The Wise Man, says
Sendivogius, finds it in a Dunghill, but the Fool cannot believe that it is in
Gold. I for my part (through the great mercy of God to me an unworthy and
unthankful Creature) I know the Art to be true, and not that only, but also
very easy; and I wonder that men of so great parts have studied for it so long
in vain; only this I am confident of, it is the gift of God; nor is it in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that gives mercy: In which
respect I am bold, to the glory of God, to confess that I have the Art, and
have Natures Operations in these so hidden Secrets, before mine eyes at this
present writing, which I see hourly with admiration of the infinite Glory, in
the beholding of such a great Glory in the Creatures, which, trust me, will
ravish the Beholder, to see such a despised Infant as our Mercury is, to grow
into so strong a Hero, which the World cannot purchase.

But not the Common, called Quicksilver by name.
YEt the difficulty is not over when once it is known that the whole Secret
consists in Mercury; for what more frequent among the Sophisters than to cry,
Our Mercury, etc. and yet in the Work of Nature they are as blind as Moles? The
cause is, for that Nature has produced a Mineral Juice in the bowels of the
Earth, which does answer to most of the Philosophical Descriptions of their
Water; as namely, that it is mineral, quick, current, without humectation,
ponderous, and the like; which when the vulgar Alchymists read, they apply it
to this naughty Mercury, which for inward Qualities has nothing in it like
ours.

Some there are, who trusting to the Sentence of most of the Wise Men who have
written concerning this Art, do reject Mercury vulgar in word, when as indeed
they dote as much upon it as others, whenas by their mock-purgations they
handle Mercuries diverse ways by Sublimation, Precipitation, Calcination Manual,
even to a black substance, like to Soot or Lamp-black, by distillation from
sundry Faeces, after grinding with Vinegar, by Calcination with Waters-fort, by
Lotions innumerable, changing Mercury into sundry forms, and after quickening
him: By all which Operations they imagine themselves secure of the Secret of
our Mercury, whenas all such ways indeed are but Sophisms; and yet Mercury so
abused is one and the same vulgar Mercury.

So that upon this Rock more have stumbled than upon any other, and yet will
stumble, till they know how to distinguish our Mercury from Common, and our
preparations from that of the vulgar Sophisters, which have no likeness one to
another.

But Mercury, without which nothing being is.
FOr our Mercury is Essential and Radical to our Body, and partakes of the
nature of it entirely, and therefore it is said to be that Mercury without
which nothing is; for all things are distinguished by Philosophers by three
Principles, (although some Simples have not three, but only by Analogy) among
which the most essential is Mercury, for the humidity of all things concrete is
called their Mercury, which is most entire to all things, forasmuch as all
things owe their beginning unto Water.

So then as the proper specific Mercury of all things is so Essential unto
them that nothing is without it, so our Mercury is so consubstantial with our
Body, that it is one in kind with that Mercury of which it was by coagulation
concrete, which vulgar Mercury is not; and therefore the Body is incrudate by
this Mercury, and sends forth its Seed by mixture with it, through the
cooperation of requisite temperate external heat.

All Philosophers record and truly sain the same.
TRuly this I could confirm by infinite Testimonies of Philosophers, since
there never wrote any who was indeed a true Artist, but he has affirmed the
same: Geber, Artephius, Haly, Rozinus, Flammel, Sendivogius, the Author of the
Rosary, Trevisan, with many others, which would be very tedious to name.

So that indeed this Work of mine I wrote not because enough has not been
written before, for I do but echo to the Voice of all Philosophers, who have
left upon record such clear Testimonies of the cooperation of Art and Nature
herein, that if Wit were capable of this attainment, the Art would have been
common ere now; and I do verily admiringly adore the Wisdom of God herein, that
an Art so true, so natural, so easy, so much desired and sought after, should
yet be so rarely found, that the generality of Men, Learned and Unlearned, do
laugh at it as a Fable: it is therefore most certainly the Gift of God, who is
and ever will be the Dispenser of it, according to his good pleasure.

But simple Searchers puts them in blame, saying they hid it.
MOst injurious are they therefore to the well-deserving Philosophers, who
because they cannot understand their Writings, and through the
misunderstanding of the possibility of Nature, do commit foul mistakes in
their operations, and therefore reap a ridiculous Harvest, they then blame the
falsity of Authors, or at least accuse their difficult writing, not considering
that Philosophers owe them nothing, and whatever they write for the information
of the studious, it is not of debt, nor yet of Covetousness, for they possess
the greatest Treasure in the World; nor lastly of Ambition, for many suppress
their names: it is of Love therefore, and of desire to be helpful to the
Studious; which Love to requite with reproaches, is a token of great
ingratitude.

Moreover, it is to be understood that the most wise GOD has a ruling hand
herein, and all Sons of Art have their Commission as it were given them; they
write and teach according to that permission which the Creator of all things
has given them. I may speak it experimentally, that when my self have had one
intent, I have been so over-swayed with unpremeditated thoughts in the very
writing, that I have taken notice of the immediate hand of God therein, by
which I have been carried beyond what I intended.

And truly it is not our intent to make the Art common to all kind of men, we
write to the deserving only; intending our Books to be but as Way-marks to such
as shall travel in these paths of Nature, and we do what we may to shut out the
unworthy: Yet so plainly we write, that as many as God has appointed to this
Mastery shall certainly understand us, and have cause to be thankful unto us
for our faithfulness herein. This we shall receive from the Sons of this
Science, whatever we have from others: therefore our Books are intended for the
former, we do not write a word to the latter.

But they be blameworthy which be no Clerks, and meddle with Philosophy.
MOreover, we write not our Books for the information of the illiterate, as
though any vulgar mechanic Distiller, Alchymist, or Sophister, should readily
carry away the Golden Fleece; or as though any covetous man, who makes Gain his
utmost end, should readily gather the Apples of the Hesperides; nor yet that
any, though Learned, should by once or twice overly and slight reading (as the
Dogs lap the Water of Nilus) straightway be made a Philosopher: Nay verily,
the majesty of this Science forbids so great impiety; it is the gift of God,
and not of Men: Our Books are for those who have been or intend to be
conversant about the search of Nature; we hint the way; prayer to God and
patient persisting in the use of means, must open these Doors. Let therefore
profound Meditation, accompanied with the Blessing of God, Furnaces, Coals,
Glasses, and indefatigable pains, be thy Interpreters, and let them serve for
Commentaries upon our Writings. So I did, so I advise thee; and the Blessing of
God attend all studious virtuous Searchers in this way.

But though it Mercury be.
YEt is not the knot untied, nor difficulties overcome, when once a man has
learned to sing this thredbare Song in Philosophy, Est in Mercurio quicquid
quaerunt sapientes: for what Sophister who cannot make so great a clatter in
these general terms as a son of Art? the greatest difficulty is to know what
this Mercury is, that is so desirable and effectual.

Yet wisely understand wherein it is, and where thou shall it seek.
THerefore let me advise every studious Searcher of this hid Science, to
consider warily with himself what he seeks and would find; nor that only, but
in what he would find it: for trust me it is not in this Science as some do
imagine, that our Arcanum may be made out of any thing, nor yet out of any base
thing: But in the knowing of the true Principle, consists the first true step
to Perfection, according to the Poet, Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.

Else I counsel thee take not this work in hand.
BUt he who knows not this our Ocean in which our Water has its flux and
reflux, and our Fountain out of which he may draw this Water for his use, let
him forbear this, as a most dangerous Science, for he may only expect loss in
it, but no profit.

For Philosophers flatter Fools with fair speech.
NOr let any expect comfortable Direction in our Books, who know not the true
Matter, nor the true Keys by which our Matter is brought forth from darkness
into the light; for verily though we write for the inlightning of a son of Art,
yet also for the fatal blinding of all such Owls and Bats who cannot behold the
light of the Sun, nor can endure the splendour of our Moon. To such we propound
rare tricks, suiting to their sordid fancy: to the covetous, an easy way
without expense, in an inconsiderable time; to the lazy Book-men, a play,
without tedious toil; to the unstable, rash, hasty multiplicity of
Distillations.

But listen to me, for truly I will thee teach.
BUt to thee, supposing thy qualifications to be Honesty, Secrecy,
Studiousness and Indefatigableness, we will show the Truth; yet so, that it may
be hid from the Vulgar, yet plain enough to an industrious attentive Reader.

Which is this Mercury most profitable.
PHilosophers have hidden much under the Homonymium of Mercury, so that it is
no hard matter for those that peruse their Books to mistake them; yea as many
as God will have excluded from this Art, shall certainly mistake.

For many things are by them named by the name of Mercury, which are altogether
useless in this Mastery; and many Processes have they deciphered which
themselves never did. I for my part shall not tread in their metaphorical
steps, but shall herein heartily follow the path of profound Ripley, whose Text
I annex to my Discourse as I go, because it is an elaborate Piece, in excellent
Method; on whom I do not so much comment, for I write mine own experimental
Knowledge, but rather intend this Treatise for a Light to that excellent Light
in Alchymy; these Labors of mine being entire of themselves: Only to help thee
to my utmost, I have confined my Discourse to his Method, which I might (as
other Philosophers have done) have scattered here and there confusedly.

Being to thee nothing deceiveable.
AS then I have chosen Ripley's Method to follow, so will I imitate his
Ingenuity, and do solemnly profess not to be deceiveable to thee in any thing,
though I shall not so unfold the Mysteries, that bare reading shall suffice to
show the unveiled Diana.

Know therefore assuredly, that when the Philosophers say, That their Matter is
every where, etc. This they speak only for the blinding of all such who taking
the Philosophers meaning according to the bare sound of their words, do reap
Trifles instead of Treasures. I shall therefore let you understand that this
subject of the Philosophers is considered either in reference to its Matter, or
formal Virtue; in reference to the former, it is a concrete of Water, as all
other Compounds are; in respect of the latter, it participates of a Celestial
Virtue, and that in a high degree in both respects. It is said to be in every
place: for the original matter, which is Water, passes equally through the
whole Family of Concretes: and for the celestial Influence, it is so universal
that nothing is hidden from the heat of it: so that indeed in this sense it is
said to be every where. Moreover, the Stone being the System of the great
World, does in some way or other represent every thing which is or can be
perceived by man; I mean in reference to some or other operation, color or
quality, and therefore the Wise have described it almost by all things
imaginable, for to every thing in some or other circumstance it has
resemblance.

It is more near in some things than in some.
YEt to speak properly for information, and not to conceal the Secret, we
profess that there is but one kind in which our Stone is found, and in number
two: understand me not as the Philosopher finds things in his first laborious
Preparation, for so one of the two subjects which being of one kind enter the
supernatural work of Generation of our fiery Stone, I say our crude Sperm flows
from a Trinity of Substances in one Essence, of which two are extracted out of
the Earth of their Nativity by the third, and then become a pure milky
Virgin-like Nature, drawn from the Menstruum of our sordid Whore.

Take heed therefore what I to thee write.
ANd now I call God to witness that I will show you a great Mystery: our Stone
is in one part of a perfect nature, which we would exalt into a more then most
perfect, and for this end we stand in need of our true Fountain, which I have
elsewhere described, and shall not now repeat: This Fountain has three
Springs, and these are three Witnesses which testify to the Artist of the
truth of his proceedings; these are the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and
these three agree in one; the Water is a Mercurial Bond, which the Sophisters
can behold so far as the outward shell reaches, but the wise man can behold
his hidden secret Center: the Blood is of our Green Lion, which is indeed the
greenest or rawest of the three: for it has no manner of Metalline Sulphur, no
not a grain, and therefore is Totally Volatile, and it is more raw than the
common Water, and yet it is called the Blood, for a most secret reason, because
it is the seat of the Life, which is the Spirit, as Blood in man is the seat of
his Life; yea the Spirit by this Soul of our Green Lion, is made manifest, and
is united to it, so that though it be very green or unripe, yet that inhabits
it, which is both pure and ripe, and can and will digest it with the Water, and
make both become life with life: Now the Spirit is nothing else but a Chaos,
the Wonder of the Wonders of God, which every man almost has, and knows it
not, because as it appears to the World it is compact in a vile despised form;
yet is it so useful, that in humane Affairs none can want it: to the
Philosopher it appears united to the Blood, that is, of our Green Lion, which
truly is not a Lion till the spirit be joined with it, and then it is made able
to devour all Creatures of its kind.

And these three agree in one, they are not absolutely one, mark that; our Fire
is not of the matter, and yet it is united with the matter, as if it were of
one form with it; and there is an agreement in one, though not a radical union;
for the spirit (which is the Fire) is separable from the Water and the Blood;
and then is our Lion actually Green, but cease then to be our Lion, but is
the true matter to multiply Emeraulds more glorious than natural.

For if to thee Knowledge never come,
Therefore yet shall thou me not twite.

ANd now indeed if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant; I know not what more
to say, and not transgress the silence of Pythagoras. I have told you that our
matter is twofold, crude and fixed; the fixed is by Nature perfected to our
hands, and we need only to have it made more then most perfect, which Nature
alone could never perform; nor is there any thing that can thus exalt
Tinctures, but our dissolving Water, which I told you flows from three
Springs; the one is a common Well at which all draw, and of which Water many
use; this Well has in it a Saturnine drossiness, which make the Waters
unuseful; these frigid superfluities are purged by two other Springs, through
which the Water of this Well is artificially caused to run: these Springs make
but one Well, whose Waters appear dry, the humidity being sealed; the Well it
self is surrounded with an Arsenical Wall, the slimy bottom abounds with the
First Ens of Mineral Salt and Sulphur, which acuate the Water of the first
Well, whose primary quality is Coldness; being thus acuated, it becomes so
powerful a Menstruum, and so pleasant to the Metals, that for its peculiar
Virtue it is chosen for to be the Bath of the Sun and Moon.

For I will truly now thee excite to understand well Mercuries three.
BUt because one Book never is sufficient in this Mastery, to discover all that
is to be known, and other Authors write variously of Mercury: Attend further
what I have to say to thee concerning this point.

We have in our work properly three Mercuries, of which one is to be by the
Philosopher prepared, of which I have spoken; and this being joynd with the
perfect Body, and set to digest, the Glass is shut, and then in this first
Composition is the Matter called Rebis, that is, (two things) to wit in Number,
for you may yet separate each from other in its entire nature.

These two being joined, do operate so within the Vessel till the Compound
become a black Powder, which is then called the Ashes of the Platter.

This Powder relenteth into a black Broth, which is called Elixir, or Water
extracted by Elixation, which is reiterate Liquefaction.

This Elixir is divided into a more subtle part, which is called Azoth, and
the grosser part is called Leton, which is by Azoth washed and whitened.

In Rebis the Matters are confused, in Elixir they are divided, and in Azoth
they are conjoined with an inseparable union.

The Keys which of this Science be.
THese Menstruums or Mercuries are the very Keys of this Science: The first is
the Philosophers Key, the other two are Natures Keys.

Reymund his Menstrues does them call.
THey are called by the wise men Menstrues, in three respects: first for the
secrecy of them; as those Lunary Tributes of Women are hid from common view,
so these Mercuries from vulgar Searchers. Secondly for the Prognostics of
them; as those in Women betoken maturity to conceive, so these are called
Menstrues because they are fit for procreation. Thirdly in regard of the office
of them; as those in Women are accounted nutritive for the Embrion, so our
Child is nourished by these to perfect age and strength.

Let me add a fourth reason, and that is, in respect of the time; the
Philosophical Preparation will hardly give thee thy first Menstruum fit for thy
use in less than a month. And after conjunction thy first Menstruum will begin
to hold of the nature of the Body in another month, and then thou shall see a
show of the second Menstruum; but wait till another month, and thou shall see
thy second Menstruum complete; then yet wait a third month, and thou shall see
a show of the third Menstruum, which in the fourth month will perfectly
exuberate, and then with it thou shall soon see perfected Sulphur of Nature,
for it is Fire of Nature; and in this first Exaltation is the white Stone
perfected.

Without them truly no Truth is done.
HE then that knows not the Secret of our Menstruals, let him forbear the
practice of the Work, for verily he may expect nothing but a sophistical
Delusion instead of the true Work of Nature: He is like a man that would enter
an inaccessable Castle without a Key, or shoot in a Bow without a string.

But two of them be superficial.
NOw that you may know our Secrets exactly, we shall faithfully discover unto
you our Experience, as cordially as a Brother may declare to a Brother; and
shall reveal what I never found yet revealed in any Author.

There are in our Mercury three Mercurial Substances, which may well be called
Menstrues, the one the more gross part, (which though it be a Water, yet it
being the most palpable part, and visible, may be termed the Body of the Water:
the last is a Fiery Form, which is the Blood of Cadmus; this is a real
invisible form, which is essentially and formally Sol Volatile: the second is
the mean Soul, which Philosophers without Equivocation call Saturn's Child; the
middle substance of these three, are made into one wonderful Mercury, which
has not its like in the world.

Now for the superficiality of the two first Menstrues or Mercuries, and the
essentiality of the third, know and understand, for our speech will be very
mysterious: Know I say, what it is to be superficial, and what essential:
Essence you know is invisible, and more formal then material, which does
actuate the matter, and ripens it; but that which is superficial is visible,
and may be seen, and is more material and passive: Now those two first which
are superficial, are the Water and the Blood, the essential Menstrue is the
Spirit, which all are in one; yet distinguished in number, though not in kind.

The third Essential to Sun and Moon.
SO then two are material passive substances, which are united in our sophical
Mercury; the third is an active essence which is hid in our Mercury, which is
essential to Sun and Moon, because it is a Fire, which is Sol volatile; and as
the Artist may govern this Mercury, it will digest the passive Principles
either into Sol or Luna, at the Philosophers pleasure.

Their Properties I will declare right soon.
I Shall by and by in its place describe to you all the Properties of these
three Menstrues, when I come to it; in the mean time take notice that by this
Mercury in which are three Mercuries, or Menstrues, the perfect Bodies will be
calcined, and then dissolved into Mercury, which is not then so properly called
a Menstrue, for it is the Fruit it self, called Azoth, or Virgins Milk; which
is a digestion beyond the Menstrues.

And Mercury of Metals essential,
Is the Principle of our Stone material.

THe Bodies when they are dissolved do transmute the foresaid Mercuries by
their own ferment, into their own nature, for the Fire of Nature assimilates
all that nourishes it to its own likeness; and then our Mercury or Menstrue
vanishes, that is, it is swallowed up in the Solary Nature, and all together
make but one universal Mercury, by intimate union, and this Mercury is the
material Principle of the Stone; for before our Mercury (as it was compounded
of three Mercuries) had in it two which were superficial, and the third
essential to Sol and Luna only, not to the Stone: for Nature would produce
these two out of it, by artificial decoction: but when the perfect Bodies are
dissolved, they transmute the Mercury (that dissolved it) and then there is no
more repugnancy in it, then is there no longer a distinction between
superficial and essential, but all is become essential: And this is that one
matter of the Stone, hat one thing which is the subject of all Wonders.

In Sol and Luna our Menstrues are not seen.
WHen thou art come to this, then shall thou no more discern a distinction
between the Dissolver and the Dissolved; for the Water shall neither ascend nor
descend, go out nor in alone, but the Fire of Nature shall accompany it, and
the color of the mature Sulphur, which is unseparably joined, shall tincture
thy Water.

It appears not but by effect to sight.
SO that thou shall never see them severed one from the other, but shall
discern them by the effect, and by the eye of thy mind more then of thy body
Therefore says the Philosopher, Azoth and Fire are sufficient for thee in the
middle and end, but not in the beginning, for then they are not our Mercury,
that is our universally united Mercury. But in the first days of the Stone,
there appear four Elements, of which three are in the Mercury sublimed, and one
in Sol, which is counted all for Earth till it be dissolved, and then it
fermenteth the Mercury, and makes the three qualities of it, which it has,
drawn from three substances to unite into one Mercury which has all in it one
essential property, and that is Solary, which first will show the Moon in the
full, and is the true one matter of all our Secrets, our one Image out of which
springs white and red, not bare Sol and Luna, as will spring out of our
Mercury, which we prepare with our hands, but the white and red Elixirs, which
show that this Mercury which Nature has made in the Glass, without our help,
is far beyond that Mercury which we prepared with a laborious toil.

This is the Stone of which we mean,
Who so our Writings conceives aright.

ANd verily he that has well studied our Books shall understand that this
general one Mercury which we call Azoth, is indeed our Stone, which wants
only digestion, for it is inseparably united, not in a Dyptative Conjunction,
which is barely a mixture of the Sun with our Mercury; or Triptative, which is
a mixture and union of the Body, Soul, and Spirit, which is before
Putrefaction; but Tetraptive, which is the Anatization of qualities, which is
the first degree of the white Stone, which will then grow higher and higher,
till the Moon come up to the full.

It is a Soul and Substance bright.
THis Stone or Virtue multiplicative is not in relation to the matter, but the
form, which does make the matter to receive and after impress Tinctures: for
who could believe that Sol, in which the virtue is but unary, I mean only
sufficient for it self, should by the addition of our Mercury, which in
reference to its material parts, is below the degree of Sol, and needs
digestion, and that only to maturate it to the height of Sol, I say that by the
mixture of those two Venerial Tinctures, should be multiplied in a manner
infinitely.

Of Sol and Luna a subtle Influence.
WEre it not that this Tincture which in the Mercury is Sol and Luna, were as a
Soul, that is, a spiritual thing, it were impossible; it is therefore the very
Dos faecunditatis which is in Minerals (which does appear in their Lunary and
Solary Tinctures) which was put and planted on and in them, in the first
Benediction of (Crescite and Multiplicamini) which increasing is in some things
juxta quantitatem: This is in quality.

Whereby the Earth receives resplendence.
SO then the matter of Minerals is a dead passive thing, in which there is
included a Light which is clothed (vitali Aura aetheria) as I may speak; this
form of Light is it which does actuate and specificate or determine the matter;
and this splendour or Light is in all Metals, Sol or Luna, which are conspicuous
more eminently in those two perfect Bodies Gold and Silver, but are in other
Mineral Bodies more Clouded and Eclipsed with an earthly faeculent
interposition between the fulgor and the superfluities, which is the
Imperfection of such Bodies; and is accompanied with a rawness and inconstancy
in the Fire, the Impure carrying away the Pure.

For what is Sol and Luna, says Avicen,
But Earth which is pure White and Red?

SO then Sol and Luna is more formal then material; for the matter is a gross
Terrene Substance, but the form of Light purifying the Substance, is a most
subtle spiritual thing which does ennoble the grossness of the matter by a
Fire-abiding Tincture.

Take from it the said Clearness, and then
That Earth will stand but in little stead.

BUt if this Tincture could be separated from the pondus of the matter, the
remainder would be an unprofitable Terrestriety: Our work therefore is for to
advance this Light by exaltation in the matter; which as it in its simplicity
is but in unity, so it may be brought to a Virtue millenary, and gradually so
exalted, that the matter would seem to be quite swallowed up of the form; and
yet in this exaltation it is not the moles or pondus that is the Solary or
Lunary Virtue, but a Light whose multiplication is not in the increase of
pondus, but in the circulation of Natures, till the Heavenly illuminate the
Earthly with an immediate Beam, all interposition being removed out of the way.

The whole Compound is called our Lead.
FOr to attain this admirable multiplication Philosophers have found out a most
subtle yet very natural Composition, which has been not a little sought for
by many: this the wise Ancients, both to describe the Fountain of these
Mysteries, as also to hide the Secret from the unworthy, have mystically called
their Lead.

The quality of Clearness from Sol and Luna does come.
THis Lead, so called from the appearing baseness of its original, is
notwithstanding of an admirable power, for it contains the Bath for Sol and
Luna; that is, the Sun and Moon enter into it, and send out their Tinctures
into it, which it receives, and like to a fertile Soil ennobleth it an hundred
and an hundred fold.

These are our Menstrues, both all and some.
THus have I in general given you a description of our Menstrues, which are
three, Acetum, Elixir, and Azoth; which I shall now particularly describe.

Bodies with the first we Calcine naturally, perfect.
THe first Menstrue we call our sharp Vinegar, with infinite other names, which
it will be tedious for to recite; and with this is made our Magical Solution of
Sol; this, says Sendivogius, is (Menstruum mundi in sphaera Lunae toties
rectificatum ut possit calcinare Solemn.) In this, says the noble Author of the
Hermetical Arcanum, is made Eclipsis Solis and Lunae in Cauda Draconis: this
is, as Artephius says, the only Instrument in the World for our Art: for it
causes the Sun to putrefie; that is, it loses its hard compaction, and makes
it to be an impalpable Powder, as says the truth-telling Flammel. In this
Calcination, as all Authors testify, and our own Experience has taught us,
Natures are united, Colors are mingled, and one holds of the other, and this
is the period of the first Menstruum, which ends in this Circulation.

But none which been unclean.
THis Blackness many erroneously conceive to be uncleanness, but it is not so,
for it is only the Sepulcher of our King; in which, though he seem to have lost
what he was, yet from hence he shall arise what he never was before.

Except one.
ANd verily there is nothing of an unclean nature that enters our Composition
except one thing, which is the Instrument moving the Gold to putrify; and in
regard that it does naturally incline the Body to putrify, and is as it were
the very grave of it, it is called by some Philosophers Aqua foetida, and by
some Mortis Immundities; yet indeed it is not in its own nature unclean, but
made pure, as pure as the Art of the Artist can make it with the help of
Nature, joining Consanguinty with Consanguinity.

Which is usually
Named by Philosophers their Lion Green.

THis hidden Body, or rather Chaos, the Philosophers have highly extolled and
deeply concealed, but they usually call it their Green Lion, which many
mistaking apply to Venus, and some to Vitriol, which is all one in a manner,
Vitriol being only Copper corroded by an embryonated Salt; but Fools, says
Ripley (in his Errors) call it the Green Lion. I shall discover this Subject to
you, so far as I dare, in this following Song.

The Learned SOPHIES FEAST.
Whosoever would lasting and eternal Fame
Deserve; Learn thou the Lion Green to tame.
Put this before you can by Art attain,
To study him to know thou must be fain;
Nor is it, trust me, for a stupid Fool,
Nor yet for one brought up in vulgar School,
I shall him therefore lively out pourtray,
Lest from this Banquet you go lean away.
This Song I style the Learned Sophies Feast,
Prepare your self to come a worthy Guest:
With Mind attentive to my words give heed,
Lest you, instead of Meat, on Fancies feed.
This horrid Beast, which we our Lion call,
Has many other Names, that no man shall
The truth perceive, unless that God direct,
And on his darkened Mind a Light reflect.
It Is not because this Subject does consist
Of Animal Components (he that list
May well conceiv^) that we do therefore use
The name of Beasts; nor is it to abuse
The Readers; he whoever so does think,
With stupid Sots himself does hereby link.
But it is because of the transcendent force
It has, and for the rawness of its source,
Of which the like is no where to be seen,
That it of them is named the Lion Green.
Now listen, and I shall to you disclose
The Secret, which times past has like a Rose
Been hedged so on every side with Briars,
That few could pluck it at their hearts desires
There is a substance of Metalline Race,
If you the matter view, whose louring face
A Sophister would at first sight so scare,
That he it to approach would never dare;
The form that s visible is very vile,
And does Metalline Bodies so defile,
That none to see it could be brought to think
That thence should spring bright Phoebus Pearly Drink:
And yet, O strange! a wonder to relate,
At this same Spring naked Diana sat.
Who horned Acteon for his ventrous peeping,
This Spring two dreadful Beasts have in their keeping;
Which drive away rash Searchers to their woe,
Them to inchant, the Art who do not know.
Yet further for to answer your desire,
I say this subject never felt the fire
Of Sulphur Metalline, but is more crude
Then any Mineral, which does delude
The unwary, and in Fire fugitive
It Is found th'impure away the pure does drive;
And its Components are, A Mercury
Most pure, though tender, with a Sulphur dry
Incarcerate, which does the flux restrain,
And as in shackles does the same detain.
This Sulphur with malignant qualities
Does so the Mercury infect which with it lies
That though they have no fundamental union,
Yet hereby is debarred the sweet communion
Which otherwise would surely intercede
Between this Virgin-Nymph, which we call Lead
And her dear Sister which in Silver streams
Runs down abundantly, then should the beams
Of bright Apollo cause the Dews which fall
From these commixed Waters, from the tall
Aspiring Mountains, gliding through the Vales,
Fire to conceive of Nature, which avails
To warm the Bath for Sol, in which he may
Descend and wash, and with fair Phebe play,
Till flesh and youth renewing, they be able
To shine with glory, aye multiplicable.
Know then this Subject, which the sure Base
Of all our Secrets is, and it uncase;
And choose what thou shall find of greatest price,
Leave Sophisters, and follow my advice:
Be not deluded, for the Truth is one,
It Is not in many things, this is our Stone.
At first appearing in a Garb defiled,
And to deal plainly, it is Saturn's Child:
His price is mean, his venom very great,
His constitution cold, devoid of heat.
Although it is mixed with a Sulphur, yet
This Sulphur is combustible, to get
Another Sulphur Metalline and pure,
And mix with the Mercurial part be sure.
This Sulphur in the House of Aries seek,
There shall you find it, and this is the Greek
Alcides, which with Jason Journey took
To Colchos, this is it which never Book
As yet revealed, and yet I will proceed,
And greater Mysteries unfold with speed.
Our Subject it is no ways malleable,
It is Metalline, and its color sable,
With intermixed Argent, which in veins
The sable Field with glittering Branches stains.
The pure parts from the impure, thou shall never
With Fire or Water for this work dissever
Nor with the hardest Iron dig it thence,
For Steel against this affords no defense.
So easily as any little Boy
A Giant can suppress, this can destroy
Alcides Breast Plate, with his Target stout,
And put opposing Armies to the rout
Of Swords and Spears, O wondrous force, and yet
The Sages this have seen, when they did sit
In Council, how this Fury they might tame,
Which (as unparalled) they then did name
Their Lion Green, they suffered him to prey
On Cadmus Sociates, and when the fray
Was over, they with Dian's Charms him tied
And made him under Waters to abide,
And washed him clean, and after gave him Wings
To fly, much like a Dragon, whose sharp Springs
Of fiery Water the only way was found
To cause Apollo his Harp-strings to sound.
This is the true Nymphs Bath, which we did try,
And proved to be the Wise Men's Mercury.
IN this Song you have the Lion Green so described, that more I dare not, more
I cannot, unless I should pen you down the Receipt verbatim, which God and
Reason forbids.

He is the mean the Sun and Moon between,
Of joining Tinctures with perfectness.

LEarn then to know this Green Lion and its preparation, which is all in all in
the Art, it is the only knot, untie it, and you are as good as a Master; for
whatever then remains is but to know the outward Regimen of Fire, for to help
on Natures internal Work.

As Geber thereunto bears witness.
MOreover be not various, seeking that in many things which is verily but in
one thing; for in all the world there is not any one subject but this: Ripley,
after the Rehearsal of all his Errors, tells you, That he never saw true Work
but one: And Geber, Exact (inquit) singula sumus experti, idque probatis
rationibus and nihil invenimus praeter solam unctuosam humiditatem penetrantem
and tingentem, etc. And Artephius says, There is no other subject in the World
for this Art, naming it, although in a Philosophic manner, wondrous subtly.
I counsel thee, with Ripley, to learn to know this one thing which I have
faithfully declared, and I know what I have declared experimentally to be true:
He that understands me will have cause to thank God and me for what Light I
have given to Ripley: He that with me understands Ripley will easily discern.

With the second which is an humidity
Vegetable reviving what erst was dead.

OUr second Water, or Menstruum, or Fire, is our Elixir, which is an Elixation
of our Matters, or drawing forth the Tincture out of our dissolved Bodies;
which does cause our dead Body to rise, and to spring forth in Sprigs and
Branches, like to the tender Grass in the Spring out of the Field; and this so
long until an entire Triptative Union be made of Body, Soul and Spirit. In this
operation our Body of the Sun has its dead moles turned into a living quick
active Spirit, and our Compound after death begins to sprout, and to show its
true Vegetative nature, it is endowed with a green Color, which is the sign of
the growth of all things.

Both Principles Materials must loosed be.
HEre your Natures are changed, and hold one of another, and become one
inseparably; that is, the Solary Nature is no to be divided from the Mercury,
nor the Fire from the Water, but with one the other is always moved; and so
though there yet be a superius and an inferius, an ascendens and subsidens, yet
now quod est superius est sicut id quod est inferius.

And Formals, else they stand in little stead.
NOw between the two Extremes of Mercury and Sulphur, you have a mavelous
medium ingendered: now the form of Gold is taken quite away, and it has at
present an accidental imperfect form, which is the mean through which it
passes to its transcendent perfection.

These Menstrues therefore know, I thee reed.
Labor with all thy might to attain the skill of these two first Menstruums
Theoretically and Practically; the first is to be by thee prepared and
proportioned in the beginning, before thou attempt any thing. When thou have
the true Nymphs Bath, then join this Spouse with her beloved Husband, and see
if she will make his Body fall to sunder in impalpable Atoms: Then let Saturn
be thy Chamberlain, and let him gather together these dissevered members, and
of them make one broth, in which is blackness complete, after which follows
greenness; and then shall thou know that thy Compound is by the living God
endowed with a vegetable Soul.

Without the which neither true Calcination
Done may be, nor true Dissolution.

HE who knows not the Mystery of these two Menstrues, can never attain either
to Calcination or Dissolution of the Philosophers: The Mystery of the first
consists in the acuating of thy Vinegar with the Blood of our Green Lion, and
the Soul of the Fiery Dragon, which is by seven Eagles, which are seven
Cohobations and Depurations of thy feminine Sperm, till it conceive a spiritual
seed, or true natural heat, to animate thy young King.

The Mystery of the second Menstrue consists in the true proportion of thy
first Water, with its own Body, and the administration of true heat external,
by which the combat between the Eagles and the Lion may be stirred up; thus
shall the Duel be ended, the Lion rent in pieces, and the Carrion of its
Carcass shall kill the Eagles; and out of these Atoms shall the second Water be
made apparent by Dissolution.

With the third Humidity most permanent.
THe third Menstrue is by Artephius called the second Water, for our second he
does join together with the first; although where he does particularize the
three Fires, he does then distinguish three Menstruums.

The like course many Philosophers have used in the description of their
Operations, some omitting the first, or at least confounding it with the
second, for the greater obscuring of the Art.

But we have (beyond what any have hitherto performed) particularly insisted
upon the three in order, and have taken more pains in the discovery of the
first, because the wise Ancients have taken such pains to conceal that most;
and after that we have made an orderly proceeding to the second, which we have
in like sort handled, and this being performed, we do now address our selves to
the third.

This is called by Ripley a most permanent Humidity: and note by the way, that
the first Water is called by Authors a permanent Water likewise; but take
notice that there is a different reason for each denomination; for first of
all, all Mercury is Water permanent, that is, the parts have no Heterogeneity,
they will not leave one another in the examen of the Fire, but either all flies
and is unconstant, or else all abides and is constant in the trial of Vulcan:
and so is our first Menstruum. And in this our Mercury and Common Mercury
agree, besides the identity of matter, for it is the form only that
distinguishes them. But in the next place, our Water is permanent with the
Body, which Common Mercury is not; that is, it by digestion does unite, not
only adhere to it, so that both together do make one Individuum, which is done
by our secret Conjunction. But lastly, when the Body is thus by our Water
reduced, at last it comes that the four Elements are united in this Water.
After Putrefaction and Purification, which is the last most laudable Tetraptive
Conjunction, and now the Tincture is the Spirit, and the Spirit is the Soul,
and the Soul is the Body, and all these are one.

Incombustible and unctuous in his Nature.
THis is our true Incombustible Mercury, for it is totally purged from all its
burning faeculency; Gold though it be a pure Metal, in respect of others which
are imperfect, yet compared with our Stone it has also its faeces; but this
when it is taken away by Putrefaction and Ablution, then becomes a total
separation of what is precious from what is vile, and as the Philosopher well
says, In the troubles of this our stormy Sea, all that is pure will ascend,
and all that is impure descend, and will abide in the bottom of the Vessel in
the form of a combust Earth; then is made the new Heaven and the new Earth,
pray to God then that thou may see when there shall be no more Sea. Yet I say
before thou have this final Inceration, thou have this most incombustible
Menstruum, and most permanent, in which Nature and Art have conspired and made
a Purification, beyond what Nature alone could ever have brought to pass.

Therefore this Mercury, though it be liquid and in the form of Mercury, it is
notwithstanding Unctuous, that is, great with Child, which Child is Sulphur,
which Sulphur it will in the end bring forth, and shall then be sealed up in
the belly of this Infant, which is when all is fixed, and Mercury is then
hidden under the fixity of Sulphur.

Hermes Tree unto Ashes is burnt.
IT does therefore naturally incline it self unto Inceration, for Earth is the
Nurse of our Stone, and in it is its virtue attained, and its perfection
entire, according to noble Hermes in his Smaragdine Table; Vis (says he) ejus
est integra fi versa fuerit in terram. By virtue of this third permanent pure
incombustible Water, thou shall at last attain a total Inceration; for this
Water though it be wholly Mercurial to sight, yet has it in its own Bowels its
own Sulphur, nay it is all Sulphur, and that all incombustible. This work is
called the burning of Hermes Tree to Ashes, which is done thrice; first, into a
black unctuous Calx, as impalpable as Atoms, which are only to be discerned in
the Sunbeams: secondly, into a fine white Calx, in which is the Moon in the
full: the third, a red Calx, in which the Sun is Orient. Now know that the
first Calcination is from the virtue of the Sun, in which the Sun seeks to
rise, but by reason of the equal opposition it finds from the water, it is
beclouded, and after through the interposition of the Earth, totally Eclipsed.

This Fire therefore, because of the mixture of it with the natural Fire of
Sol, which is in it dissolved, is called unnatural; the first Fire of our Water
is called Fire against nature, and the Fire of the Sulphur of the perfect Body
is called Fire of nature. In this operation, through the power and will of the
Almighty, the Body which has been so long dead, is by this Water quickened, and
actually sprouts like to a Vegetable; for when the pores of it are opened by
the moistning of our Water, it straight begins to follow the Spirit upon the
Fire, the Spirit then does mount aloft; which the Body thus made tender cannot
follow, but as the Poet says, non passibus aequis, as a Son that is little
follows his Father. It therefore in a token of its friendship with the Water,
does bud forth like to the tender Frost upon the surface of the Earth, and
retains a quantity of the Water with it self, occupying a middle room between
the bottom and the top; in which respects the Philosophers have called it their
Soul, which to show its union to the Body, rises no higher then it can have a
root or Basis below; and to manifest its love to the Spirit, it does as it were
climb after it higher and higher for its season, until at length it return from
whence it came: And verily this Soul is the Magnetical Medium between the
Spirit and the Body, which does desire the Spirit as its true drink; and
therefore as it grows dry, it does attract the greater drops of sweat, which
falling to the Earth, arise in a pleasant fume, and do moisten the growing
virtue with a pleasant dew, by reason of which it grows every day more and more.

This Tree of ours some have compared to one thing, and some to another; some
to a Cypress or Fir Tree, which indeed may seem to resemble it; others to
Haw-Thorn Trees, as Ripley in his Gate of Cibation; others to Shrubs and
Bushes, others to thick Woods, and in these Woods, says Lambsprint, there is a
Beast all over black. I confess there is a similitude between our Germination,
and all these; others, because of the Humidity of the Compound, which is ever
and anon returning by drops, have likened it to a moorish low Bog, in which
Rushes grow, and Toads keep; others have called it their Coral, which is indeed
the fittest comparison, for in our Tree there are Shoots and Sprigs, without
any thing that may be properly likened to Leaves: as then Coral is an union of
a Vegetable and a Stony nature, so is it in our Tree, (for Stones and Minerals
are of one Composition) our Tree is Metalline, and yet through the power of God
it seems to Vegetate. 2ly. Coral grows under the water, where one would think
no Vegetable could grow; ours also grows in a heat in which no Vegetable but it
self can grow. 3ly. Coral has many Sprigs and Branches without Leaves; so is
our Tree. 4ly. Coral as it is under water has a most exquisite biting taste,
which in the Air it quickly loses; so our Stone, or Tree Metaline, in its
place is of a pontique Fiery nature, but taken out, it in a short space loses
the same irrecoverably. 5ly. There are five sorts of Coral, the common Gray,
the Milk White, the Green, the Blood Red, and the Black; so our Tree is at his
periods of all these colors, and in this form, which Tree by the heat of the
Fire is dried to a Calx, which is called the Ashes of Hermes Tree. Lastly,
Coral is more heavy then any other Vegetable; and so is our Tree beyond all
Vegetables, yea and Coral it self, in ponderosity. It was not therefore a
fortuitous comparison that Philosophers named their Mastery the Tree of the
Hesperides, nor is it in vain that they bring in Jason pouring Broth at the
Root of it to attain the Mastery; for verily the wise Philosopher (noted by
Jason) so governing his Fire, that the Lunary or Water of the Moon may return
to the Earth in which these Trees grow, the Earth will at length be so dried by
the heat of the Sun, that it shall afford the Tree no more moisture; then shall
the Tree it self be calcined by the prevailing heat, into a Powder impalpable,
first black, then white, then red. Therefore is our little Glass by Flammel in
his Summary named the Philosophers Garden, in which the Sun rises and sets,
and the Philosophers Tree is moistened with the dew of Heaven day and night
without intermission.

It is our natural Fire most sure.
THis Mercury drawn out of the Sun is the true natural heat, in the acuating
and stirring up of which is the whole secret of the Mastery; this is the
honored Salt, when this is made to appear thy operations will be so admirable,
that they will take up thy whole worldly content, and with their variety the
time will seem so short, that thou will not take notice of any tediousness in
the passing of it.

Our Mercury, our Sulphur, our Tincture pure.
THis is our Mercury which cannot be attained with money, which is nothing but
Sulphur, and Sulphur which is nothing but Tincture, in which all Elements are
proportioned perfectly.

Our Soul, our Stone born up with wind,
In the Earth engendered. Bear this in mind.

THis is our Body, which is now become all Soul and all Spirit, all the pure
parts are separated now totally from the uncleanness of the dead; it is our
Stone, though it be as yet volatile, yet it has all in it essential to our
Stone, and therefore though it fly and sublime for the space of seven times,
yet his Nurse is the Earth, and therefore to it as to its Nest it returns, and
in seven sublimations what was before all Heaven, will now become all Earth.
And this is the period of all the Rotations, and Natures consummation.

This Stone also tell thee I dare,
Is the vapor of Metals potential.

ANd now if any should demand of us what our Stone is, we shall answer him,
that it is Gold digested to its height of purity and perfection, through the
cooperation of Art and Nature; but the means to get this, is to learn to turn
thy Body into a vapor, that is, into Mercury, which then ascends in form of a
vapor.

How thou shall get it thou must beware,
For Invisible truly is this Menstrual.
Howbeit with the second Water Philosophical,
By separation of Elements it may appear
To sight in form of Water clear.

BUt the means to attain this is not a light work, it requires a profound
meditation, for this is the Seed of Gold, (which as the Poet sang, reclusa
resedit longius) it is involved in many links, and held Prisoner as it were in
a deep Dungeon; so that as the noble Sandivow has it, it is the work of a very
wise Philosopher to let loose Sulphur; he that knows not our two first
Menstruals, is altogether shut out from attaining to the sight of this third
and last Menstrue; yet he who knows how to prepare the first Water, and to join
it to the Body in a just pondus, to shut it up in its Vessel Philosophically,
until the Infant be formed, and what is the greatest of all, to govern his Fire
dexterously, so as to cherish Internal heat with External, and can wait with
patience till he see his signs, he shall see the first Water will work on the
Body till it has opened the pores, and extracted partly the Tincture of Sol,
which as it comes out gradually, so it contests with the first Fire against
Nature, so long till they be reconciled in an imperfect medium; in which they,
like to weary wounded Combatants, lie gasping and panting for breath, and at
length dye; and then appears the second Water of the wise, which does ascend
and descend so long till it ruin the dead Carcass, and then a Soul comes into
it, and it vegetates and circulates, and changes colors so long, till
Blackness vanishing there be made a perfect union and universal temperament of
Elemental qualities, never more to contend together: then the whole Compound
for a time appears like to a new glorious Water, glittering like Oriental
Pearls, and Fish-eyes.

Of this Menstrue by labor exuberate,
With it may be made Sulphur of Nature.

THis is it which Raymund calls his Mercury exuberate, as much as to say,
Mercury with Child; Artephius calls it, the Salt pregnant, for it has
Sulphur actually hidden under the Mercurial quickness; therefore it by
digestion is easily turned into our Stone, which is Sulphur, or Fire of Nature.

If it be well and kindly acuate,
And circulate into a Spirit pure,
Then to dissolve thou must be sure
Thy base with it in diverse wise,
As thou shall know by thy practice,
That point, etc.

THis Mercury thus renovate or new born, may by the Philosopher be diversely
handled; for he may take his work from the Fire, and circulate and cohobate
this Mercury by a peculiar operation, which is partly Mechanical, till he have
a most admirable pure subtle Spirit, in which he may dissolve Pearls and all
Gems, and multiply them or his Red Stone, before it be united with a Metal in
projection for the making of Aurum Potabile. And in this Mercury thus
circulated, is doubtless the Mystery of the never-fading Light, which I have
actually seen, but yet not practically made. In a word, every one who has this
exuberate Mercury, has indeed at command the subject of wonders, which he may
employ himself many ways in both admirably and pleasantly. And certainly he
that has this, needs no information from another; himself now standing in the
Center, he may easily view the Circumference, and then operation will be, next
to the Spirit of God, his best Guide. Know then, that if thou be a Son of Art,
when thou art once arrived hither, thou art so far from being at the end of thy
search, (unless thou make Gold to be thy final object, and so thou shall never
come hither) that thou art but now come into the Mystical School of the hidden
wonders of God, in which thou may every day see new Miracles, if thou be
studious and desirous of knowledge, which all Adepti are; they prize skill
before any earthly thing, and therefore refuse Honor and Pomp, and retire only
to the beholding of God and his Works, in this admirable Looking-glass of the
most hidden Mysteries of Nature.

For so together they may be circulate,
That is, the base oil and vegetable Menstrual,
So that it be by labor exuberate,
And made by craft a Stone celestial.

YEt does not wisdom come naked, but with her she brings riches and length of
days; for this exuberate Mercury is an Hermaphrodite, and may without taking
out of the Glass be circulated into a fifth Essence.

Now the union between the two Principles, is the very true cause of this
circulation; for though in this last Menstruum there is an inseparable oneness,
yet the Components do give each their most noble quality to exalt the
transcendency of our Medicine. The extreme Components of this third Menstruum,
are the Sulphur and Mercuriality of the second; as the first Menstrue, and Sol
our Body, were the extremes of the second. The base oil, our Sulphur is called,
for he is the unctuous Dragon, or Earth which lies at bottom without wings, and
is the Basis as it were of the Work. The Mercury is called Vegetable, for that
it flies and returns, and makes the Earth to sprout and bud with tender
branches. These two (the base oil or Sulphur, and the vegetable Menstrue) at
last make one entire indivisible substance, which is of an Hermaphroditical
quality, the Man is the Woman, and the Woman the Man; the Sulphur the Mercury,
and the Mercury is the Sulphur; in this respect the Earth flies as if it were
Heaven, and at length the Heaven will precipitate in the form of Earth, and
then is our work at an end, there is the Harvest in the South, when the
glorified Soul is become a spiritual Body, which is called our Stone of
Paradise.

Of nature so Fiery that we it call,
Our Basilisk, or our Cockatrice,
Our great Elixir most of price.
For as the sight of the Basilisk his object
Kills, so slays it crude Mercury,
When thereupon he is project,
In twinkling of an eye most suddenly.
That Mercury then teyneth permanently
All Metals to Gold and Silver perfect.
Thus guide thy base both red and white.

THis Heavenly Earth is true Mineral Fire, which is then resembled to the Sun
in its Summer Solstice; it is called Venom, because it penetrates Metals so
wonderfully; it is called our Basilisk, our Cockatrice, our Tyrian Poison,
though indeed it be an excellent Medicine, in which respect it is called our
incomparable inestimable Elixir. But the denomination of Basilisk it retains
from its sudden operation upon Mercury; for it penetrates it in projection, as
warm Oil runs into sinking Paper, even to the profundity of it. Let thy Mercury
therefore be taken as it is crude bought at the Apothecaries, and thou shall
set it in a Crucible to the Fire, in such a heat as the Mercury may not fume;
and when it is so hot that it is ready to fly, which you shall discern by a
spurtling noise, throw upon it of your Medicine as much as will teyne it, and
you shall see that in a moment it will enter it, and straightway the Mercury
loses its flux, and stands congealed. Then it is to be melted by a Fire of
fusion, and you shall find pure Gold or Silver, according to the quality of
your Medicine. But if you cast your high Elixir in too great a quantity on
Mercury, you shall find in the Crucible after projection, a brittle mass of the
quality and color of the first Medicine, only of a lower virtue, which then
you may project upon any inferior Metal, and it will transmute it into most
perfect. This operation is not apparent or to sight, as is the work of
Sophisters, but it is both inward and outward, for it transmuteth into a
perfect species, and not only to show. This is the way of projection both of
thy white and thy red Quintessences, first to cast them upon Sol or Luna,
according as thy Medicine is, and after that to make projection on Mercury
again and again, till you find the true extent of the virtue of your Stone.

Aurum Potabile thus is made,
Of Gold not commonly calcinate.

ANd now I come to the second reward that Wisdom does bring with her, and that
is length of days; and here I have transposed some few Verses of Ripleys
concerning Aurum Potabile, that what he says in this point may be represented
in view together, Method inviting me to it. Some propound the Medicine of Aurum
Potabile to be Extracted out of Sol pure, by corroding with Aqua Regia, and
afterward levigating it by reiterate Calcinations in the Fire, and manual
Contritions. This Calx so subtilized, some attempt to resolve by Menstrues, (as
they call them) but in vain, there being only one Menstruum that has the power
to resolve both Gold, and all sublunary Bodies, to their first matter.
Paracelsus the first Author of this, did name this dissolving Water his
Alkahest, his Ignis Gehennae, his Corrosivum specificum, with many other names.
This Medicine thus made of Gold by the Alkahest, as it is Philosophical and
real, so it is very excellent, and known only to the Adepti.

Yet this is not our great Medicine, for this being but a resolution of Gold in
its unary simplicity, does afford to us only the most exquisite Medicine that
is in Gold, as it is made and left by Nature, which partly for its simple
virtue, and partly for its Metallic determination, does not enter our
Constitutive Principles, and consequently cannot touch or reach long life.

But of our Tincture which will not fade,
Out of our base drawn by our Menstrue circulate.

BUt when as we have by our Art exalted Gold from an unary to a millenary
perfection, and advanced it from its gross corpulency to a Spiritual Tincture,
which is unfading, and of all Sublunary things the most durable, then out of
this so glorious and triumphant in an universal virtue, we do make an Oil so
called by us, (though it be permiscible by mixture in any Liquor) which Oil is
the very Tree of Life, which prevails and triumphs over all the Miseries in the
world. For it is not Metallum, but transcending all Metalline things: This
Tincture is extracted out of Gold, not as Tinctures are drawn by the Sal
Circulatum of Paracelsus, but by an universal changing of the Sickness of the
Metalline offspring, into a true posture of Health; by which means it is able
to heal all Metalline Bodies from their Leprosy, and being resolved by its own
Vegetable Humidity, which is our first Menstrue, circulated till the Water have
a ferment from the Bodies, and the Bodies from the Water, it will give a
Spiritual Tincture, sparkling like the flame, to taste most sweet, to smell most
pleasant, the most incomparable Treasure of the whole World.

And for thy first ground principal,
Understand thy Waters Menstrual.

NOw I return to that which went before concerning this Medicine, which I
passed over in that place, that I might here bring it in together; and indeed
he who will know this Mystery, he must in the first place learn to know his
Menstrual Waters, for without this knowledge he can never come to this Mastery;
for with the third Menstruum, (counting three according to Ripley) or the
second Water, (making the first and second into one, with Artephius) is this
fragrant Balsam made: And verily the whole is but Cohobation, the first Water
being cohobated so long upon the Bodies, till it receive from them a quality of
natural heat; yet so as that the quality of its own Fire, which is corruptive,
and so against Nature, be mingled in way of action and passion with the natural
Fire. This makes a Fire innatural, and is the second Water, in which colors
rise and set frequently, and then by cohobating it till Fire of Nature have
wholly subdued his Adversary, and made a perfect peace and union with it. Then
all is Fire of Nature, then the Clouds are scattered and the Light appears; and
this is our third Water, the subject of wonders, which being one alone, does
from that time all operations within it self, congealing, relenting, calcining,
exalting, subliming and fixing all Elements, being linked here inviolably to
the making up of that great Mysterium magnum, which Paracelsus described, but
knew it not; we both know it, and have seen it, and what we do know and have
seen, we do faithfully relate.

And when thou have made Calcination,
Increasing not wasting moisture radical,
Until thy base by often subtilation,
Will lightly flow as Wax on a Metal.
Then loose it with thy Vegetable Menstrual,
Till thou have Oil thereof in color bright.

THerefore labor thou to bring thy Gold to a Calcination, not by Corrosives,
but by Mercury, not into a Powder red and dry, but into a Calx black and
unctuous, and multiply moisture by our true Virgins Milk; then circulate these
Natures together, till they will flow like unto Wax upon a Plate of Metal,
which is the sign of the true Tincture of Luna. Continue thy Fire till the fixed
again relent of its own accord, till the dry become moist again, and till a
Soul return; then shall thy Tincture proceed forward to a new Germination, and
shall be endowed with a Vegetative Soul. Govern thy Bath sweetly, until thou
have a Tincture of Citrine, which is a sign that thy Water is now impregnated
with the Oil immarcessible.

Then is that Menstruum visible to sight.
THen shall thou discover what before was hidden, and see what before was
invisible, and shall say with the Philosopher, O Nature, how thou make Gold
volatile that was most fixed! Therefore have they passed one into another.

An Oil is drawn out in the color of Gold.
THis is our Virgins Milk of the Sun, which is yellow; with this and our
perfect Tincture, we make our Blessed Oil, which has not its Peer among all
the works of God, next to the Immortal Soul of man, the Glass of Tri-unity, the
Sabbath of perfection. O happy they that attain to it!

Or like thereto out of fine red Lead.
YEt a succedaneum of this noble Medicine is found in the loins of Saturn, in
the bowels of our despised Infant, which some true and loyal Sons of Nature,
through the great mercy of God, have attained without knowing our great
Arcanum, which a man would think mavelous.

This is our red Lead, our Mercury essencificate and coagulated into a chaos of
Spiritual Gold, and after dissolved into a quintessence as red as Blood; which
because it is made out of the very Essential Mercury of our Stone, which is our
first Water, I shall leave it undiscovered, which otherwise (if it might be
explained without danger of prostituting the other Secret to unworthy people) I
would for the good of Mankind proclaim it with Trumpets.

Which Raymund said when he was old,
Much more then Gold would stand in stead.

THis Oil or Quintessence, this Balsam of Health, we do therefore prize for its
wonderful virtue, not so much for that by means of it Poverty, that great
snare, may be avoided, but for its wonderful prevailing excellency against all
Diseases both of body and mind, as witnesses Lully, Trevisan, Artephius, with
that excellent Book entitled Aurea Hora, or Consurgens Aurora.

For when he was for Age near dead,
He made thereof Aurum Potabile,
Which him revived as men might see.

BY virtue of this Quintessence Artephius testifies, that he lived above a
thousand years: Flammel also records of it, that it triumphs over all the
Miseries of the World. Johannes de Laznioro is more bold, and says, that if in
the Agony of death a man should taste but a Grain of it, all the mortal
Pestilence would depart from him.

Since then this Knowledge is so wonderfully profitable, being the very
Looking-glass of Nature, the Antidote against Poverty and Sickness, and
consequently the Cutthroat of Covetousness, Pride, Ambition, and such like
sordid Affections, who would not bestow a little time in the Inquiry of it? In
which let me assure thee in the very words of Trevisan, the Art is so plain,
that if it were nakedly described it would be contemptible. And yet in vulgar
Mechanics, how frequent is it for men to serve seven, eight, yea ten years
Apprentiship to attain them? And in some that are a little more ingenious, how
frequently are considerable sums of Money bestowed to boot? Yet in this noble
Art, so far excelling all Humane Sciences as the Sun does a Candle, who will
employ himself with diligence? unless it be some Money-minded Sots, who seek
only for Riches; and yet how soon are even they weary? So that few or none
persist in their Inquiry, save a few Roguish Sophisters who live by Cozening;
by reason of such the Art is scandalized, and ill spoken of: Yet trust me, for
I speak knowingly, the Art is both true and easy; yea so easy, that if you
did see the Experiment, you could not believe it. I made not five wrong
Experiments in it, before I found the truth, although in some particular
turnings of the Encheiresis, I erred often; yet so, as I in my error knew my self
a Master, and in less then full two years and a half, of a vulgar Ignoramus, I
became a true Adept, and have the Secret through the goodness of God. And that
this is true, there are those alive that can bear witness to this my writing,
which I penned for the sake of the Ingenious, that they may have Ariadne's
thread stretched out to guide them; so with the blessing of God they shall by
their own Experience see and know, that I wrote nothing but what the Light of
Experience (far beyond all imaginary conjectures) has taught me to be true.

ANd now my Muse, let it not irksome seem
To thee of Natures Mysteries to sing,
Those hidden Mysteries which many deem
Naught but delusions with them for to bring.
This is the opinion of the Vulgar rude,
To whom there is hardly any selcouth thing,
But seems a Juggling trick, that would delude
Their fancies with an empty wondering;
Therefore against it they with thundering words do ring.
There is a fiery Stone of Paradise,
So called because of its Celestial hew,
Named of Ancient years by Sages wise
Elixir, made of Earth and Heaven new,
Anatically mixed; strange to relate,
Sought for by many, but found out by few;
Above vicissitudes of Nature, and by fate
Immortal, like a Body fixed to show,
Whose penetrative virtue proves a Spirit true.
His property is as the Sages told,
Metals imperfect (which before would burn)
Six to transmute into most perfect Gold,
And five into the finest Silver turn,
Not equalled by Metals of the Mine;
Which while some seek, they madly seem to spurn
The pricks, which proves in the end a bad design,
And gives them cause sadly at length to mourn,
And to bewail their destiny like men forlorn.
For why, they do not well premeditate
The nature of the thing they would attain;
The only thirst of Gain does animate
These Gold-adoring wretches, who maintain
Their mad expense with many a cursed lie,
Nor from false perjury will they refrain:
Thus they allure fools by flattery,
To trust their dotage for the hope of gain,
This last so long, till in the suds they both remain.
Then Covetousness wrangles with Deceit,
And curses him for all his lewd expense:
The other being conscious of his cheat,
With subtle words does make a sly defense.
But what is past can never be recalled,
This grieves the Churl, who vows for that offense
He Will have the Jugglers future pranks forestalled,
Lays him in Gaol, O monstrous change! from thence
The great Stone-maker through a Grate does beg for pence.
But he who will a studious Searcher be
Of Truth, let him such Sophisters eschew,
And if he will but be advised by me,
Of false ways I Will him warn, and show him true.
Beg humbly of thy God to be thy guide,
For thou must pass through hidden ways, by few
Traced; and that thy suit be not denied,
Entreat of him thy heart for to renew,
Thus qualified thou may thy Journey never rue.
Next learn to know the different Kingdoms three,
In which all sublunary things are wrought,
Vnveil the hidden Bodies, whose degree
Is noble, though their place full low be sought;
In which respect they bear the Planets names,
And they to such a Virtue may be brought,
Which answer may the painful Chymist's aims,
And it perform, which will surpass the thought
Of the rude Vulgar, who by only sense are taught.
The Wise men's Books with diligence peruse,
From which, if diligent, thou may discern
What substance it is they for their Matter choose,
Also their hidden Agent thou may learn.
They tell thee eke what things thou should refuse,
And of erroneous Works they will thee warn;
Their counsel take, so shall thou never lose
Thy cost ne labor; also thou may earn
Riches and Health, the one to other subaltern.
Yet pains and labor see thou do not grudge,
Nor cost, although a little will suffice;
Yet Truth at first to find thou may not judge,
It Is well if faults at length will make thee wise:
Nor be thou over-heady to believe
The Shell of words, which them who are not nice
To sever Truth from Falsehood, do deceive,
That they to win a shadow lose a prize:
To sever Corn from Straw I therefore you advise.
And if you please to take me for your Guide,
I Will you unto a goodly Castle lead,
A Castle which to hold all proof is tried,
So that there is none within its Walls may tread
But he who favored is with special Grace,
No other title any one may plead:
And she who is Queen-Regent of the place,
Is Nature called, she in Jehovah's stead
Does sit and rule, for she next under God is Head.
This Castle round by force Inexpugnable,
Whose Composition's Homogeneal,
Immortal ever stands, that none is able
To conquer it by force, though fraud withal
Concur; its standing is so firmly stable,
No way to storm it, though we could recall
Great Hercules, it is so inviolable:
And yet withal its Beauty is so amiable.
Twelve Gates it has, and yet they are but one,
And these twelve Gates have but one only Lock,
So that you either open all or none;
Nor can you force it open with a knock,
For violence cannot it break in sunder,
Those who attempt it the event does mock;
Nay though you could call down the dreadful Thunder,
It would nothing avail; who so his stock
Shall thus employ, may walk at length in threadbare Cloak.
There is one only Key, this learn to know
And make, then I will you a Master name.
This Key the entrance of the Lock will show,
And being entered will unlock the same:
Which being done, to you shall open fly
The twelve Gates of this Castle, great in fame,
Little in bulk, which once I did espy;
Also within it a most noble Game
Fought 'twixt an Eagle volant, and a Lion tame.
FINIS.

