A strange Wonder in Wiltshire, Affirmed by Three Ministers that were
Eyewitnesses of this following RELATION.
a Cow and Calfes


The First Part.
GIve ear and attention, and you shall hear
Of a strange Wonder that happened in Wiltshire,
The marvelous thing that ere was in Print,
Faithfully written and nothing false in it.
It is of a man in his Country so rare,
That none now are living with him could compare,
His dealing it is so upright and just,
I will nere be forgot, though be turned to dust.
Last year he was blessed with a plentiful crop,
His Barns were crammed from bottom to top,
He made no advantage, all Grain being dear,
But glad was to see the Poor people appear;
To whom be sold cheap, but a Crown was his rate,
When others for a Bushel of Eight did not bate,
But worshipped their Barns and kept close the door,
For fear to show Charity unto the Poor.
But this Man he was of a spirit so sweet,
Being a very great help to all he did meet,
Great was his Pity, his Bounty also,
Exact he would not of Friend nor of Foe.
But freely at half-Rates his Corn he did sell,
As all just people hereafter will tell.
By the exacting of others the distressed came so fast,
His Barns at those low rates were emptied at last.
That he had no Corn for his house, but he bought,
And yet all the Countries over he sought,
To help to supply the wants of the needy,
In City or Country no man so speedy.
He bought a fresh Stock at the Market-rates,
All the Poor near him anticipates.
Still at the half-Rates that the Poor may live,
He sold to them, though twice more he did give.
The Second Part.
OBserve with me this following strain,
And me shall all agree,
That in the remembrance of his name,
I the Chronicle he must be:
For nere did man the like before,
Or ere will be do less,
But still strive daily to do more,
His works God so does bless.
That whensoere his Plow is going,
The ill seasons of the weather,
Forbear and hold up whilst he is sowing,
And still will keep together.
The Example there is so well known,
Observed in this year,
That on his ground there scarce has grown
A straw with single Ear.
But most were double eared and full,
Some treble eared grew,
None in his Harvest was so dull,
But what was inch thick too.
In several parts it still appears
By very honest men,
As few Straws had but single Ears,
There were others which had ten.
And all so full and largely corn'd,
That thrice the Crop it yields,
And bravely has six Barns adorned
More than their neighboring fields,
Whose Husbandmen that till their ground,
And of this Corn do buy,
Hope that their Lands will all abound
And no more barren lie.
His Cattle also have encreast
More than his Neighbors do,
Who have no young ones from their Beast,
Whilst one Cow brings him two.
In thanks to God for's blessing great,
The Poor for to relieve,
Of Barley, By and of good wheat
Three Strick a week he will give.
Now unto all I give advice,
Be kind unto the Poor,
And you will find God will not be nice
To multiply your Store.
The Example here before is shown
I hope will practiced be,
That so we all at Heavens I brone
May meet Eternity,
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for R. Cutler in Little-Britain. 1674.


