The Sorrowful CITIZEN Or, The Courageous PLOWMAN.
With the Witty Answer of a Country Damosel.
You Citizens I pray beware,
that does this Story hear;
Dote not too much on Beauty fair,
lest this may prove your share.
To the Tune of, The Country Farmer.
This may be printed,

R ^







A Londoner into the Country went,
To visit his Tennants, and gather in Rent;
He on a brave Gelding did gallantly Ride,
With Boots and with Spurs, and a Sword by his side
Because that the Inn keepers they will not score,
He lined his Pockets with Silver good store:
And he wore a Wigg cost three Guinnies and more,
His Hat was cockt up Sir, behind and before.
Thus like a great Gallant that was Al-a-mode,
Upon his stout Gelding he Gallopt the Rode,
He came to an Inn Sir, where he did a light,
Resolving to rest there, and tarry all Night:
There was a fair Damsel her Name it was Priss,
The Londoner proffered to give her a Kiss;
and would fain have been doing the thing you may guess
But the scornfully said the was no London Miss.
With Eloquent Speeches this Gallant did W(...)
And proffered her Guinnies, but this would not (...)
I pray you be Civil, good Sir, she replied,
And tempt me no more, for you must be denied
My Credit I tell you, I never will stain,
And therefore good Sir, I would have you refr(...)
To proffer your Guinnies, for all is in vain,
I slight them and you Sir, with scorn and disda(...)
Good Sir, what a rout and a racket you make
Would Robin the Plowman was here for your (...)
He will quickly make you to alter your Note,
I would not be one that should be in your Coa(...)
For all your brave alls, you are some thing too b(...)
My Chastity is not to be bought nor sold;
I care not a fix for your Silver and Gold,
I pray you be Civil and let go your hold
Why, do you imagine I will be afraid
Of such a course Coxcombly Country Blade?
For should he come in and give me a cross word,
I Will make him to taste of a piece of my Sword:
For I am a Person of Noble Degree,
Then prithee sweet Damsel be ruled by me,
He dare not come in if he chance but to see
That I am a Kissing and Courting of thee.
Cot-zo, quoth the Maiden, pray who have we here!
Or what is the cause that he should stand in fear:
Before that the Maiden could say any more,
Stout Robin himself he came in at the Door;
To him the whole Story she did declare,
The Londoner being amazed, did stare;
He would have been hid, but he could not tell where,
For he was caught napping as Moss caught his Mare.
The point of your Sword Sir, you said I should taste,
But first let me tell you, your shoulders I Will baste;
With that he lent him a sturdy stout stroke,
His Sword and his Noddle together he broke;
Though I go in Leather, and you wear fine Close,
I will have my true-Love in spite of your Nose;
And then he laid on, and redoubled his blows,
Ten Guinnies to Robin the Plowman he throws.
Forbear honest Plowman, for I do protest,
What ever I said then it was but in jest;
Then prithee Good Fellow, let us finish this strife,
And take up those Guinnies and pardon my life:
The weight of your blows I do heartily rue,
Then prithee sweet Maiden, see what you can do,
Persuade him and here is five Guinnies for you,
To buy you a Gown and a Petticoat too.
She took up the Gold and put it in her Purse,
And running to Robin, said she, it is thus,
He crying for pity, now lay no more an,
But let it appear you're a Merciful Man:
Said Robin, begone then, and come no more here,
Away he packt off, thus the Coast he did clear,
He sent him away with a Flea in his Ear,
This Plowman he lives but in Sommerset-shire.
FINIS.

