The Springs Glory: OR, A precious Posie for Pretty Maidens:
Who walk in the Meadows to hear the Birds sing,
With pleasure rejoicing to welcome the Spring.
The tune is, Monk has confounded, etc.




NOw that brigt Phoebus his rays does display
warm Zephirus blows with a gentler gale,
Nights they grow shorter to lengthen the day,
and Wood-nymphs do trip it ore hill and ore dals:
The Fawnes and the Satyrs
Nimbly cut Capers,
And dance Levaltors round in a ring,
Then let us bear a part
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery Garlands to welcome the spring.
Flora's fine Tapestry now does adorn,
the earth with a Livery pleasant to view,
Trees they do blossom which winter had torn,
and meadows are decked in a very rare hue:
The Fairies are tripping
And Lambs are skipping,
Pretty birbs chirping in the Woods sing:
Then let us bear a part,
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery garlands to welcome the spring
With sweet smelling flowers ye sense to delight,
the fields are bespangled like stars in ye skies,
With Cowslips and Primroses, yellow and white
and other rare colors to please mortal eyes;
The Daffadown-Dilly
Violet and Lilly
And Tulip^ lovely pleasure do bring
Then let us bear a part,
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery garlands to welcome the spring.
Hark how the Nightingale tuneth her notes
her tender breast leaning against a sharp thorn
The thrush and ye blackbird with their pretty throats
does chant forth their melody evening and morn:
The Cuckoo well Known
In City and Town,
Her constant old tone the sweetly does sing;
Then let us bear a part
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery garlands to welcome the spring.
The second Part,
To the same Tune.




Now pretty maidens delights for to walk
abroad in the meadows so pleasant and green
Whilst with their lovers they prattle and talk,
and pick up the flowers so gay to be seen:
Of which they make Posies
In the green closes,
Decked with Roses home for so bring:
Then let us bear a part
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery garlands to welcome the spring.
Pretty sweet Betty walks out with her love,
rejoicing that Summer is drawing so near,
Whilst Dicky dot^ call her his Turtle Dove
and vows that no other but she is his dear:
Thus with their courting
And lovely sporting
They are consorting whilst the birds sing:
Then let us, etc.
Nanny does rise in the morning betimes
to meet her beloved all in a fair grove,
Where he is composing of sonnets and rimes,
to set forth her praise and to welcome his love:
Her body is slender
And her heart tender,
He does commend her for every thing:
Then let us, etc.
Dolly the Dairy maid smugs up her self
and takes up her milk pale to trace in the (...)
In hopes to meet Roger who scorns to be ba(...)
she often has tried him and still he proved (...)
But oh what a jumbling
And what a tumbling,
All without grumbling love has his swing
Then let us, etc,
Now is the time that all creatures rejoice,
by nature they know when y spring does ap^^^^
They lovingly couple and make choice
before the hot Summer approaches to near
Let us take pleasure
Whilst we have leisure
Least such a pleasure chance to take wing.
Then let us, etc.
Trim up your Arbors and deck up your be(...)
for this is a time to be merry and glad,
Hang up your garlands and strew your sweet fl(...)
and let not a lover once seem to be sad
For we will go a Maying
With music playing
Cupid obeying, love is a King:
Then let us bear a part
And with a joyful heart
Deck flowery garlands to welcome the sprin^
Licensed according to Order.

I.P.

Pritend for W. Gilbertson,


