The State of the CASE BETWEEN DENMARK and SWEDEN.
IN the Year of our Lord, 1654. on the 15th day of September, a League of Amity
and Friendship was concluded, and afterward on both sides ratified, between
the King and Kingdom of Denmark on the one part, and the Lord Protector and
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. on the other part, whereof
this is the first Article.

Article I.
Quod ab hoc die erit firma, integra and sincera Amicitia, Pax and
Confaederatio, tam Mari quam Terra, and Aquis dulcibus, inter Regem Regnumque
Daniae and Norvegiae, and Protectorem and Rempublicam Angliae, Scotiae and
Hiberniae nec non Dominia, Regiones ac Civitates sub utriusque ditione positas,
Populumque, Incolas and Subditos alterutrius, cujuscunque gradus and dignitatis
fuerint; ita ut neutra pars, Populusve aut subditi alterutrius, neque per se,
neque per alios, direct vel indirecte quicquam agat, vel quantum in se est,
agi permittat in damnum aut praejudicium alterius, verum altera alteram bonis
officiis adjuvabit atque alterius rem and commodum pro virili promovebit. That
is to say,

That from this day shall be a firm, entire and sincere Amity, Peace and
Confederacy, as well by Sea, as Land and fresh Waters, between the King and
Kingdom of Denmark and Norway, and the Protector and Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, together with the Dominions, Countries and Cities in the
Jurisdiction of either; as also between the People, Inhabitants and Subjects of
both, of what Degree or Dignity soever; so as neither Part, People, or Subjects
of either, neither by themselves, nor others, directly or indirectly may do any
thing, nor as much as in them lies, may suffer to be done, to the Damage or
Prejudice of the other; but that the one shall aid the other by all good
offices, and shall advance the Welfare and Profit of the other to his utmost
Power.

Printed here in London at the star in St Paul's Churchyard.
Three Years after this League thus made, that is to say, in the Year 1657.
after the Danes had received many great and notorious Wrongs and Injuries from
the King and Kingdom of Sweden, and being further threatened by them to be
worse dealt with, as may be seen more at large in the Danish Manifest, called
Jus feciale Armatae Daniae: They betook themselves to their Arms. But this
War being ended through the Mediation of England and France, and the Peace
concluded at Rotshilt in February last, was Signed by the Public Ministers of
the most Christian King, and his late Highness the Lord Protector, who thereby
became Sureties for the same, as is more fully set forth in a Relation of the
Affairs between the two Northern Kings, Printed in this City about a Month
since. To be sold at the sign of the ship in St Paul's Churchyard.


This Peace the King of Sweden kept, till he had got into his hands four or
five Provinces, wherein were many Strongholds, and had received other
Advantages granted to him by the said Treaty of Peace; but being bound by the
same to quit all the Territories of the King of Danmark, in which at that time
his Army lay quartered, in stead of Marching away, he Marched back again into
the Isle of Zealand, besieged the Castle of Cronenburg and took it, laid also
Siege to Coppenhaguen, which although it succeeded not, yet he threatens to
besiege again; and he should have no better Success than he had before, he
endeavors to engage us in his Quarrel, and by the help of our Navy to make
himself Master of the three Northern Kingdoms, as he is already of the
Baltick-Sea, and the Ports thereof.

In the beginning of this second Invasion, the King of Denmark, made full
account, that the Most-Christian King of France, and his late Highness the Lord
Protector, were bound in Honor, to see the contents of that Treaty of Peace,
whereof they were Mediators and Sureties, as well performed on the Swedish
side, as he had done on his, and implored their Aid to that purpose: but
finding no Relief from England (whether the indisposition of his Highness, or
something else was the cause) he sought for Aid from such of his Neighbors,
as had tenderness enough, not to see a King and all his Royal Progeny
unjustly oppressed: amongst those Friends and Neighbors were the States
General of the United Provinces, who were bound to defend Him by a defensive
League, concluded between them and that King in the Year 1649. But before they
came to put in execution what they were obliedged to do, they endeavored to
satisfy his Highness, concerning the justice and necessity thereof, and to
demonstrate to him the inconveniences, that would arise to the Commonwealth of
England it self, if the King of Sweden should become sole Master of all those
parts; and moreover manifested their desire, that his Highness would be pleased
to cooperate with them, for the composing of those differences, which were
grown to that height, between the two Northern Kings: and his said Highness
being deceased, they continued to use the same instance with this present Lord
Protector, declaring, that they intended nothing, but what might be equally to
the good and profit of this Nation, as well as of their Own, in any Liberty or
Privilege of Trade and Navigation, not desiring the least advantage to their
own Subjects more then to us, although their endeavors to preserve those
Liberties had already been expensive to them, both in Blood and Treasure.

From these precedent considerations, we may propose these following Queries.

I. Whether the Commonwealth of England, and c. can in conscience break their
Pulick Faith and Treaty with Denmark, without any cause given? II. Whether the
said Commonwealth be not bound in Honor, to see the Treaty of Peace between
the two Northern Kings, whereof his late Highness was Mediator and Surety,
performed on both sides; obliedging him, who has violated the Treaty, to give
due reparation, for the damage received by the party injured? III. Whether it
be for the Interest of the English, in their Trade and Navigation to the
Baltic Sea, that all the Eastland Commodities, be in the power of one Prince,
who either may withhold them, or raise thereupon any arbitrary Tolls and
Customs, though never so excessive? IV. Whether it be very safe for this
Commonwealth, that one Prince should be the sole Dominator of all the North;
and whether England has not reason to fear the same Inconveniences from
thence, which it has felt heretofore, when those three Kingdoms had but one
King, and he still to contest with those Vandalick Cities, which now are in the
King of Swedens power. V. Whether the Offers and Desires of the States
General; that we would join with them to the composing of those Differences
between the two Northern Kings, by way of Mediation, be not rather to be
accepted, then that we should involve our selves in an unjust and dangerous
War, wherein a Victory may prove of worse consequence to our own Country,
then an overthrow? VI. Or whether Conscience, Honor, our Trade and Navigation,
and our Fleet, yea the safety of the State, ought to be set at stake, to
gratisie the French, our Friends at present; who doubtless for one of these two
reasons, endeavors to engage us in this overhasty War, against both our
Interests and our Allies; either that they may thereby advance and enlarge
their Conquest upon the German Empire, and make themselves Masters of all
Flanders, this Campagna; or rather that they may set all Protestant Princes and
States at variance, then make Peace with Spain, and so at last Extirpate the
Protestant Religion, having first weakened the Defenders thereof by their own
Arms?
FINIS.

