A SOLEMN League and Covenant FOR Reformation, AND Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
KINGDOMS OF Scotland, England, and Ireland.

Jer. 50.5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten.

Prove. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be
established in righteousness.

2 Chronicles. 15.15. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with
all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of
them; and the Lord gave them rest round about.

Die Jovis, 21 Sept. 1643.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Covenant be
forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Edinburgh, Printed by Robert Bryson. 1643.

Sess. XIV. August. 17. 1643.
The General Assemblies Approbation of the draught of the League and Covenant
presented to them.
THe Assembly having recommended unto a Committee, appointed by them to join
with the Committee of the Honorable Convention of Estates, and the
Commissioners of the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, for
bringing the Kingdoms to a more near counjunction and Union, received from the
aforesaid Committees, the Covenant after-mentioned, as the result of their
consultations: And having taken the same, as a matter of so public
concernment, and of so deep importance does require, unto their gravest
consideration, Did with all their hearts, and with the beginnings of the
feelings of that joy which they did find in so great measure upon the
renovation of the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdom, all with one
voice approve and embrace the same, as the most powerful mean, by the blessing
of GOD, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion, with perfect
peace in his Majesty's Dominions, and propagating the same to other Nations,
and for establishing his Majesty's throne to all ages and generations. And
therefore with their best affections recommend the same to the Honorable
Convention of Estates, that being examined and approved by them, it may be sent
with all diligence to the Kingdom of England, that being received and approven
there, the same may be with public humiliation, and all Religious and
answerable solemnity, sworn and subscribed by all true Professors of the
Reformed Religion, and all his Majesty's good subjects in both Kingdoms.

A. Johnstoun.

The Convention of Estates their Approbation of the draught of the League and
Covenant aforesaid, 17 August 1643.
THe Noblemen, Commissioners of Shires and Burrows now conveened, having
received the Covenant abovementioned from their Committee, as the result of
their consultations with a Committee of the General Assembly, and the
Commissioners from both Houses of the Parliament of England; and having taken
that Covenant unto their gravest consideration, Did with all their hearts and
great expressions of joy and unanimitie approve and embrace the same, as the
most powerful mean, by the blessing of God, for settling and preserving the
true Protestant Religion, with a perfect Peace in all his Majesty's Dominions,
and propagating the same to other Nations, and for establishing his Majesty's
thron to all ages. And being very confident that their brethren in the Kingdom
of England will heartily receive and approve the famine; Therefore according to
the earnest recommendation of that venerable Assembly of this Kirk now met,
thinks it most necessary for the good ends aforesaid, that it be sent into
that Kingdom with all diligence, that being received and approved by their
brethren there, the same may be with all religious solemnities sworn, and
subscribed by all true Professors of the Reformed Religion, and all his
Majesty's good subjects in both Kingdoms.

Arch. Primrose, Cler. Com.

Edinburgh 11. October. 1643.
Ordinance for the solemn receiving, swearing, and subscribing of the League
and Covenant.
THe Commissioners of the General Assembly, having received from their
brethren sent unto the Kingdom of England, the solemn League and Covenant
underwritten, as it was approven by the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of
England, and the Assembly of Divines in that Kingdom, and solemnly sworn and
subscribed there. After due examination thereof, did all in one voice most
heartily receive and embrace the same, as agreeing with the draught, and
unanimously and cheerfully approven and embraced by the late General
Assembly, and Convention of Estates, as the most powerful mean by the
blessing of GOD, for settling and preserving the true Protestant Religion with
perfect peace in his Majesty's Dominions, and propagating the same to other
Nations, and for establishing his Majesty's throne to all ages and generations:
And therefore according to the power given to them by the said Assembly, Ordain
this solemn League and Covenant to be with public humiliation, and all
religious solemnities received, sworn, and subscribed by all Ministers and
Professors within this Kirk; And, that this may be universally performed, It
is also ordained that this League and Covenant be forthwith printed, and that
the printed copies, bound with some clean sheets of paper be sent unto the
Ministry, And that every Minister upon the first Lords day, after the same
shall come to his hands, read and explain it, and by exhortation prepare the
people to the swearing and subscribing thereof solemnly, the Lords day next
immediately following. And it is further Ordained that Presbyteries take account
of the performance hereof in their several bounds, and that they proceed with
the censures of the Kirk, against all such as shall refuse, or shift to swear
and subscribe this League and Covenant, as enemies to the preservation and
propagation of Religion, And that they notify their names, and make particular
report of their own diligence hereintill, to this Commission, or their
Moderator, or Clerk to be delivered to them. And the Commissioners think it
very convenient, for good example, and the better encouragement of others, that
this Covenant be solemnly sworn, and subscribed by themselves now present,
before the Congregation, in the East Kirk upon Friday next the 13. of this
instant, after Sermon and exhortation to be made by Master Robert Douglas
Moderator; And that the Commissioners of the Convention of Estates now in
town, and the Commissioners from the Parliament of England, and the Divines of
that Kingdom here present, be earnestly desired to join with them in this
solemn and religious Action.

A. Ker.

At Edinburgh the 12 of October, 1643.
THe Commissioners of the Convention of Estates, having received from the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, the solemn League and Covenant
underwritten, approven and solemnly sworn and subscribed, in the Kingdom of
England. And having taken the fame to their serious consideration, do
unanimously and cheerfully receive and embrace it, as agreeing with that
draught, approven by the late convention of Estates and General Assembly. And
therefore ordains the same to be with all religious solemnities sworn and
subscribed by all his Majesty's subjects of this Kingdom: and that under the
pain to such as shall postpone or refuse, to be esteemed and punished as
enemies to Religion, his Majesty's Honor, and peace of their Kingdoms; and to
have their goods and rents confiscate for the use of the public, and that they
shall not bruik nor enjoy any benefit, place nor office within this Kingdom.
And als ordains all Sheriffs, Stuarts, and others his Majesty's Magistrates to
Burgh and Land, and Committees in the several Shyres, to be assisting to
Ministers and Presbyteries, in procuring real obedience hereunto. And that
with all diligence they make report to the Committee of Estates, of the names
of all such persons, as shall postpone or refuse, to the effect course may be
taken with them as aforesaid. And that they may be cited to answer to the next
Parliament, as enemies to Religion, King and Kingdoms, and to receive what
further punishment his Majesty and Parliament shall inflict upon them. And
further ordains their presents to be printed with the former act of the Estates,
and published at the Market Crosses of the head Burrows of this Kingdom;
Where-through none pretend ignorance of the same.

Arch. Primrose Cler. Com.

A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, and defense of Religion, etc.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of al sorts in the Kingdoms of Scotland, England, and
Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts,
and practices of the enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable state of
the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations and sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter Ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear: 1 THat we shall sincerely,
really and constantly through the Grace of God, endeavor in our several
places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland in Doctrine Worship, Discipline and Government, against our common
Enemies, the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the word of God, and
the Example of the best Reformed Churches, and shall endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and
Uniformity in Religion, confession of Faith, Form of Church Government,
directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our Posterity after us, may
as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the
midst of us. 2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons,
endeavor the Extirpation of popery, Prelacy (that is, Church government, by
Arch Bishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.
3 We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witnesses with our consciences of our Loyalty, and
that we have not thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power
and greatness. 4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavoure the
discovery of all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or
evil instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King
from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or
parties amongst the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may
be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of
their offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient. 5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between
these Kingdoms, denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good
Providence of God granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled
by both Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and
interest, endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to
all Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers-thereof,
in manner expressed in the precedent Article. 6. We shall also according to our
places and callings in this Common cause of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the
Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter into this League and
Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our
selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror,
to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and conjunction, whether to
make defection to thcontrary part, or to give our selves to a detestible
indifferency or neutrality in this cause which so much cone cerneth the glory
of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor of the King; but shall all the
days of our lives zealously and constantly continue therein, against all
opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against all Lets and
Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppress or
overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be timely prevented or
removed: All which we shall do as in the sight of God.


And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfayned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us, and our true and unfeined
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace* And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same as we shall answer at that
great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, Most humbly
beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragment to other christian Churches groaning
under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join in the
same, or like Association and Covenant to the glory of God, the enlargement of
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian
Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

FINIS.

