THE LINE OF TRUE JUDGMENT: Laid to an imperfect piece published By Thomas
Collier, which he calls an Answer to an Epistle written to the Churches of the
Anabaptists, etc.

A Reply herein is published in order to the Exaltation of the spiritual man,
with his Ordinances and Administrations, above the man of sin, with the weak
and unprofitable Ordices that does not make the comers thereunto perfect.

BY Thomas Salthouse.

Behold ye despisers and wonder and perish, for I work a work in your days, a
work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts
13.41.

Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways, Job 21.14.

They are of those that rebel against the light, they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof, Job 24.13.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate.

THe Reader may here observe, that the first entrance into this discourse, was
occasioned by a printed Paper from Tiverton; wherein the state and condition,
of the Anabaptists Churches was represented, which came to my hand; and after I
had read it over and considered their condition to be far short of what they
profess, I was moved to write an Epistle to them, and sent it among them, for
the better information of the honest hearted, and for the sake of such as are
not altogether settled upon the lees; and as an answer to that Epistle, Thomas
Collier has written a Pamphlet to vindecate their practice and present
condition, showing them many examples and instances of the Saints failings in
former ages tending to their incouragment in the estate of sin and
imperfection; intimating that notwithstanding their great abominations therein
expressed, they are, and may be owned as the Church of God, in persuance
whereof I was constrained to send this reply, as a farther manifestation of the
good will of him that would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth, with a seasonable word written by J.C. added hereunto, which may
go abroad among them to be read, received, and considered of by such as have
not refused to Return.

T. S.

The line of true Judgment, laid to an imperfect piece published by Thomas
Collier, which he calls an Answer to an Epistle written to the Churches of the
Anabaptists, etc.
WHen I consider the gross darkness degeneration and Apostasy of some high
pretenders to Religion: and how wilfully ignorant they are become of the great
mystery of Godliness 1 Timothy 3.1^
not liking to retain God in their knowledge, nor to hearken to the reproofs of
instruction, which is the way of eternal life. I remember what the spirit has
expressly spoken concerning such Romans 1.28.
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith; giving heed to
seducing spirits and Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their consciences seared as with an hot Iron; making Shipwreck of the mystery
of faith 1 Timothy 4.
which is held in a pure conscience, and which was once delivered unto the
Saints which purifies the heart and gives victory over the world, and after a
diligent search and examination had, who it is that are given up to strong
delusions to believe lies, and who teaches for doctrines the traditions of
men; 1 Timothy 3.9.
creeping into houses; and leading about silly women Captive, Laden with sin,
and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, nor to perfection; I find by evident testimony, that
the people called Anabaptists are as chiefly concerned herein as many of those
whom they themselves have formerly pretended to differ from and declare against
as Ante-Christian both in call, practice, maintenance, doctrine and worship,
with whom they are joined and confederate to fight against the truth as it is
in Jesus, as by their practice and the writings of some of them is plainly and
clearly made manifest; for, with the light of Christ are they seen through
their unrighteous covering and feigned humility: and with the Spirit of truth
are they tried, their language bewrayes them Ephesians. 2.12.
to be strangers to the Covenant of promise, yea such as cannot endure sound
doctrine, nor receive the things of the spirit of God, when in the fear of God
freely tendered and offered unto them.

And forasmuch as Thomas Collier a Teacher among them has several times
engaged himself, with the beast and false Prophet to make war against the Lamb
and his followers; by publishing his own imaginations to render them odious to
the world, Suggesting their way and worship of the true God, to be heresy and
error, as his forefathers in all ages have done: and now once more under
pretense of Answering an Epistle of mine written in the fear of God, and sent
to them in love, he has manifested much folly, enmity, ignorance, and
wickedness by wresting and perverting the words of truth and soberness therein
contained, as he has done, and does 2 Pet. 3.16.
the Scripture of truth to his own destruction, that he may not be exalted in
his wickedness; and so proceed further to boast of what he has done herein or
heretofore against the truth and the faithful witnesses of it.

I am constrained for the vindication of the truth in general, whereof I am a
witness, and for which I suffer, a little farther to search into his works of
darkness, that his covering may be stripped off, and his refuge of lies swept
away, that he may stand naked and bare in the presence Dan. 7.9.
of the ancient of days before whom the matter in controversy is to be
debated; and as for what I wrote in that Epistle, and do write on this account,
it is commended to that of God in the conscience of all such as are simple
hearted and sober minded to be read and received without prejudice, either
against the truth which is reproached by the world, or against the earthen
vessel which is herein employed as an instrument; and who has without
prejudice against any particular person (though occasion was given to mention
him) made these things public in persuance of a pamphlet lately published by
T. C. called an answer to an Epistle written by me, to the Churches of the
Anabaptists so called.

When his pretended answer was brought to light, and deliberately searched
through, and weighed in an equal balance, the scope of his discourse and
weight of his arguments was first to prove that they might be the Church of
God, notwithstanding their great abominations and wickedness confessed in their
Epistle from Tiverton, with several instances and agravations of the failings
of those in former ages whom the Lord sent his true Prophets and Ministers to
declare against, and to call to repentance; and hereby he would imply that the
Churches of God in former ages have been sinful and wicked like themselves; who
profess and would be accounted the Church of Christ in these days though
imperfect;

Secondly, Against the being of the seed of God and light of Christ within men,
thirdly against the Saints attaining to perfection and freedom from sin whilst
in this mortal estate which is the very end for which Christ Jesus gave gifts
unto his Ministers, ordaining some to be Prophets, some Apostles, some Pastors,
and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the spiritual body till we all come in the unity
of the faith unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus, in whom the whole building
fitly framed together grows to an holy temple in the Lord, and the Apostle
says, know you not that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
3.17.
and if any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy, 1 These. 1.1.
and the Church is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ, where
nothing that is unclean can enter, and the tabernacle of God is with men, as he
has said: I Will walk in them and dwell in them, though T C. have affirmed that
God never had yet a Church in the world free from sin, and so has laid sin to
the charge of Gods Elect, for John 3.8.
he that commits sin is of the Devil and a servant of sin, and so free from
righteousness, and this is the cause he has undertaken to plead.

In the front or entrance into his paper, he has cited this Scripture, to the
Law and to the testimony, if any speak not according to this rule, it is
because there is no light in them. Now in regard he has put in his
declaration, and goes about to plead a title or propriety, that the man of sin
has and must have in the Church of Christ whilst here on earth, and has here
cited the Law and Testimony (which I own) for a rule to try by; I am
constrained as Defendant, to join issue and plead with him, according to the
Law of Truth, in the presence of our Judge and Lawgiver, whose judgment is
true, and whose testimony is sure.

But first it is to be considered, what the Law and what the Testimony is, and
where they are according to the Scripture; Thy law is light, Prove. 6. The law
is spiritual, Rom 7.14. The law gives the knowledge of sin, Romans 3 20. And
behold the day come, says the Lord, Jer. 31. that I will make a new Covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according to the
Covenant that I made with their fathers; which Covenant they break, but this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with them after those days: I will put
my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; And again, Heb. 10.
I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more; and this is the Covenant
that makes the comers thereunto perfect, and the Law which makes free from the
law of sin and death; and he that believes has this witness in himself, and
so has set to his seal that God is true, and the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy; and this is that sure word spoken of 2 Pet. 1.19. And we
have also a more sure word of prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take heed
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day
star arise in your hearts; (mark) In your hearts: the Law in the heart, the
light in the heart, the testimony of Jesus, the sure word of prophecy in the
heart, the word of faith nigh in the heart. And now to come to the matter, he
says, page 2. Christ was sent to save his people, and not to save only the
oppressed seed or light within; to which I say, he was sent to set the
oppressed free, and to save his people from their sins, and to open the eyes of
the blind, John. 9.39.
that those that saw not might see, Mat. 18.11.
and the son of man was sent to seek and to save that which was lost, and the
Lord of hosts has left us a seed, else Romans 9.
we had been as Sodom, yea, like unto Gomorrah, and this seed is within: and
we know that the whole Creation travelleth together in pain until now, and not
only they but our selves also that have the first fruits of the spirit, even
we our selves have groaned within our selves, for the redemption of the body
which God has prepared to do his will, 1 Cor. 15,
who gives unto every seed its own body, and he that is begotten of the
immortal seed, and born again of water and of the spirit, is saved from his
sin, and he sins not, neither can he, because the seed of God remains in
him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God, 1 John 3. Mark, he cannot
sin, because he is born of God, and because the seed remains in him.

But T.C. says pages 2, 3. It is language besides the Gospel of truth, that
Christ came to save the oppressed seed within; and farther, that he dare say,
it is such a salvation as never came into the heart of God, nor was ever known
to Prophets, Apostles, or Christ himself to save the oppressed seed of God in
men, with which his Covenant is made. Here he has contradicted the Scriptures
of truth abovementioned, with many others that might be instanced; likewise he
has contradicted himself, for he with others of his brethren, directs their
Epistle from Tiverton to such as are called to be Saints, through the immortal
seed which dwells in them: now if it be language besides the Gospel of truth,
to mention the oppressed seed within; why does he make use of the expression?
and if it be according to truth, why does he suggest that those who use such
expressions, are poor deluded people? and because I said in the beginning of my
Epistle to them, I am constrained with compassion to the oppressed seed in you,
which groans to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, etc. he seems to
render it an offense by false constructions, arising from an evil affected
mind, wresting and perverting my words, and then calling it a mear cheat to
please children and sools, as if it were a language not fit to be spoken of, or
once named among them that are grown so strong in the state of imperfection.
And because my Epistle was directed to the Anabaptists Churches so called, and
then I denied them to be the Church of Christ, and told them that their
presumption was seen that called themselves the Church of Christ and were not,
as their blasphemy was known that called themselves Rev. 2 9.
Jews and were not. He calls this contradiction and confusion, but the
confusion is in himself, as may appear to the impartial Reader of that Epistle.
And this I say farther, that although they be called, and calls themselves the
Church, yet were they never owned, nor by me called the Church of Christ; for
as I said before, the Church of Christ is as a Lilly among thorns in relation
to their condition, expressed and confessed under their hands in print; and it
seems they have refused to return from their wickedness and great abominations,
if this man may be credited in what he writes concerning them, page 8. where he
denies not, but they are guilty of those sins expressed and confessed in their
Epistle from Tiverton; but says, He trusts they shall be found so more, if
this be to be vile, we shall yet be more vile. Now how can they be more vile
then they have rendered themselves in that one Epistle? where they confess they
have been drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and slavish fear has stopped
their mouths, till the mouth of this iniquity has almost devoured their poor
Churches, etc. and that their affections to Christ are alienated, and that the
world like a Canker has eaten out their time, their strength, their zeal, and
that the Kingdoms of the world has bewitched them, so that they are become
cruel to servants and children, exacting all their labors, with many other
offenses by them confessed, which may seem to render them vile and uncomely,
both in the sight of God and men, and yet he is so impudent as to say, if this
be to be vile, I trust we shall be more vile. Let him that has moderation
judge if this be not to glory in their shame, yet they pretend after all this,
to take some effectual course (as they say) to purge away sin, and sinners out
of the house of God, which if they do, not one of them will be left, but to
them it seems unpossible to purge away sin and sinners, if it be true, which is
here affirmed by T.C. page 7. they that say they are without sin in this mortal
estate, they are none of the Church of Christ: and after he has reviled
against what I wrote, concerning the baptism that now saves, and the great
salvation that is begun to be spoken of, he confesses it to be a blessed
truth, and then says, it is such a salvation as never entered into the heart of
God.

Should I but search through his writings, and set it in order before him,
contradiction and confusion would appear eminently therein, but that is not my
work nor intention; neither shall I render unto him or any other evil for evil,
and railing for railing, nor make him an offender for a word, nor contend and
strive about words, for I have not so learned Christ; and this I know, that
there is a witness for God in many of them, that shall confess to the truth of
what is by me written, and it shall stand upon true record for ever, though at
present he loves not holy things, nor cannot receive pearls, but turns again to
tear and rend him that freely offers them, to such as are covering after the
best things. But now we shall proceed to his doctrine in opposition to
perfection, and the Saints freedom from sin, to which I am called, and
constrained to make defense for the truths vindication, as the spirit gives
utterance, and first to what he affirms page 5. Now to this I say first as
concerning the Church or Churches of Christ, that God never had a Church in the
world free from sin, nor were there any durst so to say, except the Pharisees
and Hypocrites, the Quakers excepted.

Oh, from whence is this man fallen? and what is become of all those desires
and pressing after perfection that once appeared in him? see his general
Epistle to the universal Church; does he (and his followers) now think to be
made perfect in the flesh, that have made so fair a show of beginning in the
spirit, and such large pretenses of holiness as he has done? how has he
mingled himself among the dishonorable vessels of iron and clay, the very feet
of the Image? what damnable doctrine is this, that he holds forth in behalf of
the Prince of darkness? Surely this will please the man of sin well, to let him
be exalted above all that is called God, and to plead his cause and interest in
the Church of Christ, to exercise Lordship over Gods heritage, whilst here on
earth, for Sions sake I can no longer hold in; for if we should keep silence
that are called to contend for the faith which purifies the heart, and hear the
name of God and his doctrine blasphemed, the stones out of the wall, and beam
out of the timber would cry out against this wickedness, to say that God never
had a Church here on earth free from sin. This renders the Ephesians. 1.22, 23
body of Christ not to be without sin; but let T. C. know (whatever he affirm
to the contrary) that the Lord has reserved seven thousand in England that
has not received the mark of the Beast in their fore heads, nor in their right
hands, nor bowed to his Image, nor defiled themselves with women, nor with the
pollutions of Idols; besides, a cloud of witnesses wherewith we are compassed
about, that in their generation fulfilled the will of God, and walked before
him with an upright heart, as does at large appear in the declaration of truth,
which agrees to the exhortation of Christ, and the gifts given unto men by
Christ, who said, be ye perfect, even as your heavenly father is perfect, Mat.
5.48. who also ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, till we
all come in the unity of the faith, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. And the Minister of Christ whose
preachng was not with excellency of speech, nor with the enticing words of men's
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit and of power; he says of
himself, and his fellow laborers 1 Cor. 2.
we speak wisdom among them that are perfect, and their preaching was to the
Churches of Christ, whilst in the world, though it is here affirmed that God
never had a Church in the world free from sin, nor none that ever durst so to
say, except Pharisees and Hypocrites.

And yet the Apostle says concerning himself and the Church; how shall we that
are dead to sin live any longer therein, for sin shall not have dominion over
you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, being then made free from
sin ye became the servants of righteousness, Romans 6. Col. 2.10.
and ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principalities and powers,
in whom ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ; buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also you were raised with him through the faith
of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead; and Romans 6.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ
was raised from the Dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life: and as he is, so are we in this present world, 1 John 4. and the Church of the Hebrews was come Heb. 12.23
to the Spirits of Just men made perfect; and they who testified these things,
was not hypocrites as in this man's account; and now I leave it to the spiritual
man's judgment; whether ever God had a Church in this world free from sin; or
any that durst confess it; yea, or nay; and farther he affirms page 7. that
they that calls themselves the Church of Christ, and say they are without sin
in this mortal Estate, are none of the Church of Christ; for he had never yet
any such Church.

To this I say, his judgment is false and denied, and declared against by the
children of light, and witnessed against by the Scripture of truth; for the
Life of Christ has been, and is made manifest in mortal flesh; and 2 Cor. 4.7.
we have this treasure in harth en vessels; and for this purpose was the son of
God made manifest to take away sin: 1 John 4.3.
and every Spirit that Confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is
not of God; and this is that Spirit of Antichrist that now is in the world;
but where Jesus Christ is made manifest in the flesh, he is made manifest to
Destroy the works of the Devil, to wit sin; and to condemn sin in the flesh,
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled In us who walks not after
the flesh but after the Spirit; being Created again Ephesians. 2.10.
in Christ Jesus unto good works Coll. 1.4.
in whom we have Redemption through his blood; who has purged away our sins,
by the washing of Regeneration; glory to his name for ever; without boasting we
can speak it to the praise of his grace, who has wrought all our works for us
and In us: that 1 John 5.19.
we are of God though the whole world lies in wickedness; and that Christ
have had and yet has a Church without sin in this mortal Estate; for he that
sins has not seen God neither known him: and we deny all such to be the
Church of God, and of Christ as lives in sin, and pleads for sin, whilst in
this mortal Estate who makes a profession of the Scriptures and comes not to
the Life and power declared of by them.

For the Scripture we own and the Covenant which makes the comers thereunto
perfect, and the bringing in of a better hope we witness, and the Law which
makes free Romans 8.2.
from the Law of sin and death; and the unchangable ordinances and
Administrations to which we are subject, does not perish with the using; and
the Baptism by which we are made members of the Church of Christ does not
Decrease, but increase and save from sin: and all such as are called Churches
and yet remains in sin, in the unconverted and Imperfect Estate, offends in
many things, and are seduced and deceived, being out of the truth, they are
enemies to the Cross of Christ in the strife and envy against truth; and these
are not the Church of Christ, neither do they know it, but are strangers to the
saints Life, having a likeness of a thing, a form of godliness, but not the
power, Rev. 3.1.
a name to live and are dead; and with such we have no union; knowing them by
their voice to be strangers; and therefore we turn away from them; and cannot
but deal plainly and faithfully with them, though we be reproched by them
with the name of Quakers, and joined with Pharisees and Hypocrites, because we
cannot conform to the customs of the Heathen, and plead (as they do) for the
Devils kingdom of sin and Imperfection, that Antichrist may have quiet
possession in the Church of Christ so long as it remains here in the world.

And because we cannot own them as Ministers and Elders of the Church of Christ
that sometimes murmurs and complains of the tyrannical government of the man
of sin in them, but pleades for the continuance of sin in the Church whilst in
this mortal Estate; therefore he concludes that we are not sensible of sin in
our selves nor in others, as to warn them to mourn and seek the Lord for them.

To which I say we all like sheep have gone a stray, and in sin we were
conceived, and in iniquity brought forth, and were by nature the children of
wrath even as others, till it pleased the father in the riches of his grace and
love, to reveal his Son in us; to destroy the works of the Devil, and to
condemen sin in the flesh; and by his blood to cleanse us from all sin, and we
have known the terrors of the Lord, and his indignation against sin, and have
been made sensible of our condition, whilst sin reigned in our mortal Bodies;
and we have mourned under it every family apart, when by the light of Christ
it was made manifest, and by faith in him many have obtained victory over the
sin that did easly beset us and lead us captive; and how can we that are dead
to sin live any longer therein; shall we continue in sin (and plead for so
doing like you) that grace may abound, nay, God forbid that any such thoughts
should enter into our hearts, to draw us back to the pollutions which we have
escaped, and with the dog to the vomet, and the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire again; nay verily we are snesible of that condition, and
cannot but warn them that yet remains in it, and exhort them to come forth of
it; and we do pity them, and pray for them that they may be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, and out of the snares of the enemy; and turned from the
darkness to the light, that as obedient children, they may come to walk
honestly as in the day in the light of the Lord; and to this end do we labor
and travile, and freely administer as we have received, commending our selves
to that of God in every man's conscience; again he says, page 9. let both
heaven and earth tremble at such rebellion and pride as this is; Intimating
that we Judge and Condemn all that dare not walk in such a way of disobedience,
etc.

Hear I appeal to all sober minded people, that ever heard us speak, or read
our writings; whether ever we judged or condemned any that was obedient t oath
faith; or when did we ever press any to disobedience, or did in the least
countenance it; but have often declared that the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience; and surely if this man had not a face harder then a
flint, I believe shame would strike him in the face, at the reading again, in
the cool of the day, what he has forged against us in the heat and bitterness
of his Spirit; for all that have heard us will be ready with one consent to
say, that we press most after obedience, of any other profession or people
whatsoever, and we have sure ground for so doing: knowing that the promise of
the Lord and his blessing is to the obedient: and that the terrors of the Lord,
and his wrath is against the Col. 3.6.
children of disobedience; and our testimony stands upon record against all
such as Job. 24.13.
rebels against the light, and against all who are proud, heady and high
minded, Disobedient to parents, without natural affection, such as are Gal.
3.1.
bewitched and does not obey the truth as it is in Jesus.

And to say that we walk in a way of disobedience is utterly false: for our
way is the good old way of holiness. Jesus Christ who says I am the light of
the world, and John. 8.12.
he that follows me shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, and his record is true, and we have believed it; and again, he says
John. 14.6.
I am the way, and no man comes to the father but by me; and of this way we
bear testimony, and in this way we walk, and whosoever says they believe in
Christ, and follows Christ, and does not believe in the light, and walk in
obedience to the light, are deceived and led aside with the error of the
wicked, and are in the rebellion and disobedience, and such with the light are
judged and John. 3.19.
condemned, and by us declared against in that estate of disobedience; yet we
cannot cease to call them to repentance, that if peradventure they may come to
the knowledge of the truth: but he says page 11. that they endeavor to turn
souls from Christ to the light within them, teaching absolute disobedience and
rebellion against Christ in his word the Scriptures; and obedience to their own
fancies; and lying imaginations within them.

To which I say; this is but his own false construction and vain imaginations
mixed with Ignorance and enmity; for the Scripture is a witness with us of what
we teach and of what we believe; and endeavor to turn people unto, and he
might as well have accused the Ministers of Christ as us in this particular;
for they were sent Acts. 26.18.
to turn people from the darkness to the light; and in so doing, neither they
nor we did nor does endeavor to turn them to fancies; nor teach them rebellion
against Christ in his word, this is but the poison of Asps that comes from
under his tongue; and we can bear it; being exercised with the reproaches of
Moab, and the revileings of the Children of Ammon, with whom this man has
joined himself to fight against the truth; yet notwithstanding for the truths
defense and vindication, this may inform the simple hearted, that are not come
to a right understanding of what we hold and teach, that we do not endeavor to
turn souls to a light within them distinct from Christ; but we labor to turn
people to the true light of Christ in them; 2 Cor. 4.6.
for God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness has shined in our
hearts; and this is the true light which we have seen and which we declare, and
endeavor to turn people to, and this is the light which John was sent to bear
witness of, that all men through him might believe John. 1.
the true light that lights every man that comes into the world: and this is
not a fancy nor an imagination, as is falsely affirmed by T. C. who farther
proceeds to call it a natural light, and the ruins or remainders of that which
was in the first Adam; and says it is the great design of these men to set it
up in opposition to the true light and life of Christ, etc. but this also is
his own blindness and ignorance, of what we labor to set up that causes the
mistake and false judgment, for we labor to turn people to the true spiritual
light of the second Adam, who is the Lord from heaven heavenly; that as they
have sinned through one man's disobedience, they may by the obedience of one be
made free from sin and death; and to this end are we called and sent forth in
the name of the Lord, to call sinners to repentance that are in the lost estate
in the first Adam; and to turn people from the darkness to the true light, that
they may come to worship the only true God (whom we worship) in the spirit and
in the truth, and this is the work of our Ministry; having turned people from
the darkness to the light, to stir up the pure mind in them by daily
exhortations and provocations to love and obedience to him, who has required
truth in the inward parts; that holiness may be 2 COr. 7.1.
perfected in the fear of God; that their light (which does shine) may shine
clearer and clearer before men, that thereby the Lord may be glorified, and the
mouths of gainsayers stopped; and herein have we union with the elders of whom
the world was not worthy: who sustained the same sufferings, reproaches, and
trials of cruel mockings, bonds and imprisonments (as we do) for the testimony
which they held, and by the same power are we kept through faith unto
salvation; so that we can rejoice when men reviles and persecutes us for
Christ's sake and the Gospel; knowing that if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost; 2 Cor. 4.3.
whose minds the God of this world has blinded, and whose ears with the deaf
Adder are stopped; that although we speak plainly according to the Scripture,
and declare what we have heard and seen, yet it cannot be received by such as
are given up to believe lies; and truly this man has manifested as much enmity
and ignorance herein against us, as if he had sold himself to work wickedness,
and bent his tongue for lies; he calls them horrid abuses against Christ,
Scripture and Saints, that I would have the light within, to be believed in and
loved, and because I call Christ the true seed, the true light, the Lord, the
Law giver, the more sure word of Prophesy, etc. he makes it as some heinous
offense, and labors to make a separation between Christ and his light in the
consciences of men and women, which upon good grounds we exhort people to turn
unto, believe in, love and obey: for God has given him for Luke 2.37.
a light unto the Gentiles, a leader of his people, and for salvation to all
the ends of the earth, to open the eyes of the blind, and to bring forth the
prisoners out of the prison houses; end this is our message to the world to
declare 1 John. 1.5.
that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, and to turn people from
the darkness to this light, that they may be brought out of the estate of
degeneration and imperfection where they have lain covered with gross darkness,
feeding themselves with the hypocrites hope and empty shadows as of a light
without; a word without; Christ without; A Church without; baptism without;
bread and wine without; ordinances and administrations all without; which makes
not the comers thereunto perfect; being carnally observed according to
traditions received from men: and that which most agravates their misery; they
are self conceited, and will not hearken to the reproofs of instruction, nor
receive the things of the Spirit of God when freely tendered and offered
without money and without price.

Oh that you did but know the desires and breathings that proceeds from the
spirit that ever lives to make intercession unto God for you; why will you
spend your money for that which is no bread and your labor for that which does
not satisfy? how long will you make lies your refuge, and feed upon ashes, and
cover your selves with unrighteous coverings? the flying Angel is gone forth
with the everlasting Gospel to preach to all nations, kinreds, tongues and
languages, and the call has reached unto you that have been asleep Dan 12.2.
in the dust of the earth: Therefore harden not your hearts but incline your
ears, and hearken diligently what the spirits says, and take heed of Heb. 2.
neglecting this great salvation, for this is the day of your visitation; and
once more a word of exhortation to you as from the Lord to return to Joh. 12.3.
the light and believe in the light, and love the light, etc. Rev. 21.2.
walk in it that you may have fellowship with us, and that you may be received
into the general assembly, where the only true God is worshipped in the spirit
and truth Psa. 29.2.
in the beauty of holiness: but he says page 13. we know it is an easy thing
to be received by them without any letters of recommendation, for if a man will
but turn away from Christ, and faith, and scriptures, and obedience, and turn
to the light within, and say he is perfect, and can say thee and thou, he may
quickly be one of their Church, etc.

But truly he is deceived herein; for its not so easy to be a member of our
Church (which is the true Church) as he ignorantly pretends; though the gates
be not at all shut by day, yet there can in no wise enter any thing that
defiles and is polluted; nor no profane person, neither whatsoever works
abomination: Rev. 22.15.
for without are dogs, and drunkards, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
swearers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie:
and its death to any beast, that comes near the mountain of the Lords house,
which is established in the top of all mountains: Isay. 2.
and exalted above the hills, where we worship God in the spirit in the true
order and fellowship, where all may speak 1 Cor. 14.
one by one as the spirit moves and gives utterance; and if any of the
adulterated generation should come among us from a far country, and bring a
letter of recommendation from some great man of the world, or from an assembly
of professing people; his spirit would soon be tried whether he were of God or
not; for we cannot Joh. 4.1.
believe nor receive every spirit that may come with excellency of speech, and
the enticing words of men's wisdom, and be commended by men, and pass for a good
Christian in the worlds account; for we know the voice of Christ ^^h. 10.5.
and strangers we cannot hearken to; And as for such as turns away from
Christ, faith and obedience, they are more like to be received by, and to find
acceptance among the Anabaptists (then among us) if they will but take up their
great ordinance as they call it (to wit) water Baptism, the second or third
time, and make Confession of their sins, that light spirit, that wretched
worldly spirit, etc. They must be owned as brethren and sisters, Christ's
excellent ones, although they be cruel to children and servants, mockers of
God, etc. See a large description of the Estate of their Church in their
Epistle from Tiverton, and look abroad among all professions in the nation, if
worse fruits can be found then is brought forth among them; but how can we
expect better till the vineyard be dressed by husbandmen of the Lords calling
and sending; its manifest they ran and was not sent; and therefore the people
are not profited by them; and truly its far easier to be a member of such an
imperfect Church as theirs, the way being so wide, then it is to be of ours;
for the way is straight that leads to it, Cor. 12.13
the Baptism being spiritual by which they are received in, and the natural
man cannot receive the things of the spirit of God: and the words thee and thou
does not make a member of the true Church; neither are they the principle of
our Religion, for they may be used in the deceit, as well as the truth may be
holden in unrighteousness, though they be proper and pure language, and by us
used and owned, yet let none think that our Religion depends only upon words,
but that we are builded upon the sure foundation of many generations for an
habitation of God through the spirit ^ph. 2.20.22
Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner stone: and many that pretends to
Religion in these days, and professes the scripture for a rule, are so far
from coming to be of our Church, that a word of exhortation can hardly have
entrance among them; neither can the scripture language be born by T.C. and his
adherents; for because I said the Law is Heb. 7.
changed, and the Priesthood is changed, and the Covenant which made not the
comers thereunto perfect, for the weakness and unprofitableness of it is done
away, etc. he says, take these words as they are stated, and they speak forth
most horrible iniquity, though they be stated expressly as they (...) in
Scripture; and, says he, the ordinances that we walk in are the new testament
ordinances grounded upon the new restament Covenant; but truly its very unlike,
seeing their Covenant and ordinances does not make the comers thereunto
perfect, which thing he denies both in Epistle and practice, as is plainly
manifest to the childrne of light; And should I but trace him through his
Epistle from Tiverton; and this imperfect piece written as a vindication of it;
and their Churches imperfect Estate; a Large volume would but contain the
particular circumstances; but I shall refer the reader to that Epistle, and
mine in persuance of it, which was not written by me to the intent of strife,
or contention about words, but in the fear of the Lord, by way of exhortation
to repentance; after I had deliberatly read over and considered the state of
their Church under their hands in print, and although I did write in love and
tenderness, and in plainness of speech, and in English; yet T. C. pretends to
interpret it, to make it speak another thing then is intended; and when he
has set down his own false constructions and interpretations, he calls it our
Logic; and so sports himself in his own deceivings; and then says he, I
trust that every tender and faithful soul, that trembles at the word of the
Lord, will tremble at the thoughts of the reception of such divinity as this
is: which is nothing but a false divination of his own heart, for those that
trembles at the word of the Lord, does little approve of his divinity; its
more pleasing among, and more delightful to them that cannot endure sound
Doctrine, and they can well agree with, and approve of such teachers as will
countenance sin, and plead for the being and living in sin, whilst in this
mortal Estate.

But to press after holiness, perfection and obedience to the light of Christ
Within, Oh this is a hard saying, the land cannot bear such language; away
with such a fellow, its not fit he should breathe in the air or live upon the
earth: he brings certain strange things to our ears, this is a new Doctrine,
he us of a light within us, but this is a natural light (say they) this is not
the light of Christ; for when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is, but
we know of this light in us; let us hear of something that we know not, and
tell not us of a light within us that reproves for sin, and convinces of sin;
and thus the day of small things is despised, and the reproofs of instruction
set at naught, and the first principle of pure Religion slighted as too mean
and too low things for such high spirits to stoop to in these days.

And because out of a true sense of their miserable Estate and condition,
expressed in their Epistle, I said to the simple hearted come out from among
them, and be ye separated, least you perish in their gainsaying, he says, this
is the great work of all, Pharisee-like, to compass sea and land to make one
proselyte; now let the understanding and wise hearted judge, if I have offended
herein, and whether it be not safe to come out from among them that are formal
in holy duties, and without the terror of Gods Majesty, etc. as they are by
their own Confession.

Was it Pharisee-like when the true Prophet called to a people to come out from
among them that lived in sin, and not partake with them any longer therein,
least they also should partake of their punnishment? and is it an offense now,
to call the simple hearted to come out from among them that lives in sin, and
pleads for the continuance of it? so long as they remain in this world, Tim.
35.
and the Minister of Christ says g that those who had the form of godliness,
and not the power, was to be turned away from; for what concord has Christ
with Beliall, or what communion has light with Darkness, or what agreement
has the temple of God with Idols, for ye are the temple of the living God, as
God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; wherefore come out from
among them and be separate, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. and
this was not Pharisee-like to make a prosylite, and, he says, but why must
they come out from amongst us? to which I shall here answer in plain English,
and so save him labor to interpret; first, because they have not profited by
your Ministry, as you Confess you have labored in vain, and that which has
been brought forth has been to little purpose: Secondly, because you have 2 Timothy 3.5.
the form of godliness and not the power thereof, and does impose such
ordinances upon them, as does not make the comers thereunto perfect. Thirdly
because of your coldness and deadness, that indifferency and Laodicean spirit
that is fallen in upon you: Fourthly, because you have been drawing iniquity
with cords of vanity, whilst you have said, Let the Counsel of the Lord come
that we may know it; in a word, because your Church has sin remaining in it,
and you believe it will never be otherwise whilst you are in this mortal
Estate; so that your Ministry is not for the perfecting of the saints Ephesians. 4.
the ends for which Christ gave Gifts to his Ministers; and again he says,
whether must they come, doubtless to them a pure perfect people without sin;

I say yea, unto a people Deuteronomy. 33.29.
saved by the Lord, saved from their sins, saved from the untoward generation,
with a great and mighty salvation: to such a people are they called to come, to
the generally assembly, to the Church which is in God; to a pure people, Heb.
12.23.
to the spirits of just men made perfect, that they may be the Lords in the day
Mal. 3.7.
when he makes up his jewels; for now he is bringing in the desire of all
nations, who says to the sea, give up, and the light is risen out of obscurity
and we have seen it, and now the Lord is gathering his seed from the cast, and
from the west; I say. 43.
who says to the north give up, and to the south keep not back, bring my sons
from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth, bring forth the blind
people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears, and let the nations be
assembled, for now is salvation and strength come, and we cannot be silent, but
freely invite and exhort the simple hearted to come up with us to the house of
the Lord.

And therefore I say again, I say. 2.5.
Come let us walk in the light of the Lord, come with me from Lebanon; in vain
is salvation hoped for from the hills, or from the multitude of mountains;
arise and come away, look from the top of Amana, come from the Lions den, and
from the mountains of Leopards, come up out of Egypt and Babylon, enquire the
way to Sion, seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near; come up hither to worship God in the spirit and in the truth, and seek
not the living among the dead, Rev. 22.17.
The spirit and the bride says come, and whosoever will come, let him come to
the waters freely, and drink without money and without price.

This word is to you that are athirst, and to you that are tenderhearted in
plainness to your understandings (and not the voice of a strange women)
therefore hearken diligently, and be not as the untamed Heifer, stuffing up and
feeding upon the wind; come off the barren mountains, where you have been
wandering in the cloudy and dark day, and turn to the light of Christ Jesus (in
all your consciences) who has sent forth Pastors according to his own heart,
to administer freely, as they have freely received, and to turn people from the
darkness to the light: Let not a deceived heart lead you aside, to heap up to
your selves Teachers, that cannot profit, and so neglect this great salvation;
to that of God in all your consciences I commend these things, to be answered
with obedience to him, that you may also come to have fellowship with us, and
truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son, in the light of life,
which the Scripture is a witness of, and the true Christ, Col. 1.27.
the hope of glory (in us) we witness, and of him we bear testimony, and for
that faith Jude 3.
which was once delivered to the Saints, which purifies the heart, do we
earnestly contend; and in humility we can say, that we have denied self in
obedience to Christ, who is the resurrection and the life, and he that is wise,
let him turn in hither, for he that is of God hears us, but they that are of
the world hears us not, because they have not heard nor known the Father and
the Son, of whom we bear testimony, by whose grace we are saved.

And now if any among the Anabaptists, or any other form whatsoever have but
moderation, to read this with the spirit and understanding, they may have true
information, without an interpreter, wherefore they are called to arise, and
come out of the state of imperfection, and unto whom they must come, that they
may find rest for their souls, and refreshment from Gods presence, and let none
be so foolish as to think that this doctrine will seduce or deceive them, for
we have the mind of Christ, and 1 Cor. 2.6.
we preach wisdom among them that are perfect, and we press after perfection:
wherefore I say, (...) of truth, that you may prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good.

T. S.
Ivelchecter the 12 day of the 1 Month, 1658.
A Lamentation taken up for the Churchs of the Anabaptists by John Collens with
a call, and warning for them to come out of the self separation, into the
footsteps of the flock, and to turn from the darkness to the true light.
FRiends, you who call your selves Churches of Christ Jesus, who have separated
your selves not having the spirit to lead, and separate you from your
uncleannes, and so are in the self separation, out of the power of God, which
power makes man willing to deny himself and take up the daily cross which
crucifieth him to the world, and the world to him, where sin is nailed, and the
power of God received, to resist the Devil, which leads them captive at his
will, who live in sin and transgression, which is the work of the Devil, and
all them that are led by him have not received the faith, which gives victory
over him, nor have not believed the Gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation, nor received Christ Jesus, to save them from their sins which all
they that do believe, do receive even power to become the sons of God, and
joint heirs with Christ.

Friends, in the Name and fear of the Lord God Almighty, do I warn you, and in
bowels of love and tenderness do in Christ's stead beseech you, that in the
light of Christ Jesus made manifest, which never changes, but bears true
testimony for God, try and consider, whether whilst you live in sin, you are
not servants to sin, and does the work of the Devil: and the wages of sin is
death, and he that sows to the flesh must of the flesh reap corruption, and
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, you
cannot serve two masters, neither can you serve God and Mammon, verily verily
except you be born again you cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and he that is
born of God cannot sin, for his seed remains in him, he that sins is of
the Devil; now friends in the cooleness and moderation consider, whether you
know this birth brought forth in you which cannot commit sin, the seed immortal
begotten of God, which enters the Kingdom of God; and try your selves how you
stand in the presence of the Lord; in singleness of heart, and deceive not your
selves with words; for the gospel is not in word but in power; a profession of
God and Christ will not save you whilst you deny the power of God, by which sin
is crucified, for whosoever commits sin is under the Law: and he was made
manifest to take away our fins, truly a lamentation is taken up for you, how
are you fallen; how are your garments defiled; how are you degenerated and
fallen back to the love of the world with its customs, fashioned and
traditions, with the lusts and vanities thereof, renewing again those
idolatries which formerly you have destroyed, how is your leader and great
Apostle amongst you, Thomas Collier, become an enemy of righteousness resisting
the holy Ghost: and perverting the right way of God preaching up sin and
imperfection for term of life, going about with all the strength he can muster
up to establish the kingdom of the Devil in the Church of Christ, raking up the
failings of the Saints recorded, to confirm the reign of the man of sin for
ever, condemning the generation of the just, bringing in new destinctions to
make the body of Christ an imperfect sinful body, how does be blasphem God and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect, how does he slander, reproach and falsely accuse the
innocent and harmless Lambs of Christ Jesus, yea the Lord is witness between
him and us, and we call Heaven and earth to witness against him this day, that
these things In his book called a dialogue between a minister and a Christian.
asserted by him as our principles never entered into our hearts, our
consciences bearing us witness in the sight of God, though he like a whore has
wiped his mouth at a looking glass, in which the children of light see much
more of his deformity and wickedness; having perverted the words in several
books as he does the Scriptures to his own destruction, and out of his
mischievous heart, has wrested their honest intents, and taken pieces of
sentences and raised it up a lie (out of his own wicked heart) upon them, and
then overturned his own work; but that which is written in those books
remains untouched by him, his own lies being but wiped from them, as any who
are without prejudice may easily see, reading over the things contained in
those books who will sufficiently clear themselves, but the Devil who was a
liar from the beginning, is now cast out of heaven into the earth, and he has
great wrath with the woman, and the remnant of her seed who keep the word of
God and testimony of Jesus; but the arm of the Lord is stretched out over us,
and in his fear are we preserved from the rage of our enemies, yea a pillar of
fire to give us light goes before us, which is a cloud and darkness to our
Egyptian like enemies that follow after us:

Truly my soul pitties you, and my bowels has even yerned on you, for many
days; oh that you had an ear that you could hear, and an heart that you could
understand: you have played the harlot and are departed from God, and you have
joined your selves to another besides the Lord, you have run a whoreing after
your own Inventions, and you have worshipped the works of your hands, and your
Pastors has deceived you, for the Lord does not smile upon you, but his
jealousy burns against you as a fire, yet return and he may have mercy, and
whilst the Spirit of the Lord strives, answer with obedience; for he has said
his spirit shall not always strive with man, and while you have the light,
believe in the light, and bring all your deeds unto the light that they may be
proved and tried, whether they be wrought in God.

And now friends in the fear of the Lord deal honestly with your own selves,
and let us reason together, and in the light of Christ Jesus weigh and try all
things, and see with the light (which will deal plainly with you) whether you
are indeed such as you profess your selves; and whether the ordinances you so
much talk of be indeed the ordinances of Christ, or but shadows, whether water
baptism or the baptism of the spirit be the baptism of Christ, since there is
but one baptism, whether you have heard the voice of Christ or seen his shape
at any time, that has commanded you in the particular to take up those
ordinances, or a persuasion in your own minds from the letter when as the
letter kills, or whether such a thing as water be commanded in the letter, or
your own Imaginations from the letter.

Whether the bread you break be the body of Christ, or the cup you drink be his
blood, since it does not cleanse you from sin? whether the prayers you make be
in the spirit, and you can say in the presence of the Lord, you lift up holy
hands; have them that teach among you the spirit of infalibility, and
revelation of the mind of Christ, or they speak a devination of their own
brain, and has not received the word of the Lord from his mouth, but boast in
another line, and what themselves have invented, and whether this be the
spirit of God, or the spirit of error which is not of God; and whether the
Covenant, and ordinances which does not make the comers thereunto perfect, be
not that which is to be done away as weak and unprofitable? whether your faith
and preaching be not also vain, forasmuch as you believe you shall never
overcome sin while you live, and your faith does not purify your hearts, and
since that as a tree falls so it lies, and as death leaves you judgment
finds you, and that there is no repentance in the grave whether you must go,
and that nothing that is unclean, or that works abomination, or that makes a
lie shall ever enter the City of our God.

Therefore once more in the name of the Lord I warn you, come out from among
them, all ye that are tenderhearted, and that desires salvation to your souls
come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch no unclean thing and I
will receive you says the Lord, for whosoever cannot witness Christ Jesus a
Savior from sin in the particular, shall never witness him a Savior from
condemnation, and refuse not to walk with a pure perfect people, as T.C. says
we be, and follow us no farther then as we follow Christ, for we have the mind
of Christ; therefore own the light which convinces you of sin, for as living
witnesses for the name of our God do we stand, that the light which convinces
of sin is the true light that leads out of sin, all them that walks in the
light, as he is in the light, they witness the blood of Christ to cleanse from
all sin, which joins us to Christ as members of his body, whereby we receive
the spirit of the Father, to lead and guide us to do his will, which is our
sanctification, which spirit reveals the Son, Christ Jesus the light, who
works all our works in us, and for us, whose work is perfect, for we are no
more our own, but bought with a price; so are we baptized by one spirit into
one body, and made conformable to his death, who has raised us to life, glory
be to his name for ever: here is the Church in God the Father, where the true
Church, Ordinances and fellowship is known, and the true worship in spirit and
in truth (in which only the father is worshipped) lived in; yea, and we bear
testimony according to the Scriptures, that there is no other name given under
heaven by which men can be saved, but by Christ Jesus, who is revealed in us,
our hope of glory; this is he that has told us all that ever we have done: is
not this the very Christ, who was in the beginning with God, whose day Abraham
saw, whom the professing Jews (when made manifest) who had the Scriptures of
the Prophets (who prophesied of him) read every Sabbath day, yet their voices
they knew not, but crucified the Lord of Life, and put him to open shame, as it
is at this day; Him has God raised, and given him a name above every name,
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow; this is he whom we bear
testimony to, Christ Jesus the same yesterday, to day and for ever; therefore
take heed least ye be found fighters against God, and no longer believe lies,
but cast out the liar from amongst you, for the liar is of the Devil, and
whilst you join with him, you are one with him, and must partake of his
plagues. Therefore hear and fear before the Lord, for the Lord will rain snares
upon the wicked and pour out shame and contempt upon his adversaries; and go on
speedily with your promise which you have promised the Lord in your Epistle,
That you will cast out sin or sinners out of the house of God, so may the Lord
have a Church free from sin upon the earth, for he is come whose right it is,
and the Kingdom and the Government shall be his, who will rule the Heathen with
a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel. And now have I
eased my spirit, and cleared my conscience toward you, whether you will hear
or forbear, and the Lord will be clear of you, when he comes in ten thousands
of his Saints to execute the judgments written; this honor has all the
saints.

From him who was once owned as a Brother amongst you, and since owned a
brother by you, whilst walking in the vanity of my mind running to the same
excess of riot with you; but since the Lord in mercy visited me, and called me
out of darkness, into his mavelous light, I have been hated and despightfully
used by some of you, who am known to many of you by the name of,

I. C.

FINIS.

