The Vaulting Master: OR The Art of Vaulting: Reduced to a Method, comprised
under certain Rules, illustrated by Examples, And Now primarily set forth,

By WILL. STOKES.

Xenoph. de magisterio equitum. Juniores persuadendi sunt, ut in equos insilire
discant: Landem vero jure mereberis, si quem adhibueris magistrum sen
praeceptorem.

Imprinted at London by I. Oaks. 1641.

The Epistle to the Reader
Courteous Reader:
ALthough now adays it be little better than paper cast away, to entertain
the Reader in the entrance of a Book, though with never so necessary an
eloquence; since men will not so lose the pleasure and Venerie of envious
Censure, but hastily run on to banquet their gall with those faults which they
will either find or make: And although (as one says well) a man had better
never write than give an account to every one of that he has written:
Nevertheless, I am determined not to give ear to such a cowardly wisdom,
lest I incur a double imputation; either as not daring to meet with the
Detractour, or not caring to salute the Ingenious. There are some, I make no
doubt (though in other matters sufficiently knowing, yet ignorant in this) who
do and will dislike the thing it self, nay the very name of Vaulting, as
accounting it an unnecessarie and dangerous exercise, a device to break ones
neck, or limbs, or the like: but such when they know more, will answer
themselves; in the mean time, their ignorance is a sufficient punishment.
Another sort there are, who are content to allow the thing, but will by no
means have it an Art, but rather the child of an accidental and undigested
experience, receiving the degrees of its excellency, from blind custom only
and difference of bodies: It were too long to confute these by reason, and
likewise unnecessary in this place, seeing I have amply shown it in the
following leaves. A third sort there are, who grant it to be an Art, and this
Art extraordinarily available in the practice; but they will say it is not so
accurately handled, nor in so exact a method as it deserves. To such, since it
concerns my self, I ingenuously confess, I have done in it what I was able;
nor am I such an enemy to the common good, as to envy, or not rather calmly to
suffer my self to be cast out before him, that can and will perform it
better. Yet let me comfort my self with this truth, that all Arts, if they be
so handled that they may teach, will nor admit of that elegancie of word and
phrase, which though they becommingly dress, yet they dazzle the eye of the
Reader. A fourth sort there are yet behind, who I know will wonder, whence I
amongst all the excellent Professors of this Art, both English and foreign,
should have the confidence to enter upon this Tract, which had been worthy of
the best of them; and first of any (I think I may safely say so) dare expose
my self under this tirle to the Press and public view. This indeed comes
nearest me of any; but I shall answer (and as I think, beside their
expectation) that what they account in me a fault, and a malapert undertaking,
I esteem as my greatest happiness; nor would I change the glory of being the
first that have written, with that of having written: Since in all men's
opinions, the first Founders of all Arts and Sciences, have been as honorable
as those that have built upon their foundations to the fairest height: but
enough of this, lest I seem to hug my good fortune even to ostentation, which
might have been another, and perhaps more fit for such a burden, and far
more better deserving the honor of precedencie. Yet, Reader, this I will say,
if happily it may add any value to me or this my work: although I had rather
my work should praise both it self and me: Thou have the fruit and
observations of almost thirrie years, and Rules confirmed by daily practice
during so long a time: if this may add any thing to the esteem of my labors,
so be it: For the rest, examine the whole piece, and thou shall find Reason
embracing Experience thorowout: and among reasonable men then, how can it miss
of its ends, viz. the public good, and a just acceptance? Nor need the
Practitioner complain of obscurity, as in many other, who do so interlard
their writings with the knottie terms of Art, that they may be said both to
teach and not to teach. I have labored to avoid that vice, as having seen the
ugliness of it in them. Besides the plainness of the phrase too, wherein
every Pass is dressed, I have added to each a lively and beautiful Cut; that
so what is but dead as it were in words, may be there seen in motion and to
the life, the rule and the example mutually illustrating one another. What is
else requisite for thy learning (gentle Reader) thou shall find it there: only
as I have freely and painfully opened my self to do thee good, so do thou
stop the mouth of malice, and defend this child of mine in the fathers absence,
and esteem according to his merits of him that is,

Thine to command, WILL. STOKES.

To the truly noble Gentleman, Mr. Heury Percy, Master of the Horse to the
Prince his Highness, etc.
Honored Sir:
IT is in me a boldness, I must confess, that deserves not to be pardoned, on
so small interest to present a Toy, a light and undigested Pamphlet to you that
are so far above it: And yet me thinks this boldness is much more answerable,
when I consider that you were once pleased (during that time, in which you were
both an Ornament and an Honor to the University) to make use of my mean
skill, and humblest service in this kind: and likewise that there is none more
able, either to protect or judge of what I have written. From the first I draw
encouragement proper to my self; in the other I make that encouragement mine,
which is, or ought to be common to all that would make a fit choice of
patronage. And on these grounds I have presumed, among those many happier and
more worthy labors which wait on your Name, to place this little one: which
(although as it can never hope, so it can never have the happiness to enjoy
that measure of your Sunshine, and so bounteous an eye as those more
deserving) shall nevertheless rest content in the conscience of that
everlasting service which the Father of it owes. Be pleased then (most worthy
Sir) to suffer your Name in the Front of this, otherwise poor and defencelesse
Book. So that by that means it becoming acceptable to the world, I may not
doubt but afterward it will prove as profitable. My last, but not my least
hopes are, that as you loved this Art in your youth, and have honored it
since, so you will still advance it, and continue your favors to him that is

Your most humble Servant, WILL. STOKES.

The Preface.
AS in the greater world there is no one quality more noble and necessary
than motion and activitie, it being that whereby Air excels the Earth, and
Water and Fire the Air, and the Heavens the Fire; and that whereby all these
do preserve themselves, and those creatures they contain: So neither in the
little world; Man, whether in respect of the Soul, as being most nearly allied
to the nature thereof, it being in it self a perpetual Motion, as also the
fountain of all Activitie; or in respect of the body, as being that only
whereby we are known to live, and which chiefly distinguishes that Earth we
are made of, from the residue we tread on. Now although it be impossible for a
man to attain to that height of agility which is found in those greater
bodies, it will be sufficient never thelesse, if Art conspiring with an able
Constitution, may and has rendered men equal to the most active of the beasts.
This no doubt will seem a paradox to some, that are enamoured of the admirable
speed of a Heart, or Horse, or the nimblenesse of a Cat, or have seen the Apes:
but let such consider the wonderful frame of a man's body, how it is the
pattern (as it were) whereby both the world and all other creatures were made;
how in his thight the Horse, in his heart the Lion, in his hands the Ape, in
his back the Elephant are (as it were) stored up, all making one, by so much
more mighty than they all, by how much he is but one: and they shall find that
Nature is not wanting to man, but man to himself, and that it is not lack of
ability, but lack of use, that has shrunk men's sinews, and enfeebled them,
even to the contempt of beasts. Is it not a shame then, that men shoul so
forget that they live, and out of a base love of idleness, suffer their bones
to gather rust, as it were, and the gout lock up their joints; choosing rather a
chair than legs of their own, and the perpetual trouble and torment of
Physic, than to need none: a man may not unfitly think, they practice to lie
still all their life time, lest their grave being not used to it, should be too
troublesome. Certainly, ashame it is in any, but especially in a Gentleman, as
in a Gentleman likewise the contrary love of ingenious exercise is most
praiseworthy: considering the meaner sort of people are called to it by their
necessities, when as the Gentleman is, or should be stirred up to it by the
desire he has to do his Country good, and to heap honors on his name by his
brave and heroic actions: which how can he, when by a degenerous and unactive
life, his body becomes utterly unserviceable, and his soul, when she would
show her self in action, is in fetters, and set as they do Horses in their
trial, to draw at a tree. Well then do those, and worthy are they of their
Ancestors, as of the hearts and eyes of all men, who loathing the lazy and
unmanly life, do so accustom themselves by daily use to exercises of all
sorts, that they may be no slower in their actions, than their intentions, and
have bodies like the souls of the other. Equally blameable with those sons of
idleness are those, who out of a having and parsimonious disposition, will not
go to the price of Art, Art that is as it were another creation, and gives
those helps which Nature never meant, nor hoped, which must always sister Use,
and be in joint commission with Industry, or a man can never arrive at that
excellency and height, in this kind, which he is capable of: And this I speak
as well in general, in respect of all bodily exercises; since there is not one
of them (though mere strength and Use may perform things indifferently
admirable) but must expect their sinishings, and perfection from the hand of
Art: as also more especially, in respect of the Art of Vaulting (the Subject of
this present Treatise) as being as excellent and amiable as any of her sisters,
if not more, and partaking in as high a degree of the favors of Art, and the
advantageous helps of masterie and skill, as those that have their title Sub
privilegio, and happily have gained the more early approbation of the world:
Not that I do herein challenge the Science of Defense, or by comparison provoke
to the combat; since I know she is as sufficiently armed as able to defend her
self; but as considering they are sisters, and therefore in hope they will
without grudging endure each others praises; so neither that I would hereby
detract from the faculty of Dancing, for what were it but for one hand to
wound the other, since I profess both. No rather, let the ingenious that
desire to be acquainted with this Art, suspend their judgments till by some
trial they find it, though boldly, yet deservedly praised: in the mean time I
shall have my ends, if what I have said may provoke men only to the love of it,
and excite in the gentle breast a desire to see what he has read, not doubting
then but the success will warrant my confidence, and that the Art will commend
it self to the shame of words. Nevertheless, I must not omit those parts of
its praises, which are yet behind, lest I betray the former, and if any thing
can raise it to an equal glory with its fellows, what more authentically
than its antiquity; example in any thing being that which most readily
procures men's assent to it, and the more ancient the example, the more
assuredly ready the assent. There might be much probably alleged to this
purpose, but let this one suffice for all; it is Homers, the ancientest of the
Greek Poets, when describing Ajax leaping from the beak of one ship to
another, he uses this Simile: Iliad. 15.


As when a man well knowing how to use
The vaulting Horse, of many a Steed does choose
Four from the field, and to the City drives,
Whilst many a man and woman, thronging strives
To see, he safely, and nimbly leaps from one
To the other horse, yet they still forward run:
So Ajax, etc.
Certainly a most ancient and infallible testimony. To its antiquity we may
add its use, which daily experience has found to be manifold, both in peace
and war, for need and pleasure. In war, the nimble avoydance of a man's horse,
if wounded or killed under him, and in like manner the ready ascent into his
enemies saddle, if it be his hap to unhorse him, and much more, which the
experienced Soldier shall find: In peace, a thousand graces to horse-manship,
services to Ladies, and other courtly feats depend on it, besides infinite that
practice will meet with, which cannot now be thought on. One thing more, the
generally embraced esteem and community thereof, it has been loved even of
Princes, and now is: Do not thou then (gentle Reader) distaste, or neglect an
Art so honored by its Fautors, so anciently worthy, and so generally
necessary; but give it entertainment and love, which is that I have endeavored
according to my ability to persuade, and then I shall think thou want
nothing but a Teacher, and not repent that I have made those things public,
which were the peculiar rights of a private School: And so let us descend to
the practice.

To the Reader: On this new and excellent Book, called the Vaulting-Master.
YOu that in wanton silks diseases hide,
And wear your limbs so loose, they scarce can 'bide
A friends embrace; you that are feign each day
To bribe your health, and keep your life in pay,
That of your generous youth and Ancestrie
Decoction make, only to feed lust high:
That take no pains, but on your clothes or whore,
And only leap, ride, vault by metaphore:
If you yet live, can call your selves your own,
And have not all in the sea of women sown,
If when you hear (as now) the iron Car,
And brasse-hoov'd Steeds of all-consuming war,
In horrid noise, approach our threatened North;
You, nobly roused, can reassume that worth,
Which heapt-up ryots hide, and would assay
For man again, would any show the way:
Here Is that will soon restore what e're has bin
Impaired by ease, or what more eating sin,
Here Is that will set your nerves in tune again,
And find for each forgotten string a strain:
Wind up your sickly muscles, and refine
Th'embased spirits to temper Mascutine.
Here Is that will make a stubborn armor wear
Gentle as Persian silks, and light as air,
And will the way into the saddle find,
Though th'Horse be high as hills, wild as the wind.
The Eastern Conqueror, no doubt, had he
But known this Art, without Philosophy
Had backed Bucephalus, and got his Crown
By rules our age is blessed with, then unknown.
But why without Philosophy; yet all,
That fills the following leaves, so rational?
When demonstrations build each page, when each
Period does prove, and every letter teach?
When Aristotle (lived he) would add this
To's thefts, and call the Vaulting Master, his?
And is not he well worthy an embrace
From time, from truth, from all the world, that has
Been fruitful of an Art, that rare-borne thing,
A sister to the Seven, another string
TO Apollo's harp? and in this age too, when
Books drop from every common, undipt pen,
And those too patcht, imperfect, blind and lame?
When all still write but diversely the same?
When only to dispatch Sermons and Plays,
The Printer's feign to work on Holy Days?
Yet Sermons but each others meaning show,
And Plays are but revived, when they are new.
However the world determines, Oxford will
One sheet with his due, her due praises fill:
And would do more; but now his booke's so near,
Such beauties through this veil of praise appear,
We busy wantons have before it drawn
(The fairest may mask, but not be hid in Lawne.)
As when displayed to the discerning eye,
Will soon out-grow both praise and Poetry.
Now turn the lease over, and expect no less
Nor longer; Only let my last hand dress
My Friend in this becoming Elogie,
Men could but crawle or swim, h'as taught them fly.
N. H.

On the Art of Vaulting.
THou that have still lived thy own statue, and
Have neither leg nor arm at thy command.
Being strangely monstrous, young and old, a man
And yet a carcass, whose limbs only can
Move like the Dutch-mans Motion; every part
Being its own shackle from the want of Art.
Who cannot mount a Palfrey, unless you
Have a convenient block and stirrup too.
Where like a Cripple thou do bend thy back,
Sitting upon a saddle as a fack.
Learn now to wing the body, scorn to see
Beasts the chief masters in activitie.
Thy soul is Quicksilver, while theirs is Lead;
Compared to thine, their very life is dead.
Hence to be stiff is to degenerate,
And wrong the Nobler Powers of thy Fate.
Thou, like the Heavens, have an Intelligence;
Thy motions too, like theirs, should outstrip Sense.
What though thou yet have stood fixed like a rock:
As sails add swiftness to the heaviest block,
And engines make stones fly; so here are taught
Rules that can make each limb as quick as thought.
Thou may mount higher by this Authors quill,
Than Don Gonzado can with all his skill.
No walls can stop thy passage, thou may do
More by this Book, than Love, Fear, Hunger too.
Thou shall no more live Soloecisms, and see
A place, though lower, yet too high for thee,
This healthful Art of Vaulting will proclaim
Thy body strong, though Doctors swear thou art lame.
Ladies by this will know thou art none of those,
Whose tender flesh hangs looser than their clothes.
Should some nice Dame hold out as long as Troy,
And after ten years courtship still be coy,
Unmoved with Rings and Verses, yet her force
Cannot stand the stratagems of the Wooden Horse.
R. W.

Upon a Book written by Mr. STOKES of the Art of Vaulting.
TO you we owe (skilled Sir) that we now see.
Endenniz'd here the French agilitie:
We may be easily nimble now at home,
Oxford being Mistress to all Christendom,
Nor need we take a leap to France, or ought
Strive to be expert in the venereall Vault,
We shall not over-heat our selves so much,
That we may straddling walk, or need a Crutch.
This wooden Horse, like Balaams learned Ass,
Can teach his Rider, yet not move a pace.
Nor shall we mount lean Rozinante's brood,
Though he is so dry he may be taken for wood.
We cannot our dull Courser running set,
Like the swift trav'lling Juggler, Pacolet:
Yet by this active Art Orlando can
Leap hedge and ditch without his Barbican;
And men henceforth ennimbled, may detest
To owe their journeyes to the ignobler beast.
I hate these lumpish Solonists, who make
Their leaping Helicon, a standing Lake.
Which think it enough if they vault in their clay,
And make their Thought their sole Angelica:
As if you learned not in your Spheres, the School.
That heavy bodies harbor heavy souls;
Or that the flaming Fancies soar the higher,
And that wit pierces most, that is made of fire:
Nature's become an Art now, and each fool
May see the world is but one Vaulting School.
The active blood does its Palaestra keep,
And nimble pulse continually does leap.
So, issuing often from crannies, wind has taught
The stubborn earth against her will to vault,
And has the lazy mountains bowels rent,
Both for a precept and a punishment.
I Will now leave Plato, credit Mandevill,
When I see the head so far below the heel.
What greater Sophistry can th'Answ'rer fear,
Than to see Vaulters at once here and there.
And the dull Optic Senses scarce perceive,
When to this side they fly, or that they leave?
If then the strangest Science we most prize,
To make Even number, let us This canonize,
And choose Him Christmasse Aristotle then,
Who made our hands be guided by his pen:
That this deadwood revived by common praise,
May grow once more, and bring forth learned Bays,
And may its fruits so to the world impart,
That each new year may find out a new Art.
Stephen Skinner.

To Mr. STOKES: Upon his new and admirable Book of the Art of Vaulting.
THis is no age for Apes: (although it can
Show many a motley, frisking Gentleman)
False capers, and soft cringes, that betray
Who Is a French Courtier, are quite laid away:
Our Gallants are grown sound, they have learned a sport
For men of backs, and may be liked at Court.
He that can mount the wooden Palfrey best,
And sit him as Knights Errant do their beast;
Descend so quick, that you would swear he flies,
And were himself the Pegasus; can rise
All the Reverses; English, French Pomado's,
The Saddle-jumps, intricate Strappado's;
Hover so lightly the Angelica,
You Will think a real spirit were in the play:
Can stretch his sinews so, to jump with ease
The Stags long leap, the Leap of Hercules:
Has mettle for each Term, and were they more
Than Logic has, could do them all thrice over.
He, he is the Man! He shall applauded be
'Bove the gay suits, and Tinsell-Poetrie:
Mark how the Ladies drink to Him alone!
He man's them out; He Is talked on too at home.
All this your Book affoords, and your large skill
Lies not i'th'back alone, but in the Quill:
He writes best that does teach; I like the man
Will gain the world his Scholar if he can.
Thus Art amends weak Nature: Tell me one
That e're grew strong by demonstration!
Nimble by rule before? What was good parts
Is now grown study, and makes up our Arts.
And you will a deed of Benefactour do,
To join your School to Bodley's Buildings too.
Richard Godfrey.

To his friend the Author of this Book, and most expert Instructor in this Art.
NO view of former Tract hereof, thy pen
Does guide, (a vaulter needs no stirrup) then
Take time, from the ground of this your Art, and spring
Above a rivals aim, or envy; bring
Thy Pegasus in view, and let us see,
Though many vaunt, if any'll vault with thee.
Thy Art I manhood style; for that, its use
Is man to's proper motion to reduce,
Which upward is: by stooping low, to rise,
It makes him know humility, to prize
Celestial exercise: whereby men do
Not in affection, but in body too,
Mount up above this earth, and trial make,
Which way their active souls would them betake,
If loosed from the body; so they do
Now but prove practice in the way thereto.
Toys scale away, and cannot scale so high,
Each Pass surpasses, let the ambitious try
T'at taine this Art, he will quickly find, and say,
That Vaulting is the only Rising way.
Jo. Shearman.

On the Author and his Book.
Hark hither, Gallants, you that set no price
On any games, but only Cards and Dice:
And think all exercise is course and poor,
Except to empt the quart, and fill your whore:
I Will tell you how (if you desire to know)
Your recreation shall a virtue grow,
And all those hours you used to spend in vain
Shall give you health, and bring your Country gain.
Leave off your Carpet-games, they well become
The Needle or Distaffe, not the Sword or Drum:
And in their place receive this active sport,
Hatched first in Mars his, not in Venus Court.
This to your weak'ned limbs will strength restore,
Making that Brawne that was but Veale before.
This to refine your bodies humorous bog,
'Twill prove the covering of your soul, not clog.
This makes you rise with such an even spring,
As if each heel were helped with Hermes wing:
And on your house sit with as firm a grace,
As those that first sprang from the Centaures race.
Thank then his pains, who such a care has took,
To make you now his Scholar by his book:
And grutch not though you at some charges be,
You Will quickly save it in the Doctors fee.
He could be well content you all should come,
And practice over your rules with him at home:
But since that may not be, he thus has sent
(As objects use) his Species, to present
His Art aright: and if I often can see,
They shew't to life, though he at distance be.
The Horse which in his school never knew a life.
Nor other form, than of the work-mans knife,
Lives in the picture, and would surely go,
Did but the Soldier once the reins let flow:
Who with such nimble joints seems over to come,
The lookers on can scarce refrain to hum.
This only blame can on the Graver fall,
He cut none by to catch him, should he fall.
Since then this work has reached so fair an end,
That only he that made it can it mend,
I in my friends behalf, against such as blame
His worthy pains, or think his Art but lame,
Thus far do pray. May they a stirrup lack
Trav'lling, and got off from their horses back,
May they walk down the steepest hills with pain,
And at their feet want stocks to rise again.
S. G.

IN the first Figure you are shown how to prepare your self to the Horse,
which motion is equally necessary in every Pass: the Figure is speaking, and
I interpret it thus. March forwards to the Harse, then lay your left hand on
the fore pummell, the reins of the bridle under your hand, placing your left
leg in a direct line answerable to that hand, your right leg behind the left in
the fashion of a Roman (T,) your body sidewise; this done, march forwards one
pace with your right leg, advancing the left; then retreat one pace back with
your left, advancing the right; so shall you find your self in the same
posture this Figure does present, and ready for the following Pass.

The First Figure.


The first Pass.
BEing thus prepared, the first Pass brings you into the saddle, and is thus
performed: by raising of your right arm, and extending your right leg, provoke
your self to the spring, then at once sink your body, clap both feet to the
ground, move your right hand back, and spring, clapping your right hand on the
hinder pummell, and withal nimbly shifting it from thence to the fore pummell,
equally poyze your body on the strength of your arms with a straight leg, and
you shall gracefully sink into the saddle, then when you have occasion to
alight, clap both hands on the fore pummell, raising your body to the strength
of your arms, and reverse your right leg over the hind pummell, keeping it
straight as before, and bowing when you touch the ground: the one will make
your descent sightly, the other easy. If you chance to make use of the common
riding or hunting saddle, holding your left hand as before on the pummell, clap
your right hand in the middle of the saddle, so raising your body, remove not
your hand, till you are in the seat.

John O-Neale


Over The head of the Horse.


The third Pass.
OVer the head of the Horse you have the example before you, and it is thus
done: march to the head of the Horse, as in the foregoing Pass, lay your left
hand on the fore part of the maine, then rise with all your force, (for it will
be needful) and clapping your right hand on the fore pummell, advance your
body thereon; and being thus elevated, let go your right hand, which you may
safely do, for the spring of your arm in the going off, will send you with
much ease to the ground.

Another way there is to vault over the neck of the Horse, which is especially
in use amongst the French, and it is thus: Stand as before, then taking your
time, rise; and whereas in the former the right led the way, now let the left,
so doing you must needs force off your right arm on the fore pummell: but be
careful you quickly clap him in his place again, for you will need the help
of both hands to carry off your body, in your descent bearing your back toward
the head of the Horse.

The fourth Pass, called the Pomado at the tail.
STand in the some posture with leg and hand, as you did in the former, then
taking the tail of the Horse in your left hand, move according to the
precedent directions, and in your rise clap your right hand on the buttock of
the Horse, by that means you shall raise your body to the strength of your
arms, viz. to the elbow, which unless you do, you shall never be able to
carry your body perfectly round into the same place where you stood at first,
which is indeed the very life of the Pass, otherwise it is no Pomado, nor
worth the looking on. And this rule is to be observed in all Pomado's.

The Millers Pass


The fifth Pass, called the Miller.
TAke the Horse by the tail as before, and your rise at the hind leg on the
further side of the Horse, then clap your right hand on the hind pummell,
carrying your right leg beyond your right arm, then loose your hold at the
tail, and at the same instant turning your body, and your left leg withal
over the fore pummell, and you shall easily fall into the saddle with your face
toward the head of the Horse.

The sixth Pass, called the Pomado at the hind leg of the Horse.
PLace your left hand on the hock of the hinder leg of the Horse on the near
side, your arm firmly stretched out at length, and your body moderately
enclining, or relying on that arm, it will be convenient likewise that you
place both your legs together, omitting these motions, and time used in the
other Passes, as preparatives to your spring, being in this no way graceful,
and of little use: Thus prepared, spring, and clapping your right hand on the
buttock of the Horse, where it may perpendicularly answer to that hand on the
hock, so shall the right hand carry you, undoubtedly round, whilst the left
supports the weight of your body. Now this (as all other Pomado's) the more
readily and roundly it is done, the danger is so much the less, and the
greater the admiration of the beholders.

The Pomado at the hind leg,


The Hercules Leap,


The seventh Pass, called Hercules his Leap.
THis Pass is very fitly so named; for it does require great strength, and is
not done by an ordinary man: The way of it is this, you shall stand on the
further side of the Horse, with both your hands on both the pummels, your feet
both together, then bowing your knees, with all your might raise your self,
bearing your right leg over your right hand, and your left leg over your left
arm, forcing both your hands off in on motion, that your legs may come
together before your body descend to the ground, otherwise there is no
possibility of coming off without danger to your self.

The eighth Pass, called the Pomado at the hinder Bow of the Saddle.
PLace your left hand on the hinder pummell on the near side of the Horse,
your body composed as in the first Pass, then in your rise clap your right
hand on the buttock of the Horse: but the right hand must rebound off with the
body in the going: else that will prove a hinderance, which would be otherwise
a furtherance: but provided always, the right leg lead the way, so shall your
body fly hollow as it were on the strength of your arms, and making a true
circumference, arrive at the point where the motion first began.

ye Pomado at the hind bow of ye Sadle,


The Mistress Coma^nd,


The ninth Pass, called The Mistress Command.
YOur Horse ready, and your Gentlewoman seated, leave the raines of the bridle
on the neck of the Horse, then fixing the left hand on the fore pummell mount,
clapping the right hand on the hind pummell: but be sure the right leg move in
the same time with the right hand, that so you may readily motion the right
thigh toward the Gentle-womans lap, and then reverse the same leg over the
fore pummell into the saddle, without molesting her.

If you will do this Pass after another fashion, take the bridle in your left
hand, and putting it over the head of the Horse, place your hand on the poll,
then taking your time, spring, from the ground, clap your right hand on the
fore pummell, thrust your right leg through betwixt both the pummels, and you
are in the saddle, the woman not so much as touched.

The tenth Pass, called the Pegasus.
TAke your stand on the further side of the Horse, and lay hold on the hinder
pummell with your left hand, then keeping the time in your motion prescribed,
spring up, and withal clap your right hand on the fore pummell: but so
inverted, that the body of your hand may lay hold on the inner side of the
pummell, otherwise it is utterly impossible you should come round, then as you
are going, shift the left hand nimbly from the hinder pummell to the shoulder
of the Horse, so shall you keeping your legs straight, your right leg leading
the way, and maintaining your strength, fly round in a true compass, till both
your feet be brought to the same side again, so down.

The times whole Pomado.


The eleventh Pass, called the Times whole Pomado.
THis Pomado, as it surpasses all the forenamed Pomado's, so it is very
difficult, by reason your hands must be conveyed three times from pummell to
pummell, before you can bring your body off round: but to the purpose. Place
your self on the near side of the Horse, laying your left hand on the fore
pummell, then spring, and fasten on the hind pummell with your right hand,
carrying your right thigh over that arm, that on it the body being equally
poyzed, may rest till you can remove the left hand to the hinder pummell: for
the right hand must fly off in the same time that the left hand comes, carrying
both your legs over the fore pummell, the left leading the way, and so as soon
as your body is come round on the near side again, clap the right hand behind
you on the fore pummell, so bearing of your body with your face toward the
head of the Horse.

The twelfth Pass, called the Poysado.
YOu see the Figure presents one lying with a straight body on his right arm,
without the help of the other; a strange sight it is, and a thing not to be
attained without great pains, and much practice: nevertheless he that is
willing to learn shall not want a Teacher. Advance to the Horse, laying your
left hand on the fore pummell, then your ordinary actions performed, spring
up, settle your right hand strongly on the hind pummell, and raise your body
equally in every part from head to foot, your left hand extended like the pole
they that dance on the rope use, helping to poyze it till it rest quietly and
constantly on the right elbow: when you please to descend, clap down your left
hand again on the fore pummell, and wheel your body off with both legs
straight over the head of the Horse, to the ground on the farside; or if you
will, you may reverse with the right leg over the fore pummell into the saddle.

The Poysado


Over three Horses


The thirteenth Pass.
OVer three Horses at once: Let your Horses stand abrest, and if there be any
one higher than another, place the highest first; your Horses so ordered, march
forwards, and clapping your left hand on the fore pummell of the first Horse,
then taking your time, making no more motions than two, as is before
prescribed: for in making more, you shall over-stand your spring, and tire your
arm with expectation of its burden; as likewise if you make less than two,
you cannot sufficiently stir up your spirits, nor wind up your sinews to their
full bent: this observed, mount your right leg leading the way, as well in your
rise as in your fall, and clapping your right hand to your best advantage on
the hind pummell of the first Horse, rise to the strength of your arms, and
throw your self off as high and equally as you can, and in your passage clap
both your hands on the farthest Horse, so deliver your body to the ground.

The fourteenth Pass, called the Pomado at the wall.
THis Pomado is the top of all the rest, and as the most excellent, so the most
dangerous of any: Present your self therefore to the wall; at such a distance
that you may have room enough to march three paces forwards, then without any
intermission, in the very heat of the motion, clap your left hand strongly
stretched out against the wall, and with all the agility that may be, raise
your body with your face toward the wall, and the right leg foremost, making
use of your right hand in your passage to hasten the motion, and to force your
body the more swiftly round, neither taking your left hand from the wall (which
is, as it were, the center and supporter in all Pomado's) till you feel it
discharged of its burden, and your self on the ground with both legs
together, and in every respect postured as when you rose.

The fifteenth Pass.
THis Pass is of much use; for it will enable you to leap over rail, gate, or
any other of the like kind, as high as your head, or lower, according to your
strength: First then approach to the rail, or any of the forementioned, then
laying your left hand thereon, make your motions with right and left leg, so
often before shown unto you, and expressed in the first preparation to the
Horse; then rise, clapping the right hand not above a foot distant from the
other; so shall your body be equally poyzed, and you have strength enough to
command it; otherwise it will so overload and oppress that arm, which else
would easily carry your weight to the ground, that it is impossible you should
escape without danger, if without hurt.

Over the Raise (...) at the wall


The Pass into the Sadle,


ANd these are the chief, if not all that can be done from the ground, either
on the Horse, or otherwise, which I have handled plainly and methodically: the
one being a degree to the other thorowout, that so as the Learner increases in
strength and agilitie, he may still have difficulties answerable to that
strength, and like Hercules be still opposed by succeeding monsters, the
following always more seemingly invincible than the former: It Is true, there
are many graceful passages on the Horse, which never take their rise from the
ground, as manifold in their variety, as in number: but I choose rather to
confine my self within this compass, as knowing these as they are more
principally useful, so they do far more beseem a man: Nevertheless, if
these my first fruits shall be favorably esteemed of, and pass the public
without wounds, I shall be encouraged at some other fit opportunity to enlarge
it with those, though not so substantial parts, yet ornaments of the Art, and
publish whatsoever can be said, or done in this kind.

FINIS.

