THE ULTIMUM VALE, OR, Last Farewell Of THOMAS Earl of Strafford. Written by
himself a little before his death.
(I.)
FArewell vain world, farewell my fleeting joys,
Whole best of musick's but an Echo's noise,
And all the luster of your painted light
But as dull dreams and fantoms of the night.
Empty your pleasures too, nor can they last
Longer than aire-puft bubbles, or a blast.
(II.)
Farewell you fading Honors, which do blind,
By your false mists the sharpest sighted mind,
And having raised him to his height of cares,
Tumble him headlong down the slippery stairs.
How shall I praise or prise your glorious ills,
Which are but poison put in golden pills.
(III.)
Farewell my blustering titles, never come back,
You Have sweld my fails until my mastings crack,
And made my Vessel reele against the rocks
Of gaping ruin, whole destructive knocks
Has helpless left me, sinking, here to lie:
The cause? I raised my main-top fails too high.
(IV.)
Farewell Ambition (since we needs must part)
Thou great Inchantresse of man's greater heart:
Thy gilded titles that do seem so fair,
Are but like meteors hanging in the air:
In whose false splendour, falling thence, is found
No worth, but water-like shed on the ground.
(V.)
Farewell the Glory, from which all the rest
Derive the Sweets for which men style rhem blessed,
That from one root in several branches spring,
I mean, The favor of my gracious King:
This too, has led my wandering soul astray,
Like Ignis Fatuis, from its righter way.
(VI.)
Farewell my Friends, I need not bid you go;
When Fortune flies, you freely will do so.
Worship the rising, not the setting Sun.
The House is falling; Vermin quickly run.
Bees do from off the withered flowers make haste;
The reason is, Because they have lost their taste.
(VII.)
Farewell the treasures of my tempting store,
Which of all Idols, least I did adore:
Haste to some Idiots Coffer, and he will be
Thy slave, as I have master been to thee.
Heaven knows, of all the Suitors that I had,
I least prized thee, as counting none so bad.
(VIII.)
Last; To my Foes farewell: for such I have,
Who do in multitudes wait for my grave;
Among which I cannot believe but some there be
That hate my vices only, and not me:
Let them pass over my same without a blot,
And let the Vulgar scratch they know not what.
(IX.)
Let them besmeare me by the chattering notes
(Poor silly hearts)which echo through their throtes;
I Will pass it over, and pray (with patience too)
Father forgive; they know not what they do.
Yet O: I could have wooed my treacherous Fate
To Have let me died without the public hate.
London printed, 1641.


