The Sorrowful Ladies Complaint,
Relating how a Damosel Lamenteth the loss of her Lover, who behaved himself
very Valiantly in a late Engagement at Sea, but at last was unfortunately Slain.

This Stories known both far and wide,
To Holland's wonder, England's Pride;
Come therefore every Loyal Heart;
And in my burden bear a part.
To the Tune of, The Earl of Sandwich farewell.




One morning I walked by my self on the shore,
When the Tempest did sing and the Waves they did roar,
Yet the noise of the wind and the waters was drowned
By the pitiful cry and the sorrowful sound,
Of ah! ah! ah! my Love's dead,
There is not a Bell
But a Triton's shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Love's knell.
It troubled me much when I heard all her grief,
But hoping it might not be pass all Relief,
I followed the voice till at the last I esyp'd
A sorrowful Lady, and all that she cried.
Was ah, ah, ah, my Love's dead,
There is not a Bell,
But a Triton's shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Love's knell.
A handsomer Damosel sure never were seen,
With a face like an Angel, a Robe like a Queen,
A Voice like a Siren, and Eyes like a Dove,
Yet ever she cried for the loss of her Love;
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead, etc.
When my Love was alive his courage was such,
He conquered the Dane, and affrighted the Dutch,
He ventured to show he never feared to dye,
But woe be to me that for ever must cry,
Ah, ah, ah my Love's dead,
There is not a Bell,
But a Triton's shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Love's knell.
Surrounded with Ships and asulted by Foes,
He stoutly received, and returned their blows;
So well he did manage his Ship in the strife,
That he never would yield till he yielded his life,
Ah, ah, ah, my Love's dead, etc.
To recall him to life, Oh what would I give?
But since he is dead, it is no pleasure to live,
He ventured for me, and shall I be afraid,
To dye for my love? it shall never be said:
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead,
There is not a Bell,
But a Triton's shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Love's knell.
The second Part:
to the same Tune
My Love lies now in his watery Grave,
And has nothing to show for his Tomb but a Wave,
I Will kiss his dear lips, then the Corral more Red,
That grows where he lies in his watery Bed,
Ah, ah, ah, my Love's dead,
There is not a Bell, but a Trytons shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Loves knell.
The Oriental Pearl, which the Ocean bestows,
We Will mix with a Corral, a Crown to compose:
The Sea Nymps shall grieve, and envy our bliss.
We Will teach them to love'and like Cockels to kiss,
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead,
There is not a Bell, but a Trytons shell.
To ring, to ring, to ring my Loves knell.
He go to my Love that lies in the deep,
And in my embraces my dearest shall sleep,
When, awake, the kind Dolphine together shall throng,
In Chariots of Shells to convey him along,
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead,
There is not a Bell, but a Trytons shell;
To ring, to ring, to ring my Loves knell.
And just as she spoke, she was casting her self
From the top of a Rock on a dangerous shelf,
But I being near her made have to her aid,
And sav^d her from falling, when just she had said
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead,
There is not a Bell,
But a Trytons shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring my Loves knell.
Fair Lady, said I, whether Maiden or Wife,
Your death will not call the departed to Life:
Loves fire goes out at the loss of the Fuel,
And though you be content, you need not be cruel.
Ah! what though your Loves dead,
Yet he had a Bell,
Not a Trytons shell
To ring, to ring, to ring out his knell.
She started to find this unhappy surprise,
With grief in her face, and disdain in her eyes,
She told me my kindness had done her much wrong,
She prayed me to bear but a part in her Song:
Ah, ah, ah, my Loves dead,
There was not a bell,
But a Trytons shell,
To ring, to ring, to ring out his knell.
London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, at the Hospital-gate in West-smith-field.


