Taylor's Lamentation. Showing how he picked up a crafty Miss, who left him
sleeping in Bed, and taking his Clothes, Watch and Money, so that he was forced
to send for his Wife, which added much to his grief.
To the Tune of the Old Man's Wish.
Licensed according to order.



I am Tailor now in Distress,
Who to the World must freely confess,
That I am fairly served in my kind.
As by the sequal you shall find.
I have a fair Young Wife of my own,
Yet I am Courting every Joan;
Many a Pound on them have I spent,
But at the last I Sigh and Lament.
Listen a while and I will unfold,
As sad a Tale as ever was told,
Surely the like you never did hear,
Therefore I pray be pleased to draw near.


As I was walking thorrough Pell-Mell,
Where a Young Lord and Lady did dwell,
With a New Garment under my Arm,
Winking Alas! no manner of harm.
There a young lass I happened to meet,
Tempted I was to give her a Treat,
Then to a Tavern strait I did go,
This was but the beginning of Woe.
She for the best Canary did call,
I was obliged to pay for it a'l,
Seeking Alas! for pleasant delight,
I was resolved to tarry all might.


Then the young Tib did cunningly say,
Sir, if you are right willing to stay?
I have a Chamber here of my own,
Where we may Kiss and Dally alone?
Such a kind Proffer, who could refuse;
But I was fairly caught in a noose,
The naked truth I will not deny,
Tailor was ne'vr so cheated as I.
Now when the Night was dalli'd away,
Just before Morning break of the day,
She 'rose and left me snoring Bed:
Oh! I lament the life I have led.
There did she sieze my delicate Suit,
Likewise my Watch and Money to boot,
Thus she did fairly make up her pack,
Leaving me not a Suit to my back.
When I awoke and found she was gone,
Missing my Clothes, Oh! how I took on;
But yet Alas! it was but in vain,
For I shall never see 'em again.
Sobbing and like wise Sighing I lay,
Knowing there was the Reckoning to pay,
I had no Coin, nor Garments to wear,
How to get home, Alas! was my care.
Yet after all to finish the Strife,
Forced I was to send for my Wife;
When she came in, she rang me a Peal,
Ay, and her fist she forced me to feel:
Sirrah (said she,) if this be the trade?
You shall a sad example be made:
There did she ring me still by the Ears,
Till I Alas! was bitter in Tears.
There with her fist my Face she did maul,
Till I at length was forced to fall
Down on my Knees, her love to obtain,
Vowing I Would never offend her again.
Rascal ( said she) I Will pardon the now?
If that this day, you solemnly vow
To be obedient still to your wife;
Yes, if you please to spare but my life.
Ever since then she bears such a sway,
That I am fo^c'd her Laws to obey.
She is the Cock and I am the Hen,
This is my case, Oh! pity me then.
Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare and J. Back.


