A Threefold Alphabet OF RULES CONCERNING Christian Practice.

The first Precept of every Letter concerning Duty toward God; the Second
toward our Neighbor; the Third toward our selves. Gathered at a Friends
request in this Order for the helping the memory.

Revised and approved for Dr. Thomas Taylor's own Collection, by William Jemmat
Minister at Reading

(...).

Glasgow, Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's Printers, School.

A threefold Alphabet of Rules concerning Christian Practice, etc.
A
1. AWake with God in the morning, and before all things give him your first
fruits and calves of your lips, in 1 Confession of sin, 2. Petition of
necessaries for body, and soul. 3. Thankfulness for mercies received;
especially your late preservation, rest, and protection of you and yours.

2. Account it not enough that your self serve God, Josh. 24.15. Ps. 101.2.
Genesis 14.14. and 18.19.
unless that you see all in your charge do the same.

3. Arm your self against whatsoever the day may bring forth; Est. 4.15.
and upon all occasions think on your happy Redemption, with much thankfulness
for so happy conjunction of Justice and mercy,

B
1. Beware of occasions of sin, and wisely inure your self in subduing the
least, that at length the greater may be foiled.

2. Believe all that God speaks unto you out ^f his word, 1 Samuel 16.16.
Eccles. 3.7.
but not all that man ^elleth you: nor tell to any other ^ll that you hear, but
only the ^^uth, and that neither all, nor always.

3. Before you take in hand any ^^ing counsel with Gods Word it be lawful, Luke
2.19. 2 Samuel 2.1. 1 Samuel 30.8.
and then perform with prayer, that it my be as ^^ccessful as lawful.

C.
1. Carefully set your self in Gods presence all the day long, that setting him
at your right hand you may not fall.

1 Cor. 10.32. Col. 4.5:
2. Carry your self unto all as the weak may be won, the strong comforted, and
the Wicked ashamed.

Mat. 15.10. Ep. 4.23.31: Col. 3.5.8.
3. Consider the dignity of you^ soul, how beautiful it is to Go^ and his
Angels, so long as yo^ keep it unspotted, that so you man cleanse your heart
from the first motions of sinful thoughts, as lust, anger, envy, pride,
ambition, covetousness, sullenness: and the rather, because the least sin
deserves death.

D.
1. Daily, morning and evening at least, solemnly on your knees make confession
and requests with thanksgiving: first preparing your heart to seek the Lord: In
the morning thin^ that ye day may be your last day, and when you g^ to bed, you
know not whether you shall rise, unless it be to Judgment. It is safe
therefore t^ use prayer as a Key to open the morning, and as a bar or lock to
shut in the evening.

Gal. 6.10.
2. Delight to do all the good you can to Gods Children; and to receive all the
good you can from them.

2 Chr. 16:3.9.12. 2 Cor: 3.5. 1 Cor. 3 7. Romans 1.25.
3. Distrust not Gods providence in any matter, although you see the means
wanting, neither when you have them, let them be relied on more than God
himself, but let him be praye^ unto for the prosperous use of them.

E.
1. Exercise your mind in meditating often on the works of God, Jer. 12.2. Hab.
1.13. Mat. 25.31.
as his creating and governing of the World, his prospering and punishing the
wicked, his blessing and correcting his children, his preparing of unspeakable
Joy for the one, and unutterable torment for the other; but especially on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 20.8.
add to these meditations the holy exercises of prayer, preaching, Sacraments,
holy conference, and such like.

2. Esteem of every one better than your self, Romans 12:16. Phil. 2.3.
and the more you excel another, be so much the more humbled.

3. Examine your thoughts well, Romans 14.23 Prove. 6.14. Z^ch. 8.17. Psalm. 49.3.
whether they tend, before you fulfill your own desires; if you find them
unprofitable, curious, vain, or such as you cannot yield a sufficient reason to
God or man for, kill them in the shell, let them not live or breath longer in
you.

F.
1. Fear God and keep his commandments; Eccl. 12.13.
for this is the whole duty of man.

2. Fly and avoid places and persons, Pov. 5.8. and 6.27.28.
infectious, wanton, idle, unthrifty and bad company, which are to the soul as
poisoned and infected air to the body.

3. Follow with faithfulness and diligence your own business, Eccl. 1.13. Genesis
3.19. 2 These. 3.6.
in the lawful and particular calling wherein God has placed you; only be
careful in your earthly business to carry an heavenly mind.

G.
Ps. 92.13.14.
1. Grow up daily in the practice of every commandment, and in the Faith of
every promise of God; seeing God would have the planted in his house, thrive,
well liking and more fruitful in their age: he that is not best at last, may
fear whether ever he were good.

1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 14.13.
^. Give no offense justly unto any man whether within or without: for woe to
them by whom offenses come.

Romans 7.18.19.24
3. Grieve for nothing in the World so much as for your own sins, and in them
for nothing so much as for offending so loving a God, and that not only in
committing of evil, but also in omitting of good.

H.
1 Cor 11.31.
1. Humble your self for your sins, that the Lord may raise you up; for he that
judges himself aright, shall never be judged of the Lord,

1 Pet. 2.17.
2. Honor all men in their places, but no man ^o much for his greatness as for
his goodness, and thus shall you imitat the Lord himself, Act. 10.35.
who accepts not persons, but in every Nation accepts him that fears him.

3. Have special care to avoid the sins which you have found your self most
inclined unto, and which have in times past most prevailed: for sin is loath to
be said nay, and Satan seeks reentry.

I.
1. Justify Gods wisdom in all his proceedings concerning your self and
others; his Power in sustaining, his providence in maintaining, his Justice in
punishing, his Love in correcting, his Faithfulness in performing, his Grace in
giving, his, bounty in promising his Mercy in taking a way; every thing say
from the heart, Job 1.21.
blessed be the Name of the Lord.

2. In every company receive some good, and do some also to your power; leave
no ill savor behind you, neither do hurt by speech, silence, countenance, or
example: in your praises be discreet, in saluting courteous, in admonishing
brotherly; and wise in moving and entertaining speech or conference.

3. It is fearful to sin, Psalm. 51.3: Ephesians. 4.26.
but much more to ly in it: and therefore register all your sins daily, bewail
them at fit times, pray for pardon of them, and strength against them: contemn
none as counting it little, because Gods law has condemned it; and Christ has
died for it, or else must you eternally.

K.
1. Know God in Christ, Joh. 17.3. Psalm. 2.12.
which is life everlasting, kiss the Son of God lest he be angry, and know your
self to be a Believer, and that Christ is in you, and you in him.

2. Keep as your vows with God, Psalm. 15.4.
so your lawful promises with men: for faith and truth must kiss each other in
Christian conversation.

3. Keep out wandering and worldly thoughts as much as possibly may be, narrowly
watching your heart; for, such as you suffer that to be, such will be your
words, deeds, and whole conversation.

L.
1. Love all things for Gods sake, and God only for his own; and look you make
him your friend, whosoever be your enemy for it: this you shall do, if as an
obedient child, you live in the eye of your heavenly Father.

2. Look upon the lives and behavior of the wicked to avoid them; of the godly
to imitate them; upon the life and death of them both, as also your own not far
of, to make you loath this world, and long after the life to come.

Luke 11.34. Romans 13:13:
3. Let your meat, drink, apparel, recreation, be lawful, needful, and moderate.

M.
Deuteronomy. 28.58. Matthew. 7.12.
1. Make not mention of God, or any word or work of his, but with fear and
reverence: nor of any man but with love and carefulness, using his name, as you
would have him to use yours.

2. Mark other men's profiting in Religion to provoke your self, their slips, to
make your self more wary, their risings, to be thankful to God for them.

3. Meditat^ often upon the four last things, 1. Death 2. Judgment. 3. Heaven.
4. Hell.

N.
1. Never make show of more holiness outwardly, than inwardly you have in your
heart which God sees, Romans 12.
in which h^ desires truth; nor please your self with your unprofitableness,
unfitness or unwillingness to good.

2. No man is owner, but steward of tha^ he has, you must therefore impart of
the blessings you have, to those that stand in need, wisely, heartily, and in
due season.

3. Note your own special corruptions whether they grow stronger or weaker, 1
Cor. 11.28.
and how your self can resist them: To. 12.12.
and if any assault you more strongly, pray, and make the matter known to God:
The best way for a Woman solicited to folly, to be red of the tempter is, to
tell her husband.

O.
1. Often speak to the praise of God, Pr. 27.2. and 10.19.
never of your self. For other things, because many words want not iniquity,
speak as few as you can, or rather none than unprofitable.

2. Open not your mouth to speak of other men's infirmities, Jam. 1.19.
especially behind them; Ps. 15.3.
nor before them without grief and sorrow.

3. Of every idle word account must be given, and much more of every wicked
word, Mat. 12.36; Col. 4.6.
and therefore let your speech be gracious, poudred with salt, and tending to
edification.

P.
1. Praise the Lord for every new benefit bestowed, 1 These. 5.18.
and then by it promote his glory, the Churches good, and your own salvation;
esteeming of graces given as spurs to godliness, and pledges of eternal life.

2. Prevent anger before it kindle; Eccl. 7.9. Pr. 14.17.
it is wisdom to quench the lest sparkle of fire before it begin to flame.
Consider 1. The original of anger, being pride or self love. 2. The cursed
fruits by giving place to the devil. 3. Gods patience. 4. Gods image in your
Brother. 5. Your own weakness in the same kind. 6. The wrong is not remedied by
revenge, but enlarged; nor the wrong doer amended, but imitated.

3. Prepare your self for death, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and pull out his sting by 1. Bewailing sins past. 2. Turning to God in time to
come. 3. Purposing a new life. None can die ill, that has had a care to live
well. Persuade your self, if you live well, you shall die well; but if you die
well, doubt not but you shall do better.

Q.
1. Quiet your heart, and be still under the correcting hand of God, because 1.
He does it. Psalm. 39.9.
2. For your best. 3. He will moderate it. 4. Supply strength. 5. Seasonably
deliver out of it.

Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.20.
2. Question not whether others should do you good, or you them first: it is
praise worthy, to be first in well doing: and if you do good to your enemies,
your reward is with God.

3. Quench not the Spirit, nor suffer any good motion arising in your heart to
pass away, 1 These. 5.19.
but feed it by reading, meditation, prayer and practice.

R.
Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 6.6.
1. Read daily something of Gods Book for the increase of knowledge and
conscience; and add hereto meditation and prayer; for these three says Luther,
make a Divine: all time thus spent, is well redeemed. As for lascivious and
idle Books, shun them as rocks.

2. Rejoice in the good you know by another; praise God for it, pray for the
increase of it, but if you know any evil by any, mourn for it, and if you can
by brotherly admonition amend it.

3. Refrain your ears, eyes, mouth and hands, Job 11:1. Ps. 119.37.
from hearing, seeing, speaking or performing any wicked and vain thing;
knowing that death often enters in at the windows.

S.
1. Stick to God as well in adversity as prosperity; Ja. 1:2.
the one being as necessary as the other. If you want necessaries, humble your
self for them; if you have them, be humble with them; and use them well, lest
you surfeit them.

2. Seek reconciliation with your neighbor, Mat. 5.23. Psalm. 35.14.
freely forgiving those that have offended you, and earnestly desiring to be
forgiven of all that have been offended by you.

3. Study to approve both your heart to God, Mat. 23.25. Jer. 7.9.10.
and your life to Gods Children in your particular calling, and especially to
such as to whom God has joined you; Ephesians. 5.33. and 6, 5, 6.
as if a servant in obeying, if a master in ruling, if a Husband in loving, if
a wife in reverence; for a good conscience, a good name, and good manners must
go together.

T.
1. Take heed of performing holy duties for fashions sake, Heb: 3:12: Isa:
1:1^: Mat: 15:8:9
or without feeling and profit, for this is Hypocrisy or profaneness.

2. Thankfully requite, at least with 1. Acknowledgement. 2. Hearty affection.
Rom: 1:12: and 12:10: 1 Cor: 11:25
3. Prayer, the good you get by any man, for there is no member in the Body,
but stands in need of other men's gifts.

3. Think it the greatest work in the World to die well: which to do, you must
inure your self to die before hand. 1. By dying to your sins. 2. Leaving the
World in affection, before it actually leave you. 3. In your last leaving of
it, do it willingly, yea joyfully, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever God
shall call you.

V.
Eccl 35:34: Ps: 116:14:
1. Vow to God and keep it; esp^cially strive in performing the s^lemn vow of
your Baptism, and the Covena^^ which you renew in the Lords Supper.

2. Variance and discord wi^^ men will not stand with your pea^^ with God. 1 John: 4:20:
If you love God, yo^ will love men also, for Gods Image; or else f^^ his
Commandments sakr.

3. Used the worl as not using it, and yo^^ prosperity and liberty to be
bettered by them. That is not gained, 1 Cor: 7:3^ Mat: 16:2^
which is gotten with the loss of your soul, and then is the soul exchanged
with an handfu^ of the world, when it is not gotten and held. ^ In Christ
restoring it. 2. With Christ the chi^^ gain. 3. For Christ the Lord of it.

W.
1. Wait upon the Lord, and he will direct you^ way; Psalm: 37:7:
become his servant, for this is (...) way to attain your truest liberty.

2. Weep with them that weep, and fellow fee^ the afflictions of the brethren
yt are in the world Christ in heaven accounts the sufferings of hi^ Saints
his own, and we his members upon earth must do the same Religion and mercy are
well matched by God, Romans 12:15: Jer: 24; 17: Psalm 69:9:
and must not b^ man be divorced; as for the miseries and sins of the Age
wherein you live, Ezekiel 9:4:
mourn also for them, and pray to God for remedy.

3. Wish not a long life, so much as a good life; he has lived long, who has
lived Well A short life in grace, sets into the everlasting life of glory.

FINIS.

