Britain, France and Ireland etc. who Changed his Earthly for a Heavenly Crown,
on Friday the 6th. of February 1684. in the 36th year of his Reign, and 55th of
his Age.
Can Great, Illustrious Britains Monarch, Dye,
Without Sacrifice of Tears! what Eye,
Forbears to Drill whole Hecatombs! when we
Have lost the Atlas of our Monarchy!
Ah! sharpest Grief put out thy Keenest Stings,
Bemoan the best of Men, the best of Kings.
Can an Enraged Distracted Museforbear,
To Rail at Death, that must so rudely tear
Our [ Pater Patriae] Countries Father, hence!
Unruly Grief, Rail not at Providence.
How dare thou Murmur at they Kings Remove?
The King of Kings, would have him mountabove
An Earthly Crown, to a more Glorious one.
Bright Rays of Majesty, about him Shone.
When here! -- he now in greater Glory Dwells;
A Glory that allows no Paralells!
Then spiteful Grief be still, and Envy not
Thy Prince, the great Advancement he has got.
Ah! Words where are ye! Ah!what must I borrow
Language from Tears to Represently my Sorrow!
Drop then ye friendly Streams, till like a Flood,
[More Elegant than Words] be Understood,
Our Universal Grief, to Mourn thus, you,
Better than Groans, to Elegles, can do.
Dull stupid Pen, away! give place to Sighs,
The Fittest Mourners for such Obequies.
Perfume not then to draw his Character,
His Royal Name is Blazon'dev'ry where,
The Sun in its Orbicular surround
Scarce sees a Place, but where his Fame does found.
Ah! but I will! And tell the World that he
Was Great, and Good, and full of Clemency.
A Prince of much Majesty, that none
Could with more splendid virtues grace a Throne
That lent (not borrowed) Luster to his Crown.
Away, away; thou Blunt Poetic Art;
On meaner Subjects, Act thy little Part.
No Rhapsodies of Verse, no Prose can Rise
To Accents fit for such great Obsequies:
Oh! Great but Dismal Subject! could my Quill
Instead of Ink; with other Drops Distill,
I Would Represent to every Readers view,
Lines (not of Sable, but) of Crimson hiew.
There Is nothing of Idolarry in the,
Right Application of Apostrophe!
Then Great, (now then before more Glorious Prince)
Since our Supremest King, has called thee hence,
May Heavens o're-ruling, Bright, Illustrious Rays,
Give thy surviving Subjects Hakyon Days,
May this August Celebrious Kingdom see,
No Inter-Regnum of that Clemency,
Which saved three Kingdom from a Fatal Yoke,
The Dire Results of an Intended Stroke!
Dismis thy fear, His Royal Brother; who
Succeeds him in his Throne, and Virtues too,
Has so Majestic, so subline a Soul,
That what he promised, none shall dare Control.
Away Suspicion! here is the Royal Word;
What great surety can Mankind afford?
That Publick-Sacred-Obligation binds
The Royal Breast to leave things as he finds,
The Constitution of our Laws to be,
Just to the Subjects: just to Monarchy.
LONDON, printed for L. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1680.


