Scotch Soldiers Kindness.
It being the Sorrowful Ditty of Fifty Young Damsels of Southwark, who lately
lost their Maiden-heads with those Valiant Soldiers lately Quartered in that
Place.

Stout Soldiers then are Valiant Men,
Their Fame will ever Ring,
We may admit that they should get
Brave Soldiers for the KING:
In Warlike Fights, both Lords and Knights,
And Valiant Soldiers dye,
Then well may they with Damsels play,
To get a New Supply.
To the Tune of, The Crafty Miss.
This may be Printed, R. L. S. June 25.







SCotch Jemmy, and Iockey, and Sawny,
with many brisk Lads of that Land,
Stout hearted Courageous and brawny,
brave Boys that were under command:
Near Southwark a while they remained,
where Damsels they daily did court,
Their favor they quickly obtained,
and then there was sport upon sport.
Those Lads were both Jovial and Jolly,
as Blithe as the Birds in the Spring
With Ienny, and Maudlin, and Dolly,
they boldly did run at the Ring:
Those girls when the bargin was making
they vowed they should play in the dark,
But yet if I am not mistaken,
there is none could come nearer the mark
It seems there is forty or fifty
young Girls that for gaming did strive,
But yet they were wondrous thrifty,
for now they do happily thrive:
And also respect without measure,
those Soldiers they then did adore,
Since they were endu'd with that treasure
they never enjoyed before.






But while they were Courting and to^ing
they thought it would never be day,
But now comes the woeful annoying
when thence they were Marching away
Then Margery, Winny, and Mary,
with Jude, and Gillian, and Kate
Young Nelly, and Susan, and Sarah,
a pitiful Tale did relate.
Ah this is their sorrowful ditty,
to see they are utterly left,
Their friends will afford them no pity,
now they of all joys are bereft:
Quoth Doll let us draw a Petition
to send to the Captain with speed,
Wherein we will declare our condition,
quoth Jude let this be agreed.
They sent for a Scrivener to write it,
a neighbor that lived has by,
He had a cure wit to Indite it,
and knew how the matter did lie:
O this is our hearty desire,
to marry and make us their Bride,
Our love shall be always entire,
we will follow the Camp by their side.
Their Writeing they thought to deliver,
and Husbands they thought to obtain,
Poor girls they did use their endeavor,
but still it did prove but in vain:
They are in a woeful condition,
alas they look pitiful man,
For when they came with their Peti^
the Captain and Soldiers were
O then what a woeful Narration,
these fifty young Damsels did man
Being crossed in their expectation,
they knew not what course for to t^^^
Then Mandlin with Jude and Betty,
together with all the whole train,
Did ^ound ^^th their sorrowful Dit^
and weeping they sigh and compla^
But seen git has been out folly,
no remedy now can be made,
Come let us be ruled by Dolly,
how thus in discretion has said:
My Sisters why should we be daunt^
and Jude was just of that mind,
We will not with sorrows be haunt^
for once being loving and kind.
We Will leave it Girls when we grow o^
now since it is gone let it go,
I am glad that upon a brave Sculd^
my Maidenhead I did bestow:
Then follow my kind exhortation,
and on it we will set a good face,
We Will frat not the Worlds exc^amati^^
a Fig for the thoughts of disgrace.
Entered According to Order.

Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel i^ Spur-Street, without Newgate.


