IN DEFENSE

CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT

GOD SAVE THE KING

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION,
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lovites, (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as The Lords of The Committy of our privy Council met in the west,
By Commission from our privy Council, Having in pursueance of the Commission and
instructions given to them, issued forth a Proclamatione upon the nynth of this
instant; Requyreing and Commanding all and sundry the Heretors, Lyfrentars, and
Landlords within the Shyre of Air, and Jurisdictions within the same; To
appear personally before the said Lords within the Tolbuith of the burgh of
Air, upon the respective days therein mentioned; To give Band for themselves,
there men, Tenants, Servants, and Cottars for the security of the peace, and
quiet of the Country, and preserving the same from disorders heireafter, at
the particular Dyets therein specified, As they would be answerable;
Notwithstanding thereof many of the said Heretors, and others forsaids, Have
not appeared, And diverse of such as did appear have refused to Subscryue the
said Band, And we having Just reason to Suspect that these persons may seek
after, or wait for some occasion of further dissturbance; And finding it unfit
that they should have or keep any other Horses but Such as may be necessare for
Ploughing, and Laboring of the ground. We therefore with advice of the said
Lords of the Committy of our privy Council do hereby require and command all
Heretors, Fewars, Lyfrentars, and Landlords within the said Shyre of Air, and
Jurisdictions within the same (who have not given the said Band) To put out of
there possession, and forth of the said bounds, all Horses and meers belonging
to them, above the value of Fifty pounds Scots betwixt and the first day of
March nixt to come. And do discharge them, and every one of them, to have or
keep any such Horses or meers thereafter, above the said value without Special
License from the Lords of our Council, or there Committy under the pain of
forfaulting of there Horses or Meers, And payment to the Lords Commissioners of
our Thesaurie for our use, or any that shall be appointed by them of the soume
of An Hundredth pounds Scots for each Horse or meet above the value forsaid that
the said persons or any of them shall have or keep after the said day. As also
we ordain all Tenants, Cottars, or Servants within the said bounds betwixt
and the first day of May nixt. To put out of there possession and forth of the
said Shyre and Jurisdictions forsaids, any horses or meers belonging to them
above the said value without special License, as said is, under the pain of
forfaulting the said horses and meers and payment of the penalty above
written. OUR WILL is Herefore And we charge you straightly and Command, That
incontinent these our Letters sein, ye pass to the Market Cross of Air,
Head-burgh of the Shereffdome thereof. And to the market Croses of the
Bailliaries of Cuninghame and Carrik within the same And other places needful,
and thereat in our Name and Authority by open Proclamation, make Publication of
the Premises, that none pretend ignorance. The which to do we commit to you
conjunctly and severallie our full power, by their Our Letters delivering them
be you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under our Signet at Air the tuenty two day of February 1678 and of our
Reign, the threttie Year. Per Actum Dominorum Commissionis Hugh Stevenson, Cl.
Com:

GLASGOW, Printed By Robert Sanders, Printer to the City and University.

By warrant of the Committy of Council 1678.


