BY THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, For
Ordering and Managing Affairs in SCOTLAND.
THE Parliament of the COMMONWEALTH of England, having taken the Settlement
of Scotland into their serious Consideration, and those things which in the
Establishing of the Government there, may be acceptable to GOD, and for the
Good and VVelfare of the People. And for as much as the due Administration of
Justice and Right, does effectually conduce thereunto: And the Parliament
having in pursuance thereof, Authorized and Commanded Us to use our utmost
Endeavors, that Justice be done to all the People of Scotland, Equally and
Impartially, without respect of Persons, and as may be most for their Ease and
Relief. And finding it necessary since our Coming hither, that for those Ends.
Iudicatories be speedily erected, to the effecting whereof, in a settled and
orderly way, more time will be required then the present condition of Scotland,
by reason of the long want of Administration of Justice will permit. We have
thought fit to make the same known unto the People of Scotland. And likewise,
that in consideration of the present Exigency, We shall by virtue of the Power
unto Us given in that behalf, by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, forthwith appoint and authorize Persons to the Administration of
Justice unto the People of Scotland, who are to be continued for some short
time, until the Iudicatories and Courts of Justice, may in a more solemn and
lasting way be established.

And We do further, for, and in the Name of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, Declare, That no Power, Jurisdiction or Authority,
derived from, by, or under Charles Stuart, who pretends himself King of
Scotland, or any of his Predecessors, or any otherwise then from the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, be used, exercised, or enjoyed
within Scotland, the Isles, or any the Territories thereof; and do hereby
forbid, adnull, and make void the use or exercise of any Power, Jurisdiction,
or Authority whatsoever within Scotland, the Isles, or any the Territories
thereof, other then such as is, or shall be derived from the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, whereof all Persons of whatsoever condition or
quality are to take Notice, and required not to do to the contrary thereof, in
any ways, upon the Pains and Penalties that may thereupon ensue. And, that
none may pretend ignorance hereof, We have Commanded this Declaration to be
Printed and Proclaimed at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the other Burghs
within Scotland, where Proclamations have usually been made.

Given under our Hands at Dalkieth, the thirty one day of January, in the Year
of our Lord, one thousand six hundredth fifty and one. H. Vane. Ol. St John. J.
Lambert. R. Deane. G. Fenwick. Robert Tichborne. Richard Salwey. Geo. Monck.


Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler. Anno Dom. 1651.


