A Godly Guide of Directions for true penitent Sinners in these troubled times.
That we call to God to be our friend,
To think upon our latter end,
Man's Life is short and at no stay
We almost have a dying day,
That God may guide us along,
To bring us to our heavenly home,
Where our Souls may live and ever rest
With heavenly Angels that are blessed.
Tune is, Aim not too high by Robert Tipping:


GOod people all, I pray you understand
These Verses now which I do take in hand
And take good notice I yray you to the end
It will put you in mind that God will be you friend
There Is little Love in this World to be seen
Our Hearts does swell with malice evermore
It is a great wonder for our grievous sin
God does not strike us with some grievous sore.
There was never so much swearing in this Land,
And taking of gods sacred name in vain
It hurts our peace and does destroy our Land.
And sore offends our gracious God of Heaven,
It is a grievious thing if people would but mind
To think how sinful in this land we be
God give us grace that we may mind in time
And beg for pardon on our bended knee
What innocent blood by Villains has been shed.
(...)
In use to bring Gods Judgment on our head
But still his mercies they are manifold.
Good Lord that people would but live more civil
And serve the Lord in most loving way
And forsake the Sin of Pride that is so evil
That God may be our friend both night and day
It Is not the pride of Cloths but the pride of Heart
That hurts a man or Woman I do say,
The Lord takes notice of the inner part
Therefore good people we had need to pray.
And let love and charity be more in use
And serve the Lord and keep the Sabbath Day
O then there would not be so much abuse
But mend our lives I say then every way.
The holy Bible shows us every ways
It was for sin the world before was drowned
If we understand but what the Scripture says
(...)
Our Savior bids us if we be relest
Come with penitent heart our souls shall make a show
And come to him and he will give us rest
If they were as red as scarlet he will make them as white as (...)?
There Is many never thinks of serving God
For many sudden death there is truly,
But runs on in sin until they be struckned dead,
And as the tree does fall so it will lie.
You see what warning-pieces God has sent
By fire and sword, and sickness for our sins,
To turn our hearts that we may all repent
Yet to mend we are loath for to begin.
Let Us leave our si ns and pray for spiritual Grace
To trim our lamps, to fill them up with Oil
Our dying day is coming on a pace
Then God will give A blessing to our Souls.
Gods mercy it is great we may be sure
If we with penitent hearts can but repent
If we with patience can our Cross endure
In Health or Sickness truly be content.
And lets be careful how our time we spend
And love our Neighbor and relieve the poor
Whatever we do that God may be our Friend,
Gods mercies they will bless us and our Store,
Now all good people I say no more but this
Lets live in Love while this Life does endure,
Let every one mend what is amiss
Gods love is to those people to besure.
Our time is short we have not long to stay
But yet lets strongly stand upon our guard,
God give us grace to mind our latter day
That our souls in Heaven may have a good reward.
Concluding of these verses now in print
God bless us all and ever to our death
That all may understand what here is int
When he is pleased that we shall loose our Breath.
The oldest man that ever liked oath earth
Had but his time he at the last did dye,
We must stoop to death and leave this life at last
Let us work for Heaven, and Heavenly Eternity.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the golden ball in Pye-Corner.


