C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT For a new Imposition upon English COMMODITIES.
At Edinburgh, the twenty one of August, one thousand six hundred and sixty
three.
THe Estates of Parliament considering, how much it concerns the credit and
wealth of the Kingdom, that our own native Commodities be manufactured amongst
our selves, and that the endeavors of such persons as are setting up
Manufacturies and Trades have been, and are much retarded, by the importation
of such foreign Commodities as may be made within the Kingdom. Therefore, and
for their due encouragment, the Kings Majesty, with advice and consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, that from and after the first day
of September next, twelve pounds Scots upon ilk ell of broad English Cloth;
six pounds upon ilk ell, of Yorkshire and all narrow Cloth; two pounds eight
shillings upon ilk ell of Searge; thirty shillings upon ilk ell of Castilians;
forty eight pounds upon ilk Beaver-hat; twenty four pounds upon ilk Demi
beaver (...) vigon; and three pounds upon the piece of ilk common Hat; thirty
six pounds upon the (...) four pounds upon the dozen of Stag-gloves*, and (...)
pounds upon the dozen of (...), C(...)s, Kid or Shiverings; and twenty four
shillings upon ilk pound of Tobacco imported either for sale or private use
into this Kingdom from England, all Scots money, Be exacted, levied and
collected and fourscore per cent. upon all other sorts of Commodities imported
into this Kingdom from England, and not particularly named in this Act, and
upon all the growth and manufactury of that Kingdom, though imported from any
other place, and that over and above all other impositions put upon the same
already. And to the effect this present Act may be the more exactly put to
execution, It is Statute and Ordained, that all Goods imported from England, or
of the growth and manufactury of England, not above particularly expressed, shall
be valued, after sighting, by two skillful honest men upon oath, to be nominate
by the Dean of Gild or his Assessors, or Magistrates of the Burgh, or next
adjacent Burgh to the Custom-office where the said G^^^^ are entered, or by
the oath of the party to whom the said Goods belongs, and accordingly pay the
said f^^^^score per cent. And the Lords Thesaurer and Thesaurer-depute, and
Lords of His Majesty's Exchequer, are hereby required to take an Oath, and Bond
with sufficient Caution, from the Farmers or Collectors of the said
impositions, that they shall exactly collect the same, without any abatement
thereof, directly or in directly; and that they shall not suffer any of the
said Goods to pass or be conveyed away un-entered, and that under the penalty
of the worth of the said Goods, if the contrary shall be made appear, the one
half thereof to His Majesty's use, and the other half to the informer, and
under the pain of forfaulting their Lacks and Commissions, and being declared
incapable to farm or collect, in any time thereafter, any Custom, Excise, or
other Imposition whatsoever within this Kingdom. And if any of the foresaids
Goods or Commodities shall be informed and made appear to be brought in, or
shall be seized upon, not being entered in the Custom-office, or any other
Office appointed for that effect, then the same to be wholly confiscate, the
one half to His Majesty's use, and the other half to the first informer or
seizer thereof. And Ordains these presents to be printed, and published at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, where-through none may
pretend ignorance of the same.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1663.


