BOVRLASQVE NEWS From the Antipodes.
Stultiam simulare loco prudentia summa est.
Oyes, Oyes, Oyes.
WHoever are such serious Fools, as to believe that there is any thing in this
Book that concerns any person within our Hemisphere, shall be condemned to have
no more wit then is needful to a Constable, besides being incapacitate to trade
for the unknown riches in terra incognita.

Several Resolves from the Cabal of virtonosi, in the Gessamine Arbor of
Beneche in Cardenia.
1. Resolved, That the difference twixt the Jansenists and Semipelagians of
Lochqhabria, bereferred to the learned decision of the Sorbonists in Knoydirt
and Moydirt.

2. Resolved, That the tender consciences in Glencoe be allowed five
Michaelmasse Moons in the year, for catching Spreachries, to support their
Christmasse in flesh.

3. Resolved, That the fiery Botanick Vestals of the Trone Cloister, have
liberty of harborising on the flowery banks of the river of Loytburnia, with
this provision, that such springs of Rosemary as shall be gathered, be employed
for the Funeral of the Utopian Daaaagon: as likewise if they find any of the
lascivious Roots, called Eringo, by the Moderns termed Herba Cantea, that they
be decently basketted up, and sent to the Oblieging houses in the back of Bells
Wind and Pataraw, for seasoning their Stipone.

4. Resolved, That no Latin Ballads shall appear in print, till they be
approven by the Elders of Gilliwhimeny.

5. Resolved, That John a Groat have a patent for selling Muscadine and
Hypocrasse, to refresh the Phanatick Pilgrims that comes from China in quest of
Lobstar-claws and Cockle-shels.

6. Resolved, That whoever will be so fierce as to Curle in December with a
slasht Taffaty Dublet, shall be honored with a Skutchin, viz. a sable
Whinstone of one hundred weight in a field Azure, and a brace of Flanel clouts
Argent for his Supporters.

7. Resolved, That such Flamens of Cardenia as are clear for the interest of
Appollo, be encouraged with the Excise of the Oranges and Limons that grows in
the valleys of Kintalia.

8. Resolved, That the Citizens of Dunkellia be permitted to make a Bowling
Green of Gillyeranky, and that they have the gift of all such Chymicall vessels
as has not produced the Philosophers stone, for brewing Aquavitae.

9. Resolved, That the Mineral Adventurers have full liberty to drown Arthur
seat in Dudiston Loch, and make discovery of the King of Nod's treasure, which
was concealed there before the flood.

10. Resolved, That the Lions os Buchania be ornamented with the Whey-beards of
Quadelia, in regard they are not Ravenous beasts of Prey.

11. Resolved, That if an Antiplatonick Lady of Cardenia have the fortune to be
topt by a Domestic pedant, she shall be forthwith sent to the Metropolis of
Driuna, and after she has been mustered in the Synagogue of the Grand Piasaes,
and received instructions from the Lecture of that Logerheaded Oracle, that
prophesies there, that she be then in a Hackney Rampant, hurried through the
valley of Hoburnia, and inaugurat vestall, in the Cloister of Bloomsberia, and
Mr. Obediah Now and Anon, to carry on the work of Consecration.

12. Resolved, That if a Cardenian Ladies Jackwoman have a crack in her Curpon,
and prefer the household Flamen to be her Husband, before the Lairds Grieve or
Butler, that for that generous act she shall be absolved from the Stool of
Repentance.

13. Resolved, That the Gilded Herrings of Dunbaria in Cardenia, shall be
(without let or hinderance suffered to pass by land) if they can, to the
Cantons of Swisse, to enjoy their free sense of Monarchies without their cradle
The great gilded Herring was forking with Oliver Neptun for his privy seal of
Cardenia
Antipathies. Resolved likewise, if they come back the same way, they have
license to pass to Druina, so that every one has their Privy seal, and there
Collegiat themselves, against all the Sophisters of Botargo Cavear, etc. of the
Drugs.

14. Resolved, That the Grand Hocus of the Cardenian Athens be prohibited to
meddle any more with the screwing pins of Monarchy, M. R. B. Andriapoli.
lest the discreet disease of his feet, be screwed up to his neck, and there
supported by a pin that needs no screw.

15. Resolved, That there be a Padlock on the Pen, and a Gage in the mouth of
MERCURIUS CALEDONIUS, if from hence forth he do not draw a vail over the
Phanatick infirmities of the Cardenian Lunaticks.

After these decrees, the Court both adjourned, and removed their station: for
notwitstanding all the Art of Umbrellaes and other cooling inventions, the
scor^ching heat of the Sun, obliged them to shift; their next meeting place is
at the Pram of Stow, nigh Wardyhouse in Norway; And what shall then be
determined, after they are well soused in Brunsweek Mum and Rustic Beer, you
shall know if phlegmatic Coxcombs be not jealous, that we still speak in
Riddels and Metaphors.

From Italia Nova.
The Moderator of the City of Petropolis, which the Modern Mercurius
Tresmegistus terms Pope of Rome, has commanded Pasquinus and Morphorius his
two Theological Poets to translate the Spiritual Charter of the Flamens of
Cardenia into Swedes Ryme, and dressed into Notes, to the tune of Coliu town
Pung.
^ Upon this consideration to regal with syrenads such galloping Nuns Errant
that comes in pilgrimage to admire ill Rogero infuriato de St. Orlando. This
same sanctified Moderator, with the advice of his Lobster Presbytery of
Cardinals, has resolved it no sacraledge to be bold with St. Peter's Patrimony,
to swell up his Contadini relationi to the riches and dignity of Princes, which
has so irritat the Banquers of the confraternity of Capuchins, that they
resolve to withdraw their pecunial supplies, with which they furnished his
Holiness for assisting the godly Venetians; the Multiloquacious Carthusians
were no less startled at the Homologation of his Holinesses hints, for which
one of them had the fate to be gelt for his saucy expressions in a Sermon, upon
the vigil of sancta Futina: this oppobrie done to his Fathership raised such a
Mutiny amongst the Calias of their reverences, if that they had been provided
with such boisterous Kirkstools, as is the Cock nodled Matrons of Cardenia, the
Moderator of Petropolis might have had his beard brushed in the same mode as
the Metrapolitanus Edinensis in Anno, 1637.

From Vtopia Nova.
Apollo being sensible of the sad influences which the luxouriant Flamens
brought upon his Interest, with advice of his grand Counsel, found it
expedient to restrain their exorbitant humors, and Established this ensuing
Act, which is here set down in the same Language that all the Authentic
Charters of that ancient Kingdom are writ in.

Quandoquidem antiqui hujus Regni in Utopia Nova qui debebant esse a sacris,
tot tantasque, domi forisque, in Ecclesia and Statu, procellas pro suo quisque
genio, suscitarint, susque deque cuncta movendo. Hinc Statutum sit, quod si
quis eorum inposterum civilibus sese miscuerit, praeter Synagogae jacturam quam
proculdubio faciet, Lanifilio Correction house
damnabitur in domo illi usui destinata, ibique secundum delicta Virgis caesus,
paenas dabit.

This Act was no sooner known to these Fanatic Flamens but they hasted to
their relations, which for most part are the best bred plow men of the land,
Indeed this was no small mortification to them, as being a means to stop that
retreat wherein they thrust their stripling Children, that could neither
whistle nor dryve: for true Learning was so little regarded in the Flamenian
trade, that none but Prodigious Dolts enterprised it, the most part of their
Jargon being an ill Natured grumbleing in Public against the actions of these
whom they flattered in private.

The Grand Counsel has made many other admirable Acts for Asserting the
Interest of Appollo, and the Marches twixt his Sacred Majesty and his people
will be rendered so conspicuous, that there can hardly ever any mistaks fall out
for the future.

From Terra incognita.
All our expectations here is, that because of our scarcity of people, his
Majesty of Great Britain will disburden his Kingdoms of turbulent Spirits and
waft them over to us.

FINIS.

