The Suffolk Miracle,
OR, A Relation of a Young Man, who, a Month after his Death, appeared to his
Sweetheart, and carried her behind him Forty Miles in two hours time, and was
never seen after but in the Grave.

To the Tune of, My bleeding heart, etc.






A Wonder stranger never was known
then what I now shall treat upon,
In Suffolk there did lately dwell
a Farmer rich and known full well.
He had a Daughter fair and bright,
on whom he placed his chief delight,
Her beauty was beyond compare
she was both virtuous and fair.
There was a young man living by,
Who was so charmed with her eye,
That he could never be at rest,
he was with love so much possessed,
He made address to her, and she
did grant him love immediately;
But when her Father came to here,
he parted her and and her poor dear.
Forty miles distant was she sent
unto his brothers with intent,
That she should there so long remain
till she had changed her mind again.
Hereat this young man sadly grieved
but knew not how to be relieved,
he sighed and sob'd continually
that his true love he could not see.
She by no means could to him send
who was her hearts espoused friend,
He sighed she grieved but all in vain
For she co(...)n'd must still remain.
He mourned so much that Doctors art
could give no ease unto his heart
Who was so strangly terrified
that in short time for love he d^ght
She that from him was sent away,
knew nothing of his dying day,
But constant still she did remain
to love the dead was then in vain.
After he had in grave been laid
a month or more unto this maid,
He comes about middle of the night
who joy'd to see her hearts delight.
Her Fathers Horse which well she knew
her mothers hood and safeguard to,
He brought with him to testify
her parents order he came by.
Which when her uncle understood
he hoped it would be for her good,
And gave consent to her straight way,
that with him she should come away.
When she was got her love behind
they passed as swift as any wind,
That in two hours or little more
he brought her to her Fathers door.
But as they did this great haste make
he did complain his head did ache,
Her handcherchief she then took out
and tied the same his head about.
And unto him she thus did say
thou art as cold as any clay,
When we come home a fire we will have
but little dreamed he went to Grave.
Soon were they at her Fathers door
and after she never see him more,
I Will set the Horse up then he said
and there he set this harmless maid.
She knocked and strait a man he cried
Whose there, it is I, she then replied,
Who wondered much her voice to hear
and was possessed with dread and fear.
Her Father he did rest, and then
he stare'd like an affrighted man.
Down stairs he ran, when he see her
cried out my Child how came thou here.
Pray Sir did you not send for me
by such a messenger said she,
Which made his hair flare on his heart,
as knowing well that he was dead.
Where is he then to her he said
he is in the stable quoth the maid,
Go in said he and go to bed
I Will see the horse well littered.
He stare'd about and there could see
no shape of any mankind see,
But found his horse all on a sweat,
which made him in a deadly fret.
His Daughter he said nothing too
nor no one else though well they knew,
That he was dead a month before
for fear of grieveing her full sore.
Her father to his Father went
who was deceased, with this intent
To tell him what his daughter said
so both came back unto this maid.
They asked her and she still did say
it was he that then brought her away,
Which when they heard they were amazed
and on each others strangly gazed.
A Handcherchief she said she tied
about his head and that they ^ryed,
The Sexton they did speak unto
that he the grave would then undo.
Affrighted then they did behold
his body turning into mould,
And though he had a month been dead
this kercheif was about his head.
This thing unto her then they told
and the whole truth they unfold,
She was thereat so terrified
and grieved she quickly after dyed.
Part not true love you Rich men then,
but if they be right honest men,
Your daughters love give them their way,
for force often breeds their lives decay.
Printed by and A. M, and sold by the Booksellers of Pye-corner and
London Bridge


