The Taylor's Wanton Wife of Wapping: OR, A Hue-and-Cry after a Laced
Petticoat, flowr'd Gown, and rich Cornet; With other Apparel, which was lost in
the Chamber of Love.
To the Tune of What shall I do to show how much I love her. Licensed according
to Order.


Here I will give you a perfect Relation,
Of a youngfemale that lived near New Crane
Who used to ramble for her Recreation,
though her poor Husband did sigh and complain
Who was it seems a young honest poor Tailor,
which was not able to give her content;
At length she met with a jolly Krish Sailor,
and to a Tabern they lovingly went.
My dearest Creature, said he, I had rather
I have thee, than any fair Lady, I know;
Therefore this night we will both lodge together,
home to the Tailor my Dear shall not go:
We will enjoy all the raptures of pleasure,
a sweeter Creature sure never was known;
I will endow thee with part my Treasure,
and let the Tailor this Night lie alone.
As he the Charms of this Jilt did admire,
and every beautiful Feature adore,
She did immediately grant his desire,
thinking there by for to risle his flore:
Said the I Will setze all the Cargo about him,
and then his Courage will surely be laid,
And down the Stairs I will soon steel without him
for it is reason I should be well paid.
The Seaman never feared rock, wind, nor weather,
which the young Female the cunnsngly saw,
And as they both did sit drinking together,
out from his Fob she his Guinea's did draw,
And the young Seaman he chanced to perceive her
yet not a title or word did he say:
Thought he, I now am resolved to leave her
in sad neration, before Morning-day.
She had no sooner laid hold of the Booty,
but down the Stairs she was ready to go;
Said the young Seaman, my amorous Beauty,
we'll call the Drawer, it must not be so.
This Seaman called for some of Canary,
which was sufficient to keep out the cold,
Thus for a while they were heartily merry,
for why? His pockets were lined with Gold,
Thus enterthanging their tender Embraces,
while in the Cavern together they stayed,
Still he admired her amorous Braces,
and like two Lovers together they played.
Seeing alas! she could not be admitted,
again to drinking Canary they fell;
Certainly never was Women so sitted,
oh! it is a sorrowful Story to tell.
Their Lodging in the next Room has prepar^^
where the young Seaman soon laid her ase^
Though he with drinking was tired and wearied,
his Eyes from slumber all night he did keep
And before Morning he seized on his Treasures
which to her pocket she fairly conveyed:
Said he, Thou now shall be plagued out of meast
a just Erample of thee shall be made.
Her silken Coats that was laid down with La^^
her sower'd Town, with rich Cornet also,
This Seaman early next morning embraces,
and down the stairs did immediately go:
Thus no Apparel alas! did he leave her,
whereby to rig her, when she should awake,
Since she did rob him, he vowed to deceive her,
aboard on Ship straight his way he did tak^
Missing her Gallant, ah! how she lamented,
and for her Husband was forced to send,
Wiho like an honest good Man was cantented,
saying, she want the first that did offend:
It was along of this Rascol the Sailor,
his Wife he then was unwilling to blame;
Now there is work for this honest poor Tailor,
to cloth and rig his young Jenny again.
Printed for P. Brookshy, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back.


