BY THE COMMISSIONERS At LEITH.
FOrasmuch as by the blessing of the LORD upon the late proceedings of the
English Nation in their councels, enterprises and engagements with Scotland,
the Commonwealth of England has obtained lawful Right and Title to all
Dues, Debts, Rents, Royalties and Revenues, what or wheresoever belonging to
the late King of Scotland, of which, a just and true account is expected from
all and every person or persons concerned in the premises.

These are therefore to require, That within the space of (...) days after
publication hereof, in the County of (...) all Fue-Duties, Rents, Profits and
Casualities within the County aforesaid, (being such as aforesaid, and
immediately payable to the Exchequer, and which have been usually so paid by the
Tennants, Fuars, or Subtennants, from whom the same are due) be for time to
come, brought in, and tendered to the Commissioners in Leith.

And forasmuch as the Petty-Imposts of the respective Counties and Towns of
this Nation, have been Farmed out to diverse Persons; These are therefore to
require all such Persons, Collectors, or Farmorers of the aforesaid
Peny-Imposts, with all convenient speed, to bring in what is presently
remaining in their hands; And such of them as are willing to hold the same, as
formerly, shall (for the space of a year ensuing) be continued in the said
Charge, and have power given them to Collect what shall be judged to be justly
in Arrear.

And if any person (after such publication as aforesaid) shall presume to fail
hereof, or be found to deal deceitfully herein, by denying or concealing any
part of that Rent or Duty paiable as aforesaid, he shall thereby forfeit so
much as he has, holds and claims, by the payment of such Rents and Duties.
And that the aforesaid Tennants and Fuars (upon payment of their respective
Rents and Duties) may receive a full Discharge from the Commissioners
aforesaid, they are required to produce such Acquittances or Discharges, (as
they last and formerly received from the Exchequer) whereof they may not fail.

And upon the aforesaid Penalty, all Tennants, Fuars, and Subtennants, who are
not bound (as aforesaid) to bring in their Rents and Duties to the Exchequer,
but to make payment thereof to Collectors, Chamberlains, or other Officers
within the said County, are required by these presents, to make payment of
their said Rents and Duties (either present, or in arrear) to Master (...) and
Master (...) being by Us appointed and authorized to Collect the same:
discharging all Chamberlains, and other Officers for the late King, from
dealing or intermedling therewithal, as heretofore.

Furthermore, We require and charge all other persons, of the aforesaid
County, indebted to the late King, upon any Account whatsoever, to make payment
thereof to the aforesaid Parties, within such reasonable time as they shall see
cause to set.

Lastly, all Chamberlains, Collectors, and other Officers, being of, or for the
said County, and concerned in the premises, as accomptable and indebted for
what they have received and uplifted (or for any part thereof remaining in
their hands) are hereby charged and required to account and make payment
thereof to the Parties abovenamed; which is accordingly to be performed upon
pain of forfeiting the double value.

Given under our hands this first of March 1651.
Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler. 1651.


