BY THE COMMISSIONERS Appointed for Administration of Justice to the People in
SCOTLAND.
FOrasmuch as there be many laudable Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Nation
made for suppressing of Sorners, broken Highlanders, Borderers, and such as
have disquieted the peace of the Nation in former times: And in particular the
93, 94, 97, 98, 101, 103, and 109 Acts of the Eleventh Parliament of King James
the Sixth, besides many other Acts and Statutes of Parliament and Privy
Council, tending to the prevention and remedy thereof, which by reason of the
late Troubles of the Country, have not been put in execution, whereby many
loose and turbulent persons, such as against whom these Acts and Statutes were
made and provided, do now take occasion to trouble the Peace of the Country,
and commit Outrages, Insolences and Depredations against the well-affected,
and those who love the Peace of the Nation. For remedy whereof, and for
prevention of any such disorders hereafter, and for the better keeping of the
Peace and quiet of the Nation, It is hereby Ordained, That the Marquess of
Huntly. Lord of Park. Lord of Haddo. Lord of Newton. Lord of Rothomay.
Lord of Arradowdle. Marquess of Argyle. Lord Lorne. Lord of Auchinbreck.
Lord of Glenurchey. Lord of Arkindlesse. Lord of Glenlyone. Lord of Invera.
Tutor of Calder. Lord of Macfarlan. Lord Duffus. Lord of Assen. Lord
Pluskarden. Lord Kilcowie. Lord Cowle. Lord Tarbet. Scatwell. Lord of
Garloch. Simon Mackinie of Louchlin. Lord Lovat. Tutor of Lover. Lord Foyer.
Lord Kilbokie. Lord Belladrum. Lord Rea. Hugh Mackey of Scower. Hugh Macky of
Dilrede. William Macky of Bighous. Earl Cathnes. Lord of Brims. Lord of
Borlinu, Sinclair. Francis Sinclair his Uncle, Master of Cathnes. Lord of
Murkle. Lord of May. James and William Innisse. Innis of Coxton. Earl Arley.
Lord Bamph. Earl of Mar. Lord Erskin. Lord Dun. Lord of Lude. Tutor of
Strowon. Cap. Dunc. Robertson. Earl of Glencairn. Lord of Fasse. Lord of
Rothemirchus. Lord Inchynachan. John Stuart, Bailiffe of Athol. Mr. Gilbert
Stuart, sometime Commissary of Dunkel. Sir James Mackdonald. John Macdonald of
Shian. John Macdonald of Invergarrie. Alexander Macdonald of Bohintin.
Mackdonald of Kylchonet. Macrannold of Keppoch. John Macdonald of Shean his
brother. Captains of Clanrannold Senior. Captains of Clanrannold Junior.
Mack-Cloud. Colonel Rora Mackcloud and his three Brothers. Mackolduie. Daniel
Camron his Uncle. Lord of Mackmartin. Lord Glenavis. Donald Camron, alias
Mackevin vic conil. Camron of Caldort. Alister Mackonil of Strone. Makconchy
vik evin of Achnasavil. Mackenviconel. Lord Macklean. Lord of Lochbewie.
Lord of Ardgower. Lord of Kingarloch. Hector Macklaine. Lord of Appen. Lord
Glencoe. Macgreger of Renough. Macgreger of Rorow. Duncan Macgregor. Lord of
Buchanan. The Lord of Laweris. Baron of Comrie. Lord Rothmell. Col. Minis.
Lord Invercald. Will. Forquerson of Inveray. Al. Forquerson of Finnion. Lord
Grant. Lord Balendolach. Lord Glenmariston. Lord Carron. Lieu. Col. Grant in
Vrquhat^. John Grant of Garton, Bailiff of Straspay. Mackferson of Cluny.
Dougal Mackferson, Bailiff of Badgenoth. John Macferson Tutor of Enveressie.
Lord of Struie. The Bailiff of Stracharrich younger. The Lord of Redcastle.
Donald Camron Tutor of Lochield. Norman Mackleud. Lord Mackentosh. William
Mackentosh of Keylachie. Angus Mackquen of Correbrock. Cap. Donald and Angus
Makqueens Lieu. Col. James Stuart. Laughlan Mackferson. Mackentosh Brother.
Borlum. Strohan. Robert Auchnesse etc.
and all others not aforementioned, Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen and others yet on
life, and the Heritors of, and Successors to the Lands and Estates of such as
are deceased, and the Tutors and Curators of so many as are Minors deceased,
particularly expressed in the Roll remaining in Print, joined to the Acts of
Parliament of King James the Sixth, Parliament the Eleventh, 1587. whose names
or Titles are as follows: The Lord of Makfarlane of the Arroquhair. The
Lord of Lusse. The Lord Makaula of Ardincaple. The Lord of Merchinston. The
Lord of Glennegyis. The Lord of Drumquhassil. The Lord of Kilcreuch. The
Lord of Knokhil. Henry Shaw of Cambusmoir. The Lord of Kippenrosse. The Lord
of Burley. The Lord of Keir. The Earl of Lithgow. The Lord of Down. The Earl
of Pearth. The Earl of Murrey. The Earl of Tullibardin. The Lord Weyme. The
Abbot of Inchchaffray. Colin Cambel of Ardbeith. The Earl of Athole. The Lord
of Garntullie. The Lord Strowane, Robertson. The Lord Strowane, Murray. The
Lord of Wester-wemes. The Lord of Abbots-hal. The Lord of Teling. The Lord
of Inchmartin. The Lord of Pury-Fothringhame. The Lord of Moncreif. The Lord
of Balleachen. The Baron of Fandowie. The Earl of Errol. The Lord of
Cultiebragan. The Lord Ogilvie. The Lord of Clouay. The Lord of Fintrie.
Lord of Mackinvon. Tutor of Glenmariston. James Mackintosh of Strone.
Commissary Gray of Arbo in Ros. The Lord of Edel. The Lord of Elphinstoun. The
Lord of Forbes. Lord Makintosh. The Lord and Tutour of Lovat. Chisholme of
Cummer. The Lord of Balnagoun. Major William Ros of Gunnort. (...) Ros of
Pitcalny. John Ros of Achnacloich. John Ros of Little Tarrell. James Innis of
Touchis. The Earl Marshal. The Lord Oliphant. The Lord of Bowquholly. The
Lord of Dunnybeith. The Lord of Garloch. Makgilliechallum of Raarsay.
Macklewid of the Harrich. Mackinnoun of Strathodel. Makneil of Bara. John
Mackdonald of Island Terim. Mackclean of Dowart. John Stuart of the Appin
Mackoul of Lorne. Mackoul of Roray. The Lord of Lochinnel. The Lord of
Caddel. The Lord of Skelmurly for Rauckry. Mackondachy of Inneraw. The Sheriff
of Bute. The Lord of Camys. Maknauchtane. Maklauchlane. The Lord of Lawmount.
The Lord of Parbrek. The Lord of Duntrune. Viscount of Dudop, L. of Glastry.
The Lord of Elenegreg. The Lord of Otter. The Lord of Coll. Macklene of
Lockbuie.
And all other Landlords, Bailiffs of the Lands, Captains, Cheiftains, and
Chief of Clans, and Principals of the Branches of Clans whomsoever in the
Highlands, are to find Caution Landed men in the Country, to conform
themselves unto the said Laws, Acts and Statutes of Parliament and Privy
Council above written, and to all other Laws Statutes and Acts of Parliament
made thereanent, and relating thereunto; and particularly ordaining all Chiefs
of Clans, and others aforementioned, specified, mentioned, and hereby intended, to
come and find sufficient Caution, acted in the Books of the High Court of
Justice at Edinburgh, for Causes Criminal, or elsewhere, where the Court of
Justice shall happen for the time being, to be held, for them and their
friends, followers, and dependants peaceable carriage, according as they, or
their Ancestors and Predecessors have been formerly Ordained as aforesaid, and
under the pains therein contained, betwixt the Proclamation hereof, and the
first day of October next ensuing: with certification if they fail, they shall
be holden as contraveeners of the said Acts of Parliament, and prosecuted
accordingly with all rigor. And forasmuch as the premises are of Public
concernment, It is hereby provided and Declared, That no person whomsoever
hereby intended for finding Caution as aforesaid, coming into the Lowland, to
provide and give in the same, shall any ways in his person be molested or
troubled by Caption, Arresting, or other Imprisonment, for any Civil Cause
whatsoever, until the said first day of October, and ten days after for their
returns home be expired. And all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Messengers of Arms, and
all others whom it does concern, are to take notice hereof, and give due
obedience thereunto. And it is hereby Ordained, That these presents shall be as
sufficient, as if every particular person hereby intended for giving Caution as
aforesaid, were herein specially inserted and named. This Proclamation to be
published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the Market Crosses of the Head
Burrowes of all other Shires next adjacent to those parts where their Lands
lie, where free access cannot be had.

Given under our Hands at Edinburgh, July the 27. 1653. Hen. Whalley Advoc.
Genesis Geo. Smyth. And. Owen. Jo. March. Ed. Mosley.


Printed at Leith, 1653.


