The subtle Miss of LONDON: OR, The Ranting Hector well fitted by this cunning
Miss,
Who by putting certain Ingredients into his Wine, laid him into a deep sleep,
and striping his Gallant Attire, clothed him in a red Petticoat, and a Coyfon
his Head; then sent him in a great Chest by water to Gravesend.
To the Tune of, The two English Travelers. This may be Printed, R. P.


A Miss who near London did set up her Trade,
And whilst she did use it, some projects she played,
Amongst all the rest, here is one I declare,
The like of this humor you seldom did hear.
As she was a ranging along in the street
I Ganting brave Gallant the chanced to meet;
His Coat was of Velvet, a Sword by his side,
He feared no dangers, whatever betide.
This Gallant no sooner had fired his Eyes
Open her fair Beauty, but straight he replies,
She give thee a Guinea, so I man enjoy
Those tender embraces; sweet Love be not cay.
To seal this kind promise, he gave her a kiss;
O fie, fie, forbeat Sir, what mean you by this?
Your words are so winning, I grant your demand,
That Damsel is able your force to withstand.
They straight struck a'bargain and made no delay,
To her habitation they posted away,
Where with her old Mother this Miss she did dwell;
Now listen, i will tell you what after befell.
A Dinner of Dainties then straight did prepare,
For their jovial pastime, no charges they would spare;
But yet I must tell you, it soon came to pass,
Though they found the meat, yet he paid for the sauce.
For Claret, Canary, he freely did call,
To show himself noble, he would pay for it all;
And thus he appeared most jovial and free,
They all were as merry as merry might be.
They plied him with Bumpers, which he never denied
And likewise with other ingredients beside,
They gave him in order, his courage to rool,
Which quickly did make him as wise as a tool,
This Liquor up into his Doddle did creep,
So that in short time they had laid him to sleep;
His Reason and Senses was perfectly fled,
With their subtle Doses, as if he were dead.
Then, then they went on with their risling trade,
And of this brave Gallant a Booty then made,
He had store of Silver, both Guineas and Kings,
His Watch and Broad-Pieces, and other rich things.
Thus while he was sleeping they stripped off his Clothes
His Hat, Wigg and Cravat, his Shirt Shoes and Dose;
Then being as naked as e're he was born,
In other Apparel they did him adorn.
A course Nempen Smock they did put him on there,
One which the old Woman was used to wear;
A red Petticoat, with a Coif on his Pate,
Then he was arrayed at a not able rate.
They put him into a great Chest that stood there,
And made a small hole for to let in the air;
So great was the kindness which to him they showed,
They called a Porter to take up this load.
This Gallant had told them he had at Gravesend,
An Uncle who was his particular Friend;
And therefore to Billingsgate they did repair,
And hired a Boat-man to carry him there.
As soon as the Chest was set safe in the Boat,
To the Waterman they delivered a Note,
And bid him be careful his trust to discharge,
He vowed he would do it, their pay being large.
But now at the last comes the cream of the jest,
He knew not what treasure he had in the Chest,
Until at Gravesend he had set him on those,
Then, then he awakened and never before.
It was about twelve of the Clock in the night,
They called up his Uncle to see this strange fight;
Thered Petticoat, with a Copf on his Crown,
With wonder and laughter did fill the whole town.
With grief, shame and sorrow his Heart it did bleed,
Next day up to London he rid with all speed;
His Clothes, Watch and Guineas, in hopes to obtain,
For though he did seek her, it was but in bain.
The Miss had no sooner committed this Crime,
She shifted her Lodging, it being high time;
Therefore this young Gallant must patiently bear
His loss, for'to find her he could not tell where.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt spur street, without Newgate.


