The Subjects Satisfaction
Being a New SONG of the Proclaiming King William and Queen Mary the 13 th of
this Instant February; to the great Joy and Comfort of the whole Kingdom
To the Tune of, Grim King of the Ghosts, Or, Hail to the Myrtle Shades.
portraits of King William and Queen Mary attended by crown-bearing cherub

KIng William is come to the Throne,
the Nations Defender to be,
And this is a blessing we own,
ordained by the Heavens Decree;
Let Protestants truly rejoice,
and Bells too as merrily Ring,
While all with a laudable voice,
cry God bless great William our King.
Queen Mary his Royal Consort,
invested with Fame and Renown,
She is the bright Star of the Court,
as being the Heir to the Crown:
Long may they both flourish and Reign,
their Fame through Europe to ring
While Subjects they cry out amain,
God prosper great William our King.
The Triumph of that Noble day,
as they were in London proclaimed,
Was duly observed every way,
vast Bone-fiues gallantly flamed:
Canary was plenty and free,
as Water that flows from a Spring,
While all in one voice did agree,
saying, God bless great William our King.


As being released from that fear,
which threatened this Nation of late,
A blessing is come in the rear,
to settle Religion and State:
The Glory of Britain is come,
then Boy, let us merrily sing,
And turn a Glass over your Thumb,
with God save great William our King.
There is such a change in the Scene,
which soon all our joys will restore
A Protestant King and a Queen,
the like was scarce ever before:
Let loud Acclamations resound,
and make the high Elements ring,
The Glory of Britain is found,
in our true Protestant King.
Now good Queen Elizabeth's Laws,
in full force and power shall stand,
To maintain the Protestant Cause,
and make this a flourishing Land:
We'll purge out all Popery quite,
which Plots to this Nation did bring
And all in Obedience unite,
to pray for great William our King.
The Lords and the Commons agreed,
and gave satisfaction to all,
Though Romans false rumors did breed,
and hoped they at variance would fall;
Yet Heaven has blessed the great work,
which joy to this Nation did bring,
(...) for the French or the Turk,
now we have a Protestant King.
Except those that would us destroy,
there is not a sorrowful Soul,
The Land is transported with Joy,
full hampers does merrily troul:
Great Guns at the Tower did roar
while Fame she was boasting on wing
To carry the tidings all over,
of William our Protestant King.
Let Mary his Royal good Queen
be blessed by the powers above,
And that to her joy may be seen,
a Mother e're long she may prove;
And have a (...)
whose fame (...) ring
And sit in the (...)one,
to Reign (...) King.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in (...)


