A SERMON Preached at GREAT YARMOVTH, June 6th.

By R. S. M. A. And Rector of Taverham in the County of NORFOLK.

Quos Amo, Arguo, and Castigo. Was the Way to Heaven direct, smooth, and strait,
I should think Heaven to be a Counterfeit:
Great are the Troubles where the Prize is great,
For there is no Virtue, where we find no Sweat.
LONDN, Printed for and sold by GEORGE ROSE Bookseller in NORWICH. 1677.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT, Lord Viscount YARMOVTH, and Lord Lieutenant of
the County of NORFOLK.
My Lord;
HAD I been affected with that itching Humor of Ambition, to raise an Obelisk
to my Memory, and to leave behind me some tokens, that I have had a Being and
Existence upon Earth, I could have experienced no easier method, or more
advantageous Artifice to gain an immortality upon Earth, than by fixing your
Lordships Name, to these my poor and weak endeavors: But I am so perfectly
sensible of my own Youth and unworthiness, that far be it from me, (let others
reflect with what eye they please) to make any such thought, the occasion of
this Address; though I have two urgent Motives, which induce me to implore your
Patronage and Protection.

Not to speak, my Lord, (lest I affront the Modesty so innate to your Temper,
or come within the sphere of flattery so contrary to my Genius) of your
generous compassion and mighty condescension to all of the Ministerial
Function, which would have been too copious a Theme for my small Eloquence and
Rhetoric to pitch upon, I shall acquaint your Lordship with the Reasons of
this my Humble Dedication.

First, To congratulate the Honors our most Gracious Sovereign has so
worthily, as well as freely conferred upon your Lordship: More especially, in
that having so plentiful a choice of worthy Gentry in this County, He has
selected you to lead the Van in that Honorable Office wherewith you are
entrusted.

The Conduct and management of which, I shall spare to tell the World, because
Fame has already everywhere proclaimed your prudent settling, and (which is
highly considerable) your great augmenting the Militia. Go on then, my Lord, to
perform as worthily as you have begun, that your Lordship may be for ever
famous over England, for your Services to God, the King, and his Country; and
at last live eternally with that Glorious Militia of Heaven, who continually
attend about the Majestic Throne of the Lord of Hosts.

The other Reason of the Dedication, my Lord, is because it has been the Lot
of the later of these Discourses (as well as its Author, who blesses God for
it) to pass through good report and bad report; it has been accused of False
Doctrine, because I somewhat glaunced at Election and Reprobation, though my
Friends judged so heartily of it, that after many denyals, their importunity
has wrought so effectually with me, that I am willing it should appear in the
World (in that same impolite and unlick'd form it was delivered in) either to
clear or to condemn me: If there be any thing discordant to Scripture, or
Reason, I free every Reader from from endeavoring to justify me.

But if they be angry with me because I have told them the truth of the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, and daily contended for by the Orthodox Divines
of of the Church of England; let Geneva account it my fault, I Will ever esteem
it my duty and my Glory.

For a former Experience has fully convinced me, my Lord, that the loyalty of
a Sermon is more offensive than the Superstition, and Popery thereof; If we
deny the Legality of the Scotch Covenant, and will not comply with the
Principles of Levellers, but preach Subjection to the King and his Government,
what do they imagine it less than a Crime unpardonable? If we stand up in
defense of the Catholic Faith established in our Kingdom, and are earnest to
maintain a Conformity to the Rites and Ceremonies of the same; They presently
cry out the Romans will come, and take away their place and Nation.

But alas! poor mistaken Souls how are they deceived? When as the speediest
Voyage to the Court of Rome is by Sailing the way of Amsterdam; For I am bold
to Challenge any man of reason, to show me a more Compendious way to erect a
Papal Jurisdiction amongst us than by the destruction of the Religion of Edward
the Sixth, and confirmed unto us by Charles the Second.

For a strict maintaining the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church, is the
only Armor to withstand the Policies of the Papal Interest. For nothing can
endanger our Religion from abroad so much as our Contentions at home, whilst we
separate our selves from our Churches, and are crumbled into little Sects and
Parties. We give too great advantages and opportunity for a Common Enemy to
break in upon us, which the Romanists are so quick-sighted to espy, that it is
upon this account they send their little Agents among us, who make it their
sole business slily to insinuate themselves, and creep into the bosoms and
humors of our People, encouraging and fomenting all public differences,
pursuant to that secret End, on which they are sent on Embassy.

Now that your Lordship may be more particularly satisfied in the verity of
this confident Assertion; I humbly desire your Lordship, at your greatest
convenience, to consult the History of Henry the Fourth King of France, written
by the Bishop of Rhodes; and also that of the Spanish Monaachy, whose Author is
Campanella: In both which I have observed, that after a large Discourse of the
intended Invasions of those two Potent and Mighty Princes on the Kingdom of
Great Britain, being incited thereunto by the forcible persuasions and commands
of Rome, as much as pricked forward by their own Ambition: They especially
declare their Judgments of the Means and Instruments to be applied for the
Ruin and utter Subversion of the Church of England in this manner; That there
was no better Artifice, than by causing Divisions and Dissentions amongst the
English, and by a continual encouraging and fostering the same; and that it was
no easy Province to eradicate and overthrow their Religion, unless by the
Foundation of some certain Schools or Academies in Flanders, that the Students
thereof may disseminate and scatter abroad Seeds for Divisions in Natural and
Theological Sciences, which would disorder and discompose their Opinions, and
unhinge and unsettle their Judgments: For, say they, the English are of a
temper and constitution much tending to Novelties, and inclining to changes,
and therefore the Effects of such a Contrivance will be very considerable.

Now I leave it to your Lordship's better Judgment and Experience, whether
this has been put in practice or not, and whether the Zealous Brethren of
England be not industrious to forge Gives and Fetters to shackle themselves
withal; whereas, poor deluded Souls! they might see, if they pleased, they are
the Agents employed by Rome to defeat and destroy the Religion of Christ, and
to promote the Errors of Antichrist: For what can be a more Popular Argument to
use for the seduction of soft-minded and weakly-principled Protestants, and to
draw them off from us, than to extol and magnify the perfect unity of their
Church, and to lament and pity the sad distractions and divisions of ours. For
though men of reading and consideration can easily disprove them, and prove it
a Church by far less at unity then our own; yet still this Argument may be
forcible with them, who have not leisure and opportunity to come to know so
much of them, but they daily observe men endeavoring to rend our Church in
pieces, and cut it into little bits and mammocks.

Nevertheless I will not flatter my self, that those who believe nothing but
what themselves speak or own, will consent to the Doctrine of this TRUTH. to
wit, That they who pretend an inbred aversion to Popery, and exclaim most
against Rome, are most instrumental in procuring our Slavery unto that see; For
they are generally so wedded to their Erroneous Opinions, that none can behold
the beauty and glory of an Object, but those who borrow their Eyes to
contemplate withal: Nay, had I not begged your Lordships Protection (for who
dare avow if a Person so honorable will be pleased to countenance) I could
have expected no better than my usual Entertainment, the worst of their spleen
and malice: For if we will not style Humor, Conscience; and Novelty, Religion;
if we have not the precise Cut, and walk in their Exact Geometrical Saintship
or form of Godliness, they presently conclude us scandalous and ungodly: But
let our Opinions and Judgments concentre with their Dictamens, and then the
Wind is presently turned; for they will judge more heartily of our actions, by
blaming the infirmity of the Flesh, and weakness of humane Nature for Actions
of shame and debauchery; because the construction of our Deeds must differ
equally with those of our Principles: Nay further, they will wrest them (with
the same License they mis-interpret the Scriptures) to make them speak
according to their Sense and Opinion. From such Persons I foretell an
indifferent usage, unless your Lordship favor, what otherwise they will
certainly disaffect, which (after your Lordships Pardon for the dedication of
these Discourses so unworthy your Patronage) is the Humble Request of

Your Honors most faithfully devoted Servant R. Scamler.

THE STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
Psalm. 34.19. Great (or many) are the Troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord
will deliver him out of all.


WHEN the World was in its Cradle and Religion in her Swaddling Clouts, The
Wisdom of Heaven thought it convenient to educate the tender years of
Infant-Piety with the alluring hopes of a temporal Prosperity, to prompt and
encourage men to a ready entertainment of her Services: For had Religion in her
tender years appeared with an austere look and morose behavior, she must of
necessity have had fewer admirers of her Beauty. Least therefore she should
meet but with a slender respect and mean entertainment, she came into the World
with a mild aspect and for her dowry had all the advantages of a temporal
felicity, entitled upon her followers, which was the state of her first
manifestation, or making her self known to the World.

But when she was grown somewhat elder and of a more strong constitution, God
desisted from courting men by the hopes of her portion of splendid preferments,
and goodly heritages, that they might be enamoured of her Beauty and not of the
Appendants, that he might see whether it was out of pure and undefiled love to
Religion, or out of affection to the World, which made them to comply with the
observance of his Laws, upon which account he did then command them to renounce
the World and all their hopes therein, that they should no longer live by
sense, but Faith; that they must expect to be encountered with sorrows and
afflictions, calamities and crosses, if they would be reputed his children, and
lead a virtuous and godly life.

And this is that condition of the Righteous Holy David describes in the text,
where looking on the miseries they suffer, he seems to cry, Great are the
troubles of the Righteous; respecting the Promise he seems to sing the Lord
will deliver them out of all: Both which make our lives fitly compared to a
Musick-book, where we shall seldom observe many white notes, but they art
intermixed with black, and both together compose the sweetest harmony.

God set's us our lesson in a little book; it contains no more then two pages,
one styled consolation the other dissolution, it is necessary for both to take
their turns; In the day of prosperity, remember thy self of adversity, In the
day of adversity comfort thy self with the hopes of prosperity: For the divine
providence mingles our life as one would Wine and Water in the same Cup, Some
drink the purest, others the most compound but all taste a commixtion, for
great are the troubles, etc.

This Psalm the sweet Singer of Israel composed after he had changed his
Behavior and feigned himself mad in the Court of Abimelech his deadly enemy,
which dissimulation proved a means for happy deliverance from that imminent
peril which otherwise had most infallibly proved fatal.

He therefore no sooner saw the net broken, and himself escaped as a Bird from
the hand of the Fowler, but he tunes his instrument and falls a warbling forth
the praises of the Almighty, saying, verse 1.
I will always praise the Lord, which may serve as a reproach to them who daily
observe the benign providence of God in protecting them from those perils and
dangers, which are obvious to all amidst the changes and chances of this mortal
life, yet seldom or never send up their praises to him, from whence comes
their help; Nay, they will scarce be brought to acknowledge it is the hand of
the Lord which has brought such mighty things to pass.

But Holy David here thinks it too mean a performance for none but himself to
sing the marvelous kindness of the Lord, he therefore entreats others to bear a
part with him in this consort of thanksgiving, saying, Oh magnify the Lord
with me, and let us exalt his Name together. v. 3.


But alas! Men think they exceed in their duty, if when Heaven has been
concerned in procuring a deliverance, they cry out with the Pharisee, Lord I
thank thee; and conceit it too troublesome and tedious a service to be always
telling forth his loving kindess unto others.

Our Psalmist therefore to prompt and encourage them to this holy duty and to
incite them to piety, reckons up a Catalogue of the many privileges of the
Righteous. How that their cries will pierce beyond the Clouds, and sound in the
ears of God, for they are open to their complaint, how that he is nigh unto
them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit.

Yea, let never so many sorrows and afflictions oppress the Righteous, yet
still in his appointed time and pleasure he will not only deliver them from the
lightest and least burdensome, but also from the most tormenting and diresom,
yea, from all and every one of them, For though great are the troubles of the
Righteous, yet the Lord will deliver him out of all.

Which words present us with these Two Considerations.

First, The condition of the Righteous man upon earth, or the Religious person
presented to us in Sables, with ashes sprinkled on his head, his garments rent,
his heart broken, himself a companion, a man and friend of sorrows, Great are
the Troubles, etc.

Secondly, We have a confident assurance of this man's delivery from this his
forlorn estate, The Lord will deliver him out of all.

We begin with the State of the Righteous upon earth, Job 14.1.


Man that is born of a Woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery, says that picture of patience and Landschape of misery, Holy Job, who
took the height of other men's miseries by surveying his own afflictions; for
though he was an upright man, one who had an awful reverence for the majesty
of Heaven, and that combining with his love, caused him to shun all occasions
and appearances of evil; yet still as he endeavored to avoid all the tempting
evils of sin, the evil of afflictions pursued him close at his heels, for he
was filled to the brim with the very Gall and Bitterness of Sorrows.

How was he sequestered from all the Blessings of this Life? plundered of his
Earthly Goods! robbed of his Children, the little models of himself! and from
the hands of an ill-advising Wife, delivered into the hands of Satan, to be
buffeted and scourged at his pleasure.

Few and evil have been the days of my life, says the Patriarch Jacob, one of
the chief Darlings of God, Genesis 47.9.
yet what a large draught did he drink of the Cup of salt Tears of afflictions!
How was he banished from the knees of his aged Father! from the bosom of his
loving and tenderhearted Mother! What an inveterate, enemy to him was his
Brother Esau? who forced him to travel into a strange Country, only accompanied
with his Staff and his Scrip, almost clad with no other Garments than the
sable-weeds of woe; having no other Bed than the cold Earth to rest his wearied
and tender Limbs; no other Canopy than that of Heaven; no other Pillow than a
Marble-stone, which, like a kind-hearted Host, did, by its weeping, seem to
commiserate the hard misfortune of this unhappy Pilgrim; who, after all this,
was constrained for mere maintenance to serve a Pagan in a strange Land, for
many years.

Yes, and as we have seen the afflictions of this pious man in his own person,
so we may track the footsteps of them in that of his Offspring, for they were
the Coheirs, not only of his substance, but also of his sorrows. But to
discourse of all their troubles, crosses, and tribulations, would make your
ears undergo an Egyptian Tyranny, whilst we passed through this Wilderness of
woe. This then shall suffice, that they walked through the Red Sea of
affliction, before they arrived at the Promised Land of Canaan. verse 3.


Nevertheless these People were Gods own chosen Inheritance, or, to use the
Prophets expression, the Friends of God, and greater favorites in the Court of
Heaven.

Notwithstanding which, Zech. 13.
the Wisdom of Heaven thought it convenient to purify them in the Furnace of
Afflictions, the more gloriously to adorn them with those Spiritual Ornaments,
which can render them most amiable in the Eyes of the great King.

But amongst all, who have suffered affliction, who ever met with more
hardships than David; For he, being a Type of Christ, was always hedged about
with the Cross; as Christ was contemned of his Countrymen, so David of his
Brethren: As Christ fled into Egypt, so David unto Gath: As Christ received
Food of Women, so David of Abigail: As Herod persecuted Christ, so Saul
persecuted David: Yes, and the wrath of the King created a number of Enemies,
insomuch that though he was anointed, he could not reign; and when he reigned,
his reign was but a Warfare: The Philistines against him, the Amorites against
him, the Edomites against him, yea and Absalom too, for whom he would have
died, rose up against him. His Son, who was his darling, proved Traitor unto
him; and Viper-like, sought to deprive hin of life, who gave him breath: Is it
strange then that David affirms? Great are the troubles, etc.

But perhaps some may confess, It Is true, whilst Religion was clouded, and the
Law had shadowed the brightness thereof, men were overspread with calamities
and troubles, but so soon as the Son of Righteousness arose, he dispersed not
only the mists and obscurities that were under the Law, but also that
gloominess of sorrows which had seized on men's spirits; and since Christ is
come and has preached the Kingdom of the Gospel, our days are the Halcyon, and
weather Sunshine.

To which I answer.

If we take a prospect of the troubles of the Righteous under the Law, we shall
conclude it was but a little Cloud which arose like the Palm of a man's hand in
reference to those Storms and Tempests, which have united and spread themselves
over the face of the whole earth, under the dispensation of the Gospel, for in
temporal blessings and earthly felicities, the Law has the preeminence.

For in the time of the Law, God promised to Moses, Deuteronomy. 9.14.
for a reward of his faith and obedience, to make of him a great Nation; But
the blessed Jesus says, My Flock it is a little one.

In the time of the Law, Genesis 15.
Abraham the Father of the faithful, was blessed with the promise of plenty and
abundance, All the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it and to thine
inheritance for ever, yes, and our Royal Prophet could say, that the Righteous
shall possess the Land, Ps. 37.22.
nay, a little after he testifies that he had observed for many years together
yet never could see the Righteous forsaken, and 25. v.
or any of their Seed begging their Bread, for in those days Prosperity did
seem as it were entailed on none but the Righteous Person; But since Christ
came to settle the Gospel in the World, Tempora mutantur, and the blessings of
the godly are of a contrary die and complexion, (...) Blessed are you when
persecuted for Righteosness sake, Mat. 5.10.11.
and blessed are you when men shall revile you, and speak (...) every thing
that isevil of you for my name sake.

We must through many Tribulations enter the Kingdom of God; Acts 14.22. Heb.
12.6, 7.
So agin, Whom the Lord loves he scourges, and chastneth every Son whom he
receives.

We are therefore a Spurious Offpring and no true Children of God, if exempt
from afflictions. Quos Amo, arguo and castigo; Those who are my Darlings and
Favorites, whom I honor with the most Signal Testimonies of my love, I rebuke
and chasten.

They are the Oxen destined for slaughter, which graze in green Pastures, but
those appointed for a more mild and gentle usage, are daily harrased with
labor and subject to travail. The barren Tree is not beaten, but the Tree
planted by the River side bringing forth fruit in due season.

We read that the Stones which were to beautify the Temple of Solomon, were
hewn and squared before they were thought meet for so glorious a Fabric: every
Christian in like manner must expect to be encountered with sorrow and
calamities to fit and polish them for the building up that Triumphant Church,
whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, no marvel then that great are the troubles of
the Righteous.

For if we reflect on them with an impartial eye, we shall conclude them highly
conducive to the good and benefit of Gods Children.

For do I own the right and Sovereignty of God over me? if so, I must
consequently submit to his hand, kissing the Rod that scourges me, and then my
afflictions will be more medicinal then afflictive.

For without doubt we cannot fufficiently relish the sweetness of good without
the trials of evil, Joseph mounted on the Triumphant Chariot of Pharaoh by
Prisons and Fetters, David to the Throne of Saul by many persecutions, and they
thought their great prosperities to be much more pleasant, because they were
ushered in by sharp afflictions, as Wine is most pleasant after the Lees of
Vinegar.

Nay, let us but consult Nature we may make the same remarques, where we shall
behold the Sun darting forth more brisk and lively Rays after an Eclypse, The
Sea more calm after it has been discomposed and ruffl'd by a Tempest,; and the
Air much fairer when it has wept those showrs which did obscure its
brightness, upon which account Seneca did affirm that as Storms and Tempests
did contribute to the clearness of the Heavens and smoothness of the Sea, even
so the enterchanges of prosperity and adversity did much contribute to the
happiness of men.

How could we judge of that pleasure the Spring and Summer entertain us with,
if they were not ushered in by the piercing winds and cold of the two contrary
Seasons. Neither can happiness delight us, till we first bear the affronts of
infelicity.

For was it it the power of humane nature to prescribe an antidote as a
preservative from all manner of miseries, that very want of miseries would
prove an occasion of misery, because the mind cloyed with continual happiness
would prove a glut and burden to it self, disgusting that at last, which an
intermission would have rendered pleasant.

Does not that meat which is most pleasing to our pallats, by our daily
feasting thereon, both take away our appetite and proves loathsome and not to
be endured.

Even so it is with the pleasures of this world never more unpleasant than when
they are not served up with the sour herbs of adversity.

But perhaps some may here object, that if we can never relish happiness
without a mixture of evil, we might thence infer, the Angels were not
sufficiently happy, because they attained their perfection of bliss without
passing through tribulation; for like the Lillies of the field they neither
spinn'd nor toiled to be clothed with the robe of glory.

I answer, There is a great difference between the condition of things eternal
and things temporal, Angels entered almost as soon into felicity as being, They
being placed in the upper Region of the the World, where miseries cannot
approach, and being so singularly favored by God, needed not to be balanced
by the counterpoize of adversities, but as for us we are born in a soil as
fertile in calamities as Forests with Birds, and Rivers with Fish, and are
likewise extremely ignorant of Gods grace, when we long enjoy prosperity We
grow wanton and are ready to kick against our Maker, so long as we are puffed
up with prosperity, till the Scene is changed and we come to act a more
melancholy part, and then adversity opens our eyes that we may perceive those
noble felicities which attend and wait upon her, and also makes us to
understand who is the Author and Original from whence they proceed. And this is
the reason why Angels are perfectly happy, without afflictions, but men must
first be afflicted before they can be happy, made miserable before they can be
glorious, because they are not capacitated for the infusions of grace, until
they have freed and ridd themselves of all earthly matters whatsoever.

We must never look to ascend Mount Tabor till we first have climbed Mount
Calvary, nor can we eat of the Honeycomb he fed on after his Resurrection,
until we have pledged him in that Vinegar and Gall he drank upon the Cross.

God will have it so for several reasons, whereof these are the principal.

The first reason why God visits us with afflictions may be to Withdraw us from
the love of this World.

For whilst we are swallowed up with the pleasing conceit of the flourishing
condition of our goodly Heritages and prosperous fortunes, our devotion proves
a melancholy disturber, and one that exacts too severe a service from the minds
of generous Spirits, God is imagined as one who deals after too rough and
rugged a manner because he will not license us to be always revelling in our
jollities, but expects some certain parts not only of our lives, but also of
every day to be set apart for his service and worship, and this makes Religion
to meet but with a slight entertainment at our hands, this makes us stopp our
ears at the voice of the Charmer, our hearts are wholly ravished with the
delightful reflections on our great abundance till we prove totally forgetful
both of our eternal interest and also of the respect due to him who has
blessed us with the fatness of the Land.

They are the cloddy encumbrances of the World, that debase and clogg our
spirits making them listless and unactive, which like Bird-lime hamper and
entangle our souls, indisposing our minds for the most noble and clarified
contemplations of eternity. But when the pruning-hook of afflictions comes to
lop off these corrupting branches, then are we brought to hate that which
before was the delight of our eyes, and sole possessor of our hearts, and to
hunger and thirst after that which formerly seemed crude and nauseous to our
Palates. Ill weeds are to be destroyed before we can sow good Corn,; neither is
the Soul capacitated for the entertainment of divine truths until some sinister
accident accident and cross affliction has cleansed and purged it from the
dross of the World.

Aurem cordis Tribulatio aperit, quam saepe prosperitas hujus mundi claudit.
Tribulation opens the ear of the heart, which is too frequently shut and
deafned by worldly prosperity.

Thus Antiochus when he enjoyed the constant Series of a smiling fortune,
boasted himself superior to God himself, but when the inconstant Goddess
withdrew her beams, and appeared unto him under a Cloud of troubles, He changed
his note, for having received a fall out of his Chariot, and his Insolency
curbed by an immediate blow from Heaven, He could say,

Justum est hominem mortalem subditum esse Deo. It is meet and requisite for
Mortal Men, to be Subject to the Immortal God.

So likewise N^buchadnezzar in his carier of impiety, defied the Lord of Hosts,
and proudly vaunted himself against the Almighty, until he entered into the
Armory of his wrath, and Metamorphosed this proud King into a base beast, and
then he could confess the Lord was able to abase all them that walk in pride.
Dan. 4. last v.


For when God perceives a constant course of his kindness cannot wean us from
our sins, he then applies the Ministers of his Fury, the storms and tempests of
afflictions to ruffle us out of them. It Is true great prosperities do not
easily corrupt the souls which have taken a good temper in the fear of God,
nevertheless they wound and in some sort change them.

A little Be sometimes plays so long upon her honey that by much walking
there she entangleth her wings; So a Soul yea one of those most eminent for
devotion and piety, being continually soothed with a long sequel of the good
successes of the affairs of the World, takes some small flight out of it self,
seeking recreation in a smiling and delicate air, which affords nothing but
objects of pleasure and delight; But so soon as adversity has given her blow,
it reentreth into it self, it foldeth it self within it self, it fasteth it
self, it knows it self, it finds God in the bottom of her heart, afflicted
and perplexed with the revolutions of the World, she raises and darts her self
above the ways of the Moon, and Tracks of the Sun, to that goodly Temple of
Eternity, where Spirits dwell disrobed of these garments of flesh and bones,
which we dragg along with us in this mortal life. This is that High-Rode the
devout soul journeys in so soon as she is alienated from the Court of
prosperity, and disentangled from the affairs of the World; She then enters
into a sweet retirement, and looks on the embroideries of nature in the
Mountains and Valleys, Forests and Rivers, as a Theater declaring the glory of
God, and showing his Handiwork.

She relisheth this retreat from the World as Manna from Heaven and tastes the
deep silence of sorrow with incredible delight. Oh! how will she be delighted!
How will she be ravished! when she shall reflect on the marvelous kindness of
God toward her, that he should chasten her here, least she should be chastised
for ever, that she should be afflicted with sorrows in this life, to free her
from eternal gnashings of teeth, that he should deprive her of the gilded
nothings of this World, that she may enjoy an everlasting and supreme good;
That he should make her unfortunate here, least she should be eternally unhappy
amidst the tortures of Brimstone and Fire hereafter; In a word, How happy will
she be, when she shall consider how God has made her smart under the light
afflictions of an adverse fortune on earth, to adopt her for an eternal and
exceeding weight of glory in Heaven.

Her adversity will make her imagine, as if she were discoursing with God face
to face; This gall will make her open her eyes and see that it is the hand of
God which presses her fore, and the consideration that it is the Lord, will
make her to say cheerfully with old Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18.
Let him do what seems him good.

But indeed until we be thus varnished and brightned; till we be refined by
this fire of affliction, until we have whitened our souls by the tears of
sorrow, our affections will espouse the quarrel of the World, and wholly
declare in favor of it.

God therefore to curb us that we may not stray beyond our limits, keeps us in
a vale of tears often leading us through an Aceldema, a field of blood and
persecution, that with Jacob we may long for our Fathers house, not saying with
St. Peter, it is good for us to be here, but rather with St. Paul, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ.

For if, like the Moon in the Eclypse, we fail not to appear dark on that side
which looks toward earth, we shall most assuredly appear radiant and bright
on that which tends toward Heaven, for it is to withdraw our affections from
of the World that, Great are the troubles of the Righteous.

A Second Reason why God visits us with afflictions may be to draw us to
amendment of life.

Thus the Royal Prophet, Before I was troubled I went wrong, but now have I
known thy Law.

As the eyes of Tobit were opened by the gall of the Fish, so the judgments of
Heaven inflicted on us make us to reflect on the past actions of our life, that
we may correct and reform all the errataes and misdemeanors thereof.

For as the Rod of Moses stricken on the Stony Rock, caused whole Buckets of
water to issue out thence, in like manner the Rod of afflictions smiting on our
flinty and obdurate hearts, forces whole Rivers of tears to flow from our eyes
for our sins committed.

For what is more natural to every one, when he is in distress, than to call to
remembrance those sins, which he concludes the occasion thereof?

When Heaven is pouring forth its vials of wrath and vengeance upon us, can we
act so insensibly, as well as irrationally, as not to commune with our hearts,
and ask our souls what have we done? How have I deserved this? what notorious
crime have I committed that I have made my God who delights not in the misery
of his people, so highly displeased with me, as to afflict my body with this
disease, and that distemper?

Is it not for the Plague of the heart that I am now tormented with the Plague
in my Body? was not I afflicted with this tumor, because I was so affected
with the tympany of pride? How come I dismembered in my Limbs, but because I did
not set the broken bones of my soul together? Had I been afflicted with
Strangury or Stone, had I dissolved the Stone in my heart by the tears of a
really godly sorrow? I had never been oppressed with this Calenture, had not
that more fatal one of anger needed a cure; was not this Fever, this Sickness
or that Disease prescribed by God as medicinal for this or that Sin? And when
he has ransacked his soul to the botom and found out the troubler of Israel,
the Fonah who raises these Storms and Tempests, the Rebel who disquiets him in
his peace, what can be the issue of it, but that he bring him forth and stone
him to death; I mean that he should be perfectly sorry for his sin, and make an
absolute reformation, least if he return to his wickedness, a worse thing fall
unto him.

We must imagine him only the shape of a man, who makes no serious reflection on
his ways, when the hand of God presses him sore.

This was the case of the Israelites, for, when he slew them, Ps. 78.34.
then they sought him early.

Nay, when God chastens man for sin, will it not make him to bind himself by
most solemn vows and promises that if he will remove this burden from his
Shoulders, he will utterly renounce those sins which have made him so
miserable, and live hereafter in a stricter observance of his commands.

What multitudes had infallibly perished, had not afflictions preserved them
from it?

This is that Shepherds Crook whereby God returns his wandering Sheep to the
Fold; Thus the Prodigal Son was brought back again to his Fathers house, he had
never thought of the great plenty in his Fathers Family, had he not been
constrained to feed on Husks.

Thus the Prophet Jonah, when he was in the belly of the Whale poured forth his
prayers unto God.

Thus Susanna cried unto the Lord in her distress.

And thus the Disciples in a Storm implored the assistance of Christ, Master
save us, we perish.

What School more proper for the instruction of men, then that of affliction?
when his Judgments are in the Land, the Inhabitants of the world shall learn
Righteousness; for those evils he inflicts upon others are warning-peices for
all.

For as the indulgent Mother loves not to behold a mote on the face of her
beloved Infant, but will immediately wipe the same away; So neither can our
heavenly Father endure the least blemish of sin on the Souls of his dear
Children, but will presently cleanse it with the water of affliction. If thou
sin to day, he will afflict to morrow. For great are, etc.

The Third Reason why the Lord visits us with afflictions is to make trial
whether with the Silver-smith we had rather make Shrines for Diana, and well
paid for our labor, then to erect Temples for the worship of a crucified
Jesus, to meet with his Cross for our pains.

Yes, and thus the goodly fellowship of the Prophets and noble Army of Martyrs
were tried, who were so far from denying the truth, that they did courageously
abide the stroke of death, and choose to loose their lives in tribulation.

For this Rod and this Staff comforted them with the hopes of their deliverance
from the servitude of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Children of
God.

This was that which comforted these defenders of Christianity, that, whereon
they cast their eye in the midst of all the unexpressible tortures the powerful
witty malice of the World was able to inflict. With what incomparable violence
were their Souls separated from their bodies? Nevertheless when mortal members
yielded to the Sword of Persecution, then they beheld (though with an eye
drenched in blood and tears) the bright glory which attended them; Yes, and saw
(as in a mirror) the Thorns of those prodigious sufferings disposed into
Laurels and Crowns.

There the Proto-Martyr St. Stephen saw the Stones which pelted him into
Heaven, as so many Rubies and precious Stones to adorn that Crown which was to
begirt his Brows. By this fiery trial of Persecution, are the Children of God
and Sons of Belial distinguished, for the former will become red with blood to
preserve devotion, but the latter will betray it, for they depart from God in
the time of Tribulation.

Many may with that Rock St. Peter make solemn Protestations to follow Christ
and stick close to him, but when they come to Pilat's Hall the faint blasts of
a Virgins breath will shake the Rock, and stagger their resolution; But he who
follows Christ for the Miracles and not for the Loaves, who courts Religion for
her Beauty, and not for her dowry, will not be ashamed to confess his Master,
though he is most certainly assured to be mounted on Gibbets and undergo the
most rigid Tortures power is able to invent.

Tribulation is Virtues Furnace, the stouter and more masculine it is, the more
it glittereth in affliction.

This is that rich Diamond which can endure the Wheel, whilst all other things
are like Pebbles, somewhat glittering, but little worth.

Let any one judge how noble and glorious a spectacle it is to behold an
invincible courage, counterbuffl'd with Storms and Tempests, on whom it seems
Heaven would burst and fall in pieces; Is it not admirable to behold him amidst
the ruins of the World, and threats of the Air, always standing like to a great
Brazen Colossus, valuing them at no higher rate then Mists and small Flakes of
Snow,? because he is completely taught that in the School of Virtue we learn to
despise temporal pleasures and to trample on those vanities which others have
so much labored and hunted after.

Here we are taught mortification and the exercise of those godly and Heroic
Actions which give the Soul an antepast of Heaven in this mortal life, and an
enfranchisement from the fear of death.

Jovinian a King having two Vessels of Wine in his Palace, the one sweet, the
other sour, Decreed that whosoever would taste of the sweet wine, should first
drink of the sour; whosoever in like manner would drink of those Rivers of
Pleasures streaming at Gods Right Hand, must not refuse to pledge Christ first
in his bitter cup of afflictions.

(...) Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23.
for thou art an offense, was the rebuke the Son of God gave St. Peter when he
would have dissuaded him from suffering both the most cruel and ignominious
death of the Cross, and then assembling his whole College of Disciples
together, solemnly declared that as they had been the companions of his life,
so also must they go share with him in his sorrows, as he, so they likewise
must suffer, when the Bridegroom is gone, the Children of the Bridegroom must
weep as well as fast.

For what can be more rude and unhandsome, what can we style more unbecoming
and undecent, than to see the head crowned with Thorns and the Servants
enwrapped with softness? To see our Jesus in his Agony, and
Good-Friday-apparel, and our selves in our jollity, or Easter Robes? To see
Christ toyling under the burden of the Cross, and we dancing in our Sports? To
see him drinking Vinegar and Gall, and we pleasing our foolish appetites? To
see Christ of his Cross make a Ladder to ascend his Throne of Glory, and we to
stand here with folded arms? To see him travailing through Briars and Thorns,
and we unwilling to tread on any thing but Roses?

Is not this as incongruous as to see Princes walking on their feet, and
Servants riding on Horseback? Is not this as great a disunion, as to see the
Master in Russet, and the Servant in Purple, faring deliciously every day?

If therefore we desire to spell out our names amongst his Servants, we must
learn Christ's Cross over, and not be ashamed of his Livery, the Purple Robe,
but must tread the path marked out with that blood shed for our Redemption.

For observe that Dilemma of Christ, and you will see there are no thoughts this
Cup should pass from us, He that will save his life, Mat. 16.25.
shall loose it; and he that will loose it shall save it.

Accept of what part you please, there is a life to be lost, an Hell either
here or hereafter, But who is more stupid to the extremest misery, than he who
will ruinate his grounds for Heaven, to gain a little clay on earth? and who is
more wise and fortunate then he, who will lose his life for him? because when
Christ shall appear attended with Myriads of Angels, the vast Retinue of
Celestial Courtiers, he will confer rewards according to the deeds.

It Is reported that a Famous Captain should say to a Soldier dying with him,
Had thou done nothing worthy repute, but remained obscure all thy life time,
yet here is honor enough, that to day thou dyest with thy Master.

What honor and glory then is conferred upon thee, poor dust and ashes! when
God picks thee out as the most courageous of his Soldiers to fight in his
defense? If he has reserved pleasures unspeakable for them who barely love
him, what Laurels and Crowns are prepared for them, who love him unto death?

Where is thy courage therefore O Christian? where is thy spirit? when thou
repinest at whatever God lays on thee of this sad nature? do thou do well to
be angry? Ransack and search into the bottom of thy soul, and see what it is
which troubles thy repose.

It Is to wean thee from the love of the World, it is to make thee reform and
lead a new course of life, it is to try thy patience and love to him, to see if
it be so entire that nothing can draw thy affections from him.

It Is out of pure tenderness and kindness to thy soul, that God sends thee
afflictions in thy body, crosses in thy state, yes, every sad accident is
applied by that wise Physician of Heaven, to eat out the proud Flesh of our
corrupt nature, for he does not afflict willingly, and grieve the Children of
men; He is as it were grieved himself that he is constrained and driven to make
use of this medicine, to heal us of our more deadly wounds and putrified sores.

Is it not an argument of my insensibility, to complain of him who nips and
pincheth me, to raise and awaken me out of a deep Lethargy? and is it not to
awaken us out of the Lethargy of Sin, that God pincheth us with hardness?

And what a great influence would it have upon our lives? How would it blunt
and dull the edge of evils? what a mighty salve and cure to a mind discomposed
by sorrow, seriously to consider, Heaven is not only concerned therein, but
they proceed even from the hand of that God, who in the midst of Judgment
thinks of mercy; and like a mild and compassionate Father, pitieth his child
when he is correcting him.

For if thou know this and remain impatient, go to the Beasts, consult
Tigers and Lions, who will be beaten of their Masters and not repine.

He who extended my Arteries and Veins; he who said unto me live, when I was
but in the Embryo, still in my blood;

It Is he who made me, that strikes me, he who moderates the World, that thinks
it convenient to afflict me.

And what, Shall I fight against my God, and contend with my Maker? shall I
dare to struggle with him, who can look me into nothing? yet this, and much
more do I when I remain impatient under the heat and Toil of the day of sorrows.

To prevent which we must steadfastly resolve to strengthen our courage in
bearing our afflictions. First, With an unruffled and quiet mind; we must not
in the least murmr, though we pass through the Solitary Wilderness in the
saddest and most deserted condition, if it will conduct and lead us to the Land
of Canaan, we must not be weary of our burden, but strive to support it with
the most serene temper of spirit, least otherwise, we should dare to charge God
foolishly.

But then again in the second place we must also express our thankfulness to
God that he has thought us worthy to suffer for the name of Christ extolling
and praising him that he has made us miserable.

For as the General places the stoutest men opposite to the hottest services,
and sharpest encounters, not that he ows them a spite or bear them a grudge,
but to manifest the confidence he reposes in their Manhood and to lead them to
triumph.

Yes, and this is the method of our heavenly Father to pick out the best
spirited of his Servants, and the chiefest of his Darlings, that he may crown
them with the most noble triumphs, and to conduct them to the greatest honors.

Let others therefore shrink at the sharp combats of the World, let them
cowardly faint under the strong opposition of their adversaries; but as for me,
says the undaunted Christian, the more enemies I encounter, the greater will
be my Crown, the harder the labor the more noble my reward; when my enemies
increase I Will call new blood into my veins; let them overpower me with their
multitudes, I will overcome them by my courage; let them come about me like
Bees, and encompass me in on every side, yet in the name of my God, I will
destroy them.

Blessed by my God, that I am the man appointed to fight the Lords battles;
that he has begirt me with perils and encircled me with afflictions; I have
vowed and am steadfastly purposed to behave my self so courageously that
(humanely be it spoken) it shall not repent him of his choice.

Blessed be my God, that I am ranked amidst the first of Christian Soldiers;
that he looks upon me poor and sinful wretch that I am, capable of such
glorious achievements; Iet others then swell with fatness, but O my God, let
me be chastened every morning; let others come in no misfortune, but oh!
scourge me and and lash me in this World, that I may not be tormented in that
which is to come; let me eat my Garlic and Onyons in this Egypt, that I may
feed on the Grapes and Pomegranats in the Land of Promise; let me here feed
upon husks, that I may be refreshed with the satted Calf at the Supper of the
Lamb. Amen.

And thus you have seen the Righteous in trouble like the Israelites in exile,
but now the Lord like Moses comes to deliver them: hitherto God seemed to
sleep, as Christ in the Storm: but now he rebukes the Tempest, and the obedient
waves bow themselves, into a Calm, for though, great are the troubles of the
Righteous, yet the Lord will deliver him out of all.

Consult but the Old Trrnslation, and you will find the words in the present
tense.

Eripit eum ex omnibus illis. Which Phrase is frequent and obvious among the
Promises in Holy Writ, to intimate unto us the speed and certainty of the
things promised.

God will not leave his Children in endless miseries, they may wander many
years in the Tents of Kedar, where there is nothing but blackness and darkness,
not the least glimmering of joy, yet still he will bring them at length to the
Mountains of joy and gladness.

Thus the Prophet assures us, He gives them beauty for ashes, Isa. 61.3.
the oil of joy for mourning, and the garments of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness.

It Is the method of Heaven to place mourning before joy, as Night before Day: I
will smite, and I will make whole, First the punishment, then the blessing.

Who would have thought when the Israelites were Forty years in the Wilderness
they should ever have came into the Land flowing with Milk and Honey?

Who would have thought, when Jonah was cast into the Sea, to have met him
again preaching at Nineveh? who would have thought when Nebuchadnezzar was
grasing in the Forest to have seen him again governing in Babel? who would
have thought when Joseph was on Prison, to have seen him advanced Lord over
Pharaoh's house? who would have thought when Job was in the Dunghill, that he
should be happier and richer then before his misfortunes?

These are the great acts of mercy, which make the faithful sing with Miriam,
the Lord has triumphed valiantly, Exodus 15.21.
did not the fire that insatiable and gluttonous Element loose its devouring
nature, when the three Judaean Youths were cast into the Chaldaean Furnace,
though it consumed their enemies who threw them in, yet it hurted not them, but
caressed them with amorous embraces, as if they had been flames of love;
insomuch there was neither an hair of their head perished, nor the smell of
fire upon their clothes, for thou, O thou mighty God of Jacob did deliver
them.

Nay, thus he brought Jacob from Exile, thus he delivered St. Peter from the
hands of King Herod, and all the expectation of the Jews.

Why art thou then afraid O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?
O still put thy confidence in God for he will deliver thee.

When Herod sent forth his Troop of Horse to slay the poor innocent Infantry of
Bethlehem, to the end he might destroy him who was born King of the Jews,
tidings came at last to Mary and Joseph in Egypt, that he was dead, who sought
the young Child's life.

Even so, when our Banishment and Sickness, bondage and scarcity are fully
completed, Tidings shall come that our troubles are dead, Exodus 34.6.
and the heart shall dance and sing that Song of Moses The Lord, the Lord
Strong, Merciful and Gracious, Slow to Anger, but abounding in Goodness and
Truth.

The same hand that wounds, cures, it is God who makes the wound and
binds it up, He smites, and the powder of his mercy makes it whole.

Had David put a stop and period at troubles, discoursing of nothing but Rods,
than might have the Righteous have complained I have cleansed my heart in vain,
but as there is a flux and reflux of the waters of the Sea, so are there the
ebbings as well as the flowings of sorrows, here lies Joseph in the Prison, and
Jeremiah in the Dungeon, Job in ashes, Jacob in the Field, David in the
Wilderness, and Abraham in Exile, Daniel in the Den, and the three Children in
the Furnace, but at last comes the year of Jubilee and the Prisoners of hope
are no longer in Chains, Zach. 9.12.
but freed from Captivity and Thraldom.

Upon which account they are styled Prisoners of hope, because they may
confidently rely upon God to deliver them, for rather than Elijah shall starve,
the Ravens shall feed him, rather then Jonah shall drown, a Whale shall swallow
him up, if the Glutton be cruel and pitiless, dogs shall be kind and
compassionate.

For can a Mother commiserate the trickling tears of her crying Infant, and
will the Father of mercy be obdure to thee? are the tears of an infirm Lazaro
so eloquent and Rhetorical that they will force compassion from the beholders
eyes, and will not thy wounds seconded with the intercession of a crucified
Jesus move the God of Heaven? does he cloth the Lilly and the Rose which
neither spinn nor toil with such beauty and glory, and will not he adorn thy
head with hallowed flames? which was environed with Thorns, for the maintaining
of his Truth and Religion? has not God promised to deliver thee and will he
break his Vows? Is not a martyred soul a friend of Gods? and is he wont to
forsake his Favorites? did he not once speak peace unto thee? and is it usual
for him to recall his words? Nay, in a word, did not he smile upon thee, when
thou were in the greatest agonies, and are his smiles deceitful?

Rest satisfied therefore, and quiet thy self with the rich expressions of his
love, and full assurance of obtaining the promise to set with Abraham Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God.

We are not healed so soon as we are bruised, but our deliverance is deferred
for a while to see how patiently we demean our selves waiting the Lords
leisure, as it is said of the Prophets Vision, though it tarry, Hab. 2.3.
wait for it, for it will most assuredly come, it will not tarry, and so in the
text, Ps. 55.
though the Righteous have troubles yet they are not everlasting ones; and so
again, he will not suffer the Righteous to fall for ever.

Whilst the Righteous are in trouble they seem as it were in a trance, dead for
a while, but at length they shall come forth as Lazarus from the grave;
mourning may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, how shall this
therefore content the afflicted soul, that he shall be delivered when made
perfect through tribulation! How may this cordial revive a wounded and drooping
spirit, making it to burst forth in the expressions of David, By this I know
that thou favourest me, Ps. 41.11.
for my enemies don't triumph over me.

When old Eli heard the sad threatenings of God against him, the destruction of
his Family, the loss of the Priesthood, the cutting off both his Sons in one
day, all which were afflictions of the heaviest nature, neverthe less the sole
consideration that it was the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
made him cry out, Let him do what seems him good.

If an excess of joy be ever allowable, certain it is when we fall into diverse
temptations of trial, otherwise, Mirth what means it? and laughter it is
madness.

Is the Lilly less fair, or the Rose not so odoriferous and fragrant, when
environed with thorns? neither is the Spouse of Christ his Church, less
beautiful and comely, because she is militant and always in warfare.

Why art thou then afraid O my Soul, or why do thou repine at adversity?
especially since God has laid it as the foundation, at least medium, to
eternal felicity? art thou poor? alas! how can thou want if God be with thee?
or the rich, what have they in possession when God is afar off, St. Paul tells
us how the Hebrews with joy sustained the rapine of their goods, Heb. 11.16.
because they knew there was a more durable treasure and incomparably better
inheritance prepared for them.

What is it therefore which troubles thy repose? do thou bewail the loss of a
Parent, Relation or Friend? Oh consider with thy self, he was not born to live
always and perhaps like the Righteous, was snatched away earlier from the evil
to come.

Moreover, If you truly love God (as who cannot but love that which is nothing
but essential purity it self) How can thou be afflicted at the dissolution of
a man? since if he perish not to God, he perish not to thee, and we must not be
sorry as men without hope.

Why art thou then so sad, oh my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me? do thou groan under the pressures of an infirm constitution? remember
with thy self we should not covet to enjoy life, but according to the tenor of
its grant, we breath under constellations which by their variety of influences
create variety of humors and distempers; and if this be convenient for the good
of the universe, shall not private respects and particular interests give place
thereunto? shall I murmur against my God in grumbling at my sickness? or
rather, ought I not thankfully accept it as a present from the most merciful
and benign parent, ordained either as a chastisement of my sins, or trial of my
virtue? and blessed is that sickness whose pains lead to salvation, blessed is
that war which ends in everlasting peace.

What is it then which makes thee thus disconsolate? do the Walls of a Prison
affright thee? lift up thy eyes unto the Hills, and view those immense spaces
above the Heavens designed as a praemium of thy Restraint; for the deprivation
of a little fresh air, and some other contentments depending on liberty, what
spiritual entertainments may thou hope to enjoy, when Angels are recorded to
have accompanied not only St. Peter, but also Paul and Silas in the Prison;
there thou art free from envy and detraction,, opprobries and calumnies; for
where is that malice? Oh! where is that cruelty will rage upon the prostrate?
however where is that wise Merchant who Trafficks for so rich a Pearl, so great
a purchase, and will not venture something on the score of persecution?

Courage then, O my soul, and welcome the vexations of hunger, cold, bonds and
imprisonments, whips or scourges, ship-wrecks or nakedness, the perils of the
Sea, City or Wilderness, as boni genii, good Angels sent from God to minister
for them, Heb. 1. ult.
who are Heirs of Salvation.

For what says the sincere Christian, Nebe. 6.11.
with Nehemiah shall such a man as I lie? shall such a man as I recant? am I a
child of God, and shall not I fight his battles? am I a Christian, and shall
not I fight under the Banner of the Captain of our Salvation? how has Solomon
branded me for a Coward, Pro. 24.10.
and my strength small if I faint in the day of adversity?

How can I want comfort in the midst of adversity and trouble, Pro. 15.15
when a good conscience is a continual Feast?

With what confidence therefore will I rely upon my God! Isa. 28.16.
how patiently will I wait the Lords leisure, because faith makes no have.

I will pride my self in my Chains, and will not be troubled at diseases, for
though this Sickness may be unto the first, yet not unto the second death.

I will not flatter the Judge out of fear what man can do unto me, for whosoever
puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe. Pro. 29.25.
Shall I betray the cause when God has appointed it to try me? shall I offend
my brethren when St. Paul had rather die than be guilty of being a stumbling
block unto any? Romans 14.
shall I charge my Conscience when its wounds are more intolerable then the
tortures of the body? shall I apostatize from my profession and turn from the
faith, when at my enrolment a member of Christ, I so solemnly covenanted with
him to maintain it unto my lives end?

No, I will valiantly resist the temptations of the three Cardinal enemies of
my Salvation, the World, Flesh and the Devil; let my Friends tempt me like
Job's Wife, let my Flesh flatter me like Eve, let my Persecutors bribe me like
Balak, let them who suffer with me revolt and abandon me, yet, like Joshua I
will still serve the Lord, Josh. 24.14.
and though every one be offended because of Christ, yet will I never be
offended, for he is instead of comfort, health and liberty unto me.

How great were the troubles of Joseph, yet the Lord did deliver him out of
all? how many were the afflictions of Abraham, how many were the sorrows both
of David and Job, yet thou O my God did deliver them, and therefore thou
can and wilt deliver me, for thou art my Castle and strong Tower of defense,
Oh! have thee to deliver me, that my enemies may not triumph over me, yet if
thou do not, I will follow the examples of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego,
and will not do evil to escape danger.

For shall I shrink at this, when Christ has done so much for me? Oh! the
blewness of the stripes, and ghastliness of the wounds! Oh the pricks of the
thorns and piercings of the Nails! all which and much more he patiently
submitted to, to excuse me from the misery I had justly deserved, and what
shall I deny my Savior sopoor a kindness, so small a request, as to do
something for him, who has done all things for me? shall he give me his heart
and his bowels, and shall not I return him the same? Is there a flame in him,
and no spark in me? no reflecting of a Sunbeam? or repairing of the Stream
into the Ocean?

No with Hester, if I perish, I perish, for I am purposed to observe his
righteous judgments.

If my Purse suffer, my money does but perish; if my body be imprisoned, my
pleasures do but perish, if sickness attend me, Lord, if thou will, thou can
make me whole.

In whatsoever state or condition therefore I am, as Holy David so will I
comfort my self in the Lord my God, 1 Samuel 30.6.
this is the Staf on which I will lean, for though earthly Crowns are made of
Gold, yet heavenly Diadems are made of the thorns of tribulation, I will not
therefore look for pleasures in my way, till I have passed the narrow Gate, and
am arrived at the place, where there shall be no more hunger, thirst or cold,
but all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and the Robes of Scarlet, washed
white in the blood of the Lamb, who sits on the Throne for ever and ever.

To Whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Glory, Might, Majesty
and Dominion now and for evermore, Amen.

GODS LOVE TO LAPSED MAN.
John 3.16. For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have ever lasting life.


SUCH was the unexpressible goodness of God, Heb. 1.1.
that (...) having in many parcels and in diverse manners as the Apostle
phraseth it, revealed to men the things to come, sometimes by Visions and
Dreams, as he frequently appeared unto Abraham and Jacob; sometimes by the
coming of his Spirit upon the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1.21.
for St. Peter informs us how holy men of God spoke as they were taught being
moved by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost, such were Isaiah, Jeremiah and others;
sometimes by dispatching unto us those immaterial Ambassadors of his, the Holy
and Blessed Angels, on their Embassies of love to mankind, that he might
reconcile them unto himself, and at last bring them to Glory. But in this
latter Age of the World, he has spoken unto us by his Son, he has vouchsafed
a mercy of such a quality and noble extent, it cannot but incite the most dull
and fordid spirit to a pious commemoration of the Nativity of this Mediator
betwixt God and Man, especially, if we reflect on our own unworthiness, the
nobility of the Person, or on this as the only means for lapsed Man's recovery
to his Primitive, nay, to a better state of happiness, then that which our
First Parents enjoyed.

Upon which account our Holy Mother the Church, has appointed this day for
that solemn purpose, that all devout Christians should meet together to
celebrate the Birth of our Redeemer, and to return our praises and
thanksgivings to God, for his unspeakable love to Mankind in sending his
Eternal Son, to assume our nature and to teach, and give examples of holy life,
and at last to die for them, rise again, and ascend to Heaven.

All on this one design, that every person in the World, that shall receive and
obey him, shall be rescued from eternal death, and then made partaker of
everlasting life.

For this gift of his only begotten Son, is a mercy of such a weight, that we
cannot sufficiently admire and esteem it.

We with the Husbandmen in the Parable, did evilly entreat the other
Messengers he before sent unto us, He now therefore sends us his Son, saying,
(...), they will reverence my Son.

Amongst the constellation of all the Glorious Attributes of God, none shine
with a more Orient Luster, than that of his Mercy; This is his Benjamin in
which he takes the greatest pleasures, and most refined delight.

Insomuch, that he would not manifest himself unto us in the Thunderclaps and
Lightning-flashes of Mount Sinai, but in the Mount of Olives, a Mount of peace
and sweetness, for, he so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son,
(...) that every one believing on him, and receiving him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life.

In which words I consider.

First, The impulsive or efficient cause of Man's Redemption, the love of God,
God so loved.

Secondly, the persons to whom he expressed this love, the World, God so loved
the World.

Thirdly, The Instrument or Person by whom this Reconciliation was wrought, the
only Begotten Son.

Lastly, The end or design of this Gift. that whosoever believes in him,
should not perish, but have life everlasting.

We begin with the First,

The word God is variously taken in Holy-Writ, Exodus 22.28
sometimes (...) abusively, when it is attributed to Angels or Men., to express
the grandeur and dignity of their office and place, thus it is used, (...) thou
shall not revile the Gods, So again (...) He is a Judge amongct the Gods; Ps.
82.1. v. 6. ib.
and so again (...) I have said ye are Gods.

Sometimes the word is used (...), falsely, when they are erroneously styled by
this name, and reputed as God, as the Heathen Idols, who were the Workmanship
of men, and thus it is used by Moses (...) Turn ye not unto Idols, Levit. 19.4.
nor make to your selves Molten Gods, and so likewise by holy David, Psalm. 96
5.
(...) For all the Gods of the Heathens are Idols, but it is the Lord who made
the Heavens.

But the word God is taken (...) in a true and right sense, when it is either
used (...), for the whole Sacred Trinity, as that of St. John (...), John 4.24.
God is a Spirit, and so again by St. Paul, Romans 8.31.
(...) If God be for us who can be against us? Where is not meant any
particular single Person, but the Whole Trinity, or Three Persons together.

And so when it is used (...) when one only of the Divine Persons are
signified, and St. Paul uses it, (...) I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and so again, (...). John 17.3.
This is life eternal that they know thee, the Only True God, and whom thou
have sent Jesus Christ. Acts 20.21.


Where by the word God is not meant all the Three, but only the first Person
the Father.

So also St. Luke uses it, (...) The Church of God which he has purchased by
his own blood; So again by St. John, (...) God manifested in the Flesh, in both
which places is only meant the Second Person, the Son.

So also St. Luke, use it in another place only to signify the Holy Ghost,
Acts 5.4.
(...) Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God.

By the word God in the Text is chiefly understood the Father, for though it
may be applied to all the three Persons, yet because God the Father is the
Fountain of action, he is most properly understood by this term, both in this
and also in some other places of Scripture, as that of the Apostle, (...), Gal.
4.4.
When the Fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law, Romans 8.3.
and so again, (...), God sending his own Son in the likeness of Sinful Fiesh.

Nay, Our Savior himself was so far from a scribing this action solely to
himself, that he does not disown his mission, that he received his authority
from his Father to come into the World and save Sinners.

Thus you may may hear him declaring (...) I am not come of my self, but he
that sent me is true, John 7.28.
whom ye know not.

And thus you have had the various readings of the word GOD in sacred History,
and the definition according to St. John is, (...) God is love, and what
Justice is it for all men to conclude the same.

For our Creation was an act of the Almightys, which proceeded not from any
constraint, and tie of necessity, but from the abundant freeness and generosity
of his Spirit.

He should not have needed, unless he had pleased to mould us into Shape, and
form us into Creatures.

What worth or merit can be alleged, miserable dust and ashes that we are?
whereby we might claim a prerogative or Title to a Being.

Alas! it was undeserved; nevertheless he did it without force or compulsion,
which was an Illustrious Act of his free grace and bounty, yet far excelled by
that much more eminent one, in the Redemption of us from the slavery and
servitude of sin and Satan, yes, and reinstating of us in a better condition,
then that which our First Parents so justly forfeited.

To love us before we were, I confess is great love; but to love us when we had
rendered our selves vile, yea, and worse then nothing, what can it be styled,
but the height of love?

To love us in our nonentity is an Emblem of a most Noble Spirit, but to love
us after our monstrous ingratitude, I cannot express it, Ephesians, 2, 7.
(but in the words of the Apostle (...) the exceeding riches of his glorious
and merciful grace; For man by his own default had lost his Original
Righteousness and was trappand by Satan of all those blessings God of his
special favor intended to bestow upon him.

We were so far from meriting this grand mercy, the gift of his only Begotten
Son, that we had provoked him in the highest measure immaginable, and cast all
his commandments behind us.

What can we therefore conceive should move him to give us his Son? surely not
any loveliness, or attractiveness in us.

We were not such amiable and beautiful Creatures, as to cause a God to descend
from the Battlements of Heaven, and subject himself to the miseries of humane
nature; but his mercy and wonderful goodness alone which caused him to be
invested with the garments of flesh, and our Restoration to happiness is to be
attributed to nothing but the free Bounty and grace of God.

For Sense or Reason cannot scruple so evident a demonstration; especially, if
we consider against whom we thus transgressed, whose Law it was we thus
contemptuously trampled upon: whose I pray was it? but the Law of the great
Legislator himself?

Did we not Rebel against the Supreme Governor of Heaven? and Sin against him,
who spreads out the Firmament like a Curtain, and limiteth the Sea, that it
shall pass no further. Isa. 9.7.


How does the Prophet style him, Wise in Counsel, wonderful in judgment, and
admirable in the execution of his unsearchable Will.

He is essential purity it self, He abhors iniquity with a perfect hatred,
and utterly detests against every thing that is unjust.

Yet still it was against him that we offended, who is clothed with
righteousness as with a garment, and holiness as a Breast Plate; It was him
whom we provoked and consequently forfeited all natural right and possibility,
to happiness; Yet stand still all ye that fear the Lord, and see what glorious
things he has done for our souls, Behold, how his restless love could never be
at quiet until it had employed his Omniscience to contrive means and expedients
to reconcile both his Justice and Mercy, in reconciling Sinners to himself.

Nay, and this merciful design by the Incarnation of his Son, He prosecuted in
a way so worthy of himself, and highly advantageous unto Man, 1 Pet. 1.12.
that the Angels (...) are ardently desirous to pry into them.

How did this make St. Paul to cry out Suam commendat erga nos charitatem Deus,
Romans 5.8,
God commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were Sinners, Christ
died for us, that is, when we wanted all motives to invite, and had nothing but
our misery to cry aloud in the Ears of God for pity and compassion.

It is an usual expression, when we see one in a deplorable condition, to say,
his poverty or misery speaks in his behalf, but this is more eminent surely
in our case, and it was our misery was so prevalent with the Almighty, as to
give us his Son to save us, when all expectation and hope of Salvation was
taken away.

And how did this Son express his love to Mankind, even as the Apostle tells
us, He being in the form of God, Phil. 2.6, 7.
thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of man,
and being thus arrayed as a man he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross.

The sense of which is, that it was beneath so great a love, to love at a less
rate then death it self, and from the supereminent height of glory, to stoop to
the extremest of indignities being abased to the bottom of abjectedness, that
we might be exalted to the contrary extreme.

O Eternal Fathet of mercys! thy love and goodness is unmeasurable and thy
tender mercys are over all thy works, what a large portion have thou given us
of thy love? that to us a Son is Born, to us a Son is given Thou have not dealt
so with any other creatures, as thou have done with man, on whom thou did
stamp thine own Image, clothed him with immortality, and constituted him
Supreme over the rest of the Creation.

Nay, so great was thy goodness O God, that when we had lost our selves by
departing from thee, we should still be found of the, in sending thy Son, to
save and restore them that were lost.

Lord what is man? that thou should so regard him, or the Son of man that
thou should thus respect him? with all thankfulness and praise we remember
this day, we extol thy love, and the humble descent of the Son of thy love,
Christ Jesus.

Oh grant that he may be conceived in the heart of every one of us, that by the
operation of the Holy Spirit Christ may dwell in us and we in him; Oh let that
Spirit which was in our Savior, inspire our hearts continually, with devout
affections toward thee, that we may love thee beyond what our tongues can
express, or hearts imagine, and so join cheerfully with that Celestial Chorus,
who are still giving honor, blessing, power, glory and dominion to thee for
ever and ever for this thy unspeakable love to Mankind in giving thy only
begotten Son, that all may have everlasting life.

And so I descend from the efficient cause of Man's Redemption the love of God,
to the parties whom he thus loved, and they come under a twofold
Consideration, their Quality and Quantity.

We begin with the First, God so loved the World.

By WORLD may be understood the whole compages of all Beings, because every
creature by the Passion and Resurrection of our Savior received almost a new
life, and was in some measure delivered from the bondage of corruption.

But by (...) in the text is especially signified all Mankind and people in the
World.

Thus St. Matthew uses it (...) Woe unto the World because of Offenses. Mat.
18.7.


Yes, thus our Savior himself interpreted it, (...) the World cannot hate you,
but me it hates; where is meant the People or Inhabitants of the world.

After the same manner Satan is frequently styled, (...) the Prince of the
World, because he rules and governs in the affections of men, and enthrones
himself in their hearts.

But indeed Expositors are various in their constructions thereof, some
translate it, Sic Deus hominem dilexit God so loved the little World Man, some,
hominem ad imaginem Dei factum, Man made after the Image and Similitude of God,
others, hominem lapsum, et mundanum, fallen and worldly-minded-man, all which
Translations contribute to extol and magnify the wonderful Love of God.

For, is it not worthy our admiration to see light and darkness enter a League?
To see the torrid and frigid Zone unite and embrace each other? To see JEHOVAH
and the Gods of EKRON, the Ark and Dagon reconciled? to see the God Israel and
Baal meet together, and the Prophets of the Lord, and Sons of Belial kiss each
other.

Yet all these was fallen man, compared to him who is nothing but purity it
self; yet still, how does he court this depraved and sinful creature to a
reconciliation?

Shall we not envy his honor, and admire his love, who will lay down his life
for the sake of a righteous man? shall we not then be rapt with wonder, when we
consider the Immensity of the Divine Love to lapsed man, to see the eternal Son
of the Most High God, descend into the lower parts of the earth, and in a
manner, embrace a Dunghill, nay beyond that, to expose and submit himself to the
cruel stroke of the most ignominious death, that he might snatch sinful man
from a lamentable downfall, and mount him from a miserable earth, to the Regions
of Immortality and Bliss.

Herein is love, John 4.10.
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
Propitiation for our sins.

O thou great and All-seeing eye of Heaven, what moved thee to glance so
favorable a countenance on us miserable sinners! what moved thee to send so
kind an Embassage of peace to us vile worms! to us who were unworthy thy
compassion, though never so earnestly implored, to us, who had deserved thy
wrath more than thy smiles, thy Thunder and Lightning, thy indignation and
anger, but not the least drop of thy mercy! How comes it to pass, thou
inexhaustible Fountain of Love, thou showr'st down thy goodness upon us in so
plentiful a measure? 'twas thy mercy O God, Oh! praised be that mercy, which
saved us from destruction! 'twas thy pity and compassion, not our tenderness to
thy Laws, which sheltred us from thy fury! 'twas thy love and goodness alone,
Oh! for ever magnified be that love, which induced thee to be so bountiful unto
us! with all thankfulness and reverence, O God, we desire to join with those
Sons of Glory and bright Morning Stars in singing (according to our ability
and power) Glory be to God on High, for his unspeakable love in giving his only
begotten Son, that whosoever do believe on him, should not perish, but have
eternal life, for thou sent not thy Son into the World to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
Wonders which he does for the Children of Men.

Which is no more then Justice, and our bounden duty to perform; for if we
consult what we are by nature, what shall we conclude our selves, but Children
of wrath, the finful Offpring of disobedient Adam, made obnoxious to the worst
of deaths, before we were entitled to life, by sinning against God without
whose Reconciliation we cannot but perish.

For though it is true, Man at his first creeping into the World, was placed in
the Regions of felicity, and favored as one of the Darlings of God, yet, was
he not as quickly disobedient to the commands of his Creator? how justly
therefore was his Crown forfeited, and he deprived of all that happiness God
had conferred on him, when he was banished Paradise, and in the sweat of his
brows to earn his bread?

And if he fell, so did we, by being in his Lovns, for since the advantages of
that blessing God promised him, if obedient, had respect to his Posterity, then
certainly the curse, which was the consequence of his disobedience, did not
relate to his particular interest alone, but was of universal influence, and he
propagated infection to the last, and utmost of his Posterity.

From our First Parents therefore we derive a curse, whose Legacy bequeathed us
was sin and damnation, and all Mankind were Joynt-heirs of the same
Inheritance, the wrath of an incensed God.

Thus holy David confesses it, Ps. 51.5.
in sin did my Mother conceive me, and in iniquity she brought me forth. Now
what had been the wages of this sin, but eternal death? what had been the fruit
which they plucked from the Forbidden Tree, in the disguise of an Apple, but
everlasting ruin? had not the wonderful mercy of God found out an expedient to
salve his Justice and save us?

For had he not dealt thus graciously with his Creatures, what could we have in
reason expected, but to have been swept away in the Deluge of Divine
indignation? that he should have dipped his Arrow in the Poison of that Serpent
which gulled and mocked us, and exhaust (were it possible) his whole Magazine
of Thunderbolts; that he should have girded his Sword upon his Thigh, and take
Vengeance upon us, making us to suck the Lees and dreggs of that intolerable
potion reserved for the Sons of Perdition.

This was the fruit flourishing on the Tree of Knowledge; this was that
miserable plight, and woeful condition into which we had brought our selves; we
had deserved the worst of Gods fury, by breaking our bands and Covenant with
him,

Stand still therefore all ye that forget God, and admire his goodness and tell
me, if there be any God like unto our God, or any Father like unto our heavenly
Father, who forbore to enter into the Armory of his wrath, or to affright us
with the furrows of a contracted brow; for notwithstanding we were born Heirs
Apparent to calamity without end, yet lo he sent his only begotten Son to cut
off the entail.

We have sinned O Lord, and dealt wickedly, but this Lamb of thine, what has
he done? that he should be thus battered and bruised, wounded and bloody, to
save us from the Stripes we had justly deserved? how great was thy love to us
to send him, who was in Heaven with thee, to us on earth in the likeness of
sinful flesh.

Oh! what charming love was this! how precious are the thoughts of it to us,
Grant then O Merciful Father that the perfect Image of this thy Son may be so
formed in our hearts, that we may live the life of Christ, serving him in
righteousness, and holiness all the days of our Pilgrimage here. that we may
not defeat the ends of his death, but strive to complete the joy of our Lord.

To which end we see God spared not his Son, but a Manger is his Cradle, behold
the Bread of life appointed for the Provision and nourishment of our souls, he
came to fetch home the lost Sheep, and to cure and heal the infirm and weak.

He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. And what shall
we rob our selves of our share in this so glorious an enterprise? shall we
ruinate the purposes of Christ in delivering us out of that misery, wherein we
were so unhappily plunged.

For had not the Father sent him on that errand, how had we been broken in
pieces, like a Potters Vessel; Whips, Scourges and Scorpions, had been our
portion, had not a Rod sprung from the Root of Jesse, to save Sinners from the
lash.

Let us then return our thanks to this Redeemer of Israel and say, O blessed
Jesu! who about this time was born of a pure Virgin, we return thee our praises
and thanksgivings, for that thou would be pleased to subject thy self to the
miseries of flesh, that flesh might be capacitated for the joy of eternal
bliss; It was our gluttony O Bread of Life, which caused thee to hunger; our
intemperance O fountain of living water, which caused thee to cry out, I am
athirst; thou were made as we are, that we might be made as thou art, with all
the powers and faculties of our souls and bodies we return thee all honor and
praise, singing with the heavenly quire, All glory, power and dominion be
ascribed to the Lamb and him that sits on the Throne for ever and ever Amen.

And so I descend in the Second place to consider their quantity whom God so
loved, that he gave his only begotten Son for them, God so loved the World.

He did not give his Son for some choice and select persons only, the glorious
Son of Righteousness, did not dart his radiant beams on the Land of Goshen
only, but he arose with healing in his wings over the superficies of the whole
earth, that all mankind might receive benefit by his influence.

For by (...) in the text is meant all the world both Jew and Gentile, and so
St. Paul uses it saying, that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself; 2 Cor. 5.18.
now what is signified by reconciling the Word, is interpreted by St. Paul,
Romans 8.
(...), the whole Creation, or all the Gentile World, in opposition to the
Jewish Enclosure, not all the creatures absolutely, but all men of all sorts,
particularly, those Gentile Idolators mentioned by the same Apostle, whom he
styles, (...) you who were alienated and strangers to God, has he reconciled
to himself, Colos. 1.21.
for he sent him into the world (...) to save all men that were lost, to ave
all men that were lost, to heal the smarting sores, not of some few polluted
souls only, but of all descended from the loins of Adam.

For by Adams offense God had concluded (...), all things, all his posterity
under the guilt of sin; Ephesians. 1.10.
and therefore to satisfy his Justice, and to manifest his Mercy, he has
given us his Son, that in the dispensation of the fullness of time he might
gather into one all things both which are in Heaven and Earth, where is
intimated no more then the people who dwell under the Canopy of Heaven.

For though the mercy of God and the Merits of our Savior has so confirmed
and established the Angels in their Stations of glory, that it is impossible
for them to fall and slide away, yet this cannot be said to be by Redemption,
but by Christ's gracious uniting them to God, so that I conceive the (...)
cannot refer to them, but only to men, because Christ (...) did not come to
take hold of, reduce or reconcile the Angels, but only mankind, for the Angels
in Heaven never fell, and therefore what need had they of a Reconciliation? so
that the Apostle only endeavors to explain to us, that Christ is the universal
Redeemer of Mankind, of the Gentiles as well asof the Jews, which is (...) an
act of free undeserved mercy, imputable to nothing but Gods mere grace.

For by our Original depravation we became prone to do evil, and are not able
to think a good thought, insomuch the most righteous of the Sons of men had
need of a Savior, to make an Atonement and Expiation for them.

For the Royal Prophet informs us, God looked down from Heaven, Ps. 14.
and none did good, no not one.

Shall the disease then he epidemical, and common to all, and shall not the
cure be the same? shall Eves transgression be capable of ruining and destroying
all? and what has not Christ's all-healing blood virtue enough to save all? Is
God a respecter of persons, or if we do well shall we not be accepted? is not
he willing that all should come to salvation? why do the Church style Adams sin
an happy sin, if our Redemption and the Merits of Christ's Sacred Passion was
not extended to all, even the greatest criminal and highest offender, if he
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near?

For as by the offense of one, Romans 5.18.
death came upon all men unto condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one
the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life, whence it is clear
the remedy brought to us by Christ, reached as far as the disease.

How does St. John entitle him a Sun which gives light to every one that
comes into the World. John 1.9.


There is none overshadowed with so dismal a Cloud of sins, who may not (if
they will) take in the rays of his mercy; the blackest soul may find the blood
of Christ ready to cleanse her stains and exchange them for a pure die of
innocence, if she can with a sincere heart and tongue cry out, Have Mercy upon
me O God.

For by the blood of Christ is conveyed to all men a capacity of Salvation; but
if they neglect so great Salvation, and afterward come to perish, it is
through their own default in misusing his gracious endearments, and proving
refractory to his commands.

For this is a faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.1.
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save
sinners, Sinners indefinitely, without the exclusion of any.

And so again, He tasted death for every man, Heb. 1.9.
and is risen again for their Justification, that is, as verily as all men have
sinned by contraction of the guilt of the first man, so by the merits of the
Man Christ Jesus, they are justified freely by Gods grace, if they do not fall
off from the mercy of the Covenant, by prevaricating the conditions of it.

For through his blood he has conveyed notice to all men, that they are the
Sons of God, that they are the Heirs of eternity, Coheirs with Christ, and
partakers of the Divine Nature, meaning, that they are so by the design of God,
and the purpose of the manifestation of his Son, he being unwilling any should
perish, but that all should be saved.

Such was the unmeasurable love of Christ that he would have all men to be
saved, without exception of City or Country, Nation or Language, without
exception of the ungodly, enemies, nay, without exception of them that perish,
for it is to give them a space to repent in, that he is slack (as some men
count slackness) concerning his promise. 2 Pet. 3.9.


But alas! in our late years of Rebellion when men pretending to fight the
Battles of the Lord, took up the Weapons of the Devil, and under a pretext of
the Lords cause entered a solemn league and covenant and swore Allegiance to
the Prince of Darkness, then also began to flourish their doctrine who say,
that God designed many Souls to Hell before they had a Being and Existence upon
earth, insomuch they were incapacitated to work out their salvation, their
sentence of condemnation being already past in the predeterminate counel of
God, then began men to flatter themselves that they were the only Children of
God, the Saints that should inherit the earth; and none but they the true
people of Sion, who were the espousers of their fantastical opinion and
persuasion, judging all others to be held as Reprobates in the eyes of God
because they were so in theirs.

Then was broached that opinion of a converting grace and irresistible power,
as if God would urge men to salvation, and make them happy without any
endeavors of their own, if they did but rely on Christ and his Merits for the
payment and satisfaction.

Which Doctrines are of so pernicious consequence, that, First it renders the
Cross of Christ foolishness.

For wherefore did God give us his Son? wherefore did he die, rise again, and
ascend to his Father? to what purpose was all that wast of blood which he shed
in our behalf? if men were absolutely decreed to salvation or reprobation from
all eternity? to what end did Christ come into the world, when as without
consideration to his sufferings or the merits of his death and passion his
Father had predetermined from eternity such a number for the pleasures of
Heaven, and so many for torment without end?

If it be thus, then is Christ dead in vain, because the Father might have
effected this without putting his Son to the expenses of his blood to redeem
us. If it be thus the Father had no great love for his Son, to put him to such
cruelties and hardships, not having any cogent or absolute necessity. Nay, if
this doctrine was true, it would blemish the wisdom of Heaven, for if he had
resolved to save some and damn others from eternity, he might have done it
without the contrivance of that device of reconciling us to himself by the
death of his Son, because that was intended only to satisfy his Justice and
manifest his mercy, and what need of that if we consent to a predetermination?

But then Secondly, As it renders the death of Christ insignificant,
unnecessary, so if this be true, then is our preaching vain.

For to what end serve all the commands, instructions, calls, counsels,
admonitions and reproofs of the Gospel? for first, they are unnecessary to
those who are elected, since if they be fully persuaded that they are decreed
to salvation from eternity, what need they trouble themselves about it, when
they know they shall be brought in (in Gods due time and pleasure) by such a
converting grace and power as cannot be resisted by them.

And as the Gospel is useless to these, so in the Second place to those who are
reprobate, for if they be fully persuaded thereof, to wit, that they must
inevitably perish, do they what is possible to prevent and avoid it, why should
men beat the air, in laboring to persuade them to that which both the persons
to be taught, and the persons teaching, are fully persuaded can never be
effected by them.

Nay further, let us suppose a man doubtful of his state, yet if he consent to
this doctrine, is not the conclusion as if he should say, if I be of that
number God has determined from eternity to save, I shall be saved, though I do
what seems good in my own eyes, for at some time or other, which I am as yet
ignorant off, he will force me from my sins, and compel me to obedience by such
a power as cannot be resisted by me; but if it be my hard lot to be put in the
Catalogue of reprobates, let me be never so industrious to work out my
salvation, let me wear the ground with my religious knees by my constancy in
praying; let me pine my body to a Skelleton by the austerities of fasting and
humbling my self before God; let me be never so religious never so devout, yet
still I must be fuel for that fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
because it was decreed so from eternity, and is more unalterable than the Laws
of the Medes and Persians.

This is the fruit which springs from so corrupt a root, and the very case of
Ludovicus, that learned Italian, for he was so miserably infected with this
principle that no arguments and reasonings could convince him of its error,
till perceiving himself indisposed, and already fallen into the Neighborhoods
of sickness he sends for the Physician, who (made acquainted with his opinion)
answered him in his own style, if he should live, he should live, without
trying the experiments of his art and skill, the Patient ruminating on his
words at last was convinced in his Conscience, that as means were to be applied
for the restoration of health; so likewise for the salvation of the soul.

Away then with this deluding fantasy, which is the parent of nothing but
those Twin-Sisters of darkness, presumption and despair; and let us endeavor
to justify God in his saying that his will is, that all should be saved; 1 Timothy 2.4.
to which end he has proportioned sufficient means to all, so that none can
perish but through their own impenitency and perseverance in sin.

But alas! how has the luxuriant fancies of Geneva, endeavored to poison this
sweet truth by saying, that is not meant, that God would have every soul to be
saved, but two or three, more or less out of every order and occupation.

But St. Peter (better illuminated than those pretenders to the Spirit) has
fully answered their cavil, 2 Pet. 3.9.
by saying that God (...) he is unwilling that any one should perish, and so
again God himself has sworn, that he delights not in the death of a sinner.

But perhaps some may contest that if it be the intention and will of God, that
all should be saved, how comes it to pass so many fall short and miss of the
reward (designed by God) glory everlasting?

I answer,

The Holy Scriptures have recorded Gods will to be twofold, his Absolute, and
his Conditional Will.

The former God used when he framed the goodly Structure of the World, and
said, let there be light, and there was light; let there be a Firmament and
there was a Firmament? So likewise, when he created those incorporeal
intelligencers, the Angels, he spoke the Word and they were made; he commanded
and they were created. This is the absolute and only irresistible Will of God.

But in matters relating to the Salvation of Men, he made use of the Second,
his Conditional Will.

And those Conditions were three.

The First was in Paradise, eat not, and thou shall live; but how soon did we
forfeit this Covenant by an hankering and prurient desire after the Tree of
Knowledge?

The Second was under the Law, do this and thou shall live. And here though the
spirit was never so willing, yet so many were the weaknesses and infirmities of
the flesh, that we groaned under its weight and were not able to perform it,
until Christ the fulfiller of the Law came to ease us of its burden; and then
he made a third and new agreement with us under the Gospel, and that is,
believe on the Son of God, and thou shall be saved. To the performance of which
he has afforded such powerful aids, and encouragements, that we may observe
the tenor of his Laws, and live for ever.

For the ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace. But if we
will not observe his Laws, but break our bonds asunder, we justly forfeit our
right in Christ, and may charge God foolishly, but thank our selves for
damnation.

For though our Creation was the work of Omnipotency alone, yet the salvation
of our souls can never be effected without our endeavors.

He has opened a fountain for us to bath in, but if we refuse to wash and be
clean, who is to blame for the continuance of our Leprosy?

Nay further, he does not only to our Justification add the invitations of his
grace and holy Spirit to dispose our selves for it, promising to ease and
refresh such as are weary and heavy laden with the burden of their sins, but
positively declares he stands at the door of our hearts, knocks and solicites
to enter, but if we will not fuffer the King of glory to come in, may not he
justly defy the World to object the least fault and blame on his side, since
he has done to his Vineyard whatever could be thought requisite to make it
thrive and prosper? and if they finally perish, (as I shall show more at large
by and by) are they not the authors of their own perdition by their rejecting
those abundantly sufficient graces he has offered them to accept? So that in
the extremity of their misery they will be forced to confess, thou art
Righteous O Lord, and thy judgments are just.

But some further object, that though the satisfaction Christ made was
sufficient for the whole World, yet (say they) it was not effectual, that is,
(I conceive) he did not intend all should participate of the benefit thereof.

And what is this, but (by the worst kind of enclosure) to circumscribe his
All-sufficient goodness? to set banks and shores to that unlimited Ocean of
mercy which cannot consist with the wisdom and goodness of Christ; for if he
paid a full and plenary satisfaction for the offenses of all men, was it not as
easy and more agreeable to his mercy to communicate the benefits to all, than
to appropriate them only to a few and little parcel of men?

Any in the shape of a man would censure it a mere delusion, for the King of
Great Britain to proclaim himself Redeemer of all the captivated Christians
under the Tyrany of Ziim and Ochim, Turks and Infidels, if he should send over
Ransom large enough for all, yet afterward cashiere the poor Captives hopes of
liberty, by interpreting himself, though I proclaimed and sent sufficiently for
all, yet I meant Redemption only to a few.

Would not this renew our griefs and augment our sorrows? and if it was so with
God, what anxieties and fears, what troubles and scruples would it move in our
minds, whether we were the persons whom the King delighted to honor? for if we
conceited we were the Children elected by God, and God had resolved from
eternity to save us, what license would it give to our unbridled desires by
presuming too much on the Patience and long-suffering of God, when we believe
we cannot be dis-inherited from being Coheirs with the Son of God, and so make
us neglect the working out our salvation, knowing that our labor is in vain,
because before we were, God had determined we should not miss of our Diadem of
glory.

But blessed be God, no man's state is fixed, or unalterable, before he has a
Being, much less from eternity or before the foundations of the earth were
laid, nay, now we have a being, it is possible to pass from the state of death
to the life of grace.

It Is true when we are cut off from the Land of the living, and are arrived at
our long home, then our condition and the decree of God is unchangeable, for
where the Tree falls there it lies. Eccles. 11.3.


They that die in peace shall arise in glory with the King of Peace; and they
who die in their sins shall be raised, it is true, but receive small comfort
from the Sun of glory, for they shall be banished from his presence.

Let this consideration rouse us from the Lethargy of sin, that we may work
whilst the day of salvation lasts, before the night comes, when no man can
work.

What we do, let us do quickly, for though the marrow may seem to swell in our
bones, our blood hot and boil in our veins, though we pride our selves in the
strength and flower of nature, yet still, is not our time in the hand of God?
who can tell what a day may bring forth?

Seeing then God has expressed so high a Love to us, let us not turn his grace
into wantonness, for he that believes on him that sent me, says Christ, has
everlasting life. And St. John tells us, He is the Propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

This was an Act of Oblivion, out of which none was excepted; He came to revoke
the general Sentence, the Decree gone out against all men, For as I live, says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but that he turn and
live. He has set before us life and death, Oh! let us choose life, that we may
live for ever, and let us put up our Prayers and say:

O Almighty and most Merciful Father, we adore thy Mercies and admire thy Love
to the Word in the Gift of thy Son. O blessed Jesu! how worthy is thy Love to
be had in reverence over all the World! for thy voluntary susception and
affectionate suffering such horrid and cruel Tortures: the Waters of bitterness
entered into thy soul, and the Storms of Death, and thy Fathers Anger broke thee
in pieces: What shall we do, who by our sins have tormented our dearest Lord?
What contrition and tears can sufficiently express those sad accidents which
they have produced? Lord have Mercy upon us, Christ have Mercy upon us, and
pity our distress: And seeing thou have done so much for our Souls, only speak
the word, and thy Servant shall be whole. Suffer us not to neglect that great
Salvation which thou have purchased for us: Dispose us by Love, Thankfulness,
Humility, and Obedience to receive the benefits of thy Incarnation and Passion.
Inflame our Affections more and more toward thee and God the Father, whose
goodness was not contented in barely loving us, but to love us so, as to give
us thee the only begotten Son of God. And so I come to the Organ and Means by
which our Redemption was effected, the gift of his only begotten Son: Wherein
we consider both the Action he gave, and the Gift it self, His only, etc.

We begin with the Action.

And first, He gave it gratis, freely, and of his own accord; for he was
omnipotent and could not be constrained by any force, all Creatures depending
on him alone, Acts 17.28.
(...): In him we live, move, and have our Being.

It was not therefore any compulsion, but love only, which was so generous as
to transport it self up to Heaven, and assault the Divinity in its Throne,
drawing from thence the Eternal Son of God.

2dly. God so loved the World, that not only (...), but (...), he delivered
him; and so St. Paul uses it, He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all. Romans 8.3.


He was delivered up to the malice and fury of evil men, and thence delivered
up to the ignominious death of the Cross.

3dly. Nay God did not only deliver him up, but also sent him, For, says the
Apostle, in this was manifested the Love of God, because he sent his only
begotten Son into the World.

4thly. And to augment his Love (if perfection will admit of addition) This
Mission is the more to be accepted by us, because it was by way of commutation
and exchange for us; Commutavit filium suum unicum, He exchanged his only
begotten Son.

It was the Worlds Price was set to sale, and how dearly did he purchase it?
What reason then have we to spend every moment of our Life in loving, praising,
and glorifying him? And when we contemplate these admirable contrivances of his
Wisdom and Mercy, can we do less than say;

O God what shall we return thee in requital, or wherewith shall we appear
before thee? When we would praise thee, an Abyss of Majesty exhausts in a
moment all Encomiums, and our adorations what are they before thy Divine
Essence? Could we render our selves uncreated in deference to thee the Fountain
of all Beings, it were a poor Homage to thy ineffable Greatness: Nay could we
annihilate the World, and bring all Creatures into their old postures of
nothing for thy Glory, yet what is this compared with what thy immensity might
justly expect? But while we labor with our Poverty, finding nothing created
worthy thy acceptance (Oh astonishing Mercy!) behold the perfect oblation of
thy Son, which thou have given us, the prodigious Effect of thy Love. Him we
offer unto thee, and through him we hope to be accepted: None can speak our
Gratitude, but that word, who can only satisfy thy Justice: Since by this Gift
the very Treasury of Heaven was emptied for a time, and the Earth enriched with
that pure Sacrifice wherewith thou were well pleased; and the Odor thereof
draws upon mankind a continual Flood of Mercies. This is a Sacrifice O God,
thou will not despise; him we offer unto thee, and with him our selves and all
that we have, beseeching thee to accept of us for the sake of thy Son, who was
offered up for us all.

And so I come to consider the Gift it self, His only begotten Son.

Son, is a Name by which men often endeavor to express their endearments and
affection to us: Thus when Cushi told David of his Sons unfortunate, though
just, 2 Samuel 18.33.
death, the Text tells us (...), and the Latin Commotus: The King was troubled
and much moved, and went up to the Chamber over the Gate, where Judgment was
administered, and wept, and said, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son; and refused
to be comforted for his death; nay he wished death had been subject to a
mistake, and took him instead of this rebellious Viper, who sought the
usurpation of the Kingdom and Death of his Parent. And if a Son was so dear to
David, how dear must he be unto God: And consequently, what a Noble and Royal
Gift must this be of our Heavenly Father?

It had been too great an Honor to have dispatched unto us the meanest Servant
in his Heavenly Court to visit us; or if he had deputed an Illustrious Seraphim
to proclaim to the World, That He, who is King of Kings, the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, would be reconciled to his Rebellious Subjects: Should we not
have been startled at the news of such a Message? How much more then, when he
sends his Son, the Prince and Sovereign of the Heavenly Host to be had in no
reputation, and take upon him the form of a Servant.

But then 2dly. It was his own Son, and not another; He was not an Adopted
Son, who raised himself by his merits to the Title of the Son of God, as
Photinus and his Followers would have persuaded the World; but he was God of
very God, and Light of very Light: Or was it his Son by Nuncupation and name
only, as others did imagine, but his own Son, for otherwise we destroy our
belief of the Trinity, and conclude the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, not three
Distinct Persons but Names.

Therefore 3dly. Mat. 12.18.
It was the only begotten Son of God, conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary,
by the powerful overshadowing of the Holy Ghost.

Here is Love in its Zenith, the Son in whom his soul was well-pleased; Nay,
his only begotten Son.

This is that great Mystery the Apostle speaks of, God manifested in the Flesh;
1 Timothy 3.16.
where we may behold the Eternal Father giving up his only Son in behalf of
Mankind polluted and depraved by corruption, vitiated by sin, disobedient to
his Lord, and insolent to his King; a Worm, and no Man, a poor scantling of
putrefaction, and a prey for the never-dying Worm to feed upon. How well
therefore is it styled a Mystery, that a God most perfect in himself, who stood
in no need or want, should love so forlorn a Creature (by reason of his sin) at
such vast and great distances from him, who could do him small service and
stand him in little stead.

Yet still this immense Being, has, out of his Infinite Bounty, given us the
dear production of himself, coeternal, consubstantial, and equal, to the Father
in respect of his Godhead, though inferior to the Father as touching his
Manhood; God and Man, a Problem, whose solution puzzleth all the Reason
humanity possesses a Riddle which cannot be unfolded but by Faith.

Did we not behold it through that Perspective, but employ our reason to
consider it, we should as soon conclude to the Suns Union with a Clod, or a
Thoughts Corporeity, as to believe immortality incarnate, spirituality turned
body, and the infinite Ocean of goodness in so small a Vessel.

The composure of the World, and the variety of Creatures, was the effect of an
Almighty Power, that Man should be made after the Image of God; wonderful
enough, but that God should be made like Man, is much more admirable.

'Twas a greater demonstration of his Omnipotency, that God should be made a
like Creature, than his formation of all Creatures. Immortality put on
Mortality, and Incorruption dressed in the garments of Corruption.

We read that the Ark of the Covenant was overlaid with Gold, whilst Shittim
wood was in the midst, which was to Typifie Christ's Humanity decked and adorned
with his Godhead.

A Mystery so fruitful in Miracles, that natural Reason cannot comprehend them.
Nature was stopped as to the result of an humane subsistence, in whose place was
intimately applied the Personality of the Divine Word, and this infinite
subsistence was adorned with graces, virtues, and privileges superiment.

Do thou wonder to see the Sea divided and stand upon an heap; come here then
and admire this boundless Ocean contained in the narrow Vessel of a Virgins
Body? Do thou wonder to see the Bush in the midst of hungry Fire and not
consumed, behold a Virgin, the Mother of a Son, and yet her Virginity spotless
and undefiled? Do thou wonder to see a Moses preserved in a Cradle of
Bull-rushes, behold the King of Heaven in a Manger? Was it strange to see the
Sun go back on the Dial of Ahaz, how mavelous then is it, to see the true
Sun, Light of very Light, under a small cloud, and the most glorious Candle of
Heaven put under a Bushel? Do thou wonder the Bread of Life became Flesh,
look into the Sacrament of his Supper, and see how he can turn his Body and
Blood into Bread and Wine to nourish the Souls of Men? Do thou wonder at the
Wisdom of Solomon, lo a greater than Solomon is here. How did the Wisdom of God
become foolishness for us, and the Word it self speechless? And He who is our
God, is He not also our Brother? Rouse up thy self then, O my dull and sordid
soul, mount up thy self even to the Heavens above, slighting the things of the
World, as dross and dung, if compared with the honorable Title of being the
Son of God.

Many an express had been sent unto us from the Court of Heaven by those winged
Ambassadors, the Angels, But, Oh infinite mercy! He now sends his Legate a
latere, his Son from his bosom, expecting he would be more honorably treated
by us: But alas! how did we entertain him? It Is true he had his brows encircled
with a Crown, but it was of Thorns.

It Is true, he was a King, but anointed with his own blood; or as the
Evangelical Prophet styles him, a King of sorrows: It Is true, he had a Purple
Robe, but it was of derision.

It Is true, he had a Bedchamber, but it was a Stable; it is true, he had a
Cradle, but it was a Manger to complete the saying which was written, The Ox
lodged with his owner, and the Ass and the Master were content with the same
Crib.

Was he an Isaac, a Son of Laughter, or rather, vir dolorum, a man of griefs?
Was he clothed in his dress of Majesty? or did he disguise himself in Purples
and Furrs, that he might enjoy ease and govern all the Nations of the Earth? or
rather, was he not clothed with shame and dishonor? Did not Heaven, nay the
God of Heaven descend to Earth, that Earth might ascend to Heaven.

Thy Forehead was furrowed with Thorns, O blessed Jesu, yet thou would not
frown: We did chain those Arms, which thou did stretch forth to embrace thy
Enemies, and those who continually provoke thee to wrath; thy Bowels of tender
compassion yearned toward them, who were ready to rake into thine with their
bloody hands; Oh! most compassionate Son of the most merciful Father!

What shall we render unto thee for all thy mercies? How shall we pay our
acknowledgements? whom shall we love? to whom shall we resign our Wills and
ways, but unto thee, and the Father of mercies who has not thought the gift of
his Son too great to confer upon us? Oh blessed Incarnation! oh happy day!
never will we forget thee, but entirely devote our selves to his service and
worship, who has this day called us to be his Son by adoption, settle our
affections and confirm us in this our resolution, that by the influence of thy
Holy Spirit we may obtain the end and purpose of thy Incarnation, everlasting.

Which is the last to be considered.

And the words are easy to be understood, for by (...) is meant whosoever
shall receive and obey the doctrine of his Gospel, and frame his life according
to the rules thereof, (...) shall not perish but be rescued from eternal death,
and made partaker of eternal life, but on the contrary, if we disown him, and
reject his rules, we shall receive no benefits by the merits of his death and
Passion, for though Heaven should become a desert, yet he will not people it
with persons refractory and disobedient, but the sentence of the first Curse
shall not be repealed, but still hold valid and of force; for if they will work
their own destruction by refusing to lay hold on Christ, this inconveniency
happens unto them, not from the inefficacy of Christ's satisfaction, or a defect
of his commiseration, 2 Pet. 2.1.
and goodness toward his Creatures, but from their own default, because as the
Apostle speaks they deny him by whom they were bought.

He purchased the souls of the whole World, but if they will not accept of such
a Ransom by believing on him, and regulating their wills, by his will, they may
be damned though he was offered up a Sacrifice for them; thus the Apostle tells
us, 1 Cor. 8.11.
thy Brother perish for whom Christ died.

For he died for all, yet those only receive the privileges thereof, who
believe on him by their obedience to his word.

For though the Sun was placed in the Firmament of Heaven, that the whole World
might be cherished by the influence of its heat and light, yet how many are
there to whom it is not much beneficial; for are there not some of so reserved
and melancholy a disposition, that they are more affected with darkness, upon
which account they creep into Grots and Holes to hide themselves from the glory
of his Beams.

In like manner, light came into the World, and was offered up for the (...),
Catholic good of all, but some loving darkness rather then light, keep
themselves baricadoed from his benign influence resisting the light of faith,
for otherwise he should not perish, but have everlasting life, Heb. 5.9.
which is best interpreted by that curt, yet full expression of St. Paul, he is
the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.

The Kingdom of Heaven is shut up against none, though some are so unhappy as
to exclude themselves, for they are so far degenerated into Brutes, that
neither the dreadful apprehensions of an angry God, a consuming fire, or Worm
that never dies can frighten them into obedience, or can the invitatory Charms
of Holy things allure them thereunto, or lastly, can the modest shame of a base
and ignoble action move them; for like ill-distempered bodies they convert all
wholesome food into their own corrupted humors, saying unto God depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of his ways: who is the Almighty that we should
serve him? or what benefit accrues to us, if we pray to him?

First. they abhor the knowledge of his ways and commandments, because they are
contrary and speak against their works.

Secondly, They refuse submission to his power, persuading themselves he is not
Almighty, because sentence is not executed speedily, but he is Merciful,
Long-suffering and Gracious.

And then lastly, They will not pray unto him, because they would ask that
which is so repugnant to his supreme wisdom and goodness, that they know he
will not answer their petitions.

So that in short, it is through themselves they perish and come not to bliss
and glory, because they decline the presence of God, shutting up all the
avenues of faith and charity, through which he should come in unto them.

For God has engaged his word not to be inexorable, and the Creator has
protested and sworn that it is far from his thoughts to delight himself in the
destruction of his Creature.

For can the charity of a grave and sober person upon earth pray for the
conversion and salvation of all Nations, and what? shall the charity of Christ
be limited, or will they ravish him of his goodness? No, verily, he would have
none to perish, but upon their submission, he will embrace them with the arms
of his mercy, receive them for his own Children by Adoption, give them the
blessings of eternal life, and make them partakers of his everlasting Kingdom.

Seeing then this was the end and drift of Christ's Incarnation; seeing God has
dealt thus graciously with us, what manner of persons ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness?

How ought we to esteem and love him, who so esteemed and loved us, that he
thought not his life and blood too dear for us?

How ought we toesteem our selves, since God has thought us worthy to be
esteemed of him? Let us remember, this and know that we are men.

How ought we to take heed that we neither spot or soil that flesh wherein God
has manifested himself.

For what are we the better that God has given us his Son, if there be not a
mystical Incarnation in our hearts, and his Nativity our spiritual Birthday,
that being born anew, Christ may dwell in us and we in him.

Was it not his purpose to be like us, that we might be like him? was he not
born of a poor Virgin, to teach us to be meek and lowly? did he not take upon
him the form of a Servant, to teach us we must not Lord it over them who are
beneath us?

How little did he value the pomp and grandeur of the World, to set our
affections on things above? how contented was he in a mean condition, to teach
us not to take care for to Morrow? How courteous was he to the meanest Clients,
to teach us humanity and brotherly kindness? how liberal was he of doing good,
to teach us to be diligent in relieving the necessity of the Indigent? How
patient was he in suffering the the mockeries and scoffs of the ruder
multitude, to teach us not to pay evil for evil? how patient was he amidst the
sad tortures and pangs of the Cross, to teach us not to repine at the
chastisements and corrections of Heaven? How little did he fancy the applauses
of men, to teach us not to court popularity, or be fond of the praises of men?
How absolutely did he resign up his Will to the Will of his Father, to teach us
in every state to say, Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven? In a word,
how did he lay down his Life in full hopes of a glorious Resurrection; to teach
us to say: Though after my Skin worms destroy my Body, yet in my Flesh shall I
see God whom I my self shall behold, and not another.

These are the Beauties of Jesus to be equally admired and practiced by us:
This is a Transcript of the Deity, which we must carry always in our hearts;
for by the copying of it, Christ knows who are his.

Let us then endeavor to follow our Exemplar as close as we can in these steps
of his Holy Life: Let us not slight that Love which is gone to prepare us a
place in his Fathers House: Let us make all things conspire to proclaim his
Glory: Let us conceive Christ in our heart by our believing and hearing his
word; and let us bring him forth in our life by giving all diligence to
practice and perform it.

Let us look on the Mercy of this day as an hopeful assurance, that God will
never end his Love and good Will toward Men, till he has brought us thither,
where Jesus is.

Let us earnestly beseech him to guide us in those steps, whereby he did ascend
from Earth to Heaven.

Let us desire him so earnestly to subdue our Wills to His, that it may be our
Meat and Drink to perform his Heavenly Pleasure.

Which, that it may be more effectually wrought for the Eternal Interest of us
all; let us fall down and say in sincerity of heart:

ALmighty God, who have given us thy only Begotten Son to take our Nature upon
him, and as this day to be born of a pure Virgin: Grant, thas we being
regenerate, and made thy Children by Adoption and Grace, may daily be renewed
by thy Holy Spirit, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with the
Father and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, Might, Majesty and
Dominion, now and evermore: Amen. FINIS.

