The Triumphs of four Nations; OR, A happy Conclusion of Peace, Betwixt
England, France, Denmark, and Holland.
As it was confirmed on Sunday night July the 21. at Breda; where, after four
hours Conference in the Castle, the Plenipotentiaries about nine in the evening
signed the Articles of Peace; which Don Mounsieur Fleming, the Sweedish
Mediator, in a short Speech Congratulated the happy issue of so great a work;
After which, the Plenipotentiaries saluting and complementing each other, the
Conference ended: As they came out of the Castle, the Canons were thrice
discharged round the Town, the Musketeers giving their vollies from the Works,
and the Horse drawn up upon the Plain, saluting them with their Trumpets, the
whole Town quitting their Houses to express their Joy to them as they passed
by; This Joyful News was brought on Friday last July 26. from Breda, by the
Right Worshipful Sir John Coventry, to the King, bringing with him the Articles
of Peace, as they were Signed there by the Plenipotentiaries.

Tune is, Packingtons Pound.


LIft up thy bead England and lay by thy mourning,
thy much desired long absent Peace is returning
Like health after sickness, and ease after pain;
Like joy after sorrow, or Sun after Rain:
The sound of it comes.
Much w^^ter than Drums,
And more welcome is unto all the Kingdoms;
By Truth, Love and friendship, delights do increase,
The Joys of a Nation is Plenty and Peace.
Last Sunday was sennigh^ at Breday 'twas pas^
Which I hope will p^^^e all our comforts at l^^
The Plenipotentiaris signed to peace,
That our (...) up trading might have a release
The townsmen did laugh,
Rejoice, sing, and quaffe,
Thrice round about Breda the Canons (...)
The Musketeers made many vollies to rattle,
And Trumpets did sound as in heat of a Battle,
By Truth, etc.
The Second Part,
to the same Tune.
SIr John Coventry unto White Hall did bring,
Last Friday this happy brave News to the King
Which filled all their hearts with such pleasure and joy,
They cast up their Caps and sung Vive le Roy,
That we do agree,
With our Enemy,
The Dane, Dutch, and French are as joyful as we
The Dutch who in victual did not so abound,
Paid more for an ounce than we paid for a pound.
By Truth, Love and Friendship, delights do increase.
The strength of a Nation is Plenty and Peace.
The Frenchman has reason this peace to desire
Because he has many more Irons in the fire;
The Dane without trading will never grow rich
The best of his Lading is Fir-pole and Pitch;
Then let us with joy,
Our Talent employ,
And fill Ships with goods that were wont to destroy
When Vessels bare nothing but Powder and Lead,
The Traders and Laders, and trading is dead,
By Truth, etc.
Why should we not live all as brother with brother
The Scripture commands us to love one another
Why should not contention and dissension cease,
Since the King of all Kings is the Prince of all Peace
By Union we may,
Both prosper and pray,
By discord we do one another betray,
The Devil and Discord like Lightning and Thunder
In June and July are seldom asunder;
By Truth, etc.
If Peace does continue without and within,
I hope London City will be built again,
Which was much retarded for want of a Peace,
For what man can build where no Foundation is;
Without it there is none,
Will build on his own,
Peace is the foundation, and the corner stone,
If we have not Peace both upon Sea and Land,
The Cities foundation will be in the Sand,
By Truth, etc.
All workmen from all parts of England may comes
To work and get money without fear of Drum,
The Country man now will to labor be willing,
Not fearing to be burned in the hand with a shilling
The Gun and the Drum,
Will shortly be dumb,
Then Madge may have Roger, and Tib may have Tom;
Now howling, and scowl'ng amongst ye kind-hearte^.
Shall be lest with young Wenches for Sweet hearts departed;
By Truth, etc.
Our Merchants upon the green Ocean so curled
Shall safely pass free to all parts of the world,
And in their deep bottoms bring silks and slip slops
To please pretty Ladies and City wives chops,
Figs, Almonds and Spice,
With Sugar and Rice,
Which is a young Gentle woman's Paradise
Then silver and gold (so dangerous in power)
Life Traitors, shall both be committed to the Tower
By Truth, etc.
Then singing and Music will be in request,
And Jugge shall be dancing as well as the best,
About the green May Pole, with Gillian and Jack,
For Ale and Stewed Pruens for Custard and Cake;
True Charity then,
Will be amongst men.
Or else we may look for these troubles again,
Short comforts will be in a Nation no doubt,
Where Peace is concludes, and God is left out.
By Truth, etc.
God bless this peace to us with a right undestanding
Keep our hearts and minds under his great commanding;
God bless King and Kingdom and send that our hate
Unto one another in Church and in Stats,
May be nulliff'd,
God keep us from Price,
Ambition, Wrath, Malice and Discord beside;
when nation fights nation, and brother beats brother
They are like earthen vessels that break one another
By Truth, Love, and Friendship, etc.
FINIS.
London, Printed for W. Thackeray, next door to the Dolphin in West-Smithfield.
With Allowance.


