To the Reverend Dr. BEVERIDGE, AN EVCHARISTICON, Occasioned by his seasonable
and excellent Sermon about Restitution, on And Zacheus stood, and said unto the
Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my Goods I give to the Poor, and if I have
taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
St. Luke 19. 8. preached at St. Laurence's London, Tuesday, March 17. 1690.
COming by Chance into St. Laurence-Kirk,
Where Preachers did of Old Resistance Jerk,
The prating Reader having made an End,
I saw your Reverence on the Mount ascend,
Like Publican-Zacheus, who, to see
Jesus pass by, climbed up into the Tree.
My Thanks, good Sir, I must confess is due
To penitent Zacheus, and to You.
He by Example, You by Preaching, taught
(And therein seas'nably revealed the Thought
Of many Hearts) the Nature and Extent
Of that great Duty of the Penitent,
Called Restitution, which embalms his Tears,
Sets him to Rights, and pays off all Arrears:
Procures his Pardon from the offended God,
Atones his Vengeance, and does charm his Rod.
Pardon No Pardon without Repentance, and no Repentance without Restitution.
Dr. Beveridge's Sermon on St. Luke 19. 8. beforementioned.
the Impenitent in vain implore,
Impenitent are they that don't And as ye have hurt the Name of your Neighbor,
or otherwise hindered him, so now intend to Restore it to him again. For without
Restitution, God accepts not your Confession, nor yet your Repentance. Book
of Homilies, Fol. page 286. 120 page 465.
Restore
To th'wronged Man what was his And so it is still, for Possession does not
take away Right, and therefore Zacheus emphatically says, My Goods. Behold,
Lord, the half of my Goods I give to the Poor -- My Goods, i. e. what remains
to me after I have restored what I have unjustly taken from another, who has
the Right, and not I, though I have the Possession. And what remains when I
have made suoh Restitution, I may truly call my own. -- Dr. Bev. ut supra.
Own before.
If this be true, Sir, then Your Flock is damned,
And every swearing Priest that can be named;
Who, to detain unjustly, do not dread,
The Crown they stole from off their Monarch's Head:
Whom by false Accusation they dethroned,
And, as an Abdicating King, disowned.
Though To abdicate an Office, supposes a voluntary Act, and the consent of him
who quits it: according to Tully, Salust, Livy, etc.
to Abdicate by Force, seems, by the By,
A Monstrous Riddle, and Unlearned Lie:
Which to For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a Lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but
had pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.
believe, a Judgment is on those,
Who think it no Sin their Sovereign to Depose,
Reno^nce, Abjure, Transfer Allegiance too:
And what cannot a debauched Conscience do?
If RE^TITUTION, Sir, must needs be made;
Why not to Scepters, as well as to the Spade?
If to our Fellow Subjects we owe that Care,
Much more to Kings who God's Vicegerents are.
Or is it Lawful to defraud the King,
Whilst we are just to every other Thing?
Is it our Duty to do Right to All
Except to Him, whom we our Father call?
Must God's Laws be obeyed b'our partial Will,
The Apostle's sad In the last days perilous times shall come, for Men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous -- disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, without Natural Affection, Truce Breakers, False Accusers -- Fierce,
Despisers of those that are Good, Traitors -- 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. A Text,
which it is to be wished a certain Reverend Divine, [Dr. Sh -- ock] who lately
preached at Whitehall, had gone thorough with.
Prediction to fulfill?
Render to all their Dues, the Gospel says,
Directs to strait, condemns all crooked Ways.
Restore to the Wronged, and to all Justice do,
The Voice of Lev. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Moses is, and Remember the Golden Rule which our Savior recommends,
Whatsoever ye would that Men, etc. Dr. Bev. ut supra.
Jesus too.
Go, preach this Gospel-Doctrine through the Town,
Bid 'em Restore who do Usurp the Crown.
The Man's If the Man is alive whom ye have wronged, make Restitution to him;
or if he is dead, to his Son, or Executor, etc.
alive, and too his injured Son,
To whom Restore before the And I advise you to make no delay, make Restitution
before the Sun is set. Id. ibid.
Setting-Sun,
Or else (sad Fate!) Three Kingdoms are undon.
Fill City and Court-Pulpits with the Sound,
Cry, Without Restitution to the wronged, never expect God's Blessing upon you
or yours, etc. Id. ibid.
RESTITVTION, all the Kingdom round.
Fear not, preach, pray (You Leader of the Blind!)
Bewitched Subjects to a better Mind.
By the Exorcising Art conjure the Devil
From Rebel-Hearts, stop the impending Evil.
Bid 'em transcribe Zacheus's Be just, and act like honest Men, etc. follow the
Example in the Text, etc. Id. ib.
Honesty,
Lest they ascend, not his, but Haman's Tree;
(Tho, as Zacheus, so amply to Restore,
Will make the Thieves, and frolic Lenders, poor.)
Or else descend into the lowest Hell,
Where Parricides, Robbers and Rebels dwell:
For if the Publican we do contemn,
The Publican the Christian will condemn.
Bid 'em Repent, do Justice, and Restore,
Call home the King, and then Rebel no more.
FINIS.
A Copy of a Letter sent to the Reverend Dr. Beveridge, upon Occasion of the
Second Edition of the Paper of Remarks upon his Sermon about Restitution.
SIR!
I Have here sent You the Second Edition, with Additions, of the Paper with
Remarks upon your late Sermon about Restitution, wherein, as in a Glass, you
may see your abominable Hypocrisy, in preaching up Restitution to the wronged,
and that upon pain of Damnation, and yet you your self can receive and enter
upon the Right and Possession of another, an Innocent, Conscientious Dr. Tho.
Ken, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
Bishop of our Church, (yet in Being, and Vncanonically turned out to beg his
Bread) whose Bishopric was settled on him for his Life, according to the Laws
of the Realm, (which settled St. Peter's in Cornhil upon you) which you have
sworn to preserve and maintain to your power. You are not ignorant that a
Bishop, according to the Rules and Practice of the Church in all Ages, cannot
warrantably be deprived, or deposed, but by a Synod of Bishops, either General,
or Provincial. But was there any such Method of Proceeding in the Case of our
deprived Bishops? It being never heard of old, that Bishops were deposed, or
deprived by mere Laymen (who might indeed as legally depose Bishops, as the
People might an Hereditary King) no, not in the Arian Persecution.

Reflect, I beseech You, on the dismal Fate (as a just Punishment of the Sin,
much like that of Corah) of those Ecclesiastical, Schismatical Two Arian
Priests, who died miserably and unpitied.
Usurpers, Gregory and George of Cappadocia, who unjustly invaded the Sea of
Alexandria (which was wisely and honestly refused by Eusebius Emisenus, when
proffered to him) upon the deposing of Athanasius, the Orthodox Bishop there,
for no other Crime, than that of his Conscience, (your deprived Bishop's Fault)
refusing to comply with the Wickedness of the Time, and vigorously opposing the
prevailing Arian Faction. But the Good, Conscientious Bishop was by the
Providence of God, with Honor restored to his See, to the Joy of his Friends,
(who faithfully stuck to him in Banishment) and the Shame and Confusion of his
Enemies.

To enter upon the Right and Possession of another, Is it, I pray, agreeable to
the Golden Rule, which, you observed, our Savior recommended -- Whatsoever ye
would that Men should do to you, even so do ye to them. -- Read and apply the
Apostle's earnest Expostulation, Romans 2. 21, 22, etc. Thou therefore which
teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a Man should
not steal, do thou steal? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
Sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God? For the Name of God is blasphemed, through you. -- O
Sir! Consider what Occasion you give to the Enemies of our Religion, to
blaspheme that worthy Name by which we are called. -- Is this worthy of the
Pious Dr. Beveridge, the Humble, Mortified, Self-denying, Heavenly minded Dr.
Beveridge? Whom we esteemed a Second Chrysostom in our Antioch, the Ornament of
our Protestant City, a Main Pillar in our Church, the Beauty of our Israel, a
burning and a shining Light, a bright Star in our English Firmament, and the
great Reviver and Example of Primitive Piety, celebrating the blessed Sacrament
(the lively Memory of the Passion of our Lord, that heavenly Feast of Love,
which thinks and does no Ill to its Neighbor) every Sunday. And is it not
strange that so worthy a Divine, and so good a Christian, should be guilty of
so scandalous, so shameful a Prevarication? But, O, how are the Mighty fallen!
-- How unaccountably prevalent and mischievous are the Charms of that Sin,
which the Spirit of God compares to the 1 Samuel 15. 23.
Sin of Witchcraft?

God Almighty open your Eyes, and your Brethren's, that you may see your
Errors, and repent, and break off your Sins by Righteousness, and so avert his
Wrath and Judgments, both from your Selves, and these trembling Nations. --
Which is the earnest Prayer of,

REVEREND SIR! London, May 2. 1691. Your Sincere and Faithful Monitor, And
Hearty Well-Wisher, etc.
SIR!
You Will pardon this plain Dealing, for which I have a Warrant from God himself,
Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart: thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.




