To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of OSSORY etc. Reer-Admiral of the BLEW
Squadron, on His unexampled Courage and Gallantry as well in former ACTIONS as
in the late Engagement of the 11th. of August 1673.
My Lord,
THere needs no Muses name be called upon,
To give of you a Just description.
He that would speak you as he ought, must write
With the same equal temper that you fight;
As free from Passion and as clear from rage,
As when in the midst of Thunders you Engage.
Could we but in each circumstance appear
Like you, we might then write too without fear:
Though OSSORY's a name to which we owe
So much, who speaks it cannot fall too low.
Those glorious heights to which you are arrived,
Have Scorn and Censure of their Arms deprived.
The Proud Fanatic crew that take delight
In Raillery against Crowns to vent their spite,
Do all their surly inclinations wave,
And in their height of Spleen confess you BRAVE.
Whilst Loyal subjects, when they do repeat
What Is done, and what they hope you may do yet,
Felt a kind trembling all their sense o'reawe
And cannot reconcile their fear and joy.
They joy in such a gemme to have a share,
And fear to lose it does provoke their care:
And when your course of Honor they Survey,
How uncompell'd you tread in dangers way,
How though advanced to such a height before,
That scarce your Prince or Fortune could do more;
You slight dull quiet and expose your blood,
For your Kings glory, and your Countries good.
But whilst these thoughts Exalt you to the skies,
Clouds of despair do in their Bosoms rise.
They Dread, alas! (which Heaven avert) left all
These Triumphs should in one sad instant fall.
Then they remember all that Spragg had done,
And weep to think how soon his Race was run:
Grieve at his Fate, but more acute that Wave,
Which durst drown him you did attempt to save.
Yet in the midst of fears, they think so due,
They cannot but wish, you would Honor still pursue.
Their Faith destroys their doubts, and they are assured,
That the same providence which has secured
You in so many dreadful dangers, will
With the same watchful eye protect you still:
Nor can you of a preservation fail,
If ever prayers of faithful men prevail,
Since there is no Sect pretends to Heaven, but do
With Hearty zeal offer up Vows for you.
With Allowance.


