The Trappand Tailor: OR, A Warning to all Tailors to beware how they Marry.
Showing how a Begger-wench being insinuated into a house of Bawdery, was
suddenly transformed out of Rags into siiks, flanting it each day with
Gallants, (yet passing for a Maid.) A Tailor living hard by, fell deep in love
with her person, and afterward married her, which was no sooner done, but the
old Bawd disrobed her of the rich attire, and put on the Rags which she
brought with her; to the great discontent of our Mousieur Sparveling.

To the Tune of, How many Crowns and pounds have I spent, etc.
tom ye taler and his wife Ione


I Will sing a Song, and a dainty brave Song,
it is neither of Seaman nor Saylor;
But to tell you the truth, it is a bonny brave Youth,
he is a finikin Vapouring Tailor.
It was in the prime of Cow cumber time,
when Tailors had very much leisure;
This Gallant so nimble did cast by his Thimble,
to sport away time for his pleasure.
A Begger-Wench chanced to London to come,
a Girl that had very good Features;
With begging about, an old Bawd spied her out,
for sure there is many such Creatures.
This cunning old Craft with subtle intent,
did find that the Lass she was willing;
She took the Wench in, and washed her clean,
and put on her very good Linen.
She pulled off her rags, and gave her black baggs
and made her as fine as fine may be;
For she was so smug, she looked like a Iugg,
and she was as brisk as a Lady.
She gave her an art that she acted her part,
as if she had been an old stander;
She liked the Trade far better she said,
then abroad in the Country to wander.
She taught her the Trade to pass for a Maid,
after she had been twenty times used:
And filly Fools they are cheated like gulls,
being baffled and basely abused.
Often times in the door like a crafty young Whore,
she stands for to tempt in her Cullies:
And when they come in, she will teach them to sin,
then dearly they pay for their follies.
But while she did frisk, the Tailor so brisk,
it was his chance for to spy her:
She ravished his heart before she did part,
in hopes for to gain his desire.
For verily she pretended to be
a Country Gentleman's Daughter:
Came up the last Term new fashions to learn,
but mark how she fited him after.
He told her that he would marry with she,
for he was a Man of regarding;
He gave her rich gifts to purchase his drifts,
for he was in hopes of a bargain.
By little and little she seemed to yield,
being moved thereto by his carriage;
Pretending that she will likewise agree
to join with him in lawful Marriage.




But when the old Bawd found out their design,
she swore she will have satisfaction:
But the Tailor so sad had not enough paid,
but she presently entered an Action.
She stripping the Bride, he standing beside,
like one that did scorn to disown her:
He ceased his brags, when he saw his wifes rags,
and wished that he had never known her.
The rags the Whore knew for to be her own
to take them again she had reason:
And since she did catch a blade that could patch,
he had patching work for a whole season.
And thus she did snap the Tailor in a Trap
to pay for his Wives apparel,
That she had him lent, which made him repent,
it was but in vain for to quarrel.
And thus the poor Tailor was finely trappan'd,
he cursed, he swore, and he vapour'd;
That made him to swear, and to pull off his hair,
like a Pigg in a Halter he caper'd.
He skipt and he jumpt, but sure he was mumpt,
as well as ever was any:
A Begger-wench Bride to lie by his side,
may please him as well as a Lady.
And now we will leave him to kiss up his Wife,
she has enough to cool his courage;
Let Tailors beware and have a great care,
how they join with such beggars in marriage.
Unless that my Song it be tedious and long,
i will end it with, hey down derry;
We put it in rhyme this Cowcumber time,
that Tailors may laugh and be merry.
FINIS.
printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


