DIEV ET MON DROIT

Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council
Assembled.
SHOWS,
THat we Your most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, having with Astonishment
received the Discovery of a most: Traitorous and Horrid Conspiracy, of diverse
Ill-affected and Desperate Persons, to compass the Death and Destruction of
Your Royal Person, and of Your Dearest Brother James Duke of York; and that to
effect the same, they have held several Treasonable Consultations, to Levy Men,
and to make an Insurrection, and made great Provision of Arms; A Design
notoriously tending to the present Destruction, not only of Your best
Subjects, but of the Sacred Person of Your Majesty, the best of Princes, and to
Involve this and the future Generation in Confusion, Blood, and Misery; carried
on, notwithstanding their specious Pretenses, by known Dissenting
Conventiclers, and Atheistical Persons.

And having in the first place Offered up our solemn Thanks to Almighty God,
for His watchful Providence in bringing to Light this Impious and Execrable
Machination,

We do in the next place humbly Offer to Your Majesty the Deep Resentments of
our Loyal Hearts concerning the same, and beg Your Majesty to Rest fully
Assured, That as no Interest in this World is valuable to us in comparison of
Your Majesty's Service and Safety; So we are Determined readily to Expose our
Lives and Fortunes in Defense of Your Majesty's Person, Your Heirs and
Successors, and Your Government Established in Church and State, and
particularly, for Discovering, Defeating, and Destroying all such Conspiracies,
Associations, and Attempts whatsoever.

All which Resolutions are accompanied with our Daily and Fervent Prayers, That
Your Majesty may Vanquish and Overcome all Your Enemies; And that the Years of
Your Happy Reign over us, may be Many, and Prosperous.

2 July 1683.
It is His Majesty's Pleasure that this Humble Address be forthwith Printed and
Published.

L. JENKINS.
London, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683.


