TO THE PRAISE OF MRS. CELLIER The Popish Midwife:
ON HER IN COMPARABLE BOOK.
MADAM,
THe brightest Glory of your Sex, and Age,
Than Popess Joan more Fair, than Popess Joan more sage,
We hoped, if Catholics success had found,
To see your head with Triple-mitre crowned;
That Head, which bravest Acts can first invent,
Then, if miscarri'd, prove 'em never meant:
You're skilled, what Natures Fabric is below.
And all the secret Arts of Gropeing know,
Sexes defect with D-do can supply,
And so escape the famed Chair Porphury.
But though success have failed your great Deserts,
The world admires your Ladyships Great Parts:
Rome once adored Lucina's Deity,
But now Her Midwife-Goddess you shall be,
To help the Popes abortions, and by Merit
Deliver Nephews of the Flesh, or Spirit.
You taught the Judges to interpret Laws,
Showed Sergeant Maynard how to plead a Cause,
You turned, and wound, and Rogu'd 'em at your will,
'Twas Trial not of Life and Death, but Skill.
What though you had no Cash to bribe the She maliciously suggests (though
against her own Interest) the Jury corrupt, when all knew it was neither her own
Innocence, nor their disintegrity, but mere defect of Evidence brought her off
this time.
Jury?
They Would fell their Consciences on Trust: SecuriTy's
not expected now for such small ware;
Oaths are as cheap as Pins at Bartholmew-Fair.
Besides, you will give their Babes an easy Birth,
Or, if themselves are costive, help it forth:
For one good turn we know requires another,
As Right hand scratches Left its younger Brother.
Your Witnesses would swear against the King,
And' against the Law; they would swear like any thing.
Sweet Innocence! what Powerful charms it has
It works more Miracles, than Cross, or Mass,
As easily turns all to Catholic
As Apes shape Whelps with Beautifying Lick;
It makes men swear the Compass Ten times over,
Then makes them swear, they never swore before:
This is the force of Innocence; and never yet
Did any miss't, that sinned on Tick of Merit.
Heretical Apostate Dangerfield!
Worst of Mankind! whom have thou thus beguiled!
Thou were a hopeful, serviceable man,
But now art turned White Devil of Japan.
Pray tell me, where is thy Conscience? or why
Must Heretic Truth discover Sacred Lie?
Show your Indulgence, Sacrilegious slave!
May you speak Truth, unless the Pope gives leave?
You credited? Incorrigible Sot!
Prove you were Loyal first, and knew no Plot.
Thus your Book, Madam, has convinced the Nation,
And is one clear, entire Demonstration:
It shows the Meal-Tub-Plot's an errant cheat l
For Tub is made of Wood, and meal of Wheat.
The cause wants no such Whifflers as T. G. is,
You must defend it, not such clods as He is;
For no man yet could e're withstand the Dint,
And cogency of Female Argument.
Diva Obstretrix-O! hear the prayers
Of all the Jesuits and all the Friars!
Some Saints we have known forget us when they 're gone
To thee on Earth we make our early moan.
Then pity us: exert thy Power
To save us in this dangerous Hour.
Thou have to Life brought many men,
Ah! Bring the Plot to Life again.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXX.


