MEMENTO MORI


Tristitiae Christianae: Or an Ocean of Pious Tears.
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Minister of the
Gospel, Mr. Matthew Mead, Who Departed this Life at his Dwelling House in
Stepney, on Monday, the 16th Day of this Instant October, 1699. In the Sixty
Ninth Year of his Age.
Written by a Constant Auditor, and Sorrowful Mourner, for the Loss of this
Reverend Deceased Pastor.
decorative border Blessed are the dead which Dye in the Lord.



A Woeful Story here I Am come to tell,
Of a Lost Shepherd, whom ye all knew well,
Who left us all alone, and's gone away,
Being Wounded with Death's Dart the other Day.
D^ctor, pray stay your Sheep in the Fold they be,
Waiting for the Shepherd, whom they long to see,
There for to take some of thy Holy Meat;
But they are prevented, Death he did them cheat.
Judge now, ye Saints, if we have not cause to Weep!
For that the Pastor he has left his Sheep!
Whom he, with Spiritual Food, did use to feed;
A Saint we have lost, a Saint he was indeed.
But though he is Dead, his Works they will survive
His Glorious Soul as if he were alive;
They Will serve in place of him, though he is gone,
And left his Sheep here for to walk alone.
Ah! Could not you afford to stay a Space
Of Time with us, before you Run the Race.
And let us see Thee in the Pulpit stand,
Declaring Truth, with Bible in thy Hand:
Methinks I see Him, with a jesture, Look
Upon his Bible, that most Holy Book,
The Word of God, the which he did their Preach,
'Twas his Delight it always for to Teach;
Therefore, I say, have not we got great Cause
To 'dore his Name, and his good Works Applause.
Rouse up, Rouse up, and lend's some of your Tears,
For that we have lost him, it too plain appears;
How can ye thus so easy part with one,
Who S^udied always Satan to Unthrone;
And pull him out of all our wicked Hearts,
This was the Labor and chiefest parts
Of this Divine, who always strove for all,
Thousands of times, he did upon them Call
Unto Repentance, e're his Glass was Run,
But now it is out, and his whole Thread is spun:
The string of Life and he is forced to fall,
By the H^nd of Death that fatal General;
Who spares none, the Good, the Bad he will have,
And send them quickly to the silent Grave:
And leave us hear, to Weep with Floods of Tears,
For Famous MEAD, who (Christ) taught many Years:
But now let us Mourn and say, Times Glass is out,
And with his Sith with him has had about,
And just like Grass, with it did Mow him down,
Whilst we, who do Survive him, needs must own,
We lost a Pastor, whom I cannot set forth,
A Precious Member of a greater worth;
Than Ophir's Gold, or any Riches here:
Few, few there are that with him can compare,
But bid Farewell to a Cheerful Harmony,
And with me Tune his Doleful Elegy.
In a good Age from us he hence departed,
And left his wandering Sheep quite brokenhearted,
For loss of Him, whose Years were Sixty Nine,
He left the Earth, and up to Heaven did Clime.
And here his Aged Wife, she does bemoan
The Death of her Good Husband, Holy One,
A Man of God, whom God did call and choose
On Earth, his Holy Books here is for to use.
Methinks I see his People for him weep,
And Floods of Tears run trickling down the Cheek,
Of his most virtuous Wife, who God possessed,
And with good Children Eight he has her blessed;
Five Sons she bore him, likewise Daughters Three,
All which he left Weeping this Day to see.
His Wife, she was of a most Noble Race,
Virtue abounds with, and with Heavenly Grace,
So Generous, so Noble, and so Free,
So Courteous is likewise to all she see.
And here his Children, they poor Babes, behold
His worthy Carcass, and their Hands unfold,
With weeping Tears, and nashing Teeth, they cry
Against Death, their Father's furious Enemy.
And here his Congregation came at last,
Wishing they could have had the other Blast,
From this their Pastor, who is gone to be
With his Great Master in Felicity.
Oh Cruel Death, what makes you take so fast
Away our Doctors, who the Word should cast
Of God unto them, who is heard to say
We do Lament that Death he took away
From us some Preachers, but the other Day,
As Famous Bates, and Gammon, he did strike,
Now Holy Mead, he has served him the like,
But this you took and he must ever be
Sitting with Angels to Eternity.
Therefore, stay Death, I pray now come not here,
So boldly thus, our Preachers for to clear;
Who would dispense the Holy Word of God,
And to Declare the Truth of Mose's Rod,
But since their gone, we will not Weep no more,
In hopes we have left their Fellows still good store,
Which Christ I hope, he will preserve and keep
From Death's bold Hands, who does them Daily seek.
So let them go, their Works will serve to be,
Our Devotion and Good Company,
And serve the Name of God his Master great,
And to the World his Word he did relate,
But now in Heaven he does Praises Sing,
With a loud Voice to his Celestial King,
And since Death seized him, let him ever lie,
In Heaven above, whilst some do for him Cry:
He from the Earth is gone, ever to be,
Upon the Throne with his great Majesty.
Epitaph.
M Most Worthy Soul interred here does Rest,
A And now will set above with Angels Blessed,
T To Sing great Praises to his Heavenly King,
T To all the Nations now his Name does Ring.
M May not his Sheep have cause to Mourn* and say,
E Even they will think upon this fatal Day:
A A Saint they lost, a Saint he was indeed,
D Disturb his Rest his little Flock to Feed.
LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, in Little Britain, over against the
Pump. 1699. Price Two Pence.


