TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY THE HVMBLE PETITION of the Knights,
Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of York.

With their Humble Request to His Majesty for the removing of unruly Soldiers
billited in the said County.

Whereunto is annexed A Copy of a Writing which has been lately dispersed
amongst the Catholics in England, by Sir John Winter, Her Majesty's principal
Secretary and Master of Requests, touching and concerning a contribution of
Money toward his Majesty's supply of his Army.

November. 25.

London, Printed for JOHN Hanson. 1642.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. A Copy of an humble Petition presented to
his Majesty at Colebrooke, from the knights* Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the
same County of York, with their humble request to his Majesty for the removing
of unruly Soldiers, billetted in their said County.
MAy it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
your most humble Subjects show unto Your most sacred Majesty, that in all
humility this County both endeavored to fulfill your Majesty's command, with
the forwardest of your Maiestyes Subjects in the executions of your Maiestyes
royal commands about the military affairs, have expended an hundred thousand
pounds to our great impoverishment, and far above the proportion of other
Countyes, which although we have been willing to serve your Majesty, yet for
the future, the burden is so heavy that we cannot nor are able to forbear,
now upon this our cheerfulness to serve your Majesty, we hoped to have found
equal favor with the other Counties.

But so it is most gracious Sovereign to our great grief, as we conceive your
Majesty's intentions are wholly against the Parliament to the great disservice
of your Majesty, we find our selves oppressed with the billetting of unruly
Soldiers, whose speeches and actions tending to burning of our villages, an^
houses, and to whose insolencyes and villanyes we are so daily subject, as we
cannot say, we possess our wives and children and estates in safety, wherefore
we are emboldened humbly to present this our complaint, beseeching that as the
billetting of Soldiers in any of your Subjects houses against their will, is
contrary to the ancient laws of this Kingdom, confirmed by your Majesty in the
Petition of right.

We most humbly desire your most sacred Majesty, that this insupportable
burden may be taken from us, least by their insolences some bad accident may
happen, as will be much displeasing to your sacred Majesty, and your most
loyal Subjects will never cease to pray for your Majesty's happy reign.

Phillip Wharton. Thomas Gower. Richard Raniugton. Thomas Heblewayte. Peregrine
Stapleton. William Sheffield. John Ramsden. Jngram Hopten. George Freby. Henry
Fairefaz. John Hotham. William Franckland. Christopher Percy. Edmond Stanhop.
Richard Darly. Hugh Bethell. Abraham Anderson. George Moorewood. Thomas
Hishith. William Stricklaud. George Wentworth. Thomas Ledger. John Fowleshy.
Hugh Cholmly. John Ansuby. John Stappleton. Thomas Connington. Will. Morlesby.
George Butler. George Crotter.
Cum multis aliis.

A Copy of a Writing which has bin lately dispersed amongst the Catholics in
England, by Sir John Winter, Knight, Her Majesty's principal Secretary and
Master of Requests, touching and concerning a contribution of money toward His
Majesty's supply of His Army.
BY Her Majesty's Command to the Catholics in England, Greeting,
We have so good a belief of the loyalty and affection of His Majesty's
Subjects, as we doubt not but upon this occasion for the defense of His
Majesty's Honor and Dominions, you will express your selves so affected as
her Highness has always represented your Obedience to His Majesty, so in
this common consent which has appeared in the Nobility, the Judges, Gentry and
others, to forward His Majesty's service by their persons and estates, her
Majesty has made no difficulty to answer for the same correspondencie in his
Catholic Subjects, notwithstanding they have already concurred to His
Majesty's service, according to the qualities and values of each several
Gentleman's estate: Therefore having already by other means recommended to Her
Majesty this earnest desire of yours, to assist and serve His Majesty by some
considerable sum of money, Her Majesty freely and cheerfully presented, her
Majesty has thought fit, to the end that this her desire may be the more
public, and the more authorized, hereby, commanding me to give you Commission
and Direction to distribute Copies under hand of this Testification thereof
unto those that have met at London by Her Majesty's direction about this
business, and unto the several Collecters of every County, and as her Majesty
presumes the sum that shall be raised will not be unworthy our presenting to
the King, so will Her Majesty be very sencible of that, as a particular favor
to her Majesty in the most efficacious manner her Majesty can, to improve the
merit of it, to remove any apprehension of prejudice to any who shall employ
themselves toward the success of this business, by this they may be assured,
that Her Majesty will secure them from all objected inconveniences. And Her
Majesty is very confident, that Her Majesty's first recommendation will be so
complied withal, as that it may not only afford Her Majesty her particular
satisfaction, but also facilitation toward their own advantages.

FINIS.

