To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Parliament of England, assembled in the House of COMMONS at WESTMINSTER.
The humble Petition of the Tenants and Freeholders of the Manor of Gillingham
in the County of Dorset.
HVMBLY SHOWS;
THat at a Parliament held in February in the fourth year of his now Majesty's
Reign, a Petition was then exhibited to the Grand Committee for Grievances, by
the then Tenants of the said Manor of Gillingham aforesaid, subscribing their
names to the particular Grievances then thereby complained of, arising upon the
disafforestation of the late Forest of Gillingham on the behalf of themselves,
and of 400. others, which never compounded or were questioned, who had right of
Common within the same late Forest, containing a complaint against a
commission then lately awarded out of his M^jesties Court of Exchequer, to Sir
James Fullerton, and others, for the enclosing of the said late Forest, and a
place there called the Bayliff^s walk, and against the proceedings of the said
Commissioners, in executing of the said Commission; and likewise against a
Decree made against the said Petitioners in the said Court of Exchequer,
concerning the said Forest and Bayliff^s walk. By which Commission and
proceedings thereupo^, the said Petitioners, and many hundreds more of the
Tenants and Inhabitants, and Commoners there, were much damp^ifi^d and
oppressed, as was alleged by the said Petition; And therefore the said
Petitioners humbly prayed, that the said Commission and ptoceedings might be
examined; which said Petition was read, and ordered to be retained, and a day
appointed for hearing the said Cause. As by the said Petition remaining in this
Honorable House, and by the subscriptions, and Copy of the Order of this
Honorable House thereupon made ready to be produced, may more fully appear;
but by reason of the sudden dissolution of the same Parliament, the cause was
not heard; since which time, diverse other wrongs and oppressions have been
against the said Tenants by the Agents and Instruments of the R^ght Honorable
the Earl of Elgin, the present Fee-Farmer of the said Manor and Forest; all
which are comprehended in the Articles annexed.

Humbly therefore pray, that you will be pleased to revive the Cause upon the
first Petition, and to hear and relieve your Petitioners complaint, as well in
those as in these other Grievances since happening, as the justice of the Cause
shall require.

And your Petitioners saall ever pray, etc.
THE CASE.
THE Manor of Gillingham is ancient D^measme, and belongs to the Crown of
England, and has always heretofore used to be parcel of the Queens
Jointure, and never out of the hands of the King, Queen, of Prince for the time
being, until the same was lately granted in Fee-Farme to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Elgin parcel, of which Manor is a great Wast or Common, called
the Bayliffes Walk.

That within the said Manor and Bayliff^s Walk, lies the late Forest of
Gillingham, compassed almost round by the said Manor and Bayliff^s Walk,
within which Manor are many Freeholds, and above 200. Copies of Inheritance at
Fine, and heriot certain, the which Fines and heriots, Rents and Profet, of
Courts, have been paid to the Queens use, and ordered by the Court of the
Manor.

That there is likewise another Manor consisting of several Copy holders of
Inheritance, called the Forest Manor, at fine, and heriots certain; the
which Fines, Herots, Rents, and Profits of Courts, have been paid to the
Wardens of the Forest his use, and ordered by the Forest Court of that Manor.

That all the said Tenants of both the said Manors, and other Inhabitants,
have time out of mind had and used to have Common of Pasture within the said
Forest, for their Horse Beasts, and other Beasts, levant and couchant upon
their respective tenements all the year, at all times of the year, as to their
respective tenements belonging, and Common of Pasture within the said Bayliffes
Walk, for their Horse Beasts, or other Beast and sheep levant and couchant
upon their respective tenements, all the year, at all times of the year, as
to their respective tenements likewise pertaining.

That the said Fine, certain, and customs, have been by several Decrees, the
one in the Ezchequer, the other in Queen Annes Court, and by an Act of
Parliament 7. Jacob. Reg. confirmed, and the Charter exemplified, which cost
the tenants above 800. pounds.

That in Aug. 1. Car. Reg. a Commission issued forth of the Exchequer to Sir
James Fullerton Knight (being Commissioner and Patentee, for about 40. years
of the said Forest, at a small Rent) and to others, whereof the said Sir James
Fullerton was of the Quorum, to disafforrest and improve the said Forest, for
the advancement of his Majesty's Revenues, with Articles of Instruction
annexed, for compounding with the Commoners and Officers by allotments out of
the said Forest, in satisfaction of their Common and Offices there; and for
relief of the poor, and for setting out convenient highways through the
said Forest, as by the Records thereof in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer;
amongst other things may at large appear.

1. GRIEVANCE.
THat 22. Jacob.Reg. a Map of the said Forest was taken by one Mr. Ienkins and
his men, who brought with him a perambulation thereof, as he pretended, wherein
was included all the Bayliffes Walk, and the Houses, Gardens, and Enclosures of
about two hundred Tenants and Cottage.

2. That for doing that service, the said Mr. Jenkins required the then
Bayliffe and Hayward of the said Manor to attend his men, and to inform them
of all the places named in the said Perambulation, and the houses and grounds
of the Tenants: All which was pretended to be within the said Forest; And the
said Mr. Jenkins after the taking thereof, alleged upon his oath, that he was
assisted therein with diverse ancient witnesses, albeit the said Map was taken
by his men only, and himself very seldom with them.

3. That 23. Aug. 22. Jacob. a Court of Survey was holden at Gillingham, at
which Court a Jury was sworn to present, according to Articles then delivered
them, whereof one of them was for the bounds of the Forest (none of the Jury
then perfectly knowing the bounds between the said Forest and the said
Bailiffs walk, which had been used time out of mind, And having no evidence
produced therefore, they did not distinguish the said bounds in their
presentment, but did present only the aforesaid mapp, which the said Mr.
Ienkins produced unto them upon his Oath according to the perambulation he
brought with him; by which means the Bailiffes walk was taken to be Forest.

4 That the Commissioners caused the Tenants one by one to be drawn into a
little close private Chamber in an Inn in Gillingham, where the then Bailiffe
kept the door, and there compounded with some of them for their Commons in the
said Forest, promising, to allot to every of them ratably after the rate of
ten Acres of Forrest-ground for every 100. Acres of their several, and so after
that proportion, and to every ancient Cottage and Acre, and in that manner got
the subscriptions of 73. several men's names, of which nineteen did subscribe
for such as were not present, and some of them knew not of the said Commission,
and some of them after disastented to the said subscription, and some of them
so subscribing were the Commissioners themselves.

5. That the King by the Agreement was to enclose the out-bounds of his part
round, which is not performed.

6. That the alotments hereupon made, were laid forth defective, and not
pursuant, the said Commission and agreement and his Majesty's directions, and
laid inconveniently in respect of ways to the prejudice of five Market Towns
within 6. miles of the said Forest. And that by His Majesty's directions and
the Commssioners appointment, the said Mr. Ienkins was to lay out the alotments
and ways by the approbation of 12. of the Tenants and Commoners; but he caused
his men to lay them out as he pleased, and being questioned for it by one of
the Commssioners, and some of the 12. he answered, it is so and it must be, and
it shall be so; for I will have it so.

7. That all the alotments for all the said Tenants and poor being about 800.
Families amount not unto above 600. Acres or thereabouts, which are all taken
out of the Bailiffes walks, (except about 50. Acres) the remainder being about
2600. Acres, worth 1300 l. per Annum, (whereof about 200. Acres or more is
taken out of the said Bailiffes walk) is now enjoyed by the E. of Elgin, and
Mr. Kirk.

8. That thereupon at the instance of Sir James Fullerton (who was the Kings
Commissioner in his own cause) the intended improvement being for himself, an
information was exhibited in the Exchequer Chamber (in the name of the Kings
Majesty) by the then Attorney Genesis against some of the Tenants which had
subscribed as aforesaid, and against some others that had refused, and upon
pretense that the said Composition was made with the Major part of the
Commoners, and that the Bailiffes walk was within, and parcel of the said
F^rrest and answers made by such as were then questioned, diverse orders were
obtained there for the strengthening of the said Alotments, and a decree was had
against them, and all other the Commoners though no parties; whereupon the said
Sir James Fullerton and Mr. Kirk enclosed the residue for His Majesty as was
pretended, but kept it for their own uses.

9. That the highways by those enclosures are become impassable, and laid
upon the general Charge of the Parishioners for reparations; whereas by
Agreement the same were to be repaired by the Kings Farmer, and the Country to
be discharged, and the way^s to go through the enclosed grounds of His
Majesti^s part without restraint or limitation.

10. That diverse highways within the said late Forest, by the said
enclosures are diverted above half a mile about, and some wholly stopped up to
the great annoyance of the Country, for that they have spoiled their horses
and wares, and have been enforced to give their money to go through the
enclosed grounds.

11. That the said Sir James Fullerton did assign, devise, or leave the
remainder of his Term in the said Forest, to the said Earl as his Excecuter
in trust for the Lady Bruce his relict, and for the said Earl, or one of them,
and the said Earl has since procured to him and his heirs, both the said
Manors, and Forest, and Pa^ke likewise from His Majesty in fee farm for a
small fine and rent, per annum; for the premises being about 140. l. 16. s. 8.
d. whereof about 48 l. is the ancient rent of both manners, in respect of the
true value thereof being worth near 2000. l. per annum in good times: And
albeit the wood and Timber in the said late Forest at the time of the
dis^fforestation were worth 8000. l. at the least, which was to be sold for His
Majesty's best profit reserving a great part of it for mainta^ning hous^s,
bridges, Fences, and highways in the Forest, Park, and manor, yet it
being for the most part cut down and sold, and almost all the posts, pales, and
railes of the Park, Fences, being part of that Timber, are taken up and sold
by Mr. Bronker; for which many hundreds of the best timber Trees in the Forest
and Park were selled, out of which His Majesty has had very little profit but
great loss.

12. That the said Earl has by Tko. Bronker Gentleman, and others his Agents
and Instruments er deavoured of late to advance his purchase of the premises by
requiring and taking more beryets of the Tenants there then by the Custom are
due, to the great oppression, of the said Tenants your Petitioners, and has
preferred a Bill in the Exchequ^r, endeavoring to make good such unjust and
unconscionable demands concerning them and other things, and has likewise
taken away the yearly fees belonging to the Reeue of the said Forest and
Forest manor, being yearly by Custom, to be one of the said Tenants of the
said Forrest-mannour, amounting in value to 3. l. per annum and upwards, and
given no allowance for the same, His Majesty's directions therein not being
performed.

13. That the Court Rolls may be put from time to time into the common Chest,
appointed for that purpose, where all the ancient Court Rolls of the said
manor are, and have been ever by custom used to be put for near 500. years
past, as in an ind^fferent and safe hand be^ween the Lord and Tenants; but that
there are the rolls of 13. years last past kept in Mr. Bronker, or the Deputy
Stewards hands, and not put into that Chest to the hazard of the Tenan^s
Estates, and palpable breach of their Customs.

14. That of late a new constat of Alotments, upon the said disafforestation
has been made by the private direction of the said Thomas Bronker, and one
Edward Coward Agents under the said Earl, with great alterations from the
former, without the consent of the said Tenants or other legal authority to
warrant the same; whereby the Tenants and poor are much wronged.

15. That Charles Wills, Morgan Cave, and Edm. Coward, did subscribe and accept
of 110. Acres of the Forest for 110 poor men, named in 2. several notes
delivered to the Commissioners, and to be assured to them and others, as
feoffees in trust, to remain to the use of the poor for ever, a great part
whereof is altered and taken away.

16. That the said Charles Wills, Morgan Cave, and Edm. Coward, did subscribe
and accept of 50. Acres of ground of the Forest for 48. of the poorer sort of
Tenants named in a note presented to the Commissioners, the which note was left
in the hand of Edm. Coward, that he should take the hands of such as were named
in the said note, and to return the note to London to the Commissioners with
speed, which was not performed; but many years after Coward of himself,
without the consent of the others, put out about 20. of such as were named in
the said note, and put in others in their places; but they were such as must
sell, whereby he was rewarded of the buyer and seller, and the most of them do
not know where their Acres do lie; for that it was enclosed in the poores and
other Tenants grounds long before.

17. That after the ground was laid out for the poor and other Tenants Mr.
Thomas Branker, Richard Perue, William Sheapheard, Peter Green, Ben. Sanger,
Io. Wilkins, and Mary Green, did enclose about 40. Acres of the best of the
ground of the poores, and poorer sort of Tenants to their own use: By means
whereof the ground which is left for the poor, is half a mile in length, in
nature of a Lane, and 30. ways over it, and no allowance of ground for ways,
and is now by the said new constat set out in 9. several places, by which
means near 200. tenants and poor receive much wrong.

18* That the said Earl has now lately caused to be taken out an Inquisition
and attachment against the Inhabitants of five towns, and Parishes near the
said Forest, to satisfy him above 1000. l. for his pretended damages, to the
great disturbance and oppression of the Inhabitants near the said Forest.

19* That the said Earl does of late take upon him to dispose in Court of the
Copyhold Lands of Inheritance of the heirs of such tenants as dye, their
heirs being underage, and let out the same at under values by way of Lease for
many years together, with unreasonable and unjust allowances, to the manifest
wrong and oppression of such Infants, which is a great incroachment on the
liberty and property of the said tenants, and an attempt to draw the tenants
heirs, being minors, into a greater slavery and servitude, then a tenure in
Capite, whereas the Ordinance concerning the Court of Wards aymts (as the
Petitioners humbly conceive) at the Liberty of the Subject, even in cases of
Capite, or Knights service tenure.

20. That one Woolridg being Bayliffe of the Manor of Gillingham, and employed
in all the business concerning the disafforestation of the said Forest, was
upon a Riot of a breach of the Enclosures of the said Forest, accused in
Star Chamber for an Abettor by some who were great enemies to him for his
service done about the disafforestation, and was fined 200. l. which fine, with
others the said Sir James Fullerton had granted to him from his Majesty, with
power to discharge any that were fined, as he pleased; And being truly
informed, he did freely forgive the said fine to the said Woolridg. But after
his death, the said Earl caused the said Woolridg to be imprisoned for the same
Fine, and the said Mr. Bronker has unjustly levied of the goods and estate of
the said Woolridg, for the said Fine, above 260. l. besides it cost (the said)
Wolridg 40. l. to bring it to a hearing.

21. That Wolridg brought a suit against the said Earl, and Bronker, and
others in the Exchequer chamber, hoping to have been relieved, and have had
restitution of his goods being so unjustly taken; but when it was heard, and
the depositions of witnesses read, the Earl sitting in Court, a Letter was
delivered, and two or three lines read of it; whereupon Baron Trevor stood up;
and did take the letter, and did look in it, and said, I will believe this
Letter, before any of their Oaths (meaning the witnesses sworn in that Cause)
and that he did see no cause in Equity, why any restitution should be made of
the said Goods to the said Wolridg, and thereupon dismissed the Cause out of
the said Court.

22 That it was agreed between the Commissioners and Tenants that subscribed,
that the alotments of the Tenants should be assured unto them in the name of
Customary Lands without Rent or Fine, which is not performed.


