TO THE HONORABLE, THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND BVRGESSES IN the House of Commons
in Parliament.
The humble Petition of sundry of the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and
others of the Inhabitants of the County of Suffolk, to the number of above
13000. presented Jan.31. 1641.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas by the blessing of God, His Majesty's grace and favor toward
us, and the long continued labors of this Honorable Assembly, many grievances
and burdens both in Church and Commonwealth (under which we had a long time
groaned) are removed, which with all humility and thankfulness we humbly
acknowledge, yet understanding that many Bills tending to the honor of His
Majesty, the safety and welfare of this Kingdom, have by this Honorable
Assembly been voted and now lie in the Lords House unpassed, by reason of the
Popish Lords and Bishops sitting there, as we conceive, by reason whereof
together with the not execution of Laws against the Popists (who not with
standing through the providence of God, have been discovered and disappointed
in many of their treacherous plots against the King and State) they and their
adherents are still emboldned in their mischievous plots and conspiracies, a
lamentable experience of whose treasons and bloody cruelties we hear is daily
presented to this Honorable Assembly from Ireland, whose doleful condition
your Petitioners do much piety and bewail. We therefore your Petitioners being
greatly distracted and full of fears of some sudden and cruel design to break
out against the peace of the Kingdom which puts us into an unsettled condition,
and occasioneth a general decay in trading, tending to the impoverishing of
the Nation unless timely prevented, and having most of us solemnly protested
to maintain the Protestant Religion against all Popery, and to desend his
Majesty's Royal person, honor and estate and the High Court of Parliament,
and to endeavor the union and peace of the three united Kingdoms, do humbly
and earnestly pray,

That this Honorable Assembly will be pleased to improve all good means that
the Popish Lords and Bishops may be removed out of the House of Peers, that
this Kingdom may be secured, and our poor distressed brethren in Ireland may
be speedily relieved, that the Laws against Popists may be put in execution,
that delinqurnts may be punished and out former Petitions against Bishop Wren
and cur seandalous Ministers may be speeded, and that all burdens in Church
and Commonwealth may be removed, with the causes thereof.

And your Petitioners according to their bounden duty shall daily pray for a
prosperous success of this Parliament.

THE ANSWER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS TO This Petition, delivered by Mr. Speaker.
Gentlemen,
I Am commanded by the House to return hearty thanks to the Petitioners for
their love and care expressed in the first part of this Petition, and the House
is resolved to take the rest of the Petition into their serions consideration;
and I am further commanded to tell you, that the House has already transmitted
Bishop VVren to the Lords.

Printed in the Year, 1641.


