Tom. Brown's LETTER From the SHADES, to the French King in Purgatory.
Facit indignatio Versum.
AND will thou leave Young Jemmy in the lurch?
A plague confound the Doctors of thy Church.
And so abandon poor Italian Molly,
That had the sirking of thy Bumm with Holly!
Were I thy Confessor, who am thy Martyr,
Do think that I Would allow thee any Quarter,
No -- thou should find what it is to be a Starter.
Lord! with what monstrous Lies, and senseless Shams,
Have we been cullied all along at Sams.
Who could have ever believed, unless in Spite,
Lewis le Grand would turn rank Williamite?
Thou, that have looked so fierce, and talked so big,
In thy Old Age, to dwindle to a Whig,
By Heaven I see you are in thy Heart a Prig.
I Would not be for a Million in thy Jerkin.
Before George thy Soul's no bigger than a Gerkin.
H'ast thou for this spent so much Ready Rhino
Now, what the plague will become of Jure Divino?
A Change so monstrous I could never have thought,
Though Partridge all his Stars to vouch it, brought,
S'life I Will not take thy Honor for a Groat.
Even Oaths with thee, are only things of Course,
Thou, 'Zoons thou art a Monarch for a Horse.
Of Kings distressed thou art a fine Securer,
Thou make'st me Swear, that am a known Non-Juror.
But though I swear thus, as I said before,
Know, King, I Will place it all upon thy Score,
Were Job alive and banter'd by such Shufflers,
He Would out-rail Oats, and Curse both thee and Bouflers.
For thee I Have lost, if I can rightly scan 'em,
Two Livings worth full Eightscore Pounds per Annum.
Then Geese and Pigs my Table never did fail,
And Tyth-Eggs merrily flew in like hail,
My Barns with Corn, my Cellars crammed with Ale.
The Dice are changed, for now, as I Am a sinner,
The Devil, for me knows where to buy a Dinner.
I might as soon, though I were never so willing,
Raise a whole Troop of Horse, as one poor Shilling.
My Spouse, alas! must flaunt in Silks no more,
Pray Heaven for Sustenance she turn not whore;
And Daughter Peggy too, in time I fear,
Will learn to take a Stone up in her Ear.
My Friends have basely left me with my place,
What Is worse, my very Pimples bilk my face.
And frankly my Condition to disclose,
I most resent the ungratitude of my Nose,
On which though I have spent of Wine such store,
It now looks paler than my Tavern score.
My double Chin's dismantled, and my Coat is
Past its best days, in Verbo Sacerdotis.
My Breeches too this Morning, to my wonder,
I found grown Schismatics, and fallen asunder.
When first I came to Town with Houshold-Clog,
Rings, Watch, and so forth, fairly went for prog,
The Ancient Fathers next in whom I boasted,
Were soon exchanged for primitive Boiled and Roasted.
Since it is no Sin of Books to be a Glutton,
I truck'd St. Austin for a Leg of Mutton.
Old Jerome's Volumes next I made a Rape on,
And melted down that Father for a Capon.
When these were gone, my Bowels not to balk,
I trespassed most enormously in Chalk.
But long I had not quartered upon tick,
Ever Christian Faith, I found grew monstrous sick:
And now, alas! when my larv'd Entrai^s croke,
At Partner How Is I Dine and Sup on Smoke.
In fine, the Government may do its Will,
But I Am afraid my Guts will grumble still.
Dennis of Sicily, as Books relate Sir,
When he was tumbled from the Regal State Sir,
(Which by the by I hope will be your Fate Sir,)
And his good Subjects left him in the lurch
Turned Pedagogue, and Tyrannized in Birch:
Though thus the Spark was taken a Peg lower,
Some feeble signs of his old State he bore,
And Reigned over Boys that Governed Men before.
For thee I wish some Punishment that worse is,
Since thou 'ast spoiled my Prayers, now that my Curses.
May thy Affairs (for so I wish by Heavens)
All the World over at Sixes ly and Sevens.
May Maintenon, though thou so long have kept her;
With Brand-Venereal singe thy Royal Scepter.
May all the Poets, that thy Fame have scattered,
Un-god thee now, and Damn what once they flattered
The Pope, and Thou, be never Cater C^^ns,
And Fistulas thy Arse-hole seize by Dozens.
Thus far in jest; but now, to pin the basket,
May thou to England come of Jove I a^k it.
Thy wretched Fortune, Lewis, there to prop,
I hope thou wilt in the Friars take a Shop.
Turn Puny Barber there, bleed lousy Carmen,
Cut Corns for Chimney Sweepers, and such Vermin,
Be forced to Trim (for such I Am sure thy Fate is,)
Thy own Hugonots and Us Non-Jurors gratis.
May all this happen, as I Have put my Pen (...),
And may all Christian People say Amen to^.
LONDON: Printed for Will. Jack about.


