To His Grace John Marquess of Tweeddale, His Majesty's High Commissioner for
the Kingdom of Scotland.
The humble PETITION of Nicholas Dupin Esquire, Joseph Blake, Peter Kersteman,
and Nathaniel VVyersdale of London Merchants, in behalf of themselves and
diverse other Merchants of the City of London, their Partners, for WORKING of
all sorts of MINES and MINERALLS in this His MAJESTY'S ancient Kingdom of
SCOTLAND.
Most humbly shows,
THat Your Petitioners for these several years bypast, have at their own
proper Costs and Charges in Foreign parts, and at home, made it their Business
to find out and discover, the Art and Mystery not heretofore used in this
Kingdom, viz. The Art of Finding, Preparing, and Working of Mines, and all
sorts of Minerals, Oars and Metals. And to that end, Your Petitioners have
provided and agreed with several skillful Outlandish Ingeneers, and others,
well known to be good and experienced Artists, in discovering all sorts of
Mines, and Working and Smelting all sorts of Minerals, Oars and Metals
whatsoever.

And whereas Your Petitioners have agreed, and taken sundry Leases or Tacks
from several persons in this Kingdom, for considerable Terms of years, of their
Mines, Oars, and Minerals in their Lands. And for the establishing and better
carrying on so good and National an Undertaking, (without the least intent to
hinder or prejudice any other person, or persons whatsoever, who have already
set up the Working any Mines or Minerals in this Kingdom) have raised a
considerable Joint Stock, to be employed in their Mines and Minerals here; by
means whereof, not only their said Ingeneers and Artists, but also a great
number of poor People and others, are at present actually employed, which will
highly advance the Wealth of this Kingdom, by bringing forth out of the Ground,
those Treasures that have been so long hidden.

And whereas Your Petitioners are credibly informed, that great quantities of
Copper is yearly imported from Swedland, and several other Foreign parts, into
this Kingdom, to the great prejudice of the Balance of Trade. And Your
Petitioners being well assured, of being able out of their several Mines, to
furnish this Kingdom with Good Fine Copper, which for the future will not only
be a Means to prevent the Importation thereof, but will also save great Sums of
money in this Kingdom, which has heretofore gone thence to answer the same;
and will employ many poor People, improve Trade, and tend to the enriching this
Nation.

Your Petitioners therefore, in behalf of themselves and their several
Partners, humbly pray this Most Honorable House of Parliament, will be pleased
to grant unto Your Petitioners, that the said Mines and Mineral-Works, and
Undertakings, may be created a Manufactory; and from henceforth be called by
The Name of The Company, for Working of Mines and Minerals in the Kingdom of
Scotland: With Privilege unto Your Petitioners, to make, or cause to be made,
Pence, Halfpence and Boadles, out of the Copper of this Nation; with a proviso
therein, that the same shall not hinder nor obstruct any person or persons, who
have already set up the Working Mines, Minerals or foresaids in this Kingdoms
Provided also, that the foresaid Grant shall not prejudice His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, in their Rents, Rights and Revenues, out of any Royal
Mines in this Kingdom.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray: etc.

