The Sorrowful Complaint Of Conscience and Plain-Dealing.
Against Millers, Userers, Tailors, and Hostisses, By which poor Conscience and
PlainDealing was sufficiently abused, as you shall hear by these following
lines.
To the Tune of, Packingtons Pound.
This may be Printed, R.L.S.

Entered according to Order.





As through the City I passed of late
Plain Dealing I met in a sorrowful state,
Both Cold and Dejected, and slighted with all,
His grief it was great, and his comfort was small:
Poor Conscience stood by him and clearly dismayed,
To think that they would not have him in their trade
For most of the Nation upon them did frown,
Plain-Dealing and Conscience is clearly run down.
We have been a ranging the Nation all round,
To seek entertainment, yet none can be found;
The Graziers and Farmers were all in a rage,
Against poor plain-Dealing they vowed to engage;
Each Miller came out with a lusty great Club,
And bid us be gone, or our sides they would drub,
And thus we were posted through every Town,
Plain-Dealing and Conscience was clearly run down.
For thus said the Millers if Conscience should stay,
We then must give half of our profit away;
For out of a Bushel we cannot take a Peck,
But Conscience will presently give us a check
And Plain-Dealing too he is one of the crew,
that straight way will cry we took more then our due
For this very reason upon us they frown,
Plain-Dealing and Conscience was clearly run down.
Our Enemies daily increased so fast,
That up to the City we traveld at last,
For good entertainment we much did not fear,
But when we come there we were never the near:
The Misers whose coffers was crammed well with gold
Plain Dealing and conscience they would not behold,
But knitting their brows, and upon them did frown
Plain Dealing and Conscience is clearly run down.
The Userers cried they must both be denied,
Should we entertain them then what would beside,
Of this our Silver and plentiful store,
The which we have gotten by grinding the poor:
We should have no comfort, peace, quiet, nor rest,
If conscience should harbor or lodge in our breast,
For this very reason upon us they frown,
Plain-Dealing and Conscience is clearly run down.
But when we beheld how the Misers did frown,
We then went amongst all the Tailors in Town,
The Tailors no sooner of Conscience did hear,
But then how they trembled and quaked for fear:
But yet to poor Conscience they gave an abuse,
And threw at Plain Dealing their shears and their goose,
Then knitting their brows upon us did frown,
Plain-Dealing, etc.
The Tailors discoursed and held this dispute,
We cannot pinch a Coat in the making a Suit,
But Conscience will presently fly in our face,
With frights and with fears of a future disgrace:
And thus he would have our profit but small,
For Conscience allows us no Cabbidge at all,
This is the main reason upon us they frown,
Plain-Dealing, etc.
Poor Conscience he then to the Ale-wives did go,
But yet they no favor nor friendship would show:
The Host he did fret, and their wives they did sums
And would not so much as show Conscience a room
For fear he should into Extravegance run,
And tell them of all their old tricks they had done,
For this very reason upon us they frown,
Plain-Dealing, etc.
It Is poor Men that Labor and brings them the coin
Which decked them in Silks and in Laces so fine,
When may be their wives and their children may lack
Both food for their bellys and clothes to their back
Yet two pots for one they will commonly score,
But Conscience will sharply reprove them therefore
For this very reason the Hostess does frown.
Plain-Dealing, etc.
The Ale-wives in order your stomachs to fit,
Will bring in the morning a Relishing bit,
And these are the baits and the snares which they lay
To tempt and allure men to tarry all day
Then calling for Brandy, Tobacco, and Beer,
An then how the Hastis will simper and sneer,
And these are the tricks of the most in the town,
Plain-Dealing, etc.
Then learn to be thrifty before you grow Old,
For Age is despised and Charity's cold:
For should you now labor and bring them the gains,
They then would but call you Old sot for your pains
Then let these few lines be your rule and your guide
For now is the time for to keep down their Pride,
Then joy will increase and your comforts excel,
Then keep a good Conscience and all will do well.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Guilt-Supr-Street.


