A true NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings at the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, At
a Sessions there held On April 25, and 26. 1677.

Where Nine persons (Six men and Three women) were Condemned to die.

With a particular Relation of the Young man at Enfield, and his Brother and
Sister's Trial and Condemnation; who most barbarously abused his Sweetheart by
cutting off one of her Lips, putting out one of her Eyes, slashing her Cheeks,
stabbing her in several places, and other Inhumane Cruelties.

To which is added, a true Account of the Bloody Murder in the Hay-market,
where a Coachman lately killed his Wife with a Fire-fork.

As also an Account how many are Burned in the Hand, Transported, and to be
Whipped.

With Permission.

To. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed in the year 1677.

A true Narrative of the Proceedings at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly.
THe 25th of this Instant April began the Sessions at Justice-hall in the
Old-Bayly. The remarkable Occurrences there, were as follows:

A fellow of a good Name, but poor Condition, and worse Quality, was Convicted
for laying an Embargo on a man whom he met on the Road, by bidding him Stand
and Deliver, but to little purpose: for the Traveller had no more Money than a
Capuchin, but told him, all the treasure he had was a pound of Tobacco, which
he civilly surrendered; and the pitiful Padder to verify the Proverb, and play
at small Games rather than be idle, accepted. Being violently taken from his
person on the Road, this in strict Law was death; but the Court mixing Mercy
with Justice, was pleased to set him by before Condemnation.

A young fellow abusing the Trust reposed in him by a Person of Quality, whom
he had the honor to serve, had most ingratefully and treacherously robbed him
of Jewels, Money, etc. to the value of Twelve hundred pounds; and intending, it
seems, to spend it abroad for acquiring some French Accomplishments, was taken
on board a Ship at Portsmouth. He pleaded guilty, and begging the favor of
Clergy, had it very fully bestowed upon him. All or most part of the Prize was
refunded, and the ingenious Gentleman had only a signal Mark left him of all
his booty.

A woman, whose age might have promised more Chastity and prudence, being
privately delivered of a Bastard-childe, made shift, by her wickedness, to
deprive the poor Infant of that life she had contributed to by her wantonness.
She pretended it came by its untimely end, by falling from her body on the
floor whilst she unhumanely went from the bed toward the door; but she
concealing it above a week under her Pillow, the Law justly Condemned her as a
wilful Murtheress.

An old Offender having lately, with two of his Female Confederates, stolen a
piece of Stuff from a Gentleman in Ludgate Street, had the impudence, within
two days, to take their progress again by the same shop, and being known, he
was apprehended, and now Convicted; and having formerly received the civility
of the Warm Iron, was Condemned to die.

A man for Personating another, and in his Name entering into a Recognizance,
was convict of Felony; and truly was so far inexcusable, since another for the
like offense but two Sessions ago was Condemned and carried to Execution,
though under the Gallows he a gracious Reprieve. However, in this Case the
Crime being committed only before a Justice of Peace, it was some doubt,
whether within the Statute, which makes it Capital; and so the Court waved
Sentencing him to die, discreetly inclining in dubious Cases to favor rather
than severity.

The next was a Case wholly extraordinary; and as it was the first President of
Punishment on that most necessary Statute against cutting off Noses,
dissiguring and maiming his Majesty's Subjects; so in the Circumstances, for
Malice, Cruelty, and Barbarity, it exceeds all the Presidents of former Ages.

A young man of Enfield, being Fellowservant with a very pretty young maid,
pretended Love to her; but meeting with a Repulse, he consults his Sister, who
advised him to get to bed to her, and get her with Child, and then leave her.
This She-devil's Counsel, it seems, the Maid's Virtue hindered him from putting
in execution; and therefore finding all his hopes like to wither, they take new
measures: There was no body in Family but these two and an aged Master and
Mistress, who being both in bed, on the 20th of February last, as this innocent
Virgin and her treacherous Sweetheart were sitting together, his own Brother
and Sister came and knocked and called him by his name, who opened the door and
let them in; but no sooner were they entered, but this Sister, more like a Fiend
than a Woman, fell upon this harmless Maid, and with a Knife, whilst the other
Brother held her, and in a most inhumane manner cut out one of her Eyes, the
sight whereof she has lost; cut her Nose toward the upper part so desperately,
that two bones, produced in Court, were since taken out of it; her Lips they
slashed so, that with much difficulty, and not yet perfectly, she can use them
in speech; two of her Teeth they beat out; gave her a lamentable wound in the
Neck, and two stabs, besides a great wound in the Arm; all which was testified
by the Surgeon: and so leaving her thus mangled as dead, went home; after
which the pretended Sweetheart runs up stairs, wakes his Master and Mistress,
cries out Thieves; the Neighbors come in, send for a Surgeon: The fellow, to
color his Villainy, pretends to have been knocked down, and complains of a
blow on his forehead, but inconsiderable. After some days the Maid comes to her
self, and declares the Authors of this Cruelty: One of the Criminals flies, but
was afterward taken. No theft appeared to have been committed; so that it
being evident that it was a premeditated act of Malice to render her deformed
and unfit for any bodies Addresses, because she would not consent to his
desires, all three of them were found guilty within the Statute, which makes
such barbarous Assaults Felony without Clergy, and so deservedly received
Sentence of Death.

Here was expectation of the Trial of a Midwife for taking up a Child out of
its Grave, etc. but for some reasons it was put off. Also a horrid Murder was
in Easter-week committed in the Hay market by Charing Cross, where a
Hackney-Coachman falling out with his Wife about their Horses going to work, in
his devilish fury got up a Fire fork, and therewith stabbed her into the head
and several parts of the body, of which wounds, after near a weeks languishing,
she died, and by the Coroners Inquest on the 26th instant it was found wilful
Murder; but the Husband immediately after the blows given, made his escape,
and is not since heard of.

There were in all Nine persons, Six men and Three women, Condemned; Nine
Burned in the Hand; and Six, for petty Larceny, to be Whipped at the Carts Tail.

FINIS.

