A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Late ACTIONS between the CONFEDERATE Army Commanded by
Prince LEWIS of BADEN, and that of the French, under Marishal De Lorge:
wherein Three thousand Five hundred of the French were Killed and Wounded, with
1500 Prisoners: many Tinn Boats, and two Standards, etc. were Taken.
In a Letter from Hailbron.
Licensed 14th June, 1693.

Hailbron June 13th New Style.
ON the Third Seven hundred French Advanced to View our Bridge, but a
Detachment of Hussars and Hessians treated them so well, that most of them were
Killed and taken Prisoners; since which the Enemy have appeared in great
Parties: The Tenth they Played hard with their Cannon into our Camp, and
Designed to pass the Neckar at Wimpfell, but were vigorously Repulsed with the
loss of Fifteen Hundred Men.

A great many were drowned in the River Neckar.

Six hundred fell into our Hands.

And two Thousand were Wounded.

We Lost Five Hundred Men.

The same day, the Marishal D'Lorge, with the whole Army retired Five Hours
from us sent Twenty four Wagons with Men to Phillipsburg and Landaw, and lest
many Tinn Boats behind him on the Neckar.

Twelve Hessians. were so bold before they Decamped, as to pass among the
French, and took out two French Standards, and Swome over with them.

The French Marched the 11th. to Wistonck, and Encamped this Night at Manheim,
but sent their Baggage this Morning to St. Goar, making show of Marching to
Swabia, tho not believed, but it is rather thought they return to the Rhine.

These is now about Fifteen Hundred French Prisoners in our Camp.

Prince Lewis hearing by an Express, that the Elector of Saxony was come to
Oxenfort, is gone Post thither to Confer with him and so return again.

The French Differters do all report, that Fifteen Thousand Boores and Country
Militia make part of the Army.

De Lorge has sent a Trumpet for Exchange of Prisoners, and to desire a Place
to Adjust the Conditions, which was promised. We are assured that the Enemies
Artillery are fixty Pieces of Cannon.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1683,


