The true Loves knot untyed, Being the right path, whereby to advise princely
Virgins how to behave themselves by the example of the Renowned Princess, the
Lady ARABELLA, and the second Son to the Lord seymor, late Earl of Hartford.
To the Tune of Frogs Galliard.


AS I from Ireland did pass,
I saw a Ship at anchor lay:
Another Ship likewise there was,
Which from fair England took her way.
This Ship that sailed from fair England,
Unknown unto our gracious King,
The Lord Chief-Iustice did command,
That they should us to London bring.
I drew more near, and saw more plain,
^^dy Arabella in distress:
(...) wrung her hands, and wept amain,
^ewailing of her heaviness.
When near fair London-tower she came,
Whereas her landing place should be,
The King and Queen, with all their train
Did meet this Lady gallanty.
(...) Arabella then our King
(...) Lady straight did say,
(...) tic'd you to this thing,
(...) England took your way?
None but my self, my gracious Liege,
This ten long years I Have been in love
With the Lord Seymors second Son,
The Earl of Hartford so we prove.
Though he be not the mightiest man
Of Goods and Livings in this land,
Yet I have Lands us to maintain,
So much your Grace does understood.
My Lands and Livings are well known
Unto your Books of Majesty,
Amounts to twelve score pounds a Week,
Besides what I do give quoth she.
In gallant Derbyshire likewise
I nine score Beadsmen maintain there,
With hats and gowns, and hou^e-rent free
And every man five Marks a year.
I never raised Rent, she said,
Nor yet oppressed the tenants poor
I never took no Bribes nor Fines,
For why, I had enough before.
The second part.
To the same Tune




Which of your Nobles will do so,
For to maintain the Commonalty?
Such multitudes would never grow,
Nor be such store of poverty.
I would I had a Milk-maid been,
Or born of some lower degree,
Then I might have loved where I like,
And no man could have hindered me.
Or would I were some Yeomans child,
For to receive my portion now
According unto my degree,
As other Virgins whom I know.
The highest Branch that springs aloft,
Needs must ore shade the middle tree,
Needs must the shadow of them both
Shadow the third in his degree.
But when that tree is cut and gone,
And from the ground is born away,
The lowest tree that there does stand,
In time may grow as high as they.
Once where I thought to have bin Queen,
But yet that style I did deny,
I know your Grace had right to the Crown
Before Elizabeth did dye.
You of the elder sister came,
I of the second in degree,
The Earl of Hartford of the third,
A man of Royal blood, quoth she.
And so goodnight my Soveraign-Leige,
Since in the Tower I must lie,
I hope your Grace will condescend
That I may have my liberty.
Lady Arabella, said our King,
I to your freedom would consent,
If you will turn and go to the Church,
There to receive the Sacrament.
And so goodnight Arabella fair,
Our King to her replied again,
I will take Counsel of my Nobility,
That you your freedom may obtain.
Once more to prison must I go,
Lady Arabella then did say,
To leave my Love breeds all my woe,
The which will be my life's decay.
Love is the knot none can unknit,
Fancy a liking of the heart:
He whom I love cannot forget,
Though from his presence I must part.
The meanest people injoys their Mates,
But I was born unhappily,
For being crossed by cruel Fate,
I want both Love and liberty.
But Death, I hope, will end the strife,
Farewell, farewell, dear Love, quot she,
Once had I thought to have been thy wife,
But now am forced so part from thee.
At this sad parting she had cause
In heart and mind to grieve full sore:
After that time Arabella fair
Did never see Lord Seymor more.
LONDON, Printed for Francis Grove. 1643.


