True Love Rewarded with Cruelty.
Being a true Account of one Mary Story, a Maid, who once lived at Limehouse,
in the Country of Middlesex that was in love with one who had promised her
Marriage, so that the Wedding Day was appointed, but he changd his mind, and
forsook her, whereupon she grief and dyed about the latter end of July, 1683.

Tune of, Tender hearts of London City.


YOu that ever in love delighted,
Pity me that now am slighted
by a young man too unkind,
That did leave me, and deceive me,
which distracts both brain and mind.
I am strangely discontented,
Night and day I am tormented,
my heart is ready for to break;
But i will give over, and love no more,
for my deceitful George's sake.
But why talk I of giving over?
That am now a dying lover,
languishing through his disdain;
And now with smart I break my heart,
but he never pitties this my pain.
He to me did promise Marriage;
Oh! but mind this strange miscarriage,
his wavering mind began to change,
He pleaded debt, which made me fret,
this alteration was so strange.
But he strove to stand the trial,
What would follow his denial,
and to my sorrow now I know
That I must die; most dreadfully
Love wrought my fatal overthrow.
That very dar I should be married,
Then, alas! I so miscarried,
he said that he owed twenty pound;
This cruel news did me amuse,
and gave to me a mortal wound.
He said he would not bring me to trouble
Then my sorrows they grew double,
but 'twas only a pretense
Me to deceive, and strangely leave,
as I have been informed since.
Oh that he should be so cruel
To my flame to add a fuel
that a Maiden will destroy!
No hope can save me from my Grave
since I have lost mine only joy.
In him alone I was delighted,
Now my days are all benighted,
all my comforts now are fled,
While I do mourn like one forlorn;
mind what I say on dying-bed.
Tho there is nothing here can daunt thee,
Night and day i will surely haunt thee
wheresorver thou do go;
You broke Loves laws, and that is the cause
that has procured my overthrow.




Your false tongue was quick amd nimble,
With me you did so dissemble,
that you gained my tender heart,
Which now will break for your dear sake,
that are the cause of all my smart.
Call to mind your gross offenses,
Broken vows, and False pretenses,
which my ruin did procure;
My heart you won, and I Am undone,
cause you to me are so obdure.
Why should you be so ungrateful,
When I proved not deceitful?
but as constant as the Dove;
Why at this rate do you me hate,
and slight me thus for my true love?
Oh! remember all your wishes,
Treacherous vows, and fawning kisses,
that you once bestowed on me,
Me to ensnare; but have a care,
lest my poor Ghost does trouble thee.
In your baseness never glory,
Boast not over poor Mary Story,
time may come when you may rue
That you betrayed a harmless Maid,
who proved so loyal unto you.
Though these lines may little move thee,
For thy faults I must reprove thee
with my latest murmuring breath;
I once again do here complain
that thou have brought me to my death.
You that I do leave behind me,
I entreat you all to mind me,
my last speeches never forget,
This cruel man his Lover kills,
that he so light by her does set.
Then she did begin to shiver,
All her joints did shake and quiver,
her Cherry-lips looked wan and pale,
And cruel Death did stop her breath,
so strongly he did her assail.
You that hear this mournful ditty,
Cannot thuse but greive, and pity
this poor Creature, in distress,
For she did find he was unkind;
she died cause he was pittiless.
Youngmen never prove disloyal,
Put not Maidens to the trial
when you come their loves to win,
Do not pretend to be a friend,
unless their ruined you will begin.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in West Smithfield.


