THE True Lovers Knot Untied:
Being the right PATH whereby to advise Princely Virgins how to Behave
themselves, by the Example of the Renowned Princess, the Lady ARABELLA, and the
Second SON of the Lord Seymor, late Earl of Hartfort.

To the Tune of, Frog's Ga^liard, etc.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.





AS I to Ireland did pass,
I saw a Ship at Anchor lay,
Another Ship likewise there was,
which from fair England took her way.
This Ship that sa^l'd from fair England,
unknown unto our Gracious King,
The Lord Chief Justice did command,
that they to London should her bring.
I drew more near and saw more plain,
Lady Arabella, in Distress,
She wrung her hands and wept amain,
bewailing of her Heaviness.
When near fair London Tower she came,
whereas her Landing-^lace should be,
The King and Queen with all their Train,
did meet this Lady gallantly:
How now, Arabella, said our King,
unto this Lady straight did say,
Who has first tied ye to this thing,
that you from England took your way?
None but myself, my Gracious Liege,
these ten long years i have been in love
With the Lord Seymor's second Son,
the Earl of Hartford so we prove:
Though he be not the mightiest Man,
of Goods and Livings in the Land,
Yet I have Lands us to maintain,
so much your Grace does understand:
My Lands and Livings are well known
unto your Books of Majesty,
Amounts to twelvescore pound a week,
besides what I do give, quoth she.
In gallant Darby-shire likewise,
I ninescore Beadsmen maintain there,
With Hats and Gowns, and House-rent free,
and every Man five Marks a Y^ar.
I never raised Rent, said she,
nor yet oppressed the Tennant poor,
I never took no Bribes for Fines,
for why, I had enough before.
Whom of your Nobles will do so,
for to maintain the Commonalty?
Such Multitudes would never grow,
nor be such store of Pove^ty.
I would I had a Milk-maid been,
or born of some more low Degree,
Then I might have loved where I like,
and no Man could have hindered me.
Or would I were some Yeoman's Child,
for to receive my Portion now,
According unto my Degree,
as other Virgins as I know.
The highest Branch that soars aloft,
needs must beshade the Mirtle-tree,
Needs must the shadow of them both,
shadow the third in his Degree.
But when the Tree is cut and gone,
and from the Ground is bore away,
The lowest Tree that there does stand,
in time may grow as high as they.
Once when I thought to have been Queen,
but yet that still I do deny,
I knew your Grace had right to the Crown,
before Elizabeth did dye.
You of the eldest Sister came,
I of the second in Degree,
The Earl of Hartford of the third,
a Man of Royal Blood was he.
And so Goodnight, my Sovereign Liege,
since in the Tower I must lie,
I hope your Grace will condesend,
that I may have my Liberty.
Lady Arabella, said our King,
I to your Freedom would consent,
If you would turn and go to Church,
there to receive the Sacrament.
And so Goodnight, Arabella fair,
our King replied to her again,
I will take Counsel of my Nobility,
that you your Freedom may obtain.
Once more to Prison must I go,
Lady Arabella then did say,
To leave my Love breeds all my Woe,
the which will be lives decay,
Love is a Knot none can unknit,
Fancy a liking of the Heart,
Him whom I love I cannot forget,
though from his presence I must part.
The meanest People enjoy their Mates,
but I was born unhappily,
For being crossed by cruel Fates,
I want both Love and Liberty.
But Death I hope will end the Strife,
Farewell, farewell, my Love, quoth she,
Once I had thought to have been thy Wife,
but now am forced to part with thee.
At this sad Meeting she had cause,
in heart and mind to grieve full fare,
After that time Arabella fair,
did never see Lord Seymor more.
London: Printed by and for W. O. and A. M. and are to be sold by the
Booksellers of Pye-corner and London Bridge.


