True Copy of the List, or Roll, of the KING'S MAJESTlES most Royal
Proceedings from the Tower through London to White Hall, as it will be
Marshalled by the Lords Deputed for the Office of Earld. Marshall.
(...)is MEssengers of the Chamber Gent. Harbinger, and Sergeant Porter Gent.
and Esquires, the Dukes Servants Gent. and Esquires, the Kings Servants Gent.
Sewers, the Kings Servants in Ordinary Gent. Ushers, Quarter Wayters in
Ordinary Gentlemen Ushers in Ordinary Clarks of the Signet Clarks of the Privy
Seal Clarks of the Council Clarks of the Parliament Clark of the Crown
Chaplains having Dignities Aldermen of London The Dukes Council at Law The
Queens Council at Law The Kings Attorney and Soliciter, with his Learned
Council. The Kings Advocate and Remembrancer Sergeants at Law The Kings
Sergeants Masters of the Chancery Knights Batchellours Secretaries of the
French and Latin Tongues The Queens Secretary Esquires for the Body Sewers
Carvers, Cup-bearers in Ordinary Masters of Standing Offices, being no
Counselors, viz. The Tents Revellers Armory Ward to be made Ordnance
Masters of Requests The Chamberlains of the Exchequer Barons of the Exchequer,
and Judges of the Laws The Lord Chief Baron, and Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas The Lord Chief Justice of England Trumpets Gent. of the Privy Chamber,
and Bed Chamber Knights of the Bath Knights that have been Lords Ambassadors,
Lords President Knights Marshall, The Master of the Kings Jewell-House The Dean
of the Kings Chapel Barons Younger Sons Viscounts Younger Sons Knights of the
Privy Council Knights of the Garter Barons Eldest Sons Earls Younger Sons
Viscounts Eldest Sons Treasurer and Comptroller amongst Barons, according to
their Creation Barons of Parliament Principal Secretary Bishops Marquesses
Younger Sons Earls Eldest Sons Viscounts Dukes Younger Sons Marquesses Eldest
Sons Earls The Lord Admiral, and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, if not
otherwise employed Dukes Eldest Sons Marquesses Dukes Sergeant of Arms
Clarencieux and Norry, Kings of Arms Lord Treasurer Lord Chancellor Chief
Gent. Usher Garter, Lord Mayor of London The Duke And the Lord Great
Chamberlain
Sergeant of Arms Footmen and Squires Gent. Pentioners The Constable, The
Sword born by the Earl Marshall. The KINGS MAJESTY under His Canopie,
Cinqueports. The Master of the Horse leading a spare Horse The Vice-Chamberlain
to the KING.
Gent. Pentioners Footmen and Squires


Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno Dom. 1661.


