The 9th day of April. 1658. A true Report of the great number of poor
Children, and other poor people maintained in the several Hospitals by the
pious care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of LONDON.
CHildren put forth Apprentices, and discharged out of Christ Hospital the
year last past-101 Children buried the said year. -- 025 Children now
remaining under the care and Charge of the said Hospital which are kept in the
house and diverse places in London, and suburbs thereof, and at nurse in the
Country, One thousand and two -- 1002 The names of all which are Registered in
the Books kept in the said Hospital, and are there to be seen from what
Parishes they have been from time to time admitted. The number being so many,
and the charges of keeping of them so great, It is hoped several well affected
persons will freely Contribute toward the maintenance of them, the certain
Revenew of the said Hospital being little more then the Moytie of the
necessary Charges thereof. THere has been Cured this year last past, at the
Charge of St. Bartholomews Hospital, of mained Soldiers, Seamen and other
diseased persons, many whereof being Soldiers and Seamen have been relieved
with money and other necessaries at their departure -- 1244 Buried this year
after much Charge in their sickness -- 0234 Remaining under Cure at this
present, at the charge of the said Hospital -- 286 THere has been Cured at
the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital, this year last past, of diseased persons,
whereof many being Soldiers and Seamen, have been relieved with money, and
other necessaries at their departure -- 1085 Buried this year after much Charge
in the time of their sickness -- 217 Remaining under Cure at present, upon the
Charge of the said Hospital -- 256 THere has been brought to the Hospital of
Bridewell, within the space of one whole year last past of wandering Soldiers,
and other Vagrant people, to the number of -- 705 Many whereof have been very
chargeable to the said Hospital, for Apparel, sick Diet, and Surgery, besides
the ordinary diet, and other provisions and charges expended about them, which
could not be avoided by reason of their necessities, and many of them have been
passed into their native Countries, with Clothing, Apparel, and other charges,
which could not be avoided, considering their naked and miserable condition,
nor they thence passed without such charge. And there are now kept and
maintained in Arts and Occupations, and other useful and necessary works and
labors, at the charge of the said Hospital, Apprentices and other persons the
number of -- 157
THe Hospital of Bethlehem is of great Antiquity, use, and necessity, for
keeping and curing distracted persons, who are of all others most miserable, by
reason of their wants, both for soul and body, and have no sense thereof.

The charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with
Physic, Diet, and other relief, 52 distracted persons constantly at least,
besides the charge of servants to look to them, they being most unruly and not
able to help themselves; and the Rents and Revenues of the said Hospital being
very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearly charge, and
therefore this Hospital is a fit object of charity, there having been and
daily are by the blessing of God, upon the charge of the said Hospital, and
care of those that are entrusted with the said distracted people, diverse
reduced to their former senses.


