THE True Lovers Overthrow,
Whilst poor Amyntas pined to Death,
For Celia bright and fair,
At last for him she lost her Breath,
A grief beyond compare.
To the Tune of State and Ambition.


AH Cupid! thou provest unkind and too cruel,
a true loving Shepherd thus strangely to wound,
She that I counted my Love and my Jewel
But let her prove Faithless, yet I will prove Loyal
and tho she does Tyrannise constant i will be;
For she that has given to me the denial,
my Ruin and Destiny soon she will see,
Here panting I lie and am always complaining,
how she to her true Love has proved severe;
And when I consider her, scorn and disdaining,
from my blubbered eyes then I part with a Tear:
And panting just like a disconsolate Lover,
cry Celia how could thou be cruel to me;
As she her disdain so I folly discover,
and now I am (...)
Now I of my Senses am strangely bereaved,
and captived I am by the charms of her Eye;
Yet at my sad Torments she nothing is grieved,
nor pitties me not tho in Fetters I lie,
But if I at present am scorned and slighted,
and nothing can prove more disdainful than she
Yet she without Quession will once be requited,
and then she will remember her scorning of me.
It Is pity that Cruelty's pleasing unto her,
and that in disdain she should take a delight;
For one time or other I fear 'twill undo her,
and Tyrants but seldom get any thing by it;
What Creature so fair coul'd so slight a poor Lover?
that never was pleased till her Beauty he see;
No Riches nor Pleasure I prized above her,
(...)
Well since it is my fate I must needs be contented,
And under my burden must patiently ly;
What Is for me allotted cannot be prevented:
The worst she can do is to scorn till I Die
And when for her sake, with this World I have parted
Those that do outlive me will sorrowful be,
And say the poor Shepherd he dy's broken hearted
So a sorrowful Epitaph write over me.
And when a long time He in sorrow had pined,
At last he submitted to conquering Death;
His vitals decayed and his life He resigned
And sighing did yield up his murmuring breath
But when these sad tidings to Celia were carried
That she her poor Shephard no oftener should see
Since he by her cruelty so had miscarried
She cr'yd there is none so unhappy as me.
Ah Shepherd most Faithful true, loyal, and constant
Thou for thy fidelity payest to dear,
Who'd thinks that thy doom I should work in an instant
And now my own ruin I greatly do fear
Yet 'twill be but justice if I am requited
For cruel disdain and for storming of thee;
My joys I do fear now will soon be benighted,
Then ruin and sorrow will wait upon me.
But now it is too late my dear Love to recall thee,
Thine eyes they are closed and thy Breath it is gone,
Tho such cruel Destiny chanced to befall thee,
In Loves cooler Shades I will, meet thee anon;
My Conscience is pricked and my Senses confounded,
Wherever I go I thy Spirit do see,
I grieve that to Death a true Lover I wounded,
And now the same Fate is attending on me.
I slight all the comforts that morrtals can give me,
And here on the Earth I no pleasure can take.
There Is nothing on this side the Grave can relieve me,
I must languishing dye for my true Lovers sake,
And now my Amyntas with speed do expect me,
For soon in Eiziu^m with thee i will be:
You powers of Love to the Shades now direct me,
Where I my Amyntas may joyfully see.
Thus since you have heard of two true Lovers Ruin,
I hope this to others a warning will be,
Since this to them both did prove an undooing,
The fruits of disdain here you plainly may see;
Let those that are now bound fast in Loves Fetter,
Endeavor to fly from Pride, Scorn and Disdain,
The Fruits of Love storming, but seldom proves better,
What in pleasure begins, too often ends in pain.
FINIS.

