The true Effigies of the German Giant, now To be seen at the Swan near
Charing Cross, whose Stature is Nine foot and a half in height, and the Span of
his Hand a Cubit complete. He goes from place to place with his Wife, who is
but of an ordinary Stature, and takes Money for the Show of her Husband.
depiction of a German Giant

IT from Tradition has of old been se'd,
This Isle by Giants was inhabited,
Who with an Oak in hand would walk as free,
As once Et teneram ab radice ferens silvane cupressum. Virg. Geor. 1.
Silvanus with a Cypress Tree;
And hence it is like, that first of all 'twas spoke,
This hardy Nation had their hearts of Oak:
Arms lent by Nature, and throughout the Land,
The Oak complying with the Giants hand;
Fit for their hand, and not without desert,
The Oak complying with the Giants heart;
Yet though this Island better fenced stood
With walls of Oak, than Gyantean blood,
With walls, whose tops and bottoms do disdain
All opposition from the Roaring Main,
Yet it must not in honor be denied
Virg. Eneid. 1.
That Giants first did in this Isle reside;
Aetnean Brothers whose bold Heads aloft,
The tops of Hills, and Clouds beneath them scoft;
Such by the Labells both of Fame and Fate,
Was by the dread Hand of mighty Askepate;
Who near Southampton, a full mile, had strength
To throw a Millstone on his foot at length:
So vast a Stone, upon his foot below,
Seemed but a Corn upon the Giants toe.
The place to this day to be seen, does tell
Where this was done, and where the Millstone fell;
And such stout Coronaeus was, from whom
Cornwals first Honor, and her Name does come:
For though he shows not so great, nor tall.
In his Dimentions set forth at Guild Hall,
Know it is a Poet only can define
A Giants posture in a Giants line,
The Art falls short of Nature, and must err,
When Rules are given her by the Carpenter,
Who ought not Bulks uncircumscrib'd to draw
By the small Compass of his own scant Law;
And thus attended with his direful Dog,
The Giant was (God bless us) Gogmagog.
And He who (feared by his prodigious Frame)
Not long since kept the gates of Nottingham;
And many others who have left to all
Succeeding times their proud Memorial.
And though that Nature now more spent and old,
Does in such off springs grow more weak and cold,
Yet some Remainders to this day are seen,
Of what we find she heretofore has been:
Witness this Giant who not long ago
Was seen in Ipswich at a public Show,
And though no Native, yet his Birth must be
Famed, as his Country is of Germany:
Poor Germany who now the Turks do raunt,
Many more Giants like himself does want.
To see him hundreds day by day do throng
As he from place to place does pass along,
His Bode's uncertain, for to think it is vain
One place so tall a Wonder to contain;
His whole proportion is upright, and straight,
It Is nine foot fully, and a half in height:
Not much in debt to Age, his Body clean,
Up to his Stature, and not fat, nor lean;
His Hand exceeds in bigness, and his Span
'Bove twice th'extensions of another man.
He no excess of any Wine does pour
Into his Gorge, nor does he much devour:
And though his Stature be admired, yet he
Does seem much pleased with Mediocritie:
But that which makes the wonder seem more rife,
This so great Giant has a little Wife;
By whose Advice he is carried up and down
From Court to Country, and from Town to Town,
He is her Gain, where ever he does go,
It Is she receives the Money for the Show,
A Woman lovely, and in all complete;
And though but little, yet her wit is great:
Thus heretofore true Love with Love did die
The faithful Phillis, and the good Sir Guy:
But that a Giant, one so tall in show,
Should choose a Wife, and live with one so low,
Is more than ever any Age yet knew;
And happily more than Age again shall view.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Matthew Collins at the Three Black Birds in Cannon-street.
1668.


