True Blew the Plowman, Or A Character of several Callings which he could not
freely fancy, when he found their grand Deceit.
He never yet would change his Note,
He Would rather be aslave.
Nay wear a poor and threadbare Coat.
than counted as a Knave.
To the Tune of, The Country Farmer.
This May be Printed,

R. P.





NOw Trading is dead I resalve to contrive,
And study some calling in order to thrive,
But I will be just in what ever I do,
My Name I must tell you is honest True Blew:
Though Fortune does oftentimes smile on a Knave,
By their unjust dealings they do get and save,
But honest Plain-dealing does live like a slave,
While Ranting brave Hectors goes gallant and brave.
At first I considered what Trade I might be,
To live with Plain-Dealing without Knavery,
I would be a Brewer at first I did think,
And then to be be sure I shall never want drink:
But straightways I thought of the Brewers old fault
Who put in the Water and left out the Malt,
If I should do so and make pitiful Beer,
I should have the Curse of the Tinkers I fear.
As I was a walking a long very sad,
I met a fine Hostels that wanted a Lad,
Her words were so wiinning I could do so less,
But go along with her to tend on the Guess,
She laid, when you wait on a jolly boon crew,
Each Pot as you draw, them be sure you score two,
I told her false-dealing now never would do,
'Twas better be ragged and torn and true.
If this be your dealings I never will stay,
Thought I then I Will pack up my Awls and away,
I finding by this how the current did run,
Poor men by those Ale-wives are often undone,
No wonder it is now that they are so great,
To flourish in Silks at so gallant a rate,
It Is folly that makes men to sell their Estate,
While Ale-wives can flourish and. drink in their plate.
He told me no trouble nor cost he would spare,
Of me he would take a particular care:
I would have a calling without all deceit,
But with such a one, I as yet could not meet,
My Father was willing my joys to complete,
And now of a Tailor I mean for to treat.
I went upon liking a Tailor to be,
And now I will tell you a passage I see,
One brought in my Master some Cloth for a Cloak,
And he at his Cabbaging had a good stroke:
For taking his Shiers he whipped off an Ell,
And straight he condemned it, and sent it to Hell,
Down under his Shop-board, which when I did see,
Thought I then I Will never be Prentice to thee.
A lusty brave Miller came up to the Town,
And I as a Prentice with him must go down,
Thought I with an honest man now I am blessed,
But soon I did find him as bad as the rest:
For if you will believe me, I think in my Soul,
He dad a great Dish was as big as a Bowl,
And there was old taking and taking of Toul,
Thus he would be fishing against all control.
Beside he was counted a slippery blade,
And fain would be toying with every Maid;
There was a young Lass, and her name it was Kate,
With whom he would fain have bin playing the mate:
One day as she came with her Grist to the Mill,
My master the Miller was tempting her still,
The Maiden with courage caught hold of his Ham,
And tumbled him headlong into the Mill-Dam.
It happened to be the lower-side of the Mill,
But yet he lay crying and calling out still:
I could not tell well what the matter might be,
And therefore to him I did run hastily.
But when in the River I did him find,
Thought I in my Heart thou art served in thy kind,
And thus by the Maiden the Miller was fooled,
For then in the River his Courage was cooled.
Thought I, I will never be a slave to this Elf,
For fear he should make me as had as himself,
With same honest Farmer i will get me a place,
Where I may live happy and free from disgrace:
And thus I did leave the old Miller i will vow,
Then taking my self to the Harrow and Plow,
It Is free from deceiving, all Men will allow,
I labor and live by the smeat of my brow.

