THE TRUE RELATION OF THE LATE and HAPPY VICTORY, Obtained by the MARQUIS of
MONTROSE his Excellency, HIS MAJESTY'S Lieutenant, and General Governor of
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND: Against General Lieutenant Baylie, and others of the
Rebels, at Kilsyth, 15 August, 1645.

SOME LINES, Upon the Marquis of MONTROSE HIS EXCELLENCY; Written by the late
Lord GORDON, Who died at Alford, valiantly fighting for His Majesty's Service.
We need not praise thee, let thy passive Foes
Tell their Destruction; whilst our Nation, owes
In compensation, for the blood that is spilt
Memorialls of thy Glory, and their Guilt,
Who tempted first thy Loyalty, to dare
With private Valor, t'vndertake a War
Against a Multitude, Fortune alone
Favoring to bring future successes One:
But now thy Sword has so destructive been,
In spite of Force, and Danger, that the sin
Of bolder Treason, hence-foorth seems to be
The presage of thy further Victory:
Whilst thy succesfull Arm sustayns alone
The freedom of a Kingdom, and a Crown.
GEORGE GORDON.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
AFter the Battle of ALFOORD, MONTROSE resolving to prosecute his VICTORY,
marches the same night to Clunye; where he arryveth in the morning betymes:
And after some hours-halt, moves to Craigtoun, two miles distance from the
North-syde Dee; whence he directs the Earl of Aboyn to Buchan, and all those
next adjacent places, for new Recrewes; in reguard that many of his Forces
consisting of Hy-landers, and others there of those parts, had stragled off the
Army, and gone to their homes. Then General Major Mack-Donald, who had been
directed formerly off, was not as yet returned: Always after some stay there
at Craigtoun, fynding the Supplies, contrary to his expectation, but flowlie
advancing, resolves not to drive time, crosses Dee, marching straight in the
Merns, and quartereth the same night at Fordon; having sent to Aberdene at his
march from Craigtoun, to the Earl of Aboyn; understanding he was, at last,
advanced the length; That he might meet him there in the Merns, as his nearest
way.

ABOYN comes the next morning: But not being well accompanied, MONTROSE
desired him return to increass his numbers; and hasten up again unto him with
all possible speed, he himself marches straight toward Brechen: Where he
understands that General Major Mack-Donald was fallen in the West of Angus,
with Mackclen Inchbrakie, and all those Hy-land Forces. Upon which he
resolves to march toward him: That being joined, he might advance to the
other, side Tay, to prevent the Rebels Levies, and interrupt their Parliament,
which was then intended in great State.

Upon his crossing the River, and march toward Logiamond, the Enemy were
somewhat startled: But so soon as he advanced to Meffen, and sent some parties
of Horss toward the Town of Saint Iohnston, their Foot being retired on the
other side of the Bridge of Ern, their Horss who were upon Guard, and in the
Town, upon the sight of some Scouts, took so the Alarm; apprehending that
MONTROSE was presently to advance and storm; that they run in such fearful
terror, that they would not come in sight of a single Horss-man; though they
were stronger by at least three hundredth.

MONTROSE resolves to incamp there at Meffen, and stay for his Northern
Supplies: which he was to have hourly expected. And fynding the Enemy in such
apprehension, he thought best to keep them going. So, next day (he not being
fourscore Horses) causes mount an hundredth or sixscore Dragoniers, and faceth
the Town, at such a distance, and so ordered, as if he had been all Horss-men,
and having given them an hot Alarm, immediately marches with the same Party
toward Diplin, and the water Ern, to scurrie all those fields, and startle the
Enemy; as if he had been able to command the whole Country by Parties. Upon
which, the Enemy lifts Horss and Foot; fearing his March to Striviling, and
incampeth at Newtown, some few miles from thence, to put themselves in the way.

Some days passing in this kind, the Enemy expecting Recrewes from the West
and South; and MONTROSE impatiently longing for his Supplies from the North:
who should have been long of before with him, directs in all haste thither
for that effect; which yet still tending to Delays, the Enemies whole Forces
being gathered, they resolved to fight before those of the North should come,
and join with MONTROSE, so crosses the water, and advances Horss and Foot
toward his Camp. Upon which (they being stronger in both then above four
thousand) resolves to march: So gives command, that the Baggage provisions,
and all of that kind, might draw off, and puts himself in Batrallie;
directing some Parties to the several passes, as if he had been resolved to
have fought; by which, having amused the Enemy, until his Baggage, and al of
that kind, were so far gone, as they cold be no hindrances, he the^ marches
off in a closs body, keeping a strong party of commanded me^ to flank the few
horss, which he had on the Rear: So the Enemy never doubting, but he was to
have fought, until on the sudden they saw him quyte gone, falls on fast, to
have engaged his Rear: But there being several passes, he so dallies, and
keeps them up, as he puts himself without all reach; and poynting his
courss toward Dunkell, he quickly reaches some strong grounds, where the
Enemies Horses were not well able to follow: Which they perceaving, and fynding
they could be no better, advances fast up their forlorn party of Horss, to
vapor at the pass, that they might seem with handsomness to return.

MONTROSE perceaving, directed some twelve or twenty of his ablest Hylanders,
with snapwarks, who killing some of their Gentlemen, by mark shots; and seeing
them begin to reill, and startle, fell out resolvedly in the open field upon
them, though they were not about in all twenty, and made their whole body of
three hundredth Horss, to run upon the spur; so he marches that night to
little Dankell; where he resolves to incamp it, being a strong ground, and
convenient for the passes of the River, to favor the joining of his supplies:
To who he directed again with all possible diligence to hasten: So a few days
passing in this kind, the Enemy lying near where MONTROSE camped of before at
Meffen, and he still at little Dunkell, the Earls of Airlie, Aboyn, and
Colonel Gordon, came at last along with the Horses, and though not by much so
considerably as were expected, MONTROSE resolves to march straight upon the
Enemy, fynding he could be for the time in no better posture, and that their
forces were much melted away. So marching down toward Logiamond, within some
three miles of their camp, he faced somewhat near with his Horses, to touch
their pulss, and cry before he should engage, whether his intelligence did or
not hold good, making his foot to march off to their quarter that night, they
kept themselves so closs, as almost they did not at all appear, by which it was
expected they would march off before the next morning. So MONTROSE getting very
early to horss, to view the fields; learneth that they had marched in the night
time, in great disorder; and were encamped on the Southsyde the Bridge of Ern:
Upon which, he presently lifts to march toward them, crosses Ern, and
incampeth that night, some six miles short, marches early the next morning: And
coming within view, fyndeth them drawing in so strong a ground, as their could
be no approach, so he resolves to march a little toward their left hand, to
be betwixt them, and the Shyre of Fyff; that they should have no supplies, and
(if it were possible) he might force their ground, so that night passes. Next
morning, seeing them ly still at their Posts, and that they could not be
forced from such advantage, without great hazard, he resolves to march into
Fyff, to break the Randevouses of that Shyre; who were al a-gathething to join
with them; and to draw them also out of those strong grounds, to come to the
supply of their friends: So he removes, and marches that night to Kinrose,
the Enemy making a fashion to follow up his Rear: But not daring heartily to
do it, moves a several way toward the East of Fyff: MONTROSE directing with
a fore party Colonel Gordon, and Sir William Rollock; who having occasion to
send off most of them several ways; ^^ncountred two hundredth of the Enemies,
Horss and foot at a particular Randevo^^ just their in the way, and not being
above twelve persons, charge the Enemy, puts them to the rout, and takes
and kills diverse.

Always MONTROSE fynding that whole Shyre would join with the Enemy; and
that he could not fight them with so great disadvantage: and likewise
understanding that the whole South and West were gathering against him,
resolved with long marches to cross Forth, and shake himself so louse of the
Enemy, as all their auxilaries of Fyff, and those places should weary to
follow, and those Conventions of the West and South be dispersed, before their
Army should be able to reach that length: So be removes from Kinrose next
morning, and incampeth within some three miles of Striviling that night. On the
morrow knowing the Enemy would advance, he marches to be on the other side
Forth, staying himself, with all his horses upon the Rear; the Army being a
good distance gone, his spies come, and tell him, the enemy were advancing: So
seeing some of their scouts already in view, he follows slowly the way off
the march, and learning by a prisoner, that the Enemy were to move all that
night, to have engaged him to fight before their auxilaries should go from
them; who were already very weary, and extreme unwilling to cross Forth: he
resolves likewise to march the whole night. So next morning halting some six
myls on the Southsyde Striviling, MONTROSE fynding that the Enemy had not
crossed the water that night, but camped some three myls short on the other
side. Wherefore he continues his march, comes to Kilsyth the same night;
where he was not well encamped, when the Enemy comes up, and pitcheth within
some three miles. Upon which, MONTROSE resolves next day to fight; knowing
that the Earl of Lanerick had conveaned much of the Country; and was already
with a thousand foot, and five hundredth horss, within twelve myls: As also,
that the whole West was gathering to a head; and that he behoved to fight in
time, or those forces should al join, and come upon him; or otherwise he should
be constrained to take the Hielands.

So next morning he going tymely abroad, to view the Enemy, fyndeth they were
resolved to press him to fight, and not stay upon their Supplies, out of a
conceat they had, he would take the Mountayns, and not bide them. So seeing
them quyte their own ground, and advance toward him to force him from his,
(which was that in the world he most wished) he drew instantly out, and met
them in the field, equal almost betwixt the two Camps, giving al his me^ order,
horss and foot, to cast themselves, and charge in their Shirts, as being al
rather re^^lved to die in the place, nor not carry it, since much of his
Majesty's fortunes did depend on that success. And having two Regiments only
placed, and the horss not as yet al come up; and the whole rest of the foot at
a great distance, the enemy begins already to play hard on some commanded men,
that MONTROSE had advanced to some houses near the place where he was to draw
up; but they being presently beat, and running back in disorder; MONTROSE men
were so inspyred with resolution, and the luster of their whytes, impatient to
stay upon orders, marched along to the top of the bray, hard joining to the
enemies whole body, both of horss and foot. So MONTROSE seeing them engaged,
and that it was as impossible to draw them off as for them to have stood, if
the Enemy had but had the resolution to have charged; thinks that there were
nothing so safe, being so far already engaged, as resolvedly to put it on. The
enemy beginning to stagger; and not al of them either drawn up; so commands
the Van with horss, and flanking Musquetiert advance, and give an home-charge,
and the rest, as they could, to follow in their several order; which did so at
vnaworss astonish the Enemy, as their horss resolved not to stand; and their
foot (after first Salvie) placed all their hopes in their going, which but
served for little; MONTROSE men having the execution of them some fourteen
myls, and of six thousand foot, to which they estimate, there did not (so far
as is known) fifty escape.

Their horss consisting of eight hundredth, were all either killed, taken, or
mightily dispersed. Of Prisoners there were several taken; as Sir William
Murray of Blebo, the Lord of Fairlye, brother to the Lord Burley, Lieutenant
Colonel Dick, Lieutenant Colonel Wallace, and diverse other Captains, and
inferior officers. MONTROSE consisting of some four thousand foot, and five
hundred horss, had not of all above six killed. This so happy and glorious
Victory obtained at Kilsyth, the xv day of August, 1645, did so stonish the
hearts of the Rebels, and state the mynds of the faithful Subject; that the
one seemed to be struke with such terror, as they would have wished hills and
mountains to have covered their iniquity. The other to be so confirmed from
the evident and sensible acknowledgement of GOD Almighties providence; That
they run to profess their Righteousness (then) as the Noonday.

The Rebels went indeed back, not only seven ways, but by more a great many:
some toward Berwick, some to Irland, some to Newcastle, others to Carleell, and
some (as the Jews) scattered every where.

The whole Country, Borrowes, and Gentry, begun all frequently, to offer
themselves to MONTROSE and in particular. The Towns of Glasgow and Linlithgow;
who in their be^^^ against the disperate iniquity of so corrupt a time) stood
loyal (...) for his Majesty, chiefly the former. MONTROSE passing on a day only
at Kilsyth to refresh his people, marchech toward Glasgow, and so to Bothwer
upon Clide, whence he directs parties to the East and West, charge
Edinburgh to render, receaveth them to obedience, relieveth the Earl of
Crawford, Lord Ogilvie, and many other Officers and Gentlemen, who were in
miserable Prisons: and that only for their loyalty and faythfulness to his
Majesty's Service. All the West likewise gives over: The Earl of Eglingtoun
and Cassles (who began to make some stickling; but not being followed by the
Country, and not daring to trust themselves) flying several ways. The whole
Gentry and Commons freely offer themselves for his Majesty's service: and in
particular some in Carrick; who stood loyally affected to his Majesty, the Town
of Air, and other places did the same likewise.

THis is the seventh Battle, and the sixth total Victory, which Montrose (by
the extraordinary Blessings of Almighty GOD) has so happily obtained since his
entry into this Kingdom, which being with himself, and but two Gentlemen only.
The one whereof abandoned him in greatest necessities may truly evidence the
justice of his Majesty's Service, and integrity of that Cause, which has so
happily prevayled: For as prosperity is to be concluded as no infallible mark
of GODS favor: yet the consciousness of innocence, and clearness of Reason
^ecunded by the success of happy Providence, may justly confirm us, that GO^ is
pleased and make us conceive, that if the LORD would have destroyed us; h^
would not have taken our Sacrifice, nor carried us through all this Red Sea and
Wilderness.

Then let al true Christians, and loyal hearted Subjects and Patriots,
acknowledge then auety to GOD, Prince, Country, proper Interects, and
Freedoms; by joining themselves, and all their utmost Indevours, for the happy
Conclusion of this Great Cause; wherein the Truth of Religion, honor of the
King peace of the Country, happiness of the Subjects, are only, and totally
intended: So shall the judgment of GOD be averted, our slavery reauced, our
mourning turned into gladness, and our mouths filled with Songs of
Deliverance.

ECCLES. CHAP. viij VERSE. 2. I counsel thee to keep the kings commandment,
and that in reguard of the Oath of GOD.

Verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: Stand not in an evil thing
for he does what-so-ever pleases him.

Verse. 4. Where the word of a king is, there is, power: And who may say unto
him; What do thou?

Verse. 5. Who so keeps the commandment, shall feell no evil thing.


FJNJS.

