A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Types of His Majesty's Printing House, belonging to the
Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, His Majesty's Printer; Consisting of
several Sorts. All added since the Year 1694.
French Canon. HOPE IN GOD: AND ALL SHALL GO WELL WITH THEE. Does not wisdom cry?
and put forth her voice? Double English Roman. For he flattereth himself in his
own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful. Double English Italick.
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be wise,
and do good. New English Roman. Fret not thyself because of evil doers, neither
be thou envious against the Workers of Iniquity. New English Italick. Let them
shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my righteous cause; yea let them say
continually, Let the LORD be magnified, which has pleasure in the prosperity
of his servant. Pica Roman. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God;
corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that does
good. Pica Italick. God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to
see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God. Longprimar Roman.
Let not them that are mine Enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let them
wink with the eye, that hare me without a cause. For they speak not peace, but
they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the Land.
Longprimar Italick. I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He is ever merciful, and
lends: and his seed is blessed. Depart from evil and do good: and dwell for
evermore. Longprimar Roman, No. 2. He that reproves a scorner, gets to
himself shame: and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a blot.
Longprimar Italick, No. 2. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a
wise man, and he will love thee. Breviar Roman. Be not thou afraid when one is
made rich, when the glory of his house is increased. For when he dies: he
shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him. Breviar
Italick. The fool has said in his heart there is no God; corrupt they are, and
have done abominable iniquity; there is none that does goad. God looked down
from heaven upon the children of men, Pearl Roman. Two things have I required
of thee, deny me them not before I die. Remove far from me vanity and lies:
seed me with food convenient for me: Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
Who is the LORD? or left I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain. Pearl Italick. Be merciful unto me, O GOD, be merciful unto me, for my
soul trusts in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge,
until these calamities be overpast.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, City and College, Anno DOM. School.


