True Love Vnvail'd, Or, The Coy Lady Overcome at last.
This lively Gallant having time and leisure,
Did Court the Lady to Enjoy his pleasure;
But she seemed coy, and would not moved be,
Unto his loving suit for to agree:
Till at the length, Love pleading without fee,
She did resign up all immediately.
To a Rare New Tune, or, The French Minnim.
With Allowance.





DOwn in a Valley where Nymphs are a playing,
and she Young Shepherds are tending their Sheep,
Carefully keeping their Flocks without Straying,
after Dream in a slumbring sleep:
I spied two Lovers just at their first meeting,
who seemed fearful Least they should be seen,
Kindly Embracing, and lovely greeting,
as hand, in hand, they past over the green.
A proper young Stripling the Youth he was truly,
clad in laich Clothing most seemly to see,
Though he was troubled with passions unruly,
Ruddy Complexion'd, and Comely was he:
Of fine Carriage, and loving Behavior,
scarce such another thee was to be found;
One that in Love was not subject to waver,
though the blind Archer had given him a Wound.
The Maid she was bonny, of beauty most bright;
and like to Diana was clothed in green;
He needs must be frozen that could not delight,
In such a Girls Company for to be seen:
With Amorous Glances she looked on her Lover,
yet she did modestly blush the same time,
Which made him more willing his mind to discover,
fearing his silence was counted a crime.
Now my own Dearest, since it is our good fortune,
here for to meet at this time, in this place,
Let me no longer thy Favor importune,
but let us freely and kindly embrace:
Cupid will smile, and Dame Venus look cheerful,
for to behold us in love to agree,
Therefore my Honey thou need'st not be fearful,
but no this Hillock come sit down by me.
Oh! quoth the Maiden, and blushed at the motion,
there may be danger in coming too nigh,
Love though it is sweet, may be termed a potion,
bitter inth' end, though it is fair to the eye;
Therefore excuse me I fear to be taken,
least at the last I be left in the ^urch,
For many a Girl has been before forsaken,
being just ready to go to the Church.
The second Part,
To the same Tune.
Be not so fearful my dear but sit by me,
for why unto thee I vow and protest,
I cannot live if thou seem to deny me,
since of all others I fancy thee best:
Make no delay, for in Love it is adious,
at thy comman'd I will ever remain,
Seeing the time, and the place are comodious,
who from such pleasant delight can refrain?
Thy pretty body so neat and so slender,
has Captivated my heart and my eye,
That love, for love, you are bound for to render,
take pity on me or else I shall dye:
Do not delight to be cruel and froward,
for by this kiss I will ever be thine;
He that fair Lady wins, must be no Coward,
make no demur but agree to be mine.
O (quoth the Virgin) how I am divided,
being overcome by your person and charms;
Honor must yield, when by love it is guided,
now could I freely fly into thy arms:
For to be real, my love and affection,
has made me only at thy own command:
Cupid has brought my heart into subjection,
I can no longer your Batteries withstand.
Then (quoth her Lover) since we are concluded,
let us resolve to make use of our time,
We will no longer by fears be deluded
but take delight, whilst our love is in prime:
For when old age does come, feeble and crazy,
then to our pleasures we must bid adieu;
Therefore in youth let us never be Lazy,
for the time past we can never renew.
Into a pleasant Grove then they retired,
where none could see them their loves to molest,
She being free to do what he desired,
under a Myrtle they sat down to rest:
Where they did pass away time at their pleasure,
yiedling each other, true joy and content;
And afterward they walk home at their leisure,
having no cause of their time to repent.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospital-gate, in
West-smith-field.


