A true DIVRNALL: OR A continued Relation of Irish Occurrences, from the 12. of
Febr. to the 8. of March.

Printed after a Copy that was sent from Mr. William Bladen of Dublin, to his
Son resident here in LONDON:

Showing what overthrowes was given to the Rebels, and what good success the
Protestant party had; with a Relation of the late relief of Trohedagh.

Printed at London for William Bladen, and are to be sold by Francis Couls in
the Old Baily, 1642.

A True Diurnall, or a continued Relation of Irish Occurrences, from the
twelfth of Febr. to the eighth of March.
February the 12. 1641.
THis day the Lord ^^^bert marched out to the Deanes Grange five miles from
Dublin (with some horse and foot) where were a great multitude of the Rebels,
who had great advantage of our men both of the ground and great Ditches, which
at the first onset showed some courage to fight, but after twice discharge the
Rebels betook themselves to their heels, where our men slew many of them;
and in one Company we slew one Captain, one Lieutenant, and one Corporal,
took 12. or 14. Prisoners, one of which was a Commander, they had six
Colors but all fled.

February 14.
This day here were hanged seven Rebels, and the eighth had the Rope about his
neck upon the ladder; he made a Speech, that his life or death was worth
nothing, but if his life might be spared, he would do that service which
should be worth a hundred of his life, or else let him suffer, upon which he
was for this time preserved, to make trial of his good service, which if he
did not perform, he must go to the Gibbet from whence he came.

February 15.
This day a Rebel one of their Commanders was brought in, who on the Sabbath
before drinking with the rest of his wicked Companions, made a vow that the
first English he met with whatsoever, he would kill and wash his hands in their
blood, which he did the next day meeting with a woman, but being near Dublin,
some of our Scots accidentally met with him and brought him to our City, and
upon examination he confessed his cruel Murder, and this day he was hanged for
the same, as he justly deserved.

This day more pr^^^sion and men are sent to succor Tredaugh, the Lord in
mercy send them safe to them. We heard that Sir Henry Tichborne sallyed out of
Tredagh, and took a good booty of Cowes, Corn, and Hay, which we hope is
true, but it came to us by the Popish Rebels, otherwise we cannot hear from
Tredagh by land.

We hear that the Lord President of Munster has recovered Clomell out of the
Rebels hands, and has hanged the Major, and two or three Aldermen of that
Town, for their Rebellion which is here credibly reported to be true.

February 22.
This day we hear that the Lord of Musgra, and the Lord Rouch are revolted
from us and joined with the Rebels in the County of Cork; and that our Lord
president of Munster is forced to go into Cork for his safety, but if there
be a supply of men and munition from Bristoll, as we hear and hope there is,
I do not doubt (by the Lords assistance) but that they will be suppressed in a
short time: Musgra and Rouch have two fine Countries, and good Land, which I
trust in God will be hereafter planted with true hearted English, it is a
Country of a large extent, land enough for many thousands.

February 22.
We hear that the Rebels have besieged the City of Cork, Kingsale, and
Bandonbridge, and it is to be feared is too true: but our confidence is in our
good God the Lord of Hosts. This day here is landed a second supply of strength
both horse and foot: and we hear and hope of more coming, which by the
gracious assistance of our good God, we hope Ireland will be new molded both
in Church and Commonwealth.

February 23.
This day more men landed here, with whom one Colonel Brimigham, a popish
Colonel came and landed, but he was discovered, taken and committed to the
Castle. This night some of our forces purposes some exployts, the Lord in
mercy prosper their enterprises, and send them safe return with victory and
honor.

February 24.
This day we hear our men, some foot and horse went the last night to
Kilestone; and by the way found two of our Town that went to give the enemy
notice of their coming to them, which were both hanged, as they justly
deserved.

This night our men returned back to Dublin (blessed be God) and have done good
service; we forced the enemy out of their Trenches, out of the wood adjoining
to the Castle; in which wood they had entrenched themselves, also took from
them two Barrells of powder, and one Barrel of shot, with 500. weight of
match, killed many of them that were without the Castle, but could not get the
Castle, because we had no battering Pieces there, but all that could not get
into the Castle betook themselves to their heels and ran away; only such as
were laid fast by death, and could not run away. And we hope to visit them ere
long in another manner.

February 28.
This day our men are returned from victualling of Tredagh (blessed be God, and
have had a good success; the enemy had made a mighty Chain of Iron with
Boats, which they had sunk in the River: but such was the gracious providence
of our blessed God, that the night before our prevision was to go up, to send
such a mighty Tide, which broke the Chain, so that it was no hindrance to our
passage: they had placeda th^^ pieces of Ordnance upon the passage, but upon
the discharge of our Pinnices the Rebels ran away from their pieces, and our
men have taken the three pieces; and part of the Chain. I saw the Chain in
the Castle of Dublin, which wanted no strength, but it was the powerful work
of our good God, to whom let us ascribe al praise and glory to hi^ blessed
Majesty for ever. I could write of many other passages, but because of the
uncertainty of them I omit, for my desire is to write nothing upon uncertainty:
for I am ashamed to see some things in print, as that of birds and apparitions
in the air to be seen here at Dublin is most false.

The news we heard of Sir Henry Tychborne issuing out of the Town of Tredagh,
is most certain, he brought in above eighty Cowes, one hundred Sheep, Corn and
Hay, but with much difficulty: For the enemy beset them Front and Rear; yet
blessed be God our men got safe into the Town with their pilladge.

March the 3.
This night our men purpose to march out upon the enemy, the Lord in mercy
prosper their intentions, and send them good success, and a victorious
return. They carry with them ten pieces, five small and five great, but our
trust is in the Lord of Hosts the giver of all victory, to whom we pray for his
blessed assistance, and gracious protection. But of this event I will, God
inabling me, write in my next: for the packet is to go in the morning from
hence.

This day we hear that our men at Bandonbridge did fally out of the Town upon
the enemy, and slew 105. of them, and the rest ran away. We lost not one man,
and only one man shot in the leg, in which, as all other, we may behold the
gracious goodness of our good God toward us. We hear that Sir H. Tychborn the
last week marched out of Tredagh, and slew many of the Rebels, the rest ran
away, so that the Rebels have no hope to get that Town. Sir Henry sent to the
rebellious Lords of the Pale, that they should send in the Country to the
Market with provision, otherwise he would send for what he wanted, and take
the rest from them. I heard it from a good hand, and I doubt not of the truth
of it, for which the Lord make us thankful, as for all other his wonderful
mercies toward us.

Your loving Father, William Bladen.
Dublin: March. 8. 1641.

