The true English Protestant Soldiers Resolution.
IT is not alone the many Declarations and Votes of Parliament, that reveal
unto us how strong an influence the Papists have over the King, and his
Dominions: Nor all the Remonstrances concerning Ireland so clearly evincing by
what means that barbarous and horrid Rebellion was first fomented, and has
been since continued: Nor the Kings own Letters to the Queen so wholly
depending upon her Counsels, conveyed from Rome and Jesuits: (All which have
been published to forewarne us of our dangers.) But it is more then manifest
also, By the Popes Letter to the King, and the Kings to the Pope, long since
made known to the world in French, and now translated, acted, and almost
fulfilled in English. By all the passages and proceedings of both the Matches
when a Protestant Lady was propounded and neglected: By the Jesuits arguing for
the Spanish Match: By the increase, domineerings, threatenings, and preferments
for many years of Papists, By Intelligence from all the parts of Christendom:
By Sir Tobie Mathews; The three Nuncioes; The Queen Mothers, with all her
Jesuits gracious entertainment: By an whole College of Capuchins: By the
exceeding great decay of our ancient Protestant Nobility; and the
discouraging, neglecting, and affronting such as remained: By forcing Idolatry
and Popish Ceremonies upon the Conscience: By long pleading for six Priests and
Jesuits, contrary to Law and promise after two others pardoned, which ended in
the accusation of as many Members of Parliament: By making havocke of
Protestants, to set up Protestant Religion: By arming of Papists, to beat
down Popery; And by thousands of Arguments and Observations more, That we are
absolutely sold to Rome and her Adherents: The Achme of whose Antichristian
Devotion is, not only to assault the liberties and rob the treasures, but
confound, destroy, massacre, and root out all People and Nations that make not
haste with them to the same degree of damnation: To prevent which
over-spreading mischief, we (as all true Protestants of the Kingdom have
done) have taken up defensive Arms against these bloody enemies of nature,
goodness, and Religion, wherein since there have been already wasted much
precious and true-hearted blood of many thousands of our dear kindred,
friends, and allies, and many millions of our free and liberal loanes and
Contributions expended toward the same; There is now no likely way left to
save us from being no more a Nation nor a People (much less to have our
Religion) by all the attempts so aimed at, but for the whole Nation, (at least
so many as have any sense of piety, honor, or compassion toward their
brethren, and do truly weigh and understand their Oaths of Allegiance,
Supremacy, Protestation, and late Covenant) to unite as one man: And according
to the Orders and Declarations of Parliament; especially of the 26th of January
last, to come to aid that high Assembly, and in them our selves, whose
eternal Trophie it will be, (though their lives and States suffer by it,) to
dye in reforming England, and in the strength of Christ, to oppose the Gates of
Hell, and powers of Darkness, with their sworn factors the Priests and
Jesuits. For these are they that have at once attempted, and in great measure
acted the Massacres of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as they have formerly
done in the Low Countries, France, and Germany.

These are they who though discovered, dare yet continue to plot mischief, and
persuade the King to proclaim and justify himself the author of those plots
against his own natural subjects.

These are they who yet in despite of the Acts and Orders of Parliament, dare
walk our streets, and confront authority.

These are they whose Jesuitical incantations first wrought jealousies, and
afterward by the bare names of Brownists, Anabaptists Separatists, and
Roundheads; conjured up most strong divisions into the members of the same
Body, and by them through the whole Kingdom. For it is their Character to
seduce (if it were possible) the very elect, and as the tail of the Dragon in
these last times, to sweep down the stars of heaven.

These are the Locusts of that Apollion Abaddon, That destroy both reason and
conscience, soul and body, liberty, and estate, That destroy the King, That
destroy the Parliament, That destroy the Kingdom, That destroy all holiness.
This is Antichrist, The Antichrist, even Babylon the great. So that the
contemplation, of this is enough to inflame the frozen spirits of the dead, and
raise them up to battle. Here is a Cause, here, here is an Alarm to call forth
Michael and his Angels, and the glorious Host of Heaven to war. Wherefore
forsaking all by respects and nicknames invented to divide us, and looking up
to the Almighty power which is to be seen in the Mount, believing these
extremities ordered by his all-wise providence to necessitate us to the
performance of his will, against that mother of Harlots and abominations of
the Earth.

We do in the voice of the Angel earnestly entreat all Protestant Christians
to come out of Babylon, and forsake those Antichristian Papists, and not to
plead for them, nor join with them, lest they be partakers of their punishment.
And we do for our parts all solemnly protest in obedience to the said
declaration of Parliament, of Ian. 26. last, that since there is no other means
left (as we conceive) of assisting that honorable Assembly, or of enjoying
peace, or the Gospel of peace, nor so much as our own Lives, where these
Antichristian Locusts have any footing, We will endeavor the banishment or
utter extirpation of all Papists out of this Kingdom, as the authors and
incendiaries of these unnatural and bloody wars; and bring to condign
punishment, all such as contrary to their oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance,
Protestation and Covenant, shall oppose themselves to hinder the just and
necessary performance of this our resolution.

-- Neque est lex justier ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.

Printed at London upon the day of the general muster of all the forces of the
said City, September 26. 1643. for THO. UNDERHILL.


