A true Relation of the Cruel dealings of William Pocklington of North
Collingham in the County of Nottingham, with the Innocent People of God called
Quakers, in the same County.
WIlliam Pocklington is a man that has caused great and heavy Sufferings to be
inflicted upon us for more than nine years, and he still grows in his Envy
and Cruelty toward us, as one that hatcheth mischief upon his bed, so that we
are constrained to bear our Testimony against his evil deeds and actions, which
are briefly comprehended in these particulars following.

1. He caused William Smith of Besthorp to be arrested in his own name for
Tithes, when the Tithes of that place were not in his own hand; and William
Smith was sent to Prison, and kept a Prisoner about 21 weeks. 2. He caused
William Smith to be arrested again in his own name for Tithes, when the Tithes
were not yet in his own hand, and then William Smith had clearness to give bond
for his appearance, and did appear according to Law. 3. He caused Robert Carnel
of North Collingham, to be arrested upon forfeit of the Bond for William Smiths
appearance, Robert being bound with William for his appearance; and Robert was
sent to Prison, and kept a prisoner about 12 weeks, notwithstanding William
Smith had discharged the Bond by his appearance. 4. He caused Thomas Elsam of
Gerton, to be arrested for Tithes, and much of his Hay and Corn were taken for
Tithes, and Thomas was sent to Prison, and kept a Prisoner a long time. 5. He
caused William Thorpe of Gerton to be arrested, and sent to Prison, for about
two or three Cocks of Corn, which he pretended were due to him for Tithes. 6.
He caused William Smiths Corn to be taken off his Land for Tithes, after the
Tithes came into his own hand; and then caused him to be arrested again for
Tithes, and he was kept a Prisoner above five years, and his Corn taken both
before and all that time. 7. He caused about nineteen men to be sent to Prison
for meeting peaceably together to wait upon God, and to worship God in Spirit
and Truth; and they suffered a long time. 8. He often caused our peaceable
Meetings to be broken up, and he himself present; he caused some women to be
thrust forth of the Town, and charged the Constable of Gerton, that he should
not suffer them to meet in the Night; and some Women-friends being one night
with a Woman in travel, the Constable came, and would not suffer them to stay.
9. He caused the Town where we usually met, to set Watchmen at the Gate, to
keep us forth of the House, and we were constrained to keep our Meeting abroad
upon a Green, though the season was wet and cold: And the Town was put to much
charge with him and his Company at the Alehouse, which he much frequented, and
would make the Town bear the Charge. This work he continued for several weeks
together. 10. He caused William Smiths Goods to be seized, after his more than
five years imprisonment; and both his Sheep, Beasts, Horse, Hay and Corn were
taken away, to the value of above threescore pounds, for Tithes; and William
Smith was a Prisoner, and never gave any appearance to the Writ, not never knew
of any proceedings against him.
Now all moderate People may see how William Pocklington has behaved himself
among his neighbors, and how there is neither love, pity, mercy, justice, or
equity in his goings, and how he has acted contrary to the Law of the Nation
in these following particulars.

1. To Imprison a man for that which is not in his own hand, but in the hand of
another. 2. To Imprison a man upon forfeit of a Bond, when the Bond is really
discharged. 3. To cause any man's Corn to be taken off his Ground without his
consent. 4. To come into any man's house, and pull such forth as are peaceably
together, and to send them to Prison. 5. To cause Watchmen to keep people forth
of any house where they have just right to come, and to cause a Town to pay
Alehouse reckonings, when the Town is not concerned. 6. To cause above sixty
pounds worth of Goods to be taken for Tithes, and the party Imprisoned upon the
Writ, and never gave any appearance, and his Corn taken off his Land for Tithes
all the time of his Imprisonment and before; and sometimes a whole Land of Corn
taken away together for Tithes.
And now whether we have not sufficient cause to bear our Testimony against
William Pocklington as a cruel merciless man; for as his actions are contrary
to the Law, so they are without mercy and full of cruelty; and as he is a
transgressor of the Law, he may be justly questioned for his doings by the Law:
for such dealings and proceedings are a shame to the Law; that is made for
honest and good ends, and a shame to those that practice in the Law for honest
and good ends, that is, to right such as suffer wrong; and such things are a
dishonor to the Government, as using the Kings Name in what is so done. For
William Pockington told a Friend, That the King knew of the taking of William
Smiths Goods, and that they were taken in the Kings Name; but the King will
have no cause to take such a man to be his Friend, that lays such actions
upon him and his Name. And we do the rather publish these things, that both the
King and Country may have certain knowledge of them, and also of William
Pocklington, who has done and caused them to be done.

And during the time in which he was causing such spoil to be made upon
William Smiths Goods, there were some Papers delivered to him as follows.

William Pocklington, The Lord God dwells in the Light, and his power is over
all, and in the Light he beholds all thy unjust and illegal proceedings,
which thou actest by the Prince of Darkness, which now rules in thee; but the
Lord stand at our right hand, and with true judgment and righteousness will
plead our cause against thee; and when he shall execute the fierceness of his
wrath what will thou then do? thy fair words wherewith thou flatterest thy self
and others, will not then hide thee, for in the Light thy deeds are all
manifest, and in the hearts of all moderate men, they appear exceeding evil and
full of cruelty: therefore in love to thy soul I warn thee to repent, and
return that which thou unjustly have caused to be taken from us, or be thou
sure the Lord (for whose Truth we suffer) will visit thee in thy inward parts,
and there he will be a terror to thee and will terrify thee day and night,
but his peace is, and for ever will remain with us.

Elizabeth Smith.


Friend, William Pocklington, there is a great cry in the Country concerning
thy actions and doings, by which the eyes of People thereabouts are over thee,
wondering what will be the end thereof, and are amazed that the Earth opens not
her mouth and swallows thee up, for I have not heard the like cry and noise,
between London and the Town where thou live. Thou who did keep William
Smith, a Neighbor, about five years in Prison, and now for the value of about
four Nobles, have taken above sixty pounds worth of goods from him, having
gotten a Judgment by some indirect means, unknown to him and his Attorney how
thou have stolen out this Judgment; Do thou think the Truth will not search
and find out such things? Do thou think that such unparrallel'd actions of
thine must lie and steep? Did thou not rage at the Bailiffs, because they did
not pluck his very Bed from under him (he being sick and lame) when thou had
taken away his Sheep and Beasts, and seized upon his Hay and Corn, and locked
up his Barn door, for the value of four Nobles, for Tithes pretended? Is not
this contrary to humanity, and Christianity? Do thou not think that the Lords
eye is open to behold and see thy actions, and do thou think that he will let
the wicked go unpunished? Do thou think he will suffer the Spoiler to go
without his Reward? and do thou think that thou which ravens so much after
the goods of others, and casts them into prison, also driving away their goods
by droves, and locking up the Barn door, and art so greedy after the earth,
do thou think that the Lord will not stop and fill thy mouth with earth ere
long? Do thou think that the Country takes not notice of thy lying in
Alehouses, drinking and making spoil of the goods of the Innocent, thy selling
and making bargains in the Alehouse of them? Do thou not think there is a God
that will punish the wicked, or a Christ that will render vengeance upon the
ungodly? his hand is over thee, and thou will feel it to thy judgment and
condemnation. Oh happy would it be, if thou could find a place for
repentance! An Old Man with gray hairs doting after the goods of the Innocent,
loading himself with the spoil! I believe thou will have thy load, when thou
have gotten all the above said sixty pounds, of Cattle, Sheep, Hay and Corn
upon thy head; thou will find the weight of it upon thy head to make thy neck
crack. Oh full of darkness, who hate the Light, thou have forgotten the time
when thou wast in thy affliction, what did William Smith do for the then! Oh
cumber not the ground thou fruitless tree, for the earth will vomit thee out,
and God will vomit out all such as gather riches by cruelty and oppression, and
the spoil of the Innocent will eat thee out, thou will be never the richer for
it at the years end: for God causes a blast upon thee, and upon what thou
have, and brings his plagues and judgments to consume what thou have, who
delightest in spoiling the goods of the Innocent. What honor have thou gained
by thy ravening among men but shame and judgment? the time may come that thou
may wish, thou had never been born. Read the Execution and its date,
read thy Liberty and its date, and also read thy own works; to the Witness of
God in thee I speak, that will be thy condemnation. I say the time may come
that thou may wish, that thou had never been born. For, oh man, What have
thou been doing? do thou go on blindfold, do thou not think that the eye of
God and People are over thee? have thou thrown off God, Christ, and Scriptures
both? Can thou not read, nor see what became of those that filled their
houses with the spoil of the Innocent? and do thou cry, the Law has done it,
and thou have done it by Law? What Law? where was William Smith when judgment
was given? Well, remember that in thy lifetime thou have been warned, for many
visitations thou have had; take heed lest the day come upon thee, wherein the
evil spirit thou servest will torment thee, so that thou will seek for death
and not find it, when thy head is full of distraction and confusion; for Gods
power is over thee, and I believe that all honest people that are neighbors,
that have any fear of God before their eyes, and are of repute among men, will
be ashamed of thy actions; so here thou art come under the judgment of God and
all good men. Farewell.

L. F.


And notwithstanding these faithful warnings to him, he still pursued his work,
whilst any thing was left abroad to work upon; and W. Smiths Wife bearing
Testimony against the wickedness of those that he employed about lading the Hay
and Corn away, one of the Bailiffs said, We have not done yet, and said, we
shall not have done until you leave your ways: but we shall not leave our
ways, that are just and true, to walk in the ways of such as follow mischief;
for the Lord God will render tribulation and vengeance unto cruel and merciless
men, and that is the Cup which they must drink when they have filled up their
measure, and finished their work: But it seems they have not yet done, for it
is said, that William Pocklington intends to take away William Smiths Corn
again the next year, if he sow his Land, by which it appears that he is
hatching mischief in his mind so long before the time come.

Object. But is it not reasonable and equitable that a man should receive
Tithes that he farmeth and pays rent for, as a Farmer does for his Farm? and
do not such do him wrong as withhold Tithes from him that he pays rent for?

Answ. No; it is not reasonable nor equitable that a man should receive Tithes,
though he farm them and pay rent for them; because no man has a proper Title
or Interest to let any such part of the profit and increase of another; for
Reason and Equity concludes, that every man is worthy to receive the benefit
of his own Land, Labor and Charge, and that he is not to be forced to yield
any part of it to another, neither is another to force any part from him. And
though the sons of Levi had a commandment to take Tithes of their Brethren,
according to the Law, yet that commandment is not now to be pleaded as to the
same right, because Christ Jesus is come and has disannulled it, Heb. 7. And
there is no Law or commandment of men that can give a proper Title or Interest
in Tithes under a Gospel-administration; and seeing such as let Tithes to farm
have not a proper Title or Interest to let them, then such as take them, and
pay rent for them, do covenant and agree in their own wrong, and such as
withhold them, withhold them in their own right, as having the same Title and
Interest in the tenth part, as in the nine, and none have power to make the
tenth part a good Title unto another; and that makes the taking of Tithes to
be void in the ground or original: But such as take a Farm upon rent, they take
it from a good Title and Interest, if it be a clear Estate without any
Incumberance, and they are worthy to receive the profits which they pay rent
for, because the Letter has a good Title in the Land, and the Farmer bestows
his labor and charge upon it; and these are propper and peculiar Rights, both
in the Letter and the Farmer; and it is agreeable to Reason and Equity, as a
Branch is agreeable to the Root that bears it. But Tithes are taken out of the
Land, Labor and Charge of another, which is no way agreeable to Reason and
Equity. And though many Disputations and Arguments have been, and yet are
maintained to uphold them, some by Divine Right, and some by Humane Right, yet
the matter is determined in a few words; for since Christ disannul'd the
Commandment under the Law, Tithes have never been paid by Divine Right, and no
Humane Power can make them of right due unto any man whatsoever. So Christ
having ended the payment of Tithes, as to the Jews observation, and that there
is no command for them to be paid under the Gospel Dispensation, they must
needs be now introduced by some framed Invention, and that cannot be a ground
to force the payment of them; and we that are called Quakers, have well weighed
these things in the Light with which Christ Jesus has enlightened us, in which
Light we have seen his coming, and the end of the Law and first Covenant by his
coming, and a necessity is laid upon us to confess his coming; and we are
satisfied, that neither Priest nor Impropriator have a good Interest in Tithes
under the Gospel-administration: We do not deny them from any opinion, conceit,
or self ends, as some would charge us, but in love to Christ Jesus, who has
given his Testimony freely to us; and it is evident that we do not deny Tithes
from any opinion, conceit, or self ends, for we suffer Imprisonment many years
together, at a great charge and loss of time, and many have suffered the loss
of their natural lives by such imprisonments; and we suffer the spoiling and
loss of our goods, to the value of many pounds, whereas a few shillings might
satisfy if we could willingly pay our Tithes; so that only Conscience sake
toward God is the ground why we deny them; and it is opinion, conceit, and
self ends in such as take them. And it does plainly appear in what William
Pocklington has done concerning William Smith, upon that very account, and
also in what many Priests and Impropriators have done as to many others, who
are faithful in their Testimony unto the coming of Christ Jesus.

And now, William Pocklington, thou art called up to the Bar of Truth, and
forasmuch as thou, not having the fear of God before thy eyes, have acted and
done such wicked things as are before related, contrary to the Law of God and
Nature, and also contrary to the Law of the Nation, and so against the King his
Crown and Dignity; and that they are true concerning thee, thou art found
guilty of Persecution, and Truth gives Judgment upon that spirit that rules
in thee, and by the Truth it is condemned for ever, and Truth marketh thee for
a wicked Persecutor and cruel Spoiler.

O William, Sorrow will fill thy heart, though for a time thou may make thy
self merry with thy Alehouse company, but O thy End, thy End! what will it be,
thou will know when it comes, and it comes swiftly, and thou can not be hid,
the Lord will find thee and judge thee according to thy works, for thou have long
reigned in thy wickedness, and thy presumption is so high as that thou go on
from evil to worse, neither leaving Cattle for Fodder, nor Fodder for Cattle,
nor Seed for the Sower; and we cannot let thee lie any longer as a Fox in his
hole that always watches how he may come to his prey and devour the Lambs,
but we must testify against thy evil deeds, and lay thy wickedness upon thy
own head, and it will be a load upon thee in the day of thy Judgment, for thou
have always been lifted up with pride and vain glory; and thou have always
sought to bear rule over others with a high hand, and because we cannot bend
unto thee thou exercisest cruelty; but we rejoice in the Truth which is over
thee, and thou can neither ruin us nor root us out; and both the King and
Country have cause to be jealous of thee, who art so full of pride, deceit and
hypocrisy; for how can it be expected that thou should be true to the King
and Country in thy Office of High Constable, when thy actions are so
notoriously wicked? and notwithstanding thy wicked intention to ruin us, and
thy high expectation of enriching thy self with what thou take from us, yet
the Lord may frustrate thy end in both, and he may take thee in thy own snare;
for that which thou wickedly intendest against others may fall upon thy self,
and the Lord may cause thy own work to torment thee, by turning it upon thee;
but as for the Innocent he saves them in his hand, and they feel his mercy.

Now read thy self, thy works and name, for thou have gotten a name that will
remain unto future generations, and they will read thee to be a Perscutor, and
so thou will leave an ill savor behind thee; and except thou repent, thy works
will be a continual torment to thee, and thou will certainly perish for ever.
And all such as are partakers with William Pocklington in his wicked works, and
make your selves merry with him in the Alehouses, and buy such goods as by his
means are unjustly taken from the right owners, you must all come to
repentance, for you are in the same spirit of wickedness; and the spoil which
you greedily purchase will be a scourge upon you (mark the end of it) therefore
repent and fear the living God, and make not a mock at Sin, nor be scornful at
Reproof, for the Lord will not hold you guiltless. O read your works, you evil
workers, who sport your selves in your own wickedness, Read your Wantonness,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Deceit, Laughter and Madness; read your
own conditions, and see whether you be like men and Christians, or worse than
Infidels and Heathens; for the Heathens have more sobriety and honesty as men;
and if you will not turn at reproof and cease from wickedness, the Lord will
bring weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth upon you; and this is to you
all whose faces are set to do wickedly, that ye may repent before calamity come
upon you, and it is spread abroad as a Testimony against all evil works and
workers; for it is not good to have respect of persons in judgment; He th^^
says to the wicked, Thou art Righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations
sha^ abhor him; but to them that rebuke him, shall be delight, and a good
blessing shall come upon them, Pro. 24. And this Testimony the Lord God
upholdeth where he sets it, and the wickedness of the wicked cannot root it out
or destroy it,

Given forth the 12th month ( called February) 1667. from us who are called
QUAKERS.


