THE True pattern of Constancy: OR, The Loyal Lovers Joys Completed.
When Young Men find their Love's unkind,
they then impatient grow,
But when their Grief does find Relief,
it Expiates their Woe.
To an Excellent New Tune: Or, Farewell the Flower of false deceit, etc.
This may be Printed,

R. P.









FArewell thou Flower of false deceit,
and I wish the height of you may fade,
That your Countenance may altered be,
and your Honor in the Dust be laid.
Never was a Man more true than I,
as you your self full well do know;
Till I found you in your Cruelty,
that you sought my final Overthrow.
I wish the bright Sun may not shine
on thee, as it has done before;
For your Countenance has me beguiled,
I can love again, but you no more.
Once I could have been as constant Sweetheart
for to cross the Ocean Seas for thee,
As Vulcan did for Venus's sake,
when he Sailed into Italy.
If you were as fair as Rosamond was,
with her Cherry Cheeks and dimpled Chin;
Or if you were as fair as Hellena was,
I should never more delight therein.
But now my heart it is my own,
why should I for another care?
For to sigh and sob, lament, and moan,
for to bring my self unto Despair?


I will enjoy my Liberty,
and in the World I mean to range;
For I will no more your Captive be,
you I for another mean to change.
You treated me with such despite,
while I your person did adore,
That I value not your Beauty bright,
then adieu, adieu for evermore.
The Maidens Answer to the Young Man.
Such Resolutions do not name,
pray let me speak a word or two;
Do not thus against thy Love exclaim,
when thou know I cannot part with thee,
Why do thou charge me with Deceit?
such was my Love and Loyalty,
That I never could your Person meet,
but you proved as a Life to me.
Here I do offer hand and heart,
with all that I can call my own;
Then do not from thy true Love part,
but take some pity of my moan.
For my heart to thee is linked fast,
I cannot waver with the Wind;
But as long as ever Life shall last,
sure I shall never change my mind.
This Loving Couples happy Agreement.
Can I believe this is my Dear,
who once did slight me with disdain?
If it be, then will my joys appear,
seeing she is thus returned again.
Now nothing can my peace annoy,
as long as ever Life does last;
In my Dear I place my chiefest joy,
utterly forgetting all that is past.
I will embrace thee in my Arms,
with many a soft and tender Kiss,
With many thousand pleasant Charms,
in a full perfection of our Bliss.
Though once I did reflect on thee,
'twas while my heart was filled with grief,
And I never did expect to see,
that thou ever would afford Relief.
But since the Frowns of Fate are fled,
and I have found thy Constancy,
Now my heart is free from fear and dread,
I will love my Jewel till I dye.
Then he took his true Love by the hand,
calling her his true and Turtle-Dove,
We'll no longer now disputing stand,
but resolve to live and dye in Love.

