A True Relation of the SENTENCE and CONDEMNATION of Thomas Dangerfield, at the
King's Bench Bar, for his horrid Crimes and Perjuries.


THE Great Mystery of Iniquity being now in a great measure laid open, and the
long Phanatical Vizor to shroud their own Hellish Designs, under the pretended
Danger of Popery and Arbitrary Power, that old Stale cheat, that so lately
brought the best of Monarchs to a Scaffold, and Three flourishing Kingdoms to
Confusion, being now taken off; it has pleased Heaven to bring the Blackest of
Villains, and Vilest of Impostors, the late infamously memorable Titus Otes, to
some part of a Punishment for his most egregious and unexampled Delusions and
Perjuries. And Truth and Reason beginning to run in their right Channel again,
one of the junior Imps of this senior Beelzebub, viz. Thomas Dangerfield, has
been also brought to taste the same lash with him.

Now as there is a certain way of Eternizing a Man's Name, as well by the
blackest of Impieties, as the brightes^ of Virtues; and one single Judas shall
be as long remembered, and recorded, as the whole Twelve Apostles; o^ whether
one Devil or all of them (which is most likely) had a hand in hardening the
Fronts, and seering the Consciences of our late Saviors of the Nation (the
Discoverers of the Pretended Popish Plot) to bring them to the Kissing of
Bibles, Swallowing of Oaths and Sacraments, the barbarous shedding of Innocent
Blood, and the renouncing of Heaven and Eternity; and all to mislead a Jealous
unthinking Kingdom to Lunacy and Madness, and consequently, to Treason and
Rebellion, and so in a fair way to Hell and Damnation, it matters not.

But in short our Grand Beukblawer, Titus, that truly Original of the kind,
came upon our Blind side with hi^ Popish Discovery, a little (as a Man may say)
like a Jugler of Skill. For though Invisible Commissions, to rais^ Invisible
Armies; whole Thousands of Armed Papists, Mustered an^ Disciplined
underground;, Black Bills, an^ Pilgrims innumerable at the very Throats of us;
and yet the Devil a Mortal Eye, or indeed a Rational Imagination capable so
much as of conceiving the when, where, and how, all these Popish Engines were a
working: ye to the credit of little England be it spoken, all this was Sworn to
so solemnly, and believed so heartily, an^ truly almost so universally by the
multitude, That really Garlic and Onions, amongst the old Egyptians, were not
more easily made Gods of, than Titus his Narrative made Gospel.

But though I say all this wonderful Discovery was rendered almost no less than
Evangelical, yet the Narrativ^ of our True Protestant, Thomas Dangerfield, so
far out-does him, That nothing certainly can be more stupendously miraculous:
For how wide soever was the large English swallow, and how Romantic soever was
Titus Discovery, the Gorgon was still of a piece: and Otes, with the softer
Front of Brass, was graciously pleased give us a plain and manifest
Compurgation of his present Majesty, from so much as a Thought of Conspiring
again his Brother; instancing the careful conduct of the Jesuits, in concealing
the whole Plot from him, as conscio^ of the untaintable Integrity, and
immovable Loyalty of so Faithful a Friend and Dear a Brother. Nay, he w^ so
far from being suspected even the least pliable to their Popish Designs, That
the same Death that was intend his Brother, was threatened Him also; and no less
than the whole Race of the Stuarts, expressly in his Narrativ^ Root and Branch
to be extirpated by the Popish Conspirators.

But to confront all this, up starts Dangerfield, and since Swearing was grown
so beneficial, and every (...) Projector ought to out-shoot the first Bolt;
very briskly, with an Impudence even beyond Otes himself, Forges such a Mass of
Villainy, not to be named without Execration and Horror.

The hidious Contexture of his whole Libelous Narrative, to confirm this
Diabolical piece of Perjury, is all much of the same Infernal Hew; That, in
short, it has long since answered it self. Nay, in the very heig of the late
True Protestant Implicit Faith, the highest ferment of the then Reigning
Phanaticism, and when most every thing went down, our Dangerfield so far
over-acted the true Protestant Plot Evidence in his wh^ Narrative, that the
very Faction that set up the Tool, and who at that time of day had Insolence
enough, ev^^ to Depose Princes, were, nevertheless so modest, and indeed, so
ashamed of our Captain Willoughby's, alias Dangerfield's Discovery, That they
laid it aside as Waste Paper, and never so much as endeavored to start up
Testimony, though for their dearest darling Idol the Exclusion Bill, and the
Propagation of the most sac^^^ Good Old Cause. This was the Discoverer, and
this the Monster, that now Justice has brought to his too mu^^ merited Public
Shame and Infamy.

See here the Minor Vndergraduate Tool,
Takes his Degree in the Doctor's Flogging School:
Whilst the brisk Captain does in state advance,
To Titus his Old Jigg, the Tyburn Dance.
March, honest Ketch, devoutly his by side,
And Discipline, dear Jack, his Perjured Hide.
The outward Man of Sin's within thy Power;
But the soul inside let the Devil scowr.
This may be Printed. July 2. 1685. R. L. S.


