A TRVE CONFVTATION OF A FALSE AND LYING PAMPHLET ENTITVLED, A Divelish design
by the Papists to blow up the City of OXFORD with Gunpowder, on Thursday the
13. of January 1641.
TO All to whom these presents shall come. Whereas there have lately been
diverse false reports in printed Pamphlets, and otherwise raised, and
dispersed, of a Divellish design by Papists to blow up the City of Oxford
with Gunpowder. And that for the effecting thereof, there were found upon a
search by Officers at the sign of the Star near Carfoxe, two and twenty
Barrels of Gunpowder, two Barrels of Shot and Bullets, and great store of
Warlike Ammunition, as Shovells, Spades, Pick-axes and the like, with complete
Arms for one hundred and fifty men. These are to certify, that upon
examination of the premises, We can find no foundation of truth for the same,
neither was there found at the said sign of the Star, any powder, shot,
Bullets, or other warlike Ammunition, but such as was placed there by the Lord
Lieve-tenant, and Deputy Lieve-tenants of the County of Oxford, wherealso the
Magazin and store of powder, and Ammunition for the said County, has for many
years before been kept, nor does any cause appear to suspect, that the said
Gunpowder and Ammunition, was intended to be disposed of, or employed, but
according to the direction of the Lord Lieve-tenant, and Deputy Lieve-tenants
of the said County. And whereas these false reports may tend to the great
Injury, and prejudice of Mr Thomas Williams who keeps the said Inn. These
are moreover to certify that the said Mr Thomas Williams is of very good
repute within the said City of Oxford, and conformable to the Protestant
Religion of the Church of England, no way addicted to Popery, and most unlikely
to comply, or confederate with any bad or popish design, against his King or
Country. And whereas the said reports have by some been pretended to be founded
on some letters or speeches of one Martin Wright Alderman of the City of
Oxford, the said Alderman does utterly disclaim to have given any color to
the said reports by his subscription hereunto.

In Witness whereof, We have subscribed our names. Dated at Oxford the seventh
day of February 1641. Io. Tolson Vicecan. Oxon. deput Leonard Bowman Major.
Samuel Fell Deane of Christ-Church. Robert Pinck Warden of New College.
Christopher Potter Provost of Queens College. Gilbert Sheldon Warden of
Allsoules College. John Saunders Principal of St Mary Hall. Henry Sowtham
Alderman. Martin Wright Alderman.



