A True COPY of a LETTER, From the Justices of the Kingdom of Ireland, to the
Privy Council of Scotland.
Dated, Dublin-Castle, 25th of July 1691. Our very good Lord,
WE herewith send your Lordship a particular Account of the late great Victory
obtained against the Irish, and have this only to add, that the General being
sat down before Galway, writes us word the 22 instant, That the Fort being
Stormed without the Town the twentieth in the morning, the Town sent out in the
Afternoon to Treat, and Agreed to Surrender on Sunday Morning next at six of
the Clock, and immediately all the Outworks were delivered in to our
Possession, and all their Cannon drawn from their Walls, and five Hostages
delivered; We believe Limmerick is the next place he intends, though we have
some reason to hope, they will soon capitulat. We are, my Lord,

Your Lordships most humble Servants, Charles Porter. Tho: Cuningsbey.


A Particular and Full Account of the Routing the whole Irish Army at Aghrim,
upon Sunday the 12th of July, 1691.
With a List of the Principal Persons that were Killed and taken Prisoners.
Published by Authority.

UPon Friday the 10th instant, our Army moved from Athlone, and Encamped that
night at Killcashell, 7 Miles nearer to the Enemy, whence the General went to
view the Pass at Ballynasloe, and perceiving the Parties the Enemy had abroad
to withdraw upon our advancing, he went on to Leagh, a large Mile beyond
Ballynasloe.

Upon Saturday the 11th, about 4 in the morning, we decamped, and marched to
Ballynasloe, and encamped all long on the Roscommon side of the River Suck; The
General went to the Hills of Knockdunloe in the County of Galway, half a mile
distant from our Camp, whence he could perceive the Enemies Out-Guards upon the
Hills of Corbally, who upon our approach retreated to the Isker of Liscapull,
two miles beyond Ballynasloe, upon which he went forward to the Hills of
Corbally, whence he could take a view of the Enemies Camp, which was formed
beyond Aghrim, about three miles beyond Ballynasloe, and extended it self from
the Church of Killcommodan on their right, to a place called Gurtnapory on the
left, above 2 miles in length, a Mapp of which being drawn, it presented it
self thus: On their left ran a small Brook, having steep Hills and little Bogs
on each side, next to which was a large red Bogg, almost a mile over, at the
end of which stood the Castle of Aghrim, commanding the way to their Camp,
which was passable no way for Horse, but just at the Castle, by reason of a
River, which running through a moist ground, made the whole a Morass or Bogg,
which extended it self all along to the Enemies right, where was also another
Pass called Vrachree, having a rising ground on each side of it: The Enemy
encamped upon the side of a Hill very well Ditched, and the Ditches as well
lined with Shot to the very edge of the Bogg, by which it appears they were so
well posted, as not to be easily attackt.

Upon Sunday, July 12, about 6 in the morning, we marched, but Orders were
given, that our Tents and Baggage should remain where they were; the Foot
marched over the Bridge, the English and French Horse and Dragoons, over the
Foord above the Bridge, and the Dutch and Danish Horse and Dragoons over two
Foords beneath the Church, with directions, as soon as they were over the
River, to put themselves in order of Battle which they did on the Lands of
Garbally, Rathboy and Dunlow; in which order (the morning proving hazie) we
stood till 11 at noon, when the General Commanding the Army to move forward,
advanced himself before the Army, to view the posture of the Enemy, and
perceiving some of their out-Scouts upon the Hills, ordered a Party to beat
them thence, upon whose advance the Enemy retired from Hill to Hill, within
half a mile of the Camp, by which means the General had the opportunity from a
high Hill on the right of the Enemy, to view their whole Camp, which he found
Posted, as before described; and that he was under a necessity of gaining a
Pass to the right of the Enemy, where he perceived some of them posted, to
which purpose he ordered a Danish Captain with 16 Horse to force it, who being
repulsed by the Enemy, the General ordered to be succored by 200 of Sir Albert
Cunningham's Dragoons, who having secured some Ditches near the said Pass, and
having also briskly charged the Enemy, obliged them to retire to a little
Grove, whither the Enemy, seeing their danger, had sent a fresh Party to
sustain them, which our General perceiving, ordered Colonel Eppinger's
Dragoons to get between them and their Camp, which had been effected, but that
it was too timely discovered by the Enemy, who had sent out fresh Detachments
enough to cut off our Dragoons, but they were quickly seconded by a Party of
the Earl of Portland's Horse, who behaved themselves with great bravery, but
lost several Men and Horse in this part of the Action, upon which both sides
sending fresh Detachments to sustain their Parties, what at first was only a
Skirmish, had by this time engaged a considerable Body, and after an hours
Dispute, obliged the Enemy to retire in great disorder over the Brook that
flanked the right of their Army, without any great loss to us, though the Enemy
all the while fired upon us with some of their great Guns from the Hills of
Killcommodan.

The General perceiving the disorder of the Enemy, resolved to attack them on
their right Wing, by that means hoping to draw off the strength of the Enemy to
the Right, and then with our right Wing to fall in upon their left, and thereby
engage their whole Army.

The left Wing of our Army being most Forraigners, was Commanded by his
Highness the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the Right by the Major-Generals Maccay,
Talmash and Ruvigny, the General himself with great diligence moving every
where, giving the necessary Orders, and ordering Reinforcements as he saw
occasion; About half an hour after 4 in the Afternoon our left Wing moved
toward the Enemy, and by 5 were got up to their Ditches, well lined with the
Enemies Musketeers, which (notwithstanding their advantageous Post, and their
defending themselves better than usually, or than indeed we expected and the
opposition made by the Lord Galway's Regiment of Horse, and the Royal Regiment
of Foot so called) Our men soon forced and made them give ground, so that our
General's design had its intended effect, in drawing off most of the Enemies
Horse from their Left to succor their Right, which though it much damaged
Colonel Earls's, Colonel Herbert's, and Colonel Fowlke's Regiments did yet
facilitate the Attack of our Right Wing, which with a good Body of Horse, Foot
and Dragoons, forced the Pass by Aghrim Castle, though defended by a Regiment
of Dragoons, and so narrow, that our Horse were forced to march it by a Defile
of two a breast, receiving the Enemies Shot with no great loss, till at last
recovering the firm part of the Bogg our Men formed a Line, and some of them
advanced under the Walls of the Castle, and lodged themselves in a dry Ditch,
though the Enemy poured Volleys of their small Shot upon them; the rest of that
Brigade with great bravery attackt their Ditches, and pressed so far upon the
Enemy, beyond what they ought to have done, unless they had been supported with
Horse, that they were forced back to the Bogg, but when they were reinforced
by our Horse (who charged through the Enemy with Sword in hand, as did also our
Horse on the left Wing) they drove the Enemy to the top of the Hill, where
their Horse and Foot mixed with ours, but after a short dispute we totally
routed them, and beat their Horse out of the Field, who never drew B^^t for 7
miles, leaving their Foot to be cut in pieces. They began to run as it grew
duskish, and our men pursued them about 4 miles: Their Foot were entirely
broke, and those who ran away, (after their usual manner) threw away their Arms

Aghrim Castle being taken, many there in were put to the Sword, and Colonel
Bourke, his Major, 11 Officers and 40 private men were taken Prisoners.

Our General showed extraordinary Conduct, Diligence and Bravery throughout
this whole Action, Our Officers behaved themselves with great Resolution, and
so did the Private Soldiers, who were not in the least daunted, notwithstanding
all the advantages which the Enemy had over them in number, in their strong
Entrenchments, or in the difficulty of attacking them. In short, never did Army
fight better, nor can we find Actions fitter to compare with this, than those
of their own former performance, viz. the forcing of the Boyne and Shannon.

Our loss, considering the greatness of the Action, was not very much, having
but 62 killed, among whom were Major General Holstaple, Colonel Herbert,
Colonel Mongatts, Major Deverish, Major Pettit, Major Colt, Major Cornwall and
Major Fox, with several Captains and Subalterns, and about 950 wounded, 4 parts
of 5 whereof, will be easily cured, and soon fit for Service.

In this Action we took from the Enemy 11 Standards, 32 Colors, all their
Cannon, Ammunition, Tents and Baggage. We killed also of the Enemy about 7000,
and took about 450 Prisoners; The Principal of those killed and taken Prisoners
are as follows, viz.

PRISONERS.
General and Field-Officers Twenty Four, viz. Lord Duleek. Lord Slain. Lord
Buffin. Sir Nicolas Brown, commonly called Lord Killmare. Major General
Dorrington. Maj. Genesis John Hamilton. Brigadier Tuite. Coll. Walter Bourke.
Coll. Gorden O Neal. Coll. Butler of Kil^^sh. Coll; O Conaell. Lieut, Col.
Edmund Madden: Lieutenant Colonel John Chapel. Lieutenant Colonel John
Butler. Lieut. Coll. Magennis. L^eut. Coll. Rossiter. Lieut. Coll. Maguirt.
Major Patrick Lawless. Major Kelly. Major Grace. Major William Bourke. Major
Edmond Butler, Major Edmond Broghall, Major John Hewson
Captains Twenty-Six. viz. Walier Byrne. Walter Bourke. Hagan. Charles Mac
Carty. Common. Mac Donagh. C^imon. Bellew. Fitz Patrick. Blanshfield. Peter
Anthony. James Garvan. Thomas Plunket. Huhbert Dillon, John Minnis. Shea.
Tearn. Darby Grady. Miles Burke. John Gould. James Bater. Heugh Mac Dormot.
Walter Blake. Walter Boukre. William Mac Evoy. Bryan Morphy.
Lieutenants twenty four, viz. Henry O Neal. Thomas Walter. Edmond Brenan. Mac
Carty. Purcel. Murphy. Mac Manus. Rafter. Mac Mahon. Daffy. Halluly. Quirke.
Tobyn. Devy, Walsh. Walcott. Butler. Cahan. Bourke. Barry. Mac Loghlin.
Cantlin. Dunn. Brody.
Cornets five, Ensigns twenty three, Quarter Masters four, viz. CORNETS. Edward
Neile. Terenee Neile. Daulton. Jourdan. Quin.
ENSIGNS. Ward. Fitz Patrick. Moore. Mac Loghlin. Lavallin. Pain. Freeman.
Stretch. Verdon. Aylmer. Mac Loghlin. Lincy. Shane. Archdeacon. Meagher.
Bourke. Bourke. Kelly. Mac Evoy. Daniel. Fleming. Daly. Loghlin.
QUARTER MASTERS. Byrne. Higgin. Mac Gwire. Bigly. Wholan. -- Adjutant.


General and Field Officers, 24 Captains, 26 Lieutenants, 24 Ensigns, 23
Cornets, 5 Quarter Masters. 4 Adjutant, 1 -- Officers Prisoners, 107 -- Privste
Soldiers, about 300 --

KILLED.
Lord Killmallock Lord Galway. Brigdier Connell. Brig. Will. Mansfield Barker.
Brig, Hen, Mac John O Neal. Coll. Walter Nugent. Coll. Charles Moore, his
Lieutenant Colonel and Major. Coll. David Bourke. Coll. Ulick Bourke. Coll.
Cohannaught Mac Guire. Coll. O Gara. Coll* Arthur. Coll. Felix O Neil. Coll.
Mahowny. Coll. Cormack O Neil. Lieut, Coll. Morgan: Major Purcell, Major O
Donnel. Sir John Evirard.
Besides a great Number of Captains and Subaltern Officers.

Brigadier Talbor, AND Sir Morice Eustace, Both desperately Wounded; but made
their Escape to Limmerick.

And it is generally reported, the French General St. Ruth was killed by a Great
Shot.

Printed at Dublin, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to their most excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1691.


