THE Bishop of ELY's LETTERS To the Late K. James and Q. Mary, Sent Under the
Disguised NAMES of Mr. Redding and Mrs. Redding.
To Mr. Redding
SIR!
THOUGH the Bearer of this will do us the Justice to assure you, We are as full
of Duty, as unfeignedly and concernedly Yours, as your self could wish; yet
this Gentleman has undertaken you will forgive the Presumption, If I do my self
the honor to give you this fresh assurance in a few Words, which We do by our
Actions: I shall omit no Occasions, not neglecting the least, and making
Zealous Wishes for the greatest, to show our Selves such as We ought to be.

Sir! I speak in the Plural, because I write my Eldest Brother's Sentiments, as
well as My own, and the rest of the Family; Though lessened in Number, yet, if We
are not mightily out in our Accounts, We are growing in our Interests, that is,
in Yours.

He that delivers this, will, I hope (entirely to Your satisfaction) represent
Us, and Me in particular, as, with all the Devotion imaginable, and
Unchangeable Affection.

Yours, etc. God grant the Happiest New Year.
New Years Eve.
To Mrs. Redding.
AS it is impossible for Me to express that extraordinary great satisfaction it
gave Me this time Twelvemonth, to receive that Mark of your Favor and
Goodness under your own Hand: So I have lived in some pain for an opportunity
to write you my Humble Acknowledgments, and Truest Duty: From which, (by the
Grace of God) I am no more capable of swerving, than of Renouncing my hopes of
Heaven: I say this in behalf of my Elder Brother, and the Rest of my Nearest
Relations, as well as for My Self; You may entirely depend upon Us, not only
for a constant Adherence to so well chosen a Principle; But for our utmost
Activity to promote your Interests, Which are inseperably our Own.

I need come to no Particulars by this Bearer, Who can, and will tell you our
whole Hearts; And I wish you cold see them, how sincerely they are devoted to
your Service. God grant you a most Happy New Year, and many, very many, and
very happy: Our Young Master has all our Best Wishes; He daily gains more
Friends, and We get ground of his Adversaries.

New Years Eve (1694/1)
Rushworth's Collections 1st. Part.
The Censure and Doom of a Pragmatical, Turbulent, and Proud Bishop of Ely, in
the Reign of King Richard the First, was this: Per totam Insulam Public
Proclametur; Pereat qui perdere culicta festinat. Opprimatur, ne Omnes
opprimat. English. Let him be Cut off, who Plotted to bring all to Ruin; Let
him be Dispatched, least be undo us All.


