THE Unfortunate WELCH-MAN; OR, The Untimely Death of Scotch JOCKEY
If her will Fight, her cause to right, as daring to presume
To Kill and Slay, then well her may take this to be her Doom.
To the tune of, The Country-Farmer.
This may be Printed,

R. P.









S^^^^ Shonny-ap-Morgan to London would ride,
(...) seek Cosen Taffie what ever betide;
(...) ^^n Sisters Son, whom her loved so dear,
(...) ^^d not beheld him this many long year:
^^^^^es in the morning stout Shonny arose,
and then on the journey with Courage her goes,
(...) Cossit of Gray was the best of her Close
(...) Boots they were out at the heels and the toes.
(...) Sword by her side, and with Bob the Gray Mare,
(...) rid on the Road like a Champion so rare;
(...) ^ast how it happened to her hard Lot,
To meet with young Iockey, a bonny brisk Scot
Then Iockey was jolly, and thus he did say,
Let Us gang to the Tavern, drink Wine by my fay,
Then Shonny consented, and made no delay,
But Iockey left Shonny the Reckoning to pay.
While Morgan was Merry, and thinking no ill,
The Scotch-man he used the best of his Skill,
Considering how he might Scamper away,
For why Sir, he never intended to pay
But like a false Loon he slipped out of door
And never intended to come there no more,
Poor Shonny-a-Morgan was left for the Score
Cotzo her was never so served before.
Her paying the Shot, then away her went,
The Welsh Blood was up, and her mind was Bent
For speedy pursuing he then did prepare,
Then Morgan did mount upon Bob the Gray Mare
Then Whip and Spur stout Shonny did ride,
And overtook Iockey near to a Wood-side,
And pulled out her Sword in the height of her Pride.
And wounded poor Iockey, who presently died.
Then Shonny was taken and hurried to Iail,
Where her till the Sessions did weep and bewail;
And then at the last, by the Laws of the Land,
Was brought to the Bar to hold up her hand;
O good her Lord Shudge, poor Shonny did cry,
Now Whip her, and send her to Wales her Country;
Or cut off a Leg, or an Arm, or an Eye,
For her is undone if Condemned to dye.
But this would not do, poor Shonny was Cast,
And likewise received her Sentence at last;
A Gentleman Robber just at the same time,
Received just Sentence then due for his Crime:
Then Shonny-a-Morgan her shed many tears,
Her heart was possessed with sorrow and fears,
The Gentleman Thief likewise hung down his ears
For then he expected his ancient Arrears.
The day being come they must both did adieu,
Forsaking the world and the rest of their Crew;
The Spark was attired so gallant and gay,
But Shonny was poor, and in ragged array:
Then when they came both to the Gibbet Tree,
The Gentleman gave to the Hangman a Fee,
And said, let this Welch-man Hang farther from me,
So vile and so ragged a Rascal is he.
The Welch-man he heard him, and was in a rage,
That nothing almost could his anger assuage;
But fretting and chaffing, he thus did begin,
Her will make her to know that her came of good kin
Besides, her will tell her her hearty belief,
That her is no more then a Gentleman Thief,
That robbed on the Roads, and the Plain, and the Heath
Her now will Hang by her in spite of her teeth.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deacon, at the Angel in Gultispur-street.


