decorative border Tudor rose C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Scottish thistle blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms portrait of
woman portrait of one-legged man portrait of woman with two orphans

Two PSALMS of Thanksgiving to be sung by the Children of Christ's- Hospital,
the one on Monday, and the other on Tuesday in Easter Holy Days at St. Mary's
Spittle, for their Founders and Benefactors, Anno Domini 1665.
This Chorus is to be sung by all the Children, and repeated after every Verse

1.
^ O Blessed Lord, we will record Thy Glorious Name and Worth:
^ To thee we will sing, Our God and King, And praises warble forth.
Verse.
^ WHAT floods of sorrow once indeed Poor Orphans did surround,
^ Which made our hearts to ache and bleed, And caused a discord sound?
^ Like Shipwrecked Mariners were we, Being gravel'd on the shelves
^ Of need and pinching po-ver-ty; But could not help our selves.
^ Then did our God himself alone Stretch forth his liberal hand,
^ And us poor Orphans did bemoan, And brought us safe to land.
Chorus.
^ O Blessed Lord, etc.
2.
The Scene is altered quite, and now, Our Night of fears is past,
Our Clouds dispelled are: see how The Sun appears at last.
We weep this day for joy, that we In London's Hemisphear
Such Bright and Glorious Stars may see On this day to appear;
Whose influence revives the Heart Of them that are brought low
By pining Famine, and the smart Of penury and woe.
Chorus.
O Blessed Lo^d, etc.
3.
Long may our Patrons live, and be Preserved from Envie's frown;
When summoned hence, Posterity Their lasting Name shall crown.
Heaven bless our Royal King and Queen, The Council, Church and State,
Enrich them all with joys unseen, And keep off Envious Fate.
Lord Mayor and Senate, Lord, protect; Our Cities Store increase;
Remove all jarrs and plots detect, That we may live in Peace.
Chorus.
O Blessed Lord, etc.
The PSALM for Tuesday.
This Chorus i^to be sung by a^^ the Children, and repeated after every Verse.

1.
^ THou, Lord, do reign, and still maintain The world by glorious might:
^ Thy dreadful name we will proclaim In all Blasphemers sight.
Verse.
^ IF foul-mouthed Atheists should deny, There sits in heaven above
^ A God, whose Glorious De-i-ty All things below does move;
^ Then we poor Orphans will alone Their lies make to retreat,
^ To whom th'Almightie's care is shown, And mercy wondrous great.
^ Our Number shall their Blasphemies Most plainly here confute,
^ Who boldly dare by Hellish Lies Against our God dispute.
Chorus.
^ Thou, Lord, etc.
2.
O Blessed Lord, it is thou indeed, That rul'st all things below;
It Is thou alone the Poor do feed, Oppressed by pinching woe.
And you, Grave Senators, likewise Our Doleful state supply;
You healed have our Miseries By your Benignity.
We Will change our mournful Dirges then To Songs and Praises meet:
The noble Acts of Famous men We Will study to repeat.
Chorus.
Thou, Lord, etc.
3.
Our Royal Edward first did frame The model of our Weal,
And Pious men uphold the same, That it shall never reel.
The Lord stir up the hearts of more, That may with libr'al mind
Diffuse their Bounty and their Store, And to the Poor be kind.
Our King, our Queen and Royal Race Heaven keep and still defend;
To City, Senate, grant thy Grace, And joy that never may end.
Chorus.
Thou, Lord, etc.
S. H.

A true Report of the great number of poor Children and other poor People
maintained in the Four Hospitals under the Pious Care of the Lord Mayor,
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of LONDON.
Children-put forth Apprentices and discharged out of Christ's- Hospital the
year last past -- 103 Children buried the said year -- 008 Children now
remaining under the Care and Charge of the said Hospital, which are kept in the
House and diverse places in London and Suburbs thereof, and at nurse in the
Country, six hundred, and fifteen. -- 615

The names of all which are registered in the Books kept in the said Hospital,
and are there to be seen, from what Parishes they have been from time to time
admitted.

The number being so many, and the Charges of the keeping them so great, It is
hoped several good Christians will freely contribute toward the maintenance of
them, the certain Revenue of the said Hospital being little more then the
moiety of the necesssary Charges thereof.

THere have been Cured this year last past, at the Charge of St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, of wounded, sick, and maimed Soldiers, Seamen and other diseased
Persons, from several parts, of the Dominions of the King's most excellent
Majesty, and from other Foreign parts, many whereof have been relieved with money
and other necessaries at their departure -- 1561 Buried this year after much
charge in the time of their sickness -- 214 Remaining under Cure at this
present, upon the charge of the said Hospital -- 246 THere have been Cured this
year last past, at the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital, of maimed Soldiers,
Seamen and other diseased persons, whereof many have been relieved with money
and other necessaries at their departure -- 1163 Buried this year after much
charge in the time of their sickness -- 094 Remaining under Cure at present,
upon the charge of the said Hospital -- 211 THere have been brought to the
Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one whole year last past, of
wandering persons and other Vagrants, to the number of -- 908 Many whereof have
been very chargeable to the said Hospital for Apparel, Sick-diet and Surgery,
besides the ordinary diet, and other provisions and charges expended about
them, which could not be avoided by reason of their necessities, and many of
them have been passed into their native Countries with Apparel, Clothing, and
other charges, which could not be avoided, considering their naked and
miserable condition, nor they thence passed without such Charge. And there are
now kept and maintained in the said Hospital in Arts and Occupations, and other
useful and necessary works and labors, at the charge of the said Hospital,
Apprentices and other persons, to the number of -- 194

THe Hospital of Bethlehem is of great Antiquity, use and necessity, for
keeping and curing distracted persons, who are of all other most miserable, by
reason of their wants both for Soul and Body, and have no sense thereof.

There having been brought into the same Hospital, within the space of one
whole year now last past, out of several Parishes in London and place adjacent,
distracted men and women to be cured of their Lunacy to the number of -- 025
There have been Cured of their Lunacy and discharged out of the same Hospital
this last year, to the number of -- 013 And there are now remaining in the same
Hospital, and kept at the great charge thereof, both with Physic, Diet and
other Relief, under Cure, to the number of -- 057

The Charge thereof being very great, as well in respect of their Physic,
Diet, Clothing, and other Relief, as also the great charge of servants to look
to them, they being most unruly and not able to help themselves, and the Rents
and Revenues of the said Hospital being very small, not amounting to two third
parts of the yearly Charge thereof; therefore this Hospital is a very fit
object of all good men's Charity, to be extended, as God shall enable them,
toward their relief, there having been, and daily are, by the blessing of God
and the Charge of the said Hospital, and the care of those that are entrusted
with the said distracted people, diverse reduced to their former senses.


