The Tenor of the Oath to be taken by all Persons in public Trust.
I A. B. Solemnlie swear in the presence of the eternal GOD, whom I invocat as
Judge and Witness of my sincere intention of this my Oath; That I own, and
sincerely profess the true Protestant Religion, contained in the Confession of
Faith, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the sixth, and that I
believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable to the writters Word of GOD.
And I promise and swear, that I shall adhere thereto, during all the dates of
my lifetime, and shall endeavor to educat my Children therein: and shall never
consent to any change, or alteration contrair thereto: And that I disown, and
renounce all such Principles, Doctrines, or Practices, whether Popish, or
Phanatical, which are contrare unto, and inconsistent with the said Protestant
Religion, and Confession of Faith. And for testification of my Obedience to my
most Gracious Sovereign CHARLES the second, I do affirm, and swear, by this my
solemn Oath, That the King's Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, over all persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil:
And that no foreign Prince, Person, Pope, Prelate, State, or Potent at, has,
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminencie or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Civil, within this Real^ And therefore I do
utterlie renounce, and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities, and Authorities, And do promise, that from henceforth, I shall
bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Majesty, His Heirs, and lawful
Successors, And to my power shall assist, and defend, all Rights,
Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, Privileges, Prheminencies and Authorities
belonging to the King's Majesty, His Heirs and lawful Successors. And I
farther affirm and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I judge it unlawful for
Subjects, upon pretense of Reformation, or any other pretense whatsoever, To
enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to convocat, conveen, or assemble in any
Councils, Conventions, or Assemblies, to treat, consuit, or determine, in any
matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastisk, without his Majesty's special command,
or express license had thereto, or to take up Arms against the King, or those
commissionated by Him: And that I shall never so rise in Arms: or enter into
such Covenants, or Assemblies: and that there lies no obligation on me from the
National Covenant, or the Solemn League and Covenant (so commonly called) or
any other manner of way whatsoever, to endeavor any change or alteration in
the Government, either in Church or State, as it is new established by the Laws
of this Kingdom. And I promise and swear, that I shall with my utmost power,
defend, assist and maintain His Majesty's Jurisdiction foresaid against all
deadly: And I shall never decline His Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, As I
shall answer to God. And finally, I affirm and swear, that this my solemn
Oath, is given in the plain genuine sense and meaning of the words, without any
equivocation, mental reservation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever; And that
I shall not accept, or use any dispensation from any Creature whatsoever. So
help me GOD.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1681.


