UPON THE HAPPY AGREEMENT BETWEEN KING AND PARLIAMENT: AND THE Spanish Priests
Bonefire, March 8. 1672.
WHat time a Storm Impended over our State,
Plotted by Foreign and Intestine Hate,
When Belgic Brutes, and Traitors had intent,
Like Vaux, to undermine our Parliament:
And with the Devil, undertook a Course
To get by Fraud, what they never could by Force:
When Brandy sailed, and naught remained to them
(Distressed Devils) but a Stratagem;
When they had done all that the Dutch were able,
And found Deceit was stronger then the Cable,
From their Infernal Country strait they come,
Impostures, to out Seminary Rome;
And among us such Damned Seeds of Discord sow,
As might ourselves, whom none could else overthrow.
But Britains Mighty Caesar soon looked in,
And saw the Ass coucht in the Lyon's Skin;
Making their closest Machins but his Mirth,
Alas! he spied 'em, e're they gave 'um Birth:
And to the Members such a Speech began,
The Voice of God they cried, and not of Man:
Each Sentence so Serene was, and so choice,
If 'twas not Gods, 'twas Gods Vicegerents Voice.
'Twas a Substantial Word, a Word in Season,
Archt over with Honnour, underpropt with Reason;
So Gracious as his Auditors became,
His Subjects double, both of Joy and Shame:
So Sweet, so Clean, so Keen that every Word
Hewed down more Laurel then his Royal Sword.
Above 'em all they saw his Glory Fly,
As high in Parts as Principallity;
There he that worth Ten Thousand of us was,
Did all the Wisdom of his Realms surpass,
They that disputed, do themselves despise,
The People weak are, but the Prince is Wise;
My Lord the King, Wise as Gods Angel is,
Discerning what is right, and what is amiss.
'Has given 'em now an understanding right,
Right as the Righteous Cause, for which we fight.
Now shines the Sun in Uigor and full force,
And all the Glorious Stars observe their Course,
Whose Royal Beams have so Enlightened them,
Midnight cannot conceal a Stratagem.
What Monarch in the World compares with ours.
Heads such a multitude of Councillors,
Who while they well their proper Orbs maintain,
May (under him) be each a Sovereign;
They Are Wise then, that keep close to such a Head,
Whose Arms Expanded over Europe spread:
So shall the Audacious Dutch, that Huff it thus,
Come Cap in hand, and Truckle under us.
But now we Praise and thanks to Heaven return,
And in Bonefires, that Hagg Discention Burn;
Red Seas of Wine flow from each teeming Terse,
As 'tware the Vintage of the Universe:
Agreed, Agreed, they cry, O Heavenly Voice,
The very Streets themselves seemed to Rejoice:
The Spanish Priest, out did us all by odds,
We Burnt but Faggots, but he Burnt his Gods.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Thomas Vere, at the Angel without Newgate. 1673.


