Upon the Death of the truly Valiant and Magnanimous SR CHRISTOPH: MINNS
WOUNDED AT SEA.
TIME break thy Glass! Why should we longer stay!
Beat a Dead March, our Captain leads the Way.
He who so often from the Batavian Brow
Had snatched the conquered Palm away, see how
He lays, -- a piece of Earth; unfit to weild
The Warlike Weapon or to hug the Shield!
No sooner had the black-mouthed Ord'nance
With Hell-bred Flames, and big with Flemmish (hot shot)
Spit forth its Venim'd blasts, enough to make
The well compacted Universe to shake,
But straight the Waves (supposing thou were dead)
Leapt up to catch the Airie Substance fled;
The expecting Ocean, waits to have thy Tomb
An Everlasting Trophie, in her Womb;
That Jewels might invest thee, and thy Bones
Be Metamorphiz'd into precious Stones;
Each drop of Blood should into Rubies turn,
And serve to deck thy well enameled Urn.
Whilst that the Sympathizing Dolphins stay
Longing to bear their welcomed Guest away.
But least that Corpse that did so Bravely Die.
Should underneath the Waves forgotten lie,
And find no other Funerals, no Grave
But what was then bestowed on every Slave,
In pity Gentler Fate to us has given
Thy Body, and returned thy Soul to Heaven.
If there be any place above the rest
Thy brave Herocik Soul shall be possessed
O^ its Immortal Glories, and thy Name
Still warbled forth by never dying Fame:
There Warriers Garlands shall thy Temples Crown
Free from the blasts of Fate, or Envies Frown;
Instead of Bloody Scarrs thy batterd Face.
Shall be environed with a Nobler Grace.
Nor can thou Die, but art Transcendent grown
And challengest the World as if thine own;
Who have (to do thy Native Country Good)
Been Prodigal of Fortune, Life and Blood.
Methinks I see another Star appear
Brighter then Mars and in a Nobler Sphere,
Whose Warlike Influence shall make the Fire
Of the undaunted Brittans mount up higher
In future Ages, and the World shall know
Stars act upon the Bodies here below.
OXFORD, Printed for Joseph Godwin. 1666.


