Upon the Departure of His GRACE, James, Duke of Monmouth.
To all Protestant well-wishers. 1679
AH! Can he go and no one shed a Tear
For him, who never thought his Life too dear
To hazard, to protect us from our Foes;
As his late Victories in Scotland shows.
Holland and France, will Trumpet forth his Fame,
Until they each of them shall want a Name.
And shall we be less Grateful to that Prince,
Whose daily Actions does the World convince?
Are only squared for the common good,
For which he will venture Fortune, Life and Blood
Let Protestants a sorrow now contrive,
To show his absence they can scarce Survive.
Let England lament until it be,
Turned into a weeping Niobe;
And with their servent Sighs keep full his Sails,
With Loyal, safe, and the most prosperous Gayls,
And let their Tears into the Sea resort,
To waft him safely to his Royal Port.
And may their daily prayr's to Heaven be,
That he may escape all Dangers of the Sea.
May his most Royal Father live to see,
Him over his Foes obtain sole Victory.
And be a pattern to his Royal Son,
In what he has so worthily begun.
And may he in due time with all renoun,
Enjoy the Favors Fortune tumbles down.
May this, and all the happiness that can,
Be bounded in the boundless heart of Man,
Attend the Noble Monmouth. May he be,
Still our Defense, and Scourge to Popery.
May thy Great Soul Great Prince like active Fire,
The more deprest, more vigorous and rise higher.
Which like a Ball thrown hard against the Ground,
Rises much more, upon a fair rebound.
May still the Charms of thy Eternal Fame,
Convince thy Foes of an immortal shame.
May thy high Actions of thy Great Renoun,
Shake and destroy the Roman Triple Crown.
May Heaven and Earth both thy possessions be,
And may thy Bliss last to Eternity.
Great Prince and Patron, now we must submit,
Our present Lives, to what the Fates think fit.
Yet this we boldly dare affirm as true,
None but your Royal Father, Sir and you,
Can keep our half dead gasping souls alive,
He whilst he lives, and you whilst you survive.
May our Great God protect his happy Reign,
To see you once return with Joy again;
To be Assistant to the Royal Will,
Of our Dear Sovereign, Faith's Defender still.
Which Princely Monmouth we with Tears implore,
Daily and Hourly, at Heavens Crystal Door.
Our Pray's shall never cease, until God grants,
This Christian-wish of all true Protestants.
FINIS.

