The Unconscionable Gallant: OR, The Beautiful Lady's Misfortune.
To the Tune of, Fond Boy, etc
Lieensed according to Order.

^ NOw I pray you attend, to the Lines that are penned,
Which abroad to the World we in merriment send;
It is absolute new, and they say it is true,
Therefore listen a while unto what shall ensue:
A young, Gallan^ of Fame to a Friend's House he came,
Where he sent for a fair and young beautyful Dame.
When her Charms he beheld he with Raptures was filled,
Yet although he in Courting was very well Skilled
His fine Amourus Tale could in no wise prevail,
For without Half a Piece of his Joys he should fail:
Like a Lady of State she had told him the Rate,
And this done, not a Penny or Farthing she would Bait.
Half a Piece is too much for a poor single touch,
Therefore pray use a Conscience, for faith I do grutch
To give more than a Crown for a bit of the Brown,
I can have it for less of the Girls of the Town:
Therefore make not this fuss, and stand scruing me thus,
For a light Gain they say makes a rich golden Purse.
If a Lady you lack, Sir, I stand to my tack,
For I Will have you to know I am no common Crack,
That for Six pence or less will their kindness express,
You may see that I go in a rich silken Dress,
Paint with powdered Hair and black Patches I wear,
Which cannot be maintained with that Price I declare.
Pry'the be not so nice, it is a very good Price,
And thou knows very well 'twill be earned in a trice:
Therefore do not deny, but with reason comply,
And perhaps for my Jewel a Cornet I Will buy.
But the Answer she gave, You must give what I crave
It Is in vain to dispute, for ten shillings I Will have.
When he found her so stout, he began to fall out,
And, as some says, he threatened to Kick her about:
Since her price she would not ^^ait, faith his Love turned to hate,
And he threatened to Call for an Officer strait:
If you will have full Ten, I will punish you then
That can be so hard-hearted and Cruel to Men.
Now the Lady Replied, in regard you are denied,
Can you be so uncivil your Friend to Deride?
Yes, I will then, he swore: And, Miss, what is more,
Some good Justice of Peace you shall now go before,
To Receive the Reward that the Law will afford,
Straight with Tears in her Eyes she his pity implored.
The Disgrace I do fear, therefore let me go clear,
And my Scarf with Five Shillings, I Will render you here,
Had I here so much more, I would part with my store,
For, alas! I was never so fitted before.
Then he pitied her Case, and would hide the disgrace,
And without more to do they departed the place.
LONDON: Printed for C. Nates, at the White-Hart in West-Smithfield.


