Whitehall, Sept. 12. 1695. This Morning came in several Mails from Ireland,
the last bringing Letters of the 6th. of September.
Published by Authority.
Dublin, September 6. 1695.
ON the 29th. of August (the day to which the two Houses were adjourned,) my
Lord Deputy went again to the House of Lords, with the usual Solemnity, and the
Commons being sent for up, and appearing at the Bar, Mr. Rochfort, His
Majesty's Attorney General, made the following Speech:

May it please Your Excellency.
IN Obedience to Your Excellency's Commands the Commons of Ireland having met
in their House, have done me the Honor to Elect me their Speaker.

And though I am Commanded to acquaint your Excellency with their Choice, yet
the due sense I have of my own Imperfections, and my small Experience in
Parliamentary Affairs, oblige me humbly to Address to your Excellency to excuse
me from this weighty Employment, which is proper only for a Person of
Extraordinary Abilities.

For notwithstanding the Obligations I am under to the Service of His Majesty,
and the promoting the Public Good of this Nation; and the just Respect and
Deference I pay to the Judgment of the House of Commons in Electing me their
Speaker.

I cannot but declare my unwillingness to accept the Honor, since I am
sensible of my insufficiency to discharge the Trust.

And therefore I humbly entreat your Excellency to direct them to return to
their House, and make Choice of a more fit Person for that Service.


Then my Lord Chancellor, by his Excellency's Command, said,

Mr. Attorney,
HIs Excellency Commands me to let you know, That if you had been a Stranger
unknown to him before this time, yet what you have now said to disable your
self, shows you are too well Qualified for the Service, to which the Commons
have designed you, for him to allow your Excuse.

He is satisfied from this, and the Experience he has had of your Prudence and
Judgment in many Occasions, That the Commons have well considered their own
Service, in the Choice they have made of you for their Speaker; And therefore
Disallows your Excuse, and Confirms their Choice, and Commands you Cheerfully
to attend their Service.


Mr. Speaker's Answer.
May it please your Excellency,
YOur Excellency having been pleased to declare your Approbation of the Choice
of the Honorable House of Commons, and laid your Commands on me to attend
their Service as their Speaker: I take the Confidence to assure your
Excellency, that the present Conunjcture of Affairs in this Kingdom does seem
to be so happy, that our Enemies have no ground to hope, nor our Friends any
reason to fear, the least Breach or Disunion among us. For I am persuaded that
every Member of both Houses has fully resolved to lay aside all private
Interests, and unanimously to endeavor with all possible Application and
Integrity to promote the public Welfare of their Country.

And nothing certainly can be a greater assurance to us all of the happy
Success of this Parliament, than his Majesty's Wisdom, and gracious Pleasure in
appointing your Excellency the Chief Governor of this Kingdom; who inherit
your Fathers unparallelled Loyalty to the Crown, and your noble Brother's
Extraordinary Affection of this Country.

And it is the general Hope, and the Expectation of us all, that what the late
Earl of Essex, when he was in this Government, so obligingly designed, so
prudently contrived, and so prosperously begun for the public Good and
Interest of this Nation; your Excellency may have the Glory of accomplishing,
and we the Happiness of enjoying.

As concerning my self, the Commons of Ireland have been pleased to make Choice
of one of their Country, and of joint Interest with them, to be their Speaker,
That by my own Experience of His Majesty's extraordinary Favors to this
Kingdom, I might the more affectionatly return their most humble
Acknowledgements for them.

And though I am sensible of my being unworthy of so great an Honor, and
insufficient to dischare so weighty a Trust; yet I shall make it my business to
supply in some measure my want of due Qualifications, by the Faithfulness of my
Services, and the Sincerity and Heartiness of my Endeavors for the Public.

And I am the less concerned for my great and many Imperfections, when I
consider that this Honorable House of Commons is composed of Persons of so
public Spirits, and of so eminent Abilities, as will not need a Speaker of
extraordinary Wisdom to direct their Counsels, or of Experience to manage their
Debates, or of Eloquence to move their Affections to the Service of His
Majesty, and the Good of their Country.

And now having in Obedience to your Excellency's Commands, and by the Favor
of the Commons of Ireland, taken upon me the Office of their Speaker, I beg
leave of your Excellency to begin to discharge some part of my Trust, by humbly
Demanding in the Name of the Commons of Ireland,

That they may have Freedom of Speech and Debate.

And not be molested in their Persons, Goods, or Attendants.

His Excellency being withdrawn, and the Commons returned to their House,

The Lords Ordered, that the Thanks of this House be given to the Lord-Deputy
for his Excellent Speech; And a Committee having drawn up an Address for that
purpose, it was agreed to by the House, and presented to his Excellency the
31th of August in the Morning.

The Commons also Ordered a Committee to draw up an Address of Thanks to his
Excellency for his Speech on the 27th of August, and having agreed to it,
presented the same to his Excellency the 31th in the Afternoon.


Address of the LORDS.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled attend you
Excellency, to pray you to return our most dutiful and unfeigned Thanks to His
most Excellent Majesty, as well for the many great Benefits we have already
Received, as for those which by your Excellency's Speech in Parliament we find
His Majesty graciously intends for us. And we think our selves obliged to
express our Gratitude to your Excellency for the great Part you have had
therein, and esteem our selves very happy under your Excellency's Government.


To His Excellency HENRY Lord Capell, Lord Deputy-General, and
General-Governour of Ireland.
The Humble Address of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament
Assembled.
May it please your Excellency,
IT is with the highest satisfaction we are put in mind of the obligations we
owe His Majesty. The mentioning them gives us a pleasing Remembrance of the
great things the King has done for us, and obliges us to make such returns as
becomes Obedient and Loyal Subjects. To His goodness we owe the assembling us
in Parliament, where our Actions shall silence the Enemies of our Welfare, and
show us Dutiful and Grateful to His Majesty, who in Addition to his other
Gracious Favors, has placed your Excellency in the sole Government of this
Kingdom: At once choosing a Faithful Servant to the Crown, and one most
acceptable to this People by personal Merit; and the Memory of our Happiness
under the Government of your Noble Brother. And that our sense of His Majesty's
Great Goodness may not seem to terminate in Words only. We take leave to give
your Excellency Assurance that we shall avoid all Heats and Animosities in our
Debates, and apply our selves to what shall be agreeable to His Majesty's
Expectation and for the Service of the public, by supplying the deficiency of
the Revenue, and proposing such Laws as may most contribute to the Honor of
the Crown and the settlement of our Selves and Posterity on the best and surest
Foundations.


To which His Excellency was pleased to Answer in this manner, viz.

Gentlemen,
I Thank you for your Address, and am very well satisfied that you approve of
what I have done; I shall steadfastly pursue His Majesty's Interest and Yours
which I take to be the same; And continue upon all occasions to represent you
to His Majesty as His most Loyal and Faithful Subjects.

The two Houses since their first Meeting, have proceeded upon the
Consideration of several Public Bills and other Matters.

On the 4th. The House of Commons resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That this
House will to the utmost of their Power, stand by and Assist His Majesty and
his Government, against all his Enemies Foreign and Domestic. And the same day
resolved in a Committee of the whole House, that it was the opinion of the said
Committee, that a Supply be Granted to His Majesty, to which the House agreed,
Nemine Contradicente.

Yesterday the Commons passed the Bill for an Additional Duty of Excise, and
sent it up to the Lords.

And this day my Lord-Deputy went in the usual manner to the House of Lords,
and gave the Royal Assent to such Bills as had passed the two Houses, viz.

An Act for an Additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors. An
Act for Taking away the Writ De Heretico Comburendo. An Act declaring all
Attainders, and all other Acts made in the late pretended Parliament, to be
void. An Act to restrain Foreign Education. An Act for the better securing the
Government, by disarming Papists. An Act for the settling of Intestates Estates.
The Commons have resolved on Monday next to proceed upon the Business of the
Supply.


Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson,
Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


