A True and Real ACCOUNT Of the DEFEAT of GENERAL BUCHAN, And BRIGADEER CANNON,
Their High-land Army, at the Battle of Crombdell; upon the 1st of May; 1690.

Conform to a Letter, sent by Sir Thomas Livingston Colonel of a Regiment of
Dragoons to Major General Mackay, giving a particular Account of the said
Defeat; with a List of the Officers taken at the said Battle, and at the Castle
of Lethen-Dee.

Licensed May 8th. 1690.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Anno Dom. 1690.

A true Account of the Battle at Crombdell, May 1st. 1690. conform to this
Letter, is, as follows.
Honored Sir,
AS I have in several Letters before, given you nothing but ill News, so I am
glad I have now the occasion of sending you somewhat better: The General
Buchan, and Brigadeer Cannon, with his Highland Army, having for a while
marched up and down this Country, increased as a Snow-Ball daily, which
affrighted and discouraged the Country so far, that upon Sunday last, I
resolved to march out of Inverness, with a Detatchment of four hundred men of
Sir James Leslies, six Companies of Grants, the Highland Company of Captain
Mackay, three Troops of my Dragoons, and my Lord Yester's Troop of Horse, and
Camped that Night near Brodie, where I was forced to stay two days, for my
Baggage Horses coming in very slow from the Country, as likewise for the three
other Troops of Dragoons from Elgin, and Captain Burnets of Horse: The Enemy
was at this time at Strathspey, threatening to Slay and Burn all that would not
join; whereupon I resolved the thirtieth of April, about twelve a Clock in the
Day, having then got certain Intelligence where they Camped, and what number
they were, to march toward them, we marched the whole Night in as bad Ground
as Lochaber may be, till at last, by two a Clock in the morning we got to
Ball-Chastle, where being arrived, we discovered by the Enemies Fires their
Camp, I informed my self of the Nature of the Ground, and the depth of the
River, and notwithstanding they told me, the Ground was somewhat Boggish, I
formed a Design to Attacque them by surprise, for they did not know of my being
arrived, but my Men and Horse being so extremely wearied, I gave them about
half an hour to refresh themselves, after which time, I called the Officers
together, and told them my resolution, so that they might Examine their
Soldiers, if they were able to do it, who unanimously told me, they would stand
by me to the last man, and desired earnestly to go on; I having got Guides by
this time in readiness, we passed the River by three a Clock in the morning, at
one Foord, where there was a Church, the Enemy kept a strong Guard, where I
sent some Foot, and a few Dragoons, to Fire upon them, and Amuse them, and in
the mean time past the River an another Foord, below it, two Troops of
Dragoons, and Captain Mackay's Highland Company was already passed before the
Enemy perceived us, and then we see them run in Parties up and down, not
knowing which way to turn themselves, being surprised, so I commanded all the
Horse and Dragoons to join, and pursued them, which affrighted them, so that
they took themselves to the Hills; and at the foot of Crombdel we overtook
them, attacked them, killing betwixt three and four hundred upon the place, and
took about 100 Prisoners, the greater part of them Officers, the rest got off
by a Mist, that came just at that time upon the top of the Hill, so that we
could scarcely see one another, otherwise the Slaughter should have been
greater, so I caused (...) a Retreat, our Horses being ready to fall down, and
drew up upon the low Ground, Prisoners being brought to me from all hands:
Buchan, when they took the alarm first, sent a Nephew of his with some more
Officers and Soldiers, in an old Castle, who at first seemed to be Opinionate,
I caused to surround them, and finding the Ground proper to undermind them,
which they finding, surrendered themselves to the King's mercy: Buchan got off,
without Hatt, Coat, or Sword, and was seen that day, and in that posture, in
Glenlivet, very much Fatigued, carried in a Cousins House of his; Cannon got
away in his Nightgown, Dumfermling had gone from them about some business the
day before.

We have taken all their Baggage and Ammunition, and the Soldiers have got more
considerable Plunder, as I thought, they carried about with them. Their King
and Queens Standard, where they cited the Country people to repair to, are
taken; there are said to be people of note, that are killed, but of this, I can
give you no certain account, being that when we came to visit them, they were
all naked, by what we could judge, there was some appearance of it.

The resolution and forwardness of all the Troops is admirable; and although
the Foot could not get up to us, they marched after us with as great diligence
as possible.

It is remarkable, that in this whole business there is not one man lost, three
or four wounded; but not dangerously either, and about a dozen of Horses, but
many Horses disabled. This night we have had one of the severest that could be;
I design to pursue this, and see if I can disperse what is of them yet
together, which will be but a small number, being that they ran to all Arts;
but the Weather is so horrible, that I fear I shall be obliged to give it over.

I pray God this beginning of this Years Campaign may Prognosticat a blessing
upon Their Majesty's Forces, so that an end may be made of this troublesome War
this Summer.

I desire, Sir, you would send me immediately Orders what to do with the
Prisoners, for at Inverness they cannot possibly be kept. Expecting your
Honors Orders, what you think fit shall be done further, I am extremely
troubled to make the Horse subsist, and remain, Honored Sir, Yours, etc.

T. Livingstone.

The Letter is directed thus, For the Honorable Major General- Mackay,
Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces in Scotland.

POSTSCRIPT.
Captain Mackay and his High-land Company behaved very well: If, as Major
Mackay says, that we can have more of them, it would not be amiss.

After the business was over, we drank your Health in good Claret taken from
the Rebels. The Narration is somewhat long, and lame, but it is the true and
real Account of all. Here enclosed is a List of some of the Prisoners names,
and some Papers that are taken. The Officers that are taken declare the
High-land Army was betwixt fourteen and fifteen hundred.

A List of Officers taken at the Battle of Crombdell, on the First of May, 1690.
Capt. Huchings. Capt. John Mcclean. Capt. Allan Mcclean. Capt. John Colloe.
Leiutenant John Mcclean. Leiutenant Alex. Halliburton. Coronet Andrew Baird.
Ensign John Mcclean. Ensign John Mcnaughton: Charles Cornwell Volunteer.
Officers taken in the Castle of Lethen-dee.
Capt. James Buchan. Capt. Brown. Leiutenant Scratcher. Leiutenant Middleton.
Leiutenant Brawdie. Leiutenant Sewell. Leiutenant Auchinmootie. Leiutenant
Drummer. Ensign Dunbar. Ensign Ross.
Many more Gentlemen are taken, who will not own themselves Officers.

FINIS.

