Whitehall, July 19* 1^^^
This Afternoon came in the Mail (...) day last, and brings the (...)
Published by Auth^^^^^.
From His Majesty's Camp before Namur, July 25. N.S. 1695.
AT our last Writing it was thought, that Monsieur Montal would have besieged
Dixmuyde, having taken the necessary Posts for it; but by the great Care of the
Prince of Vaudemont, the French have been disappointed in their Designs, both
upon Dixmuyde and Nieuport, in the last of which Places they expected little or
no Garrison, so that Monsieur Montal made the greatest haste he could thither;
but finding the Duke of Wirtemberg and Sir Henry Bellasyse in the Neighborhood
with a considerable Body of Troops, he marched back, sending his great Cannon
to Dunkirk, and he is thought to have rejoyned the Marshall de Villeroy, who
is in constant Motion, and was yesterday about Harlebeck near Courtray.

The Prince of Vaudemont continues to observe him in his Camp at O^stacke,
where it is believed the Duke of Wirtemberg and Sir Henry Bellasyse may have
joined him again by this time.

The Earl of Athlone was yesterday Encamped by the Village of Aubay, from
whence he intended to march this day to his former Camp at Pont a Selle.

Yesterday the Horses were sent from hence for Mechlin, to bring hither the
Flanders Artillery, in which are 8 whole Canon.

We have 11 Batteries playing upon the Enemy, (besides 4 at the Brandenburg
Attack) five of Mortars, and 6 of great Guns, most of which are employed in
battering 2 Bastions on each side St. Nicholas Port, where a considerable
Breach is already made. This Work is separated by a wet Ditch from the ancient
Wall, within which the Enemy have likewise made a Retrenchment.

Casal is surrendered upon Conditions; one whereof is, That the Fortifications
of the Town and Citadel shall be demolished.

Hague, July 26. The Letters from Flanders say, that the Count de Montal is
retired from before Dixmuyde, which the timely care of reinforcing the Garrison,
and the opening the Sluices, had secured from any attempt. The Marshall de
Villeroy had at the same time a design upon Nieuport, but the Prince de
Vaudemont having sent Sir Henry Bellasyse with 12 Regiments that way, prevented
it, and the Marshall de Villeroy returned toward Rousclaer. They write from
Madrid of the 7th of July, That a Regiment of 1000 Men were arrived at
Barcelona the 24th of June, New-Stile; and that the 29th, the Transport Ships,
which had on Board the Troops from Final, appeared off Barcelona. Admiral
Russel continued on the Coast of Provence. The New-Spain Fleet would depart
from Cadiz about the end of July.

Paris, July 23. The Letters from St. Malo of the 17th inform us, that the
Enemy began to Bombard the Town the 15th, and continued to do so all that day;
We do not yet know all the particulars of the damage we have suffered; The
Inhabitants were in a great Consternation, and most of them retired to the
Country, and they reckon that half the Town is destroyed. They write from
Marseilles of the 12th, that the last News they had of Admiral Russell was,
that the contrary Winds had carried him to the Gulf of Palma in Sardinia. The
News is confirmed, that the Garrison of Cazal has capitulated, and that the Town
and Citadel is to be demolished. We are in great pain for Namur, and they say,
there is a misunderstanding between the Marshall de Boufflers and Count de
Guiscard the Governor.

Francfort, July 20. The two Armies continue in the same Camps you had an
account of in our last; The French have sent their Baggage over the Rhine, and
are laying two Bridges over that River near Ketch; but their Army will hardly
be able to pass it, without giving us an opportunity to fall upon their Rear.

Vienna, July 13. The last Advices from Hungary say, That the Imperial Army was
marching toward Peter-Waradin, and we conclude they are by this time near that
Place. They write from Transylvania, that General Veterani is marched with the
Forces under his Command toward Caransebes. The Letters from the Turkish
Frontiers say, that the Grand Signior was on his march toward Sophia, and
would be at Belgrade about the beginning of August.

Turin, July 12. Our Troops before Cazal having pushed on their Attacks with
great vigor, the Garrison hung out a white Flag the Ninth Instant, and desired
to Capitulate; Hostages were given accordingly, and the Articles of Surrender
were agreed on Those of most importance contain, That the Fortifications of the
Town and Citadel shall be razed; And that so soon as that can be done, the
Garrison shall march out with their Arms and Baggage, 12 Pieces of Cannon, two
Mortars, and several Wagons, and be conducted to Pignerol; The rest of the
Cannon, with the Provisions of War, is to be left behind, whereof the Duke of
Savoy is to have two Thirds, and the Imperialists and Spaniards the other
Third. The Siege of this important Place lasted but 13 Days, and during it we
lost only 250 Men, besides wounded. It Is believed, the Allies will undertake
some new Enterprise before the end of the Campaign. Our Cavalry is Encamped at
Buriasque (...) Horse at Le (...)


