A Defense of the Ministers of the Nation, in Answer to an Epistle lately
published by THOMAS SPEED.
The Inscription of the Epistle.
[To all the Public Teachers in this Nation, who are by themselves and the
world, called Ministers of the Gospel.]

BEfore I go further, I shall observe in answer to this Inscription, these four
things.

1. That this Author thinks it not enough (I know not whether he scorn or no)
to lay hands on Mordecai alone, and to oppose himself against my poor self,
whom he might with more ease, and less sin, have trodden under foot; but his
design is to disgrace the public Teachers throughout the whole Nation, unto
whom therefore he gives the odious name of Chief-Priests, (which they never
owned, and by which never any Saint, that we read, or know of, called them) the
better thereby to fasten upon them his monstrous and fictitious accusations.

2. That he that prefixed this Title cannot but know, that himself has heard,
not only the world, but many Saints also, call the Teachers of this Land by the
name of Ministers, unless he be come to that pass to think that none are
Saints but Quakers, and that he was none himself, till he was one of them.

3. That the people of this Nation, and he among the rest, whether they and he
hear, or whether they will forbear, shall know one day that there have been
Prophets and Ministers among them Ezeck 2.5.

4. A fourth thing which I observe, and offer to the Reader to take notice of
is this, that he that casts all that dirt, that is in this foul Epistle upon
public Teachers, was lately a public Teacher himself, though not by the world
nor the Saints, called a Minister, as having not (for that his carriage makes
to appear) so much love to the Ministry, as to engage in it, nor so much fear
of it as to forbear without a due Call, or a true heart to it, to be tampering
about it he gave a Say to that calling, and it might have been thought that he
would have been a star to have lead others to Jesus Christ, but he he is proved
a Comet, and is now not only fallen to the earth, but (which I am sorry to
speak, but this Book will speak it) falls foul upon heaven, which I cannot but
present as a very considerable warning to all others that take the boldness to
be public Teachers without any mind and meaning to be Ministers of Christ in
the way of Christ, least God not only give them over to teach erroneous things
(which they often do) but leave them at last to fall off from preaching
themselves without a calling, to be bitter enemies to those that preach with a
calling; as this miserable man declares himself to be; who notwithstanding has
nothing to defend himself from the dint of his own sword-like words, but only
this, that he is no Minister, and making us none neithe^, the case is alike,
and so all falls on himself in reference to the time wherein he was a public
Teacher, and no better (sure) than other public Teachers, whom in this Satyr
he so much enveighs against.

The Epistle.
T.S. Sirs, the night is far spent, the day is at hand, and blessed, yea,
blessed from the Lord are all they who are found walking not as children of the
night but of the day. The hour is coming, and now is, that all coverings shall
be removed and the vails plucked from off all faces, and lamentation and woe
will be to all them who are found covered, but not with the covering of my
Spirit, says the Lord God. Awake therefore O ye Shepherds, awake, awake, stand
up, seriously consider of and prove your coverings; make diligent inquisition
and search whether ye are covered with power or profession, with the substance
or with the Form etc.

You do all pretend your selves servants to the Son of God, and to be Ministers
by him called forth to preach the everlasting Gospel, from the bottom of my
heart do I wish, that I were able truly to say of every individual of you, But
why does he not say what he may truly say of so many of us?
that you are found walking worthy of such a Master, and bringing forth fruit
worthy of that high and holy calling, with which you pretend your s^lves
called, I shall not undertake rashly to judge you, or accuse you unto the
world; let your fruits demonstrate what Trees you are, and let your works judge
you]


W.T. The Ministers of this Nation are not unwilling to be awakened to the
serious consideration of ny thing wherein they are truly concerned, nor are we
deaf at, but yet we wonder at those false witnesses that in these days rise up
against us, and lay to our charge things that so many of us know not of, Psalm.
35.11. Among whom the Author o^ this Epistle will needs appear to all the
world, and that as an eminent undertaker; one would hardly think that one that
is so much a Novice, 1 Timothy 3.6.
should so far lift up himself (^ut that Novices will do so) as to sit in
judgment upon, c^ll to the Bar, indite and prepare for the highest
condemna^ion, not only the publi^ue Teachers of this Nation, (to ^ll whom he
writes) but (which he may do upon the same false account) of all the Reformed
Churches, yea, of the Churches of Christ generally since the Apostles times, as
if Christ had forsaken his Church for so many Ages, with which he has promi^ed
to be present in the Ministry to the end of the world Math. 28.19, 20.
Strange it is that a man pretending to piety should put himself into such an
office, if the adversaries of a right Religion, that say as the King of Syria
fight neither with small nor great, s^ve only with those whom they call
Ministers, seek for a Proctor to plead their cause thoroughly, may not they
find one here? unto whom it belongs seriously to consider (and I heartily wish
he would think upon it before it ^e too late) how near he comes to that
Tertullus that loved to call Paul a pestilent fellow, and how that will speed
when he comes to ^e tried by that word, he that despises you, despises me; if
such Scriptures be nothing to him, but he will needs think he does God service,
when he will cast all reproach upon his se^v^nts* therein lies his danger,
which I speak the rather for their sakes* that are of the sa^e way and spirit
with him, who, if the Teachers of the Nation be found at the last day the Lords
Ministers and Ambassadors (as the conscienc^s of so^e of them c^nnot choose but
acknowledge they will, if the work of the Word be not clean blotted out of
their hearts) then may they collect wh^t a fearful reckoning there does
(without repentance) remain for them from those direful things that befell the
Ammonites state upon their base usage of David's messengers 2 Samuel 10.6. and
12.31
.

Yet had the Ammonites a pretense for it, and made as if David's servants had
come to search the City, to spy it out and to overthrow it 2 Samuel 10.3
, nor did Tertullus want a color for that which he pretended as Paul's black
character; for he does not say of Paul, he is reported to be, but we have found
him to be a pestilent fellow; just as this man says, let your fruits
demonstrate what Trees you are; let your works judge you, and so Tertullus;
this Paul is a pestilent fellow, let his works judge him, for he is a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world: Here is a great proof, if
Tertullus had not been a great liar.

Howbeit I do not deny but that if he speak of particular men, there may be
diverse or many among the public Teachers of this Nation justly blamed, (though
few in that height in which he sets them forth) whom neither my self nor any
godly Minister will plead for, but mourn for; but what is this to [all] the
public Teachers of this Nation? Yea, how is this to any purpose at all? Since
there was never any National Society of Ministers wherein there was not an
observable corrupt company? If that be a sufficient reason to condemn the
Ministry, because there is not a walking worthy of that calling in every
individual Minister, then no society of men will be uncondemned, because
unworthy persons are still mixed, and (ordinarily) the most.


T.S. [You pretend the Scripture to be your rule; come therefore, let us
plainly reason together, and see if your own rule will condemn you or absolve
you.]


W.T. We own the Scripture for a Rule though this Writer does not; and are
willing (as in duty we are bound) to be tried by it; but while we acknowledge
the Rule and the Law, we deny the Fact, and the things that are here alleged
against us in that generallity wherein he alleges them: We say (as Jeremy
Jer. 37.14.
) its false: And as Paul, Neither he nor his Partners can prove the things
whereof they accuse us Acts 24.13.
.


T.S. [ The Spirit of the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Micah chapter 3.11.
accounted it among the abominations of the Priests and Prophets of those days,
that they taught for hire and did divine for money; and as an aggravation of
this their wickedness, he further testifies, that they even prepared war
against him that refused to put into their mouths v. 5 Let these Scriptures be
your indictment before the Judge of all the Earth; And to the light of Jesus
Christ in every one of your Consciences do I appeal, whither you are able to
plead to it not guilty, and if guilty, how then can you escape the same
sentence and condemnation that fell on those Priests and Prophets, who were
found in the same transgressions.]


W.T. To this I answer.

1. If the taking a maintenance for our Labor in Preaching be Preaching for
hire, then we acknowledge we Preach for Hire: But that such a construction is a
vain surmise, is evident by Scripture that says, The Labourer is worthy of his
hire, Luke 10.7. We profess we take that which Christ says we are worthy to
have; but if he understand by p^eaching for hire, that we exercise and order
our preaching for the getting of money and maintenance, there are enough of us
that (through Gods mercy) know that to be a mere slander, as the other also is,
of preparing war for those that put not into our mouths. If this man made
conscience of applying Scripture, he would otherwise apply it, and use more
caution, that there might be less calumny.

2. Nor are we afraid to hear of an appeal to our consciences: For though we do
not know so little of our Rule, or of our selves as to pretend to perfection,
(as Quakers do) but find many things amiss, for which we humble our selves
before the Lord, yet, in reference to those gross things whereof he speaks,
our hearts shall not reproach us so long as we live, Job 27.6.

3. We will not secure our selves only within this brazen wall of an accusing
conscience, but freely offer our selves (in this and in the things following)
to the trial and testimony of the people of God among whom we have lived: Let
them say whither they have found such evils in us as are objected against us,
while we have walked in and out before them Act. 24.20
.

4. We shall willingly and cheerfully join issue in refering our cause to the
great God that knows perfectly our hearts and ways, and before whom we doubt
not to stand in the judgment through Jesus Christ at the la^^ and great day If
our sentence should come ^orth from Quakers we might very well and very much
fear; but Lord, let our sentence come forth from thy presence Psa. 17.2.
.

5. I wonder it should never come into the heart of this man that has so many
[It's] If guilty, If so etc. to think what if it be not ^o? What if they be not
guilty? Shall not they that be wronged have reparations? Will God take it well
to have his servants slan^ered, or shall they go scot-free, that make it their
trade to traduce them?


T.S. [Jesus Christ, the true and great Prophet of his people, denounces the
woe again t the Teachers in his days, for that they did their works to be seen
of men, standing praying in the Synagogues and the corners of the streets, as
also because they loved the uppermo^t rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in
the Synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be called of men Rabbi,
Rabbi; vi^w your selves in this glass also, and let the light of Christ in all
your consciences judge whether these spots are not manifestly to be seen in
your garments; and if so, who can absolve you from being sharers in their woe,
who are found partakers with them in their evil works.]


W.T. Let the Reader observe that Christ condemns not 1. Standing in prayer
(whereof there be diverse examples in Scripture Nehem. 9 4, 5, 6. Luke 18.13.
And whereof Christ himself says, when you [stand] praying Mark 11.25) 2. Nor
Praying in the corners of the ^treets, (though this man of this company know we
do not so) (for wisdom cries (and may to cry God) in such chief places of
concourse Pro 1.20, 21.) 3 Nor taking the uppermost rooms and seats, as if it
were a sin to take them, for ^ome body must needs h^ve them. Nor 4. gr^etings
in the markets and meetings (which humanity requires, and Scripture favors
Acts. 15.23. We find greeting in letters to be dispersed in every City and Acts
21.19. 1 Pet. 5.14.
) 5 Nor being called Rabbi Read more of this in M. Bakers Catichisme. p. 17.
(...).
else it is like Christ would not have taken that name John 1* 38. Ma^k 14.45. On
the contrary, it is evident by the text, that the thing which our Savior
^lames, is, prayer in places where we may be seen [to be seen] as Mat. 6.1. To
be seen of men, that is, in a vain glorious way; and the [loving] (for so he
speaks) and [willing] and [affecting] of higher places and Titles. To what
purpo^e then is this place brought, but only that this uncharitable cre^ture
(who has no knowledge of our hearts an^ ends) takes it for granted, Mark 12.38.
compared with 1 Samuel 2.16. Genesis 34.19 vide Beram in locum sign^ficatur voluntas
cum summa cupiditate conjuncta.
that when we stand in a Pulpit for the peoples edification, we do it for our
own praise* and that because we [take] therefore we [love] those a little
h^gher places and titles which civility casts upon us.

This is so senseless an ^llegation and imputation, that one would not take
notice of it, but that the Quakers generally bring it, and Christians may
understand the text better by giving some explanation of it.


T.S. [ The Scripture witnesses that the sheep and the sheepheards of Jesus
Christ were not of the world, because by him chosen out of the world, and
therefore by the w^rld were they hated, persecuted, imprisoned, stoned, beaten
in their Synagogues, dragged before Rulers and Magistrates for his name sake,
cast out as the sweepings and offscouring of all things. Stand to the Bar, O
you Shepherds before the righteous Judge that cannot be bribed, and in the
presence of him that searches the heart and tries the reins of all men: Give
true answer to what I shall demand of you. Are you by the world hated, or are
you haters of others? Are you persecuted or Persecutors? Are you imprisoned for
Truths sake, or are you imprisoners of others? etc.]


W.T. To this I answer, 1. That we are h^ted and persecuted in the height (with
Ismael's persecution Gal. 4.29. with Genesis 21.9.
yea) and ma^e the off scouring of all things in the Quakers Books, and in
this o^ his more especially, and more studiously, more virulently and more
generally than in many (or for ought I know in any) other. 2. He shall answer
himself in the next Page but one of his Epistle; where he says, that the
Bishops did in their dawes imprison, and evil entreat many of us. Why does he
say, are you imprisoned, when he himself tells us we have been imprisoned? If
he mean that we are not now imprisoned, neither were the Shepherds of Christ
still imprisoned Acts 9 31. Besides this, how many were tossed and troubled in
the High-commission-court, by wicked men in and about their own places?


T.S. [ We never read that Paul or any of the Ministers of Christ, in
Scripture, did so much as claim a maintenance from those without, much less
did they Commence suites at Law against the world or the Saints for the tenth
of all their Labors. Are you the of Christ? And is the Scripture your rule?
How is it then that you dare not engage to preach, h^ving not first made firm
Indentures See this about Indentures answered in the 7. Article of his scoffing
Change.
for your livelihood? Or why is it that you fill the Courts of Ju^tice with
your actions against those that refuse to pay you the tenth of all their
increase? Nay, by what rule do you exact it of those that never hear you, nor
own you for their Pastors?]


W.T. We read that Paul says and proves that he might claim of maintenance of
right; if he forbore it in fact (for reasons referring to those times) does
that hinder the righteousness of the claim in these days, Cor. 9. l. 6.6.
which was righteous in those?




T.S. [Moreover the Scripture manifestly declares against all the works of the
flesh, such as are drunkenness, swearing, hypocrisy, coveteousnesse etc. and
are your bands all clean from this filth? Are not a great part of you found
wallowing in this common mire?]


W.T. Our Savior says of his own company, you are not all clean John 13.11.
And if there were one bad among so few, no marvail if there be many bad among
so many, whom yet there is no purpose to defend, but a course taken to cast out.


T.S. [ And among those of you that have escaped that open pollution of
drunkenes with wine, are you not yet intoxicated with wrath and rage against
the innocent? Let me ask you further, (and let you anger be turned into a
serious consideration of what I shall say) is there scarce a Prison this day in
the Nation in which some se^vant of the living God or other is not prisoner to
your insatiable fury? Does not Jesus Christ as truly lie bound in many nasty
holes and dungeous in England by your instigation and procurement, as he did by
the procurement of Saul in Damascus? If any poor Jeremiah come from the Lord to
bear testimony against all your abominations, is there wanting a lordly Pashur
among you who (in case the Magistrate be so honest as to refuse) will not with
his own hands put his feet in the stocks? Now then to your Rule etc.]


W.T. 1. Here he makes many Questions wherein he must answer himself. I neither
know nor believe any such thing as his interrogations import: In particular I
doubt not but Ministers are as far from being Pashurs and putting, men's feet in
the stocks, as Quakers are from being Jeremiahs and that is far enough.

2. If unruly persons be imprisoned, do Ministers put them in prison or
Magistrates? If Magistrates, have they not authority and order to do it from
the civil Power? Why then does he not blame and cry out upon the supreme Power,
because it will not suffer the public service of God to be every where
disturbed by the sottish messages of deluded souls, tending to the hinderance
of the delivery of Gods, message and the abusing of his messengers? Must the
blame be laid on Ministers because men and poor misled women suffer as
malefactors, that is, for breach of civil Laws, disturbers of the public
peace and tumultuating in solemn religious meetings?

What follows after, is by others already answered In a sober Answer to this
angry Epistle, p. 10.11.
.


T.S. [ As it was of old so it is now, there being no new thing under the Sun;
the seed of the bondwoman persecuteth the seed of freewoman; the form
fights against the power; and the letter against the life. The professing
religious Jews cried out against the Apostles and Saints in those days, Help
O Caesar, help men of Israel, for there are a Sect of men called Christians
risen up, who turn the world up side down; The late Bishops, they cried out,
Help O King against this factious generation of Puritans, who will not ^ave us
to reign over them; own us, and guard us with thy sword, for if thou suffer us
to fa^l, this will be the consequence, no Bishop, no King* Those called
Persbiters, they also invokated the Powers late in being, crying out, help O
Parliament, help against these schimatical Independents and Anabaptists, who
begin to refuse subjection to those yoaks we would lay upon them, as we did to
those laid by the Bishops upon our necks. But now so it is at this day, that
all the Teachers of all sects and factions (like as the Pharisees and Sadduces
against Christ) do with one lip cry out and say, help O Protector, help O
Magistrates, help, for there is now a strange Generation of men risen up, that
the Earth is not able to bear; such as strike at our very root, and if we fall,
this will be the consequence (if you dare to believe us) no Minister, no
Magistrate]


W T. To all this I answer,

Heb 9 10
: or when an inward light and life is lift up, to disparage that Word of God
which is not a dead letter, but quick and powerful, and sharper than a two
edged sword Heb. 4.12.
.

Help O Caesar etc] if you take out the fancy that is in it (which its like
much pleased the Framer) it comes (in regard of the two former passages in it)
to this sense, (if it be sense) you must not call upon the Magistrate to punish
those that deserve it, because sometimes the Magistrate is called upon to punish
those that deserve it not: A man must not call upon Moses to put a blasphemer
to death, Levit. 24.13, 14, 15.
because the Elders and Nobles of Naboths City, were sometimes called upon to
put Naboth to death upon an unjust accusation of blasphemy 1 Kings 21, 8, 9, 10.
. Is not this a good Argument, you ought not to call upon the Magistrate to to
trouble a true man, therefore you may not prosecute the Law to hang a Thief and
a Murderer?



Ishmael? Not only because of their persecution of others with bitter words
Gal. 4.29.
, but also of others disaffection to them, their hand being against every man,
and every man's hand against them Genesis 16.12.
. I do not say, bad men's only, but good men's a also, unless there be no
Teachers good in the Nation besides Quakers; now, how sad is the condition of
these men, whom so many wise and godly men can see no cause to approve and
favor?

No Minister, no Magistrate, will be found a truth in good earnest; for they
that contemn Gods express ordinance in the former Ephesians. 4.11.
, will (for the same reason) undermine it in the latter, to wit, that an open
way may be made for what they like, and what they like, yea, Magistrates are in
so much more danger than Ministers, because such men are more hindered in their
purposes by their gr^ater ter power, and may gain more (if they can accomplish
their purposes) by their subversion. Herein late experience will give some
light, by which it has been observed, that they that had an evil eye upon the
Ministry (and being not content with Reformation thereof meditated ruin) were
also possessed with principles leading to the overthrow of the Fundamental
Laws, and of Magistracy. The affecting of a fist Monarchy has an evil aspect
upon whatsoever is reckoned a branch of the fourth.


T.S. [ Horrible blasphemers they are; grand Heriticks; and notorious
blasphemers, and that you may know we do charge them to be such on as ju^t
grounds as our brethren the Scribes and Pharisees charged Christ If we should
admit that we are as like the Scribes and Pharisees as the Quakers are like
Christ, we should not suffer much, for that is to be most unlike.
we desire you to scan over this ensuing list of their monstrous blasphemies]


W.T. The generals being passed over, we must now come to the particular
charge, which this accuser has drawn up, in ^est, against himself and his
assosiates, in earnest, against the public Teachers of the Nation: I cannot
but exreamly loath the spirit with which it is written and exceedingly blame
the writer; and yet it grieves me whenever I think of it (and that is very
often) that one formerly reputed to be religious, should so far forget
Religion, and show so little fear of God as to strain his wit (which God has
given him for a better purpose) to frame such a play Book as this is, made up
of Fifteen fancies thereby to mock and blaspheme Gods Messengers 1 Pet. 4.4.
(...).
: As concerning which he must be told in the first place, that persons
criminous would think themselves in very good case, if they might but draw up
their own charges, and make such a list against themselves, as themselves list.
Yet shall the several Articles of this his charge, be considered as they
proceed from himself, that sits down (let all men judge whether it be not) in
the seat of the scornful, and thus gives them forth,


T.S. [ First, they blaspheme and say, that Christ is the light of the world,
Joh. 1.9.8.12.
and has enlightened every man that comes into the world, and that he that
follows that light shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, which light is sufficient to teach them and guide them unto the Father,
etc.]


W.T. Here are two Scriptures joined together with more subtilty than
soundness, and upon a design rather than reason; for though there be a
similitude in words, n^v indicat eam praesentiam quae cum ipso mundo coepit.
yet the words import different things and are spoken upon a different account;
for which purpose I shall take it for granted, that the first Scripture, to
wit, John 1.9. n^v Nempe etiam antequam mitteretur Johannes, aut ipsemet in
mundum veniret Beza.
speaks of Christ's enlightening the world as God before his coming in the flesh,
or at least as well before his coming as after, which will I suppose appear
clearly two ways. 1. Because the purpose of the Evangelist in the former part
of that chapter, is to set forth Christ's Divinity, which he does both by reason
and the testimony of John Baptist. 2. Because it is not said that [is] the true
light, but that [was] Calvin in Mat. 23.37. Neque hic disseritquid sacere
inceperit (...) quo suet in ca ne manefastatus, etc.
If any say, that enlightening work is still carried on, I shall not deny it,
but that will amount to no more but this, that the thing intended there, is to
advance Christ in the eminent work of enlightening the world in the generallity,
and to show that Christ is the fountain of light to all generations and
successions of men. Viri per nativitatem ex utero matris, as Joh. 18.37. and
12.46. piscat.
Now I conceive that it may with good reason be made out that the lighting
intended there is most properly with the light of nature, and that 1. Because
of the latitude of the subjects enlightened, to wit, every man that comes into
the world, that is, that is born into the world Calvin Cartwright Piscator.
Polanus Syntagm. L 6 c. 18. Cameronis Opera. p. 233. est loquutio in scripturis
usitata illud Deo tribuere quod fieri non potest nisi a Deo, licet in
omnibusnon fiat, ut Psalm. 145 14. Omnes cadentes licet in lapsibus suis multi
manent,
2. Because it does not appear, that the light of Gods Word and the knowledge
of Christ, has been, or is, communicated to all the world Universally, much
less to every one born into the world Individually, but rather the contrary,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. Acts 14.16 with Deuteronomy 18.14. Acts 16.6. Diverse there fore
understand this of the light of nature and they that understand it otherwise,
yet no way favor that which the Quakers would deduce from it; for they limit
the words thus, Christ lights every man that comes into the world, that is,
every man that is enlightened, he enlightneth him: And again thus, every man
that comes into the world, that is, both Jews and Gentiles, in which sense
the world is taken, 1 John 2.2. And yet again, every man that comes into the
world, that is, that comes into the Church, or into the world collected into a
Church (as world is taken Mat. 13.38.) though not by saving illumination, yet
by saving revelation, that is, by that Gospel-revelation that is fit to save
them And therefore is called salvation Acts 28 29 Heb. 2.3.
, though diverse receiving the revelation, do (through their own fault) loose
the salvation. So that which was soever the words be taken, the sense that the
Quakers fasten upon them will fall. For, understand the text of natural light,
and the [no man] has enough to save him; understand it of spiritual and saving
light and then [every man] has not enough to save him Mat. 13.11 John 17.25. I
shall leave this text (worthy of the view of the worthiest men) to their beter
consideration, observing only what suffices to the present purpose, Mr. Baxter
has answered them well and warily, when he says, All that come into the world
of nature he enlightneth with the light of nature, and all that come into into
the world of grace, he enlightneth with the light of supernatural revelation
The Quakers Catechism p 7.
which is, that the lightning there spoken of, does at least include (and that
signally) the light of Nature; the other light (I mean the light of the Word)
being not communicated to any (in any observable generallity) before the coming
of Christ, but only to the Jews, who were the only people of God, and whose
privilege it was to have the Oracles of God communicated and committed to
them. Rom 3.2. Which I note for this purpose, to show* that this Scripture
cannot be rightly urged to conclude, that there is a light in every man
reaching unto Christ and unto salvation.

But the other scripture, to wit, John 8.12. is of another consideration, as
being delivered by Christ as God manifested in the flesh, and appearing in the
world in person and in Gospel-preaching; and so it directly intends his
enlightening of the world, that is both Jews and Gentiles (for he does not say
as in the other place, I am the light of every one that comes into the world)
with the saving knowledge of the Gospel, and concerning this its true, that
whosoever follows Christ enlightening them by his voice (which some do through
grace, many do not, and none can without it) shall not walk in darkness, but
have the light of eternal life, John 10.27, 28.

Now here lies the deceit, that both scriptures are confusedly clapped together,
when the first speaks (if not of the light of Nature only; yet) of that in a
great part, and the latter speaks only of Gospel Light; particularly it lies
in applying that effect to this light spoken off in both places (as if every
one that comes into this world had a light to lead him to heaven) with belongs
properly to the light spoken of in the latter place And yet the light spoken of
in the latter place is not saving by the use of our own Free Will, but by the
grace of God.

Sober Adswer p. 12, 13.
I shall now apply my self to my Opponent, with whom my Brethren have dealt
providently in Querying him out of his starting hols, that so there may be a
fair fight in the open field. Were his meaning fair and honest, and he intended
no more when he says, he that follows that light; but that he that follows
Christ the great light of the world, as he directs by his Word and Spirit
should have the light of life; or that Christ Jesus the light were sufficient
to teach and guide to the Father. I say, if he meant thus, we should not
gainsay him, and The Charge in such a sense is his own, not ours: But if his
meaning be that Christ puts a sufficient light within every man that comes into
the world to guide him unto the Father and unto life. I deny that to be true,
and charge him and his company with falsehood in affirming it, for that natural
light (which is the alone light that Christ the word communicates to all men
universally) shines in so much darkness since the fall that the darkness
comprehends it not so, as to make out that from it which is sufficient for
salvation Joh. 1.5.
. Its true, that Christ or the light [lightning] is sufficient to guide to the
Father every one that comes into the world, but not every light of Christ
[lighted] Let him show any Scripture that says, that Christ so enlightens
every man as that that light is sufficient to guide him to the Father, that
explication is his addition; nay the light that all men have, though it seem to
make them know God as God, yet it suffices not to make them know that there is
a Father, that is, to inform them that there is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, or
that there is any Gospel: Since natural light insists only on the moral Law and
covenant of works; for there cannot be more written in the heart of fallen man
without further revelation than there was in the heart of innocent man which
was only the Law of works, not the law of faith. There is nothing known of the
Gospel but by report and tidings from God Romans 10 14, 15.

But let all Christians mark the poison that lies under these lips; every man
has a light, that is, a light within him; (for so they still express it) to
help him to life and guide him to the Father. Therefore 1. No need of teaching,
or the ministry of man, that is his own inference here; therefore come no more
at Sermons. 2. Nor need of Scripture: For what necessity of a light without, if
there be a light within sufficient for the enjoyment of life, and for direction
to the Father, the fountain of life! Therefore throw away Scripture as a dead
letter. 3. Nor need of grace; for every man that comes into the world, whether
he have grace or no grace, has that light with him: which if he will make use
of it, it is enough for him, therefore set up free will, which Quakers (as they
conceive that are nearly acquainted with them) call a power accompanying the
light to destroy every evil as appears in them that yields themselves to it,
and watch that their vain minds draw them not from abiding in the the pure
light of Christ: A faithful discovery of a treacherous design p. 11.
Thus corruptly do they speak, but do you Christians who have been taught
better things, look with a jealous eye upon the light within. If the light of
the Word, and the light in the heart agree together, then you may take the
light in the heart as Gods light, but if that light within, agree not with the
light of Scripture without, then look upon it as darkness, and fear it as a
traveller does a dark night, or a mendipmist, or that which they call a
[foolish fire] by which so many wander out of their way.


T.S. [And then what need of our teachings?]


W.T. By our teachings, he means Ministers teachings.

To this therefore I answer,

1. That his inference is little worth, because it is brought from a false
ground of his own, to wit, that every man has a light in him sufficient to
bring him to God, when none can come to God but by Christ, Heb. 7.25. Nor by
Christ unless by faith, nor have any such faith or dinarily, unless by
hearing, Romans 10.14. Nor hear without the Word of God, which every man has
not, yea, the Gentiles in general are said not to have the Law Romans 2.14.

2. For the thing it self, when he says, what need of teaching? I do thereupon
demand of him (not to what purpose the Quakers teach, for sure there is no need
of their teaching, yet they that make nothing of other men's teaching, make
something, yea, much of their own; but I demand) what need had Christ to send
forth his apostles, and bid them go and teach all Nations? Math 28.19. Or what
need had Christ to give some to be Teachers to the end of the world? Is it not
for the perfecting of the Saints till we all come to a perfect man? Ephesians. 4.11,
12, 13. Or what need had the author to the Hebrews to say both these things you
ought to be Teachers and have need to be taught? Heb. 5.12. And yet sure those
Hebrews had as much light in them as is in every man that comes into the world.

3. Considering there be some places of Scripture seeming to make the teaching
of men not so needful. I shall for satisfaction of weaker Christians speak a
little to those Scriptures.

The Scriptures are Jer. 31.34. 1 John 2.27. In regard of both which I shall
speak generally and particularly.

1. The Scripture speaks not in those places logically and definitively, but
Rhetorically and by way of amplification.
that the Holy Ghost saying, you shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and you need not that any man teach you, does not speak strictly and
absolutely, but comparatively, to wit, so as to signify that there should not
be so much need of teaching in the time of the Gospel as formerly, and that
because the Spirit should be poured forth in a greater measure than ever was
before, whereupon knowledge should abound Isa. 11.6. Act. 2.17.
If any ask why I give this interpretation? I answer, 1. Because other
Scriptures declare the teaching of men to be necessary Paul says necessity is
laid upon me 1 Cor. 9.16. Yea, in Isa. 2.2. Jer. 3.15.
The Gospel Prophecy (such as that of Jeremy is) runs thus, we will go to the
Mountain of the Lord and he will teach us, to wit, by the Law coming out of
Sion, and the word from Jerusalem, by the mouths of Gods messengers, Isa.
52.7, 8. Add to this, that Christians also are to teach and admonish one
another, Col. 3.16. Now, that is a certain rule that no Scripture must be so
interpreted as to cross another Scripture, therefore that in Jeremy must not
be taken in its full latitude, but with due limitation. 2. Reason, and our
ordinary manner of speaking justifies the foregoing interpreatation, for we say
usually of a witty child, that he will learn of himself without a Teacher, not
absolutely ^ut in comparison with other children, that have no such prompt and
precious Spirit. 3. The Scripture it self speaks thus, Jer. 16.14, 15. It shall
be no more said, the Lord lives that brought the children of Israel out of
Egypt, but that brought them from the Land of the North; where the Prophecy
must not be taken absolutely, as if deliverance out of Egypt should never be
mentioned more; (for we remember it and magnify the Name of God for it to this
day) but in comparison with, and to set forth the excellency of their more
glorious Redemption from Babylon; and this is the use of Scripture, to deny and
make nothing of one thing, when it would advance another, making that which is
excerded as if it were not exi^t^nt, as Psalm. 51, 16. Hos. 6 6. so, 2 Cor.
3.10. a thing is said to have no glory in comparison with another thing which
far excels it in glory.



Jeremy, I conceive that a special thing considerable there is that the Prophet
holds forth the difference between the Old Testament and New Testament
dispensation. In the former they were t^ught by men (other inward te^ching was
not so conspicuous) in the latter by God, John 6 45 The reason why I mention
this is, because those words, You shall teach no more every m^n his neighb^ur,
Jer. 31.34. follow upon the promise of the Spirits effe^^ual ^nward teaching v.
33. as if he should have said, in the New Testament the teaching of the Spirit
shall be eminent, as teaching by men was in the Old not but that God taug^t by
his Spirit in the Old Testament also, but yet Spirit is in special manner
ascribed to the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3 6. which may be for two reasons, 1.
Because the Spirit of God was given in all ages, from that which Christ was to
do and did in the time of the New Testament, John 7.39. and therefore it is
ascribed to the New Testament only, when the two Testaments that is the two
dispensations are opposed, as they are, 2 Cor. 3.6. They taught at a great
disadvantage in the Old Testament, for no teaching was effectual without the
New (there was never any merit or Spirit, but from things acted in the
New Testament) nor so eff^ctual as in the New. The knowledge [then] was but
like a d^op, this [now] is like the Sea, Heb. 2.14. Acts 2 17.
2. Because the spiritual teaching in the Old Testament was nothing, that is,
very inconsiderable in regard of the abundant teaching of the Spirit in the
New. So that the proper answer to that place in Jerremy may be this, that under
the New-Testament-dispensation they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
that is only So Tremel, and Jun. in Jer. 31.34. Non autem [solum] docebunt
eclipsis frequens ut, Genesis 32.28, 1 Samuel 8.7.
, with such restraint of the accompanying Spirit of God as was in the
Old Testament, but all the people of God (however taught either by Pastors or
Neighbors) shall be truly said to know God as persons taught not so much by
men outwardly as by the Spirit inwardly, and, in regard of former times,
eminently.

Take these three together, The Spirit in the Word, the Spirit in the Ministry
of the Word, and the Spirit in the heart of a sanctified Christian, and then
it is true, that no Christian (taught by these) needs any man should teach him
(or Angel either, Gal. 1.8.) otherwise or any other thing than the Spirit in
these three teaches.
2. For that other Scripture 1 John 2.27. two answers may be given

1. That being instructed so far and so long already, they needed not any man
should teach them, to wit, the Fundamentals and main things of Christianity;
for those they had learned and come to a full knowledge of.

2. They needed not any man should teach them, that is, otherwise then they had
bin taught by the Spirit that is, by the Spirit in the Word, and in the heart;
for it is not spoken to exclude the te^ching of men, because the Apostle was
now teaching them himself, and he wishes them to abide in that which they had
heard, v. 24. to show, that teaching and hearing was then in use; but what he
speak^ is to arm them against seducers, v 26. by putting them in mind that
they had been so soundly and so fully taught that they needed not to seek other
Teachers to receive from them a righter or an higher Doctrine* The thing they
were to do, was, not to heaken after a new Gospel to be thereby tau^ht, but to
abide in the old Doctrine wherein they were already instru^ted by the spirit in
the Word, and which was sealed up unto them by the Spirit in their hearts.


T.S 2. They say that that which may be known of God, is manifest in the
con^ciences of the very Heathen (God having revealed it unto them) even his
eternal power an^ Godh ad: Romans 1.19, 20. chapter 2.15
And that though they have no Law without them, yet the^ show the wo^k of the
Law written in their hearts, and ar^ a Law unto themselves.


W.T. I know not what there is in this second Article, unless it be a double
untruth 1. If he say (as he does) that the Teachers of th^s Nation lay to the
charge of Quakers the bare affirming of that which is here put-down, to do by
his former words) that such heathen-knowledge is a sufficient guide to the
Father, or to blessedness, that is another untruth; for the Scripture speaks
truth when it says, The invisible things of God are clearly seen of men, even
of Heathens (not so as they may be saved in that way, for how could they
without the knowledge of a Christ which neither Nature, nor creature reveals?
but) So that they are without excuse Romans 1 20. To shut up this therefore in
brief; If he say that men that never heard the Word of God, have light enough
to help them to heaven, let that be his charge; for he that believes not shall
be damned, and how can they believe in him of whom they have not heard, Mark
16.16. Romans 10.14.


T.S. [3. They say that Christ did not mock nor impose an impossibility upon
his poor Lambs when be exhorted them to be perfect even as his heavenly Father
is persect, Mat. 5.48.
etc]


I answer, 1. The Scripture exhorts us to many things, that we have made our
selves unable to do, because however we are not able, yet it is our duty to do
them. And God has reason to claim his right though fallen man has lost his
power.

2. Yet we may be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, to wit, perfect as
God, though not as perfect as God, as the Air is light as the Sun, though not
as light as the Sun: There may be, and should be an inchoate, and a progresive,
but there cannot be here an absolute perfection; and it is blasphemy to think
that we shall ever be perfect as God is perfect, that is, an inequallity.

[therefore] which is in the verve he cites, that he speaks of a comparative
perfection in opposition to Publicanes, who love those that love them and
salute their brethren only; and thence he infers (without any such mocking as
this Fabler feigns, if there were not a plenary perfection) th^s serious
exhortation, Let it not suffice you to be perfect as Publicanes are perfect,
but labor to be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, that is, make him
your pattern and aspire to that perfection that appears to be so eminently in
him, while he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good; yea, gives his
only Son not for the comfort of his Friends, for he had none among fallen men,
but for the salvation of his enemies Romans 5.10.


T.S. [ And that the same Christ spoke truth, whenas he bear witness of
Nathaniel, that he was an Israelite in whom there was on guile, John 1.47.]


W.T. Christ does not say there was no sin in him, but only that there was no
guile in him, which imports not absolute perfection, but sincerity Genesis 20.5,
6. Psalm. 66.18.
. To have no guile in the spirit, does not prove that a man is perfect, or no
sinner, but only that he is a pardoned sinner. Psalm. 32.2.


T.S. [ As also that Paul did not design that which was impossible, when he
labored to present men perfect in Christ Jesus. Colos. 1.28.]


W.T. The Question is not, whether men may be perfect in Christ Jesus in a way
of justification, but whether they may be perfect in themselves in a way of
sanctification; Romans 10.4. Col. 2.10. vide Davenant in locum.
this latter (though Ministers labor still that people may be carried on to
perfection) cannot be attained here, but is reserved to the last day 1 Cor.
1.7, 8. 1 These. 3 13. Jude v. 24.

If the Scriptures which he quotes be rightly understood, it is his own charge
still not ours; (we shall never charge him for saying any thing the Scripture
says, in the Scripture sense) but if his, and the Quakers meaning be under
such expressions of Scripture to affirm a perfection without sin, then let
them take their charge from the Apostle, which is, that they are therein liars
1 John 1 10. Yea, while men plead perfection and sinlesnesse, God himself
professes he will plead with them and every such person as they are, because
he says, I have not sinned. Jer. 2.35.

Let Christians therefore go on and bear up to perfection, but never boast of
perfection; no man can do that reasonably, that either knows himself or that
knows Scripture; that is, that knows how high and perfect the rule is, and how
imperfect and defective himself is, being compared with that rule. Our duty
here is to be always perfecting 2 Cor. 1.7*
, but it belongs to our wisdom to know that we can never be fully perfected
till the last day wherein our souls shall be among the souls of just men made
perfect. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11. Heb. 12.23.

Mean while they may fear and tremble to think of the perfection of Quakers, as
is related by one th^tbest knew them, (being once far ente^ed into their way)
who relates this of them, that They are people ^ereaved of former ways and
means, wherein the Lord does work faith, knowledge and enjoyments in the hearts
of his children, and of al^ those former excellent things which we e brought
forth in them by the power of truth, and of the use of those ways of waking,
wherein they have manife^ted any love or obedience to God: They are people
b^r^av^d of all things of this nature, and they reckon it their happiness and
their perfection so to be. The worlds wonder or the Quakers blazing Star.
p.16.17



T.S. [4. They do not blush to say that Christ and the Apostles spoke as they
meant in the Scriptures, and therefore they deny our meanings and
interpretation as needless, etc.]


W.T. Quakers have reason to ^lush (if they know how) at such a consequent as
here they bring in: For it is as if one should say, God spoke as he meant by
Moses in the Law, therefore there was no need that Ezro and the Levites should
give the sense, and cause them to understand the reading, Nehem. 8.8 O that
Godly the Prophet Isaiah spoke as he meant, and therefore the Eunuch h^d no
need of a guide, for the understanding of his Prophecy, Acts 30, 31. See John
2.19, 20 21. and 16.18.19. Luke p. 4.27.
Or that Christ spoke as he meant, and therefore his expounding afterward was
needless, Mark 4.34. May not a man speak as he means, and yet the expressions
be so dark or doubtful to many a man that he is not able to discern what he
means? Every Author ordinarily speaks as he means, Is there no need therefore
of Commentators and Expositors to make it plain, that the words which may be
taken diversely, yet in such a place carry such a meaning with them and not
another?


T.S. [Effecially because we differ among our selves in our own meanings, and
are fallible in our Interpretations we give of them, by which means a great
part of our craft and employment is like to fall to the ground*]


W.T. I answer, 1. That in the interpreting of Scriptures Cor. 15.11. Whether
it were I or they so we preach and so ye believed. Acts 17.11.
, not that the Interpretation of Scripture is needless: Is there no use of
Physicians? Had people as good be without them, because there is a difference
of judgment among them? Or is it safe therefore for diseased persons to go from
them to Mountebanks, because Physicians will ^ckno^ledge they may be deceived
or disappointed, but Mounteb^nks will tell them they will cure certainly and
infallibly? Yet a great difference there is between Physicians that have not,
n^^ Ministers that have an infallible Rule; after which while they walk they
can neither be deceived nor deceive Jer. 20.7.
3. H^s coffing close wherein he comp^res Gal. 3.1.
Ministers by who^ christ is evidently set forth, and, as it were, pictured, to
tho e that made silver shrines for Diana, Act. 19.24, 25.
shows with how good a w ll he sits in the sent of the scornful, and there
l^ughs at a Ministers employment, committed to him of God, which is to be a
Messenger and ^n Interpretor, Job 33.23. For the people should se^k the Law at
his mouth. Mal. 2.7. Whereby is not meant ^h t they should seek from him the
Law it self (for that they had from God) but the Interpret^tion, and tr^e
meaning of the Law, which it belonged to their office to make known

While these men there one deny Gods Or^inance of opening and Interpret^ng
difficult places of scripture ^y his Messengers Mal 2.7. We charge that upon
them as a wicked error, and warn all Christians to t ke heed of tho e men that
will take away the Exposition of Scripture from them, an^ the knowledge o the
mind of Go^, by the men of God; and who (as the Papists with whom they do
much agree) may well be afraid the scriptures should be opened, and the light
of God let in, because by that way of God their own f^lse Wares and sophistic
ted stuff will be soon discovered.

In the close of this, I cannot omit to mention these two things,

1. That Quakers are enemies not only to the Preaching of Ministers, but to
the teaching of men: For no man can te^ch the things of God, but by opening the
mind of God, as t^s revealed in Scripture.

2. That there is one thing in these times, which (when there is much deformity
in them otherwise, yet) may be counted, their proper ornament, that the devil
very much envies, and that is Scripture-Exposition, wherein good men before
this time ha^ never so great assistance, and of which never men that went under
the name of Chistians declared such dislike.


T.S. Mat. 5.34. (...) A Prohibition so universal, that it admits of no
exception.
[5. They assert, That Christ did not speak one thing and intend another, when
as he commanded men not to swear at all; but let their yea, be yea, and their
nay, nay; whereas, we that are Orthodox, do both swear our selves, and teach
men so to do; otherwise we way happily go without our maintenance, for want of
sw^arers in our Courts of Justice, against those Heretics that refuse to pay
us Tithes.


W.T. This man and Anabaptists (for the Quakers Religion is a me^ley) would be
excused for accusing all Oaths as sinful, because Christ says, swear not at
^ll: a prohibition says this Commentator, so universal, that it admits no
exception: But that you must take on his word, who though he be against
Interpretations, and so declared himself immediately before; yet gives such an
Interp etation of that place. Fallacia a dicto secundo quid etc.
Now its very true, as Christ says, we must not swear at all, but that
expressions wherein there is such an universality admit no exception, that is
not true; as will appear in other instances; All things are lawful for me,
says Paul, again and ^gain: 1 Cor 10.23. What? Without exception? Was it
lawful for him to lie, steal, commit adultery, etc. No: but such large
expressions are to be limited to, and by the subject matter and the argument in
hand: namely, in the forecited places, it is to be restrained to things
indifferent. In kine manner the same Apostle faith, 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made all
things to all men, not by an unlimited and lawless compliance, as if he would
be a blasphemer among blasphemers; or among persecuting Jews a persecutor, but
by an humble, justifiable, and advantageous condescension.

We Assert also that Christ did not speak one thing, and intend another, when
he said, swear not at all: but all the question is, what he intended, and that
may appear by the words subjoyned: For he did not only say, swear not at all,
and there make an end; but proceeds and shows what he means by that general
saying, while he adds; neither by Heaven nor by earth; nor by Jerusalem, nor
by the Head So James cap. 5.12. (without any comma) (...), etc.
that is, whereas the Scribes and Pharisees made as if the third commandment
forbad perjury only, Math. 5.33.Our Savior shows that there is such a kind
of swearing as is not to be at all used, to wit, 1. when men swear by the
creatures, either impiously and Idolatrously, putting them in the place of God,
as if they knew whether we swear true or false, or could recompense us
accordingly; or else irreligiously and irreverently, abusing, in the profane
use of such creatures as are here enumerated, the name of God imprinted on
them, or God himself related unto in them; this is one [swear not at all [that
is implously or profanely by the creature. 2. The other is, that none should
swear at all (by God, or creatures Therefore James says* neither by the heaven
nor by the earth, nor by any other oath, to wit, by the like creatures; again,
by no oath at all in ordinary talk, so as to make our communication a swearing
communication, opposite to Yea and Nay (i.e.) to an affirming or denying
communication, without any oath.
) rashly, unadvisedly, uncertainly, that is, without a just cause, or calling,
or ordinarily, that is, in familiar communication, thus also our Savior
explains his injunction of swear not at all. Math. 5.34. by that which he says
v. 37. but let your communication, that is, your ordinary communication Your
(...)
be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; to this purpose also the Apostle James speaks; above
all things swear not, to wit, by heaven, earth and such creatures, according to
the profane usage of those times, for it seems men then were like ungodly
people now, who think it no fault to swear, so they swear the truth, when not
only to swear falsely is a great sault, but to swear frivilously, causelessly,
and in familiar conference. The Apostle therefore adds, but let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, nay; that is, in common discourse let there be no oath at
all: But a constant and candid expressing your selves, in simple and stable
affirmations and negations. In brief, that which Christ speaks is not against
all swearing (wherein the Name of God is so much advanced in his Omniscience
and Justice) but against creature-swearing and common swearing: we may
therefore put our Savior and his Apostle together and conclued that both
Christ and James (whose words we may call a comment upon our Saviors words) do
not take away the use, but establish the reverence of an Oath, by prohibiting
the profane and trivial taking of it up in men's common talk.

Let this then be the charge (since these men will needs be charged) that they
absolutely deny the use of an Oath, when yet God commands it in the Old
Testament as a part of his Moral worship, Exodus: 22.11. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Psalm. 63.11.
Isa. 65.16. Jer. 4.2. And thou shall Swear etc.
laying down also special rules for the holy use of it. Jer. 4.2. And with that
the New Testament tells us, that an Oath for confirmation is the end of all
strife. Heb. 6.16. Let them consider therefore upon what good account they put
an absolute end to that which God himself says, puts an end to all strife.

But this man sits and laughs at this necessary and effectual assistance for
the administration of Justice, and speaks as if he would let the world know,
that he will neither swear himself, nor get any body else to swear for him to
obtain that which is due to him; for if it be not thus, but he will seek his
own as Ministers seek their own, then he himself will be accounted one of those
Orthodox men among whom he is so loath to be numbered.


T.S. [6. They are bold to assert, that in taking Tithes: for preaching, we are
true neither to the Old Covenant, nor the New: Not to the Old, because Tithes
were the maintenance peculiarly appointed to the Tribe of Levi, Deuteronomy. 14.29.
of which Tribe we cannot say we are; and also the Tithes of old were by
command to be put into a storehouse, whether the stranger, the Fatherless and
widow, were to come and eat of them and be satisfied, which we practice not;
nor to the New Covenant, Numb. 18.21.
for that Jesus Christ has put an end to the Levitical Priesthood, and
consequently to all the maintenance and appurtenances thereto belonging.]


W.T. A. Levi, yet we are Ministers of the Gospel, 1. Heb. 5.1.
taken from among men, and ordained for men, in things pertaining to God: So
there is an agreement in the generality of the office, and such a succession
and correspondency in regard of the spiritual substance of it, that
New Testament officers taken from among Gentiles are prophesied of under the
name of Priests and Levites. Isa. 66.21. with Romans 15.16.

Levi, 2.
so we have not those Tithes that were appropriated to that Tribe: Its true, we
receive a portion of the fruits of the earth called Tithes, yet it comes very
short of that ample proportion which the Tribe of Levi had See Ainsworth on
Deuteronomy. 14.28.
who yet besides the Tenths and Fift-fruits, and the share they had in the
sacrifices, had also 48. Cities with their suburbs.

3. Tithes were not so appropriated to them, but that there was one Tithe for
the people themselves, Deuteronomy. 14.22.23. and another Tithe was to be laid out for
the poor, Deuteronomy. 14.28.29. which was called the Poor man's Tithe Godwins Moses
and Aaron lib. 6 cap. 3.
. If people were to lay out a Tithe for the use of the poor now, as they did
then, we should be as far from hindering them of it, as this writer from a just
imputation, when he speaks of not practicing that by our selves in these times,
Godwin ubi supra.
which was to be done by the people in those times; and yet out of that we
have, the poor have an allowance, both by way of yearly pay, and of voluntary
Alms.

4.
that we are true to the new Covenant (under which we stand) because though
Christ has put an end to the Levitical Priesthood, yet he has not put an end
to the Church Ministry, nor to that maintenance which is necessary for it; for
there is a new Gospel-Ordinance to establish it, to wit, that they which preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.14.

5.
that Tithes may be considered two ways,

In the general nature of a maintenance of the servants of God in the service
of God] As to speak more plainly and by way of instance, in regard of the
matter now in hand; the Levites having no part nor inheritance with their
brethren Deuteronomy. 14 27. and yet being Gods special Officers about the service of
the Tabernacle, wherein there time was taken up, they had need of a sufficient
support for them and theirs. In this respect Tithes belonged not to the
Ceremonial but rather to the Judicial Law; as the Levites were a part of that
body of people, all of which was to be provided for in the land of Canaan; yea,
we may say to the Moral Law of the 2. and 4. command of the first Table, as
they were Gods servants: An^ to the 8. command of the 2. Table as they were the
servants of the Church laboriously imp^oved for them, according to the rule of
service pres^ri^ed in those times:

Now to apply this: In this nature we take Tithes, that is, as they serve to
make up a fit maintenance, for the support of the servants of Christ, in the
service of Christ for the people of Christ who partaking of spiritual things
from us, ought in equity to minister carnal things to us, Romans 15.27.

under the notion of the support of, and their special application to the
ceremonial service. Now as they were given, received and made use of, to
maintain and uphold that old Testament worship, and the Priests and ^^evites in
order to that, so they are abolished: we lay no claim to them in that relation;
but yet the Tenth being the only maintenance designed unto us, we ^o with a
good Conscience take it, because there is no ceremony in the proportion, that
is, in maintaining the ministry ^y laying out a Tenth, but only in the old
Testament application. Tithes were an appurtenance to the old ceremonial
worship, but they were not [in themselves] a Ceremonial ^ppurtenance: for we
find a tenth part given to God long before the Ceremonial worship was
instituted by the hand of Moses, Genesis 28.22. Yea, whereas he says, they were
appropriated to the Levitical Priest hood, or to the Tribe of Levi, we find
them paid by Abraham to Melchisedeck, who was none of that Tribe, Heb 7.6.9.13.
Yea, to him even Levi himself paid tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7.9. How then were
they proper to Levi?

Let the Quakers then take their right charge which is this: that while we
challenge not Tithes by Moses law; but only a maintenance formed out by the
just and pious laws of the land in that proportion, they deny Ministers that
maintenance, and would have us labor (if we will labor) without any
livelihood, without any hire: When Paul says, I took wages, 2 Cor. 11.8


T.S Luke 10.3, 4.
[7. They call us hirelings, because we preach by Indenture first made with the
people for our maintenance, and do not go forth (trusting our Master Christ) as
his Ministers of old did, carrying neither purse nor scrip with us: which
should we practice, we are doubtful we should be reduced to one of these two
straits, to wit, either to work or beg; the first of which we cannot do, and
to do the second we are ashamed.]


W.T. I Answer, 1* There Is a great difference (but that this man will not open
his eyes to see it,) between taking hire, and being an hireling; for Christ
approves the former, Luke 10.7.
and condemns the la^ter, Joh. 10.13.



3.
the people that seek out a Minister, and know he cannot subsist to do service
to their souls without a worldly support, do freely offer such a maintenance as
they conceive may be competent, which if it appear so to ^e, the Minister
(after he has first found the place fit for the execution of his Ministerial
Function, and that he is thereunto lawfully called) does accept of it, and so
closes with them, to do his office among them. He lays no necessity upon them
to give him such an allowance; but they seeing the necessity of enjoying the
Ministry, are willing to give it. Hereupon happily some writings are drawn up,
that while the Preacher does his duty he may not (through the injustice or
inconstancy of the people) be defrauded of his necessary maintenance, which on
both sides is agreed upon; In this transaction, the charge which is here laid
upon Ministers (for the meaning of the man in all these charges, is to
discharge the Quakers, and to charge and deride the Ministers,) is as vain and
foolish, as the ground thereof is weak and frivolous.

Now whereas he speaks of our going forth, not trusting our master Christ, as
his Ministers of old did, etc. I Answer,

1. our master Christ does neither require us, nor allow us, to depend on, or
rather to tempt him Mar. 4.7.
in resting on, extraordinary courses, when there be ordinary ways before us
wherein we may lawfully walk.

silver, no shoes, Nominasse est refutasse.
, Acts 21.7.
nor yet a staff? Mat* 10.10. Nor salute any man by the way? Luke 10.4. Or was
it not rather such a Law as was given the Isralites at the eating of the first
Passover, Exodus 12.11. (but unobserved after) and that for the same reason, to
wit, because they were in have, and two Coats might clog them, Salutes stay
them, ordinary worldly Provisions cumber them; Neither do I deny, that it was
to teach them Faith also, but then I add that though dependence upon God be a
perpetual duty, yet we are not bound to exercise it always, in the same way;
for we find Ezra taking one course that is, an extraordinary, and resolving
against a band of Soldiers, Ezra 8.22. and yet Nehemiah taking another, that
is, an ordinary, and accepting from the King Captains of the Army and Horsemen
to go along with him, Nehem. 2.9. What does this show, but that we are to rest
upon God in an extraordinary way, when the Word, or honor of God requires it,
and in an ordinary way, when Providence, without any prohibition, or just
prejudice opens it; God would have the walls of Jericho thrown down with Rams
horns, to confirm their Faith in God; but in the next onset upon Ai, his will
was that they should go to work in an ordinary way, both of power and policy,
Josh. 8.3, 4. Yet observe, that in the forecited places, where Christ sent
them forth without providing for themselves, he tells them also, that the
workman is worthy of his meat, Mat. 10.10. and the Labourer of his hire, Luke
10.7.

Let this man therefore, and his company take their charg, which is this; that
they call us hirelings, because we take that hire which Christ says we are
worthy of, and that (whiles we are not doubtful of provision from our master
Christ himself extraordinarily, if there were no ordinary lawful way therein
to have it,) these men show themselves desirous we should be reduced to one of
these two straits, either to work, (when another work is required 2. Tim. 2.
) or else to beg, (whereof the world might be ashamed, but especially the
Saints)

Collect from hence what honest men these be, and how unlike that godly
Jehosaphat, who commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the
portion of the Priests and the Levites that they might be encouraged in the Law
of the Lord, 2. Chron. 31 4.


T.S. [8. They call us greedy Dogs, because we do not walk after the example
of those whom Christ sent out to preach the Gospel, Luke 10, 7*
to wit, eat and drink such things as the people give us; but ins^ead thereof
do force that by Law, even from the poor and needy (to wit, the Tenth of all
they get by the sweat of their brows) which by fair means we should never
obtain. A thing they say which the true Prophets and Ministers of Christ
mentioned in Scripture never practiced.


W. T. A. 1. We profess we do not (because we believe we ought not) walk after
extraordinary examples, no more then they after the example of Elijah, Luke
9.55. Christ bad his Disciples when he sent them forth, heal the sick, and
cleanse the Lepers, and raise the dead, Math. 10.8. Must we undertake that
work too? If extraordinaries now are to be followed, let Saints go and sell
all (as in the first times they did) and lay down the money for the Churches
use: Will this young Merchant do so? With whom we must needs be Dogs and
greedy Dogs too, because we take a maintenance, which devout persons, and in
particular, such as ought to be Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers to the
Church have provided for our nourishment, and which people (that love those
that labor for their souls) are willing to give us and set before us, what
have we but what Christian people have given us, or do give us? In which
respect we eat and drink what is set before us.

Tim. 3.4. and a lover of hospitality? Titus 1.8. What? And have nothing to
keep house or hospitality with of his own, but only other folks meat and drink?

Object. But they say we force it.

Answ. If some better minded, set meat and drink before us, and others that are
worse affected, will come and catch it away, must we be so unthankful to those
that have set it before us, or so injurious to our selves, as to let them carry
it from us?

Object. But we force from the poor and needy the Tenth of that which they get
by the sweat of their brows.

Answ.Either the poor and needy be spaced and nothing is received from them;
or else it is (as their state is) very little. That little is given to God by
being given to faithful Ministers for the support of that work of his wherein
they labor.

(For I plead not for idle, or Idol-Shepheards) Its laid out also that their
souls may be provided for; and that not without good ground of hope of
prospering the beter in their outward estate, Mal. 3.10. If this little may not
be had without Law, it is many times lost; but suppose the Minister do by law
seek his maintenance from them who get their living by the sweat of their
brows (which is the lot of all men, and of conscientious Ministers especially,
that spend and are spent for their people) I say, suppose he use force to get
those dues which (as he confesses here) by fair means he should never obtain,
is he an Oppressor that seeks his right forcibly? Or is not he unjust and
wicked that detains it, and forces him so to seek it, if ever he will come by
it? I speak of such poor as be in some measure able to pay this, as well as
their other debts. If their poverty be such as that they have nothing at all to
pay, then his outcry is as just against the Merchant or any Tradse-man, that
shall demand his due of them, as against the Minister.

Before the honorable Committee of Parliament when the business of Tyths was in
agitation An. 1653. See the Paper entitled, Some modest and sober
Considerations about Tyths
, that the Minister has full as much right to the Tenth part as any man has
to his Nine. The Tenth is the Incumbents own, not given to him by the present
generation that lay it out, but paid as a Rentcharge on the Land, charged with
it before either Lord or Tenant had any propriety in it. None but a Minister
possessed of the place, can claim a right to it, as being freely given to the
Church.

This may suffice for answer to him and them whom Tithes trouble so much, but
the Ministry much more, by which latter trouble Christians may judge of the
former; unto which I add that many of those men that are enemies to the
Ministers Tenth, are no friends to Gods Seventh, that is, are ill observers,
yea, bold slighters of the Sabbath day; which I speak to warn Christi^ns from
closing with them that have so lost the reverence of Religion.

But since I am drawn for far into this subject, I hope I shall not be
injurious, if I do a little detain the Reader by adjoining and offering (only)
some Arguments for this kin^e of maintenance by laying out the Tenth, that
being the thing that in these times is in so much question.

I say therefore,

Moses, considering that the Apostle gives this construction of that
Old Testament maintenance, that they who ministered holy things, who waited and
served at the Altar, were in that respect, partakers with it, and lived upon
it, 1. Cor. 9.13.14. whence therefore he collects, that they who preach the
Gospel, should live on the Gospel. Now is it a Ceremonial thing or is it a
Moral thing, that a man that labors should live of his labor? And into that
the Apostle resolves the Altarmaintenance in the Old Church.

A sad complaint of this was made by Pareus Professor in Hiedleberg to Dostor
Twisse, when he was there with him, as was reported by D. Twisse himself to a
friend of his
But because wise and godly men, saw there was no other wav so like to fulfill
the mind of God, for a competent and a conven ent main tenance* as by ordering
it to be Lid out in that particular w^y of Tithes? I offer this as an Argument
drawn from the judgment of discretion in the Christian world Its true that in
some Protestant Churches there has been an alteration, but followed (as I have
heard cre^i^ly reported) with lamentation for the straitness, falling upon
Ministers by such change of maintenane.

3 I propound this way of maintenance as most rational, and that in diverse
respects,

1. Because equal, and though re^roacht as oppressive, yet cannot be proved so,
nor possible be so,

1. People have nine parts and do but lay forth the Tenth, and is it hard when
God gives men ten parts of the Fruits of the earth that they should give him
one again?

which he never farmed himself, nor paid any thing for, and which no man but
the Incumbent had any right to sell him.

Suitable: A Ministers duty is, to be given to Hospitall^ty. (1 Timothy 3.2.) for
which he will be best enabled by receiving something of every kind, for
thereby he is furnished with those various things, whereof Hospitallity is made
up This is the more confirmed ^y that Scripture-Rule, Gal. 6.6. Let him th t is
taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches him in all good things,
one and another.

simpa^hizing maintenance, that is, a Minister being to have his subsistence
from the ^ruits of the earth, is ^hereby moved the more feelingly to pray for
ablessing from Go^ upon them. If people be loosers therein, he is a loo^er with
them; and if they have more, he has more: Nor will it follow from hen^e that
Covetousness makes him pr^y, but ^nterest does, and Interest (if it be a just
Interest, though it be in some ^ense a self-Inte est) ought to do it; for, is
not that it which God himself propounds as a motive to the performance of that
duty, while he s ith by h s Prophet, Pray unto the Lord for the peace of
Babylon, for in the peace thereof shall you have peace? Jer. 29.7. so may
Ministers pray (and that according to Gods mind) for a blessing on the fruits
of the earth, because in the increa e thereof is their increase. Yea, and in
this very case, Ma^h 3.10. Bring your Tithes to God, is urged by an Argument
from their own Interest, to wit, that God will pour a blessing upon them.

freest from temptation. If subsistence come from the people, then there is a
great temptation to please them; if from the State, then, if the State and
higher Powers happen to be corrupted (and who in so much danger as they) There
is another and greater temptation lies on that hand, to comply with it, I mean,
with the corruptions of it, for in all justifiable things, there ought to be a
compliance. This Argument receives strength from our daily prayer, which is,
Lord lead us not into temptation.

most easily obtained: Whilst the occasions of people require continual
layings out, but espeially at such a time as this is, when the necessities of
the State force upon men many and great payments: hence money is very har^ly
had; but at that time when God (in the fruits of the earth) gives in much, its
easy to part with a little of the same kind.

Promise which is proper to this kind of maintenance, and which is before
mentioned, may, I doubt not* be justly applied for assuring those of gaining ^y
it, who are conscientious in it Mal. 3 10

I do not in wh^t h^th been said press the Jus divinum of Tyths in the new
Testament in a strict sense; yet for that much may be spoken An^ here (since
that I am thus invo'ved in this Argument) I shall not ^orbe^r to publish what
has been spoken where my self was (I thank God) an hearer; and is left in
Notes in my own custody, by one of singular worth and sincerity, now with God
Mr. Sam. Crok Pastor of Wrington in Somerse^shire. preached Ann. 1627.
I shall tran^cr^be it as he left it in his Notes u^o^ Mal. 3 8. where the Lord
is giving in his Answer to that Q^estion, Wh^rein have we robbed thee? Says,
in Tyth^s and Offerings, which in those days were expressly requi^ed in the
Law: But the people returning from Babylon, among other duties neglected that.
Nehem. 13.10, 11, 12. Herein therefore says the Lord am I ro^bed.

Observe, The inte^verting of things hallowed is a robbing of the Lord.

David says, Psalm 56.12. [Thy] Vows (as if he ha^ said, no longer Min^,) are
up n me O God. So Levit. 27.10.28 See the example of A^anias an Saphira Acts 5.
befo e sale all was the^rs; after sale, the money was theirs* but being once
consecr^ted, no p rt was theirs. It was a lie against the Holy Ghost to deny
it, a ro^bery of God to detain it: And this was in the church of the
New Testament, and in the ca^e of a Free will Offering.

Legaldues established by the Law either of God* or of* man for God? Un^er both
which this due of Tithes falls, and under one at least, is perpetual.

Quest.
Quest By what Law are Tyths now due? It seems not by Gods Law here urged, no
more than other Offerings (here joined with Tithes) unless by the Ceremonial
or Judicial Law now out of date?

Answ.
Answ. Nay, even now, under Christ and the Gospel, Tithes are due, For

Melchisedech, Genesis 14.20. In whom there was a Type of Christ's Kingdom and
Priesthood, unto whom even Abraham and, in him, Levi paid Tithes, and his
Priesthood is everlasting, Heb. 5.6. and so Christ's, and the dues belonging to
it.



Obj. We read of free-gifts Acts 4.

Answ. That was an [Interim] while the Church [under Persecution] could not
receive Tithes. But what provision is there for the Church in peace under
Christian Government? Surely none if not this, therefore this is in f^rce still.

in all good things Gal. 6.6. some part therefore of all increase, Ministers
are to partake in Something for bread, for cloth, for drink for all men are
nourished and maintained by the same elements: Other settled ways of
maintenance will not afford a proportion suitable to that Rule.
, what part can be more equal than that which the Lord prescribed?

3. Wherefore the whole Christian Church (Prince and people) together with the
faith, received and established this Order of maintenance by Tithes, whereby
(call it Civil, Municiple, or Ecclesiastical Law, yet) now at least it become
Moral by consequence as obedience and Tribute to princes, Romans 13. The 3. thing
may be further explained by what he delivered in the preaching of the Sermons,
to wit, thus; I take the Law of Tithes (said he) to be more than Judiciary,
even Ecclesiastical which comes nearer to the second Commandemt. than a matter
of robbery between man and man.

Its a Law therefore though not immediately promulgated from God, yet enacted
by men for God. The things are consecrated to God and the Law of those things
is consecrated to God too, therefore cannot be taken away: Do Christian
Magistrates require subjection, as to God, because it is said, give to Caesar
that which is Caesar's? And is it not a subjection to God to obey this Law for
God?




And it was the wisdom of Christians to depart no further from Jews, then in
things necessarily to be left, as Figures yielding to the body, etc. As
likewise of Protestant Churches, no further to depart from the Church of Rome,
than in those things wherein they had departed from Christ.

This may serve for ground of resolution, without disputing every objection

Mean while it reproves those who wink at this sin, willing to persuade
themselves, that is not against conscience, which is for their profit, as

appropriating (indeed impropriating) them to Monks and his creatures when they
were appointed for Gods service.

Henry the 8 who taking the Popes robberies from Church and Lay, that is,
taking Temporal revenues and spiritual together, had not so much care and
consciences as to distinguish and restore Tithes, but turned both to the
Commonwealth. Hence many by a miserable necessity do inherit this Robbery, and
live on the Churches Revenue.



Thus far this wise and godly man of God, and in no wise worldly, but exceeding
liberal, as in Gods house, by instruction, so in his own, by Hospitallity.

I shall leave what I have written (which had it been published by the Author
himself would have been much more like himself) to the judgment of such who
have purposely studied this subject, and to whom God has given a larger light,
recollecting my self and resuming that which I have already spoken, that is,
that I reach not so high as to press the divine Right of Tithes in a strict
sense, but (keeping my self to my own measure) that which I insist upon is
this: Th^^ whereas they is clearly a divine Right for maintenance in the
generality, that general Law has a special influence into this particular way
of maintenance (I mean by laying out the Tenth) inasmuch as no other way is
like to be found, in all respects so expedient, for the fulfilling of the will
of God in the maintaining of those that do the work of God as this is. I leave
it to consideration therefore, where it be not consequentially divine; for a
maintenance is due by divine right; if so, then it is Gods mind also that it
should be made out one way or other, and if in some way then in the fittest
way. I shall add only that there are two great ordinances of God, the one of
the Ministry, the other of their maintenance; for so has the Lord ordained,
that they which Preach of the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.
and there is much in the latter of these for the supporting of the former, I
mean, in the supporting of the maintenance, for the supporting of the Ministry,
which is easily confirmed, while it cannot but be observed, that they that
plead against Tithes, do through the sides and upon the account of Tithes,
strike at the Ministry of England, and transfer the plea th^ther. The great
eye-soare is not Tithes, but the Person concerned in the Tithes, that is, the
Ministry. The Lord keep it in the thoughts of the hearts of our Governers to
establish the Ministry, and that maintenance by which the Ministry may be best
established I shall conclude this with two Scriptures, 1. The old Prayer, Deuteronomy.
33.11. Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of his hands. I am loath
to write (but would have Quakers and Anti-ministerial men to read) the rest. 2.
The other Scripture is 2 Chronicles. 24.16. They bu^ied Jehojada in the City of
David among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God and
toward his House.

I doubt not but I may say truly that neither my Brethren In their Sober
Answer to this anger^ Epistle newly put forth. p. 18 etc.
nor my self have thus extended this Argument out of a mind to make good to
our selves or others, a personal maintenance; but we thus far plead for
maintenance, th t the Ministry may be continued; and for a maintained Ministry,
that Religion may be maintained; and for the maintaining of Religion, that our
God may be detained, and may not for the forsaking of a right Religeon, for^ake
us and utterly depart from us.

Its high time to return to my Epistler, who says in the close of this
Article that the true Prophets and Minister of of Christ mentioned in
Scripture, never practiced the procuring of any thing from people by force of
Law.

To which I answer,

by God himself, for the maintaining of the ordinary Ministry; and such ^ourses
were taken by godly Magistrates in good times as whereby they were still
relieved Nehemiah 10.32. to the end, and 13.10.
, which in probability, was by complaint made for unjust detainments To wit,
either by themselves or some other godly persons that saved them that labor,
which of others would do for us, we should sit still with thanks.


2. As for the times of the New Testament mentioned in and Scripture, it is not
reasonable to think of requiring any thing by Law. 1. Because the^e was no Law
establishing a ministerial maintenance; yea, 2. it was scandalous also to go
to Law about other things wherein the present Laws might relieve them, because
it was before infidels. 1 Cor 6 etc.

Having spoken thus long of this Articles, I shall return it upon this Author
and his adherents, with this charge* that whilst the^ call the Ministers of the
Nation greedy Dogs, (such is their Religion, such is their reason, such is
their charity because some of them have sometimes forced their right from some
poor men by law, who yet were not so poor but they might have paid it (for
if any have exacted from persons altogether disabled, I defend them not) but
they were so unjust, and froward, that they would not pay it otherwise, let
them consider* how they will answer this at that great day, when Christ shall
come to determine who be greedy dogs, and who be faithful shepherds, and how
he will take it to have all branded because some may be blamed.


T.S. [9. They call us hypocrites, pretending these as the reasons. 1. Because
we Preach the things we practice not: accusing us for preaching against Pride
and yet living in it: against covetousnes, and yet being greedy of filthy
Lucre. etc.]


W. T. A. But how does it appear that they live in pride or are greedy of
filthy lucre? why this man says so, and are not strong affirmations great
proofs? especially when they be in the mouth of an adversary? yet in regard of
this or the like things before or after, I do not undertake to plead for every
public teacher in the Nation. Let this accuser come forth, and speak his
mind plainly; if what he produces against the public teachers be by him
meant of all the public teachers in the Nations. its an absolute falsehood: if
only of a corrupt company among them, its an absolute folly; as if a man should
write an epistle to all the merchants and Tradesmen in the Nation, and say, you
couseners and cheaters, and Extortione^s etc. because some or many of them be
such: were not this a madness?

Besides that he may know that a man's points are sooner taken from his knees,
(yet excesses in that or in any such kind, we preach against) then pride from
his heart, as this his Epistle shows.

But we be hypocrites again.


T.S. [2. Because often times in the close of our Sermons we tell the people we
should have proceeded further if time had not prevented us when as indeed we
had no more to say.]


W. T A Here malice is witty, and the man thinks he has hitt us home: but how
does he know that such Ministers as now and then say so, had no more to say?
who made him a window into preacher hearts? and does he judge so of other men
because his conscience tells him it was so with him when he was a public
preacher? or does he think it so hard for one that uses to preach, when the
time is past (as he supposes it to be) to add yet something more if it were
convenient to add it? or has not he heard that they who say so, preach much
longer at some other times? and therefore (for any thing he knows might be
provided to say more at that time? But whether that he says be true or no, yet
it seems it was one of the choicest aspersions that he could think of, to a
base the ministry withal, and therefore (at all adventures,) down it must.

But if this be not strong enough, he will have threefold cord, to see whether
that will hold us and represent us to the world under the notion of Hypocrites.


T.S. [3 Because in our prayers before sermon we frequently beg of God, that he
would put words into our mouths, and teach us what to say; whereas even then,
we have our sermon notes, either in our pock^ts, or our bibles, or the
platform of our discourse prepared in our heads.]


W. T. A. I Answer,

hear them without indignation, nor a godly man without grief, nor ungodly men
and common hearers without laghter.

Pro. 16.1. Though we be weakly prepared, he can and often does, supply us;
though we be never so well prepared, he can confound us. If a man be never so
Intelligent, or never so Eloquent a Preacher, yet God can remove away the
speech from the trusty, and take away the understanding of the aged. Job.
12.20. We do not therefore pray to God only for what we want, but for what we
have, which we hold, or loose, according as God stands by us in our work, or
leaves us.

Now let us judge how just this charge of Hypocrisy is, and withal whether it
may not be justly retorted upon him by whom it is published, who (if you look
to the bottom of this Epistle) subscribes himself a cordial lover of our
souls, when he shows himself by his bitter invectives, a cordial hater of our
Ministry, in the exercise whereof we save our own souls, and the souls of
those that hear us. 1. Tim. 4.16. Withal he names himself a Servant of Jesus
Christ, who witnessed a good confession, and yet makes it his work (and his
play too) to reproach his laborious servants and faithful witnesses in the
Ministry.

That an accute Athiest upon the Ale-bench should babble out such things as
these be, or a learned good fellow please himself with such foolish talking and
jesting (when the Pot and the Pipe has whetted his wits) were not to be
wondered at, but that a man that professes the fear of God himself, and that
has been so often in the Pulpit as if he meant to teach it others, should speak
after this rate, this is too too bad; the Lord make him and his miserable
companions better.


T.S. [10. They call us Thieves and Robbers, because we spend six days in the
week, to gather together the words of the Prophets and Apostles, the words of
Jerome, Augustine, Calvin, Luther, etc. and then came forth in the first day
and speak to the people, saying, Hearken to the word of the Lord, when as
indeed we received it not from the Lord, but from the writings of other men
with whom we converse.]


W. T. A. We acknowledge that we do spend our time to gather together the words
of the Prophets and Apostles (with their right meaning) that accordingly we may
speak to the people, and then we say, hearken to the word of the Lord, for, are
not the words of the Prophets and Apostles the word of the Lord? Luke 1.70. 1.
Pet. 1.11. 1. These. 2.13.
And if they be so, are we Thieves because we receive from the Lord that which
we deliver to this people? 1 Cor 11.23. These be strange things: But it seems
by their writings See the faithful discovery of a treacherous design Page 33.
that they make all Thieves and stealers of the word that quote Scripture, if
that which they deliver to others be not delivered to them by immediate
inspiration.

Jerome, Augustine, Calvin, Luther, I answer, that we are not such contemners
of the gifts and graces which God bestowed on them, for the edification of his
Church as to make no use of them. He that scorns to make use of the labors of
man for his improvement in the things of God, shows himself a proud and
unthankful man; yet we do not ground any point of Religion upon the words of
the most eminent men, but we make use of their light, and that judgment of
discretion that was in their time, for our better assistance in a right
understanding of the mind and way of God.

Jerome and Austin we do not say, Hearken to the word of the Lord. Its true, we
say so before the Sermon, because we take a Text out of the Word of God, and to
that, we bid them hearken, as also to all those things which our purpose is to
deliver to them out of the Word of God afterward: But if there be occasion to
make use of humane Authors, (as there is seldom in Country Congregations) we
offer to the hearers what we receive from them only as the considerable things
of men, not as the infallible things of God; nor do we impose them upon the
consciences of any, as we do the Word and worship of God.

But whereas it is not enough with this man, that he makes us Hirelings, and
greedy dogs and Hypocrites, but he must mame us Thieves and Robbers too; I
shall return him his charge, and desire him to reflect upon himself and his
company, that cry after us as men do after a Thief, and to enquire whether they
may not more justly be accounted such themselves, that strive to steal away the
good names of others, and put the name of Thieves upon them, by a foolish and
false fame. For as for the first part of his accusation, it is foolish, to wit,
that we gather from Prophets and Apostles, and then say hearken to the Word of
the Lord, for so we ought to do; and as for the latter, it is false; to wit, that
we say, Hearken to the Word of the Lord, when we bring the writings of men, for
that (unless he mean it in some sophistical sense) we do not.


T.S. [11. They have the confidence to advise us (see the boldness of these
deceivers) to preach no more to the people, than the Lord has spoken to us,
and then we our selves witness the life and power of within our selves, which
if practiced, would be of sad consequence to us; for that whereas most of us
are engaged by contract to preach weekly, some once, some twice, some three
times; if we should preach no more, then we witness the life and power of,
either constant silence, or rare speaking would be found in our Congregations;
and then what our sheep would do for shepherds, or what we shephears should do
for hire, let all that are in Authority juddge.]


W.T. A. This I let pass, as seeming to have nothing in it; but a calumny
coucht under a counsel and pretended advice, though perhaps there be a device
in it also, and some deeper deceit; for when they say, see a faithful
discovery of a treacherous design. p. 28.
speak no more than you have experience of, then you live in; they who have had
personal discourses with them, find from thence ground to declare, 1. That
this is to silence you from ever mentioning the Histories and Prophecies of the
Scripture, as Creation, coming of Christ into the world, Day of Judgment,
Resurrection of the body, which being past, or to come, we can have no present
experience of. Or 2. that by this means all the Scripture must be construed as
metaphorical, in an Allegory; the Creation, Adam, Eve, Wilderness, Canaan,
Kings, Prophets, yea, Christ himself, his Flesh, Blood, Cross, Jerusalem,
Herod, Pilate, Churches, Elders, Antichrist (and what not?) to be fulfilled in
the Allegorical construction of particular experiences.

If there be no such mystery of Iniquity as this in his mind; and again, if he
do not intend in these words, a living up to our Doctrine in full perfection,
(which we dare not pretend unto) then let him know, that the desire and
endeavor of the public Teachers in England is, to express both within and
without themselves, the life and power of that they preach to other, wherein
what their seize are, let those witness among whom they are best known,
and say whether they be not such, as to prove this part of his charge, a false
accusation,


T.S. 12. [ They say that the mind of God is not to be known by study in an
University, but by revelation of the Spirit, who alone knows his mind. 1
Cor. 2.11, 12, etc]


W.T. A. If he mean the mind of God cannot be known, savingly by nature or by
humane learning, that we say too, and hold against the Quakers, that God does
not so enlighten every one that comes into the world, as to know the mind of
God in that sense: But if he mean, it cannot be known notionally, that is, so
as to understand in many points the truth of Scripture-Doctrine, that we deny
Scribes and Pharisees may sit in Moses chair and teach those truths that other
men ought to hear. Mat. 23.2 and therefore they may know them themselves. Unto
this I add, that humane Learning (considered in it self) will not acquaint us
with the mind of God, but yet being sanctified, its a great Assistant for that
end.


T S [ And that Paul and Peter, and other the Ministers of Jesus Christ in
Scripture, did not serve an apprentiship in any University to learn the Trade
of Preaching; 1 Cor. 2.10. Galat. 1.16
but did preach that Gospel wh ch Christ by his Spirit revealed in them, and
therefore they charge us to be Ministers of the Letter only, because we preach
the Saints words, but do not witness their condition]


W.T. A. vid. Amesium in 2 Pet. 1.1. de differentia Apostoloru^ and ministrorum
ordinar.
A. Paul and Peter were instructed by immediate revelation, which we are not so
presumptuous as to expect, or to make the condition of the Apostles our
condition; if we must do all that Paul and Peter did, then we must go up and
down and not tie our selves to a particular place; and then, what need is there
of that reading, study, meditation, which Paul presses upon Timothy, 1 Timothy
4.13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 2.15.

Yet did not the Apostles preach only by revelation of the Spirit within them,
but according to that which the Spirit in Scripture revealed to them, Acts
26.22. by which they were willing to have their doctrine examined Acts 11.17.

As for the rude illiterate scoff of an Apprentiship, what conscience this
Merchant makes to instruct his Family in a right Religion, and to confirm them
in piety by Family Prayer, may well be suspected. But you may be sure he is an
Apprentice-taker, and so is skild in this language, and accordingly must thus
speak, but it is because he has a mind to be abusive, for otherwise he has
looked so much upon the University (I think) as to know that scholars do not
live the^e in the nature of Apprentices, but study the liberal Arts in a free
and ingenious way. But his wantonness (I must say his profaneness also) rises
higher when he speaks with all contempt of preaching, as if it were some common
Trade, when it is that glorious calling wherein the Son of God spent his time
when he was here upon earth, and which is the way of God in which he is well
pleased to save those that believe 1 Cor. 1.21. That we are Ministers of the
letter only, is his saying only, but he has a great reason for it, to wit,
because we preach the Saints words, but do not witness the Saints condition.
And what is this witnessing the Saints condition? that is a part of their
gibberrish who devising a new Religion, had need devise a new uncouth language.
Let him speak plainly, and as men use to speak, that are not afraid to be
understood. If he means by witnessing their condition, to give witness to the
truth of God, that they still do, and desire more and more to do by their
Doctrine, and (wh tsoever he says to the contrary) by their conversation; yea,
many of them have formerly sealed it with their blood and many more are ready
by Gods assistance to do it, when God shall call them to it, which ^ay be
quickly; for we a e not so secure (whatsoever heights his petulant Pen puts
upon us) as not to think of suffering in a way of cruelty by those by whom we
suffer, so much in a way of calumny.


T S. 13. Their blasphemies do not end here, but they proceeded on, and declare
both to us and our people, that all our talling and profession of Christ, his
death, rresurection, and righteousness in the notion (though never so
orthodox) shall nothing avail us, or them, unless we witness the life of
Jesus in us, and his eternal power raising us up to newness of life.


W.T. A. That the profession of Christ; in the notion will nothing avail
Ministers (as to their salvation) without the power and life of religion, we
easily grant, and therefore (in that reg^r^l) his charge is ground less, and
has nothing in it, but only an oblique and untrue taxing of the Ministry of
this Nation, as if there were nothing of the life of Jesus in the public
Teachers thereof.

But that Orthodox teaching will nothing avail others. When the Teachers
themselves are bad, let him prove, and disprove therein our Savior himself.
Math. 23.2, 3.


T.S. Jam. 2 9.
14 They do not spare to publish it a truth (and practice accordingly) that he
that respects persons does commit sin, and therefore it is (Heretics as
they are) that they will no sooner bow down to the rich man wearing the
gold-ring and the goodly apparel, then to the poor man that is clad with vile
raiment: of which, if permitted (O you Rulers and Magistrates) this will be the
sad consequence that you will neither be styled honorable nor worshipful; nor
we be called by the well-pleasing Titles, of Doctors, and Divines.


W.T. A. Let such uncivil men prove that Christ was a respecter of persons in
his concession to Nicodemus, that he was a Ma^her in Israel; or the spirit of
God in Luke, when he calls Gamaliel a Doctor of the law. Act. 5.34. And some
women honorable women. chap. 17.12. or Paul when he says, most noble Festus,
chap. 26.25. This (quandam) Teacher of others might have learned himself by
this time, that though it be a great fault to respect men impiously, so as to
derogate from God, 1 Samuel 2.29.
or respect men partially, with the contempt of poor christians, (wherefore
James speaks, chap. 2, 1, 2.) yet it is no fault to give men Titles of
distinction (as to call some noblemen, others Knights, others Gentlemen, so
some Divines, other lawyers) or to give them those titles of respect and
dignity that belong to them in their places; but a duty rather; for we must
give honor unto them to whom honor belongs, Romans 12.7.


T.S. Lastly, they do avouch it to be proper (as in Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
so in English) Heb. (...) Thou. Gr. (...) thou La. Tu thou
to say Thou and Thee to any single person: concluding (see what is to be
illiterate) that because Adam, Abraham Moses and we our selves do say thou, and
thee, to the great God that made world, therefore the same expressions may be
used to mortal men; and though we do esteem the impropriety proper for great
men and rich men, to say thou and thee, to a poor man, and a mean man; yet we
cannot but condemn the same (though proper) for a poor man or a mean man, to
say thou and thee to a great man, and a rich man.


W.T. A. 1. It is not proper, nor possible, to say thee or thou to any man, in
Hebrew, Greek or Latin; for neither Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, have any such
words.

2. It Is true that the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin pronounes are translated
[thou] in our English tongue when a single person is spoken too. Nor is there
any irreverence in speaking so in our prayers to the great God, because in our
English translation of Scripture, Scripture-prayers are so expressed, and the
use of all the people of God in England has so far obtained, that there is no
abatement of the honor of God in it. But on the other side, such is and has
been the constant manner of speaking in this Nation, that it is thereby become
offensive to say thou and thee to our superiors, and when such offense, may be
avoided by another way of speaking which (according to the usage of our English
Tougue) Loquendum ut vulgus.
is as proper as that, the offense ought to be avoided; for Scripture says,
Give no offense, 1 Cor. 10.32. To wit, if it may lawful, fairly, and
especially easily, be prevented, the old rules is to speak as people commonly
and ordinarily speak. Now custom has made it to be the civility of our
language to testify our respect by saying you, and disrespect by saying thou,
to any superior or equal (unless it be in a way of familiarity)

3. It Is true also that when a child learn his Accidence he must say Ego, I,
Ille, He, Tu, Thou. But must he therefore go to his Father and say O Thou
Father, give me this or that?

What a strange thing is this to make rudeness a matter of religion? as if a
man could not be holy, unless he be humorous, nor a perfect Christian, (as
perfection is attainable) unless he be a perfect Clown.


T.S. [ These are the horrid Blasphemies, and damnable Doctrines, against the
Abettors of which, you do at this day discharge so much passion, and rage,
both from Press and pulpit; calling, to the civil Powers for Bonds and
Prisons; nay fire and faggot against all those, who (fearing the Lord) do
fear to call darkness light, and light darkness. But stop a little and consider,
what you are doing whilst you are upon the full carrere posting to Damascus
upon Saul's bloody errand. Will you not out of your own mouths be condemned
before him that cannot err in judgment? Do you fulfill or violate that Royal
Law of Christ written in your hearts, to do unto other, as you would they
should do unto you? are not you as notable hereti^ks in the esteem of those
whose blood you thirst after* as they are in yours? and would you esteem it
just that (were the power in their hands) they should mete the same measure
unto you?


W.T. A. This studious Accuser of those Elders against whom no accusation is to
be received, but before 2. or 3. witnesses. 1 Timothy 5* 19. Thinks (its like) he
has acquainted himself and cleared his company very well in the forenamed
list of 15. (as he scoffingly calls them) Blasphemies, (which are for the most
part, truly and in good earnest such in the Apostles sense 1 Pet. 4.4) And yet
he is not quiet* but proceeds to blaspheme further, and to condemn the
public Teachers of this Nation, not of any petty crime, but as posting on
Readiness bloody errand and thirsting after blood.

What he says is very high; but how vain is his Religion, who bridles his
tongue no better then to fasten upon us those horrid things, which being
applied to all the public teachers in this Nation (to all whom he writes) are
just as true as the like accusation of Shimei was when it was applied to David.
2 Samuel 16.7,8.

But let him and his accomplices consider, whether their own mouths, which are
so full of the cursings of ministers, and their bawling Books (that are so
full of swords) do not sufficiently signify that it is far more probable
that they will shedd our blood (if God should once give them power) then true
that we desire theirs. Our desire and prayer is, that God would open their eyes
to see the error of their way, and turn them from their by paths that they
may not perish in them, wherein we believe we shall prevail for those among
them that belong to God.


T.S. [If you shall despise it as mine, yet accept of it as the counsel of
Gamaliel, that sober Pharisees, take heed to your selves, what you intend to do
at touching the innocent whom you now so fiercely pursue, lest happily yon be
sound even to fight against God. etc. And note what is in all the world that I
(who am become your en^my because I tell you the truth) do wish unto you
Teachers? Even this, that the gr^cious God would gran^ you to witness the same
change that Sa^l did, that the same hand of love that struck him to tip ear^h,
would likewi^e bring you down from all your high thoughts, and lofty
imaginations to stoop to the teachings of that Jesus whom you now persecute,
that you may come to witness all the wisdom of this world to be foolishn^sse
with God, and may be content to become fool s, that you may be wise. That you
may cry out (from the same root of li^e) with the same Saul, Lord what w^uldst
thou have us to do? That you may not in words only* but in truth, come to
witness all your excellency but l^sse, and you^ glory but as dung, for the
excellency of the knowl^dge of Jesus Christ: And fin^ll^, that you may be made
a^le to compreh^nd w^^h all Saints, what is the ^^e^dth, and leng^h, and dep^h*
and height, and to ^n^w the love of C^r^t that passes knowledge: All which are
the hearts desires of him for you, who is

A cordial Lover of all your Souls and a servant of that Jesus who w^n^st a
good confession before Pontius Pilate.

Thomas Speed.


W T. A In these last lines of his Epistle he rat^rnes to his exhortations and
supplications; w^erein (having expressed his ^etestation of us by ay^ng the worst
he can, and that with all the wit he has against us) he would be thought to
wish us well* if he do so, its the ^etter for h^m^elf, and w^ would not be
behind with him that way However good and wellgro^nde ^ad onitions we shall
not refuse to observe, though coming out of the ^^outh of an enemy not n ene^y
as he says, because he tells us the tr^th, but because he tells (let him
search whether the not out of ^n invenomed spirit against us) so many untruths
of us, though he speak some truth to us.

I e^re to think the best, Charity is ^inde 1 Cor 13.4. but yet it is not
blind: Nor can less be said (I think) concerning the best he says (by any
man that will not shut his eyes) but that his dealing therein is like the old
management of the business of Jobs Friends with their unjustly condemned Job.
They were grave and wise men, gave him very good counsel, told him how much
comfort he might expect from God, but all this was, If he would be an honest
man, when as he was one already, yea, better than themselves (as appears by
Gods commendation of him in the beginning of the Book chap. 1.8. he was a None
such) and righter th^n they in the cause he maintained, as appears by Gods
approbation of him and condemnation of his Friends in the latter end of the
Book chap. 42.7, 8. Just so it is here, for though this man come as short of
these men's wisdom as he does of their years, and indeed be no way worthy to be
compared with them, yet he comes full up to their mistakes. If we Ministers
would take his counsel and become honest men, (who are a company of greedy
Dogs, and Hypocrites, and Thieves, and Robbers,) then it would be well with us;
but (though we detest the carriage of any of our calling, that shall be found
guilty of those evils and abominations, yet) the public Teachers of this
Nation can speak with a good conscience (yea, and ought to speak) in that
language of abused Job, God forbid that we should justify him: Till we dye we
will not remove our integrity from us; our righteousness we hold fast and will
not let it go; our hearts shall not reproach us so long as we live: Job 27.5.6.
We desire to be much humbled for our miscarriages, and know what need we have
of a Savior; but yet can confidently refer our selves for the trial of our
cause and carriage as it stands here, to that righteous God and supreme Judge,
who will thoroughly plead the cause of Zion (ever shot at through the sides of
Ministers) and will one day disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon, and all those
Instruments of theirs that fight against them and him Jer. 50 33.34.

As for his cordial love which he does not show, but say, he has toward our
souls, my return thereunto (for my own part) shall be only this, that
whatsoever I have spoken in dislike of, and opposition to this scandalous
Epistle, yet I may truly say* it has deeply affected my heart, to think of the
sad condition of these poor and miserable men (whom we call Quakers, because we
know not how otherwise to distinguish them, or to converse with them) whereunto
I am moved by these two reasons.

1. Because they are (I do not say, nor do I mean, such bitter enemies to us)
but such adversaries to the eternal salvation of their own souls; as many
other ways, so especially whilst they bring not the light within them to Gods
light, which is contained in Scripture, but Gods Scripture Light to that light
which they pretend to be in their hearts; which is the ready way to their
undoing; for he that trusts in his own heart is a fool, and so r^ns upon his
own ruin and perdition, Prove. 28.26. and they are the Scriptures, and the
Scriptures only that make us wis^ unto salvation 2 Timothy 3, 15.
unto which I may ad^^e their other pernic^ous e^^ our o^pl^cing Justification
and salvation in a Righteousness ^ithin, and not in Christ and his
satisfaction without

2. Another reason is, because these poor creatures are left (I mean the
princip^l of them) by those generally that have written most tenderly to them,
and that not without great and sad reason as ^en whom it is to no purpo^e to
speak to; they are left (whose heart would not grieve to think of it?) as men
irrevoc^bly lost, like those men of whom the Scripture says, who has for
warned you to fly from the wrath to come? Luk.3.7.
they are possessed with such opposite principles as render them incapable of all
those warnings that should work upon them and be effectual in them, to free
them from the wrath to come; but Turn thou them o Lord, and they shall be
turned. It is impossi^le for all even and means to save such hardened souls
from death, but none have so erred from the truth, but that a God can convert
them. Lord, what thou would^st have us to do, and what it is impossible for us
to do, be pleased to do thy self to whom all things are possible: We cannot but
thou can, save even such souls from death, and so cover a multitude of sins
Jam. 5.9, 20. what is it that Omnipotency cannot do? What is it that
Free Grace will not do? So work in them, so work for them, that in the Ages to
come, the exceeding riches of grace may be manifested and magnified; and a
probatum may be put upon that glorious truth, that even in regard of such grace
raigns through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord Romans
5.21. Ephesians. 2.7.


If my style seem to any so severe as to call In question the reality of such
compassions and supplications, to that I have spoken in my Epistle Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke sharply, praecisely, severe.
, and shall add this further, that my spirit has been much humbled within me
(let it not be accounted fondness to say so much) and not a little contained
and immoderated by what providence pointed me to, while I was about this work
in Mr. Beza's Argument on Psalm. 143. wherein he tells us that that Psalm
declares what moderation we should use, when we are oppressed with slanders;
for though he that is unjustly accused (says he) be not guilty of that crime
in his own conscience, as it appears that David was banished without all
deserving as a seditions person, and guilty of high treason (which causes him
both in other places and in this psalm, boldly to appeal unto God, tru^ting in
his innocence) notwithstanding whereas the conscience before the judgment seat
of God does abundantly reprove them also, which are most innocent before men,
it must needs be that the conscience here sustain a double prison, both
confessing it self guilty, and also setting it self as innocent before the same
Judgment seat, and David does this thing most manifestly in this Psalm, adding
a sentence as notable as any is any where in the holy Scriptures, whereby all
and every man without exception (besides him only who was borne pure without
all spot) being considered in themselves, are condemned of injury done to
others, and therefore wothy of sundry punishments. Thus far that holy and
humble man.

And shall it not be our testimony that we the Ministers of Christ, are not
such as we are made to be, because we freely acknowledge our selves worthy to
be made such? I say worthy, in regard of our guilt before our God, though I
doubt not but such charges as these (as they come from those that charge us)
shall be cast out of the Court of heaven. Yea, and that we shall receive
through Jesus Christ for all those things wherein our consciences do accuse us,
and wherewith that God that is greater than our consciences, is able to charge
us (while we accuse our selves and fly to free grace) an absolving sentence.

Yet sure this sends us (for I shall not fear to conjoyn my dear Brethren in
this concession) and that very feelingly to a more special scruting, and severe
search, into our own hearts and ways, to find out if it may be, whence it
may arise in true consideration, that God should permit so much scorn to be
cast upon us. He spoke like a Philosopher that says, What evil have I done,
that bad men speak well of me. but he speaks like a Christian and like Divine,
that says, what evil have I done, that bad men speak evil of me? Honest
Phocion applauded once by the people, who never used to like him, wondered at
it, and said to one near him, Ecquid improdenti hodie mihi excidit mali Have I
let fall any ill passage that the people are so pleased.
I know not why they should be so offended, but there is reason enough, whether
I know it or no, why God should be displeased, and by their most unjust, manage
his most just displeasure. Surely it is meet to be laid unto God (from the rod
of men, and that scourge of their tongues, which is ever in the hand of God) I
will not offend any more, that which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done
iniquity, I will do no more Job. 34.31, 32.

Having thus far made bold with my Reverend Brethren (yet speaking all to my
self most) I may not leave without adding a few words concerning those of the
Ministry, who may be justly charged with some or many of these enormous things,
that are heaped up in this Epistle: Yea, from whom such aspersions have risen
upon the whole company and calling of public Teachers. I hope they will give
me leave without impatience or contempt, in a fair and loving, but yet serious
and sad way, to impart my self unto them.

1. Then for the matter of Teaching, though this Epistle be not such a friend
to public teaching, as to tax us for neglect that way, yet that no dou^^, is
a Ministers principal task, and to be looked upon as a matter of absolute
necessity 1 Cor. 9.17. The Call to Preaching reaches as high as heaven, and
the woe for not Preaching goes as low as hell, and will be found so to do, when
Christ shall come to require an account of that charge of Preaching the Word,
and being instant in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. but th t which it
concerns me more especially to intimate, is this, that whereas much is here
spoken, concerning maintenance, they have no cause to lay hold on the wages,
that have no care to do the work of the Ministry for it is the Labourer, not
the Loyterer that is worthy of his hire. I shall pass this with Gregory's
censure Moral. in Job. l. 22. cap. 23.
Fructus absque pecunia comedit qui Ecclesiastica commoda princ^pit sed
ministerium popu^^non impendit. Quid ad haec nos Pastores dicimus qui offieiu^
quidem praeconis susipimus, sed aliment a Ecclesiastica muti manducamus;
exigimus quod nostro debitur corpori^sed non impedimus quod subjectorum debetur
cordi.

2. That which there is more cause to speak to here, is this, that if any that
are of this great Calling shall (in these days wherein men are more pressed to
take pains) preach frequently and live desolutely, they have to consider, that
they are under our Saviors black character of those Scribes and Pharisees (with
whom this indiscreet and un-distinguishing Epistle shuffles us all up) and
that is this, they say and do not, Mat. 23.3. like Kine (its an homly similitude
but which comes home) that give a good meal (and that perhaps of sincere milk)
and then throw it all down with their foot; or like children that write a fair
copy, and then I lot it out with their slieve. How dishonorable a thing is
this, and how uncomfortable? Haeres. 64.
For here I remember what is storied of Origin, who being drawn in by a device
(as Epiphanius reports) to offer Frankinsense to the Heathen gods, he left the
place where he did it, which was Alexandria, being not able to endure the
infamy that succeeded such a fact, and came to Hi^rusalem, where when they
constrained him to teach, he rose up at length, and read this sentence of the
50. Psalm, But unto the wicked says God, what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my covenant into thy mouth? And when he
had done, laid aside the Book and fell a weeping and wailing, and the whole
company with him. And sure, if ever God awaken a mis-living Ministers
conscience, an evil carriage will be a weeping business, and the 50. Psalm to
him will be like the 51. to David.

3. That which I have most cause to mention, and which has moved me to speak
of all the rest, is, that this Book of reproaches taxes its rise an^ the little
strength it has, from the loose and unjustifiable carriage of diverse persons
in the ministerial Calling. Now what a lamentable thing is this, that Ministers
of the Word should so live, as to dishonor both the Word and the Ministry It
is but reason that they suffer me to speak, by whom we all suffer Romans 2.
Thou that teach another teach thou not thy self? Thou whose business it
it to preach the Law and Word of God, by breaking the Law, dishonourest thou
God? For the Name of God (even that Name of his which is stamped on his
ordinances and Ministers) it blasphemed among the Quakers and Anti ministerial
men through you. Is it nothing to you, that you make the offerings, the
ordinances of God, the ordinances of the Ministry to be abhorred? 1 Samuel 2.17.
Will not the account be sad at the last day, that you have not only lived
scandalously your selves, but also brought a scandal and all approby on all
those of the same calling, that have lived better? O think seriously and
seasonably of that heart-smiting aggravation and the sheath-lesse sword that
followed it. By thy sin thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme. 2 Samuel 12.14. 2 Cor. 8.23
A good Minister is the Ornament of the Ministry, yea, the glory of Chri t; but
a bad one, the blot and the blemish, who has therefore three heavy things to
be acountable for, a bad carriage, the bad carriage of a Minister and making
the Ministry it self despicable by so bad a carriage. Let this (if any thing
hasten an amendment for the preventing of an accumulated Judgment: And for that
reason I have written thus much, and not as assuming any thing to my self over
others of the same calling, or as loving the faults of any; were it not that
there is such a cause, and by occasion of this Book, such a call.

Its high time for me to draw to a conclusion, wherein I shall return to him
with whom I have to do, and to those of the same way, concerning whom myself,
and I doubt not to say, the public and pious Teachers of this Nation, are
willing and ready to pray that they do no evil, not that we should appear
approved, but that they should do that which is honest, though we be as
Reprobates, and yet I trust they shall know that we are not Reprobates 2 Cor.
23.6, 7.

But I had cause notwithstanding thus to apply my self to this first and
foulest part of our Adversaries Book, out of a sense of what David sometime
said 1 Samuel 22.22.
, I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy Fathers House; to wit,
fourscore and five Persons of the Lords Priests, My love to my Brethren will
not suffer me to do less than to reflect upon ^y self (when I re^d these most
abusive things) as the Person, through whose occasion the dear servants of God
have been thus vilified; and though the railings of injudicious and uncivil men
be of little value upon right consideration, (save only to lay upon themselves
a fearful guilt) yet because diverse weak Christians, who^re not so well able
to see into the subtilties of Deceivers, and to find out the de^ths of Satan
in this design, may be induced to less estimat on of pu lick P^eachers and
Preaching, whi h are Gods principal ordinar^ way to the salvation of they so
les* I have taken the ^ore pains to afford the the hel^ o thi^ Discovery, that
o the ordinance of he Ministry ay not have les^e efficacy upon their souls, ^y
having le^^e respe^t in their hearts

Now if God shall be ple se to bless any thing that has been spoken, so as to
m ke t prevalent for the confirming of tho e who have yet kept the Faith, an
the reducing o those who are not f^r gone, or not long gone from the right way,
I shall humbly ble^^e^ o for it an doubt not but they will do so also* however
I shall leave all to that all-working Go^, who when Paul plants, and Apol^o
waters does hi^^el^ ^one give the increase, and a ^de (through his goo^ Spirit,
which I humbly beg for that end) an effectual operation.


FINIS.

