The complaint of M. Tenter-hooke the Proiector, and Sir Thomas Dodger the
Patentee depiction of a rat dressed as a man presenting money bags to a
patentee I have brought money to fill your Chest, For which I am cursed by most
and least

Over many years scraping is left at a clap, All thou have gotten by others
mishap,


If any ask, what things these Monsters be,
It Is a Projector, and a Patentee:
Such, as like Vermin over this Land did crawle,
And grew so rich, they gaind the Devil and all.
Lo I, that lately was a Man of fashion,
The Bug-beare and the Scarcrow of this Nation,
Th'admired mighty Mounte-banke of Fame,
The Juggling Hocus Pocus of good name,
The Bull-begger, who did affright and fear,
And rake, and pull, tear, pill, pole, shave, and sheare,
Now Time has plucked the Vizard from my face,
I am the only Image of disgrace.
My ugly shape I hid so cunningly
(Close covered with the cloak of honesty)
That from the East to West, from South to North,
I was a man esteemed of ex'lent worth.
And (sweet Sir Thomas Dodger) for your sake,
My studious time I spent, my sleeps I brake,
My brains I tossed, with many a strange vagary,
And (like a Spanniell) did both fetch and carry,
To you, such Projects, as I could invent,
Not thinking there would come a Parliament.
I was the Great Projector, and from me,
Your worship learned to be a Patentee,
I had the Art to cheat the Commonweal,
And you had tricks and slights to pass the Seal.
I took the pains, I traveled, searched, and sought,
Which (by your power) were into Patents wrought.
What was I but your journey-man, I pray,
To bring your work to you, both night and day:
I found Stuff, and you brought it so about
You (like a skillful Tailor) cut it out,
And fashioned it, but now (to our displeasure)
You failed exceedingly, in taking measure.
My legs were Screwes, to raise thee high or low,
According as your power did Ebb or Flow:
And at your will I was Screwd up too high
That tottering, I have broke my neck thereby.
For you, I made my Fingers fish-hookes still
To catch at all Trades, either good or ill,
I cared not much who lost, so we might get,
For all was Fish that came into the Net.
For you (as in my Picture plain appears)
I put a Swines face on, an Asses ears,
The one to listen unto all I heard
Wherein your worships profit was preferred.
The other to taste all things, good or bad
(As Hogs will do) where profit may be had,
Grape, Starch, Tobacco, Pipes, Pins, Butter, Hay,
Wine, Coals, Cards, Dice, and all came in my way.
I brought your worship, every day and hour,
And hope to be defended by your power,
Sir Thomas Dodgers Answer!
ALas good Tenter-hooke, I tell thee plain,
To seek for help of me it is but in vain:
My Patent, which I stood upon of late,
Is like an Almanacke that is out of Date.
T'had force and virtue once, strange things to do,
But now it wants both force and virtue too:
his was the turn of whirling Fortunes wheel,
When we least dreamed we should her changing feel.
Then Time, and fortune, both with joint consent
Brought us to ruin by a Parliament:
I do confess thou broughtst me sweet conceits
Which now I find were but alluring baits,
And I (to much an Ass) did lend my ear,
To credit all thou saydst, as well as hear.
Thou in the Project of the Soape did toil,
But 'twas so slippery, and too full of oil,
That people wondered how we held it fast,
But now it is quite slipped from us at last.
The Project for the Starch thy wit found out,
It Was stiff a while, now limber as a Clout,
The Pagan weed (Tobacco) was our hope
In Leaf, Prick, Role, Ball, Pudding, Pipe, or Rope.
Brasseele, Varina, Meavis, Trinidado,
Saint Christophers, Virginia, or Barvado;
Bermudas, Providentia, Shallowcongo,
And the most part of all the rest ( Mundungo)
That Patent, with a whiffe is spent and broke,
And all our hopes (in fumo) turned to smoke.
Thou framdst the Butter Patent in thy brains,
(A rope and butter take thee for thy pains)
I had forgot Tobacco-pipes, which are
Now like to thou and I, but brittle ware.
Dice run against us, we at Cards are crossed,
We both are turned up Noddies, and all is lost.
Thus from- Sice-sinke, we are sunk below Dewee-ace,
And both of us are Impes of black disgrace.
Pins prick us, and Wine frets our very hearts,
That we have raised the price of Pints and Quarts.
Thou (in mine ears) thy lies and tales did foyst.
And madst me up the price of Sea-coales hoyst.
Corn, Leather, Partrich, Pheasant, Rags, Gold twist,
Thou brought all to my Mill, what was it we mist?
Weights, Bonlace, Mowstraps, new, new, Corporation,
Rattles, Seadans, of rare invented fashions,
Silk, Tallow, Hobby-horses, wood, red-herring,
Law, Conscience, Justice, swearing, and For-swearing.
All these thou broughtst to me, and still I thought,
That every thing was good that profit brought,
But now all is found to be ill gotten pelf,
I Will shift for one do thou shift for thy self.
Finis.
JOHN TAILOR London Printed by H. P. for Frances Coals dwelling in the
Old Bailey.


