Unfeigned Friendship, OR, The Loyalists Cordial Advice. A pleasant New
Playhouse Song, now greatly in Request.
Concord is that by which the world does move
Nor is the worlds Creator ought but love:
in thise Men's happiness do chiefly rest,
And none without them ever yet was blessed.
To a new playhouse Tune, called, How happy's the State, or, Can Life be a
Blessing, etc.







HOw happy's the State where no discords are dreeding
No strife, nor debate, no cares too exceeding?
Oh! there it is they are blessed of all things possessed,
Oh! there they have happiness heaped up in store;
There Is traesure, and pleasure, and joy beyond measure,
So happy are they that need not no more.
Why then should fond mortals seek their own annoy,
And open the Portals, themselves to destroy,
To plague one another, and hare each his Brother,
To banish the Father and ruin the Son,
When treasure and pleasure would slow beyond measure
If concord it triumphed and discord was gone?
If each in his station would keep his right sphere,
Then all our vexations would soon disappear:
Ah! then all confusion and all strong delusion
On the wings of disorder with darkness would direct:
Then pleasure, and treasure, and joys beyond measure
Would sorrows, and cares, and harsh discord expel.
Then England be wise, and let Unity flourish,
Let none be precise, their fond fancies to cherish;
Thereby in their passion to trouble the Nation:
For if with discretion each mortal would move,
Then treasure and pleasure would flow beyond measure,
Then all would be peace, oh then all would be love.
If none would stickle at the Oath of Allegiance,
No, nor Conventicle to baulk their obedience,
Nor at Ceremonies where deceney shown is
Cavell and Carp, and yet give us no reason:
Then treasure and treasure would flow beyond measure,
And happy, thrice happy would be the blessed reason.






Then the Pope might despair and the Jesnites repine,
For they nothing could share if we once did but join;
If discord was banished, and envy quite banished,
Then happy, thrice happy a Nation were we,
Then treasure and pleasure would slow without measure,
And all we could wish we should instantly be.
Then those golden days which the Poets once feigned,
Might to our high praise once again be regained;
For were we united our cares would be slighted,
Then happy, how happy should we live at ease!
Then treasure and pleasure would flow beyond measure,
And we should lie down in the vailes of sweet prace.
With roses o'respread, and with sillies surrounded,
Where with troubles our head should never be confounded,
But still sweet repose with soft slimber should close,
Our eyes and our cares, and all that disturb us:
The treasure and pleasure would flow beyond measure,
When nothing, when nothing remained as could curb us.
Then at last be you Wive you Whiggs, and come over,
There Is naught you devise more content can discover;
Be no more discontented, least it is repented
When it is too late, and the time it is past;
When as treasure and pleasure will not flow beyond measures
For then all your hopes will be at the last cast.
Then be not perverse, but let Unity flourish,
Idle Dreams never rehearse, nor wilfulness cherish,
But be loyal, be loyal, and you will desie all
That envy and malice does plot for your harm;
Then treasure and pleasure will slow beyond measure
Obedience and Unity is the best charm.
To secare us from strife, and all idle debate;
Which, alas! are too rise amongst many oblate:
Then at last be you wise, and come take my advice,
And make your selves happy whilst time does remain,
That treasure and pleasure may (...) without treasure,
That Concord and Unity ever may Reign.
Printed for J. Wright, J. Clark, W. Thackery, and T. Passinger.


