TWO PRAYERS TO BE Taught unto Children at School; Which also may be used in
Families, The singular number being turned into the plural. Together with a
form of Blessing God, before, and after, meat.

EDINBVRGH, Printed for John Mason, 1672.

Morning Prayer.
O God, I praise thee, for the creation of the World, and for the Redemption of
mankind by the Lord Jesus, and for thy many favors bestowed on me: Thou did
safely take me from the womb, and have ever since cared for me thou have by thy
mercy caused me to b^ born within thy Church, where I wa^ early given to thee
in baptism: thou ha^^ afforded me the means of grace, and called me to the hope
of glory.

But, O most merciful Father, (...) a poor and miserable sinner, conceive^ in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity have gone astray from thee: I have (...)
cared to know thee, and do thy will bu^ have done mine own will, and followed
my foolish and sinful inclinations; and do therefore deserve thy wrath and
curse.

O Lord, have mercy upon me: turn me unto thee, and grant me repentance, and
forgiveness of all my sins for Jesus sake: Let it from henceforth become my
chiefest care to please thee, and to seek thy kingdom and righteousness: work
in me a true faith, a lively hope, and a fervent charity: make me humble,
meek* patient, sober and just, kind and loving to all men, submissive and
obedient to them that are over me, and well content and thankful in every
condition of life: grant that I may daily grow in knowing, ^oving, fearing, and
obeying thee: Creat ^n me a clean heart, O God, and renew (...) right spirit
within me.

I thank thee, O Lord, for thy care of ^e this night; watch over me this day:
keep me mindful that I am always in thy sight, that I may be in thy fear all
the day long; and grant that through the whole course of my life, I may be holy
and harmless in all manner of conversation, that when this short and frail
life is at an end, I may be made partaker of everlasting life, through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name and words I pray. Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

Evening Prayer.
MOst Gracious God, What sha^^ I render unto thee for thy man and great
benefits bestowed on me* Though I have been an undutifull an^^ disobedient
servant to thee, thou has^ continued thy care and kindness for m^ ever since I
was born, and have preserved me this day: let me never forget thy goodness,
but grant that thereby I may be led to Repentance and amendment of life.
Preserve me from every thing that is displeasing to thee: O Lord, keep me from
cursing, swearing and lying, from pride, stubbornness, and idleness; work in
me an utter dislike of all uncleanness, of gluttony and drunkenness, of
malice and envy, of strife and contention, of deceit and covetousness: give me
grace to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly,
righteously and soberly in this present world: cause me to understand and
consider the laws and life of Jesus, that I may do his will, and follow his
steps: let ^ever the cares of this life, nor the love of ^iches, nor evil
company, nor the corrupt ^customs of the world withdraw me from ^he obedience
of thy laws; but strengthen, and establish me by thy holy Spirit that I may
live and die thy faithful servant.

O Lord, send thy Gospel through the world: pour out plentifully the Spirit of
truth, holiness and peace on all thy people. Bless this Church and Kingdom;
preserve the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Family: guide our Judges and
Magistrates: sanctify and assist the Ministers of the Gospel: Visit all that
are in trouble, and sanctify their afflictions to them: be gracious to all my
kindred, friends and neighbors, and bless and forgive all mine enemies.

Lord, watch over me this night, and ^eep me ever mindful that I am shortie to
die, and come to Judgment, that may without delay turn to thee, and ^asse the
time of my sojourning here in fear. Good Lord, hear me, and grant these my
desires, and what else thou know to be needful for me, for the ^ake of
Jesus, in whose name and words I pray, Our Father, etc.

Grace before Meat.
O Lord, be merciful to us, and pardon our sins: sanctify these thy good
benefits, that we, by the sober and thankful use of them, may b^ enabled for
thy service, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior Amen.

Grace after meat.
WE thank and praise thee, (...) Lord, the giver of all goo^ who have at this
time fed our bodie^ stir up in us a greater care for ou^^ souls, and grant that
our short live^ which are so carefully sustained b^ thy bounty, may be spent in
doin^ thy will: lead us safely through thi^ vain and sinful world, in which w^
are pilgrims and strangers, and a^ length bring us to everlasting res^ through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

