THE SPEECH OF Sir EDWARD TVRNER KNIGHT,

SPEAKER of the Honorable House of COMMONS, TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT
MAJESTY,

On Monday the eleventh day of April, 1670. Upon the Adjournment of the
Parliament.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1670.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
THE SPEECH OF Sir EDWARD TVRNER KNIGHT, SPEAKER of the Honorable HOUSE of
COMMONS, To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY, On Monday the eleventh day of
April, 1670. Upon the Adjournment of the Parliament.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
AT the opening of this Session of Parliament, your Majesty was pleased to
speak to your two Houses, and recommended three things especially to us; Unity
amongst our selves, the Union of your Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, and the supply of your Majesty's present and urgent Occasions. In
obedience to your Majesty's Commands, we have industriously applied our selves
to the consideration of these Matters.

By the blessing of God, all differences are buried in oblivion; Your Majesty's
happy Expedient, has like a strong gale of Wind, blown up the Rouling Sands,
and filled up all impressions, Vestigia nulla retrorsum: And as your People
will universally enjoy the fruit of this happy Union, So our united prayers to
God shall be, that your Majesty may be Crowned with the promised Blessing,
Beati Patifici.

In order to the Union of your Majesty's two Kingdoms, both your Houses of
Parliament have humbly besought your Majesty to name Commissioners for this
your Kingdom of England, and we have prepared a Bill to Authorize them to Treat
with Commissioners to be appointed for your Kingdom of Scotland, upon such
Grounds as shall be thought conducing to that end, and to report them to your
Majesty, and to both Houses of Parliament of this your Kingdom of England,
reserving always to your Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, the entire
consideration of the whole, and the allowing or disallowing thereof, or any
part thereof, as they shall think fit.

We have also considered of a Supply for your Majesty's Occasions; and I am
commanded by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, to
present your Majesty with this Bill, whereby we have given to your Majesty an
Imposition upon all Wines and Vinegar imported, after the rate of 8 l. per Tun
for all French Wines and Vinegar, and 12 l. per Tun for all other Wines; and
have granted this unto your Majesty for eight years, to commence from Midsummer
next. And I am further commanded to acquaint your Majesty, that we apprehended
the Revenue arising by the power of granting Wine Licenses, settled upon his
Royal Highness by Act of Parliament, has been prejudiced by the last
Imposition upon Wines, and will be much more impaired by this present
Imposition: we therefore added the last year unto this Bill of Supply, with
this Vote, That your Majesty be humbly desired therewith to recompense his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, for the damage he has received, and shall
receive in his Revenue of Wine Licenses, by this and the last Imposition.

Having thus in the first place with all dutifulness obeyed your Majesty's
Commands, we held it necessary to remember those that sent us hither, and to
present unto your Majesty some Bills that will be of public use for all the
People of the Nation.

There is first a Bill for the prevention of Seditious Conventicles, whereby no
man is hindered the use of his own Judgment, in the exercise of Religion by
himself, or in his own Family, or in the presence of four Strangers; but
because the Peace of the Nation may be endangered by more populous Meetings,
contrary to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, we have imposed
a Penalty of 5 s. for the first offense, and 10 s. for the second, and every
other offense upon all such offenders, to be levied by distress and sale of the
offenders Goods.

We are informed that your Majesty suffers much by the stealing and imbezilling
of your Ordnance, Ammunition, Sail Clothes and Stores; and likewise your good
People are much damnified by a wicked sort of people, who make it their
practice in the nightime to steal woollen Clothes and Stuffs from off the
Racks, and they are much encouraged in this their wickedness, by reason they
have their Clergy: We have therefore prepared a Bill for the taking away the
benefit of Clergy, upon the conviction of all such offenders.

We have likewise prepared an additional Bill for the rebuilding the City of
London, wherein we have revived the Judicatory of your Majesty's twelve Judges,
impowering them to hear and determine the remainder of Causes and
Controversies, which have not already received a settlement by them. We have
also made provision for the widening many more Streets than were mentioned in
the former Act, and to enable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, to give satisfaction to those whose Grounds shall be taken from them.
And also for laying the foundation at least of the famous Cathedral of St.
Paul, and toward the rebuilding of fifty one Parish Churches, we have added an
Imposition of 2 s. for every Chaldron of Coals that shall be brought into the
Port of London, for the space of seventeen years to come.

We have likewise prepared a Bill for the ascertaining the Measures of Corn and
Salt, and provided that one Measure shall be used in all the Market Towns of
this Kingdom.

We have found great inconveniences by the want of due repairing the Highwayes
of this Kingdom, and have therefore taken care for time to come both to amend
them, and to prevent the spoiling of them again, by carrying excessive Loads,
and drawing them with extraordinary number of Horses and other Cattle.

Experience tells us, when the consumption of Foreign Commodities exceeds the
use and exportation of our Native Commodities, the Nation must insensibly grow
poor, and our Treasure will be exhausted: We have therefore prepared a Bill for
the encouragement of Tillage, by permitting the exporting of Corn, and also for
the encouragement of other sorts of good Husbandry, by exporting of Horses,
Swine and other Cattle, and of Butter and Cheese, and have made them all free
Merchandise, paying certain Duties to your Majesty upon the exportation.

There be some other Bills of a public nature, and diverse private Bills, all
which are ready to be presented to your Majesty for your Royal Assent, the
which I shall forbear to enumerate, for fear it may prove tedious to your
Majesty.

Having given your Majesty this Account of our proceedings since our last
meeting, in this our short, but happy Session, it is evident we have not
misspent our time, but with the good Servant in the Gospel, have gained many
Talents; So that we may with comfort and satisfaction return to our Houses, and
we hope we shall carry our Masters Blessing with us.

HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS SPEECH.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am unwilling to let you go away without telling you, that I am very well
satisfied with the success of this Meeting; and that you have so well complied
with My desires, both in the correspondence between the two Houses, and in the
progress you have made toward an Union between the two Kingdoms. I heartily
thank you for the Supply you have given Me; and I assure you, I will make it go
as far as I can, toward the satisfying of My Debts. And because you have been
long from home, I am content you Adjourn your selves till the 24. of October
next.

FINIS.

