UPON THE MARRIAGE OF Prince George of Denmark WITH THE LADY ANNE: And his
being Installed Knight of the Garter.
A Pindarick POEM.
Vt gaudent pater AEneas and avunculus Hector.
Virg.
I.
ALmighty Love! who can thy Ways define?
Thou small Intreaguing God, you are all Design;
Thy Quiver and thy Darts are farther known
Than the gay wandering Bow which in the Clouds is shown;
Thou keep'st the Gods themselves in awe
By thy Universal Law.
Jove, though amidst his stores of Rain and Hail,
Against thy Secret Flames can naught prevail;
Thou breakest through his Guards, and with thy Dart
Do pierce the groaning Monarch to the Heart.
Neptune, though all around with Waves oppressed,
Yet by the Ocean finds his Love increast,
Like Water which on Fire's cast.
Nay, thou beyond the Tropicks can approach,
Where Sol in all his Journey dare not touch,
Let it be Torrid, or the Frigid Zone,
There an Empire thou do own,
Which would both Temperate be,
Were it not, bold God, for Thee.
Denmark, which lies remoter from the Sun,
With as brisk Flames, we find, as Britain burn:
Thou first did fire the Prince's Heart,
Then to Her Breast the Message straight impart;
He owned thy Power, and never stayed,
But thy Godship soon obeyed:
Led by thy Light through rolling Seas he moved
To meet his Royal Love.
He feared no Rocks that lay between,
So that within her Breast none could be seen.
He feared not what from Seas and Winds could come,
So that her Breath did not pronounce his fatal Doom.
Thus Vesta's Flame it self did once maintain
Through the black Deep, till it the Port did gain,
Till it at Rome had reached the Sacred Fane.
Nor did he long expect his Doom,
He did but Come, and See, and Overcome.
By Parlee and Capitulation
In ten days space her Virgin Fort he wone.
An easier Conquest Jove could never boast,
No Mistress ever stood him in less cost,
When Cloistered Danae he would gain,
To bribe her Keepers he was fain;
With Gold his Godship then was forced to buy
New Morsels and Supplies for his Almighty Luxury.
II.
Pardon, Blessed Pair, these rude unpolisht Lines,
With which a Loyal Muse would now approach your Shrines;
Like some young Virgin, who when half undrest,
(Around her loosely cast her Vest)
Into the Crowd with eager steps does go
To gaze and wonder at the pompous Show.
Welcome, Great Prince, to our Once happy Shore
(For this one time, dear Land, thy pardon I implore)
For many years the Pride of all the Flood,
The Envy of the Western World it stood;
In this our Isle, as once of Rhodes was said,
The Sun was never thought to hide his Head:
Antiquity with all its searching eyes,
Could never fancy or devise,
That once in Egypt, or in Albion Clouds could rise.
Let Fortunate or Happy now no longer be its name,
But style it henceforth Europe's shame:
As in Greek Story, we of Countries read,
That for their Sins have often changed their Breed;
Of Men or Manners, so, no more appears,
But all are here transformed to Lions, Dogs and Bears
III.
But the Mistaken World may fancy yet
That Happiness here keeps her peaceful Seat,
Who see our thronged Streets still ebb and flow
With Waves of people crowding to and fro;
Who with such artfull beauty and surprise
See all our Palaces and Temples rise,
Who see our Navies daily plow the Main,
With a full Harvest blessed of dear-bought gain;
Some fraighted with the Golden Spoils of the West,
Some with the shining Entrails of the East:
So a poor Swain viewing a Tyrant's state,
With secret envy does applaud his fate,
But yet never learns to prize his own dear peaceful Rest,
Nor sees those inward flames that wrack the gaudy Pageant's Breast.
Thus Aetna to the distant Sailers fight.
Shows with a Top that is verdant, flourishing and bright,
But yet within its burning Womb contains
Nothing but Brimstone, Lime, and scorching sulphurous Veins.
IV.
Yet from these Mists, Great Sir, that darken all the Air
A sudden Joy does dart, and scatter our despair,
When thus by you a way we opened find
How the Fates may still be kind,
How by your Royal Progeny
We and our Sons may ever happy be.
So have I seen a kind auspicious Star
Shine forth, and guide the wandering Traveller,
While all else stood with thickest Night beset,
This sparkled like a Diamond set in Jet.
So from two warring Clouds black teeming Womb
Often have I seen the frisking Lightning come,
And trembling run over all the Azure way,
And with its Light create a short-lived Day.
The Unruly Many now shall cease to rage,
Or ever more disturb the Age.
No more shall Schism, and bold Anarchy
Among our English Manufactures numbered be;
Pale Faction now shall hang its drooping head,
It shall be through the World expressed
That Oracles are once more ceased,
That the Old Cause, the mighty Pan is dead.
These cursed heart-burnings and ill-boding Flames
Shall hence be exorcis'd by your Illustrious Name,
As Culinary Fire,
In the Sun's beams does lose its force; and straight expire.
The giddy Rabble, and the Beasts of Prey,
Shall by your Nuptial Fires be scared away,
As men in Africa do Bonfires rear,
To keep 'em from the Lion and the Savage Bear.
Then let our British Annals talk no more
Of one St. George, his Deeds, and wondrous Power,
This is the Man; him the Great ORDER shall
In future times their Saint and Patron call,
And what before was Legend, Fable, Lie,
Shall pass for current and Authentic History.
London, Printed for Walter Davis. 1683.


