TWO PETITIONS TO THE HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT IN BEHALF OF EPISCOPACY.

ONE DELIVERED BY Sr THOMAS ASTON from the County Palatine of Chester.

THE OTHER FROM THE Cities of L. and W.

Printed in the year 1641.

A PETITION DELIVERED INTO The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, by Sir THOMAS
ASTON, Baronet, from the County Palatine of CHESTER concerning EPISCOPACIE.
To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT.
The Nobility, Knights, Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the
County Palatine of Chester, whose names are subscribed in the several
Schedules hereunto annexed.
Humbly show,
THat whereas diverse Petitions have lately been carried about this County,
against the present form of Church Government, (and the hands of many persons
of ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretense to be presented to
this Honorable Assembly:) which we conceiving not so much to aim at
reformation as absolute innovation of Government, and such as must give a great
advantage to the Adversaries of our Religion, We held it our duty to disavow
them all.

And humbly pray, that We incur no miscensure, if any such clamours have
(without our privity) assumed the name of the County.

We, as others, are sensible of the common Grievances of the Kingdom, and have
just cause to rejoice at, and acknowledge with thankfulness, the pious care
which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the better
supply of able Ministers, and the removing of all Innovation; and We doubt not
but in your great Wisdoms, you will regulate the rigor of Ecclesiastical
Courts, to suit with the temper of our laws, and the nature of Freemen.

Yet when We consider, that Bishops were instituted in the time of the
Apostles; That they were the great lights of the Church in all the first
general Counsels; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their
bloods, and rescued Christianity from utter extirpation in the Primitive
Heathen persecutions; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the
Gospel We now profess from Romish corruption; That many of them for the
propagation of the truth, became glorious Martyrs; That diverse of them (lately
and yet living with us) have been so strong assertors of our Religion against
its common enemy of Rome; And that their Government has been so long
approved, so often established by the Common and Statute-Lawes of this Kingdom;
And as yet nothing in their doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the Word
of God, or the Articles ratified by Law: In this case to call their Government
a perpetual vassalage, an intolerable bondage; And (prima facie and inaudita
altera part) to pray the present removal of them, or (as in some of their
Petitions) to seek the utter dissolution and ruin of their Offices (as
Antichristian:) We cannot conceive to relish of justice or charity, nor can We
join with them.

But on the contrary, when We consider the tenor of such Writings, as in the
name of Petitions are spread amongst the Common People; the tenants preached
publicly in Pulpits, and the contents of many printed Pamphlets, swarming
amongst us; all of them dangerously exciting a disobedience to the established
form of Government, and their several intimations of the desire of the power
of the Keys, and that their Congregations may execute Ecclesiastical Censures
within themselves: We cannot but express our just fears, that their desire is
to introduce an absolute Innovation of Presbyterial Government, whereby We, who
are now governed by the Canon and Civil Laws, dispensed by twenty-six
Ordinaries (easily responsall to Parliaments for any deviation from the rule of
Law,) conceive We should become exposed to the mere arbitrary Government of a
numerous Presbytery, who together with their ruling Elders will arise to near
forty thousand Church Governors, and with their Adherents, must needs bear so
great a sway in the Commonwealth, that if future inconvenience shall be found
in that Government, We humbly offer to consideration, how these shall be
reducible by Parliaments, how consistent with a Monarchy, and how dangerously
conducible to an Anarchy, which We have just cause to pray against, as fearing
the consequences would prove the utter loss of Learning and Laws, which must
necessarily produce an extermination of Nobility, Gentry, and Order, if not of
Religion.

With what vehemence of spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly
such popular infusions spread as incline to a paritie, We held it our duty to
represent to this Honorable Assembly; And humbly pray, that some such present
course be taken, as in your Wisdoms shall be thought fit, to suppress the
future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the Common People. We
having great cause to fear, that of all the distempers that at present
threaten the welfare of this State, there is none more worthy the mature and
grave consideration of this Honorable Assembly, then to stop the Torrent of
such Spirits before they swell beyond the bounds of Government: Then We doubt
not but his Majesty persevering in his gracious inclination to hear the
complaints, and relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments,
it will so unite the Head and the Body, so indissolubly cement the affections
of his people to our Royal Sovereign, that without any other change of
Government, He can never want revenue, nor We justice.

We have presumed to annex a Copy of a Petition (or Libell) dispersed, and
certain positions preached in this County, which We conceive imply matter of
dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State. All which We
humbly submit to your great Judgments, praying they may be read.

And shall ever pray, etc. Subscribed to this Petition, Four Noblemen. Knight,
Baronets, Knights and Esquires, fourscore and odd. Divines, threescore and
ten. Gentlemen, three hundred and odd. Freeholders and other Inhabitants,
above six thousand.
All of the same County.
The Anti-Petition, or Answer to this, is a base Libell and a forgerie.



TO THE HONORABLE, THE Knights, Citizens, etc.
The humble Petition of the Cities of L. and W.
Humbly shows,
THAT whereas there has of late a Petition subscribed by many (who pretend to
be Inhabitants of these Cities) been delivered, received, and read in this
HONORABLE House, against the ancient, present, and by Law established
Government of the Church, and that not so much for the Reformation of Bishops,
as for the utter subversion and extirpation of Episcopacy it self; We whose
names are underwritten, to show there be many, and those of the better sort of
the Inhabitants of these Cities otherwise and better minded, do humbly
represent unto this Honorable House, these considerations following.

I. That Episcopacy is as ancient as Christianity it self in this Kingdom.

II. That Bishops were the chief instruments in the Reformation of this Church
against Popery, and afterward the most eminent Martyrs for the Protestant
Religion, and since, the best and ablest Champions for the defense of it.

III. That since the Reformation, the times have been very peaceable, happy,
and glorious, notwithstanding Episcopal Government in the Church: and
therefore that this Government can be no cause of our unhappiness.

IV. We conceive that not only many Learned, but diverse other Godly persons
would be much scandalled and troubled in Conscience, if the Government of
Episcopacy, conceived by them to be an Apostolical Institution, were altered:
and since there is so much care taken, that no man should be offended in the
least Ceremony, we hope there will be some, that such men's Consciences may not
be pressed upon, in a matter of an higher nature and consequence, especially
considering that this Government by Episcopacy, is not only lawful and
convenient for edification, but likewise suitable and agreeable to the Civil
policy and Government of this State.

V. That this Government is lawful it appears by the immediate, universal
and constant practice of all the Christian World, grounded upon Scripture, from
the Apostles time to this last Age, for above 1500 years together: It being
utterly incredible, if not impossible, that the whole Church for so long a
time, should not discover by Gods word this Government to be unlawful, if it
had been so. To which may be added, that the most learned Protestants, even in
those very Churches which now are not governed by Bishops, do not only hold
the Government by Episcopacy to be lawful, but wish that they themselves might
enjoy it.

Again, that the Government by Episcopacy is not only lawful, but convenient
for edification, and as much, or more conducing to Piety and devotion then any
other, it appears, because no modest man denies, that the Primitive times were
most famous for Piety, Constancy, and Perseverance in the Faith,
notwithstanding more frequent and more cruel persecutions then ever have been
since; and yet it is confessed, that the Church in those times was governed by
Bishops.

Lastly, That the Government of the Church by Episcopacy, is most suitable to
the frame and form of the Civil Government here in this Kingdom, it appears
by the happy and flourishing Union of them both, for so long a time together;
Whereas no man can give us an assurance, how any Church Government besides this
(whereof We have had so long an experience) will suit and agree with the Civil
policy of this State. And We conceive it may be of dangerous consequence, for
men of settled fortunes to hazard their estates, by making so great an
alteration, and venturing upon a new form of Government, whereof neither We,
nor our Ancestors have had any trial, or experience; especially considering
that those, who would have Episcopacy to be abolished, have not yet agreed, nor
(as We are verily persuaded) ever will or can agree upon any other common form
of Government to succeed in the room of it, as appears by the many different
and contrary draughts, and platformes they have made and published, according
to the several humors and sects of those that made them. Whereas, seeing every
great alteration in a Church or State, must needs be dangerous, it is just and
reasonable that whosoever would introduce a new form in stead of an old one,
should be obliged to demonstrate and make it evidently appear aforehand, that
the Government he would introduce, is proportionably so much better, then that
he would abolish, as may recompense the loss we may sustain, and may be
worthy of the hazard we must run, in abolishing the one, and in introducing
and settling of the other. But this We are confident can never be done, in
regard of this particular.

And therefore our humble and earnest request to this Honorable House is, that
as well in this consideration, as all the other aforesaid, We may still enjoy
that Government, which most probably holds its Institution from the Apostles,
and most certainly its plantation with our Christian Faith it self in this
Kingdom, where it has ever since flourished, and continued for many Ages
without any interruption or alteration: whereby it plainly appears, that as it
is the most excellent Government in it self; so it is the most suitable, most
agreeable, and every way most proportionable to the Civil constitutions and
temper of this State. And therefore We pray and hope will always be continued,
and preserved in it and by it, notwithstanding the abuses and corruptions which
in so long tract of time through the errors or negligences of men may have
crept into it: Which abuses and corruptions being all of them (what and how
many soever they may be) but merely accidental to Episcopacy; We conceive and
hope, there may be a Reformation of of the one, without destruction of the
other.

Which is the humble suit of Ten thousand thousand.

