VOX PACIFICA OR A congratulatory Poem on the peace; Between England, France,
Denmark, and Holland.
BY the High Senate of the Powers above
A Union is decreed, the God of Love
Dissides dissension, makes Neighbors to agree;
The only Maxim in Christianity!
Mow England do I see thy stars shine clear,
For though thy Natives hearts no Foe did fear
In The height of War: but for their Countries good
Wool'd Right its wrong, or spend their dearest blood,
Rather than yield, and as deaths welcome prize
Render their lives a valerous sacrifice:
Like those bold Turks who on their nimble feet
Did run to face death with their winding sheet;
Yet notwithstanding, all that is wise will deem
Pax bello potior: is a Princely theme
Bellona's frowns no more do war presage,
We must enjoy such as love only wage,
And like a Nation truly, happy sit.
Under secure shades, use the benefit
Of peace and plenty, which the blessed hand
Of a good King gave this distremper'd Land.
A general joy this general peace atends,
A happy virtue that makes Foes prove friends!
What to our Cities good can be more dear,
The Seas are free, each Ship does pass by clear,
And safely to its haven does arrive
With a full fraught to make their Merchants thrive,
At which they smile, like dying Saints thar know
They are to leave the earth and to heaven go,
Indeed who is not glad, whose interest.
Is not hereby made greater, whose is best,
Is indisputable, but all will confess
Peace makes a universal happiness.
What shall I say? my weak Muse cannot impart
Peculiar joys, which every loyal heart
Ecchoed, when proclamation of a Peace,
Gave us assurance that our wars must cease:
But if loud shouts and hollowing descry,
A joyful heart, I am sure I do not lie
If I say many thousands did express,
By such glad signs their endless happiness:
If ringing of the bells, if bone-fires show,
We have good cause now, to surcease our woe
I dare avouch then (since difference does decay,
London in time will see a second May.
Then let us sing such songs, as may dispense.
Knowledge and pleasure to the Soul and sense,
Torneys, Masks, Theaters, will now become
Our Halcyon days: what though the Heathen drum:
Bellow for freedom and revenge, the noise
Concerns not us, nor shall divert our joys,
Mor shall the thunder of their Corabins
Drown the sweet aires of our tuned Violins;
For I believe if their prevailing powers
Gained them a calm security like ours.
They Would hang their arms upon the Olive bough,
And dance and revel then, as we may now.
But let not our mirth extend to sin,
Least peace abused create a war agi'n,
Pardon my Muse if that he seems to be
Tedious in one line of divinity,
In representing to each Christians view,
Entire Emblems, from which may ensue
Entire Joy to those, whose life does move
In Hope, Faith, Fear, Grief and Entire love:
Let us not Heathen like appear so rude,
To repay mercies with Ingratitude.
Though we have a peace, we must not now forget,
We have been sinful, but from sin regret.
Retire then presumptuous man and see
These Emblems that may work thy Eternity;
Despise the world, and what is voluptous,
A perfect Dives to a Lazarus!
Trust, trust in God alone and he will be,
Thy chiefest comfort in thy misery,
For when despair had almost wrought our death
This welcome peace gave as a second breath:
Then England doubt not, thou have a God above.
That will replenish thy wants with his love.
Contemn the help that this world does afford,
And let thy Faith be steadfast in the Lord.
Him seek, him serve, and daily from thy heart
Thy sins confess and his due praise impart,
With fear and Reverence, and he will be
Thy God of comfort to Eternity:
Bewail thy sins and for the future be
More mindful of thy immortality,
And in the sphere of union only move
For God loves him who knows that God is love;
This done will make each Christians joy increase.
Ascribe all praise unto the God of Peace
Pax optime virtus.
With Allowance.

London Printed by P. Lillicrap 1667.


