A Voyage to Virginia: OR, The Valliant Soldier's Farwell to his Love.
Unto Virginia he is resolved to go,
She begs of him, that he would not do so;
But her Entreaties they are all in vain,
For he must plow the curled Ocean Main:
At length (with sorrow) he does take his leave
And leaves his dearest Love at home to grieve.
To the Tune of, She Is gone and left me here alone.




My pretty Betty I now must leave thee,
the Drums does summon me away
I must confess it sore does grieve me.
I can with the no longer stay:
When we are parted, he thon true hearted
thou will not change thy mind I know.
From thee my favor, shall never (...)
though i must to Virginia go.
When first I did behold thy feature,
my senses all were set on fire.
Thy beauty bright, and comely Stature,
which caused me for to admire:
But fates prevent me, for to content thee;
which fills my heart so full of woe;
I cannot tarry, with thee to marry,
for i must to Virginia go.
Long time I have been true and constant,
as thou thy self did, always find.
I never proved false one instant,
nor never was to thee unkind:
My dear believe me, and do not grieve me,
since thou do see it must be so.
My fortune I, will now go try,
for i must to Virginia go.
Had I a thousand pounds to leave thee.
although it were in good red Gold.
Not half so much it now would grieve me,
to speak the truth I may be bold:
What ever thou requir'dst of me,
thou never heardst me answer no;
Therefore content thee do not present me
for i must to Virginia go.
It Is for Promotion and for Honor,
that I must fail upon thee Flood,
I Will venture under Englands Banner;
although I lose my dearest Blood:
For unto danger I am no stranger,
when (...) minds aloud do blow,
I Will not forget the my dearest Betty,
though i must to Virginia go.
When betty heard his Resolution,
and ^^at he was so fully bent.
Her senses all were in Confusion,
and thus with sorrow she did lament:
O stay quoth she and do not venture,
^ast that thou break my heart with woe
Leave not this City, but take some pity,
And do not to Virginia go
I prithee dearest do not forsake me,
thou know I love thee more then life.
According to thy promise take me,
and let me be thy Wedded wife:
Leave bloody wars, and wounds and scars,
to them who love did never know.
Whilst I will ease thee and strive to please thee
then do not to Virginia go
But if thou be resolved to wander,
and nothing can thy fancy turn.
I Will march under the same Commander,
and never stay at home to mourn:
It Is my desire in Man's attire.
thy Comrade to appear in show.
And day and night yield you delight,
as you unto Virginia go.
O no quoth he, my dearest Jewel,
that may not be in any wise.
Upon the Seas are dangers Cruel,
and many Storms arise:
To stay at home then he contented,
whilst I do fight against my Foe.
And cease thy mourning, till my returning
for i must to Virginia go.
Take here this King which I do give thee,
my dearest and do not complain
For with the same my heart I leave thee,
until that I return again:
I hope here after for to embrace thee,
then suffer not those Tears to flow:
For when I am absent, I will be constant,
although i do to Virginia go.
And so farewell my dearest betty,
a thousand times farwell my sweet,
I now afford the Kisses plenty,
for to remember till we meet:
If cruel Death of Life deprive us
i will meet the in the shades below,
Where we together, shall be for ever,
although i do to Virginia go.
When betty saw her Lover parted,
she senseless for a time remained,
Being so kind and tenderhearted.
at length her Spirits she regain^d
And then a thousand happy wishes,
she after sent her Love to show:
Then home returned and there she mourned
whilst he did to Virginia go.

