The Wealthy Grasiers Joys COMPLETED.
Or, The Shepherd's beautiful Daughter obtained.
His Love was pure, and did endure,
And will for evermore;
Her Beauty bright is his delight,
And her he does adore.
Tune of, Ladies of London, etc.
This may be printed,

R. P.





PRithee sweet Creature sit down by my side,
I have no design to undo thee;
But am resolved to make thee my Bride,
and therefore am coming to woo thee:
If that thou will but give thy consent,
there needs no more disputation;
I shall have comfort and perfect content
in thee, the sweet Girl of the Nation.
Tell me, my dearest, if thou will be mine,
it is nothing but Love I desire;
All that I have in the World shall he thine,
thy person I much do admire.
Here I protest my love it is true,
I never use dissimulation;
Let me enjoy but the favor of you
the beautiful Girl of the Nation.






I Never fancied no Creature but thee,
thou fair and most amorous beauty;
I do desire thy servant to be,
and count it no more than my Duty,
Nay, and I call the Powers above
to witness this my Oration,
That I will never prove false to my Love,
the Beauty of all the whole Nation.
Here I do promise, and give thee my hand,
my Love, that I Will never offend thee;
but will endow thee with Houses and Land,
and servants shall always attend thee:
Therefore if thou to love wilt agree,
there needs no more disputation;
I never fancied no Creature but thee,
the Beauty of all the whole Nation.
Both Corn and Cattle I have a great stock,
and young ones daily are breeding;
Three or four hundred Sheep in a Flock.
with Lambs that are sweetly feeding;
I will maintain thee gallant and brave,
and thou shall live free from vexation;
Had I ten thousand times more than I have,
it is thine, the sweet Girl of the Nation.
Both night and day thou do run in my mind,
then prithee now do not deny me;
If you imagine I will prove unkind,
my dearest I Would have thee but try me:
Here in my Arms I will thee infold,
believe this my true protestation,
For I do prize thee far better than Gold,
thou beautiful Girl of the Nation.
When he had told her his honest intent,
she finding his Love so entire,
This youthful Damosel did give her consent,
and granted her true Love's desire;
Then by the hand his Love he did take,
and brought her home to her Relation,
Where he protested he would never forsake
this beautiful Girl of the Nation.
He was for making no longer delay,
with her he was truly delighted;
And the young Damosel appointed the day,
their Friends they was likewise invited;
That they in Love might both he linkt fast,
according to Laws of the Nation;
And when the Wedding is over and past,
we will give you a further Relation.
Printed for I Deacon at the Angel in Guiltspur-street, without Newgate.


