UNTO HIS GRACE, HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And the Honorable ESTATES OF
PARLIAMENT The COLLECTORS of the POLL imposed Anno 1693.
Humbly Shows,
THAT for payment of the Arreers due to the Army preceding the First of
February 1691, and out of these for payment of the Arreers due by the Army to
the Country, there is a Poll imposed conform to the several Classes expressed in
that Act: Whereby the Commissioners of the several Shires were to sub-divide
themselves, and take up the Roll of the Polable persons of each Paroch, and
return the same betwixt and the first of October 1694 to the Lords of Thesaury,
or Pol-Office, and the Persons liable conform to these Rolls, were to pay at
Martinmas in the said Year 1694, under the pain of the Quadruple.

This being a new Imposition, both as to the Subject and way of Uplifting, and
diffused over all the Nation, and we being desirous to serve His Majesty
therein prevailed at the Roup by offering Forty Four Thousand one Hundred
Pound Sterling therefore, and got a Tack thereof; whereby we were to have the
Roll of the polable persons betwixt and the first of October, and thereby to
lift the Pole it self according to these Rolls at Martinmass 1694. under the
pain of the Quadruple from each deficient.

When the first of October came few Rolls were returned, whereupon we
acquainted the Theasury therewith, both by Petition and Instrument; and also
the Lords of Privy Council issued forth several Proclamations for supplying
these defects: But for all this the Rolls were never completed nor payments
timously made, so that the Quadruples fell due.

We were necessitate to send several persons of Quality to represent our case
to His Majesty, that the Tack was not fulfiled to us, and the Quadruples
incurred, the uplifting whereof would be a great hardship to the People,
whereupon his Majesty first sisted Execution for the Tack-duty, and then with
consent of Parliament turned the Tack of the said Pole into a Collection. By
the Act turning the Tack into a Collection, The reasons for so doing expressed in
the Act are, That the levying of Money by Pole being new, and the Country and
others concerned not observing the Rules and Ordinances contained in the Act of
Parliament thereanent, but throw their failzie incurring the Quadruples
appointed be the said Act by way of penalty, the foresaid Tacksmen were not
able to pay the forsaid Duty, unless they had been allowed to exact the
foresaid Quadruples, which had visibly tended to the great oppression and
disturbance of the haill Kingdom. Therefore His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament liberate us from the foresaid Tack, and ordained us to Count as
Collectors, and gave a Commission to the Honaurable Persons therein named to
take in our Account, and determine all differences thereanent; and to ferm the
same at 30000 lib. Sterling as the minimum, and no person being able to offer
that Sum, the Lord Balheaven and others, for the behoove of the Officers for
whom the Pole was imposed, took the same at that rate.

The Commission after much Pains and Travel prepared and presented a Report to
the Parliament, in two points, whereof we are principally concerned. The First
is, whether our Expenses ought to be allowed to us conform to the Account we
have offered. And Secondly, Whether we can be further liable for the Vintuples
then for Ommissions and Concealments of our own Intromissions, but not for the
Vintuples of the Concealments of our Sub-Collectors, for which they themselves
as the Persons guilty, ought only to be liable.

As to the first point we humbly conceive, that our Expenses cannot be refused
because our Tack being turned into a Collection, not upon our Account alone,
but upon the just grounds represented in the Act, and we made Collectors; we
ought to be considered as if we had been appointed Collectors from the
beginning: in which case it is unquestionable, that where a Tack is loused and
turned to a Collection in the same Tacksmens Hands, we are in the same case as
if we had been always Collectors, and never Tacksmen. And so by the foresaid
Act 1693, imposing the Poll, the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council are
empowered to allow out of the said Poll Money, such Charges and Expenses as
shall be necessary for Execution of that Act. And therefore conform to the said
Power, it is humbly expected from the Justice of the Parliament, that our
Expenses and Charges will be allowed us.

2do. By the Act appointing us Collectors, the Commissioners therein named are
empowered to allow, or not allow our Expenses for in-bringing of the Poll, as
they shall see cause: Which clearly imports, that our Expenses was still under
Consideration, and the Allowing only delayed till our Diligence and Pains
should appear.

3tio. The report bears, that the Commission found, that the expense of
uplifting what remained of the Poll would exhaust what could be recovered: And
seeing what remained, was farmed at 6000 lib: Sterling, we having uplifted
24000 lib: Sterling, and the whole being Farmed be the Officers for 30000 lib:
Sterling: it is evident that we could not uplift 24000 lib:, whereof a part
from each person in the Nation without vast expenses, besides the expenses of
our application at Court; attending Parliaments, and the Commission these
several years, and otherwise, seeing the 6000 lib: could not be uplifted for
its value: And upon which ground we refused to Farm the Poll at the minimum;
and so the Officers, who had the right thereto, and could be in no hazard, took
the same at that rate

4to Though the Officers had the Farm their many years; Yet after all their
diligence they have recovered little, except from such Shires as were totally
deficient to us.

We being turned from Tacks-men to Collectors, not from mere Grace and Favor
to our selves, but upon plain and necessar grounds of Justice related in the
Act, Viz, That Levying of Money by Poll was new, and that the Country had
failed in observing the Rules prescribed, whereby we are not only blamless, but
in effect wronged by our Tacks not being observed and fulfilled to us. 2do. The
Act does further acknowledge, that the Country had incurred the quadruples, and
that these quadruples were due to us: And which if we had exacted we could have
paid the whole Tack-duty: So that the Act of Parliament having Discharged
these quadruples which was the Subject of our Tack, it necessarly follows, that
the Tack was turned to a Collection for a most onerous Cause upon our part; and
so consequently we fall all our expenses and Charges: and if there were place
to bring back the Question; we might justly demand Sallaries for our pains.

It is known, that when several Tacks set by the Thesaurie and Exchequer have
been turned to a Collection; and the Tacksmen appointed Collectors, they got
not only their Charges but Salaries: And we cannot be jealous, nor apprehend
from so just a Parliament, that our Tack being turned into a Collection, not
for our sakes, but for the hail Country, who had incurred the Quadruples which
belonged to us, and whereof they are thereby discharged, That we shall pay for
the favor done to the Country, and in our prejudice, But that the honorable
Estates will allow us our Charges, In representing the same to His Majesty,
uplifting, and otherways upon that behalf: For if any loss be sustained by the
Conversion, the Country in general, who were discharged of the Quadruples,
which was our Right, and nor we, who were deprived of these Quadruples, ought
to make up the same. And in general, That Expenses ought to be allowed to us,
was found by a Vote of the Commission after full Debate.

THE 2d. Question which the Report presents to the Parliament is, concerning
the Vintuples: As to which we humbly represent, That we can only be liable to
these of our own Concealment, and not for our Sub-collectors, who if personal
Transgressors, must sustain the personal Punishment, according to the known
principles of Law, That noxa caput sequitur and pena tenet suos authors.

The Report bears, That the Officers opponed the Act of Parliament, which bears
the former Tack to have been turned to a Collection, upon the Condition, that
the Tacksmen and Sub-collectors should be liable in 20 ss. for each shilling
concealled, and that the Tacksmen should be liable for there Sub-collectors.

To which it is answered, That the Act of Parliament is opponed, turning the
Tack ex justitia into a Collection, and ordaining The Tacksmen to Count for
their Intromissions with the Pol-money: Sick like as, if they had only been
Collectors and instead of the Tack, had got a Commission allenarly for that
effect.

By which it is clear, That they aware only to Count as Collectors for their
Intromissions: It is true, There are Conditions annexed, viz. That the Tacksmen
be liable for all the Sub-collectors and Mannagers employed by them. 2ly: That
our Books be made Parent, and that we and our Sub-collectors be examined upon
Oath as to the Verity thereof, and whether there be any thing omitted.

Which two Conditions relate to our Intromission, and as to any Intromission
had by us, or any employed by us, we willingly subject our selves.

The 3d. Condition which is altogether mistaken by the Officers is, That in
case it be found there was any thing received from the Country not given up in
the Books, That the Tacksmen OR their Sub-collectors, be liable in 20 ss for
each Shilling so omitted.

By which Condition it is plain, That the Parliament understood that as Penal,
and the punishment of Fraud in receiving from the Countrry, and not charging
themselves therewith; wherefore in the Conditions annexed to our Compting for
our intromissions, the Parliament justly statutes and finds us liable for our
Sub-collectors and Mannagers employed by us; but when it comes to our Omissions
and faults, than the Parliment applys the Penalties to the Transgressor in
disjunctive Words. Viz. That the Tacksmen OR their Sub-collectors be liable in
20 ss. for each Shilling omitted, which was received from the Country, not
given up in the Books. So that where the Tacksmen received one Shilling from
any in the Country not given up in his Book, he is liable in 20 ss, and where
the Sub-collector so received what ^s not given up in their Books, the
Sub-collector, and not the Tacksman, is liable

For if the Parliament had intended us liable for these Frauds of our
Sub-col^ectors, they would infallibly expressed the same; and if they had offered
any such expression, we would rather have adheared to our Tack and Quadruples,
then subjected our selves to the Vintuples for other Men's Transgressions: And
seeing it is not so expressed, and that the Commission has moved a Question
thereanent to the Parliament, we are confident that the Parliament, with regard
to the Circumstances, and genuine import of the words, will find each Man
liable for his own Transgression.

For though we were liable for our Collectors when we employed them; yet these
Penalties being imposed by a subsequent Law, can never reach us who had
employed them before that Law.

It is of no import, nor can it be any Defense to the Sub-collectors, That they
did not crave the Conversion: Because the Conversion was made upon the account
of the Country, that they might be discharged of the Quadruples incurred; and
the Penalty was imposed by Statute upon the Transgressors. And the
Sub-collectors would understand, that if we were damnified by their Fault, they
will be liable in the Reparation. Therefore the Parliament, for preventing the
Multiplying of such Processes, did not find us liable for their Faults, but
each Man for his own. And in this they have no prejudice. And it is scandalous
in any Man that has transgressed, to excuse himself from the Penalty inflicted
upon such a Transgression.

The Officers by the Report further urged, That there being Seventeen Thousand
Pound applied for payment of the Atreers to the Country, there remains only One
Thousand Pound to them of the Forty Four Thousand pound contained in our Tack:
And if we be not liable in the Vintuples, they cannot make up their Tack-duty
of Thirty Thousand Pound.

To which it is Answered, That it seems the Officers only look upon that as
payment, which they get in their Hand, but not what is given to their
Creditors. But they would understand, that the Seventeen Thousand Pound of
Arreers paid to the Country, was due by them to the Country, and so is payment
to themselves; Whereby they have got Eighteen Thousand Pound, besides what they
have and may uplift:

It is an odd Argument, That if we be not liable in the Vintuples, they cannot
make up their Tack-duty: Which is as much as, whether right or wrong, we must
be liable.

May it therefore please your Grace and the Honorable Estates, in
consideration that if our Tack had been observed to us, and the Rolls timeously
delivered, and the Quadruples exacted, we might have been well able to have
paid up our Tack-duty: And that in regard our Tack was not fulfilled to us;
and that the Quadruples incurred, and due to us, was forgiven to the Country,
and that our Tack was therefore loosed, and we ordained to make Count of our
and our Sub-collectors Intromissions, as if we had got Commission for that
effect, when we got the Tack: And that by the 3d. Condition of that Conversion,
we or our Sub-collectors are liable for what is received and not Booked. To
allow us our Charges and Expenses, in uplifting Twenty four Thousand pound
whereof a part from each Person in the Nation, according as is provided in the
Act 1693 impossing the Poll. And to find, That the Vintuples incurred affect
the Transgressors, and not u^ for them, that being an intolerable Hardship,
which we cannot undergo, bu^ would rather have kept our Tack with the
Quadruples: And however, the pursuing thereof, will be of great difficulty and
more Expense, than all that will arise therefrae.

And Your Grace and Lordships Petitioners shall ever Pray etc. In respect
whereof, no Act ought to be past, so Unjust in it self, and so Dangerous in the
ma^^ of presenting it.




