Vox Populi Suprema Rex Carolus. Or, The Voice of the People for KING CHARLES
With a true ACCOUNT of the Actions of the KINGDOMS Grand Trappanners, since the
year 1641 to this present year 1660.
GO, Go Bellora, try if thou can
Find out another Clymate, Our wants
Have made us Friends, The Angels sing,
The People Vote, God save the King.
No more Committees, nor Sequestrators,
No more Excise, nor Habberdashers,
No more Compounders nor Malignants
No more Engagements, nor Covenants.
No more Imprisonments, nor Confinements,
No more Jamaca's, nor Exilements.
No more Tub-preaching, nor Hugh Peter's.
No more Good Wives to rub, nor holy Sisters,
No more Lord Bradshaw, nor Prideaux
No more Tom Scot that Jack in a Box,
No more long Parliaments we thank thee George.
No more Lord St. John's of all designs the Forge.
No more John Thurlo, old Cromwels Spyder
No more blind Generals, nor Esquire Lyder,
No more Tom, and no more Noll
No more Bess, nor no more Poll --
No more of Richard, and no more of Harry
No more Pembrooks which will neither go nor tarry
No more Cecills of the Cammels Order.
No more Lambert, but no more Sr. Arthur,
No more Protectors nor false Committee.
No more Projectors; to undo our City,
No more John Ireton, nor John Titchbourns
No more of Jenkins, nor blaspheme Barebones,
No more of Marshall, and no more of Ny
No more Phanaticks nor Presbytery
No more such State Confounders, and their Kings,
No more of Conscience ty'de with codpiss strings.
No more Lord Desborough, but hie, je, ho.
No more the Burgess which never said I nor no
No more of gifted Fleetwoods, nor Lord Whaley
No more of Pride, the Commonwealths damned Talley.
No more of Hewson the Commonwealths Translator,
No more Church Lands for Rich Sr. Arthur.
No more of Stains Old Noll's Contriver,
No more Lady Lambert since Old Nol don't sw -- her:
No more Lord Baxter the Thimble-maker.
No more Griffith of all Sects but a Quaker.
No more of Overton to keep out Hull,
No more Nan Robbins! Harry Martins T^ull;
No more Whitlocks, nor Lisles for Keepers,
No more Fleetwood Captain of the Weepers:
No more Miles Corbet Divil of the Nation,
No more Cooks the Devils by Creation:
No more Hie, nor Haec, nor Hoe, no more Rump,
No more Dear Sisters for a holy Jump,
No more cheating of our City Maids,
No more riding of our Wives like Jades.
No more pretenses for a Reformation,
No more Pissles for honest Hugh's Collation,
No more Acts against Christmas Pyes,
No more failing that with a Sister lies.
Now then no more, hare are enough to please,
Three Kingdoms, since no more shall be of these.
Now you have heard these Changes, there is but one more
More Sweet then all the Changes were before.
A KING, a KING, all the people cry --
The KING, the KING cries GEORGE and I --
And so it shall be; GEORGE thy Word
Will fetch him home, if not thy Sword.
Although I am no Figure Flinger,
No William Lilly, nor yet John Stringer,
No Alminack nor yet Prediction,
No strange Prophecy nor new Fiction,
St. GEORGE that Star, was to Usher in the Sun
To see Great CHARLES, of Good Charles the Son.
Oh what a night we have had! GEORGE thou alone
Must be both STAR and SUN to light him home.
Hasten good GEORGE, and bring him to his Throne,
Both KING and People, shall plate thee in thy own.
To close these Changes, Men and Angels sing
Thanks to thee GEOROE, and GOD save the KING.
LONDON, Printed by Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660.


