ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER, OR, A thankful acknowledgement of Parliamentary
Mercies to our English-Nation. Wherein is contained a breife enumeration of
all, or the most of GODS free favors and choice Blessings multiplied on us
since this Parliament First began.
This book of the law she (...) not depart out of thy mouth but thou shall
meditate therein day and night yt thou may of serve to do a according to
(...) yt is written therein; for then thou shall make thy way prosperous etc:
Jos: ^: 8

Give the King thy Judgments, O Lord and thy righteousness unto of Kings son so
shall, he judge thy people thru equity and thy poor thru Judgment: psalm: 72: 1.

My heart is toward the governors of Israel who offered themselves willingly
Judges: 5: 9:

Slack not thy hand from thy servants, come up to us quickly and sa^e^s, and
help us: for all the Kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are
gathered together against us. Josh: 10.6.

Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people saved by the lord
and who is the sword of thy Excellency and thine enemies shall be found liars
unto thee: Deuteronomy: 33 and 29

^hon the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly because with a
cheerful heart they offered willingly unto the Lord, And the King also rejoiced
with great joy: 1: Chron: 29: 9.



COmehither, each true Christian heart and see;
But, bring a joyful, thankful heart with thee.
Come see (I say) to Gods eternal praise,
His miracles of mercies in thy days. 1. Two Parliaments dissolved

How, though two former Parliaments were broke, 2. A third called.

A third is called, hopeful to strike the stroke
Of blessed reformation; to which end,
See how the Lord the peoples hearts did bend 3. Choice of Knights and
Burgesses.

To choose renowned worthies there to sit,
Maugre the adverse plot to have hindered it.
How God stirr'd-up our Scottish Brethren brave, 4. The Army of Scots our
friends.

As friends, not foes, justice, (with us) to crave.
In which mean time, how by Heavens providence, 5. Soldiers turn Reformers.

Soldiers in the Country, with strange violence
T(...) Reformers, hating the Popish-party 6. And haters of Papists and
Pontifictans

And Pontificians with despite most hearty.
Crossing Papists and the Prelates plots, 7. Prelates plots crossed.

To force fierce wars betwixt us and the Scots,
To three great Kingdoms certain Desolation, 8. The Pacification.

All crossed by a blessed Pacification:
Scattering and batt'ring(that time)Spaines great Fleet, 9. Spanish fleet at
Sea, vanquished by the Hollanders.

By honest Holland, who, their pride did meet.
How God begins t'avenge th'unpater'nd ruth, 10. M. Burton, D Bast. M.Prins,
happy return from captivity.

Of that pair-royall-Witnesses of Truth,
And all the suffering Worthies of the same, 11. And the rest of Christ's
sufferers.

^ them to comfort, credit, fame.
How God has shot those impious Canoniers 12. Canons and Oath in the Synod
damned.

By cursed Canons to deep shame and fears,
Of fatal, final fall, even by an Oath, 13. And turned to their own ruin.

Whereby they hoped to go full Popish growth.
How Heaven discovered has a rotten-Sort 14. Scandalous Priests discovered.

Of scandalous Baals-Priests of foul report;
And open set a Door of restoration 15. Godly Pastors discovered.

For faithful Pastors happy re-plantation.
How, by their own plots, God has strangely wrought 16. Plots harm the
Prelates most.

Papists and Prelates to decline to naught.
How by the very blood of blood of traitorous foes 17. Traitors executed.

The Lord begins the wounds to heal and close
Of Church and State, and, for this purpose, has 18. Days of private
humiliation on by godly Christians.

Kindled the fire of Supplicating Faith
And fervent Zeal in private humiliation,
Such, as the like was nere seen in this Nation;
And with transcendent sweet returns re-paid 19. And returns of their prayers

Our prayers into our bosoms with blessed aid.
How the Lord has, the Spirit of Unity.
Shed on Both Houses, Courage and Constancy; 20. Blessed Union in Both Houses.

O, how their indefatigable pains
Our happy Hopes in Church and State maintains!
To see both Prince and People blessedly
Conjoined in a sugared Symphony 21. Agreement twixt King and Parliament.

To fit and consult with full content,
Till they themselves dissolve this Parliament.
And after it to sit triennially 22. A trien^all Parliament conacted

To Church and States future felicity.
To see Ship Money, Pattents damned down, 23. Ship money and Patie^ts damned

And good men set in seats of high renown. 24. Good men made officers of State.

To see Non-Resident justly disgraced, 25. Non Resident voted against.

To see our lazy Pluralists displaced; 26. Pluralists against.

And godly Lecturers by their flock elected, 27. Lecturers rightly chosen.

And droanish Deanes and Prebends disrespected 28. Deanes and Chapters voted
down.

And voted-down in Parliament. To see, 29. Universities reformed.

Oxford and Cambridge hopeful purged to be.
To see Gods Sabbaths more sincerely kept, 30. Sabbaths better satisfied.

Of Carryers, Fruit'rers, Taverns soil well swept; 31. Printing Persses opened.

And Presses open wide to vindicate
The Sabbaths precious honor, which, of late, 32. Sabbath-sports put down.

By impious Prelates, Pontificks profane
Had (by vain sports) received a deep-dy'd stain.
To see to th'Sacrament, none (now) admitted 33. Lords Supper rectified.

But such as piously are thereto fitted,
To see the Surplice and such Romish trash 34. Popish Ceremonies sentenced.

From Parliament receive a deadly gash,
Whereby no Popish gestures, vestures are
Imposed against Conscience on Gods Saints to wear.
And no man forced (now) at Church to stay 35. Liberty to have the word more
freely.

Where is no preaching to promote Gods day.
To see Gods Outcasts called home again 36. Persecuted Pastors recalled

And sons of Beliall feel just shame and pain.
No High Commission, Sp'rituall-Court to see, 37. No High Commission Court
admitted.

Whereby Gods peoples hearts from fears are free,
Of their unjust Commands, lawless taxations
And all Churchwardens cleared from vile vexations, 38. Church wardens feed.

To see our Seas and Cinque Ports fortified; 39. Sea's and cinque-(...)^ifide.

That we may und'r our Vines securely 'bide.
But, specially to see, with exultation
From Both the Houses a blessed Protestation, 40. Ablessed Protestation

Together, all true English-hearts to tie,
In a blessed league, Romes Strumpet to defy, Against all Popery and Popish
innovations.

All Popish Innovations to disdain,
Christ's Truth toth' death constantly to maintain.
O, who cannot these Halcyon-dayes admire,
And with enflamed Zeal be set on fire,
To sound the praises of our bounteous Lord
Who these heart-cheering comforts does afford
Unto a Nation, in th'esteeme of most,
For Sin, forsaken, perishing and lost.
But, now, much like a Ship by swelling-wayes A proper Simile.

Tossed to and fro, gaping to be the graves England compared to a Ship tossed at
See.

Of all its heartesse Mariners, but yet
A sudden calm and fair winds favoring it,
It Is brought in saf'ty to a harbor fair
Where all arive, where all preserved are:
So, O, even so, thy God in mercy free,
O England, England, thus preserved thee! Admonition to England.

Hopeless and helpless: Lay this then to heart,
Rouse up thy Soul, perform thy praising part.
O great King CHARLES, cheer-up thy soul, like Wise, Counsel to the King.

Ponder these ponderous things, arise, arise,
High time to put-on refolutions rare,
To honor God, who with such honors fair Reformation desired.

Has blessed thee and thy three Kingdoms, now,
A thorough Reformation in them vow. 5 Princely Petitionners to the King.

Remember also and Commiserate
Thy royal Sister's poor Palatinate, 1.

Sad Germanies long lamentable woes; 2.

Rochell, like Rachell in her childlesse throws. 3.

Thy near allied Denmark in distress, 4.

Holland thine honest, ancient friend no less. 5.

Who All, with Us, and on Us, look for aid,
From thee, great Prince, who long have been ore-layd
With Romish rage and Spanish cruelty, Against Spain and Rome.

Still groaning, grieving, by their tyranny,
To forward which most blessed work, behold, Helps at hand.

Thy prudent Peers resolved with courage bold, 1.Peers.

Thy pious Prophets with their prayers addressed, 2.Prophets.

Thy people all with hearts and purses pressed, 3.People.

To give thee all their aid, to spend their blood,
To hasten-on this work so great, so good.
And, O our God, let thy good Spirit strike-in, 4.A Prayer.

To make the work complete, to pull-down sin,
To set-up Christ in his pure, powerful throne
To rule and reign in all our hearts, Alone.
So shall we All, all our remaining days
To thee our God eternal trophies raise
Of all obliged praises infinite,
Who, thus, to do us good, do take delight.
FINIS.
JOHN VICARS.

London, Printed for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at the Bible in
Wood-street, M. DC, XLI.


