A VINDICAT1ON of DUNCAN LIDDEL, And his Son GEORGE LIDDEL, The on Professor of
the Mathematics, and the other a Student of Philosophy, and John Forbes,
Printer to the University and Town of Aberdeen, by way of Answer of a
scourrilous Ryme sent from Edinburgh.
To the Tune of, The Gentleman's Mear is behind.

An Answer too that mad Man's Ryme
Will prove an Horse at fooling time,
And if that fail he will turn an Ass,
As Ferrie's count at the next grass.
WHat makes the foolish Cocks-comb so to carp,
Like too a foisting Curr can naught but bark
At him who is profoundly learned in all;
Not only speculative, but practical
Parts of the Mathematics (which fool ye)
Knows even as much as does a Beetle Be:
But grant ye had some skill as ye have none,
Then I would ask at you this Question,
What is the difference 'twixt an current day?
And on complete if this ye know, I say,
Your ignorance ye had not so bewrayed,
Nor in your judgment had so much decayed,
^s not to know the difference, I say,
Tiwxt the Artificial and the natural day.
(...) this ye'd known as ye pretend to do,
^e had confessed our Feasts both right and true,
^he first, the third of March which cannot fail;
^hen without doubt the ninetenth of April.
^he second holds as ye may read and see,
^onfirm'd by Vincent Wing, and Gadburry.
^our weakness Sir ye very much discover.
^or to prove Easter by the Jews Pashover:
^ut I with pardon this much most tell you
(...) greater things I fear you are too much Jew.
^s for your Hebrew it is not very good,
When ye mistake month Nisan for Abib.
^ut tho it were as ye would hav't to be;
(...) nothing proves as all learned men agree;
Athough good Friday fall near the full Moon;
^et still it holds not so, as may be seen
^his present year, which I think none will doubt:
^t you good Sir, whose wit is in your snout,
^hen Christ our Savior suffered on the Cross,
^e know that darkness was miraculous;
^t that proves nothing to the thing in hand.
and so I hope your Worship's at an stand;
^en I conclude who ever you informs
^ost justly does deserve a pair of Horns,
(...) at the least to have the same reward
^ich Midas had: and what is that ye've heard?
(...) I perceive who sees you well without
(...) all he can expect; for without doubt
(...) naught within, but a poor empty House:
A Lodging hardly worthy a Mouse:
But had ye knowledge as ye apprehend
Your self to have, then truly I would send
Some lines unto you of an deeper die;
But to an naughty shallow Fellow, I
Thinks it below my wrath; because I know
There Is naught within you to your self ye owe,
But other learned Men's works that ye steel.
Which sure I am ye understand not well;
And here I will a Lesson you prescrive,
If ye be wise, no longer for to dyve
In matters to Antartick to your brain;
Or in the least compet with learned Men,
Whose Books ye are not worthy for to bear,
Should make you keep within your proper sphere
To wit the Dung Hill, which sympathizes best,
With your dull brains, and there resolve to rest;
Because these heavenly Bodies which we see
Goes far beyond thy gross capacity.
Your Prima Coruu which is in your Ryme
Holds forth your Grammar not to be so prime
As ye would hav't, believed since there are none
Have learned the Rudiments, but knows its wrong.
I know by prima stella's understood;
But ye do lake (In An) to make it good,
And right construction, which plainly shows
Your Latin is no better then a Cows.
What are these Problems? twelve I do not know
Ye've answered him, he only you but two,
To lie so grossly holds you forth more base
Then any horned Ox or surdid Ass.
Next ye bring in to back your lies old Lilly;
Had ye a tail ye'd make a complete filly,
For Lilly our Professor know to be
As great a Master of the Art as he;
Although these juggling tricks he did not use,
Which Lilly did poor people to abuse,
Erecting figures of Astrology
To cheat them, had not knowledge of their money.
If Master Duncan pleased to contend
With on like you, there is none needs him defend;
But that he think's it below him to contest,
With either hummel or with horned beast.
Now of this Matter for to make an end
With our Professor do not more contend,
Whose skill and knowledge in Astronomy,
And all the secrets of Astrology
Is known to be so great, that there are few.
Will dare to challeng't, but an Ass like you;
Since all the learned Professors of this Art,
In Britan or in whatsomever part,
Both will and have acknowledged and confessed,
He is not inferior to the very best.
As for George Liddel whose years do not arrive
As yet unto the Number of four times five.
Most shameful has put you to the foil,
And made you back upon your breach recoile
Whose printed Problems plain and clearly show,
Which yet are extant to the public is view
I think, and so should every wise Man too;
Ye should desist from railing as ye do.
Whereas ye talk of George to run their fiddel,
Assure your self e're long ye's have a Riddel
Shall run you well enough, but that I fear
Your madness spoil your brains ever ye come there.
As for our Printer ye strive too abuse,
Who is a Gentleman, and does not use
To rail on any man, but no thing's true.
I hope he is nothing yet behind with you;
But that he thinks't below him to contest
With you that loves to rail and lie at best.
If I had thought thee worthy of my Pen,
I could have written in an higher strain;
But for an Block-head this is good enough,
Whose learning fits him better for the plough,
Then for to strain his Rustic brainet so high,
As touch at Matters of Astronomy.
If I esteemed Thee better than a Slav,
I 'd take in hand to Ryme thee to thy Grave.
Your empty head's no better then a stock,
Fit for to be an Haberdascher's block;
And shall I speak more properly my mind,
At best ye 're but a bladder blown with wind.
But I Will conclude, take head to your self,
In case ye splite upon a Northern shelf;
Since I have power to make an Storm arise,
Shall quite destract you if ye'l not be wise.
A CONFUTATION OF JAMES SETON And Mr. DUNCAN LIDDEL OR, An answer to the
foresaid Rables, Who place their Art in lying Tables; Against James Seton and
the Beasts, Who will maintain Erronous Feasts.
Tune.

The Gentleman John Forbes Mear's behin^
Then Patersons ye still before shall find.
IN Fastens-Even ye se it is most plain,
At Aberdeen they take their word ag^
As here before it clearly may be seen,
But Cocks do rave still near to Fastens-Eve
Yet how can this be, they are Horned Be^
Because they erred so much into the Feast
But what of this, they may be changed a (...)
You know upon Acteon what did fall.
Because he had to curious a Brain,
For to Espy and make his Sex a Stain;
He first on two feet, then on four did go
May not their four, likewise be changed t^
For when like Beasts before they did rem^
Acteons foisting Currs would have them s^
But to return they are now in the burrs,
Their Combs do vex them, like Acteons (...)
Yea, Honey Combs that comes from the
Does vex these Drons, as clearly you may
And now they do begin for to discover,
Their Ignorance into the Jews Passover
They do their contra-party call a Jew,
But who will read in Holy write, Mat^
The twenty six, and likewise Mark for
Will clearly see that we no Jews have bee^
Then read what follows and ye will dis^
Our SAVIOR suffered at the Jews Pass-(...)
And that he did on Sunday next arise,
Which none but Jews this any way den^
Consider this, and ye will find it true,
And clearly know who now have been the
You cite both Vincent Wing, and Ga^
Whose Rules are right, but Tables wrong the
The English Liturgy will you confoun^
Although of Art you say you're so profo^
For it does give the same Rule that we u^
Now if you loss your Comb you will prove a (...)
Whose Feathers Southward did fly with the
But left the Gooss for to be Roast behind:
Against the Feast of Christian-mass I tr^
And then we will know the Christian from the
The Month Nisan and Abib is all o^
Which none denies except your self a (...)
Thou Boasts of Hebrew like a learned (...).

