A SERMON Preached at WINDSOR Before his Majesty, the Second Sunday after
Easter, 1684.

By JOHN Archbishop of TVAM.

Published by his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.

And are to be sold by Samuel Helsham Bookseller in Dublin

A SERMON Preached at WINDSOR.
PSALM. 82. ver. 6, 7. I have said ye are gods, and all of you Sons of the Most
High, but ye shall die like men.
THe Holy Scriptures afford no where, a more solemn Charge and Exhortation unto
Justice, than in the Psalm whereof the Text is a part; from which be pleased to
consider, two things:

1. A full concession of the great Dignity and Authority granted to Princes and
Civil Rulers: I have said ye are gods, etc.

2. An Admonition of their being accountable for the Administration of it: But
ye shall die like men.

Ye are gods, but ye are but mortal ones, of the same frail condition with
those your poor Creatures that worship and adore your Power. When men are
advanced to any height, their heads grow light and giddy, and they are too apt
to despise those below them, as of a smaller size and stature than themselves.
The Psalmist therefore dwells not on the intoxicating Argument of Power, but
immediately calls down the thoughts of Princes from their golden heads, to
consider of their feet of Clay. He no sooner wishes them joy of their Honor,
but lest their spirits should be exalted above measure, and grow too fine and
volatile, he fixes them with Grave-dust, presenting them with a Scepter and a
Spade, the Royal Robes and a Winding Sheet together: I have said ye are gods,
but ye shall die like men.

Before we consider what is here said, viz. Ye are gods, it may be proper to
enquire, who it is that says, and to whom it is said.

1. Who has said. Great Persons have often this frailty among others, that
though they most need, they can least endure plain and wholesome instruction, the
benefit whereof is often lost, for want of Prudence in the Address. The
Psalmist therefore to give weight and authority to what he says to the Princes
of the World, personates the Almighty in the delivery of this charge, whom he
places in the Throne, Verse. 1.
as a Judge among the Gods; not as an unconcerned Spectator, but as a severe
Monitor, and Observer of their Actions, come down on purpose to take notice of
the discharge of that duty, which their high Titles and Commissions require of
them. God stands in the Congregation of Princes. So that David does not here
usurp an Authority over his Equals as a Reprover and Instructor, but with great
solemnity and Majesty brings in God, as speaking in his own name. So that this
is emphatically Gods word that is here spoken; and so our Savior says,
referring to this Text, Joh. 10.34.
to whom the Word of God came. And where the Word of God is, there is Power
with him in the supreme right of disposal, who at first made all things,
clothed the World when it lay naked in its Causes and imperfect Potentiality,
and then ranged the various Orders and Classes of the Creation, according to
the Idea's he had conceived in his eternal Mind; in which he has ever since
preserved them by the breath of the same Power, which once discontinued, the
Axes of the World would crack, and the whole Frame, like an old House, would
tumble and fall in pieces. Since therefore all things do so essentially depend
upon him, he may well be presumed to have a right to govern what he first
raised out of nothing, and always maintains at his own charge, and to make what
distinctions he pleases among the works of his own hands; on one piece of Clay
putting the Image of a Prince, on another the Picture of a Beggar; forming that
to a noble, and this to an ignoble service. So that things are and must be what
he is pleased to call them: It is God that has said Ye are gods. But to whom
does he speak? And that is the second Enquiry?

2. To whom is this said? I have already supposed it to Princes and Civil
Governors, though I am not ignorant that these words are challenged as the
Churches Patrimony by Pope Gregory the Great, in an Epistle to Mauricius the
Emperor. But if the Words were addressed to Churchmen, it is plain from the
style of the Psalm, it was in their Civil Relation and Capacity. And all that
can be inferred, is only, that it was not then, nor is it now unlawful for an
Ecclesiastical person to exercise Civil Power, when God and the King appoint
them to it. But the Powers are in their natures distinct. And what was done by
the High Priest under the Jewish Theocracy, must not be drawn into Example
under the Gospel: for our Savior affirms his Kingdom is not of this World, and
has thereby for ever discharged spiritual Persons from temporal Power, by
virtue of their Office either directly or in order to spiritual purposes; but
he has not made the man incapable, by placing him at his Altar, of serving
Princes in sitting Stations, when by them they are thereunto appointed; nor is
any Person less qualified, as one may think, for being the Kings Servant, for
his standing, in some respects, nearer than others to Him, by whom Kings reign.
And since a prudent and pious conduct of both Powers may make each promote the
private ends of the other and the common end of both, the Glory of God, why
should they be thought so insociable, as never to be exercised by the same
Person? Nor indeed are they, by those very men, who declare most against
Church-mens meddling, as they phrase it, in Civil Affairs: for who are more
forward in such matters, when they have opportunity, without Authority, than
such as exclaim against our Churchmen for those Civil Trusts and Honors
granted them by Authority? And while they preach against the exercise of a
derived Power under Princes, are aspiring after one paramount to them

Princes are called Gods, and Ministers are called Angels, let every one abide
in that Calling wherewith he is called; for as that Priest or Angel that
arrogates the Title of a God, smells strong of the Pit, and savours of the
Pride of Lucifer, so on the other side, they who condemn all Civil Power as
unlawful in the Church, are too like Antichrist indeed, Exalting themselves
above all that is called God in the State.

3. Having seen by, and to whom these words are spoken, let us now consider the
meaning of what is said, Ye are gods, and all of you Children of the most High.

There is on every Creature some Character of Divinity, but God has placed his
Image upon Man, impressed himself on our Nature, as the Prophet on the Child,
and shed his likeness on us, so that by reflecting on our selves, we may know
as in a Glass, and darkly, what God is: but as he has honored our Nature with
his Image, part whereof was a Dominion over the Creation, so in our Nature he
honors some persons with his Name, and has thereby given them Dominion over
others of their own kind. They have not only his Image but Inscription, of
whom in a qualified sense, we may say what they of Lycaonia said of the
Apostles, Acts 14.11.
The Gods are come down unto us in the likeness of men.

I need not say here, they are not Gods and Sons of God, as our Savior is, by
an unconceivable generation, which were to make them equal with God; To us
there is but one God, though there be that are called Gods.

Nor are they always Sons of God by Adoption and Grace, as Members of the
Invisible Church; that Aphorism that Empire is founded in Dominion, being not
more absurd and false, than that other, that Dominion is founded in Grace.
Grace neither giving title to Land and Estates, nor Estates to Empire. Wicked
men may be not only lawful Proprietors, but lawful and good Princes.

Nor are Princes always lastly, even by external Profession Sons of God, as
visible Members of the Church, though it is a great felicity when they and
their subjects are so: no Crown sitting surer than such as is most Christian.

For the true discovery therefore of that sense in which they are styled gods,
and Sons of God, we must consider, that it is familiar in Scripture to call a
Person the Son of that man whom he resembles in some very signal character; as
Believers are called Sons of Abraham, for their resemblance to him in that
Grace, that was so eminent and illustrious in that Holy Patriarch, that it was
imputed to him for Righteousness. On the contrary, our Savior says to the
Jews, Ye are of your Father the Devil, for the works of your Father the Devil
you will do: such as cruelty, and malice, and spite, and revenge, which argue
a Diabolical nature and temper. Agreeably to this notion,

1. Princes are called Gods, because as such they have their being from God,
that is, Authority to govern.

2. Because they resemble God in the conduct and menage of that Authority they
have from him.

3. God calls them his Sons, because as they are begotten by him, and are like
him, so as a Father he defends them, and more especially concerns himself in
their cause and protection.

1. Princes have their Being from God, and are begotten by him: As in the Scale
of our Saviors Genealogy, Luke 3.
it is said of all but Adam, he was the Son of such a one, and he was the Son
of such a one, but of Adam, he was the Son of God, because he came immediately
out of his hands. So may we say of inferior Magistrates and Officers, who
stand in subordination to others; but when we come to the Sovereign Power, that
is the Issue of Heaven, they that are invested with it, are the Sons of God, of
whom they hold immediately, and are born of the seed of divine Authority and
Power.

God who by his Word made the World, has by the same Word, by saying Princes
are Gods, made them so, and this Scripture which cannot be broken, is their
Commission. Joh. 10.35:
For so the Text is expressly expounded by our Savior, for he calls it, a Word
of God coming to the Magistrate. Now we know the Word of God coming to a
Person, is a Phrase authorizing that Person to the Service he is then employed
in. In the Old Testament, the Word of the Lord came unto me, is the common
style of the Prophets Order, and therefore these words, Ye are gods, being a
word coming unto the Prince, are his Letters Patent for his Title and
Authority. Wisd. 6.3, 4.
So that his Power is given him of the Lord, and Sovereignty of the Highest,
says the Wisdom of Solomon, and by him Kings reign, Prove. 8.15.
and Princes decree Justice, says the Wisdom of God: Which Wisdom acknowledges
the Power even of Pilate over himself, and says, Joh. 19.11.
It was given him from above. And St. Paul tells us, the Powers that then were,
the Powers that be, Romans 13.1.
are ordained of God, though they were neither the most lawfully acquired nor
the most equally administered. So that Magistracy and Magistrates, (for so the
word Powers there, must be understood of Persons exercising Power) are not
only of Gods general providence and permission, which suffers many
irregularities in the World, as sometimes the abuse of this Power by
mal-administration, and sometimes the ruin of it by Rebellion, or Translation
by Conquest) but they are by his special ordination and appointment, they are
ordained of God. And hence it is that Rebellion is a damnable, and without true
Repentance, a damning sin, and I fear it is in this, as well as other respects,
as the sin of Witchcraft, (the Covenant with Hell) that it is but too rarely
repented of.

It is a fulsom thing to multiply Arguments and Authorities in a plain Cause,
and such is that, (if any) that I am pleading for, the divine Original of
Government; which whosoever reads the Scriptures cannot but discern, unless he be
hastening after another God than they preach. But this truth will appear with
fuller evidence, if we consider the Rises of Government, and what share the
People, that is, the governed part, can have in the most Popular Gonstitutions.

1. It is certain that Government was originally in the Parents and Heads of
Families; if we believe Mankind to have been created and propagated according
to the Scripture Tradition, which is the most natural and rational hypothesis,
and most credible, though it were not assisted by Revelation. We could never
yet find where that Utopia lies, where men lived without natural dependencies,
but came into the World in Arms and Armor, fighting with, and destroying one
another; and yet on such precarious Poetic Fables, some have chosen to found
their Commonwealths, rather than on the History of the Bible, which informs us
of another origination both of Men and of Society. There we are acquainted with
our growing from one common root, in the way of natural propagation, which ever
carries a necessary obligation with it: for Nature teaches the Son obedience to
the Father, so that Adam, were he now alive, would be the Universal Monarch by
right of Nature, and eminently in the language of the Text, Son of God, and of
the Most High. And from him Power descended to the firstborn by the Privilege
of natural Succession, without asking the consent of his Brethren, and as the
Family spread, so did the Empire. Marriages were made, and Children begotten,
and Houses filled, and new Colonies sent out, and so by degrees a Tree became a
Forest, and the Paternal Power spread and grew into a Political. This is the
way and method by which Government was first planted in one Family, and
according to its increase, shed and disseminated it self abroad over many, and
so far there is no shadow of an Authority derived from the People, that is, the
governed part, unless we should fancy the Root were made and nourished of the
Branches, and the Father of the Children. But thus much of the Order of Nature,
which was soon altered and broken in pieces by force.

2. For secondly, Men still increasing and multiplying, their natural
Obligations of obedience to remoter Parents in the direct line, as well as love
to Relations in the collateral, grew weaker and colder; and the farther the
lines were drawn from the Center, the further they were removed from one
another; and so, as the Tree became a Forest, the Forest soon became a
Wilderness. And then the Passions of Men were let loose, and grew wild, and
they began to range abroad, and to prey upon each others Possessions, and some
grew Mighty Hunters, and by force or fraud drove their Neighbors into the
toil, and made them submit to their Yoke and Tyranny, which they did not out of
choice, but of necessity, as the Reed bends only because it is forced by the
Storm, that otherwise would break it. I doubt not but it will be allowed me,
that it is the Conquerours Sword that carves out what Right he has, and not
the Peoples courtesy and favor, which here is not supposed nor desired, and I
shall in return as readily yield, that mere Conquest gives no Right, nor lays
any obligation on Peoples Consciences to obey. There must be some Title
antecedent (by Descent, or particular divine Designation, or Compact) or a
voluntary Submission afterward at least, to legitimate the Force, and entitle
the Conqueror to a just Possession. But if without these he have any Right, it
is visible it is without, and not from, but against the People and their
Consent. And thus much of Force and Conquest.

3. God himself in his love and care for some portions of Mankind, has not
only raised and qualified men that seem born for Government, but sometimes
immediately conferred a Title, or sent a Prophet to anoint them. So Moses,
Joshua and the Judges, and several Kings were set up by God, or a Prophet in
his name; and on such a Message they ascended the Throne, and ruled the People,
without desiring any suffrage from them, so as to derive their Title from it.
David's substantial right to the Crown, was his Unction and Divine Designation
by the Ministry of the Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel, 16. V, 1. and 13. 2 Samuel 2.3. 2 Samuel 5.3.
which the men of Judah and Israel did severally recognize in Hebron, by
repeating of the Ceremony. The King further making a League with those of
Israel before the Lord, that is, to govern by the Law^ God had prescribed by
his Servant Moses: wh^^^ is an Act of Grace resembled by the Coronat^^^ Oath of
our Kings, and not such a stipulation b^tween David and the Israelites, as that
a failure on his part should devolve the Government upon them; for how should
that escheat to them, which he held not of them? his Right being divine and
antecedent to their submission. So then in this way of particular designation
by God, no Right is derived from the People. If it be any Case, it is,

4. By Popular Election; when the People to prevent the mischief of an evil
Governor, or Usurper, or the want of Government which in our lapsed State is
the greatest Evil of all, meet, choose such a Person as they judge best
qualified for the ends of Government, and invest him with all the Powers and
Liberties, of which they were possessed by the Law of Nature, obliging
themselves to defend his Person, and obey his Laws.

1. They elect the Person; but possibly they are not so free in this Action as
they fancy; will they exclude the Divine Providence, and allow God no share in
their Councils? Will they confine him to his own Heaven, and challenge the
management of all Affairs here to themselves? We are neither such automatous
Machines as move only as we are set and directed; nor such absolute Lords of
our Actions, as we imagine our selves; we cannot bring about always certainly,
what we freely design, but God often steps between the purpose and the event:
and at other times addresses our free motions by an unseen hand: So that the
People may name the Person, but God chooses, he speaks by their voice, and acts
by their hands; Psalm. 75.7.
for he is the Judge that puts down one, and sets up another.

2. When the Prince is elected, the People invest him with Power, that is, with
all they have, and more they cannot give. But there is a Power necessary to
Government, which the People never had, and therefore could not give; that is,
of punishing capitally, which the Prince either usurps, or derives from some
higher Principle. So that the People can only make a Golden Calf, or an Idol,
but not a God: If the Prince had no Power but from them, the Government would
be weak, and insufficient for the ends of it; for without Capital punishment he
could not be a terror to Evil doers: Romans 13.
But the People never had this Power, (I mean the governed part) radically in
them, because no man ever had it singly, before Government was settled. No man
has more power over another in the State (or Notion rather) of Nature, than
over himself. But no man has a right to dispose of his own life; he cannot
kill himself without sinning, and therefore he cannot have, as a private
person, this right over another; and if he have not this right in himself over
himself, neither can he transfer it to another: and if one cannot, neither can
two, nor three, nor any number; for Number may give Force but no Right: if an
hundred set on one man and kill him without Authority, it is as much murder, as
if but one had done it. To sum up this therefore.

Men embodying into a Society, and submitting to one person or more, part only
with what they have, their Liberties and Possessions, but over their Lives
having no right, they can make no disposal; and therefore the exercise of this
Power in the Prince can be no issue from the People, (for then the Stream must
run higher than the Spring) but from God, whose Prerogative it is both to give
Life, and to take it away, and not to be challenged by any person, (for
Vengeance is mine) but to whom he communicates it. And therefore the Prince
strikes with Gods Sword, and the Apostles Expression is very accurate, Romans
13.4.
when he says, he is the Minister of God, an Avenger for wrath.

I am not ignorant that the whole series and Scale of Magistracy, (as well the
King as Supreme, as Governors sent by him) is called by the Apostle, a humane
Creature, to whom yet he enjoins subjection, ^ pet. ^.13.
for the Lords sake, as the Fountain of the Authority. Men may be Instruments
in the Election, and the safety of Humane Society may be the end of their
choice, on which accounts the Government is there called, a Humane Ordinance,
which in its Original, is the Ordinance of God. Romans 13.
As a City may elect a Mayor by privilege of Charter, but his Authority when
elected, is from the King, so is the Kings from God, where the People have the
greatest share visibly in the Designation of the person: but they only prepare
and dispose the matter in the political Generation, but the Soul of Sovereignty
is Divine, and infused from above, and not by low and popular traduction, if
you consider Government to take its Rise either from the Order of Nature, or
from Conquest, or particular Designation, either Divine or Humane. And so much
may suffice for the first Reason why Princes are called Gods, and Sons of God,
they are begotten by him.

I have herein possibly made too bold with your patience, though the temper of
this Age be too just an Apology for my doing so. But if ye suffer Fools (as the
Apostle speaks, but I know not how) gladly; if every Journeyman become a Kings
Monitor, and every Pebble in the Guttur thinks it self a Jewel worthy of their
Crowns, or the Breasts of Priests, there to shine and rise up into Oracles,
suffer us also in the discharge of what we owe to Religion and our Sovereign,
to tire you a little on so necessary a Doctrine, and such Inferences as fairly
flow from it; As

1. The Prince deriving his Authority from God, it follows hence, he is
accountable to none but God. He stands or falls to his own Master, and he calls
no man Master upon Earth. This is truly in right reason a consequence from the
Nature and End of Government. There must be some person or persons (according
to the Frame of the Polity) from whom there must be no Appeal. Some Authority
must be absolute and injusticiable, or the Process will be infinite, and the
Grievance without Remedy; and the circular and endless motion of Appeals, more
grievous than any Tyranny.

2. If the Prince derive his Authority from God, it follows again, His Laws
oblige the Conscience of the Subject: Such as command lawful things, for to an
unlawful thing there can be no obligation, because he has no authority from
God to make unjust Laws, and therefore if he does, they do not oblige the
Conscience of the Subject to that obedience, which is called active, though
even in such cases, he is obliged to subjection, to endure the penalty, which
they call passive obedience.

But if the matter of the Command be a thing indifferent, not forbidden by any
Law of God, Moral, or Positive, there the Prince creates an obligation in
Conscience to conformity and obedience. For men to think they must have the
same liberty after they are entered into Society, either Civil or Religious, as
before, is contrary to the very nature and end of Society: they must submit
themselves in things lawful to the determination of the Communion, whereof they
become Members; and the enquiry lies not, whether the thing enjoined be
expedient or inexpedient, for of that the governing part must judge, but only
whether it be lawful. And it is lawful, if not forbidden by God; and if lawful
before, it becomes now after the Law necessary in its use, and so is our
obedience. Nor does this take away the natural indifferency of the thing, nor
the liberty of Christians, nor exalt Princes into Gods Throne, or make them
Lords of Conscience, (for that is still free to judge of the natural
indifferency) any more than our obligation in Conscience to believe what the
Apostles have delivered, makes them Lords of our Faith; a Title which they
disclaimed, as proper to him who is the Author and Finisher of it.

2. Princes are called Gods, not only because he begets them, but they are
like God in the administration of their power. Which is a reason assigned by
Hierocles, why the Heroes were called also the Sons of God in the Ethnic
Theology. Now Princes resemble God when they act by the same principle, and for
the same end.

1. In making their Justice shine with equal dispensation on the Righteous and
the Wicked; and not only in doing, but in loving of Justice. This carries a
double benefit with it to him that sues for it, and him that distributes it.
The love of Justice sweetens the toil of the Employment, and makes that a
Recreation, which without it is a Drudgery; for it is a joy to the Just to do
judgment.

2. Princes resemble God in Mercy. This is the first letter of the Name,
whereby God proclaims himself to Moses, Exodus 34.6.
The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, etc. and herein he is
principally to be imitated by such as are called by his Name, in moderating the
rigor of Law, when men in their simplicity and honest meaning, may fall within
the lash of its severity: or when the face of the Poor is ground, and eaten up
like Bread, by the greediness of an Oppressor. It is impossible but there
should be frequently such cases, wherein if the Letter of the Law be strictly
observed, the end will not; and it is the Glory of a Prince in such cases to
extricate persons out of the snares of legal Entanglements, and his Prerogative
is then much more advantageous to his Subjects, than all their boasted
privileges.

I need not say on this occasion, what Prince of the World is the most lively
Image of this most Heavenly Attribute, whose Mercy, like the Divine Original,
is indeed over all his Works, who makes not every man an Offender for a Word,
nor every Offense Capital, but is strong and patient, though provoked every day.

3. Princes are like God, when they act, as by the same principles of Justice
and Mercy, so for the same end and safety of the Society. They are therefore
elsewhere styled Restorers of Paths, and Healers of Breaches, and here the
blessing of the Peacemakers falls upon their heads, which says our Savior is
to be called the Sons of God, Mat. 5.9.
and the more they intend this God-like end, in preserving the peace, not only
of their own Subjects, but of the World in general, the better title they have
to that Beatitude, and nearer resemblance to the God of Peace. There are indeed
some Sons, not very like their Father, who resemble the great Destroyer rather,
that is daily seeking whom he may devour. Such are Disciplines and Scourges in
the hand of God, (as one of the Gothic Kings called himself) to chastise the
Christian World for their Luxury and contempt of God and his Commandments. But
though these are only stimulated with the Lust of Domination, yet they are
overruled by the Divine Providence, and directed to a point they thought not
of, and often forced to bring Glory to God in the conclusion, though they
designed only their own, in the first motion of their Arms. But what ever
excesses the wantonness of Power may tempt some Spirits to, they have the best
right to this high Title of being the Sons of God and are the most natural
Lords of their People, who like Parents, are always laying up for their
Children, esteeming their peace a common advantage, the Glory of their Reign,
as the public Good of the World is the Glory of God.

There is certainly great truth in that celebrated Aphorism, Salus Populi
Suprema Lex esto; but the vulgar sense is to be corrected by considering what
is meant by People, Safety, and Law.

1. We are not to prescind the Head from the Members, but by People to
understand the whole Body, all in, as well as all under Government. And so
indeed the care ought to be mutual and reciprocal, for neither can be safe,
when the other is in danger; but the principal should be for the principal and
vital parts, and the best Armor placed on the Head and Heart. Thus while David
perceived his Kingdom to be exalted for the sake of Israel, 2 Samuel 5.12. and
21.17.
the People called him the light of Israel, which they were fearful should be
quenched.

2. We are not to understand Safety in the most uncircumscribed and indefinite
sense, for Peace of any kind, on any terms; but such as the Apostle prescribes,
which by Prayer for Princes, we may hope to enjoy under them, 1 Timothy 2.2.
a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. Now happy are the
People that are in such a case; this is a blessing greatly desirable, a
Reformation heartily to be endeavored, when Peace, and Godliness, and Honesty
meet together and kiss each other.

3. Peace and Safety thus described is the Supreme Law, that is, the general
Rule and Canon of Direction to all in their respective Stations, it is the
Princes Reason of State, the Compass by which he steers the Government, where
plain and positive Law has not directed; and where it has, he must often leap
over, nay break through many positive Forms to come at it; for that is the
Supreme Law, to which all positive Laws, as inferior, must give place; for the
sake of that, the Prince may dispense with these, but that is indispensable, it
is superior to him in a way of perpetual direction, which he is the most
proper Judge how to intend and follow. This Law also is the Square and Reason
of the Subjects obedience, by which and Prayer they are more likely to obtain
their end, than by Rebellion and Schism; that being a method of Gods
appointing, but this an unsanctified way that never will be blessed by him.
Thus you see this so applauded Maxim is far from confounding Government, by
making Rulers accountable to those they Govern; that the Right to Govern is
from the People, (if you divide the Head from the Body) because their Good is
the and of Government, is a false Inference from a false Principle, the
preservation of the whole is the end, and not of any part; and if the good and
safety of the People (separately from the Prince) were the Supreme Law, yet it
follows not, that either his Right is derived from them, or his account of the
Administration must be made to them. For God has the same end, the Common
Good, in the great Monarchy of the World, and yet is not liable to an
Indictment by his Subjects for any mal-administration. And Parents and Masters
of Families intend the same end in their petty Monarchies, and are not
questionable or punishable by their Children. So that this cannot give Subjects
any superintendency over the Princes Councils or Actions, but obliges them
rather in their private capacity of Obedience and Religion to conspire to the
same end, the Glory of God, in the Public Good. Both these are designed by
God, and both by the Prince, and the distinction is rather formal than real
between them: for though they may be distinguished, they cannot be divided, but
are to be promoted by the same means. God cannot be honored by Sin, and
therefore we must not do evil that good may come of it. God may suffer it for
that end, but we must not do it for that or any end. No more must public
Safety and common Good be secured by any thing that is unjust or dishonest.
Religion must not be reformed by Rebellion, nor destroyed for the sake of a
palliated worldly Peace. The very Heathens were so generous, as to scorn by
base Compliances and wicked Plots and Stratagems to preserve their Country; and
therefore a contrivance of Themistocles for the public Good being imparted to
Aristides, was rejected by the Senate upon Aristides his Report, that it was
not honest, concluding nothing profitable or honorable, that was dishonest;
but when the common Good is carried on by just and wise Counsels, a peaceable
life is endeavored by pious and honest policy, the People have at once great
safety, and God great Glory; and this is the care and travel Princes have under
the Sun, to be in continual motion, that their Subjects might have the comfort
of their Influences, though they are too often requited with noisome stenches
and stinking exhalations. But as God is never weary of doing good to those who
weary him and themselves with doing evil; so neither should Princes, though
their Subjects prove ungrateful and rebellious. Thus much of the second Reason
why Princes are called Gods, and Sons of God, they are like him, acting the
same Attributes, and for the same end.

3. Thirdly and lastly, They are so called, because God as a Father takes a
special care of just Governments and pious Governors. There are sometimes
Providence that seem anomalous and exceptions from this Rule, when God suffers
Religious Kings to be smitten by and for the sins of the People, which is one
of the heaviest Judgments, that can befall a Nation, to be made their own
Executioners, by cutting the throat of their own peace and happiness. But as
Princes are called Fathers of their Country, and have bowels for their
Subjects, so has God for Princes, whose Seats could never be so secure, amidst
so many strivings of the People, but that the Lord is King be the Earth never
so unquiet, and covers the head of his Anointed, and bears up the Pillars of
his Throne. So we find, notwithstanding all the Plots, the secret Caballings,
and open and bold Designs of David's Enemies, Psalm. 2.
God says, Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, exalted him to the
top of Regal Power. God seems to point at him with a hand out of the Clouds, as
a person reserved for some great work, and by his miraculous deliverances,
eminently to declare him to be his Care and Darling, Thou art my Son, Psalm.
2.6, 7.
this day have I begotten thee. Which Scripture, though it had a literal
verification in David, and a mystical one in our Savior, may be accommodated
to the Histories of other Empires, and no where more fitly than to the modern
state of this Kingdom; in the support whereof the Divine Providence has
observably concerned it self, when all the foundations of the Earth were out of
course, and like the Earth our Government seemed to hang without any hold. But
though God be terrible among other Kings of the Earth, and is now dashing them
in pieces, like a Potters Vessel, he has set ours upon his holy Hill of Sion;
where may the same Goodness long and long preserve him.

That what has been said may be made useful:

1. Since Princes are called Gods, it would be their care to walk worthy of
that high calling, and honor their own Character, by defending his Worship and
Worshippers from Contempt, that has so honored them; neither suffering their
Power to degenerate into Cruelty or Tyranny, for that were of Gods to become
Devils, nor their zeal for Justice and Religion, into Sloth and Lukewarmness
and Neutrality; for that were to become Idols, that have eyes and see not, ears
and hear not: for then the latter part of the Text will appear like the writing
on the Wall to Belshazzar in the height of all his jollity. When the swelling
Titles fume in the head, and they are elevated (like Alexander) with vain
thoughts of being really what they are only called, God will call them to
account, who has said, they shall die like men, and there will be no
distinction in the Grave, the Crown will leave no impression on the Scull. But
let us leave them to be chastized by him against whom only they sin; and

2. In the next place consider what shall be done to them whom God has so
honored, as to give them a Name above every Name? Surely they will reverence
my Son, says God in the Parable: and surely so we should. But alas! to the
reproach of the Christian Name, both that which calls her self the Holy and the
Catholic, and many that would be thought the True Protestant and Reformed
Church, have eaten of sower Grapes, and their Childrens Teeth are set on edge:
while both Revile and Crucify our Church between them, that so sincerely
preaches and practices the Doctrine of Loyal Obedience, that let a Prince be of
any Religion, as to his private Faith, it would be his Interest to have all his
Subjects of that, of the established Church of England. I shall crave leave to
speak a little to those of each hand, though I fear I shall become their Enemy
because I tell them the truth.

Nothing is more current in the Court of Rome, than the Doctrine of the Popes
Supremacy over Princes; it is the Test of Roman Orthodoxy. This is acknowledged
by many, who yet will not allow it the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and I
wish for my own part, it were not.

But what is that they call the Court of Rome? The Pope and Conclave, and their
Retinue of Canonists, and other Expectants of Preferment. And what is the
Church? The Pope and General Council. In both which this Doctrine is so plainly
taught, that it is hard to tell which is the Mother of the Child. To Quote
particular Authors were an endless labor. Aquinas rules the Case for the
School, and in Bellarmine, Aqu. 22. q. 12. a. 2. Bell. Rom, Pont. l. 5, c. 8.
9. Val. tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 12. punct. 2.
Valentia, and many others, we have the Usage and Practice of the Court, in the
Catalogues of Princes deposed; from whence they argue this may be done, because
it has been; but the History is better than the Logic. But that which is
chiefly considerable, is the Canon of the Council of Lateran, 4. Council of
Lateran, ch 3.
which in point decrees such Princes as will not expel Heretics out of their
Dominions, to be Excommunicated, and their Subjects absolved from their
Allegiance, and their Kingdoms to be given to Catholic Princes. There is a
Salvo for the Supreme Lord, if he obstruct not the Sentence, (that is, they
will not depose him, if he submits) like the Condition in the Covenant to fight
for the King, if he would fight for it. If it be said, this is a part of the
Discipline, and not the Faith of the Church, the matter is not much mended, nor
Princes better secured by the distinction, since we know they are as rigid
exacters of Obedience to the Rule of Discipline as of Faith. But thus by their
Canon of Discipline they make void the Law of the Fifth Commandment,
discharging Subjects of their Duty to those whom God and Nature has commanded
them to honor and obey.

Now this Council (if any) deserves with them the name of General, consisting
of 1215 Fathers (one for every Year from Christ's Nativity to the Year of its
Assembling) Convened and Confirmed by the Popes Authority, and is accordingly
owned as such, even by two succeeding General Councils, Constance and Trent: in
the mouth of which two Witnesses, Constable. Sess. 30. Trid. Sess. 2^ Cap. 5.
(whereas Trent bears only witness to it self) the Authority of this Council
is more than abundantly confirmed.

The Issue is this: 1. A General Council declares the Doctrine of the Church.
2. The Fourth of Lateran is a General Council, in the judgment of those of
Constance and Trent. 3. That has decreed the Deposing of Princes, if they
expel not Heretics, after admonition, out of their Dominions; this then is the
Doctrine not of Jesuits only, their Order being founded some Centuries after;
nor of the Court, but even of the Church of Rome.


And yet I would not accuse all that hold Communion with it of an explicit
belief of this Doctrine: there are many whose Loyalty is so sound and healthy,
that it is not to be tainted by the pestilential Air they breath in, who would
desert that Church in which they believed such things were taught. Such I only
desire neither to believe our Priests who charge them with it, nor their own
who deny it, till, like those Noble Bereans, they have consulted their own
Editions of their Councils, their Eyes, and common Sense, and then they will
discern by whom they are abused, and of what Leven they are to take heed and
beware.

2. But while I am speaking of these things, methinks I hear a Voice, saying
unto me, as unto the Prophet, Ezekiel. 8.6.
Son of man, see thou what they do, they of the Church of Rome, turn thee yet
again, and thou shall see greater abominations: a People as distant from the
Papists, as one Pole from the other, in the interest, yet parallel with them,
in the mischief of their Faction, who pretending to be Israelites, have whet
their Swords among the Philistines, and entered into the secret of our
Adversaries. Those men in their zeal for God, rebel against his Authority, and
serve their Prince as the Heathens were thought to worship Mercury, by throwing
Stones at him; in kindness to the Reformation, they stab it to the heart, and
under Jacobs smooth voice, make it feel the rough hands of Esau; endeavoring
to destroy at once, the best Government, the best Monarchy, and Monarch, and
Religion in the World.

1. The best Government; A Monarchy, the first and most natural Form: a Form
that has the fairest pretense, (to speak modestly) to a Divine Right. Others
may be lawful, but God never immediately appointed any other Form. Moses was
King in Jesurun. The Government of the Israelites, till Saul, was Theocracy,
the noblest kind of Monarchy. So this Government is best, as approved of God,
under which the greatest blessings are promised to his Church of Kings becoming
Nursing Fathers; best in its self, as most sufficient and ready for the ends of
Government, and best for us, as most agreeable to the Genius of these Nations,
who would never long endure many Tyrants.

2. The best Monarchy, whereby the gracious Concessions of our Kings, and
harshness of Arbitrary Power is sweetened into a Fatherly temper, and Will is
changed into Law, and the Rod of Iron is melted down into a Golden Scepter; and
it is the true Interest of the People to preserve the Prerogative, because that
does best preserve the Liberties of the People. We have in our Constitution all
the advantages of others, without the Inconveniences that attend them. And all
others, of what Form soever, are absolute and arbitrary, fierce as the Wind,
and hot as the fire, while God speaks to us, in this, in a gentle and a still
voice.

3. The best Monarch. But while my heart is inditing of a good matter, Psalm.
45.1.
and I would speak of the things, I have made of the King, his Royal presence
hinders my tongue from being the Pen of a ready Writer, and forbids me to speak
either of his Personal or Political Endowments, the gentleness and goodness of
his Nature or his Royal Virtues. In stead therefore of such an Entertainment,
let us rejoice in the cool shade of those Blessings we enjoy under his
Protection, and take a view of the flourishing condition these Kingdoms are in,
did they think themselves so. In whose Reign did the Sun ever behold this
People swimming in greater wealth, the Trade and Riches of the World flowing in
to their Doors? We are tilling our Fields, and filling our Barns and
Storehouses, while our Neighbors Backs are ploughed and harrowed by the
miseries of War. We are groaning only under the burden of Peace, panting under
loads of Plenty, surfeiting of Health, and running into Fevers through height
and abundance of Blood. To conclude, nothing is wanting to us, but thankful
hearts for such Blessings, as no Nation under Heaven does or can enjoy, but
under such a Monarchy and Monarch.

4. What shall I say of our Religion, which is our highest Glory; for God has
not dealt so with any Nation as with us. If we were not become too brutish to
have a relish for so spiritual a consideration, you might be even charmed to
Ecstasy, with the prospect of the Heavenly Comforts you enjoy above all others
in the World, in a Church Orthodox in her Faith, Chaste in her Worship, Modest,
yet Solemn in her Ceremony, Primitive in her Government, General and Peaceable
in her Articles of Communion, Gentle in her Discipline, Charitable to persons
of honest lives, though differing persuasions in the common Faith, and more
than any other, Loyal to Princes. I wish we might be provoked to jealousy by
another of the same Beauty. This is the Hill of Sion, the Joy of the Earth,
upon which God has set his King; and of these Blessings these men would rob
us, and expose us a naked prey to our cruel Enemies, destroy the Laws to secure
our Estates, and our Religion to save our Souls. In return of all which, I hear
her crying out in the words, and with the tears and compassion of our Savior,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest my Prophets, how often, etc. Oh ye of
the Foreign Reformation how often would I have gathered you under the Wings of
my Communion, and covered, or excused your defects, and ye would not; but now
these things are hid from your eyes, and your house is left unto you desolate.
And Oh ye of the Domestic separation, how often would I have gathered you? but
so often have I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying
People. Yet at last return to a Christian peaceful temper, for ye know not what
spirit ye are of; it is your Schism that is like to open the Postern for the
common Enemy of the Reformation; it is under your covert he hides his Spies and
Intelligencers, through your Divisions the Name of Protestant is evilly spoken
of, and our Brethren abroad are the worse treated, for the weakness that you
occasion at home. Consider therefore your duty and the common danger, and kiss
the Son lest ye perish, and pray for the man of Gods right hand, that he would
make him strong for himself, and while he labors for Peace, make not your
selves ready for the Battle; and then the God of Peace will return, stablish,
strengthen, settle us. Amen.

FINIS.

