The valorous Acts performed at Gaunt, ^y the brave bonny Less Mary Ambre; Who
in revenge of her Lovers death, did play her part most gallantly.
To the tune of, the Blind beggar,
soldiers armed with swords, pikes and shields

WHen Captain courageous, whom deeth could not daunt,
Had roundly besiged the City of Gaunt,
And manly they marched by two and by three,
But the foremost in battle was mary Ambree.
Thus being enforced to fight with their foes.
On each side most fiercely they seemed to close,
Each one fought for honor in every degree,
But none so much won it as mary Ambree.
When brave Sergeant Major was slain in the fight,
Which was her own true Love, her joy and delight
She swore unrevenged his blood should not be,
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary Ambree.
She clothed her self from the top to the toe,
With Buffe of the bravest most seemly to show:
A fair shirt of Male over that slipped she'
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary Ambree.
A Helmet of proof she put on her head,
A strong armed Sword she girt on her side:
A fair goodly Gautlet on her right hand wore she,
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary Ambree.
Then took she her Sword and her Target in hand;
And called all those that would be of her Band,
To wait on her person there came thousands three
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary Ambree.
Before you shall perish the worst of you all,
Or come to any danger of enemies thrall:
This hand and this life of mine shall set you free,
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary ambree;
The Drums and the Trumpets did sound out alarm
And many a hundred did lose leg and arm:
And many a thousand she brought on their knee,
Was not this a brave bonny Less, mary Ambree;
two ladies, one dressed as a man, and one in formal dress

THe sky she then filled with smoke of her shot
And her enemies bodies with bullets most hot
For one of her own men a score killed she
Was not this a brave bonny Less, Mary Ambree?
But then her false Gunner did spoil her in fent.
Her Powder and Bullets away he had sent:
And then with her weapon she flasht him in three.
Was not this a brave bonny Less, Mary Ambree?
Then took she her Castle where she did abide,
Her enemies besiged on every side,
To beat down her Castle walls they did agree,
And all was to overcome Mary Ambree?
Then took she her Sword and Target in hand
And upon her brave Castle walls stoutly did stand,
So daring the Captains to match any three,
And what a brave Captain was Mary Ambee
At her then they smilled not thinking in heart,
That she could have performed so valorous a part:
The one said to the other we shortly shall see,
This gallant brave Captain before us to flee.
Why, who do you think me or take me to be,
Unto these brave Soldiers so valient spoke she?
A Knight Sir of England and Captain quoth they
Whom shortly we mean to take prisoner away.
No Captain of England behold in your sight,
Two breast in on bosom and therefore no Knight:
No Knight Sir of England, nor Captain quoth she,
But even a poor bonny Less, Mary Ambree.
But art thou a woman, as thou do declare;
That have made us thus spend our armor in war,
The like in our times we never did see,
And therefore we will honor brave Mary Ambree.
The Prince of great Parma heard of her renown,
Who long had advanced for Englands fair Crown,
In token he sent her a Glove and a Ring,
And said she should be his Bride at his wedding.
Why ho does he think me or take me to be,
Though he be a Prince, and of great dignity.
It shall never be said in England so free,
That a stranger did marry with mary Ambree.
Then unto fair England she back did return,
Still holding the Foes of brave England in scorn,
In valor no woman was ever like she,
Was not this a brave bonny Less Mary Ambree?
In this woman's praises, I Will here and my Son
Whose heart was approved in valor most (...)
Let all sorts of people what ever they be
Sing forth the great valors of Mary Am^^^^
London Prnted for William Gibertson in Giltspur-street.


