VOX POPVLI, IN PLAIN ENGLISH.
bible

Service book

Supersti^^^^





(1.)
IN City and Country throughout the whole Land,
The minds of the multitude diverse ways stand:
There Is some that endeavor with might and with maine
To set the proud Prelates on Horseback again;
That they may make Cannons, and send out their Oath,
To stablish their power, and dish out their broth.
(2.)
Of this rank there is many in every place,
The which were Created by little Lauds grace:
Who since are grown lofty, and now like to fall;
Which makes them through Anguish alowd for to call,
To Papists and Atheists and all such as does:
Love lazy proud Prelates and lukewarm broth.
(3.)
Those fat belli'd priests that have Livings great store,
If Bishops go down: they shall never have more;
Their lourney-men readers, likewise are afraid:
That they must be forced to give over their trade,
And wear leather garments instead of black Cloth,
Which makes them love Bishops and lukewarm broth.
(4.)
And great men would never be counted such fools,
As to send their Children for learning to Schools,
But that they hoped in process of time:
That they to the throne of a Bishop might climb;
And there domineer, which fills them with wroth:
Against such as love neither Bishops nor broth.
(5.)
Another sort likewise must not be forgotten,
Who in their maine principles seems to be rotten;
Supposing that heaven stands open to all:
That tend on their prayers when the Saints Bell does call?
Where in stead of substance there is nothing but froth,
Much like the proud Prelates: so is this their broth.
(6.)
All these do endeavor as much as they may,
To back the base Bishops from day unto day;
The Papists assist them, and rather then fail,
The Devil will help them, that he may prevail:
It makes for his Kingdom to stand for them both,
I mean the proud Prelates and their common broth.
(7.)
Agninst this rude Regiment there does appear,
Some troops of courageous hearts that will not fear,
T'incounter this rabble, in mischief profound,
Hark how they cry down with them, down to the ground:
The Papists and Prelates, away with them both,
For we will have none of them nor of their broth.
(8.)
And these are no base ones as some do suggest,
But of the Kings Subjects indeed are the best,
Indeav'ring the good both of Kingdom and State,
What ever Baals Priests and proud Prelates do prate.
Who for the love which they bear unto sloth,
Do labor to hold up their luk-warme broth.
(9.)
Then let all good people take courage indeed,
So that they from Antichrists yoke may be freed;
And seeing that Liberties gaind by the Scots:
Let Englishmen seek for it, it may be their Lotts
Then join hands together, and fear not their wrath:
But Cry down the Plelates: and spew out their broth.
(10.)
Their pride and presumption must needs have a fall,
Their wicked devices for judgment does call;
Their hatred of holiness, and love of sin,
Will work their destruction, which now does begin:
Their curbing the Gospel, will kill their own growth,
Go tole the Bell for them, and eke for their broth.
MDCXLII. A Present for this New year of the Prelates fear.
FINIS.

