The Water of Talk, With diverse Essences and Rarities.
THere is now made by that Famous Italian PECVNE, a Water of Talk, and Pearl,
the Clearest and Brightest of all Waters; and is of that exellent quality for
Beautifying the Face, that in a short time will turn the Brownest Complexion to
a lovely White. It takes away Freckles, Scurff, and Morphey, etc. makes the
Skin smooth and soft, illustrates Beauty to Admiration; and it is now used by
most Persons of Quality in England, it being of that excellent Virtue, that the
longer it is kept, the better it is.

If any persons Faces are Wrincled, or damaged by using poisonous Powders,
which are too frequent in this Age, this Water will not only bring them to
their former Complexion, but create Beauty where Nature has been defective, as
it has been experienced by many Persons of Quality, who have been at the
Charge of sending many Leagus for it.

He has an excellent Water, that takes away the redness of the Face, with all
its defects. Also an excellent Ointment, that infallibly takes away all marks
or scarrs of the Smallpox out of the Face.

Also a Water that fastens Hair that is falling, and makes it grow very thick;
It will bring hair on a Bald-head, if the Party be not too old.

He has also an excellent Ointment, that takes off the Hair from any part,
that it shall never grow again.

Also an Excellent Water to make the Hair Curl.

Also Pomatum made of several Oils, which is rare good for cleaning the Face,
and taking out Wrincles.

Also Forehead Pieces, to take Wrincles out of the Forehead, which are to be
worn at nights.

Also a Salve, that heals all Sores or Chops in the Lips, and makes them smooth
and soft, and gives them a good Color.

He has a rare Powder for the Teeth, prevents them from decaying, takes off
the Rottenness, and makes them white. If any Persons are troubled with an
Unsavory Breath, occasioned by the Fumes of the Stomach, he cures them in a
short time. Likewise you may have Talk finely prepared, both Roman and English.
And any other Wash made, as Myrrh-Water, May-Dew sublimated, or Blossom-Water,
called the French-Wash, with many more herein omitted.

Also excellent Pastes for the Hands, which makes them white, soft and smooth,
to Admiration.

He has likewise Oils, Essences, Perfumes, and Sweet-Powders, with several
other Rarities. Also PECVNE'S Book of Secrets.

Also ready drawn Spirit of Mint and Saffron, Spirit of Orange, pleasant and
very excellent good against the Scurvey; Rosa Solis, made the Italian way, most
excellent in a Consumption, and a High Cordial, the pleasantest of all Liquors.

There is another Person, who has lately set forth Bills, Entitled, The
Fountain of Beauties; who does pretend to something of this Nature, but nothing
to the Purpose; he being only taken in by me for sometime as my Servent, till
he thought he bad gained experience enough, then ran away in my Debt, and is
now gone further distant to deceive others.

YOU may be pleased to repair to the Green-Bill in Blew-Ball Court, over
against the Ship-Tavern in Salisbury-Court, in Fleet Street; Or at the
Green-Ball in Chiswel-street, turning, up Bun-hill, over against the Corner of
the Artillery-wall, next door to the Anchor; where lives a Gentlewoman that
will furnish you with the aforesaid Commodities.


