A VINDICATION OF A Marriage Life: In Answer to the Broadside against MARRIAGE.
THou dull insipid Wretch, who could not choose,
An apter Theme for thy Prophaner Muse:
Thy limping Pegasus though shod with Rhyme
Flounders and halts even in the second Line.
As if like Balaam's Ass, he durst not go
His usual Pace against A Godly Foe.
Thou Mercinariest Rhymer of the Town,
Thou Pimp to all Debauches for a Crown,
Who for a Strumpet's Fee do thus dispense.
With breach of Laws of God and Conscience.
And rather then thy Luxury control
Wilt fell the noble Charter of thy Soul.
Nay had the other poor half Crown bin given,
I dare to swear Thou Had sold thy claim to Heaven!
From the dull Poem we collect no more
But only that thou art, A Son of a Whore
The Harlots Champion and her part do take
Because thou love her for thy Mothers sake.
And who can think him less who thus derides
The holy Privileges of happy Brides.
Who cause himself's a Bastard will not allow
The blessed effects of a conjugal Vow.
So Thieves and Rogues who boast their own esteem
Would have she honest, though as bad as them.
And with loud Oaths applaud that very crime,
For which perhaps they are hanged another time,
Which just deserved Fate since it is his due;
I wish may reach our Poetaster too:
Who by a long accustomed trick of thieving
Is the known Robber both of the Dead and Living,
When hired Verse has worn his fancy bare,
His Brain as Empty as his Pockets are.
Made desperate through want, like some mad Lad,
That Is driven by necessity to Padd:
He rifles all the Poets in the Town
And what he rudely seizes, makes his own.
No Play or Character, e're yet was Writ,
But suffers by this Highway man of Wit,
Who when reso e're he meets it bids it stand
And quietly resign at his Command.
No wonder then if such as he degrade
The spotless pleasures of a Marriage Bed;
Whose In famous Progenitors never knew
What honors to that happy 'state is due;
But still ran on in an Incestious Line,
And knew their Parentage no more than Swine,
Thus I dare swear, Incorrigible Sot,
Thou was it not got by any holy Plot;
But as a hated Judgment did proceed
To punish those who did so ill a Deed.
By thy own Parents Recon'd a mishap
Whose Birth they dreaded worser than A Clap.
Thy Mother cursed thee in her very womb.
And wished her belly might have been thy Tomb:
So passionately mad she was to see,
That thou shoul'st spoil her 6 Months Letchery:
What shall I say thou thing of low Estate!
The longest Cur^^s too short to reach thy Fate,
To make comparison 'twixt Hell and thee,
Were but to complement thy misery,
And by so mild a simily to press,
Too modest thoughts on thy unhappiness.
Enjoy thy self, thy Royets and thy Wenches,
Thy Pocky Pills, thy Diet, Drink and Drenches;
Commend thy Plasters, Scringes, and Fluxes,
Apd swear there is no such pleasure as the Fox is;
Thy snuffling Eloquence shall never dissuade
Me from the Pleasures of my Nuptial Bed.
Marriage tho Noble Center of the Mind,
Wherein an Heaven we only quiet find:
The even Calm of fifty pleasant Years,
Wherein no storms but those of love appears,
And repetitions of our Chaste delights,
Which we like Gods enjoy without affrights,
We run no hazards, but go to it with ease,
Squenching our Souls, and leaving when we please.;
Cloyed with the pleasures of the active Night,
Our minds next day repeat the blessed delight;
Flushed with sweet kisses, our desires move
So high we drown our Duty in our Love.
Marriage, the holy order which confines,
Our stragliag faculties to good designs,
That wise retreat which bids us take a View,
Both of our selves, and of our fortunes too,
Which busy Youth could never abide to do
A Wife! that sweet divider of our cares!
Doubles our joy and half our sorrow shares:
If angry Destiny our Fortune shakes,
She smiles, and heals those wounds which Fortune make:
Sugared within humble Language, she
Calmly diverts our Growing misery.
In short a Virtuous Wife's a good estate,
And he who has her is secured by Fate,
To Live in Credit, and be Fortunate.
Printed for J. L. T. Ashfield. 1675


