A VINDICATION OF THE RUMP: OR, THE RUMP RE-ADVANC'D.
To the Tune of, Up tails all.
FUll many a Ballad has been penned,
and scoffing Poem Writ
Against the RVMP, but I intend
to speak in praise of it.
Come Jove and Apollo, come Venus and Mars,
And lend your assistance: to speak of the A --
will require a Prodigious wit.
There Is scarce a Lady to be found
that loves either Pear or Plum
One half so well, if she be sound,
as tabering at her B --.
It may be, you will say, I Am wide of the Case,
Since that Musick's made in a distant place:
I answer, the breadth of your Thum.
When Alderman Atkins did bemar
his Hose, through a Panick fear,
And Captain Rea, that Man of War,
Oh! what a Hogo was there?
If you ask me, what praise is in this? at a word,
The Captain so fenced himself by a T --
that his enemies could not come near.
There is not a Lawyer in Country or Town,
whose Rhetoric does prevail,
Although he has purchased Fee-simple Gown, the
but loves to be dealing in tail;
And I may well swear by Apollo or Mars,
That at a place called, the Oven's Arse,
often times I have drunken good Ale.
And when you are dallying with a young Maid
would you not her buttocks bethump?
And I have been often well apaid
with a Goose both fat and plump:
The body being eaten, we strive for the tail,
Each man with his Kan'kin of nappy brown Ale,
does box it about for the RVMP.
The RVMP of a Coney I often have seen
most piteously clawed by a Ferret,
And a Capon's Rump is a bit for a Queen,
although she is a person of merit.
In preaching and praying who spends the whole day,
At nights keeps a Rump wherewithal for to play,
be he never so full of the spirit.
I wonder who first called the Parliament RVMP,
some say, that it was Jack Hobby,
And some, fiery Pryn: good wits will jump;
now I write not this to bob ye,
But only to tell ye, that good Mr. Pryn,
For all that he is cropped, yet he could not get in,
but was fain to remain in the Lobby.
The other day I was going in haste,
(to think on it, it grieves my heart)
I saw a poor fellow all naked to the waste,
and whipped at the Arse of a Cart:
His Rump ('it is true) suffered the rout. But I would
Fain know who it was, that durst be so bold,
as to call Mr. Speaker Sir F --
He might as well have styled him Anus,
since he was the mouth of the RVMP,
As cunning a Fox as Rome's Sejanus:
but I do not love for to frump;
Or else I could tell ye, my friends, to an Ace,
What good can accrue to the Land by a Mace,
as long as the Knave's the great'st Trump.
Our zealous sticklers for Reformation
will edify on the Rump of a Sister,
And it will never grow out of fashion
to physic the tail with a Glister.
But beware that Monk does not come with a bitter
Purge to our Rump, which will make her beshit her,
for she has already bepist her.
Rumpatur.
London, Printed for Rosicleer Arsewind, the RVMP's Leather-Seller.


