Variety of NEWS for all Pallats, As Certainties, Probabilities, etc.
TO the first, There is nothing of greater truth then the blessings that
accompanies His Majesty's happy Government, have already made His Subjects in
Great Britain, forget their bypast miseries: And what a harmony is twixt His
Majesty and Parliament of England, you may perceive by this ensuing extract
from the English Intelligencer.

Westminster.
His Majesty was graciously pleased to send a Letter, dated the 22. instant to
Sir Edward Turner, Speaker of the House of Commons, to be communicated to the
House; wherein His Majesty having acquainted them of the great design, He
formerly told them He had to make His Progress this Summer, to visit Worcester
and other places to pay God thanks for His miraculous deliverances, does
withal mind them of some Bills which He had told them were prepared for them
for confirmation of what was enacted at their last meeting, more particularly
the high value His Majesty had of the Act of Indemnity, for the dispatch of
which, His Majesty assured them that could He have used stronger expressions
for the speedy dispatch of it, He would have done it, and that He thought what
He said, would have made an impression in all who profess a desire to serve
Him, and that He expected every day it would be presented for another Assent;
His Majesty farther acquaints them, that He has heard they have already
prepared some good Bills (for which He heartily thanks them) ready for the
Royal Assent, yet that He has not a mind to pass them, till the Act of
Indemnity be likewise presented: upon which, His Majesty says (if they take
His word) most of His quiet and good depends, and in which He is sure His
honor is concerned. His Majesty therefore again conjures them, with all
earnestness possible, to pass the Act in the same terms He has already passed
it (to which His Majesty takes Himself obliged) and that they will at present
lay aside all private business to betake themselves to the Public, that they
may be ready to adjourn by the middle of the next month.

Whitehall.
His Majesty taking special notice of the prudent managery of affairs by Don
Francisco de Mello, Comte de Ponte, Ambassador extraordinary from the King of
Portugal, how by his constant care and faithful applications he has not
only satisfied the desires of his own Master the King of Portugal, who, out
of a long and natural affection to the English, always wished for a nearer
alliance with this Crown, but withal afforded such vast advantages to the
people of England, as could not be expected from any one Nation, besides that
incomparable blessing which these Kingdoms will enjoy, in that most excellent
Princess, Donna Katharina, the Infanta of Portugal, that such faithful and
eminent services for the mutual benefit of his own and these Kingdoms, might
not be passed by without some signal mark of His Majesty's favor, was
graciously pleased Himself to give an invitation to the Ambassador to dine with
His Royal Person at Whitehall on Thursday the 27. instant. And that this Royal
invitation might (ar far as could) be answered with a fitting solemnity on
that day, the Right Honorable the Earl of Bedford, together with Sir Charles
Cotterell Master of the Ceremonies to his Majesty, went with his Majesty's and
his Royal Highness the Duke of York's Coaches, with several other Coaches
belonging to the chiefest of the Nobility to the Ambassadors house, and thence
conducted him with his whole Retinue to Whitehall: where being come, after the
hearty salutes of the whole Court, the Ambassador was placed at the same Table
with His Majesty. Whilst this high honor was given to the Ambassador, those
worthy Gentlemen of his Retinue were with all respect provided for, being
treated at the Tables of James Duke of Ormond Lord Steward, and Edward Earl of
Manchester Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household.

London, July, 2. 1661.
Yesterday the House of Commons heard witness as to such of the late Kings
Tryers who are dead, and voted that their Estates should be forefeited to His
Majesty. The Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, were also
brought before the House of Commons upon their knees: the first confes^ed his
fault with much regrate, and pleaded that he was drawn into such an horrid Act,
for which he was very sorry, and acknowledged his sitting in the pretended High
Court of Justice. Sir Henry Mildmay was sorry for his misguiding: but said that
he fell out with Cromwell about the prosecution against His late Majesty, that
some Members of the House being going to Dinner, he was drawn to go into
Westminster Hall, and was a Spectator, but did not vote in the Court, though
his being present, was proved. Mr. Wallop craved pardon of the the House, was
sorry that he should be named in such a vile Commission, but was an old frail
man, and did not remember that he sat in the pretended High Court: (it was also
proved he was also present, June 23. 1648.) Sir James Harrington appeared not,
but it was proved that he sat in the High Court of Justice upon the whole. The
House of Commons resolved, that the Estates Real and Personal of the said
four Persons, should be forefeited to His Majesty; that they should be drawn
from the Tower to Tyburne upon Hurdles with Ropes about their necks, and thence
to several Prisons to remain during life.

Since my last, we understand from Dunkirk, that the Country have paid in
their contributions to that Garrison, notwithstanding the orders that were
alleged to be given against it.

Probabilities.
It is twenty to one but the 75000. Florens, which the Religious Hollanders
have advanced for reparation of the walls of Geneva (chance to miscarry) if it
be entrusted to such Elders hands as were the contributions of the Protestants
of Lucerna.

It is probable, that the Pope may drink his Albano in security, since the
League and Covenant, which our Levites told us should have brought the Vatican
about his ears, made so solemn a halt over all England on the 29. of May last;
and its mother, the National Covenant, had the honor to be burnt at Musleburgh
much about the same time, in the bosom of Bessy Fouler, that renouned
Fishwitch.

It is probable if Caledonius had writ in Anno 1649. the cuff of his Neck might
have passed for Bran and his Buttocks for Bacon; for his head would been as
toothsome to some, as the foreskin of a Philistin was to Saul.

If it be true that is reported of an Island, newly discovered, fifty Leagues
to the west of Ireland, and that the Inhabitants be of so large a bulk as ten
yards in length, and three of breadth; It seems not to be that so much
mentioned enchanted Island, sometimes seen on the west Isles of Scotland, named
in the Mapp, O Brazil, and by our Philosophers in the Hebrides, Rockcolle: But
much more probable that it must be some of the Benign Planets, who wearied
with the lies and reproaches put upon it by the Astrologers of this World; and
to confound their observations, the discreet Planet has joined her self to
that part of the Globe which is under the Protection of our Dread Sovereign.
They report the Inhabitants are very wise and moral, and a knowledge much
exceeding that of our Distinguishers; and this is the reason why some thinks it
rather a Colony, sent from the Moon to instruct our World of the true natural
causes of all those mysteries which raises such heat and contention amongst the
Pedants in our Schools, so it is hoped if we had once communication with them,
the common answer of Oculia qualitas, so much used by our Philosophers in
matters they do not understand, shall be quite banished.

If any one now in the Dog days eat immoderately of the black tailed Pouts
that are catched in the Cannongate, it is probable he may purchase a pair of
everlasting Breeches though possibly the Fancies of them chance to prove
expensive.

A LETTER from the Prince of Tartar's Secretary, to the City Recorder of
Cockany.
SIR,
I Shall not at this time be so large, as to give an account of all the
adventures his Highness met with in traversing the Country, reserving that for
a large description of it self: But I shall tell you of an accident that had
almost split my weak Noddle, if I had not been strongly fortified with read
Ale, Unions and Aquavitie, which I drunk at the Mure Alehouse, with a reduced
Major of Pryds Regiment, who is very well satisfied to be Tapster of the place.

It was, Sir, at Midsummers Eve, a night when the King of Fairy and Prince of
the Air, are accustomed to parad toward the skirts of Glentannarwood, a sort
of spiritual Groteske in a brown Suit and black Buttons, flat Shoes, a tipped
Virginia skulcap, with an Antipiscopall Hat, and above 7000. Ladies and Women
of all stations and sizes; nay, even to the courser sort of Chamber-maids and
Spinsters: As also, a considerable number of Trads-men and Shopkeepers; all
with melancholy aspects, in a straggling disorderly way they marched after him.
By his retinue I judged him a Tinker, but he told me no, and that he was a
Schoolmaster of a Country Hamlet in Fife, his name was engraven upon a
Posset-cap in a great Golgatha; I asked if he intended for London or Edinburgh,
to inherit the Benefices of Parson Pe^ers and Mr. James Guthery, he answered
no, his business was for America, to whom he was to address himself to the King
of Bantam, who is a Cadet of the Ethiopian John, to whom he was to discover
greater secrets of Policy* then ever have been heretofore done by Plato,
Matchiavell, or Bodin; for in respect of him they were but Pedees, for the
matter of conquering and subduing of Nations: The pretext of R^ligon says he,
is of so Tiffany invention, that the people through it do soon discover the
bareness of the Breech, that Arms again were too lasting, and after once
fitted, they were loath to part with them; but the cheapest and securest way he
affirmed, was by the mighty power of a Rogero infuriato and implacabile, which
he undert^ok to prove both by History and Tradition, was not Jupiter, said he,
the son of Saturn and King of Latium, not only a grand Conqueror, but
reverenced for a god; and yet never no noise of his Wars for topting the third
part of the World, as Floods, Mountains, and Beasts, and that was Europa. How
do you think that I being a Bumpkin Pedant came by all this trayn, Mafoy
Monsieur a force de bien labourer, etc. There Is not one of these poor wretches
you see here, but I Will undertake before I want the least satisfaction of my
senses, but they will pawn the best of their movables, nay even to their
Crumbs of comfort, or Wedding smocks; and the only reason as I told you, Je me
fou d'eux and de toute leur famile.

This horrid Policy did highly astonish me, yet when I considered the influence
such Hypocritical impostures has had upon the weaker understandings, I thought
it not so strange. I then demanded him which way he intended to transport his
Tribe, he replied so soon as I once get to the west Coast of Whigmeria, I shall
meet with souls so precious and of so great faith, as in two days time shall
waft us to our journeys end: I wished him a good voyage, and told him, if he
would obliedge this Country that he should leave none of his brethren behind;
but in stead of a reply, I found he and all was evanished, which made me
conclude, that this must have been the Ghost of some grand Seducer and his
company, the souls of such that dyed in his belief. You may communicate this to
such as can make the best use of it. In the mean time I am

Your humble Servant, John Dow, Mackermoch.
Postscript.
Our Prince resolves to sojurne at Kincairn Oneil, partly to see the
Solemnities at Bartel Fair, partly to recover a weakness in his back,
occasioned by the Bailies Daughter of Bervy, as she was sucking out a Corn in
his great toe: the last Letters he had from his royal Father signified as much,
that he had taxed his Empire for 20000. Cratszoniskys, which in our money comes
to five Merks, for the charges of his return: In the mean time he has Bills of
credit from Buckhaven to all the Northcoast to furnish him with all sort of
Fish.



For my old Acquaintance, T. S.
SIR,
SO long as you were taken up in collecting the Occurrences of the world, and
exposing them to the public, I thought it not good manners to disturb you; but
now that I have failed so long, both in hearing from you, and receiving any of
these little Memento's of you, I adventured this, to rid me of doubts. Is it
possible that you have quit the pen for the Witches prine? Are all your
projects in serving your Country come to exorcisme? Are your voluminous pains
and singular contrivances regalled with Slate* stones? The fault certainly was
yours, either that you had outrun your self and could start nothing new, or
you have assumed too much liberty in, etc. and so received a check; or, as I
have lately heard, your Cros-langing the Country, in the Great Enquiry, does
totally take you up. Could you have spared your pains, you might have found
venerable ones at home, O! What a sweet thing is it to suck the exhalations of
such a Carbanado'd one? how welcome will these souls be to your World in the
Moon, while they mount enwrapt in these smoaky sulphurous vapors of the black
rock, where they are pythagorically transmitted as a new colony. But I hope,
Thom, if you be so taken up in this enquest that you are not so wedded to it as
you can not leave it, which I could heartily wish, or if it be otherwise that
you cannot quite it brevi manu, enquire after others in the like sin, enough
unfound out ones as yet: firk me these transgressors who has gold to choke
you, dig in their Urnes, and rake not the calcined ashes of that poor simple
deluded Sex: yet when I consider, I cannot blame you, for it is better to play
at small game then sit out; and since you cannot acquire a fat Rebel, rather
then altogether want, a lean witch will still keep you in possession of your
pretense, their sins and punishment being equal. I shall conclude with this,
that you project how to stay at home, for among all your Comrades none shall be
more desireous of it then

Your humble Servant. A. W.

FINIS.

