VOX CIVITATIS OR, Londons Call to her Natural and Adopted Children; Exciting
them to Her speedy Reedification.
WHat News, my Neighbors of the Riming Trade?
What, all by Londons Burning quite dismayed?
Has our late too much Heat dried up your Well,
And choked the Sisters that there used to dwell?
Or does your so much famed Poetic Fire
In Londons Conflagration expire?
That not one idle Muse attempts a strain,
To promise Her Rebuilding up again?
Call the old Theban from his drowsy Tomb,
And with his potent Lyre here let him come;
And if he ere built Thebes (as Poets tell's)
Or by his Music or Poetic Spells:
Here let him on a worthier Subject try
His skill, and Londons Walls reedifie.
But see, the sullen Ghost keeps still its station.
Nor yields obedience to our Invocation.
Ah! no, that which our Reparation brings,
Must flow from Real, not Poetic Springs.
And now, methinks I see the aged Head
Of London Town move from her too warm Bed;
And with her parcht tongue seeming to essay
Something to her much suffering Sons to say.
It Is She; Her by her reverend locks I know,
With her own Ashes strow'd instead of Snow.
She calls to all her Children in each Land;
And I her mean Interpreter here stand.
What needs all this astonishment, my Sons,
As if ye were transformed to liveless stones?
Viewing with stupid horror my decay,
As though all hopes of Rise were taken away.
What frights ye thus? does this such terror strike,
As though ye nere had seen, nor heard the like?
Have not as great Towns heretofore, or greater,
Suffered sometimes by Fire, sometimes by Water?
Are not all Bodies subject to like Fate?
Do not your own of Fire participate
In Burning Fevers (pray?) and what are then
Dropsies, but Inundations in Men?
All things their Seasons have, and Revolution;
And shall have till the last great Dissolution.
In "all things there is a Spring, wherein its youth
Sprouts, and seems to presage its future growth:
A Summer that succeeds, when strength arrives
To its perfection, and a fullness gives:
A scorching Autumn follows, when the pride
Of former strength and beauty seems to hide
It wholly from our sight: and it may ly
Unseen all Winter, sleeping, yet not die.
I, your sad Mother, in this rank am found;
Burnt by the raging Fire almost to the ground:
My present Fall indeed stupendous is,
Yet have I risen from as great as this.
Now comes it then that now so much time sees
Me in a suppliant posture on my knees?
What is the cause? ye cannot your Mother blame,
Who never was to her Children a Stepdame;
Oh no, it is to the Universe well known,
What Glories I have to my Offsprings won.
Here Is then the case; I still preserve my state:
But ah! I fear my Sons degenerate!
If so, my tears should from my eyes be skrew'd,
Less for my Fall, than their Ingratitude.
I that could once with Laureate Brows have sung
Cesars and Princes from my intrals sprung:
Have nothing left, my griefs now to decline,
But the remembrance that they once were mine.
Where are my Philpots, Walworths, Greshams, Lambs,
Suttons and Ramseys, with the rest, whose Names
Claimed a bright Rubric in my Calendar;
Glorious for Acts of Virtue near and far?
It Is sure, they could not die; their Names still live,
And their immortal Memories survive
The Ruins of their own all-praised Deeds.
Oh for a Race now that might them succeed?
And all like them, by happy Transmigration;
Then might I hope my speedy Restoration.
Rouse up, my Sons, methinks my Prayer's heard,
And you already to my help prepared;
Warmed by the self same genuine heat and force,
Which once did actuate your Ancestors.
Some of our Heroes are already met,
And to this end in Consultation set:
Lay to your helping hands; so may you see
Your selves once more to Fame advanced with Me:
So may we mutually rejoice each other,
I in my Glorious Sons, you in your Mother.
Licenced.

R. L'Estrange.

London, Printed by B. W. in Little S. Bartholomews Court in West-Smithfield.
1666.


