The VIRTUES and USES of The Cordial Spirit of Saffron.
(...) be taken two three or four Spoonfuls at a time, according as the Stomach
is more or less indisposed, and most especially in a Morning after a heat of
Wine overnight, walking after it, which effectually cuts the Phlegm, cheareth
the Spirits dissipates the Cloudy Vapors disturbing the Brain, whets an
appetite for Dinner; the rest ot the admirable Virtues of SAFFRON and this
Spirit ensue.
SAFFRON it self is of such excellent virtue and of so great use among many
Nations, as Germans, Polanders, Hungarians, Bohemians, Sclavonians, Croats,
Turks, and diverse others, that they commonly boil no Flesh, no Fish, no Milk,
no Herb, or any thing else fit for Meals, without some Saffron, which they do,
both to cause the better Concoction of the Diet, and to make their own Spirits
cheerful, and to preserve themselves anainst the injury of corrupted Air, or
against the violence of any Distemper: Wherefore the Spirit well made of it, is
of such virtue, and of so high esteem in Physik, that it is thught almosl alone
to be suffient against any Distemper.

MOreover the Spirit of Saffron (taken according to the Directions near the end
of this Paper) is of singular use in the following Distempers. viz.

Consumption, It so helps, that by the blessing of God it easily restores
the Patient to perfect Health; for it ripeneth the Ulcers of the Lungs,
cleanses, and with a gentle Adstringency and Insernative faculty heals them;
it mitigates the Cough, takes away the Distillations of the Brain, and amends
the salt and sharp humors.

Aslbm^, that is, Difficulty of Breathing, and Phtysical (or Tiffical) Persons
it much helps; for it concocts, ripeneth, and consumes the crude and gross
humors sticking to the Lungs, and restores to them the faculty of easy
breathing.

Melancholy, and sad Constitutions it greatly comforts; for it amends the
faults of the Liver and Gall: it dissipates the Hypocondriack flatulency, it
strengthens and comforts the Heart, and wonderfully causes Mirth.

Swooning, herein it is highly worthy of praise; for it happily restores the
Spirits that are lost by their vanishing away through the pores of the Body, by
their exceeding subtilty and volatility, etc.

Apoplexy, herein it has a great Power, for it helps the Brain, and
strengthens the same, asswaging the Phlegmatic and gross humors, swelling
with Wind, and wasting with Acidity the Muscles, and Nerves, freeth the
obstructed passages of the Spirits, and shakes off deep and profound drowsiness.

Yellow Jaundice, the Spirit of Saffron, with equal quantity of Juice of
Lemmons or Water of Sorrel, and sweetened with a little Sugar, is an especial
remedy: for it opens the obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and by natural
property from all parts of the Body draws the Choler, alters it, and expels
it by Urine; whence ensues a beautiful ruddy, healthy Complexion.

Plague, Measles, and Small Pox. Both to prevent them, and expel them, its Use
is frequently known; for it is of subtle parts, and easily penetrates, and
causes Sweat.

Agues. In the Cold Fit it may be taken with great Comfort to the Patient.

Strangury, Stone, and Gravel. It is of great Worth; for it opens the
Obstructions of the Urinal Passages, asswageth the acrimony of the Humors,
forces Urin, Gravel, and small Stones, and takes away the Pain.

For Women's Terms, and Women in Childbed, It is a Noble Cordial, It is
likewise a great Enemy to Barenness, and highly provokes Venery.

Looseness, Bloody Flux, Griping of the Guts. It is very profitable against
these Distempers, for it concoct the raw Phlegm about the Belly and small Guts,
that causes looseness: It corrects the acrimony and sharpness of Humors that
irritate and force Nature to go to stool often. It strengthens the Bowels, and
heals the Ulcers-of the same.

Empyema or Impostume, newly begun in the side, it helps very much, for it
easily disperseth the gathered Humors and flatulency or windiness therein.

Trembling of heart: It is very good for them that are troubled with trembling
of Heart, for it allayeth the vehement fermentation of Blood; it dissipates the
thick and gross vapors enclosed in and about the Heart, and it restores
cheerfulness to the same.

Pains, Dullness of Hearing, and Noise of Ears, are remedied by this Spirit; for
it disperseth the gross Humors gathered about the Tympanum of the Ears, and
dissipates the flatulency enclosed in the Brain, if some Drops thereof be mixed
with Woman's Milk, or Oil of Bitter Almonds. It also ripeneth, breaks,
cleanses, and heals Ulcers in the Ears, if it be dropped into a roasted
Onyon, and be applied to the Ears.

Scurvey. This Spirit is most excellent to prevent this Distemper, so
epidemical and common, that it becomes the Spring or Cause of many Diseases
that perplex Mankind; it likewise in a great measure cures it, and for this end
is carried to Sea, for long Voyages, through hot Climates, and is known to
restore the Native Vigor, with a good Countenance.

Weakness of Stomach, and an inclination to Vomit often, it wonderfully
helps, for it concocts, dissipateth, and consumes the raw humors,
disperseth the flatulency, strengthens the Stomach, brings a good appetite,
and causes good digestion.

In a Bastard Plurisie it is an excellent Remedy, for it opens the Breast,
cuts the Phlegm in it, expels the Wind, and freeth the Lungs from all
Obstructions.

Colds, Indisposition of Body. Take a Spoonful or two in a Morning; for it
concocts the Humors in the Stomach, amends the sharpness of them, and
dissolves the Phlegm: Yea, this Spirit of Saffron is of so general Use, that it
may be mixed with any Physic, proper for any Distemper, to increase its
Operating Faculty.

Note, A Man or Woman of Age, laboring under the said Distempers, may take one
or two Spoonfuls of this Spirit at a time, by it self, if they be not in
burning or Hectic Fevers; but if so, let them mix it with some cooling Drink,
or Syrrups proper for those Distempers, and take little Quantities of it four
times a day, to wit, early in the Morning, between Meals, and late at Night
when they go to Bed.

The Virtues and Uses of this Spirit of Saffron are taken out of a Letter or
Manuscript of a most Learned and long experienced German Physician, G.
Agricola, communicated to a Friend of his here, in regard England yields the
best Saffron in the World, and makes the least use of it, in reference to their
own Health.

Translated and Publishied by John Collins e Reg. Soc. Philomath.
The Coffee-Houses following are furnished therewith.
Mr. Alexander Man at Charing Cross. Mr. Vigures in the Old Palace-Yard
Westminster. Mr. Brewens near Guild Hall. Mr. Samuel Booth in Ave-Mary Lane.
Mr. Richard Torvers at Temple-Barr. Mr. Ward in Bread-Street. Mr. Earling in
Bow-Street Common-Garden. Mr. Thomas Stroud, at the Corner of the Pall Mall,
against St. James's. Mr. John Dicas in Fullers Rents near Gray's Inn. Mr. Henry
Gardener at St. Mary-Overy's Dock. Mr. Bond at Leaden Hall. Mr. Ogdon without
Algate. Mr. Woolfe at the Still-yard. Mr. John Smithiers against the
Custom-house. Mr. John Painter in Newmans Court, Cornhill. Mr. Richard Rogerson
behind the Exchange. Mr. Kidd in Bartholomew-Lane behind the Exchange. Mr.
Thomas Nicholson in Birching Lane. Mr. Tobias Collier in Pye-Corner. Widow
Ward on Snow Hill. Mr. James Probut, at the Rainbow at the Corner of St.
Martins Lane. Mr. Heyrick, at the Corner of Charter House Lane. Mr. Heavysides
in Hart-street without Newgate. Widow Soame against the Boars-head in
East-cheape. Mr. John Knight at the Corner of Cow-Lane. Mr. George Dassin
against Lincoln's Inn. Mr. Richard Lion against Doctors-Commons. Mr. Tounsend,
in Fryday-street. Mr. Richard Tart in St. Bartholomews Court Smithfield. Mr.
George Marmion in St. Martins le Grand, at the Harrow. Mr. Kistel, near the
Naggs-head, Cheapside. Mr. Shipton at Fleet-Ditch, near the Derby-Ale-house.
Mr. Philip Preston at Exeter Exchange. Mrs. Foord in Devereux Court, near
Effex-buildings. Mr. Sydenham in Mark-Lane, near the Navy-Office. Mr. Benning
next the Bull-Head in Cheapside. Mr. Robert Woolgar in Jewen-Street. Widow
Graces Coffee-house in Clare-Market.
The following Person are likewise supplied therewith for Sale.
Mr. Robert Horn, Stationer, at the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange. Mr.
John Lands, Barber-Chyrurgeon, at the Corner of Ironmonger-Lane, next
Guild Hall. Mr. Collins, Bookseller, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. Mr. Clavel,
Bookseller, at the West End of St. Paul's. Mr. William Miller, Bookseller,
against the littie North-door of St. Paul's Church. Mr. John Seller, the Kings
Hydrographer, at the Hermitage Stairs in Wapping, and at his Shop on the
West Side of the Royal Exchange. Mr. John Playford Bookseller, near the
Temple-Church. Mr. Thomas Glover, Tailor, at the Blew Pales in Petty-France
Westminster. Mr. Northcot Bookseller next the Hoop-Tavern at the Bridge-foot.
Mr. Thomas Flower, Clerk of St. Katherines Coleman, in Magpy-Alley in
Fanchurch-street. Mr. Edward Painter, Shoemaker in Catt-street, Oxford.
The said SPIRIT is distilled from the best sort of Wine and Saffron, and is to
be had at the House of Mr. Randal Tailor, Beadle of the Stationers Company,
near their Hall by Ludgate; from whence the abovesaid Coffee-House, etc. were
furnished therewith: and is sold in Bottles sealed up, the half-Pint Bottle at
the Shilling three Penee, the Pint Bottle Half a Crown, and Wuart Bottle a
Crown.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham at the Seven Stars in Ave-Mary Lane.


