A Good Wife is a Portion every day. OR A Dialogue discovering a good Wife from
a bad.
And happy is that man that has such a one.
The Tune is, Pockingtons pound.
By J. Wade.






COme youngmen and listen to what I Will you show
then William, and Harry, and Robin, and John
When as you are minded a wooing to go,
for these Lines do concern you every one:
And what I declare,
I Will make it appear,
From Eve it sprang out, and has last till this year,
For though she was Man's fall, mark what I say,
A good Wife is a portion every day.
For a good wife will be saving and fearful to waste,
but keep all things together so near as she can,
When that a Spend:thrift will let fly as fast,
and seeks by all means to undo her good man:
Though he carps and does care,
She Will not pinch nor spare,
But junket abroad, and must have her fine cheer,
She thinks what she brought will never decay,
When a good Wife is a portion every day.
A wife that is virtuous and civil beside
will honor her Husband, his words she will obey,
She Will not strive to cross him what ever betide,
but make all things well when there should be a
With fair words she will him draw
To submit to her Law,
Though his Beard it be frozen, in time she will it thaw
Although he be given to wander and stray.
A good wife will lead him into the right way.
But she that takes no care but only for Pride
how Buckle and Thong together to hold,
She will have her humor whatever betide,
or else day and night at him she will scold,
For let a man starve,
As I am alive,
First he must ask his wife is he shall thrive:
And if she says no, his Estate will decay;
When a good Wife is a portion every day.
If a youngman has but little withal to begin,
if he lights of a good wife his stock will increase,
What he gets without doors she will save it within,
and if he be froward she will strive to keep peace:
When a cross-grained wife
That Is given to strife,
Will seek to make a man weary on's life:
What e're he says to her she will not him obey,
When a good wife is a portion every day.
Therefore young Batchellors wherever you be,
let not this money your hearts so bewitch,
For 't 'ant that which makes a good husband you see
nor Means altogether don't make a man rich:
The reason i will show you why,
You shall not say I lie,
She that brings a great deal looks to be maintained high
Her costly Attire an Estate will decay,
When a good wife etc.
I heard of two Brothers, the one was the Heir,
the other had little at all to begin,
He married a wife that was both rich and fair,
then for his poor Brother ^e cared not a pin:
For he did live high,
And his wife she let fly
His means, till she brought him to poverty,
Then to his poor brother he sighed and did say,
A good wife etc.
Thus you may see how some are made poor,
and some that has but little to fortune does rise,
then he that has a good wife make much of her therefore
and do not against her no mischief devise:
But some men cannot see
When as they well be,
But seeks for to ruin their Family:
Then all the blame on the poor woman they lay,
When a good etc.
He that has a good wife, happy is that man,
if he does his endeavor his Living to get,
And not spend it abroad in Pot nor in Can,
she will arive always to keep him out of Debt;
Good Counsel she will him give,
If he will it receive,
And set him all times in a way for to live:
But a wife that is froward his Estate will decay
But a good etc.
But youngmen you will say how should a man kno(...)
how to choose a good wife from a bad,
In few lines I here will you show,
and teach you that will make your hearts glad
Choose one that is civil,
And strives to shun evil,
For some are too cunning I think for the Devil,
But she that means honest will keep the right w(...)
When a good etc.
Be sure don't take a wife that will swear and lie,
nor one that is given to flout or to jeer,
Though she has never so much means, she will make all fl(...)
and spend more in a week then thou wilt get in a ye(...)
Nor do not take one
That Is too fluent in tongue,
She Will always be tattling of that she knows none
Though it be nonsense she will have her way,
when a good etc.
But if thou art minded for to have a Mate,
chu^e one that is virtuous and civil beside,
Although thou art poor she will live at the same rate.
and with patience will wait till thou can bet(...) provid(...)
For content is a thing,
That comfort does bring,
It makes a poorman as well as a Lord to sing:
Then let the red shank or Dane deny what I say
If a good wife etc.
Concluding my ditty of what I have told,
make much of thy wife tho you are never so poor
And if thou'st got children esteem them as gold,
then thou wilt find a Salve for to cure thy sore:
To work do thou strive,
To keep them alive,
As thy charge grows up thy stock it will thrive:
Then youngmen remember th^^e words that I s(...)
A good Wife is a Portion every day.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the golden Ball near t(...) Hospital Gate in West
Smithfield.


