THE WELSH Fortune Tellers; OR, Sheffery Morgan's Observation of the Stars, as
he sat upon a Mountain in Wales.
To the Tune of, Touch of the Times.
Licensed according to Order.





SInce Arrival, Proclaiming and Crowning is o'^e,
And song upon song made, what would you have more
Why yet after all, In Prophecy b^ing,
It Is writ here in Verses for Lasses to Sing;
And therefore come buy t^is new Di^ty for why,
The truth of this Story there is none can deny
We see by the Stars that promo^ion will be,
Extended to persons of every degr^e.
When we are united all ove^ (...)
Resolving against all the Rom^^^ (...) stand,
Under the Protection of William our King
And pay our Allegiance in ever y thing
And Protestant Boys, with a th und'ring noise,
Has routed Tyrconnel, and all his Dear-Ioys,
Then all these three Kingdoms will flourish again,
and we shall be blessed with a Prosperous Reign.
When Lawyers at Westminster plead without Fees,
And Travallers walk all the turbulent Seas
Without any Vessel from Britain to Spain,
And when it does fair Maids and Feather-beds rain;
When Rome and her crew, are both Loyal and true,
And bid all their Treasons and Plottings adieu;
I say when these wonders come truly to pass,
The Protestants all will admire the Mass.
When Lasses are mothers by lying alone.
And Sheffery finds the Philosophers Stone,
And England is walled round with Silver and Gold,
When Knaves will not honest-mens Treasures with-hol(...)
When Friars grow chaste, and will not embrace
Young Ladies that comes with an amorous grace,
To make an ingenious confess^on of Sin,
Then Rome will be purer than ever she has been.
When every River with Brandy does run,
And hard stony Rocks they do melt with the Sun;
When Fishes make Honey that swims in the Seas,
And Oranges grows upon Sycamore Trees;
When Usurers they throw their money away,
And then fill their Bags and their Coffers with clay;
When this comes to pass I will make it appear,
That Rome shall be honored by Protestants here.
When the richest Amber of pebbles is made,
And Diamonds with Jewels for Gravel is laid,
The City and Country Roads to repair.
When Towers and Castles do fly in the air,
And great Ships refrain, the vast wide Ocean main,
And sails in the middle of Salisbury plain,
When all these strange wonders comes fairly to pass
The Protestants then shall admire the Mass.
Here is a prediction for Lasses likewise,
The which will their longing desires suffice;
When ever you're merry be modest and chaste,
And al days give way to your betters in place;
Though you lie alone, yet make not your moan,
For here by the Stars it is very well known,
If you will be thrifty and both get and safe,
When you are all married you Husbands shall have.

