The Loyal Nonconformist, OR; An Account what hedareswear, and what not.
I Fear an Oath, before I swear, to take it;
And well I may, for it is the Oath of God:
I fear Oath, when I have sworn, to break it;
And well I may, for Vengeance has a Rod.
And yet I may swear, and must too; it is due
Both to my Heavenly and my Earthly King:
If I assent, it must be full and true;
And if I promise I must do the thing.
I am no Quaker, not at all to swear:
Nor Papist, to swear East, and mean the West:
But am a Protestant, and shall declare
What I cannot, and what I can protest.
I never will endeavor Alteration
Of Monarchy, or of that Royal Name:
Which God has chosen to command this Nation;
But will maintain his Person, Crown and Fame,
What He commands, if Conscience say not nay,
(For Conscience is a greater King than He)
For Conscience sake, not Fear, I will obey;
And if not active, passive I will be.
I'II pray, That all his Subjects may agree,
And never more be crumbled into Parts:
I will endeavor that His Majesty
May not be King of Clubs, but King of Hearts.
The Royal Oak I swear I will defend;
But for the Ivy which does hug it so,
I swear that is a Thief, and not a Friend;
And about Steeples fitter for to grow.
The Civil Government I will obey,
But for Church Policy I swear I doubt it:
And if my Bible want the Apocrypha,
I swear my Book may be complete without it.
I dare not swear Church Government is Right
As it should be: but this I dare to swear,
If they should put me to 't, the Bishops might
Do better and be better than they are.
Nor will I swear for all that they arc worth;
That Bishoprics will stand, and Doomsday see.
And yet I Will swear the Gospel holds forth;
Christ with his Mysteries till then will be.
That Peter was a Prelate, they aver;
But I Will not swear't when all is said and done:
But I dare swear, and hope I shall not err,
He preached a hundred Sermons to their one.
Peter a Fisher was, and he caught men;
And they have Nets, and in them catch men too:
Yet I Will not swear they are alike; for them
He caught he saved; these catch, and them undo.
I dare not swear that Courts Ecclesiastic
Do in their Laws make just and gentle Votes:
But I Will be sworn that Burton, Pryn and Bastwick,
Were once Ear-witnesses of harsher Notes.
Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters are brave men
By Canon, not by Scripture; but to this,
If I be called I Will swear and swear again,
That no such Chapter in my Bible is.
I Will not condemn those Prechyterians who
Refused Bishoprics and might have had 'cm:
But Mistress Calamy, I Will swear, does do
As well as if she were a Spiritual Madam.
For Holy Vestments I Will not take an Oath,
Which Linen most Canonical may be:
Some are for Lawn, some Holland, some Scotch-cloath,
And Hemp for some is fitter than all three.
Paul had a Cloak, and Books, and Parchments too;
But that he wore a Surplise I Will not swear:
Nor that his Parchments did his Orders show,
Or in his books there was a Common Prayer.
I own Assistance to the King by Oath;
And if he please to put the Bishops down,
(As who knows what may be) I should be loath
To see Tom Beckets Mitre push the Crown.
And yet Church Government I do allow,
And am contented Bishops be the men:
And that I speak in earnest, here I vow
Where we have One I wish we might have Ten.
In fine, the Civil Power I Will obey;
And seek the Peace and Welfare of the Nation:
If this will not do, I know not what to say;
But farewell London, farewell Corporation;
LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDC LXX.


