The West-Country DIALOGUE:
OR, A Pleasant Ditty between Anniseed-Robin the Miller, and his Brother Jack
the Plough-man, concerning Joan, poor Robin's unkind Lover.

To the Tune of, O folly, desperate Folly, etc.
Licensed according to Order.





Robin. WEll met my loving Brother Jack,
mind what I shall say to thee,
My Mother tells me that I lack
a Woman to wait on me:
She tells me I Am big enough now for a Wife,
And therefore must alter my Batchelor's life;
But I am afraid of care, trouble, and strife:
O Charges, Family-charges,
makes me afraid to wed,

Jack. It Is like you are loath to take a Bride,
because that the Times are hard,
Pray cast such careful thoughts aside,
and never such things regard:
For if you can live now when every thing's dear,
Why then Brother Robin, I Will make it appear,
In times of full Plenty much Moneys you will clear
O marry prithee now marry,
Joan is a pretty Girl.

Robin. I am not sure that honest Joan,
will marry with me I swear;
For she to such a height is grown.
that if I by chance come there,
And Proffer to kiss her, she will turn her about,
And then with her Fists she will batter my snout,
Till blood from the same came trickling out:
O marry, if I should marry,
How will she serve me then?

Jack. It Is like you did not compliment,
and give her a kind Embrace;
But like some clownish Booby went
with Hat hanging over your Face;
And it may be, your Shoes and your Stockings untied,
You looked like a Lover that want^ a Bride;
For some such like Reason she liquor'd your hide
O Robin, Anniseed Robin,
is it the truth or no?

Robin. Believe me as I am a Man,
true Breeding I there expressed;
And as you know full well I can,
I went in Apparel dressed.
My Grandfather's Hat, and my Calve's leather-cloath^^
Then into her presence I merrily goes,
And made her a Congee quite down to my Toes;
yet Joaney angry Joaney
kicked me about the Room,

Jack. You should have told her what you had,
to bring a young Woman to;
This would have made her Heart full glad,
without any more ado
With Kisses thou should have said, If thou'st be mine,
Why then all my Capons, my Turkies, and swine,
And every thing else that I have should be thine:
Then Robin, Anniseed-Robin,
you would have gained her Love.

Robin. I was not wanting to declare,
my Riches to her at Large,
And how I was my Fathers, Heir,
sure I could maintain a charge,
And told her, that I had a Cow, and a Calf,
And something likewise that would make her to laugh,
As large, and as long as a Constables Staff:
yet Joaney, Passionate Joaney,
kicked me about the Floor.

Jack. Go try your Fortune once again,
and never be daunted so;
Her love you may at length obtain,
for Lasses are coy you know:
But after a while they surrender and yield,
For Love is a thing cannot be concealed,
And you may be Lord of the conquering Field,
then Robin, tickle her Robin,
she will at last be thine.

Robin. To take your Council I Will nor fail,
but to her I Will go once more,
I Will give her Custards, Cakes and Ale,
which I did not do before;
I Will spend a whole Shilling, and when it is done
It she will not love, me as sure as a Gun,
I Will call her young Whore, and away I will run:
so leave her, utterly leave her,
never come there again,

Printed for P. Brooksby in (...)


