WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon surmounted by robin
The Westminster Wonder:
Giving an Account of a Robin Red-breast, who, ever since the Queen's Funeral,
continues on the top Pinnacle of the Queen's Mausoleum, or Pyramid, in the Abbey
of Westminster, where he is seen and heard to sing, and will not depart the
place, to the Admiration of all Beholders.

Tune of, Jealous Lover.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.



YOU loyal Subjects of this Isle,
Be pleased to attend a while,
To this Relation which I bring;
You never heard so strange a thing,
In any former Ages past:
Queen Mary died December last,
And Robin Red-breast, to this day,
Continues singing where she lay.
Not in the mourning Chamber, no,
Where Death did strike the fatal blow;
But in Westminster-Abby, where
They did a Pyramid prepare,
Against her solid Funeral;
This they did her Mausoleum call,
Where in the Abbey it was placed,
With rich and sumpt'ous Beauty graced.
The very Art of Man was tried,
To make it richly beautified,
Angels and Cherubins of Gold,
A sight most glorious to behold.
This Monument does taper rise,
A Pinnacle at top likewise;
There is and eke a Wonder too,
Which I declare is strange and true.
This is a Wonder strange, I say,
Ever since that great and solemn Day,
Of the Interment of our Queen,
There is a Robin Red-breast seen,
Upon the very top of all:
He sings a Note soft, sweet and small,
Which is most pleasant for to hear,
When they the Royal Place draw near.
Sometimes it flies a little way,
Yet from the place it will not stay,
But soon returns with speed again,
Where it does Night and Day remain.
Upon the Pinnacle it sits,
Spreading the little Wings by fits,
And in the very midst of Prayer,
This Robin he sits singing there,
And is not missed; yet we conclude,
He must fly forth sometimes for Food;
Which done, his flight he back does take,
And never does the place forsake.
The News was carrie^ far and near,
That Robin Read-breast does appear
Upon the Queen's Mausoleum still,
Which does all Men with wonder fill.
Renowned Lords and Ladies gay,
And Common People, day by day,
Upon their hearing this Report,
They to the Abbey still resort,
Where Robin Red-breast they behold,
Upon the Pinnacle of Gold;
And it is the thoughts of rich and poor,
The like was never known before.
A wise Astrologer declares,
It is a sign that our Affairs
Will be successful every Spring,
Which makes the Robin Red-breast sing.
He learns from these sweet Songs of Joy,
That Potent France shall never destroy
The Church, though good Queen Mary died,
For God above will be our Guide.
London: Printed for J. Blare, at the Sign of the Looking-glass on
London Bridge.


