It Is Money makes a Man: OR, The Good-Fellows Folly.
Here in this Song Good Fellow thou may find,
How Money makes a Man, if you are not blind?
Therefore return e're that it be too late,
And don't on Strumpets spend thy whole estate,
For when all is gone, no better thou will be:
But Laughed to scorn in all thy poverty.
To a pleasant new Tune: Bonny black Bess: Or, Digby.
By J. Wade.


OO what a madness it is to borrow or lend,
Or for strong Liquor thy Money to spend;
For when that is wanting thy courage to cool,
Thou most stand Cap in hand to every fool:
but if thy pock^ts can sing and they will take thy word
Oh then thou art company for Knight or yet Lord:
Then make much of a Penny as near as you can,
For if that be wanting you are counted no man.
Then listen a while and i will tell you in brief,
The most of my sorrow, my care, and my grief;
I had an estate I Will make it appear,
Besides all my stock, was worth fifty a year:
But so soon as I to drinking then fell,
My Land I then Morgaged, my Cattle did sell;
No sooner the money I for them had took,
But it went to the Alehouse i will swear on a book.
Thus in a short time my money did waste,
And I found my self not a pin better at last;
Whilst other Tradesmen were working full hard,
I from an Alehouse could not be debarred:
There would I sit tippling day after day,
And my Wife she unto me full often would say,
Make much of a Penny as near as you can,
For if that be wanting thou wilt be counted no man.
But the words that she spoke i would regard not a straw
But would kick her, and beat her, and keep her in awe;
My children at home might eat the bare wall,
Whilst I in an Alehouse for strong liquor did call:
And my Hostis forsooth must needs sit on my knee
though my wife she has twice more beauty then she
Yet that would not please my letcherous mind,
Because for my Money my Hostis was kind.
But in the conclusion here comes all my care,
My back it grew thin, and my pockets grew bare;
Then I told my Hostis my pitiful tale,
In hopes that my sorrows she would be wail:
But she turned up her nose, and she looked a squoy,
You might have been wiser she straight did reply;
This was all the comfort that I got from she,
That always pretended my friend for to be.






THerefore all young men that loves the Ale-bench
Some counsel i will give them before they go hence;
If thou sit'st day and night, and drink'st never so fast
Yet thou wilt find thy own home is the best at last;
It is but for your money they wait you upon,
And when that is wanting you are lightly looked on;
If she sees but twopence you run on the score,
She Will swear by her troth she will trust you no more
^hen have a care young men, be ruled in time,
Lest drink overcome thee, in old days you pine;
For you see Good-fellows how threadbare they go
And what good-husbandry brings a man to;
For some lives most bravely tho means they have small,
And some that has hundreds do quickly spend all;
Then make much of a penny as near as you can,
For if that be wanting you are counted no man.
It Is money you see makes a Lord, or yet Ea^l,
It Is money you see that sets out a young Girl;
Likewise it is money makes the Lawyer to prate,
and it is money does make the man love his wife Kate
And it is money breeds love where never was none,
Although she be old, yet money makes her young:
A Knight or a Beggar, whatever they be
If they have but money they are welcome to me.
Thus money you see, and do well understand,
If a poor man can but get it, he buys house and land
But it must not be those that works hard all day,
And at night in an Alehouse does throw it away.
Nay, that will not serve, but twice as much more,
If his word it will pass, he runs on the score;
Then all the week after, though then he don't ^eed
He wants bread-corn his poor children to feed,
Therefore he advised boon Companions all,
For you see the worlds so they laugh at a man's fall
With speed your old haunts pray begin for to shun,
Take warning by others the which are undone:
You Will say a good fellow it is a brave name,
But many a man does pay dear for the same:
The which has all spent, now in Goal he does lie,
And none will relieve him in his poverty.
But some men have got such a spark in their throat
That I would not be him that should quenched for a groat;
All the fair words his wife can him give,
Yet he will not be ruled though poor he does live:
Hang money he c^ys, till all ^^'t is gone;
As for house and Land I mean to buy none;
I must see my Hostis to go neat and fine,
Although that my family does starve and pine.
And thus have I told you the conditions of some,
That all long of strong liquor will never keep home
His stock it d^cays, although his wife cries,
And in the conclusion a beggar he dies:
but a good husband's means you see does increase
He maintains his household in joy and in peace;
Then make much of a penny as near as you can,
For if that be wanting, thou wilt be counted no man
FINIS.
With Allowance,

To. L'Estrange.

Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


