A Congratulary Poem ON THE RIGHT HONORABLE Heneage Lord Finch, Baron of
Daventry, Earl of Nottingham AND Lord High Chancellor OF ENGLAND.
MY Lord, Ariststotle the Lerarn'd did say
That Wit, and Virtue, always made the way
for their Allies, to mount bright Honors Chair,
By rendering of them Excellent and Rare.
A Man may rise in Greatness from his Blood,
But unless he, be Virtuous and Good,
He wants Weight, and equal Balance High,
To make him truly Great, and from the Sky.
Blood without Virtue, it is but only Nature,
Without embellishing of the Creature,
But when together, are in hand and hand,
That Soul enjoys the Heavens and the Land.
Blood without Virtue's, but a dazeling Light,
And blinds the Optics, more then clears the Sight.
But when Companions are, in the same way,
Honor comes up and makes her Holliday.
Blood without Virtue, is too often Vain,
Its Color fading, because not died in Grain.
But when with her, She Hawks up Honor high,
Says the most Learned in Divinity.
Virtue without Blood, does still make Honor
Essentially so, from Heavens great Donour.
Since that is the Primum Mobile of all,
Of things above, and below Terrestial.
By her, Men are great, and that of Course,
For true Greatness flows from Heavens Source.
For what is nearest the thing, Logicians say.
Enjoys that most, which we call Honors day.
The Arts cry out, they only Honor have,
That understand how to be good and brave,
Learned, Just, Pious, and from Reason high,
As Men not born from Earth, but from the Sky.
Wisdom relates, that she Commission has,
Honors to give, as she best pleases
To her Allies, those things she does bestow,
That in our selves may live, and not Mankind owe
Any thing, but what out selves think Just,
The surest way discharging any Trust,
Wisdom's a Portion to the Sons of Men,
The softer Sex to the fine Women.
Virtue's Honor still, and from on high,
Honor without her, is but a Mystery;
And not so, from Reason, Sense nor Story,
Therefore I have done with Honors empty Glory.
But your great Soul still moves on Honor true,
Acted by the powers above, above Red and Blew;
It loves to live with you, and with you will dye,
And beyond the Grave shall keep you Company.
Honor, the bright Star, from the Arts Spheers,
Honor the gay Plannet of our years,
The Youth most beautiful, Charming and Fair,
Courting the Maid Virtue, as in the Air,
The Sun himself courts all things here below,
And by its motion runs daily to and fro,
Leading the Life of Love, as we do see,
Makes Men and Beasts take their felicity.
Nature, Blood, Wit, Art, Wisdom most high;
Makes you so Rich, and so to signify.
In that you are not singly, but doubly Great,
By Fortunes Charms, and not by those of Fate,
You are so excellent, and of such parts,
Whether you will or no, you take all Hearts;
Bringing them to their great and chief Delight,
Their pains discharge, and settle them on the Right.
Your Picture in your Character may see,
As the Sun when smiling on a Willow Tree,
There your perfections, are rendered bright and rare,
As Angels Gay, do dance beyond the Air.
There we may see enough, of one fine Man,
That we we may imitate, and do the best we can;
For that which we cannot Copy, we must admire,
As Persians do the Suns bright Golden Fire,
When this great Oak must be cut down to die
By Death the Woodman and in the Grave to lie;
It shall be set in the Orchard above,
Near the purling River, of Heaven's great Love;
Where it shall thrive, and be watered again,
Pruned and be Trimmed, and there rejoice amain;
And so receive from time to time such pleasure,
Beyond Thought, Words, Fancy, and all Measure.
W.W.

