Doctor COOPER at Work Upon DAUNCEY'S Bones: AND COOK licking his FINGERS After
his Dose and Pill.
O For the Doctor's lines, or Cleveland's, Dauncey
To truss thee in, how bravely would I haunse thee,
Then like a Jack of Lent the first of March,
In Cuerpo thou should hang under some Arch,
There to be played on by the wind, and noise
Of Fish-wives, Orange-wenches, and the Boys.
Was It not enough the brethren felt his whip
So smart and keen, but he must make thee skip
Thou Jackanapes? think thou, thou piteous elf,
To draw his anger on thy single self,
And rescue so a number? foul-mouth no,
You are beneath him, he is more worth than so.
Lord, what a holy thing is want of clothes.
How it keeps Balladers from drink and oaths!
When there is no more to pawn, an oath were vain,
Your words will go as far in Chart'r 'ouse lane.
Thou seem boy to have taken his advice
And gone to school again, and thou art wise
In doing so, thou may be of his stables,
Thou Art at the Dunghill now in AEsop's Fables.
Your mine is Hell deep, we give a guess what is in it,
Poets we are sure send nothing to the mint.
We Are pleased to see you wince, you have a gauld hide,
Your own breath stinks when it is to you applied.
If your own words refounded be accursed,
Your meaning was not wholesome at the first.
Mark how this saucy Rascal 'gins his prate,
As though the Doctor were an advocate
OF foul debauchery: when in no man's hearing
He ever spoke of drunkenness or swearing;
Nor thinks there can be such a sin in fashion
In The Clergy, 'ts hatched in your Imagination:
There it is ye slanderous villains that ye frame
An odious abuse, and then declame.
So I have seen a Coward draw his sword
Against a Post, and every blow a word;
Now if thou were a man, I Would have thee here,
And then again he cries I Would have thee there.
Bring forth your swearers, and your drunkards too,
Or on my word this Knight o'th post are you.
I a've a Physician that without perhaps
Shall cure your mouth secure of after claps.
Down of your knees, thank God, and thank me too,
It Is well, it is well, now Gallows claim thy due;
And when the Surgeons chest has brought you sir
Back from that tree, into their Theater,
The Doctor for a Lecture shall not stick,
To send your bones unto the Devil to pick.
You might have seen, had you been so inclined,
(But as the saying is, hasty Currs are blind)
The Doctor knew your Asse's meaning sir,
And needs not you for an Interpreter.
We like no coxeing friend, nor ever will,
Joab and Judas both did kiss and kill.
Had Griffin brayed against a man or two,
Or on a County where such things they do,
His Libel might have gone untax'd: but now
To write at random thus, and to allow
A roving Kite with full spread wings to fly
Over the Nation, carrying infamy
Thus undetermined; Dauncey it is too much,
Ill minds conclude the Clergy all are such.
This mischief he has done, and as we mention,
We had but's own word for his good intention.
This has your pious soul done, that cannot drink
Yon say, but shall I tell you what I think?
What I have heard? Danncey I will take leave,
For all your affidavit, t'undeceive
My silly Countrymen, who live in doubt
Some Minister of worth set this Cry out;
Whose spirit bleeds within him for the sin
That yet the people, and the Clergy's in.
But come cheer up my hearts, it is no such matter,
This fellow in Divinity does but smatter,
Hangs on the Press, and as his learning's small,
His pay's ten groats a ballad, and some Ale:
Which not one Stationer alone does pay for
But all the Crowd, which he goes first to stay for;
The Common sponge, a fellow of no reckoning,
Shall follow you to an Alehouse but for beck'ning.
And be brought out again perhaps. But How!
What do I see, Dauncey, the grizly brow
Of Goblin Truth, Fathers in Truth, the thing
Undid the Church, and cut the throat o'th King?
Choke us no more you R -- with your minced meat,
Fathers, feed's at discretion, we will eat,
I and give thanks too for your institution,
And call you fathers without diminution,
Conservers of Gods Oracles, bring these fellows
Truth to confess, where they should do it to the Gallows.
And mark it Dauncey, see how thou art caught,
As if thine own lie to betray thou had watched;
When with comparison thou would up-cry
The faith of Griffin, As has no reply.
But Mr. Dauncey, now you have showed your lack
Of wit and art, let me again go back,
And view the subject of your declamation
Not against things, but vices O this Nation.
Are vices nothing? and's all this ado
Made about nothing, by you Puppies two.
Now you begin to belch up your disgrace,
And spit foul Language in the Doctor's face;
What are you proud of, that you thus be-Asse us,
And knave us bluntly, is it Land in Parnassus?
Who would not swear you are drunk? it is no ruth
To conscience for a man to swear the Truth.
Would thou know what thou art? thou can not miss't,
In the first Chapter of the Alchymist,
Where Sub^l, Doll, and Face do seem to me
Railing, to conjure for a name for thee.
There read thy self, they are thine all, and if it be
Thy chance to escape a sadder destiny,
When with the Stationers thou have sucked so long
Scot-free of Ale, as the other has, whose tongue
Thou now defendest, may thou by good prayers
Rise by degrees, from Link-boy, to the Players;
To be their book-keeper, and then grown bold,
Upon thy parts, when thou art blind and old,
Presume to write a play in thy last age,
And have it basely hissed off of the stage,
For which thy heart must break, if it break not
This minute, for thus having played the Sot.
We are ingenuous, and do not deride
Your poverty, you Knaves, no, but your pride;
And cannot choose but laugh, to see the Saints
Have drunken Atheists to defend their plaints.
So exit Dauncey. -- Now comes Cook in fury,
Lick-spit o'th Law: speak sirrah to the Jury,
There you may find a dozen of the name
You give the Doctor, (Caterpillar of fame:)
Beat me this Buckram Rogue, Falstaff, to seven.
Nay if thou will, beat him into eleven,
And if they have no better manners then,
Send them to me, I Will beat them all again.
Knaves that do naught but quirk upon his Calling,
And quit their cause; it is time the Ass left bawling.
Martial. Ep. Dic tandem aliquid de tribus Capellis. I Thought I'ad finished
William now, but hark,
I'ave commendations to thee from the Clark,
Fogg in Rye dough, thou image of a Lawyer,
Fitter to make a Carman, or a Sawyer,
Much more then ordinary appears in you.
Plead you for Asses, and are Asses too?
Must Readers preach; has the Church no degrees,
Nor order? Scribes go take the Lawyers fees.
Hell's where confusion is, and rotten speech,
The Lawyer took's own pill, and spoke at's breech.
The journey-pew supplies his need, as it is,
Pray, get your Ass a pulpit to serve his.
He will not be the first Ass that e're spoke
Out of one, and got by it a suit and cloak.
I wish thy libel might have pleased where't came,
And that thou would had a more auspicious name
At Westminster Hall Gate, he will see that looks,
What Is to be thought of disaffected Cooks.
God bless King Charles, so that he never again
Be troubled with such Rogues, speak Clark, Amen.
Now stroke the Doctor's beard, ye Libel flingers;
And if ye foul your hands, Cook lick your fingers.
By Not. Wildoe.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1661.


