The new made Gentlevvoman Or, The dishonest Lady.
Written as true as she did relate
How Money made her every Rascal's Mate
Likewise she says she is gathered riches store.
By only playing of the private Whore.
And now in the Country she is gone,
And left me behind to sing this song.
To a new Tune, Or, The Flatteries of Fate.


COme Gallants and lisen unto me a while
i will sing you a song that will make you smile
Of one that is pretty, in London fair City,
And Gentlemen's humors she can beguile.
My Parents quoth she has left me forlorn,
And told me how I was begot in a Barn,
But since I am to elder years grown
To be told of my Parents I hold it in scorn.
I got a few Clothes and to London I came,
Where quickly my beauty did get me a name;
I tell you the truth although you me blame,
I now am become a Girl of the Game.
The first that come to me he was a Footboy,
And he gave me a Crown for to call him my Joy,
I loved him and joy'd him and honey'd him so
That it cost him an Angel before he did go.
A Lawyers Clerk was the next that did come,
And made me believe that he was a Lords Son,
I pleased his mind when I found out his play
That it cost him a pound before he went away.
And many more to me did strait ways Resort,
With Gold and with Silver my person to court,
That Riches I gathered by using this Trade
After forty had used me I went for a Maid.
heart

depiction of book

WIth silks and with sattings now bravely I go,
and waiting maids on me attend, you must know
My justico and Black-Patches I were,
Which make all admire that on me does stare.
Brave Gallants I promise you does me adore
Not taking me to be a vampified Whore,
They Will give me a Guinny if on them I smile,
And two for a take-up, thus I them beguile.
My Smock it is Cambrick I tell you the truth,
And handled by many a prodigal youth
I have a fine spring that runeth so clear,
That it brings me as good as two hundred a Year.
Now I have got Treasure no longer i will stay
But into the Country strait I will away,
where one of my lovers has done me much wrong
For in a weeks time he did send me this song.
The Gentleman's Song that he sent his Lady into the Country.

MY Lady is grown so bonny and gay
she is gone from the City in the country to play,
And by her great fame, she is got such a name,
With singing and dancing it makes her go lame.
She played in the City almost half a year
And yet for her wages she is never the near,
But a Gallant did say this part you must play
It Is thought in some corner that he did her lay.
I steering my coast one night in the dark
I met with a Frigot that sailed toward the Park
She haisted up sail and away she did run
I see her cast Anchor at the Prince in the Sun.
I gave her a Guinny to enter her Fort
She presently yielded to come to the sport,
But finding me lasie strait bid me begone
I gave her a shot, but she fired my Gun.
And thus I was conquered and forced to retire
For she gave me a Clap against my desire
she makes me go stradling with swelling my eggs
you may drive a wheel-barrow between my 2 legs.
But now her beauty is almost decayed,
which makes her to paint for to hold up that trade,
with false locks and vizard masks she has great skill,
But she is known for a whore let her go where she will,
By L.W.

