The SCOTCH Riddle Unfolded: OR, Reflections upon R. VV. his most Lamentable
BALLAD, CALLED The LOYAL NONCONFORMIST.
STand up Smectymnuus, and hear thy trial;
Thy monstrous Title puts me to a pause:
Was ever any Nonconformist Loyal?
Love he the King that disobeys his Laws?
Yet he can Swear, and yet he fears to Swear;
For Solemn Oaths they must have sacred grounds:
The Oaths of Scotland cost poor England dear,
That Swore from Faith and Troth, to Blood and Wounds.
It Is truth, old Boreas never could blow West;
And you may note a Non-Conformists mouth
What ere he says, what ere he does protest,
Stands (like Emanuel Chapel) North and South.
He fears an Oath, as Lawyers do a bribe,
Though he dissembles a Religious dread;
For it is well known that all that factious Tribe,
Swallowed the Covenant Hand over head.
That Covenant, in which the People Swore
They knew not what: 'Twas such another thing
As Satan's Oracles, of Torletons Lore,
That cried Forbear, yet whispered Kill the King.
That cursed Covenant, which he that now
Abjures is free; but he that keeps it finds
Himself a baffled Samson, and his Vow
A Dalilah, for whom it binds it blinds.
How vainly do their loose pretenses guild
That Warbeck principle, called Conscience, which,
Like Jone of Arc, leads Troops into the field,
She styles her self a Saint, yet proves a Witch.
If Truth has any virtue to convince:
If Pulpits can speak better things then Tubs:
This Conscience owes Allegiance to her Prince;
The King of Hearts command the Queen of Clubs.
But is it not strange the Bramble should defend
Joves sacred Tree, that lately did aspire
Not only the Ivy, but the Oak to rend,
And (like a Traitor) set the Wood on fire,
Yet talked of Loyalty; but what he meant
Some Conjurer expound, but to Obey
Moses and flee from wicked Korah's tent,
Is Holy Writ, and not Apocrapha.
Nor care I though the Apocrapha were not,
And yet I do believe that Ancient story
Of Bell and Dragon cannot be forgot,
If there be extant ere a Directory.
The Machabees shall flourish like Italians,
And after ages shall not be bereft
Of chaste Susanna, and her pair of Stallions,
Whilst we have Church, or they have Elders left.
What our great Prelates do, and what they are,
God and the King shall question; we are forbid:
Yet they that do the worst, do better far
Then the Smectymnian party wish they did.
Their Bishoprics (against the false Kirk's will)
Have outlived Sedwick's Doomes-day; and I hope
Each Diocese will keep her Crosier still,
And not let every Parish have a Pope.
What was St. Peter's Office, what his Trade,
The Gospel gives us a most clear Narration;
It does not say his Fishing Nets were made
Of Treason, Sacrilege, or Sequestration.
That he nere taught the Presbyterian way
Does well appear by his Divine Epistles:
And (though he Preached as often as they say)
He never Preached for Bodkins, Spoons, and Whistles.
Peace then foul Mouth's, be still unhallowed pates;
Make not the Church the subject of your Jeers,
But reckon Dr. Bastwick and his mates
Uncircumsised of heart, though not of ears.
Proud Presbyters; remember, Thirty pieces
Was all the fees the Jews ere gave your Patron:
If London Sheep had born no better fleeces
Dame Calamy had been a Threadbare Matron.
Yet who is it does not think your sniveling Brother
Would swing his Handkercher over Paul's steeple,
And wear as high s Miter as another,
But he is a Pharisee and fears the People.
As for Church Vestments, Hemp we will bestow
On Snarling Priests that mouth against the King,
And he that comes into the Church by the Bow,
It Is Justice that he should go out by the string.
But if the Gallows ere should have her right:
As who knows what may be (dear Smec. perhaps
'T may be thy day) 'twould be a pretty sight
To see the Hangman wear a brace of Caps.
Was any of Paul's Books or Parchments found
In Byfields Registry (my good Divines?)
Although his Cloak was long and swept the ground,
'Twoud be too short to cover your designs.
Hence then ye Catterpillers, Dregs of Men,
Hence Pulpit Bloodhounds, hence Seditious pack:
Bow Bells shall never say Return again,
Although perhaps the Ropes may call ye back.
And farwell Wild, with all thy learned Meeters,
Posterity shall laugh, and picture thee
On the same Sign with Archee, and Hugh Peter's,
And under-write this Motto, We be three.
Printed in the Year; 1666.


