Thomas Waits Case, A Condemned Prisoner in the Tower.
THat He was much dissatisfied with the Armies proceedings, in Imprisoning
diverse Members of Parliament, in the year, 1648.

That he went down soon after to his own house, 80 miles distant from London,
and came not up again until he was summoned several times, under pain of
Sequestration and Expulsion, and did not come up until the day before that
horrid sentence was given against the King, and then knew not what it was that
he was commanded to come up for.

That he was none of the Contrivers, or Lawmakers, for setting up that
Unwarrantable Court, for Trial of the King, but was absent all the while.

That he never knew himself to be one of that Court, until his name was
called, at which he was amazed.

That he was trapan'd by Cromwell and Ireton to come out of the House, and then
forced by them into the Court, and when the King desired to be heard by his
Lords and Commons in the Painted-Chamber, He, with some others desired he might
be heard, which caused the Court to withdraw into the Court of Wards; then
Cromwell rebuked those that were the occasion of it with many reproaches, which
made all men silent, seeing it was to no purpose to speak, whereupon he
returned no more into the Court, but stayed behind in the Crowd.

That he signed not the warrant for Execution, nor any writing tending
thereunto until after that horrid fact was committed, but some time after was
forced by Cromwell to sign a writing with others (not knowing what was contained
in it) saying we should not slip out so, and from that time to his death, he
looked upon him with an evil eye. That he never bought any of the Kings Lands
or Goods, only a final Fee-Farm rent that he paid out of his own Lands.

That he was put out of all Authority by Cromwell, for assisting the Kings
Friends, in helping them to their just dues, and being serviceable to them.

That he was a great Sufferer under Cromwell, for opposing his Tyranny.

That he nearly escaped Decimation, for offering himself to be bound for some
of his Countrymen, that were Decimated.

That he would not suffer any of the Kings Friends to be Imprisoned, or their
houses searched, in the year 1659. when he was in power.

That he never took the Oath of Abjuration against his now Majesty, but always
opposed it in his Station, and glad he was at the restoration of his Majesty.

That he came in upon the Proclamation.


