THE Witty Maid of the West;
OR, The Miller well thrash'd by Robin the Plowman: For which Service he
received a Sum of Money, which bought a Ring and paid for the Marriage betwixt
him and his beloved Nancy.

Tune of, Ladies of London.
This may be Printed,

R. P.







William the Miller, who lived in the W^st,
A lusty stout Lad, brisk and ayry;
Now if you will but attend to the Jest,
I think it will make you all merry:
There was a Lass that used his Mill,
Her Name it was pretty faced Nancy;
He would be kissing and courting her still,
There Is no one but she he could fancy.
She was a beautiful Lass, I declare,
And one that was wonderful witty:
There is not any with her can compare,
In Country Town or in City:
Nancy she did the Miller beguile,
She knew him a knave by his learing;
Pray now have patience, and listen a while,
The Story is well worth your hearing.
Often he fain would have been at the sport,
if Nancy she would but be willing,
And as the Maiden her self did report,
he gave her full twenty good shil^ing;
She straight did yie^d, the case it was thus,
the Lass was resolved to cheat him,
The twenty Shillings she put in her purse,
and said at the Mill she would meet him.
Now for to study some joke she did aim,
that she in her fancy might glory,
Then to her true Love the Plowman she came,
and told him the sum of the story:
Robin replied, my counsel is this,
we will not stand di^coursing and arguing,
I in a Sack will be carried as Grist,
because you shall stand to your bargain.
Master and Man did bitterly Roar,
I and for Mercy often did Cry,
But she did Thump and Thrash them the more,
sure said the Tailors now we shall dye:
No ye Rascals I Will not Kill you,
but am resolved to pay your Arrears,
With that she did bru^se them, and bitterly use them
poor Tailors was never so lugg'd by the Ears.
Then they got loose and both run away;
Betty in wrath did vow and protest,
That she would send to them the next day,
for the Kings Service they should be Pressed:
Then they were again affrighted,
this did create whole Troops of new fears,
We Will send now for pity to good Mistress Betty,
for Sea Fights are worse then lugg'd by the Ears.
These very Lines the Tailor did send,
saying, sweet Betty Pardon us now,
Though it is true, we once did offend,
yet at your feet we'll willingly Bow,
Now this day to beg your Pardon,
that you may put us out of all fears,
We'll never abuse you, but likewise excuse you,
although you did lugg us both by the Ears.
Now when the Lass had Pardoned them both,
how the poor Rogues did Caper amain,
Likewise they tied themselves by an Oath,
that they would never offend her again:
Likewise gave her a Colation,
seeing she thus had banished their fears,
They were not unwilling to spend twenty Shilling,
although she had lugg'd them both by the Ears.
After the Feast he said to his Man,
this has been charges you understand,
Therefore take all the care that you can,
Easter and Whitson Tide are at hand:
For to Cabbidge Silks and Sattins,
do not forget to whett up your Shiers:
Dear Master never fear it, we'll presently share it,
and for time to come, take care of our Ears.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare and J. Back.


