His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE War, which I Entered into by the Advice of My People, is, by the Blessing
of God, and their Zealous and Affectionate Assistance, brought to the End We
all Proposed, an Honorable Peace; which I was willing to Conclude, not so much
to Ease My Self from any Trouble or Hazard, as to free the Kingdom from the
Continuing Burden of an Expensive War.

I am heartily sorry My Subjects will not at first find all that Relief from
the Peace which I could wish, and they may expect; but the Fonds intended for
the last years Service have fallen short of Answering the Sums for which they
were given, so that there remain considerable Deficiencies to be Provided for.

There Is a Debt upon the Account of the Fleet and the Army.

The Revenues of the Crown have been anticipated, by My Consent, for Public
Uses, so that I am wholly destitute of means to support the Civil List; and I
am never distrust you will suffer this to turn to My disadvantage, but will
provide for Me during My Life, in such a manner as may be for My Honor, and
for the Honor of the Government.

Our Naval Force being increased to near double what it was at My Accession to
the Crown, the Charge of maintaining it will be proportionably augmented, and
it is certainly necessary for the Interest and Reputation of England, to have
always a great strength at Sea.

The Circumstances of Affairs Abroad are such, that I think My Self obliged to
tell on My Opinion, That for the present, England cannot be safe without a Land
force; and I hope We shall not give those who mean Us ill, the opportunity of
Effecting that, under the Notion of a Peace, which they could not bring to pass
by (...) War.

I doubt not but you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, will take these
Particulars into your Consideration, in such a manner as to provide the
necessary Supplies, which I do very Earnestly Recommend to you.

My Lords and Gentlemen,

I Esteem it one of the greatest Advantages of the Peace, That I shall now have
^eisure to Rectify such Corruptions or Abuses, as may have crept into any Part
of ^he Administration, during the War, and effectually to Discourage
Profaneness and Immorality; and I shall Employ my Thoughts in promoting Trade,
and Advancing the Happiness and Flourishing Estate of the Kingdom.

I shall Conclude with telling you, That as I have, with the Hazard of every
thing, Rescued your Religion, Laws and Liberties, when they were in the
Ex^^eamest Danger, so I shall Place the Glory of My Reign, in Preserving them
En^^re and Leaving them so to Posterity.

FINIS.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Glasgow, by Robert Sanders One of His
Majesty's Printers, Anno Dom. 1697.


