THE VVitty Damsel of Devonshire:
OR, A Dialogue between a Mother and her Daughter, concerning Robin the Miller
whom the Daugther hated, and resolved to marry William the Plowman whom she
dearly Loved.

Tune of Here I Love, there I Love: Or, The two English Travelers.
Licensed according to Order.









DEar Daughter come hither and hear what I say,
When do you intend to be Married I pray,
Poor Robin the Miller lies sick for your sake,
Some pity of him I would have you now take.
He vow^ that he loves you as dear as his life,
And has a desire to make you his wife;
Then do not be cru^l dear Daughter, said she;
For why, he lo^^^ none in the Nation but thee.
I ^ill not believe him dear Mother she cried,
Th^^e's Prudenc^ young Bridget, nay Susan beside,
Nay Nelly, and Nancy, likewise Bonny Kate,
All these youthful Lad^es he courted o^ late.
As soon as their Innocent Hearts were betrayed,
He never regarded the Vows that he made;
Now if he does languish, in faith let him dye,
I know he is given to flatter and lie.
My d^ar loving Daughter I an't of that mind,
I Am certain he never can prove so unkind;
Afford him all kindness and love that you can;
you will find this poor Miller a right Honest Man.
His life I would have you endeavor is save,
For why should you send him with Sighs to the Grave;
Poor heart he does languish and cry day night,
That you are resolved to ruin him quite.
His strange Protestetions I vow and declare,
Are none but self-notions young Maids to ensnare;
Therefore I Will have nothing to do with him then,
These Millers I know to be false hearted Men.
His death I am certain we need never fear,
For Loyal to any he never did appear;
Young Lasses he now courts a Store and above,
Then hang him dear Mother he will never dye for love.
Besides I must tell you his calling I hate,
And never desire to live at that rate,
Before the Toll-dish my Apparel shall give,
I will stay a Maiden as long as I live.
I wonder dear Daughter you should be so coy,
Both Riches and Pleasure you soon would enjoy,
Beyond your Three Sisters Kate, Dolly and Joan
For Robin you know has a Mill of his own.
Likewise he has three or four Acres of Land,
And al^o good Silver and Gold at command,
He tells me that you shall be Dame of his store,
Now think of this Daughter, what man can say more.
I care not a Fig for his silver and Gold,
Though he had as much as my Apron could hold,
Nor yet do I value his owning a Mill;
If ever I wed it shall be honest Will.
His living he gets by the sweat of his Brow,
Sometimes by his Thrashing then Harrow and Plow,
By honest hard labor he lives true and just,
But Millers you know they are Thieves as the best.
I value not Robin, nay Richard nor Ralph,
If (...) am with William m^ thinks I am safe,
For why to his Honor, nay Glory and Fame,
We now have a right valiant King of his Name.
But as for the Robins it never was know,
That they were thought worthy to come near the throne,
Then Heavens preserve all the Williams therefore
It being the Name which I dearly adore.
Her Mother immediately made this Reply;
Let Robin the Miller with languishing dye,
With these pretty sayings my Heart you have won,
I will have a William likewise to my son.
Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, and I. Back.


