To His Grace JAMES DUKE of ORMOND, etc. Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND, On His
return to that Government.
NOt that the Soul of Poesy was flown,
Or wanted Argument to Work upon;
Or that the Air was thick, or that the Muse
Was crammed with ease, or Bedridden with disuse,
Has she kept State, or Chamber, all this while,
Or as 'twas thought by some, forsook the Isle;
But that she mis't, since your departure hence,
Her Patron, and his wonted influence.
Banished from Pla'o's Commonwealth and from
Saint Austin's City, wanting You at home,
What could she do? she rov;d over ground untrod,
Dark as her Fancy, neither track, nor rode;
Till tired with notions, satisfied with none,
She fancied an Idea of her own.
A man of Plato's grand Nobility,
An imbred greatness, innate honesty;
A man not framed of Accidents; And whom
Misfortune might oppress, not overcome:
One, who loved Virtue for her self; and still
Was good, not by necessity, but will:
Who did, but what he ought; what is just, and fit;
And never biast by an Appetite:
Who weighed himself, not by Opinion,
But Conscience of a worthy action:
Who, like the Sun, by how much higher, the less
His shadow: Who never used power, to oppress:
A man! who might (in this) with Caesar vye,
Forgetting nothing but an injury.
VVrap't in that Melancholy trance, she heard
The Name of Ormond! At that mighty word,
She stretched; and fell to ruminate her dream,
Not guessing yet, whence she had took the Theme;
'Till calling in her Spirits, at next view
Found it was no more, than what sh'ad sketcht from You,
You! than in whom (Great Sir) Achilles shield
Did not more Multitude, nor Mixture yield,
Nor better put together: As in Paint,
It Is not the single Color makes the Saint,
Nor all, if not well mingled; There must be,
Proportion too, and correspondency:
Such is Your chain of Virtue; what elsewhere
Lay loose, and scattered, are constellat here;
And those so truly linkt, it is hard to tell
What Is wanting, or, what unagreeable.
What but a soul so framed, had ever dared
Stem the late Torrent, In the late Rebellion.
and have not despaired
His Masters fortune? what? what but a breast
Lined through with Cato, durst have stood the Test?
Or would not, when the Sun did disappear,
Have kissed his, hand unto a Meteor?
Such too, were You; You! who almost alone,
Durst grasp a Spear, and underprop a Crown?
Durst, Loyalty (when it was a Crime) retrive,
And force it back to i^s forsaken Hive.
But, what am I, who thus presume to raise
A Trophy to Your Memory, not praise:
Your Urne must bloom; and that last Dust stand safe,
Which has two Kingdoms for an Epitaph:
Nor can it, till the Sea gives up its Dead,
But Ossory, and Arran, must be read:
Yet -- while You fill the Land, Your Son's the Sea;
Where! where (Alas!) shall the next Ormond be?
He must, like Sultans, who themselves allow
To build no Mosche, but what their Swords endow,
He must enlarge, or sweat for want of room,
And crowd himself within his Grandfires Tomb.
Tomb! Let it not be named; the Sounds too sharp;
May You, yet live, to tune our jarring Harp;
Sweeten her strings, and make the World confess
Discords, make Music more, but Kingdoms less:
May Your return, like the increase of Nile,
Bode the like happy Omen to this Isle:
Long may You shine, a Star in CHARLES his Wain,
And disarmed Fortune, make Attaques in vain:
Be, like the upper Region secured;
Not shook by Thunder, nor by Clouds obscurd:
Thus live; Thus shine; Thus, Ages read yourstory;
And to Crown all Exchange Your Grace, for Glory.
Jo. Wilson.

Licensed October. 15. 1677.

Roger L'Estrange.

Printed by H. Brugis, for T. Vere, at the Angel without Newgate, 1677.


