A Winters Tale, TOLD To such as have WIT to understand it, And WORTH to Reward
it.
Published by B. S. Gent. To seek a Parallel.
1.
THere whilom was a seemly Buxom pair,
That wedded were with full and free consent;
The Maiden to her Father was Co-heire;
To love each other dear was their intent.
And so they did, as ever yet did any,
She liked him best, he none so well as Nanny.
2.
But fickle Fortune which does often cross,
As these she did, with malice and despite,
By Lawsuits were they put unto such loss,

As made them leave their Native Country quite,
And tack about to seek some other place,
Though homely clad, to live without disgrace.
3.
And so they took their way to Chester Strond,
With happy Gale, and Vessel that was stout,
Soon did arrive upon the Irish Land,
Where they their business quickly brought about:
And happily there they got a Habitation,
For profit good, and pleasant situation.
4.
There lived they in long and happy bliss,
Sweet Children many 'twixt them were begot,
If Household jarres, or ought were done amiss,
When once debated, long it lasted not.
Such Children, Wife, such Husband as was he,
You could in other places hardly see.
5.
They planted well, and Houses builded store,

A Church obtained in a wilder place
Then any that adventured heretofore,
Which was descended of the English Race:
You could not meet with folk of better quality,
For Conversation, and for Hospitality.
6.
They did extend their Pity to the Poor,
Instead of Surgeon, often dressed their wounds;
Relieved such as begged from door to door,
And others that were needy in their bounds:
And such as died, not having covering meet,
They often furnished with a winding sheet.
7.
Before they came into this uncouth place,

No Innes were built to entertain a stranger,
But such as came were forced to ride apace,
Or stay much short to keep from further danger:
To Travelers, that often was ill bestead,
They gave a courteous welcome, meat and bed.
8.
Thus lived this Couple both devout and zealous,
Brought up their Children in the fear of God,
Nor were they of each other ever jealous,
Their Servants kept from gadding much abroad:
Nor were they pinched, that they should need to steal;
Thus ordered was their little Commonweal.
9.
When he about affairs abroad did ride,
She neither kept close house, or open door,
The goods in Pasture wisely she did guide,
Of Household five and twenty, or some more.
Much joy they had, of sorrow seldom tasted,
Each year increased, when many others wasted.
10.
As one time he from chiefest City came,
Which Dublin Hight so famous and renowned,
Quoth he, dear Love me thinks they are too blame,
Which planted have not yon same piece of ground,
That lies so right from Dublin for a Stage,

And yet has no receipt for Man, or Page.
11.
God has so blessed this our undertaking,
In sending us Prosperity and health,
That while my Limbs are good, my Spirits waking,
I Will study how to serve the Commonwealth:
That much good may be done there is no deny all,
If you consent we will put it to the trial.
12.
She gentle soul, who never was averse
To ought that he inclined in word or deed,
Sweet love she said, so well you ken your Verse
In Field, and Town, you little consell need.
This is your love exceptions to prevent,
It Is kindly moved, as kindly I consent.
13.
And thus he went unto the Lord Dunsany,
The rightful owner of the fore said place,
A Noble Lord, by Birth as good as any;
His gentle Lady came of English race.
In brief to tell ere past was much debate,

They full agreed on Covenants and the rate.
14.
Some Chapmen thought he did not well advise,
To give so great a price for naked Lands;
But such I mean as were not over-wise,
Or such as sought to gain't in their own hands:

Or such as had no right discerning sense,
To know Commerce will build both house and fence.
15.
For being seated in so great a Road,
And from the City so complete a Stage,
When such as journey* wanting there abode,
Must further ride, it booteth not to rage,
As many more have done as well as I,
When as we were benighted, wet and dry.
16.
Our Clothes were wet, and we were dry for drink:
Because I will not hold you in a Riddle,
Amiss of me I hope you will not think,
If you may there embrace your Hostess middle;
As since you mighr, and more you might not do,
If you mean ill, she thought no harm to you.
17.
For in that place he builded Host'ries twain,
And put therein two very honest couple,
Where Guests of all sorts came with might and maine,
For unto such they were exceeding supple;

And all things came so fitly to their hands,
As shortly did improve both House and Lands.
18.
Lords Rent did trebble what it was before,
New Tenants lived in far more gentile fashion:
The undertaker totted up his score;
And here begun this pretty new Plantation:
Then thus advanced, the Bargain was not derre

From sixty to three hundred pounds a year.
19.
If you desire to know the reason why
The Lands of Ireland are so quickly gainful,
It is to such as have discerning eye,
And to their proper use to fit are painful.
Thus did this loving couple prosper well,
Till Gods wrath kindled fierce, by Rebels, fell.

20.
But not on them alone, their hap was better
Then many thousands under that dire cross,
For which to God above they are still debtor,
Their lives were saved, though goods were put to loss.
They were in the, North about their household care,
And were surprised ere they were aware.
21.
For there it was they made their first Plantation,
With mutual comfort, and all good success.
And there it was this heavy visitation
O're-whelm'd that Country people more and less.
Let any judge what cause they had to fear,
Eleven months full (in dread) they Prisoners were.

22.
And after that they freedom had to pass,
Which was great comfort to afflicted mind;
Yet sad and heavy were the terms a less,
Their eldest son was forced to stay behind.

Quoth they, to you our Country is well known,
Thus far we yield, for favors you have shown.
23.
But yet your skill in this our Irish war,
Much augmented by your long residing,
If you be sent we shall be very far
To think that here we shall have safe abiding;
Therefore him we keep, that we may be more sure
T'exchange for ours, or be our selves secure.

24.
I would our State were pleased so to think,
That such as left their Lands and Goods behind,
Will not so easily be induced to wink,
As such as know but little of their mind:

For who so fit as those have double band,
TO advise and fight with double heart and hand.
25.
Thus on they march with sad and mournful cheer,
To leave their eldest son in doleful plight;
For Lands and Goods they never took such fear
As that to him they would do lit le right.
A youth so sweet of nature, and so kind,
One death it was to leave such son behind.
26.
Then came they to an English Garrison,
Droghdagh that seated was upon the Maine,
The Father sad beyond all comparison,
To Dublin went, soon to return again,
With hope to bring relief, sad hearts to cheer

Of Wife and Children, almost dead with fear.
27.
Thus came he to that old and famous City,
Where he had left two daughters for their breeding,
One whereof, O pity, greatest pity,
Was dead, which set his heart strings fresh a bleeding:
And sure the fear she had of us below,

Did cause her death, which added to our woe.
28.
A gracious child, withal a proper Less,
No doubt she wears now a Crown of glory;
And since our God, which all things bring to pass
Was pleased, then ought we to be sorry?
No happy Maid that is before us gone,
When others live with cause of further moan.
29.
He found their eldest Daughter plunged in sorrow,
For Sisters death, and their imprisonment;
And had he not come early the next morrow,
Which gave some comfort to her languishment,
She might perchance have found same way to Bliss,
But now she lives to see more things amiss.
30.
And long may live to give our Maker glory.
A meeker soul lives not upon this earth:
But now I must return unto my story;
Our lives were dated long before our birth.
Then let us live, so as we need not care
For Hell, or Death, that will not Princes spare.
31.
And now he went unto the Counsel Table,
To let them know what he beneath observed,
And did relate the truth as he was able,
For otherwise he had not well deserved.
The Board did seem to pity much his case,
And moved that noble Lord to give him place.
32.
Who bravely then commanded there in Chief,
Lord Marquis of Ormond.
And worthy was as any I have known,
(For I do love to tell my mind in brief)
Be what he will in field or yet in Town:
And he brave Lord himself was nothing slack
To give him Horse and Arms, to cloth his back.
33.
But now the Regiments were all come over,
That hard it was an empty place to find
A Soldier he, his style I will not cover,;
That there and else where often had been trained.
But so long had they kept him close in Mew

Others got the start, which then but little knew.
34.
For that good turn his Masters did below,

Who did intend that he should be their Agent,
They kept him that he might not strike a blow;
Nor yet get out for to seek employment.
But now this gentle Lord full of remorse,
Did study how to raise him Troop of Horse.
35.
He in the mean time to Droghdagh was sent
TO old Sir Henry Tychborne, That gallant Knight,
Prisoners to release was the full intent,
Left still behind that would come if they might.
This Message was full glad in this respect,
His son amongst the rest he did expect.
36.
But ere he could adventure to Droghdagh,
He staid a night at Garrison Corduff,
And afterward he had no cause to laugh,
There fell out such ill-favored piece of stuff.
Some few Dragoones he had unto his Guard,
That led him wrong, and thus with him it fared,
37.
A Thicket was the way that they should ride,
He liked it not, it seemed a doubtful place;
Go see quoth he if Rebels do them hide,
To give annoyance to us as we pass.
He sent two men to see what might appear,
Who brought him present word the Coast was clear.
38.
It proved not so; for as they marched by,
They heard a clamor, and a sudden rush,
And to their cost they quickly did espy

Rebels heads peep like Snakes out of a bush.
And then began the business very hot,
They poured on him alone full thirty shot.
39.
Himself, his Cloak, his Saddle, and his Horse,
Upon Account had holes to that same number,
Which suddenly was done without remorse,
And how he escaped with life it was a wonder.
They feared another Party of our men,
Which made them back retire unto their Den.
40.
His Horse was killed, one of his men stark dead;
Of theirs two they killed, Prisoner was the third:
Sore wounded he went with an aching head;
A greater escape (it was thy mercy Lord)
Did never fall to any sinful wight:
Back they return in sad and woeful plight.
41.
And then appeared he shot was with six Bullets,

A homely place, God knows, fell to his Harbor,
He was not fed with over many Pullets,
To make him trim he stood no need of Barber:
A Surgeon was the man he wanted most,
And him to fetch one rid away in Post.
42.
Next day there came a nimble Leech, James Moore,
Was sent to him by honest Thomas Howard,
(Who gave him money in his hand before)
Him to requite he never will be froward.
His wounds were bound, and searched with all good speed,
No vein left open any more to bleed.
43.
Ill news goes far, and so did these of him,
His Wife heard he was dead, or at the point,
She makes all haste, staid not to make her trim.
You need not doubt she trembled every joint:
A Convoy fitly served the way to cross,
Leaves Children four behind, to mourn their loss.
44.
Full wan she looked to find him in that case;
Take cheer, quoth he, I hope all will be we will,
She sobb'd, and sighed, and wiped her blubred face,
And softly then she down by him did kneel:
Her coming to him did such comfort brings,
He thought himself as happy as a King.
45.
For her kind soul more gentle then a Willow,
Lord how he grieved that had not welcome fit,

Hard Boards her Bed, a Saddle was her Pillow,
Which put him quite besides his little wit.
Dear Love, said she, no harm can me betide,
No stone is hard, so I lie by thy side.
46.
The place did only yield his hurts a Pallat,
And that likewise upon the Boards did lie,
There Is many begging all day with a Wallat,
That when night comes, to lodge so will be shye:
The times were such no better could be had,
Then they that cause such times are worse then mad.
47.
No want of will in People or in Soldier,
Of what they had they gave the very best;
Not any place wherein they might be bolder,
His thanks he paies, God quite them for the rest.
In few days space there was good hope of life,
Praised be his Name that sent him such a wife.
48.
In the Surgeons absence she could play her part,
Few women might with her compare for skill,
TO help such as need she always had the heart,
Now she acted lively both in deed and will.
In one months space to Dublin he was brought,
Such sudden change could hardly have been thought.
49.
A change said I? Now comes change on change,
For here this blessed Creature did contract
A Flux and Ague, which held her very strange,

His hurts were mending, but his heart was racked,
To think that she should come his life to save,
And bring her self to such untimely grave.
50.
Now was she sometimes better, sometimes worse;
Their Children as y'hare heard were left behind,
Them to recover they did make a Purse,
To give some ease unto their troubled mind.
Their second Daughter, with two pretty Boys,
Came with such news as drencht their new-come joyer
51.
For when these three appeared each after other,
He mist a fourth; Lord how his heart did dread,
Wet eyes he saw in sister and in brother:
Nay then, quoth he, our little Girl is dead:

O happy she, then said her Mother dear,
For her we need no longer stand in fear.
52.
What though she was our Darling young and tender,
As sweet a Child as ever woman bare,
To send this wicked world her wit was slender,
Our gracious God of her has taken care:
This ought we not to reckon is a loss,
For surely this a Blessing is, and not a Cross.
53.
This I discern, although I faint and languish,
Through glimpse of God Almighties giving,
Such as remains shall have both woe and anguish,
The dead are better far then are the living.
God bless you all that harken to my song,

Ere you be queat it will be very long
54.
For such a cursed Rabble upstart Crew,
The Serpent has infused with deadly hate,
They never will leave off to work your Rue.

Till they have quite undone both Church and State.
They listened to her lore, sat by and cried;
She sighed, and turned about, and shortly died.
55.
Now break heart, if thou art not made of Flint,
I hear thee crack, and eyes with Rivers swell,
No wounds, or loss of goods gave such a dint,
Or earthly thing that ever him befell.
What further hope does now for him remain,
The World to him a Chaos is again.
56.
Yet Children pledges dear of mothers love,
He needs must join with her in Prophecy;
He sees such direful threatenings from above,
Through Satan's craft and man's iniquity,

That till our injured King be once restored,
Each gentle wight must suffer, Knight, and Lord.
57.
Thus did poor Father, and poor Children four,
Bewail, lament, and mourn each others loss;
Their elder Brother, as you heard before,
Was doleful prisoner still, O heavy Cross:
Now all the world began to run on Rucks,
Deep sorrow brought deep Fever and a Flux.
58.
Besides, a wound that was not rightly cured,

Broke out again, and wrought him mickle teene:
O Lord, he has not yet enough endured,
Thy wonders great must more of him be seen:
Sad children cry, to see him in this taking,
Folk think him dead, his Coffin is a making.
59.
And now behold the great Almighties power,
Comes gushing from the foresaid hollow wound

Impostumated stuff a Quart, or more,
As he lay senseless grovelling on the ground:
Then shortly after he was pretty able,
About his Son to wait at Counsel Table.
60.
And that brought on his eldest Sons release,
With earnest suit he shortly did obtain,
A way to work the weary young man's peace,
By sending in exchange of Prisoners twain:
And even then a noble Sir Will. Cole.
friend below,
Had late redeemed him from his thrall and woe.
61.
Thus once more were his Children in his sight,
Eleven once, now five the number left:
And thanks be given to that good God of might,
Which brought such ease to heart full deeply cleft.
But then they had such want of livelihood,

His Sons to England went to seek their food.
62.
For now it was the time of a Cessation,
Long sought by th'Irish, and at length accorded,
Which brought to some a very short Collation,
Amongst the rest it naught to them afforded.
His Lieutenant he sent with Children three,
His Daughters two remained, Irish phrase,
poor Cramacrees.
63.
For he was then designed to carry over
Some men to England, as it was projected,
Which made him send his people so before,
In hope that there they might have been protected.
But once more as they past upon the Seas,

They Prisoners were again at little ease.
64.
And he himself now ready was for fare.
With Men and Arms to follow on the chase;
But Ships within our Harbor brought new care,
And blockt us up for running further race.

Thus wheeled about, for Children making moan,
At length he License had to go alone.
65.
Alone, I mean, without or Men or Arms,
With Daughters two, he went to seek the rest,
Praying our God them shield from further harms,
For he it is by whom we must be blessed.
Now after all these sad and heavy Tales,
Their Vessel shortly brought them to South Wales.
66.
Two of his Boys he found upon that Coast,
A friendly Capt. Weston and his wife.
Couple took the third away:
He was the youngest whom they tendered most,
Not having of their own wherewith to play:
A Lad for feature might attend a Prince,

Where he is, God knows, we never saw him since.
67.
Here was he brought before the Admiral,
For that a Soldier he was deemed to be,
And then presented to the Major-Generall,
A very worthy gallant man was he;
And had withal as generous a wife,

As I have ever known in all my life.
68.
This gentle Lady, and with her Mistress Cannon.
another,
Took both his Daughters with such kind respect,
None could do more, except it were a mother;
Such goodness do these Country folk affect:
If others blanch, we speak what we have found,
We never set our feet on kinder ground.
69.
But now into the Army he must go,
For so he will that there commands the Seas;
Whatsoever he thinks, it is bootlesse to say no,
He is in hands that may do what they please.
And now again his heart strange passion feels,
Yet go he must, or else may go by the heels.
70.
Yet sure these two Major Genesis Laughorne. Captain Swanley.
were very worthy men,
The one by Land, the other on the Sea,
They soon contrived employment for him then,
He used there that time no other plea.
But when he had well looked into the Cause,
He thought it hard that subjects should give Laws.

71.
Things were too high for him to understand,
He could not see good reason for these broils,
That thus infested this unhappy land,
And hook't us into such unwelcome toils.
Yet while he stayed, he did refuse no duty,
But had no skill to plunder, or get booty.

72.
To pay the Soldier Money there was none;
Alack poor Countrey-folke what have you done?
He thought it better far for to be gone,
Then thus upon your score so deep to run.
For truth to tell in brief, by fraud or force,
So ^^k you neither Sheep, nor Cow, or Horse,

73.
Thus Service done, he once more License had,
With him and his again to cross the Seas;
The way by land at that time was but bad,
And they that ventured found but little ease:
By long and irksome Sea about they came
To London, where they found untoward game.
74.
Such way was cast for them to seek Arreare,
The like I think was never yet invented,
It put them to such trouble and such fear,
Some fret and fume, some sigh, and all lamented.
At length it comes from Cloak to Welch-mans Button,
But finds them neither Pottage, Beef, or Mutton.

75.
Then back to Ireland he employment sought,
As was most proper where he lost his Lands,
Where Wife and Children dyed, one sister caught,
And cruel murdered by the Rebels hands,

Another stripped of all he clothes and goods,
As she past through the Irish Rogges and Woods.
76.
Some people jealous, does not us confide,
They think we are not fit to serve their turn,
The our Integrity has been often t y'd,
When Towns and Houses 'bout our ears did burn,

Or whether it be to confound the Monarchy,
And raise in stead thereof confused Anarchy.
77.
Piece of a Soldier he is from his youth,
In Low Countries, Denmark, and in Ireland;
Then who can him detract not sparing truth:
None will I Am sure but some hellish Firebrand,
That goes about to wrack both Church and State,
Confounded will they be that truth do hate.
78.
Yet promise upon promise he has had,
As if some good to him they did intend,
But with delay enough to make one mad,
Nor can he yet procure successful end.

Commission on Commission he obtained,
Yet on such terms, as naught by them he gained.
79.
His Son has in this Army served truly,
In Wales and Ireland from his tender age;
His Pay from him detained is unduely,
Since he for Ireland likewise did engage.
Though they have waited till they pawned their Coat,

He Is forced to go (poor youth) with never a Groat.
80.
Part of their own yet give, if you have heart,
Himself and Children left, alive too keep,
And do it soon, for now it is your part
To make them smile that long have cause to weep.
Thus have you heard a story of more woe,
Then that of Juliet and Romeo.
FINIS.

