By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION.
MARIE R.

THe King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's taking into Their Princely
Consideration, That the Holding the next Assizes for the several Counties of
this Kingdom at the Days and Times first intended, might greatly obstruct the
good Endeavors of Their Majesty's Subjects, for the Common Defense of the
Kingdom at this time of Invasion by the French, and desiring Graciously to
Provide that Their good People may not suffer in their Private Affairs, whilst
they are so unanimously attending the Service and Safety of the Public; Their
Majesty's therefore, by the Advice of Their Privy Council, having thought sit
to Command Their Judges of the respective Circuits, to Appoint other more
convenient Times for Holding the said Assizes; And in Obedience thereunto, the
Judges having appointed the Times and Places of Holding the same in manner
following; That is to say,

Home Circuit.
Lord Chief Justice Holt. Mr. Justice Rokeby.
Hertford, Monday 1 Sept. at the Town of Hertford. Essex, Wednesday 3 Sept. at
Chelmsford. Surrey, Monday 8 Sept. at Kingston upon Thames. Sussex, Thursday 11
Sept. at Horsham. Kent, Tuesday 16 Sept. at Maidston.
Norfolk Circuit.
Mr. Baron Nevill. Mr. Baron Turton.
Bucks; Wednesday 10 September. at Aylesbury. Bedford, Friday 12 September. at
Bedford. Huntingdon, Monday 15 September. at Huntingdon. Cambridge, Tuesday 16
September. at Cambridge. Suffolk, Thursday 18 September. at St. Edmondsbury.
Norfolk, Tuesday 23 September. at Norwich. City of Norwich, the same day at the
New Hall of the same City.
Midland Circuit.
Lord Chief Justice Pollexfen. Mr. Baron Letchmere.
Northampton, Tuesday 26 August at Northampton. Rutland, Friday 29 August at
Oakham. Lincoln, Monday 1 Sept. at the Castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln, the
same day in the City of Lincoln. Nottingham, Friday 5 September. at Nottingham.
Town of Nottingham, the same day at the Town of Nottingham. Derby, Monday 8
September at Derby. Leicester, Friday 12 September at the Castle of Leicester.
Borough of Leicester, the same day in the Borrough of Leicester. Coventry City,
Monday 15 Sept. in the City of Coventry. Warwick, Tuesday 16 September at
Warwick.
Northern Circuit.
Mr. Justice Dolben. Mr. Justice Powell.
Lancaster, Friday 22 August at the Castle of Lancaster. Westmorland, Thursday
28 August at Appleby. Cumberland, Saturday 30 August at the City of Carlisle.
Town of Newcastle upon Tyne, Thursday 4 September at the Guild Hall of the Town
of of Newcastle upon Tyne. Northumberland, the same day at the Castle of
Newcastle upon Tyne. Durham, Monday 8 September at Durham. City of York, Friday
12 September at the Guildhall of the City of York. York, the same day at the
Castle of York.
Oxford Circuit.
Lord Chief Baron Aitkins. Mr. Justice Air.
Berks, Monday 25 August at Reading. Oxan. Wednesday 27 August at Oxford.
Gloucester, Saturday 30 August at Gloucester. City of Gloucester, the same day
at the City of Gloucester. Monmouth, Thursday 4 Sept. at Monmouth. Hereford,
Saturday 6 Sept. at Hereford. Salop, Thursday 11 Sept. at Shrewsbury. Stafford,
Tuesday 16 September. at Stafford. Worcester, Saturday 20 Sept. at Worcester.
City of Worcester, the same day at the City of Worcester.
Western Circuit.
Mr. Justice Gregory. Mr. Justice Ventris.
Southampton, Wednesday 27 August at the Castle of Winchester. Wilts, Saturday
30 August at New Sarum. Dorset, Wednesday 3 September at Sherborne. Cornwall,
Wednesday 10 September at Launceston. City of Exon, Tuesday 16 September at the
Guild Hall of the City of Exeter. Devon, the same day at the Castle of Exeter
in the County of Devon. Somerset, Wednesday 24 September at the City of Wells.
City of Bristol, Saturday 27 September at the Guild Hall of the City of
Bristol.
It is therefore Their Majesty's Pleasure, That all Their Loving Subjects be
Discharged from Attendance at the Assizes, Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and
General Goal Delivery, at any other times than as herein before is particularly
mentioned. And all and singular Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
Head-boroughs, and all other Their Majesty's Officers, Ministers and Subjects
whatsoever whom it may concern, are required to take notice hereof, and govern
themselves accordingly. Provided always, and Their Majesty's are hereby
Graciously pleased to Direct and Command, That no more or further Fees or
Charges shall be paid by any of Their Majesty's Subjects, for or by reason of
the Altering, Amending, Renewing or Sealing of any Writs or Records of Nisi
prius, or other Process or Records, on occasion of this Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Nineteenth Day of July, 1690. In the
Second Year of Our Reign.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heir of Andrew Anderson,
Printer to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1690.


