W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish
unicorn and thistle on the other
By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas His Majesty has been Informed, That great Numbers of Papists and
other Disaffected Persons, who disown His Majesty's Government, have lately
Resorted to, and Assembled in the Cities of London and Westminster, contrary to
the known Laws of this Kingdom; His Majesty therefore has thought fit, by the
Advice of His Privy Council, to Issue this His Royal Proclamation, and does
hereby strictly Charge and Command all Popish Recusants, Natives or Denizons,
being above the Age of Sixteen Years, That they do, according to the Statutes
in that behalf made, repair to their respective Places of Abode, and if they
have none, then to the Places where their respective Father or Mother is or
shall be Dwelling, and do not hereafter remove or pass above Five Miles from
thence. And His Majesty does hereby Command the Lord Mayor of London, and all
other Justices of the Peace, and other Officers within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and Ten Miles of the same, That they do Effectually proceed to put
in Execution the Statute made in the First Year of the Reign of His present
Majesty and of the late Queen Mary of Blessed Memory, Entitled, An Act for the
Amoving Papists and Reputed Papists from the Cities of London and Westminster,
and Ten Miles distance from the same, by tendering to them the Declaration
therein mentioned, and otherwise according to the said Act. And His Majesty
does likewise Charge and Command the aforesaid, and all other Justices of the
Peace whatsoever. To tender the Declaration aforesaid, according to one other
Act made in the First Year of the Reign of His present Majesty and the said
late Queen, Entitled, An Act for the better Securing the Government by
Disarming Papists and Reputed Papists. And for the better Discovering of
Persons Disaffected to the Government, and that being discovered, their
Disloyal and Wicked Purposes and Attempts may be disappointed, His Majesty does
strictly Charge and Command all Justices of the Peace and other Officers in
that behalf Authorized, That where they shall find or be informed of any
Person, who by reason of his Conversation, Discourse or other Demeanor, shall
be suspected not to be well Affected to His Majesty's Government, they do
effectually put in Execution the Act made in the Seventh and Eighth Years of
His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the better Security of His Majesty's
Royal Person and Government, by Summoning the said Persons, and Tendering to
them the Oaths by the said Act Appointed to be taken, and in Case of Refusal or
Neglect of Appearance, to Proceed further against such Offenders according to
the Directions of the said Act; It being His Majesty's Pleasure, that the Laws
be Executed to the utmost against such Offenders. And His Majesty does hereby
Charge and particularly Require all Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the
Peace, that they do meet Monthly to Inquire into and Inform themselves of the
Affairs of their respective Counties and Divisions in relation to the
Premises, and take special care to preserve the Peace, and prevent all
unlawful Meetings and Assemblies, and that from time to time they give
Information of their Proceedings and Discoveries to the Lords of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Eighth Day of February, 1699. In the
Eleventh Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.


