BY THE KING AND QUEEN, A PROCLAMATION FOR A GENERAL FAST.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas for about a Year last past, a Wicked Rebellion has been Carried on
and Maintained against Their Majesty's in Their Kingdom of Ireland (which is
known to be inseparably Annexed to the Imperial Crown of England) which
Rebellion has been Contrived, Encouraged and chiefly Supported by the French
King, Designing by that means to make an absolute Conquest of the said Kingdom,
and hold it as a Province, or else to bring a total Ruin and Destruction upon
the same; for which, and other Causes, Their Majesty's have been Obliged to
enter into a Just and Necessary War against the said French King. And whereas
His Majesty is Resolved, by the Assistance of God, Vigorously to Prosecute the
said War by Sea and Land; And so Effectually to Reduce that Kingdom to its due
Obedience, that Their Majesty's Good Subjects there may not only be Res;cued
from the present Force and Violence, but be Secured against all such
Aggress;ions for the Future, and be Settled in a Firm and Lasting State of
Peace, Safety, and Prosperity: For which purpose His Majesty has determined to
make a Royal Voyage and go thither in Person. putting His Trust in Almighty God
(who has by his mavelous providence hitherto preserved and conducted His
Majesty) That he would vouchsafe a special Blessing on this his righteous
undertaking, and thereby consummate the Deliverance of these Kingdoms. Their
Majesty's taking the premises into their most Serious Cosideration have
thought fit to appoint, and do by and with the Advice of their privy Council,
hereby Appoint and Command a General and public Fast and Humiliation to be
observed throughout this Realm in most Devout and Solemn manner, for
Supplicating Almighty God for pardon or our Sins, and Imploring his Blessing
and Protection in the preservation of his Majesty's Sacred Person, and
Prosperity of his Arms in Ireland, And the Naval Forces, to be Religiously kept
and observed on Wednes;day the Twelfth day of March next, throughout Their
Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and thenceforward to be observed on the third Wednesday in every Month
successively During the present War. And for the more Orderly Solemnizing of
the said several fast Days, Their Majesty's have given directions to the Right
Reverend the Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayers suitable to
this Occasion, to be used in all Churches and Chapels, and other places of
Public Worship; And have given Charge for the Dispersing thereof through their
several Diocesses in the whole Kingdom. And Their Majesty's do most expressly
Charge and command that the said Fasting and Prayers be Soberly, Reverently,
and Decently performed by all Their Loving Subjects, as they tender the Favor
of Almighty God, and upon pain of such Punishments as Their Majesty's can
Justly Inflict upon all such as shall Contemn or Neglect so Religious a Work.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twentieth Day of February, 1639. In the
Second Year of our Reign.
EDINBVRGH. Reprinted at the Society of Stationers Printing house in
Harts-Close over against the Trone Church, 1690.


