His Majesty's LETTER TO THE Lord Bishop OF LONDON, To be Communicated to the
TWO PROVINCES OF Canterbury and York.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh by the Heir of Andrew Anderson,
1690.

His Majesty's Letter to the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Henry Lord Bishop of
London, to be Communicated to the Two Provinces of Canterbury and York.
WILLIAM R.

RIght Reverend Father in God, We Greet you well. Whereas the Advancement of
the Honor and Service of Almighty God, and of the Protestant Religion, which
by his wonderful Providence has been preserved and established in these
Kingdoms, ought to be the chief part of Our Royal Care: In Order to this, as We
have oftentimes Declared, That We would take the Church of England by Law
Established, into Our particular Protection and Favor; So We take this
Occasion to Renew these Assurances, being Resolved to do all We can for the
Support and Strengthening of it; Preserving withal the Liberty of Concience to
all Our other Protestant Subjects, which by Our Laws they now Enjoy.

And because the Welfare, Peace and Honor of this Church depends so much upon
all Persons faithfully doing their Duties in their several Places and
Functions, We therefore First of all Charge and Require you the Bishops of this
Our Church, to apply your selves with all Diligence and Zeal to the Duties of
your Episcopal Function, according to the Word of God, the Orders of this
Church, and the Laws of this Our Realm.

More especially as to Ordination of Ministers, We Require you to use all
possible Care and Strictness, in Examining and Enquiring into the Lives and
Learning of such Persons as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders, and herein
constantly to observe the Can. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Canons relating thereunto, the Neglect whereof We shall strictly Enquire into,
and take Care that it be Punished according to Law.

We also Charge and Require you to keep a strict Watch over all the Clergy in
your respective Diocesses, to see that they be duly Resident upon their Livings
according to the Laws in that Case provided, and that there they be Constant
and Diligent in their Duties, performing the Public Offices of Worship Gravely
and Devoutly, Preaching the Word of God Plainly and Practically, without
running into needless Controversies, and Administering the Holy Sacraments
Frequently, with that Reverence which is due to the Institutions of Christ;
Also Catechizing the Youth, Visiting the Sick and Distressed, and doing all
such Things in their Stations as may tend to promote the Honor of God and True
Religion, together with Peace and Charity among all their Neighbors;
Themselves giving a good Example to their Flock, by walking before them in all
Holy Conversation and Godliness.

And the more effectually to prevent the Scandals that may arise by any
Disorders in the Lives of those who ought to be Examples to others, you shall
Admonish them Religionsly to observe the Can. 75.
Canon Entitled, Sober Consideration required in Ministers. And you shall
Severely and Impartially proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures, against all such
of your Clergy as shall be found guilty of any Notorious Violation of this or
any other Law or Canon relating to their Duty.

And for the better Encouragement of Deserving Men, as We intend to make it a
Rule to Our Self, so We also Require it of you, in Disposing of Church
Preferments, to have a special Regard to such Persons as by their Piety,
Learning, Diligence and Peaceableness, do most promote the Honor of God, and
the Edification of his Church.

And because, as Our Duty requires, We most earnestly desire and shall
endeavor a General Reformation of the Lives and Manners of all Our Subjects,
as being that which must Establish Our Throne, and secute to Our People their
Religion, Happiness and Peace; all which seem to be in great Danger at this
time, by reason of that overflowing of Vice, which is too notorious in this, as
well as other Neighboring Nations. We therefore require you to Order all the
Clergy to Preach frequently against those particular Sins and Vices which are
most prevailing in this Realm; And that on every of those Lords Days on which
any such Sermon is to be Preached, they do also Read to their People such
Statute Law or Laws as are provided against that Vice or Sin, which is their
Subject on that Day, as namely, against 21 Iac. Cap. 10.
Blasphemy, Swearing and Cursing; Against 5 Eliz. Cap. 9.
Perjury; against 4 Iac. Cap. 5.2. Iac. Cap. 7.
Drunkenness; and against PLACE="marg" N="*" 29 Car. 2. Cap. 7.
Profanation of the Lords Day: All which Statutes We have Ordered to be
Printed together with these Our Letters, that so they may be Transmitted by you
to every Parish within this Our Realm.

And whereas there is as yet no sufficient Provision by any Statute law for the
Punishing of Adultery and Fornication, You shall therefore require all
Churchwardens in your Diocesses to Present impartially all those that are
guilty of any such Crimes in their several Parishes; And upon such
Presentiments, We require you to proceed without delay, and upon sufficient
proof to inflict those Censures which are appointed by Our Ecclesiastical Laws
against such Offenders: In doing whereof, according to your Duty, you shall not
want Our effectual Assistance and Support.

And for the better Carrying on of so good a Work, We do in the last place,
Charge and Require you to Preach frequently your selves, to Confer often with
your Clergy, and to Enquire by all proper means into all Abuses and Corruptions
in your Diocesses, in order to a full and speedy Reformation. And all this, not
only as you shall Answer it to Us, but also as considering the great Charge
that God has Committed to you, and the Account that you must give him for it
at the Great Day. And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 13th day of February, 1689/90. In the
Second year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Shrewsbury.


