The wonderful Praise of a Good Husband Or, The Kind and Careful Mothers
Counsel to her Daughter.
Bad Husbands they, often run astray,
as being most Unkind:
But Good we see, will always be
of a far better mind.
To the Tune of, My Life and my Death; Or, The Poor Man's Counselor.








DEar Daughter, i would have thee to take special care,
With whom thou do Marry, for why, I declare,
Bad Husbands occasion much sorrow and grief,
It seldom or never affords a Relief:
Besides, in their Humors they will never be controlled,
Good Husbands are Jewels far better then Gold.
Some Men are so wilful they will spend all their store,
And say when it is gone, they can Labor for more;
This resolute humor, will bring t^em to know,
In time of affliction, much sorrow and woe:
For Friendship is scarcy, and Charity's Cold,
Good Husbands, etc.
That Maid that shall Wed an Extravagant Man,
Although she may Labor and do what she can,
Yet all is in vain, for if he does Consume,
Yet trouble and sorrow must needs be her doom:
Dear Daughter I tell you, I know this of old,
Good Husbands, etc.
Some Women when Married, great Portion have brought
Yet Riotons Husbands their Ruin has wrought;
For those that will lead an Extravagant Life,
Regards not the tears of a sorrowful Wife:
Their Houses are Mortgaged, and Livings are Sold,
Good Husband; are Jewels far better then Gold.
TO Gaming, and Hawking, and Hunting they will Ride,
With drinking and feasting with Harlots beside;
Full quickly will squander and waste their Estate,
And they may be sorry when it is too late:
Loose Living will bring them to want when they are old,
Good Husbands are Jewels far better then Gold.
When ever a Spend-thrift is seen to pass by,
There goes a Good Fellow, his Cronies will cry;
An honest true heart too, this, this is their tone,
Alas! he is no bodies Foe but his own:
But yet Wife and Children much sorrow behold,
Good Husbands, etc.
Your Ale-wives they flourish in Silks and black Baggs,
While poor men, their Clyents, are clothed in Rags;
They laugh when they see an old Spends thrift Carrouse,
Because they do feed of the Sweat of his Brows:
But yet they, will slight him when e're he grows Old,
Good Husbands, etc.
To speak of their Dertues I now may at large,
They Will tender their Wives, and provide for their Charges
Nothing shall be wanting that they can provide,
Both Meat, Drink, and Clothing, with all things beside:
Providing in Summer for Winter that is Cold,
Good Husbands, etc.
They, like the industrious Be, will delight
To Labor, and bring home their Profit at Night.
If such a kind Husband you happen to have,
Your duty, dear Daughter, will then be to save;
And likewise be loving, not given to Scold,
Good Husbands, etc.
When Wives by their Husbands are dearly adored,
No greater a Blessing the world can afford;
In Troubles or Crosses, or what may befall,
Good Husbands will still bear a share in them all;
And in their kind Arms their sweet Wives will infold,
Good Husbands are Jewels far better then Gold.
FINIS.
This may be Printed,

R. P.


