THE KING, And none under GOD, but the KING, Can Save this NATION.

With a Welsh Prophecy (prophesied above a Thousand years ago) now Englished
and Fulfilled to the Admiration of all that reads it.

BY WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Gent.

ECCLES. 8.4. Where the word of a KING is, there is Power, and who may say unto
Him, What do Thou?

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake, 1660.

The KING, and none under God, but the KING, Can save this NATION.
BRethren it is not unknown unto you, how Abraham (the Father of all the
faithful, Genesis 14.18, 19, 20. Heb. 7.4. honored Melchisedec King of Salem,
doing him homage and giving him tithes.) And how God in the conclusion of his
promises to Abraham and Jacob, and having changed their names, Gen 17.6. Genesis
35.11. at last tells them that Kings should come out of their Loins, imitating
that to be the chief and greatest of all his blessings to them.

And if we consider the History of the Children of Israel, and look upon their
different condition, when they had no King, and when they had a King, we shall
find it so indeed: for Moses who under God, brought the Children of Israel out
of Egypt, is called a King, Deuteronomy. 33.5. to show us that such a great work as
that was, could not be done without a King; and under a single Person they
Conquered the Land of Canaan; Read the book of Joshua: but soon after Joshua
died, Israel will be a free State, (without King or Single Person) to do what
is right in their own eyes, (they cast off God and his Law) they will have a
pure liberty of Conscience to do what they list; and to serve what God they
please, Judge. 2.13, 14, 15. and some serves one false God, and some another:
yea they were divided and devoted to serve seven Gods at once, Judge. 10.6. yet
the true God came not into their minds, until they are forced to cry unto him
being sore oppressed (for want of a King of their own) by all the Kings round
about them whose Gods they served; but the Lord hearing their cry, now and then
gives them a Deliverer to save them, Judge. 2.17. yet after they obey him not,
to serve the Lord.

And when their Judge our Deliverer is dead, Judge. 2.19. they return unto their
folly free state again (not regarding God nor his Law) that they might do what
is right in their own eyes: so that the true worship of God is not mentioned to
have been in all the time of the book of Judges: and all the reason given to
show us, why? (the Children of Israel were so ungodly, unrighteous, and in such
misery during that time) is because they had no King, Judge. 17.6, 7. as you
see, Micah sets up an Idol, Judge. 18. the Danites rob him of it, the men of
Gebeah like the Sodomites use the Levit and his Wife, Judge 19. and this was
their doings when they had no King, Judge. 2.14. the stronger destroys the
weaker, and the Kings of the Nations round about them, Judge. 6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
destroy them, oppress them, Judge. 5.6, 7, 8. drive them into holes, 1 Samuel
13.19, 20. takes all their Arms from them suffers them to have no Smiths among
them, 1 Samuel 14.11, 22. so that when God is pleased to raise them a Deliverer
or Judge to bring them into a little better condition, he having no other
weapon, sometimes must overcome their enemies with an ox Goad, or the jaw bone
of an Ass; and in such misery they continued (until the time of Samuel) four
hundred and fifty years, Judge. 3 31. Judge. 15.16. Act. 14.20. and when they had
a King, Saul by name, and though as bad as some count him, yet he delivered
Israel from all their enemies: and did for the Children of Israel, (put all
their actions together) more then all their Judges in 400. years had done, 1 Samuel 14.47, 48.

We need not compare that time, to our present time, every one can apply it;
and see that as the Israelites were delivered from Egypt, so we were delivered
from Popery; and as they had a Law made for them to worship God, so we had a
Law made for us to worship God; and as they cast off the true service of God,
to serve Baal and Ashtaroth and all the Gods of the Nations, and were spoiled
by them; so we cast off the true service of God, to serve Independents,
Anabaptists, Levellers, Renters Quakers, with many more Sects, and were spoiled
by them; we may see our own condition, by theirs, as a man sees his face in a
looking Glass: and we may conclude also with them, that all this is come upon
us, because we have no King; and desire the Lord to give us a King.

Doubtless the Gods of these Nations had as delightful, pleasing, deluding
power to draw the corrupt nature of man to their service, as that power we see
now has to draw men to the Sectaries of our times: so that it was hard for
Israel to live among them, and not to be deluded by them, and drawn away from
the true God; therefore they were commanded to destroy their Altars, and
utterly to consume both them and their worshippers, Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 5. Deuteronomy.
12.2, 3. Judge. 2.2, 3.

And now to the History again; Samuel had settled his Sons to be Judges in
Israel, and they took bribes and perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 7, 8. and
because of that, all the Elders of Israel came to Samuel, and said unto him,
behold, thou art old and thy Sons, walk not in thy ways: now make us a King to
Judge us, like all the Nations, but the thing displeased Samuel: when they said
give us a King to Judge us; and Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord said
unto Samuel, hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me that I should
not Reign over them: according to all the works which they have done since the
day that I brought them up out of the Land of Egypt even unto this day,
wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other Gods, so they do also unto
thee 1 Samuel 10 18, 19. thus the Lord answered Samuels prayer: and he took it in
this sense, that the people in rejecting him, rejected the Lord; and Samuel all
along holds it forth, so making the people to be great sinners in ^^^ing a
King; but the Elders of Israel took it in this sense, that as the people did
formerly reject the Lord to be their God, and served other Gods, so now they
do reject Samuel, and would have a King; for so the word of the Lord holds it
forth, saying, they have forsaken me and served other Gods* so does they also
unto thee, 1 Samuel 8.8. and the Elders would not at all cross the good old man
in his saying (who was now displeased,) but lets him have it, yet
notwithstanding Samuels words they will have a King, and will stand firm for
him, for all Samuels persuasion to the contrary; for Samuel tells them what the
Lords answer to his Prayer was, 1 Samuel 8.10. and they see the mind of the Lord,
and that Samuel being a little carried aside by self interest did not construe
it right. And it is the nature of good men to confine God to their own
assemblies, yea Governors have high conceits of themselves, as if God were no
where but with them, witness that proud Motto upon our States Coin; God with
us, the Commonwealth of England: it is true, Samuel was a mighty Prophet, but
not without sin; his fault was Ely's fault, he loved his sons too much, so that
he would not hear of their evil doings.

The whole book of Judges is a story of Isreal's misery, for want of a King,
Judge. 21.25. and it ends with a lamentation, thus, In those days there was no
King in Israel, every man did what was right in his own eyes. These things were
written for our example and learning; and truly we may very well say Amen to
it; for we know it to be true by woeful experience, we had a King, and then
were the happiest people in the world, and now we have no King, we are in a
woeful condition at home, and in scorn and derision throughout the world; and
could not our great Scripturians see this before now? No sure, the Kings Lands,
and Bishops Lands, with Deanes and Chapters Lands stood in their eyes and made
them blind, so that they could not see the truth, but now let Christ open your
eyes.

I know you would not be counted the sons of Belial, (or sons of the Devil,
that is the meaning of it,) therefore see of what sort the sons of Belial are,
1 They are wicked Sodomites, Judge. 19.22. 2. They know not the Lord, 1 Samuel
2.21. 3 They are against Kingship. 1 Samuel 10.26.27. 4 They are very unruly, 2 Samuel 23.6.7. 5 They have neither bounty nor charity or Justice, but they would
have all to themselves though they spue it up again, 1 Samuel 1.14.15.16. 1 Samuel
30.22.23.24.25. 6 They have no concord with Christ, 2 Cor. 6.15. 7 Of such
Belials (that pretend holy things, but intend earthly things,) does the Apostle
speak. Romans 16.17.18. Phil. 3.18.19. I say by these marks you may know whether
ye are the sons of Belial or no, and if ye be and continue to be the sons of
Belial, how ye are to expect sudden destruction. Phil. 3.18.19. 1 These. 5.3.
and to confirm it with something that speaks to us in particular, I will show
you a Welsh Prophecy, spoken above a thousand years ago by Taliesin, and
Printed above two years ago, ^hen none could tell what it meant; but now every
one may see it fulfilled, ye have it page 82. (of Mr. Pughe's book, called
British and outlandish Prophesies) Thus as follows

Bid. S. Wyddeles in weddillion. Bid. Frwythig y fall, bid ball ar saefon. Bid.
M. Ar grwydir wedi brwydar union. Bid. H. In rhychor ynghor eugylion. Bid. L.
Ddigwyn a ddwyn gelynion. Bid. Naw in osbarth ar arth anghifion. Arthur is a
bear of Steel.
Bid. Yno cymro in Cymrud y Cloffion.
In English.
1 Let S. The Irish be a reserve. 2 Let the Belial English be unsatisfied. 3
Let M. Be wandering after an union of distraction. 4 Let H. Be chief in the
quire of Angels. 5 Let L. not regarded bring in Enemies. 6 Let 9. Control the
unrighteous bear. Let The Welchman then take the lame.
1 That is the Scots Irish highlanders. 2 That is those who are against
Kingship. 3 That is General Monck. 4 That is Sir Arthur Hasilrig. 5 That is
Lambert now under foot. 6 That is the Nine Colonels Controles Sir Arthur
Hesilrig.

The Welchman is the Prince of Wales, who without doubt will come in suddenly:
make your peace with him quickly, lest Lambert and those gallant old Colonels
and Commanders laid aside by you, beat up your quarters for him: I promise you
they want neither wisdom nor valor, and they will not want weapons, and Ox
Goad or the jaw bone of an Ass in their hands will do more execution, then all
your weapons; they are experienced Soldiers, and much beloved among your
Soldiers, and by many in City and Country; therefore beware lest by your
delay in Proclaming the King, you bring it to another War and loose all.

The people were divided in Samuels time (as now we are) some for the King, and
some against the King: those that were for a King were so earnest, because God
had touched their hearts to be so minded, as once he touched Lydias heart: but
they who were against the King are called the Children of Belial, who said of
Saul, how shall this man save us, and they despised him, 1 Samuel 10.26, 27. Act.
16.14. yet we see how under God, Saul first saved them from Nahash the
Ammonite, and after that from the Israelites, who would have put them to death,
because they despised King Saul, had he not stood up for them, 1 Samuel 11.11,
12, 13. so that these despisers were more beholding to Saul then all the rest
of the people beside; and who knows O ye dispisers of King Charles Stuart,
whether it may not be your case, and that King Charles shall save you in like
manner.

But you will say we will have no King to save us, but King Jesus? I answer, do
you think that Jesus was not the Savior in those days, but he saves by means,
now as he did then; Saul was the means who gave the Glory to the Lord, 1 Samuel
11.13. and before those days Jesus was the King and the Savior, yet Moses was
the means; for he was King in Ieshurum, Deuteronomy. 33.5. or in the room of Jesus,
Moses was deputy or Steward, as King Charles Stuart; now as for Steward it is a
Prophetic Gospel word which has the promise, Luke 12.42, 43. therefore have a
care that you despise him not, for he is Christ Jesus high Steward or Viceroy
at this time.

I have heard 15 years ago, that they had a sport or a way of dispute in
Bedlam, which they called the hunting of the spirit; and they hunted it always
until they came unto the word King, and then they could go no further; and I
find since that many in England has been a long time hunting the spirit: and
now it is come to the word King, they must hunt no further; for the spirit now
rests on King Charles, as it rested on King Jesus 1630 years ago, Ioh. 1.23. I
know those Bedlam men were inspired with no worse spirit then them are who all
a long since, and now pretended to have much of the spirit, yet they hunt the
true spirit of God; and that those Bedlams were forerunners of such Sectaries
as we had since: but let them rest with the word King, as those Bedlams did,
and go no further last they perish.

This came providentially to me, and I thought good to cite it as an Argument
among the rest, to bring those people which indeed I love, to leave their
folly; and though it be a mean argument, yet I know those people look upon mean
things to be of God, and most powerful to work great things in men's hearts, and
so be it unto them.

God indeed does not seem to approve of a people that run from one Government
to another who are never satisfied; therefore Samuel does strongly argue, that
the people of Israel who always (since they were a people) had been Governed
by Judges, did evil in asking a King to govern them; and his main argument to
convince them, was the showing them their descent and government under which
God did own them, 1 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9, 12, 13. alas, what is that to our cafe,
they had been then but 4 or 5 hundred years under Judges, Act. 13.20. we have
been above 3000 years under Kings, in which time we received such signal signs
of Gods favor that none had the like: I say what would Samuel say (if he were
present now) to see such a people that refuse their King, and would change
their so ancient a government; truly I do believe he would be so displeased
with them for it, that he would immediately call to God for Thunder and Fire
from Heaven to destroy them from off the Earth, 1 Samuel 7.8, 9, 10. 1 Samuel 12.18.

I never saw young King Charles but once in all my life, and then he was a
Child, upon this occasion I saw him, when I came out of prison in the Lent
time, 1638. I went to hear a Sermon at VVhitehal, the Text was, Luke 19.41, 42,
43, 44. If thou had known, (even thou,) at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. etc. And after
the Sermon (which was very pertinent, touching the things which came to pass
in England since that time,) a man came with Prince Charles in his Arms, and
held him out over the Rales of the Gallary, for all the people to see him, to
show them that he was under God, the only means of peace to them, and so I
believed then, and do believe yet, that England cannot be happy without him,
and now also the people are sensible of it.

Therefore ye great ones, do not think, that the people value Parliaments so
much, as their joy manifested of late, upon the news of a free Parliament, but
that their hope is, they will bring in the King, otherwise they care not for
Parliaments; the late King Charles gave them too much of that already, they know
Parliaments by woeful experience to be hurtful to them; so that they do not
desire to have Parliaments Reign over them any longer

But now beware ye people (that desire the King) what men ye Choose to Sit this
next ensuing Parliament; for if ye Choose any of them that have bought or sold
the King, Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters Lands, they will do you no good;
therefore choose none of them nor any of their Friends, which you think will
carry on their private ends and self-interest.

FINIS.

