AN ALLARUM FROM HEAVEN, OR, A MEMENTO TO The great Council, and Magistrates
of England, now sitting on the Seat of Justice.
By G. W. a cordial lover of the peace of England.

Deuteronomy. 12. You shall not do what seems good in your own eyes, but what the
LORD has commanded you for the good of His People.

Psalm. 2.12. Embrace the Son, least He be angry, and so you perish from the
right way.

Imprinted at London, for G. Wharton, MDCXLIX.

AN ALLARUM FROM HEAVEN OR, A Memento to the Magistrates of England, concerning
their proceedings in Justice and Government.
Endeared Countrymen of England,
IT is the saying of the divine Psalmist and many other excellent Authors do
avouch it, That no Power, Potentate, nor Council, who are elected as
Representatives of the people, for the Government of a Nation, can rule or
govern rightly, that loves not to judge which and that they betray their trust
and usurp a power, which pealeth partially: For we must remember, that they
measured Salomons worthiness to reign, by his well swaying of the Scepter; the
which, Solomon could not have handled so well as he did, if he had not been
carried away with an earnest desire to deal indiferently, and to judge
impartially, as appears in the most excellent demonstration and prayer, which
transcended from him, unto the Almighty Jehovah of Heaven, when he says, Give
unto thy servant, O Lord an understanding and a wise heart, to judge thy
people, that I may discern betwixt good and evil, 2 King. 3. And when he had
prayed for wisdom and understanding, he shows whereunto he would apply
those good gifts of God, even unto the glory of him that gave them, To judge
the people, that I may discern betwixt good and evil says he) Prove. 8.15. for
by him Kings reign, and by him Magistrates decree Justice; which, that it may
be duly executed within the Territories of our English Nation, let the people
make choice of such faithful patriots, as are here prescribed and set down in
this ensuing parable of Jethro, viz.

When Jethro the Father in law of Moses came out of the Land Midian to see him,
being at the Mount of God, which was Mount Sinai, and beheld how the people
cried to Moses (their Governor) for Judgment and Justice by due consideration
thereof, Jethro found these three inconveniences, viz.

First, That Moses wearied himself with (sitting in judgment from morning to
night.

Secondly, That he was too tedious unto the people, which attended upon him in
all that time.

And thirdly, that notwithstanding his carfulness in judgment, and their
earnest expectation of Justice, he was not able to dispatch so many matters as
were brought before him, but with a slight hearing, and little regarding of
many men's causes.

Wherefore, Jethro being a man very desirous that Justice might proceed, that
no men's matters might be slightly slipped over, counseled Moses to make more
Magistrates and Rulers in Israel; and to the end, that this might with more
facile be prosecuted, Jethro prescribes a way, and points at the disposition of
those men which should bear Rule: For (says he) Thou shall choose out amongst
all the people, men of courage, dealing truly, serving God, and hating
covetousness, and them shall thou make Governors over the people, Exodus 18 21.

Even such Magistrates and Rulers does the Commonwealth of England stand in
need of, whose Government desires men of courage, faithfulness, and
impartiality; and seeing that her Governors are nominated and appointed, and a
Rule is set down for the people to walk by, God grant, that they may follow
the example of Jethro, to deal truly, act justly, execute impartially, and
redress the grievances of the people, and not to rule as the Council of
Macedonia did, who upon the humble address and representation of a poor Widow,
purporting her sad and deplorable condition, they rejected her, and cast her
off with this slender answer, Go thy way, for we have no leisure to hear thee
now.

The woman being much grieved thereat, replied thus; Thus why have you liesure
to be Rulers and Magistrates.

And therefore, if the Council of England, proceed and continue in their ways
of impartiallity, acting justly, and detesting all by ends, and self-interests,
this Nation will have cause to rejoice; if they desist from so doing, her joy
and tranquillity will be frustrated and eclipsed.

O remember what God said unto Israel, You shall not do what seems good in
your own eyes, but what I command you to do, says the Lord.

Then know, that you do not that which he has commanded, if you deal not with
mercy and truth, by judging every man's cause aright. It was a worthy
commendation, that David uttered in the praise of Jerusalem, when he said,
There is the Seat for judgment, the which appointing of that Seat for Judgment,
was an argument, that they loved the true executing of Justice.

And first, the place where it was set assures us hereof, for it was set in
the Gate, where through men might have passage to and from the Judgment Seat.

Secondly, the manner of framing the Seat in the Gate; namely, that the Judges
and Council might sit with their faces toward the rising of the Sun, in token
that their judgment should be as pure from corruption, as the Sun was clear in
his chiefest brightness and splendour.

O happy Common wealth of England, art thou, who can say with Jerusalem, that
thy Justice Seat is not putrified with corruption.

And whereas God stands in the Parliaments of Princes, so is he a Judge
amongst Gods, to give all Magistrates a Memento, that God is present in all
their assemblies, and judges them that judge under him, whereof they had need
to be put in mind: for oftentimes Micheas proves too true a prophet, in saying
that the great man will seek what his heart desires, and the people must allow
it well: of the which sort of men, the very best is but a thistle, which a man
can hardly touch unpricked, and the most just like a bramble, whereunto the
silly sheep seeking to be shrouded from sharp showers, is often forced to leave
his fleece behind: whose unworthy coming to their places, Jon ham has well
described in the person of Abimelich, when he said, The trees of the wood went
to anoint a King over them, and said unto the Olive tree, reign thou over Us:
but the Olive tree answered, shall I leave my fatness, which both God and Men
praise in me, and go to be promoted over the trees? Then they came to the Fig
tree, and said, Come thou and reign over us: the fig tree answered, shall I
leave my sweetness and good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees? They
said unto the Vane, reign thou over us: but the Vine answered, should I leave
the Wine wherewith I cheer the Sons of men, to be promoted over the trees? Then
they said unto the Bramble, will thou reign over us? Then said the Bramble, if
it be true indeed that you will submit your selves to my authority, and put
your trust under my shadow; or else, fire proceed from the Bramble and consume
you.

By this Parable we are taught generally, that every man is to be content with
that estate wherein God has placed him, and that for the most part the very
best-worthy do refuse proffered promotion, and on their part well deserved:
whereas on the contrary, the most unfitly furnished with Justice and true
Judgment, and the least deserving in a commonwealth, are of all other most
ambitions.

And it is to be feared, that many will rise through their wicked practices,
and subtle stratagems, both in this Nation, and parts adjacent, to disturb the
peace of our Israel; But God grant that they prove not like to those, whom
Zephaniah, feared not to liken to Lions and Wolves, who finding their proy in
the evening, chop up all, not leaving so much as the bones until the morning.

Another Memento is, That the civil Magistrate who bears the sword is called
the Minister of God, as well as the spiritual Magistrate that teaches the
Word: and that no doubt, to the intent he might take care to maintain true
Religion as to minister deserved Discipline. For it stands with all divine
and humane reason, that if all masters and fathers ought to have a more then
ordinary care to instruct and help forward their families in Christian
Religion, so much as in them lies: much more ought the Magistrate to mediate
by all means prossible to perform his duty therein, who is a father over all
families. I cannot set this forth in any plainer demonstration, than David has
done in this short saying, Embrace the son, least he be angry, and so you
perish from the right way. By which speech the Prophet teaches, that God
cannot be honored by any other means, than by that which Christ his Son has
taught, and that if you worship not the Son as he has commanded, then you
dishonor him; if you dishonor him, then you anger him; if you anger him, he
casts you off; if he casts you off, then you are from the right way; and if
you are from the right way, then you perish. For the avoiding whereof, all
Godly Magitrates have had a special care to meditate in the Law of the Lord:
such were Moses Joshua, David, Solomon, and others. Of whose good example, God
grant, that the Magistrates of England may make use thereof.

Vale, G. W.
Imprimatur,

Theo: Jennings.



FINIS.

