The Wanton Vintner, AND The Subtle Damosel,
Being an Account of a Young Blade who needs would be dabling with his
Maidservant, to which she seemed to agree, but went directly and informed her
Mistress, who resolved to prove the truth of this matter her own self; so away
she went to the place appointed, being the Vault, but her Husband in the mean
time sent another to toy with his Maid, so by his own contrivance he Hornified
his own pate, his wife in the dark supposing it to be her own Husband.

To the Tune of, The Doubting Virgin.
depiction of a woman in the grounds of a house

depiction of a man

YOu that are with Jests Delighted,
come give ear a while to me,
You shall hear of one requited,
according to his Letchery:
A Vintner gallant, brisk and Valiant,
had a fair and comely Maid,
He did endeavor to deceive her,
so on a time to her he said.
Come my Damsel fair and pretty,
thou art Beauteous in my eye,
And thou art exceeding witty,
I do long with thee to lie:
But she denied, and him defied,
and seemed loath to him to yield,
But in the end, did Love pretend,
by which he thought he would won the field.
The Maid was honest, just, and Civil,
and abhorred his base intent,
He was deluded by the Devil,
but she unto her Mistress went:
And told her all, was to befall,
at which she seemed to be enraged,
But her passion, was a rash one,
and could not quickly be asswag'd.
depiction of a wealthy man with cuckold's horns

depiction of a wealthy woman

The house of Office, the Maid told her,
was the place where they should meet,
The good wife then did grow more bolder,
and resolved for to see it:
In discontent, she thither went,
her husbands folly to find out,
Where it is said, he with his maid,
had bargained to have a bout.
This maidens beauty was bewitching,
but mark the bravest jest of all,
Some were drinking in his Kitchen,
and did for a Reckoning call:
Away went he immediately,
and like an inconsiderate Blade,
Did there relate, and simply prate,
how he had bargained with his maid.
And to the Company declared,
if any of them did desire,
His maid to him she should be spared,
which set one youngsters heart on fire:
Away went he, most hastily,
and there he found the Vintners Wife
The maid he thought, for whom he sought,
which bred much discontent and strife.
But yet he verily believed,
it was the maid and none but she,
But this the Vintner sorely grieved,
when he knew it certainly:
Near to the fire, he did admire,
his honest servant there to see,
But little thought, that he had wroutgh,
^
Where is your mistress quoth the maid
and began to be afraid,
Half mistrusting the disaster,
of which himself the ground had said:
But them he watched, and so he catched,
them both together coming out,
The gallant he undoubtedly,
with his dear Wife had had a bout.
But oh! how simply he did look then,
when this sight he chanced to see,
The man he see was much mistook then,
which did vex him heartily:
O he did fret, but yet the net
which he had for his Servant laid,
His forehead Crowned, at which he frown
but was not this a subtle maid.
Thus you may see, who digs a hole,
thinking to cause another fall,
In their own net sometimes do get,
let this be warning to you all:
Your honest wives, love as your lives,
and by them set a mighty store,
It brings but Shame, unto your name,
ever to meddle with a whore.
FINIS.
Printed for Josiah Blare, Bookseller at Looking-Glass, in the New-Buildings
on London Bridge.


