The Young Damsels Courage and Conquest:
OR, The close Encounter between Country KATE and a lusty Soldier of FLANDERS.
Tune of March Boys, etc.
Licensed according to Order.

^

(1)
A Soldier from Flanders he Traveled of late,
and here in the City of London did lie,
And happened to meet with bonny brisk Kate,
a Lass with a delicate rouling Eye:
She chuckt the Soldier under the Chin,
she being youthful brisk and airy,
And said if thou will my favor win,
then come Boy, come Boy, let us be merry:
Come Boy, come Boy, beat upon my Drum Boy,
fain would I see how thou can Tabor,
Do what ye can, honest John, like a Man,
and I Will reward you for your labor.
(2)
I never could Tabor a Drum, I declare,
though long I have Marched in Flanders in Spain,
A Musket I still on my Shoulders did bear,
when ever I followed the Warlike-Train:
The Damsel immediately thus replied,
if thou art a Soldier draw out thy Rapier,
Thy Courage and Valor with me shall be tried,
Draw then draw I Will make you caper:
Draw Boy, draw Boy, 'teent against the Law Boy
for if I do but once come near you:
It Is my delight, for to sight, though by night,
come on, brave Soldier, I Will not fear you.
(3)
He drew out his Rapier and to her did run;
as soon as she saw it young Kate got a fall,
But yet there alas was no prejudice done,
she still for a closer encounter did call:
Just when he thought he had gotten the day,
her courage and strength did still grow stronger,
So that she still showed him delicate play,
till he, till he could strive no longer:
Longer, longer, not a Minute longer,
thus was he conquered by a Beauty,
She got the day, as they say, in the fray,
and vowed that she would make him know his Duty.
(4)
She turned to the Soldier and gave him a smile,
and said was you e're so beaten before,
I am not like those that will parley a while,
but conquer without any Cannons that roar:
At this the Soldier was straight in a rage,
resolving his Forces again to rally,
That he with young beautiful Kate might engage,
in vain, in vain, it was to dally,
Dally, dally, never would he dally,
nor would he yield on no condition;
She held him to it, he did shoot, the dispute
held while he would spent his Ammunition.
(5)
Now his Bandileers being empty at last,
so that he no longer could stand the Field,
He would have been running but she held him fast
so that he was forced to submit and yield:
Though often he fought in the Field of Mars,
where Cannons had roard like claps of thunder,
At length by a Beautiful Country Lass,
he was subdued and soon brought under:
Under, under, yet it was no wonder,
being no more than what is common:
Those that have fought, many Enemies stout,
at length have been conquered by a Woman.
FINIS.
Prindet for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J Back.


