All things be dear but poor Men's Labor;
Being a true Relation of the dearness of all kind of Food, to the great Grief
and Sorrow of many Thousands in this Nation.

Likewise, the uncharitableness of Rich Men to the Poor. This Song was begun at
Worcester, the middle at Shrewsbury, the end at Coventry.

By L. W.
To the Tune of, Hold Buckle and Thong together.


KInd Countrymen lissen I pray
unto this my harmless Ditty,
Observe these words which I shall say
for it is true the mores the pity;
But chief to those that stand me by,
whether stranger, or my neighbor
I think here is none that can deny.
all things are dear but poor man's labor,
We find that Bread-Corn now is dear,
in every Town throughout this Nation,
The Rich now poor men will not bear
because Charity's out of fashion,
Poor men do work all day and night
for that which in it has small savor
A Loss of six pence is but (...).
^
Beef and Mutton is so dear
a man's weeks wages cannot buy it,
There Is great complaints in every place,
all things are dear who can deny it,
But poor men's labor is too cheap,
and Trading's dead which makes times harder
That all their pains wont find them meat
all things, etc.
Cheese and Butter is so dear
you know it better than I can tell ye
Twould grieve a stony heart to hear
the poor complain thus for their belly.
And (...) dead,
(...)t find them bread
^










I Will makes my very heart to ache,
to hear poor people thus complaining,
For all their care and pains they take,
rich men the poor are still disdaining,
But let Rich Misers consider well
the poor, and show to them some favor
Or else their Souls will hang in Hell,
all things, etc.
In it not sad for Parents now,
to hear their Children for bread crying,
And has it not for them to give
although for food they lie a dying,
Poor little Babies they must fast,
although it grieves Mother and Father,
A bit of bread they cannot taste,
all things, etc.
To hear the many sad Complaints,
as I have heard in Town and City,
I think youd cry as well as I,
the Rich has for the Poor no pity
For if they work now for Rich men,
there is some will keep their Wages from them
And make them run to and again,
Which makes the Poor cry fie upon them.
Farmers so covetous now they be,
their Corn they will hoard for better profit
Although the Poor do fast we see,
their grain they will keep what ere comes of it
Whole Ricks of Corn stands in their yards
and scorns to show the Poor some favor
For some do swear they do not care,
if things be dear, but poor man's labor.
A Rich man there was in Staffordshire,
which is a Knave, i am sure no better
He hoped to sell his Corn so dear
e're long as Grocers do their Pepper.
When Wheat was sold for shillings ten
he would not Thrash, Fan, nor yet rake it
Let poor despair, he often did swear.
heed keep it for a better market.
Too many their is of such base men,
all England round in Town and City,
They Will see the poor starve at their door
before they will show them any pity;
For some will make poor men to work,
all day and night for little favor,
For Rich men be, cruel we see,
all things be dear but poor men's labor.
But thanks to God' Corn falls apace,
and all things else that is for the belly,
Yet still it does go bad with some
although they work full hard I tell you,
Sixpence a day, is now the pay
for a days work, and held a favor,
This must maintain Wife and Babes,
all thing be dear, etc.
So to conclude, lets be content
with what the Lord does please to send us,
Let us our evil lives repent,
then in our woes God will defend us:
And let rich men be merciful
unto the poor stranger or neighbor,
For all do know, unto their woe
all things be dear but poor men's labor.
Printed for J Clark at the Bible and Harp in West-smithfield.


