THE Young-Womans Answer TO Her Former Sweetheart On board one of His
Majesty's Ships, who complains of her Unkindness.
Tune of, I loved you dearly, etc.
IN every street I hear 'em sing
My Love's Complaint, who served the King:
I went with him to the Boy it'h' Nore,
And could a gone all the World over.
He says my Love appeared true,
I do declare it was to too;
And let his love be never so great,
Mine was as much, though unfortunate,
A Golden Chain I had of him,
Which I will freely return again;
As for my sighing when we did part,
'Twas from the bottom of my heart.
Then both of us did straight agree,
At his return Married to be;
As for his letters he sent to Town,
I do declare I never had one.
But now I find it (though too late)
My love complains of his hard Fate;
But it is my Father's Fault indeed.
He often said that you were Dead.
Those letters that you sent to me,
My Father would not let me see;
But always said: Child be at rest,
For thy Sweetheart was slain at Breast.
Then he persuaded me to wed
To a rich old Man that is almost dead:
It Is true I Am Married, and am a wife,
I wish I Would lived single all my life.
I always loved a Seaman brave,
And once I was in hopes to have
Him which I now never expect to see;
You Maidens all then pity me.
While we are young and once in love,
It looks like blessings from above;
Yet our Friends oftentimes will make
Us break those Vows for Riches sake.
And as for Gold and Silver too,
I freely curse it as well as you;
For if that had not caused this strife,
Then you and I had been Man and Wife.
Although we both are crossed in love,
Your Resolution I Would have ye move;
Since now you see the fault's not mine,
Think not so hard on womankind.
Where one Woman is false in love;
A hundred Men they false do prove;
Though I lay not this charge to you,
Nor I hope you don't think me untrue.
Return, return, I beg my Dear,
For here are thousand Women here,
That are more Beautiful than I,
Therefore never go where Bullets fly.
'Twould be the comfort of my life.
To see you have a happy Wife,
Though I am crossed, 'twill ease my pain,
To see you once returned again.
Printed for Charles Barnet.


