THE ENTERTAINMENT OF THE LADY MONK At FISHERS-FOLLY. Together with an Address
made to her by a Member of the College of Bedlam at her visiting those
Phanatiques.
The Bedlams Speech.
TOpsie tervie, hai down derry.
You sober boys lets now be merry,
Here comes noble Georges Wife,
Let Us then bespeak her to the life.
Most Noble Lady, now we see
The World turns round as well as we;
Our Chains are Ornaments, our Cells
Are Palaces where Honor dwells,
Whilst you adorn this place, we know
No greater happiness below,
Than to behold the sweet delight
of him that will restore our right:
Madam, to you it is we look
As the best Scripture in our Book,
Could we but learn to be so wise
As love our Head as well as Eyes;
Our University might be
Happy in your felicity,
Our Chains as useless as the large
Contents of Lamberts n^-discharge,
Our Time not spent in picking straws,
Our Holds, only most wholesome Laws
Our Bedlam true Phanatiques keep,
Not such as dream when fast a sleep.
Let George know we are not so mad,
But we can love an honest Lad.
The Speech at Fishers-Folly.
THrice welcome noble Lady to this place,
Wife to a Person sprung of royal Race;
Whose Highborn Soul proclaims him one of those
Which claim an Intrest in the Milkie Rose,
Upon whose Brow prudence and valor try
Mastries, and strive each other to outvie:
And what is his greatest praise, his Royalty
Appears full fraught with ancient Loyalty.
The rarest Jewels that the World imparts
Are Royal Subjects crowned with loyal Hearts,
And such (sweet Lady) is your royal Spouse,
Who cannot choose but mind his former Vows,
One that is verst in honest Politics,
And deeply hates such Ped(...) ^^icks.
As Murder, Rapine, Perjury, which crimes
Were in vile Cromwels and the Rumpers times
Accounted Godliness, and in wrong Sense
Styled Acts of Heavens Gracious Providence.
But now (i hope) we shall be freed from th'Spell
And witching Charms o'th Devil and Machiavel,
They must invent new Sleights, a cloak that is stronger,
Religion will veil vilany no longer;
All men have now found their false knavery out,
But noble George has put them to the Rout:
As Fabius wearyed Hanibal, he so
Blasted their force, yet gave them never a blow:
Wonderful Conqueror that could withstand,
Nay soil his Enemy without a hand!
Never had England a more prosperous fate,
Nor purchased freedom at a cheaper rate.
Who absent, lo, we Pay all Honor due
To her who is a Part of him; that is you,
Even you (fair Lady) who are ever blessed
In his Enjoyment: You Are a welcome Guest
Unto our Board, whose presence makes us Jolly,
Since you vouch safe to come to Fishers-Folly,
So called from the Founder, a Lack-wit
Who built the House, but could not finish it:
Our Geogre a greater Work has well begun,
And scorns to leave it, till its thoroughly done:
He gently does his business, and has learned
To move the Wheel, so that its not discerned.
And with a silent calmnesle does assuage
The Hot-spur spirits and the fiery rage
Of fierce Phanantiques; who, like foolish Elves,
By their mad zeal would have burnt up themselves,
Thus has he wisely stopped the mouths of those
Builders of Babel, which did still oppose
The repayring of our Sion, to whose aid
We Will all stand up until the top-stone's laid:
And after all, confess Great George to be
the chief Restorer o^ (...) Liberty:
And you thric^ happy ^^vourite of Fate
Who have so wise so great, so good a Mate.
(...) (...)-Folly (...)


