A Worthy Panegyric UPON MONARCHY; Written Anno M DC L VIII.
By a Learned and truly Loyal Gentleman, for Information of the miserably
misled Commonwealths-Men (falsely so called) of that Deluded Age; and now
revived by One that honors the Author, and the Established Government of these
Nations.
I.
IF wanting Wings one may ascend the Skies,
And Phoebus view, without an Eagles Eyes;
Then Rouse up ( Muse) from thy Lethargick Strains,
And (having first invoked the God of Brains)
Let the Grand Subject of thy Measures be,
No Soul to England like a Monarchy. Monarchia a Monos Archon, The Rule of one
Prince or Governor without a Peer, or the Government of one man over many. As
in England and c.

II.
It is the Image of that Domination,
By which Jehovah rules the whole Creation;
Angels nor Saints, do in his Kingdom share,
God is Sole-Monarch, they, but Subjects are:
Whose Laws are such, as when they did Rebel,
Sequestered not, but sent them strait to Hell.
III.
As Old, as that Paternal Sovereignty,
God placed in Adam, ruled his People by;
Disowned of None, but them whose Minds aspire,
And Envy ONE should have what All desire:
For be it a Few or Many we live under,
Such shall repine, still, whilst not of the Number.
IIII.
The Ancients did a Monarchy prefer,
Made all their Gods submit to Jupiter;
And (when Affairs and Nations first began)
Princes DECREES were the only Laws of Man;
Experience will avow it, where there is any,
One HONEST MAN is sooner found than MANY.
V.
The Rational Soul performs a Princes part,
She rules the Body by Monarchick Art;
Poor Cranes, and silly Bees (with shivering Wings,)
Observe their Leaders, and obey their Kings:
Nature her self, disdains a Crowded Throne,
The Body's Monstrous, has more Heads than ONE.
VI.
(...) Monarchy's that Politic simple State,
Consists in Unity (inseparate
Pure (...) entire;) a Government that stands,
When others fall, touched but with levelling hands:
So Natural and with such Skill endu'd,
It makes ONE Body of a Multitude.
VII.
In Order (wherein latter things depend
On former) that is most perfect does attend
On Unity: But this can never be
The Popular State, nor Aristocracy;
For where or All, or Many bear the Sway,
Such Order, to Confusion leads the way.
VIII.
A Monarchy more quickly does attain
The End proposed; for it is the Single-Brain
That ripens Council, and concealeth best
Princely Designs, 'till Deeds proclaim 'em blessed.
Whilst Numerous Heads are rarely of one Mind,
Slow in their Motion, louder than the Wind.
IX.
Treason, nor Force, so suddenly divides
The United Strength that in a Crown resides:
Sedition prospers not, it seldom here,
Results an Object of the Prince's Fear:
Then when an Empire, Rome was never so strong,
Nor Triumphed under other Rule so long.
X.
A Monarchy abates those Feverish Fits
Of Emulation a Free State begets:
A Prince cannot his Reins so quickly slack,
Or throw his Burden on anoth^^^ Back:
But where so many Rulers (...)e Command,
The Work's transferred, and tossed from Hand to Hand.
XI.
The People, or the Nobles to debate
The deep Concernments of a troubled State,
Set Times and Places have assigned them, they
First meet, and then adjourn from Day to Day!
Whereas a Monarch, who by Nature's ONE,
Deliberates always, never's off his Throne.
XII.
But hold! Me thinks I see the three Estates
Convened; thrown open Prison-Doors and Grates,
Extinct our paltry Jealousies and Fears,
Grace offered to All, but Cavaliers
And --! yet with Patience they abound,
In Hopes of Better, now the Wheel go's round.
Britannia ab initio mundi semper fuit Regia and Regimen illius simile ille
Caelorum.

Howel.
LONDON, Printed for W. B. M DC LXXX.


