MAN'S Terrene-Refuge SLIGHTED: AND THE EXCELLENCY OF CELESTIAL Concernments
briefly ASSERTED, By RIC. WARD Gent. And directed to his worthy Friend in a
Letter.

Eccles. 4.6. Better is an hand-full with quietness, then both the hands full
with travel and vexation of spirit.

1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness with contentment is great gain.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Henry Seile 1651.

To the Reader.
AS the ensuing tract was composed at the immediate instance of, principally
intended for, and directed to a private friend: so I knew not but that it might
have been confined to his closet. For my own part, I had cause enough to
account it unworthy of a public view; or to look forth into an age, wherein
so little passes that is not liable to censure. Nor am I ignorant, that
whatever becomes obvious, (unless it appear in a polite dress) is esteemed
contemptible. Nevertheless, no sooner was my pen and this paper divorced, but
(through some secret intelligence, or (as I conceive) collateral knowledge of
the thing) I met with importunities, more then a few, to exact my consent, for
its publication. But how little proportion that held with my desire, those with
whom I contested can readily witness. For, as I was willing to continue at a
just distance, from any thoughts of sacrificing to my own net: so I could have
been well satisfied this had slept in a single manuscript. Yet whatsoever I
asserted in my own defense, wanted efficacy to satisfy my friends. Nothing
less then an absolute grant of this particular, would suffice. Therefore being
cast upon this strait, I rather chose to strike sail, as an argument of my
condescension; then expose my self to the hazad of a farther encounter; and
thereupon resolved to revise, and cloth it, with some additional thoughts. For
(as empty vessels are most receptive: so) I was very sensible 'twas not only
capable of correction, but repletion too, as being the bare issue of some
broken hours; yet herein was I much prevented, the copy having continued
sometime forth of my hands, upon enquiry, I found it committed to the press
with greater expedition then I expected, although it was very requisite, both
in reference to my self and others, it should not have seen the world, unless
in a better habit. But since it will abroad, as I have no ground to commend it:
so no prevailing faculty to indulge it to thee, only transfer it to thy
favorable view. And if thou may imagine it worth a leisure hour, it is freely
at thy devotion; and so farewell.

R. W.

The PREFACE.
SIR,
YOU Know it is not long, since you were pleased to express a very deep and
deplorable fence of the distractions, and discontents that were too apparently
predominant in the spirits of private men; especially when it was evident, that
the wonder-working-hand of God, was immediately pointing at some very
remarkable design that had reference to his Church and People. And that which
amazed you was, that men's eyes were not fixed upon it, but their minds carried
on to an impetuous height of Impatience and discomposure; I told you then it
was the same consideration, that had possessed my own thoughts, wherein (by a
private discussion or (as it were) a self-Conference) they had assumed a large
Liberty: upon which acknowledgement, it was your pleasure to command something
from me upon this subject; whereunto I made no positive promise; for what might
principally induce you to this, I knew not, neither did I then, nor do I yet
imagine, unless it were that small account I once gave you upon another
particular.

Whereupon returning to my Chamber, I was reduced to this Dilemma: Either I
must dispense with your commands, (the thoughts whereof had a strict influence
upon me) or else I must appear in a work, whereto I was deeply sensible of my
insufficiency; so that to disobey your Injunction, or to frame the thoughts, I
told you of, into words, and then digest those into a method fit for your view,
both, to me were extremely difficult. By this you may easily judge, what
conflict I had with my self; yet at last I resolved upon obedience, concluding
that the safest course, though other respects urged me to decline it. And
although I cannot in the least measure pretend to any proficiency in, or
aptness to a Task of this Nature; yet I am willing to extend that power I have
to its limit, and humbly pray it may be serviceable.

What I offer in obedience to your Command, shall be no otherwise presented
then in this Epistle; And that which you pleased to hint (in these words,) He
that casts his eye upon past experiments, may observe, That sometime a cure
has been wrought by very low and contemptible Means and Instruments, that
has been given over as desperate, by Persons of more profound knowledge and
riper judgment, shall (without any further Apology,) be my Encouragement to
proceed as follows.

The Introduction.
I Apprehend the greatest part of the Christian world groaning under the heavy
burden of trouble and discontent, and (being now in travel) labors with no
less extremity of peril, then pangs, to be delivered.

And although many of us may be apt to plead, that we have been so far from
declining, as that we have laid hold upon every occasion, and endeavored to
make a faithful improvement of all probable means that might tend to overruled
the torrent, and give stop to its violence: Yet I humbly say, that it is much
below the power of any Mortal to conquer in such conflicts, without a great
measure of Divine assistance; and I am confident, that many by their frequent
addresses, have solicited at Heavens Throne in that particular; Yet however the
Almighty may, for many causes best known to himself, for a time suspend his
help, though not absolutely deny it, and also for some respects that fall
within our knowledge. For it is not improbable, God does it to the end we may
continue in a state of dependence on him, that so, not only those other
heavenly graces, that the Lord out of his immeasurable bounty has vouchsafed
us, but our faith also may be exercised, which is very acceptable and
wellpleasing to his sacred Majesty.

And although we have formerly sent up our supplications to Heaven for aid;
perhaps we have at that very time, for our hearts are deceitful beyond
measure, had regard to some thing on earth, that in our apprehension seemed to
hold forth satisfaction.

Now this ground alone were enough to cause a suspension of help. For Almighty
God out of a tender regard to his glory, will not suffer any earthly thing to
come in competition with heavenly; and as he would have his own way and means
used toward the accomplishing every end, so his holy Name chiefly glorified.
But in regard I shall have occasion to speak more to this purpose, before I
period my Epistle, I will in the next place endeavor to make inquiry after the
causes, that might possibly usher in our discontents, and use my best diligence
to remove them, that so the effects may cease.

Twenty Quaer'es propounded.
1. ANd first, it will become us to enter into an exact scrutiny with our own
hearts, and ask our souls this question: Whether we have not set an
over-endearing value upon sublunary things, and upon that score, contrary to
intent and purpose of the great Creator and most wise Disposer, advanced the
servant above the master?

2. Let us press to know, how our hearts have stood affected to that which the
world calls riches, then which nothing imaginable is more apt to attract the
affections and seize upon the souls faculties, and thereby work a diversion
from matters of a more high and heavenly concernment?

3. Have we not said within our selves, that without riches men are confined to
a state of Penury, and therefore misery, and that in respect of their
possession, the esteem of men in their days ebs and flows proportionably?

4. Has it not troubled our spirits, that the sole Giver of all things, has
vouch safed a larger Alms or distribution thereof to others, which in our
apprehension, have less deserved then our selves; or advanced them to higher
places of honor and repute, in respect of their authority amongst men, and
thereupon our eye has become evil, because our heavenly Fathers was good?

5. Have we not given up our selves to an over-solicitous and indirect seeking
after these momentany trifles?

6. Have we not connived at our own hearts, when they have bin ready to
converse with fraud and entertain conference with oppression, or embrace any
other sinister course for the acquiring of worldly wealth?

7. Have we not employed our wits and abilities in procuring thereof, at such
times and seasons, which God out of his wisdom has appointed more immediately
for the sacred duties and performances that chiefly refer to his glory?

8. Or at such a time when for the crying sins of a people, Judgment and
Calamity is threatened, and is even ready to seize on every Family and Person in
a Nation? For alas, when we should endeavor by all means to appease the wrath
of an angry God, which we have shamefully provoked, it is then very
unseasonable to seek after great things for our selves.

9. Have we been faithful stewards of that portion, which the Lord in his
providence has afforded us?

10. Have we relieved a disciple in the name of a disciple? Have we administered
to the necessity of the Saints? Have we supplied our distressed brethren in
their exigents?

11. Have we fed the hungry, clothed the naked? And have our bowels earned with
compassion toward them in their extremities?

12. And if our souls, upon private conference, can tell us that we have done
this; Have we done it to a right end? Not for ostentation or popular applause,
nor at the over-instance of Friends, nor importunity of Allies, but in
obedience to Gods command, and that his Name may have the Glory?

13. Have we upon this account been ready and willing to defray and lay out a
great part of our substance for the purposes aforementioned, and for the
advancement of piety, without repining and reluctance?

14. Have we not been filled with an over-high expectation of content, that we
imagined might flow from creature comforts?

15. And have not our thoughts been taken up and possessed with more then is
really to be found in them?

16. Have we considered the many inconveniences that must inevitably attend all
worldly enjoyments, though they present themselves never so pleasant and
amiable to the eye of a facile apprehension?

17. Though as to our own particular, Providence may seem to have shared out a
less pittance, then we think proportionable to the means we have used and the
prayers we have put up for that purpose; have we considered that God in his
wisdom has abundantly made it up to other members of the Mystical body, that
have possibly suffered want in an higher degree, and have therefore stood in
greater need then our selves?

18. Have we considered, that those for whom God has appointed an
incorruptible inheritance that fades not away, in that Celestial Tabernacle not
made with hands, the Heaven of heavens, have for the most part the meanest
portion of outward things, and the least of worldly comfort in their enjoyment?

19. Have we considered that afflictions and troubles of the world, are in some
degree the inseparable companions of the choicest Christians? (Divine Writ
imports no loss: Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
Rest.)

20. Have we duly confidered upon what a slippery place and dangerous
precipice all those stand, that are encompassed about with such a confluence of
earthly endearments, and become such slaves to their pleasures, that they have
scarce liberty to entertain a thought either of Heaven or Hell, Death or
Judgment, God or Christ, unless guided by an extraordinary principle of Grace?

Now as we tender the good of our own souls and hope for comfort, It behooves us
to enter into a serious and impartial examination with our selves, and a due
consideration of each particular Quaere, and labor faithfully to know how much
they concern us; and by how much we find our selves conscious, as to a failing
in that wherein by duty we were engaged the contrary, by so much we may humbly
conclude that Divine pleasure has for a time given us over to a condition of
trouble and discontent.

Object. But you may be apt to say, that all this avails little to our help,
and that it is a very harsh, if not, a preposterous way of cure to rip open
causes after this manner.

Answ. I answer, that all causes art not easily, but with much difficulty
removed, unless well known. I have therefore taken liberty to insist a little
upon this course, wherein I have desired to involve my self, as well as others,
not despairing of some advantage by it.

Inconveniences that attend discontent dilated.
IN the next place I shall set forth and dilate the many sad and miserable
inconveniences that accompany a discontented condition; And first, it will be
necessary to render a definition of this malady; And although we may know by
too woeful experience what it is, yet it is not unseasonable to take notice
thereof: And herein I shall not much differ from a knowing Author that pointed
to the same particular.

Discontent is a composition or mixture of two violent discomposing passions,
Anger, and Grief, both which stir up fearful Tempests and beget cruel
conflicts in the soul: As 'twas said of Job (though a Mirror of patience)
Prove. 18.4.
that he toar himself in his anger; and according to the Echo of the chosen
vessels voice, the sorrow of the world works death; so that either of which,
though they encounter us single, come not without their mischiefs, and
therefore of more danger, when their forces are united a in a confederacy or
combination As first a discontented person he comes altogether indisposed to
every duty that referres to his spiritual or temporal condition; for so long as
he macerates himself through his own distemper, the preaching of the Word, the
performance of Prayer, o^ the administration of any Divine Ordinance to him, is
little available A Lecture to a distracted (I had a^ most said to a dead) man
is attended with as much efficacy: Prove. 15.13.
For through a vexatious sorrow of hea^^ the spirit is broken (says the w^^
man) and so long as that continu^ (as it were) disjointed, and in piec^ it is
altogether improbable that should receive an impression of goo^ and bring forth
fruit proportionably. Now herein, I would not be ^^staken, for it is not a
Godly pentential sorrow that I speak of, but a petulent vexatious trouble, that
brings such a discomposure, and barrenness with it in respect of Good; For by
the first (it must be confessed) that the spirit becomes more maleable, and of
a more Divine and affable Temper, whereby the seed of the Word may take deeper
root, and produce fruits answerably: In this case though the spirit may seem to
be broken, yet no otherwise, then the superficies of the earth is, when the
Husbandman intends to cast in grain; And as that by the influence of
seasonable distilling showers is again compacted and consolidated, without any
prejudice to the crop; so a Christians spirit (when softened with a pious
sorrow) through the sunshine of divine dispensations, becomes more firmly
cemented, and more fruitful then ever, being then in a better capacity to
conform and yield obedience to the Apostles rule, in 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
adding to Faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience and to patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, brotherly Kindness; and to brotherly Kindness, Charity; and those
in whom these things are and abound shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of Jesus Christ (as the Apostle observes.)

Thus, having cleared my sense in this partticular I shall wade further toward
the discovery of those inconveniences that attend discontent: And as I said
before, it works an indisposition to Good, so it also lays Men open and
leaves them liable to much evil; it is deplorable to think how many through the
violence of that passion, have wilfully contracted the spanne of their life, by
an untimely death, and made themselves more miserable by their distemper, then
the Almighty ha^ done by crosses: Alas! how apt ^ that destroying enemy of
Mankin^ (Satan) (who watches every o^ casion, and attends every oportu^ty to
advance his kingdom of da^nesse to seize upon a discontent spirit, as being
then most likely work its overthrow, either by aggravation of its misery, or
some other insinuating suggestions? And on the other hand, How do those
insnaring subtilties, and deceitful allurements of the world, make it their
advantage to encounter a spirit in distraction, as then supposing it to have
cast off the protection of the meek spirit of patience (the best armor against
such assaults?) Nor will a third dangerous enemy (the flesh) be idle at such a
time, but fly out into rebellion and leavy war against the Law of the mind, and
so subject it to the law of sin, Thus we see what a conspiracy of evil
Instruments there is to destroy poor souls. that are involved in this malady:
Oh! then what a madness is it for contemptible clay to contend with the Potter
that can fashion and mould it as he pleases! Oh! What a senceles thing is it,
for a man to torment himself and harraze his own soul with the vexatious
thoughts of those evils, that are beyond all remedy! He that spurnnes against
pikes of Iron, can in reason expect to gain nothing but wounds: He that
willingly runs against a rock, not only dashes the vessel in pieces, but loses
all the fraught: for he that entertaines or gives way to discontent, not only
torments the body, but also casts the souls welfare into extremity of hazard.
What will not a man do in the midst of this passion? He Will create quarrels with
men, and sometimes with those of nearest Relation to him, without any color of
cause, and so both betray his folly, and run himself into a guilt of gross
enormities: And which is more sad, he will not stick to quarrel and contend with
God himself, if any thing be presented contrary to his liking, or offer to
thwart his humor.

What an hanious crime was it in that discont ented Prophet, so vainly and
furiously to contest with his Maker, about such a trivial thing, as a withered
Gourd? And it could not but afflict good Jacob, (more then the sterility of his
wife) to hear her queratously cry out Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die; as though Providence were confined either to
grant her desire or accomplish her ruin; The latter is often true, if the
first be inordinately sought after or unseasonably sued for: and this is very
observeable, that those who are excessively given up to the bent of their own
wills, (When they see it disproportionable to the Will of the most High) do not
only meet with grievous Troubles from within themselves, but for the most part,
heavy Judgments from God: and thus it was with the murmuring and repining
Israelites, who because they had not every thing they desired, esteemed
slightly of what they had; and because they were not exactly humoured, became
wilfully ungrateful and therefore were justly pursued with multiplied
judgments.

What a detestable humor was that in Ahab, who within the confines of all
Israel could not sind matter enough to feed his hungry desire, nor satisfy his
discontented craving mind, unless he might enjoy Naboths poor Vineyard? What
an high contempt of the Almighties Munificence and bounty was this; that he
could not content himself with a Kingdom, but labor with so much vehemence
to gratify his corrupt pleasure with such an inconsiderable trifle?

And to proceed yet further, discontent is the mother of disorder; it devides
and subdevides not only the senses but the faculties, and sets them at an
irreconcilable distance and enmity one with another, and through this fewd and
opposition they debilitate and weaken each other, whereby that natural and
inherent life and vigor, whence there should proceed lively and perfect
Issues, (being thus decayed) produces little but obliquities, and effect of
decrepit nature.

Moreover he that is perplexed i^ mind, seldom acts any thing that either
pleases himself or another those actions and carriages that ^^ late to his own
particular, are for the most part looked upon with an evil eye, as carrying
along with them direful troubles, doubts and disquieting Molestations: and so
being discomposed and out of frame, it cannot be expected, that those actings
which refer to others, should be any ways proportioned to their desires, or
suited to their pleasures: But alas! this is not the worst, (although bad
enough to be opposed both to ones own and others advantage) for he that
discontentedly troubles himself for outward things (either in respect of their
miscarryage, for that they have not directly occurred to his humor and given
full answer to his expectation; or in regard of the deprivation of those
enjoyments, on which his heart has been set, but now irrecoverably lost) runs
in a Dyametricall opposition to the rule of Gods word manifested in sacred writ
(which ought to be the guide of every man's life and actions) and thereby
extremly displeases and irritates the Majesty of the most High, then which
nothing in the world is of a more lamentable consequence.

Thus (Sir) I have in some degree endeavored to make a true discovery of those
miseries and inconveniences that accompany discontent, and have accordingly
given an account, of some of those many dangers, wherein a troubled and
dissatisfyed person is involved: And although you may meet with a more ample
and complete discovery (in relation to this particular) then this of mine, as
proceeding from those of larger experience and riper judgment; yet as an exact
proportionist will portray the whole stature of Hercules by the print of his
foot, so may you by that skantling I have here given, and that little I have
said, guess, what may be farther offered to this purpose.

Object. But perhaps you will say, I stand at a great distance from the cure, and
that instead of applying comfortable cordialls I have used cutting and
corroding Gorrasives, which only tend to the aggravation of affliction, and not
to the extenuation of grief; And that I have inverted that order, which
compassion engages me to proceed in, in maladies of this nature; and deal like
an hard-hearted Chirurgian, that extends his probe to a painful search, by
ripping the wound, and terrifying his Patient with the danger thereof, before
he power in one drop of balsome, or apply one healing medicine.

Answ. To all which I say; that although I have been a little strict in the
inquiry after the causes, and laying down the effects of this distemper, yet I
hope, my method and manner herein, has been no other, then what may very well
consist with our comfort and satisfaction; Though for the present, it may seem
something harsh and disconsolate (especially to such, as have had experience
of, and acquaintance with trials and dispensations of this nature:) Yet
nevertheless I doubt not (through Divine Assistance) to prescribe and offer,
some such effectual means, as may very probably tend to overruled the
distemper, drive away the disease, and consequently estate us in a condition of
content.

1. PARAGRAPH: Twenty particulars pointed at and insisted on.
ANd in my apprehension there (...) not any thing more considerable or more
effectually conducible then unto then to possess our hearts with a
consideration of the Instabilitie (...) variableness of all things here (...)
low; For without doubt, if (...) were seriously and imparti^^ weighed, the
transitory trifles (...) this life, would fall far sh^^^ of that high
valuation, which m^^^ men unadvisedly put upon them (...) these days; Nor can
any thing (...) reason be alleged for such (...) esteem, if we do but duly
consider, the there was never yet any one in the world, that upon infallible
ground could promise and assure himself the enjoyment of any sublun^^
felicity, for the continuance of one day, which is but a small time compared
with a man's life, and the longest tract of ones life, is but as a span in
respect of eternity: For first either the wise disposer may suddenly take them
away from us, or us from them; If we look upon our selves in the largest
dimension and highest capacity over the creatures, we shall find that we are
but stewards, and stewards must either quit, or account for their employment
when their masters please.

All earthly things we do enjoy, are but ours upon condition; and how prone and
ready the best of men are, to fail, on their parts, I leave to every experient
and rational man to judge; I might dilate this into several particulars, and
discover by how many ways and means, we may be deprived of outward
enjoyments, and by what devises they may be snatched from us: but that amongst
other things I shall transfer to our own thoughts, in regard it would swell
this discourse beyond its intended limit, and render it (...) there a volume,
then Epistle: therefore next let us consider how soo^^ we may be taken from the
world who can assure himself of a mi^^^ time? Though he be endued wid never so
much wisdom, strengthened with never so much power, an compassed about with
all the huma^^ helps and advantages that can co^^ within the circuit of his
imaginatin yet as the Psalmist says, his soul is ^^ tinually in His hands, nor
does he (...) but that it may expire in his next breath^^^ Alas! The life of
man is but like bubble, and how soon that vanishe^^ away (even before we can
well apprehend it) experience tell us: or like the drop of a bucket, or the
dust of a b^llance that is shaken off and buried from our view, by the least
motion: or like Jonas his gourd that was fair and flourishing over night but
withered and dead the next morning.

How many have retired to their evening habitations with intent to take their
healthful repose: and in order thereunto, have shut their eyes in a natural
sleep, but never waked, except in another World? Hence we may gather how fragle
and brittle a thing man's life is, even like a glass that by how much the finer
it is, by so much it is the easier broken: or like a twined thread, which how
soon it is cut a sunder, all men know; Therefore it argues a great measure of
weakness and inconsideratnesse in us, if we look not upon each day, as if it
were the last, that is allowed to our Pilgrimage: why should we esteem our
selves in a better condition then good St. Paul Who 1 Cor. 15.31.
protested by that rejoicing he had in Christ Jesus to die daily? What a
miserable poor complaint was that of one of the Roman Emperors, ( Titus
Vespasian that great conqueror of the Jews) who being seized on by sickness,
and conveyed in a litter, looks forth, and with much indignation quarrels with
and accuses heaven for that he must die, and had not deserved it? When alas!
silly Mortal, if he had but considered he was a man, it had been guilt enough
and for which nature might just pronounce her sentence of dea^ against him: But
he had been so pu^^ up with the honor and success his high Achievements, that
he co^^ not entertain any thoughts (...) parting with this, and embaacing
better life: and I heartily wish the crime did not cry aloud in our dai^ and
that men's minds were less taken up, and their thoughts less i^ ployed about
secular affairs, a^ the fading trifles of this world, a^ more intent on those
spiritu^ things, that might advance a mo^ glorious Kingdom, wherein the souls
might be happied with an eternal welfare.

I am persuaded that the defe^^ on of most men in this particularises through
the want of due consideration of the vanity of earth things.

What considerate man wo^^ doat upon that goblin honor, t^^ cannot be fitter
compared then (...) mere shadow, which upon the (...) interposure of a cloud is
quite gone, without so much as leaving the least mention where it was? To this
purpose observe the words of a learned Author: The same Sun (says he) sees
Haman adored in the Persian Court like some Earthly Deity, and like some base
vermin waving upon a Gibbet: Do we see the great and glorious Cleopatra
shining in the pompous Majesty of Egypt? Stay but a while, and you shall see
her in the dust, and her two children whom she proudly styled the sun and the
moon, driven like miserable Captives before the chariot of their Conqueror.

Psalm. 49.12.
Man being in honor abides not (says the Psalmist) he perishes, but his
greatness (as more frail then he) is oftimes dead and buried before him, and
leaves him the surviving executor of his own shame: Much more of vanity might
be discovered in this trifling shadow (Honor.)

Another thing which surprises the eye of the world, is Beauty, and that, if
rightly considered, is but a sading flower which the revolution of one days
time, beholds both its glory and ruin, its birth and burial.

It Is no other then a light touch of natures tincture cast upon the skin, and
how suddenly that is wiped off with a little sickness or other casualty,
experience tells us: He that had the choice of many thousand faces, (as well as
a plenitude of all other enjoyments) could say toward the period of his
Proverbs, Prove. 31.30.
that favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity; whereof we may be very
credulous, since we know not a more valid authority, then this of the
wise-mans, that will maintain the contrary.

Nor does Strength and Vigor of body (which is more chiefly appropriated to
our own sex) carry with it a less proportion of frailty, then the former: for
though we could sustain and hold it up to its ultimate term, till hoary old
age seize upon us; Alas! that is but a short time; it greetes us before we be
aware, often letting us know, by its decaying effects, that it has us by the
hand; it shrivels our flesh that before was brawney; weakens our sinues, that
lately were strong, and criples our joints that were nimble and active, and
steals away (though almost by insensible degrees) that natural heat and
vigorous warmth, whereby every part became enlivened and comfortably refreshed.
But it may be observed, that many times, either solitary sickness or some
wasting malady, prevents the decayings and debilitations of age, and so
subjects the stoutest man to a low condition, and pulls the strongest upon his
knees, causing him to confess with the holy Preacher, that Eccles. 11.10.
youth as well as childhood is vanity. Another thing which seizes many, and
hurries them headlong to their own ruin (unless well grounded upon pious
principles) is an Excess of worldly Pleasures, which may not improperly be
called vanity in the abstract, a mere extempory flash, far more imaginary, then
real, which for the most part dies in the birth: But admit them petmanent; yet
the consideration of those direful effects they produce, administers matter
enough for a loathing and detestation of them, and ground enough to deter
every conscientious Christian from an eager pursuit after them, or delight in
them.

One would tremble to think what dangerous incendiaries they are to lust; and
that so emasculates all the powers of the soul, that its noblest operations
become brutish: It begets a wanton eye, a lascivious ear, obscene talk,
unclean and filthy jests; besides many other secret abominations, not to be
conceived without horror, much less to be mentioned.

Therefore if we look upon sensual pleasures, as they are in themselves vain
and transitory; or in their vile consequenses base and impious, they deserve
not to have harbor in a sober mind: but rather to be ejected and utterly
banished from our thoughts, as contemptible, and unworthy of our notice.

Thus I have plainly laid down the vanity and short continuance of these last
mentioned earthly felicities; and we may be satisfied, that all other temporal
enjoyments are subject to the same fate and mortality. What can we fix our eyes
upon, that does not admonish us of our frailty? Do not all our fellowcreatures
die for us or by us? The brightsome cheerful day, dissolves into dark and
melancholy night: The fruit-bearing-trees, and other pleasant plants of the
earth, suffer an Autumnal nakedness: The beautiful face of that common mother
of us all, does once in each twelve months time resemble death. Oh! what a
stupendous height of madness is it in any worthles miserable mortal, to think
he can extract a continuance of happiness out of an inch of time! That
Chemistry or sacred art is only proper to him, to whom all things are
possible: That Almighty power can draw forth the vast spaces of eternity out of
a moment of time; can contract the swelling Ocean into the compass of a
nut-shell, and the capacious Earth into a grain of sand, and is able to
accomplish those things, which are ten thousand degrees beyond the reach of
all humane capacity and imagination.

Do we then upon serious consideration manifestly discern the fading
transitorinesse of accumulated Riches, of adored Honor, of shining Beauty, of
vigorous Strength, of delightful Pleasures; yea and of Life it self, and
whatever else can be esteemed as dear and precious to us in this world; and can
we (upon second thoughts) so fix our hearts on them, and dote after them, as to
be troubled and dejected with our parting from them? Sure it betraies a great
measure of folly in any one to bewail and afflict himself for the loss of
that which he knows must certainly decay and vanish: yet such is the nature
and condition of earthly-minded-men, whose wills are so vitiated, affections
misguided, and understandings dark'ned, that they cannot see further. But wise
Christians will value good things according to their continuance, and therefore
set their hearts upon those unspeakable, and invissible comforts of a better
life; as knowing (or at least truly believing) that the things which are not
seen, are both happy and eternal.

Therefore let us be persuaded, as a counter-ballance to the Creatures vanity
(having already seen how frail and transitory all outward and earthly
enjoyments are, though their enticements be never so many, and seem to hold
forth promises of a fair and pleasing nature) stead fastly so six our souls
on those things which are of a more Celestial concernment, those inestimable
Riches that are treasured up in heaven, where neither moth nor ruff can ever
possibly corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal, which are beyond all
thoughts of diminution or decay. Oh that we could satisfy our selves with an
holy and humble contemplation of those unspeakable and unparalleled joies,
wherewith the glorified Saints and Angels are perpetually happied, and whereof
there is a plentiful portion reserved and appointed (through the bountiful
providence of the most High) for every true pious believer! If we do but cast
our souls upon that immovable rock (Christ Jesus) and lay hold on him by a
steadfast faith, we may be confident, there shall not be one mercy, that
respects our eternal happiness, withheld from us, as is very clear and evident
by sacred Scripture-authority. What person then, that has but a spark of
grace, can afflict and macerate himself, for the want and deprivation of those
creature comforts, which are doomed to a fading mortality, when he may upon
such soul-solacing, and saving terms become undoubted heir of all those
glorious promises, that are recorded in Holy Writ, (in and through the merits
of Christ) and have as great a share in that heavenly inheritance, as the
highest Angel has? I say, then who would trouble himself about the trifles of
this world?

2. PARAGRAPH.
FOr although there be a confluence and continuance of all earthly endearments;
yet they fall infinitely short of satisfaction; which is another particular I
shall crave leave to insist on; not doubting to offer something that may not
only appear, but prove considerable. As first, suppose that Life it self
(without which all earthly things amount to nothing) were protracted to the
utmost length of Methusala his age; and then withal consider that original
guilt and corruption, which is derived from the loins of our first Parents,
whereby our whole man became depraved, and lost, (in respect of our first state
of innocence) and alas! we shall find very small satisfaction in this length of
days: we should be either much unsatisfyed, and out of order: we should grow
insufferably weary of our selves, and of the world, making it our daily suite
to be dissolved, and so exiled from, this unpleasing Pilgrimage.

If we cast our eyes on those, whose age Providence has drawn forth but to
seventy or eighty years, for the most part we see them miserably tired and
encumbered, crying and calling out for death, to release them from that burden.
And certainly, if their lives should run forth into a larger term, it would be
attended with a greater measure of toilsomenesse and trouble.

Then again, admit that to length of days there were added, a fullness of
earthly blessings, and those freed from many perplexities and grievances,
wherewith they are commonly accompanied; yet very little satisfaction could the
soul receive from them, or find in them: For without doubt if any thing of true
contentment and of a comfortable durance could have been found i^ them, Great
and wise Solomon, that had the full command and enjoyment of them all, upon the
fairest conditions that the earth could allow, would have afforded them a more
favorable Character, then vanity of vanities: and why we should expect more
from them, that have them upon far meaner terms, then that wise Monarch had,
is to me no less then a Paradox? Nor can I rationally apprehend, why any
should promise to himself a felicity in those things, which daily and hourly
experience renders not only dissatisfactory but miserable. If we look upon the
rich and covetous person (for indeed they are seldom separable) who, though he
has heaped up worldly wealth, to a seeming inexhaustible store, and as much as
would probably satisfy many moderateminded-men; yet we shall hear him express
a want of something, still vehemently craving, and inordinately desiring more:
Though his substance be never so vast, it is too poor and narrow for his
avaritious mind: The eye and the ear (those twins and purveyors for the flesh)
still remain unsatisfyed, and thereupon the heart says, it is not enough: the
more it has, the more it craves; discontentedly afflicting it self, when it
cannot attain to the utmost extent, of its boundless and unlimited desire. Nor
is the proud and ambitious man less perplexed, when he cannot reach to the
height of that honor, which his lofty spirit looks at: His aspiring thoughts
will prompt him to leave no ways or means unassayed (though never so
dangerous and unwarrantable) whereby he may possibly accomplish that, which his
thirsty mind aims at; as we may plainly see in Hamans case. If in the next
place we observe the Voluptious person, who bathes himself in pleasures, and
swims through times swift current, with as much vain mirth and jollity, as a
created capacity can suggest; yet all this suffices not, so light and airie are
all delights of this nature, that they pass away like a shadow, and are many
times gone in the very moment of their enjoying; In so much that for the most
part those men which are voluptuously given, are forced to feed their humors
upon a stock of past pleasures, suffering their thoughts to run over with a
kind of pleasing liberty (though indeed a most sinful licen ciousnesse) the
former passages of their vicious and voluptuous lives. And all this (if rightly
considered) is so far from administering true content, that it aggravates
their misery, by contracting a double depravity and guilt upon their own souls,
which will one day reflect upon their miscarriages with sorrow and sadness,
and bitterly condemn their own folly for giving way to such irreligious and
horrible courses.

Further if we look upon the Strong and Valiant man, we shall see how frail
and unsatisfying that is (as I have before more fully declared) and how soon
the most active and vigorous strength becomes weakness, either through the
decaying of age, sickness, or other accidents. Sampson (so famous in Holy
Writ) that had as much cause to boast of himself in that particular as ever
any, having thereby done such unparalleled things, as almost exceeded belief;
yet how suddenly he was bereft of all that power and strength ( Judge 16.17.
after he had discovered the cause thereof to his Dalilah) is notoriously
known. I might run into (...) multitude of Instances, of the creatures
dissatisfaction, were it not rather to protract time, then afford content.
Therefore in a word. thus That if all the pleasures and profits, earthly
concernments and enjoyments of ten thousand worlds were heaped together, and
became a monopoly; There is not so much efficacy to be found in all as would
satiate the desires of one Immortal soul and the reason is this; for that they
are of a frail and finite nature; and the soul purely infinite; they are
material, but the soul immateriall; they are of a drossy substance, but the
soul made up of heavenly faculties; so that there can be no more true
fellowship betwixt them then there is betwixt light and darkness, which stand
at an irreconcilable distance.

Therefore since it appears that the choicest of all outward endearments are so
little satisfying, (or rather so much dissatisfactory) It may induce us to give
them a proportionable value and no more, and to six our hearts and affections
on those higher things that are of a more durable substance; which we may be
certain will not perturb our spirits, nor subject us to this destroying
distemper of discontent.

3. PARAGRAPH.
ANd because there may be some in the world that are more apt to be deterred
from what they incline to, by an apprehension of danger then any other
consideration; I shall therefore now show, how perilous it is, to overprize
earthly comforts; and that will appear, f^^ in regard it affronts the majesty
(...) the most High: for we lessen the esteem, which we ought to entertain of
the Almighty, when w^ overvalue those things which a^ subordinate: then
consequent^ this error must be acknowledged to be exceeding dangerous: Oh! How
can that God endure, (whose bounty freely di^penseth it self to the relief of
a^ those that have interest and affiance in him) to see his creatures value
above himself! It will vex a natural man to see his favors feasted o^ and his
person contemned, to b^ beaten with his own weapon; Ho^ may it much more
provoke the fie^ anger of the Omnipotent God to brea^ forth and consume those
that crea^ to themselves an heaven on Earth who though they live and subsist
upon mercy, yet under value the Gr^ Giver and Author of it: For this (...)
undeniable that where the creatu^ is overvalued the Creator is under valued;
and (to speak it with reverence) we do then as much as in us lies to degrade
the Deity, and debase the Majesty of our heavenly Father: we ought to be very
circumspect in this particular, and armed with abundance of caution, against
the insinuations and attempts of our subtle and deceitful enemies who ly in
wait, and are ever ready to prompt us to enormities of this nature. Satan
seeks all advantages to withdraw our affections from God, and to that end
presents us with the world laid forth in all its variety, and in its most
amiable dress, and if that take us, he has gained great part of his design;
for by the next degree he thinks to make us his own: And then the World, though
a seeming friend, becomes a real enemy, and contributes to Satan's Design, and
like a cheating Gamester suffers us to win at first, that at last he may go
away with all: He courts us with smiling flateries and pleasing pretenses,
until he has engaged us; and then he makes us vassals.

Nor are our corruptions idle, but ready to entertain the worlds (...) braces,
and like Tinder fly in^^ flame upon the first touch. In (...) regard we ought
to be very car^^ how and upon what terms we (...) verse with the world, that
we (...) not be involved in danger. (...) fullness of the earth is made u^^
many ingredients, and though t^^ are for the most part of a gross nat^^ and
therefore less taking; yet (...) are mixed with some that have a^^ ring baits,
and so attract our affe^^ons; when alas, in the end they (...) into emptines
and can never sat^^ the better part of man (the so^^ but many times hazard the
loss^^ that most precious Jewel, that (...) so dearly purchased with an
In^^mable Price, (the Innocent bl^^ of the Lord Jesus) to recover which the
powers on earth cannot lend (...) least assistance.

And that which yet brings m^^ danger, the fullness of the world tainted with
poison, with sin (...) the curse of God. And what pl^^sure can any man take
to drink that cup that is mixed with poison, though it be never so sweet and
delicious to the taste? Besides it is a most defiling substance; for whatsoever
the heart converses with that is worse then it self, it receives pollution
thence and so becomes corrupted. And though we have never so great a share of
this fullness, it falls below our expectation, sinck it as low as we can. And
that which is yet more dangerous; It costs us many thousand times more then it
is worth: our precious time, which was a lot^d us for a better improvement; our
^ar and daily thoughts that were given us to feed on higher things? and often
takes up our Immortal souls which should not fix on finite objects: that here is
a large stock laid out (...) it: abundance of care to get it; extremity of fear
to keep it; and many times exceeding much grief to ^^se it. And being obtained
and ^^held with all this difficulty: it ^ay make us miserable, but dever tru^^
make us happy. Oh! Then, that man alive (unless he be given over to act his
own ruin) that ha^^ a God to serve, and a soul to sa^^ an heaven to hope for,
and an h^^ to fear; sins to avoid, and Gra^^ to acquire; will employ his tis^^
his thoughts, his interest to beco^^ the world's Favorite, when the (...)
fruition of earthly things in th^^ highest felicity appears so dangerous? Let Us
rather be willing to p^^ with all that is dear and delight to us in this life,
then run so g^^ an hazard as the displeasure of G^^ and the loss of our own
souls. L^^ be ready upon every occasion to (...) off these encumbrances, that
imp^^ our progress in our spiritual cou^^ and cheerfully embrace those hel^^
and advantages that may direct (...) further us in our way to hea^^ ward, where
we shall enjoy hon^^ without envy; sollace without (...) row; felicity without
frailty; (...) comfort without end.

4. PARAGRAPH.
HAving laid down the danger that involves all those whose hearts are let forth
to an over-high valuing of creature comforts: I shall next examine, what a
perplexity and distemper is usually wrought both in the bodies and souls of
those that have over-full estates: and also what a torment it is to them, when
they are forced to part with them, or otherwise suffer a declension in their
honor and greatness, (especially if they be such as are merely moral.)
Experience tells us, that excess is attended with sickness, and superfluity
produces a world of diseases, neither of which are ordinarily attained to
without over-plentifull, estates. Observe that man whose curious and craving
palate is such, that he cannot endure to satisfy himself with some dishes that
are choice, but will extend his command to (...) superfluous variety of them,
an^ after he has fed so long as nature will admit him, many times quarre^ with
himself, because his stoma^^ will not receive another course o^^ choicer
morsels, but becomes glu^^ upon the very sight of them: so tha^ hence proceed
surfets, feavouri^^ distempers, and abundance of other maladies that cry out
for the Physician; who shall now be in more reque^^ then the Cook, and a second
sicknes^^ must endeavor to cure the first. Th^^ health which is one of the
greate^ of sublunary mercies, must be wantonly destroyed, or at least be s^
impaired, as will render such a person in a decaying sickly condition so long
as his life lasts: When o^ the contrary he to whom provident has allowed a
small portion in thi^ world, eats and drinks proportionably, and so lives at a
comfortable distance from such distempers.

Besides, so great are the troubles tha^ for the most part wait on a ful^
estate, that me thinks a due conside ration of them, might enduce us to rest
satisfied with a little. First, Envy is an unavoidable companion of Greatness,
this body can never walk without that shadow, they are inseparable: when on the
contrary it scarce ever looks at a mean Condition: low shrubs are seldom
struck with lightning; It is the lofty proud Cedars that are most liable to
those devouring flames. David while he tended his fathers flocks lived merrily
and without disturbance; but when he once approaches the Court (though by
Sacred Election and Appointment) and becomes arrested with applause and
greatness; then emulation and envy, despite and malice, pursue him close at
the heels; and though he forsake the Court, and wander in the Wilderness,
thither these bloodhounds follow him: If he fly to the land of the
Philistines, they will find him out, and chase him to Ziklag: and though at last
he arrive at his just Throne, and there hopes to breath a little after all
these tedious Encounters, yet still he is accosted with unquietness, and forced
in a most patheticall and sensible manner to cry out Psa. 132.1.
Lord remember David and all his troubles. Thus, many are betrayed by their
wealth; and their very greatness creates a Judge to condemn them as
malefactors.

He that falls from an high precipice, cannot probably avoid bruises; but he
that suffers a fall on even ground, is liable to little or no harm. Is it not
then much better to be safe in a low condition then mounted high and subject
to so much peril? And then further, greatness can never continue without
vexatious and disquieting cares; that are ever ready to perplex both bed and
board, to distract our sleep, disgust our meat, embitter our pleasures, and
shorten our days. Nor are the holiest of men free or exempted from these
perturbations: By how much the higher they are advanced in outward things, so
much the more trouble and vexation they shall meet with (either in respect of
instruments or otherwise) in the managery of those affairs: For where earthly
promotion is, distraction (in some degree) inseparably attends it. That made
Gregory, (none of the worst Bishops of Rome) passionately complain of the clog
of his high preferment, confessing though he was outwardly advanced, he was
inwardly debased; and that the burden of his honor did insufferably depresse
him, and his innumerable cares disquiet him on all sides. It was observed by
the Jewish Doctors, that Joseph the Patriarch, was of a shorter life then the
rest of his brethren, And this reason they render of it, that his cares were so
much the more and greater, as his place and employment was higher.

And further, sad experience tells us, that Honor is rarely upheld without
sin, and that grievous temptations follow great Estates. The 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
holy Apostle Paul brands wealth with deceitfulness; for that it cheates many
men of their souls, and so robbes them of those everlasting treasures, that
are preserved from all corruption and decay, whereof they might have been made
partakers, (...) not their hearts been inordinately (...) on this thick clay,
this mammon of the world.

And it is incredible to think, wit^ what torment earthly men part wi^^ this
trash. How many men have lo^^ their lives, rather then they would lose their
bags; or at least runn^ themselves into such extremity (...) danger to
preserve them, that they have ever after lived miserably? B^^ that which is yet
more in sufferably grievous and lamemtable, is the grea^^ Account that will
inevitably succee^ these large entertainements, at the last and General day of
Judgment when every one shall be summone^ to answer for what has been done in
the flesh, and how they have employed (or rather improved) those Talents they
have been entrusted with. Oh! How terrible will it be then for those to appear
before the Majesty of Heaven, that have made Gold their God? That in this life
have doated upon a moment of time, and so much slighted the vast spaces of
eternity? Sure it must be very difficult, (if not impossible) for such to make
a fair reckoning, in the failing whereof they become perpetually miserable.
And that conscience that before seemed dead, will contribute to the souls
affliction and sorrow, and bring fresh to mind those evils it has formerly
delighted in.

Now if these several particulars be summed up, as first, those tedious
indispositions and distempers of body, occasioned through an Excess: Then
those extraordinary troubles and perplexities of mind raised by inordinate and
sollicitous cares, for the support of greatness; together with that Mortal
hatred and sinful emulation incident to a full Estate; besides the vexation in
parting with, and torment in accounting for this worldly pelf; and that which
is most dreadful, the hazard of losing our Immortal souls: certainly these
considerations duly weighed, and seriously thought on, have sufficient force
to deter any sober minded Christian from running on to a delight of these
drossey and perplexing vanities, these rotten earthly treasures. Therefore
steadfastly eyeing these many Inconveniences, we ought rather earnestly to
pray, that we may be freed from the occasions of them, (which appears by what
has been said, to be outward pomp and secular greatness) then in the least
measure to be afflicted for the want of them, when at best and in their highest
capacity, they may perplex us, but never really content us.

Object. It may be objected, that it is a far easier thing to say we may be
happily contented, and satisfied in the want of these worldly advantages, then
to be truly so indeed; and that the practice is far more difficult then the
profession.

Answ. I confess it is so, and that all have not learned that Divine Art: they
must be diligent disciples in the school of Christ before they can take forth
this lesson, and become proficients: Nevertheless if these particulars I have
already insisted on, be well considered, as the unstable and momentany
condition of all things here below, and how unsatisfying they are in their
greatest confluence and abundance; together with that exceeding danger that
arises by an over-high estimation of them; and also the many and great
distempers and distractions that attend both body and soul, in the fruition of
them and parting with them; and likewise the terror in accounting for them.
These with such circumstances and enlargements as our hearts will be ready to
find out and suggest: will in some degree learn us how to want.

5. PARAGRAPH.
But in regard all are not thus qualifyed, I will endeavor to show the
difference betwixt those that know how to dispense with the want of
creature comforts, and those that do not. The first sort, are principally such,
as have learned to frame their minds (with as much exactness as may be) to
their estates. All satisfaction and contentment arises from this very
conjunction of suitables; a convenient with a convenient: he that has never so
va^^ an estate, if his heart be not framed to it, cannot be satisfied. And on
the other hand if his fortune be never so mean and poor; if his heart be suited
to it, he is content, and enjoies himself with much felicity. That person knows
how to lack, that can speak with the same faithful heart in David's language,
Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my Shepherd, and therefore can I lack nothing. And, that can also
willingly embrace that saving exhortation of this good King, in another place,
Psalm. 34.9.
O fear the Lord, ye that be his Saints; for they that fear Him lack nothing.
It cannot be denied, that many Servants of God enjoy but small portions in this
world, and may be reduced from a greater to a less estate: but they conclude
that the wise providence of God finds it good for them; therefore they will
humbly submit and submissively stoop to that Divine Hand, and subject
themselves low at the feet of the Almighty, and with much patience endure what
ever the Lord appoints them, and can with Act. 16.25.
Paul and Silas, rejoice in their tribulation (if they be called to it.) These
know how to want, and nevertheless faithfully rely upon that God which gave
them a being, and walk conscionably before him, trusting that he who is Lord of
the whole earth, and the fullness thereof, will not permit their careful and
pious endeavors to go weeping away; but will in his own due and appointed
time, (when most agreeable to his Sacred Will) vouchsafe them a better being.
O! What an happy estate have those arrived at, that can improve misery to such
an advantage? That become richer by their want, and better by their afflicton;
and whose very infirmities afford them strength? This seems strange to flesh
and blood, and a carnal mind will be ready (...) condemn it for an heresy; yet
neve^thelesse true with the children (...) light, who are spiritually minde^
that are so much the purer, in r^gard they have passed under the h^^^ of the
refiner, and know how (...) bless God, and content themselve in the lowest
condition. And such doubtless have the greatest Interest i^ that incorruptible
inheritance, that is laid up in heaven.

Now on the contrary, such as a^^ unskilled in this art, of knowing well how to
want; are first those who^ indigence is accompanied with d^strust. And though
there be man gracious promises that hold fort^ relief (or at least support) to
tho^^ that are subjected to a mean condition; yet such is their diffidence that
they cannot endure to wait the accomplishment. If they receive n^^ supply in
the very nick of time th^^ they expect it, they begin to despa^^ of ever
obtaining any: so apt is depraved man to measure the merci^^ and dispensations
of the Almighty by the crooked line of his own sense, and by this means
irritates the Majesty of the most High, rendering himself not only miserable,
but offensive.

There is a second sort whose po^erty is clogged with envy, they ab^orre to see
any in a better condition ^hen themselves; it many times ^^oubles them more
then their own ^ant: such is the nature of this base ^^ssion, that it extends
not only to (...) hatred of others in respect of their ^^tward enjoyments; but
also, of ^^e goodness that is in them. An ^^vious person cannot endure to
^hold one that makes more con^^ence of his course of life, then ^^^mself; or
that has a fair repute ^^ongst those that are good; or that ^^deavours to
avoid those ways that (...) sinful and destructive: especially (...) such a man
prosper and flourish, ^^in that raging monster observes no ^^nds; but runs
into all the in^^^rate exorbitances that may be, and (...) qurrels with Divine
Providence ^^lf, till he work his own ruin.

There is a third sort whose (...) is accompanied with Pride, (...) though the
very apprehensio^ that condition, should be a m^^^ rather to humble them, then
to (...) up their hearts to such a prep^^ rous Excess; yet notwithstand they
often become guilty in (...) case, and suffer their lofty (...) to roave beyond
their estates: of this number were the Rev. 3.17.
for La^diceans, that esteemed them rich, increased with goods, wanting
nothing, when in truth were no better, then wretched miserable, poor, and
blind, a^^^ked. This proud conceit the Eccles. 25.2.
(...) Man inveighes against as an al^^nation.

Moreover, there is another (...) people, whose want is attend^^ abundance of
impatience; by (...) means they do not only ag^^^ their own affliction; but
(that (...) is more lamentable) they p^^^ and stir up the displeasure o^^ by
a sinful murmuring and re^^ at his all-wise dealing. When (...) ^^nstead of
gaining relief to themselves, they add guilt to their misery which will one
day prove a greater ^^rrow to the soul, then the want of (...) outward
accommodations can ^^ssibly be to the body.

What a passionate humor (and ^uch to be lamented) was that of ^^e Prophet
Jonah; who being depri^^d of the protection of that gourd, ^^ich a few hours
before had no ^^ing; could, in the face of that God ^^ich made both him and it,
say, Joh. 4.9.
^^o well to be angry, even to the death? ^ese and many more, that I might
^^ance in (should I further run into ^^ticulars) know not how to want, (...)
are so much the more miserable ^^d so to be pittyed) by how much less
knowledge they have in this ^^ssary Divine Art. Thus if we ^^ider and compare
the particulars ^^nsisted upon, both in respect of (...) that know how to want,
and (...) that are ignorant thereof; we (...) easily discern the difference,
see the vast disproportion be^^t them. The first are meek and humble, the other
are proud (...) impatient; the souls of the first (...) filled with love and
confidence (...) Gods mercies, the other are envin^ and diffident; the one
observes (...) the dispensations of God with spiritual eye, the other looks
upon them with the eye of sense; so (...) there is as perfect antipathy (...)
twixt light and darkness.

Therefore this should engage (...) through the assistance of Almig^^ God
(whose help will never be ^^^nyed to those that humbly (...) faithfully implore
it) to endea^ by all means possible, so to b^^ and digest our wants, as that
(...) may neither indispose us to hi^ ^^cred service; nor disturb our (...)
souls, and thereby shut us (...) all hopes of that holy content^^^ which
seasons and sweetens (...) condition to us.

6. PARAGRAPH.
CErtainly we cannot be careless and negligent in this, if we con^^ider the
Celestial estate of those that ^ive contentedly. If there be any (...)
appinesse under the Sun it must ^^e fixed here.

For first if we be freed from those ^^xieties and disturbances that all
^^iscontented persons are liable to, ^e shall the better answer and mani^^st
the end of our being, (which is (...) serve our God in holiness and ^^uth) we
shall be invested with a ^^ller capacity for that purpose. and that is a
felicity, beyond which (...) mortal can attain to in this life: ^^or he that is
once settled in the ^^vice of his Maker, dreads not ^^e worst of extremities,
in respect (...) any permanent misery they can ^^duce him to: For so long as
his ^^onversation is above, what needs he be afraid of any cross acciden^^
here below, since all things work^^ together for the good of those that fear
God? Whatever storms ari^^ he can anchor in a safe Harbour^ Whatever
adversaries he me^^ with, he is sufficiently armed against them; for the Lord
is his Shield an^ Buckler, He Is a present help in ti^^^ of trouble: and if
occasion be, (...) has a strong Tower, a Rock of R^fuge, and a Castle of
Defense to (...) treat to, that will secure him in (...) greatest difficulty
and danger.

Another Privilege of those th^^ live contentedly is, they comfort^^^^ enjoy
themselves without wh^^^ (although a man possess the w^^^ world) he is
miserable. That (...) enjoyment is this, when a man (...) peaceably and quietly
attend, (...) the service of God, and his own ling, without distraction, and
(...) comfortably apply himself to (...) vocation that providence has (...)
pointed him in his Pilgrimage. A^^ What does it avail this Emper^^^ that
Monarch, though their T^^^ ^all Governments extend as far as Land, and their
commands reach the Seas, when they can never address themselves to the
managery of those weighty affairs, that fall with^n the compass of their
Empires and Kingdoms without vexations and distracting disturbances? Do they
not meet with daily and hourly troubles? Sometimes they are threatened with
Invasions from without, insurrections within, and discontents on every side;
which dis^urb their minds in such an high ^egree, that their powers become
^rievous, and their Honors insufferably burdensome.

Furthermore, that which adds to ^he excellency of contentation, It (...) no
where to be found, but with ^ose that are truly Christians not ^ominally but
really: who ever else ^etendes to it, will find he has but small share, if he
examine himself (...) a right rule. It Is true, many Mo^ll men may proceed far,
and offer ^ir to this particular: yet if they be ^ought to the Test; It will
be found they fall much below an holy co^tentation. St. Paul the Great (...) of
the Gentiles, could say after (...) conversion (not before) Phil. 4.11, 12.
I have lea^ed in what state soever I am in, ther^^^ to be content: I know how
to be abase and how to abound. It was not the learned Gamaliel, at whose feet
(...) sat, that learned him that Iesso^ he had not that Divine skill; no,
(...) was his Heavenly Master that taug^^ him this, and therefore he prof^^seth
it. And hence may we kno^ not only how to attain it, but a^^^ how to value it.
And by how m^^ the more difficulty it is obtained, (...) much the higher
estimation we^ engaged to set upon it; for if (...) once arrive at this haven,
we ha^^ taken a degree in Heaven, and the goodness of our merciful Fa^^ know
how to be happy both in (...) and abundance. What a rare a^^ excellent
advantage is this, when the midst of troubles and comb^^^ons, how great, and of
what na^^ soever they be, a Christian can co^^ fortly acquiesce, and enjoy that
(...) peace within, which the world is not worthy of, nor has any acquaintance
with.

Though a man be otherwise never so well accomplished, never so exquisitely
learned (which I must confess is highly commendable: and could the face of
humane learning be presented in its beauty, and made obvious to every eye; I am
persuaded it would almost ravish every spectator;) yet without this inward
soul-satisfying peace, all outward acquirements, and natural endowments would
prove empty and dissatisfying. How nearly then it concerns us, as we tender
our own satisfaction and comfort, as we regard the service of our Heavenly
Father, to send up our earnest petitions to heaven, and to lay forth al our
power and Interest for the purchasing this precious Jewel, which in the worst
of times will be of singular advantage.

7. PARAGRAPH.
It Is true, to quiet our selves in the contrariety of estates is difficult; yet
by the assistance of Gods holy spirit, and the use of such Sacred means as are
appointed, it may be attained to. That which most opposes us in this work, is
our querilous natures, that are hardly brought to know what they would have;
and when they have it, are ignorant how to approve of it. Many would be happy;
yet are extremely unwilling to part from their houses of clay: they love not to
think of their dissolution, (which is the beginning of true happinisse, to
those that have made their calling and election sure.) They desire to have
their lives prolonged, and drawn out to a large term, yet are loath to endure
the troubles, and the decayings incident to old age. They express a
willingness to be kept in order, and so to be made meet for their masters use,
yet cannot well digest the chastisements of affliction. And thus in many
instances of this kind, most men suffer a distraction in the contrariety of
estates and conditions, and that in no small measure, so long as perverse
nature is predominant: But if once Grace, (that spiritual habit of the soul)
master and overcome that (otherwise untameable) monster; (rebellious nature I
mean) from thenceforth it becomes cowardly, unpowerful and dead, in respect of
any prejudice it can possibly reduce us to. Let our condition be what it will,
we shall be enabled to rest satisfied; which arrives us at some degree of
perfection. Nevertheless it must be acknowledged, that middle estate, or
Golden mean, which the wise Monarch's thoughts seemed to pitch on, (when he
desired Prove. 30.8.
neither poverty nor riches; but that he might be fed with the food of his meet
allowance,) is in all rational apprehension the best, and will most probably
avoid those perturbing inconveniences that are incident to both extremes. For
poverty, o^ the one hand, (especially if it m^^ with a man merely natural) will
deject him lower in his thoughts then the very earth that bears hi^^ and be apt
to render him far more desp icable in his own esteem, then the want of
substance makes him poor. Nor does it rest here; but many times engages him in
a quarrel with his maker, and prompts him to fly in the face of heaven;
because he is not master of a larger portion of earth: And to contemn the
inexhaustible Treasures that are above, because he wants a little transitory
trash here below; and thus at on^^ continues not only poor but offensive.

So on the other hand, he that is gl^^ted, in riches, and wallowes in wealth and
rather prey's then feeds on the fatness of the earth, discovers a^ much
unquietnes in his estate, as those that have but a skantling (compared with his
fulness.) Besides his unlimited and avaricious desire importunes for more, and
with the horseleech, still cries, Give, Give; seldom or never considering how
he has carried himself in his stewardship; nor regarding what pious
improvement he ought to have made of so great a substance; nor minding that
strict account that will one day be exacted, for the whole carriage of his
life, and especially for the managing such a large possession. Alas! these
things are too often exiled from his thoughts, so that he grows imperious, and
that carries him to a contempt of those below him; but in the end (to his
misery) sets him at a greater distance from true happiness. Thus both
extremes are hazardous, unless they meet with a gracious heart, that like a
skilful Pilot, which way soever the wind blows, can steer them to his
advantage, and whenever storms arise (though never so boisterous and
terrible) can provide for his own safety. How necessary is it then for all that
respect their own happiness, by all industrious means to labou^ and endeavor
after this gracio^^ habit of the soul, that will rend^^ every condition
placable, and eve^^ estate comfortable, without whi^^ we may only wish, but
never, upon sure grounds, hope for content, amongst those many cross traver^^^
and contrarieties of occasion tha^ the world pre^ents us with? The wise Seaman,
whose ship is tossed (...) the angry Ocean with furious an^ irresistible waves,
will be ready t^ feed the sea with his fraught (though never so rich) by
casting it overboa^^ if he may thereby secure his own li^^ and his friends:
Much more ought we, that are continually tossed in the troubled sea of this
world, to cast away all carnal affections and worldly desires, and willingly
suffer a deprivation of earthly endearments to preserve that main necessary, (a
gracious heart) which will prove of far greater moment then all outward
Considerables.

8. PARAGRAPH.
THis great advantage an holy heart furnishes us withal. It seriously
considers that Divine Providence orders and overrules all Events. Whatever is
done in heaven or earth, is obedience to it: not so much as an hair from our
heads falls, whereof God is ignorant: no transaction whatsoever, respecting
our spiritual or temporal estate; but falls under the cognizance of the
Almighty. That all-wise God measures out to every creature such a due
proportion: as he knows will tend most essentially to his good: nor will he
suffer any one child of his to want that, wherewith he should be truly bettered
in the enjoyment of it. Alas! Of our selves we are most prone to make choice of
those things that affect our sense, and appear amiable and delighful at first
view, though otherwise they man produce dangerous and destructiv^ effects and
consequences. Wha^ would become of us in this case, if Almighty God did not
direct us and like a merciful Father, with a kind of Gentle compulsion, even
force us to a reception and imbracement of those better things, that have
regard to the glory of his name and our own Eternal Welfare? (...) our station
were not set us, we should respect no bounds, observe no limi^^ but wander in
those ways that would destroy us.

There is no outward condition that can be universally good for all that which
is healthful and nourishing meat for one, may prove a medicine to another. The
Turk find food and Physic in that Opium, which would cast one of us into our
la^^ sleep: should the painful daily labourer, be confined to the Gentle man's
dainty fare, it would either naucerate his stomach, or leave i^ to quarrel for
stronger provision. What one loves another dislikes therefore providence
furnishes every one with that which is most fit for him; although perhaps not
always to our apprehension. There is not a creature in the world but is
provided for by the Almighty: but we are altogether unfit to be our own
Carvers, for that we know no measure. It is the Lord that looks down from
heaven (says the Psalmist) he beholds all the sons of men; From the place of
His habitation, He looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth; and to those
whom He has given a being, makes such provision for, as is most agreeable to
his wisdom and their condition, and will, out of the abundance of his love
(in his own appointed ^^me) give them such helps, as may ^^nd to their better
being. Certainly ^e must betray a world of infidelity, (...) we do not believe
that God infinitely ^ise does know what is best for us, ^ho by his immense
wisdom has ^^rmed the earth, and by his understanding has established the
heavens; (...) whose knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds dro^^
down dew. Nor is his mercy le^^^ infinite to will what he knows b^^^ for us:
He opens his hand (sait^ David) and satisfyes the desires (...) every living
thing; but especiall^ fulfils the desires of them that fe^^ him, and graciously
preserves tho^^ that love him. His power is also in^^nite to do what He wills:
in whose rig^^ hand is length of days, and in (...) left hand riches and
honor. The he that is steadfastly persuaded (...) that overruling power, and
Sup^^ intendency, that Divine Provide^ has over all persons and occasion
cannot but be well satisfied, (...) submit himself totally to the Lo^^ will;
and in what condition soever he be, with Christian wisedo^ and meekness say,
It Is the Lo^^ dealing, let him do what he (...) What cross or calamity soever
be^^ us in this life, is endured with m^ more easiness, if we consider (...)
Providence takes notice of it; an^ it be for righteousness sake, (...) not
only relieve us, but rewa^^ for our sufferings. Very rarely has any. Child of
God, fainted under affliction, that has but seriously eyed Providence in its
several dispensations, and faithfully endeavored to make such an holy use of
them, as becomes those that live under the Government of such a ruling Majesty.
It Is true, Gods ways are as far above our ways, as heaven is above earth,
and therefore are not so easy to be discerned by the sons of men, yet a
steadfast and well-grounded faith will very much supply our defects in this
particular; and we may nevertheless justly admire, what we cannot fully
comprehend: and this may be taken for granted, that there is not any imaginable
accident in the world, that befalls those that have an interest in God, but it
has a secret saving end in it, though it is not immediately made obvious to
^he eyes of those it respects; nay, ^^ough it carry never so seeming an
^ntipathy, as to their wills and pro^ensions. All men naturally desire (...)
enjoy health, without which all other outward enjoyments have (...) relish,
yet, Sacred Providence ma^^ find that bodily sickness is essenti^^ to our
souls health. Life is likewi^^ much esteemed by us, but if He tha^ gave it,
has appointed that nothin^ less then death can render us glorious, sure we
ought to be well sati^fyed. We cannot but betray a w^^^ of weakness, if we do
not express (...) earnest and real willingness, to pa^^ with a life, of a span
long (whi^^ for the most part is attended wi^^ trouble and grief) for that
which full of bliss to all eternity. Wha^ soever the dealings of the Almigh^^
are, they should have a sanctify influence upon our hearts. An h^^ble and
serious observation of eve^ step of Gods providence, will mu^^ improve our
spiritual stock, and e^able us to bear any condition wi^^ comfort. Although our
sufferi^^ be of an high nature, and never^^ much aggravated by circumstance^^
though our nearest Relations shou^^ hold us in contempt, our famil^^ Friends
should despise us, and inste^^ of lending us relief, (as much as in them lies)
add to the measure of our afflictions: and though all outward means, which we
use for our own recovery deny us help, and utterly fail our expectation; yet
the consideration that God has an hand in all this, and that by his wise
Providence, he can reduce it to our good, and make us happy in the midst of our
unhappiness, will abundantly quiet our souls and engage us to look above all
second causes. Thus we see what a sovereign remedy this is, against all
disasters that may encounter us in this distracted world.

9. PARAGRAPH.
THere is no estate whatsoever, from whence we may not extract some advantage.
Poverty is the least desirable of any, and yet from this (if it be not in the
utmost extremity) much benefit may be reaped. The poor man that enjoies but
little of the world, is first freed from those terrible heartbreaking and
soule-distracting fears, that frequently attend those of the richer sort, wh^
many times suffer a deprivation o^ their wits, out of an apprehension they have
of parting with their substance, and so cast themselves into a deep degree of
misery; when the poor man rests quietly, and sleep^ securely and seldom or
never mee^ with any such terrors by day, (...) affrightments by night. And
the^ again, he is free from those solicito^ and turmoiling cares that
inseparabl^ wait on full estates.

He that has riches upon the be terms that this life can allow, (...) subject
to many troubles and care^^^ solicitations about the due orde^ing, and right
managing of that sto^^ which the Almighties bounty ha^^ furnished him withal.
He conside^ that a great weight lies upon hi^^ and that an exact account of his
(...) haviour will one day be called fo^^ But the troubles which follow wicked
worldly men are insufferably more grievous, those are of a more perplexing and
destroying nature, racking their joints and harazing every part, when the poor
man's care is only to purchase so much with his pains and industry as may keep
him honest, and in some small measure maintain himself and his charge; and if
at any time a better morsel be afforded to sweeten his courser fare, he sits
down exceedingly rejoiced, and sends up as many or more hearty thanks to God,
(the great Giver of all) as he that has fed deliciously and feasted on the
choicest dishes all his days. There is not the meanest mercy that an honest
poor man meets with, but he highly values, and raises it to a rich esteem:
when on the other hand, great mercies are very little or none at all regarded
by those that are worldly-minded and fatted up with the fullness of the earth;
so strangely do the hearts and minds of men become corrupted.

But to trace poverty a little farther, I have sometimes taken occasion to
converse with people of very poor and narrow fortunes (as to the world) such as
indeed have looke^ very near an extremity. And I cannot but admire to think how
abundantly well satisfied they have been with their condition, and have
expresse^ more of spiritual worth, then thousands that have moved in a far
higher Orb, (in respect of temporals.) Certainly this can be esteemed (...)
less then a very great benefit, when men so low in the eyes of the worl^ live
so high in the eyes of their Maker, and it must be imputed to (...)
extraordinary goodness of God, (...) that he furnishes them with su^^
proportionable support, to ke^^ their spirits from fainting, and the^^ souls
from sinking in such outwa^^ adverse conditions. When gre^^ men hoist their
top-sail and laun^^ forth into the main, having the sp^cious clew, which they
spread, e^posed to the violence of wind a^^ weather, the poor man sails n^^
the shore, and when an angry sto^^ threatens, puts into the next creek, and in
a calm security wears out the extremity of the Tempest, whilst he observes
prouder vessels miserably tossed, and many times fatally wracked. Nor is it a
small benefit, that the poor man is freed from the peril of hateful
contrivances and spiteful machinations, the Nimrods of the world think him too
inconsiderable to take notice of; no man will sharpen his axe to cut down such
a shrub: It is the lofty Cedars and large Timber of the world that have most
cause to fear hewing. He fears not the danger of a fall that lies flat to the
ground. Besides it cannot but have a very close reflection upon any spirit
(though but morally ingenious) to trample upon those, whom the Almighty has
already laid so low. Sure it is an high degree of aggravation, for any one to
harbor a thought of adding misery to those, that are in any measure miserable:
and whoever becomes guilty of this; will one day be sadly sensible of it.
Christian Prudence and compassion teaches this Lesson, that wh^^ever we see a
Child of God under a^fliction, we should be earnest by (...) possible means to
administer relie^^ and hold forth succor: by this (...) do not only help the
distresse^ (which is great satisfaction) and (...) imitate our Savior, but
also gain^^ further interest in the Father of mercies.

Another singular benefit that arise^ to those of a low and mean condition; is
this, they have less interruption and more freedom in their recourse to
heaven, then those which are clogged with the incumbring cl^^ and mammon of the
world. The po^^ man, his affections being not glue^ to the things below, in his
secre^ addresses soars heavenward, an^ there finds such inestimable riche^
as worldly men are not worthy of and though for the present he enjoy but in
part; yet he is satisfied of a fuller fruition hereafter when all creaed powers
are dissolved, and earthly advantages fled away. And then again, those persons
that are accounted so despicable here, cannot but receive a great support from
those gracious promises which are recorded in Holy Writ, and do more imediately
respect them then others. The poor and needy are pronounced blessed, and have
assurance given that the Lord will deliver them in time of trouble. And though
they should be denied the very crummes that fall from the rich man's table; yet
hereafter to be happyed with such a receptacle as Abraham's Bosom, must needs
be accounted a full compensation for all their sufferings.

10. PARAGRAPH.
IN the next place, the better to beget a satisfaction, I would have all men
seriously consider, what a small pittance will suffice nature; and certainly
whatsoever exceeds that, is merely matter of opinion. The Apostle Paul gives
out this charge, that 1 Timothy 6.9.
having food and raiment we should be therewith content. Nature car^^ for no
more, then what may len^ us nourishment, and hide our nakedness; It Is only our
want on will that render us guilty of a fastidion choice: and when they cannot
attai^^ to that they rove after, then o^^ condition becomes implacable. Wha^ a
madness is this in any person living to be both Author and promoter of his own
disturbance; to giv^ so much way to a peevish perve^^ will, as to distract his
whole course and make him not only a servant, (...) a slave to its imperious
tyrannical i^trusions?

It would contribute much mo^^ to our satisfaction, if we laboure^ to put a
restraint upon our wills, tha^ they run not into such exorbitance^ nor affect
such superfluities. Ancient stories relate, that those AN^ CHORETS of old, that
retire^ into deserts, and sustained nature with the sparest diet that those
place^ could afford; lived longer then others, who usually stifled themselve
with a gluttonous variety. How often have we seen poor industrious people,
whose fare has been as hard as their labor, enabled with a greater measure
both of health and strength, then those that have fed daintily, and lived as
idly all their days? If it were duly considered how pernicious an enemy
Excess is, and how destructive both to nature and grace; we should rather
decline it, then so vehemently thirst after it; and learn to lymit our desires
within moderate bounds; and so we should find mediocrity and ease. Extrems on
all hands are not only dangerous, but deadly. And without doubt if we could but
once reduce our minds to a satisfaction in those things which are only
necessary, and there acquiesce; our conditions would be far more comfortable
and well pleasing both to our selves and others. For as one well observes, he
is not rich that has much, but he that desires not much. And the best and
truest measure of having or desiring is not what we would, but what we ought:
And if we we^^ ^ut brought to this rule, we should ^e so far from being
sollicitoue i^ the acquiring great things, that (...) should rather slight
them; and a^^ count it much greater advantage (...) enjoy a mean, then to riot
in abundance.

It is a most pernicious temper in any one to let his affections run after
variety, when much less may rationally suffice. It Is only nature in in^
depraved condition that hunts after novelty; and such is our misery that we
want propension as well as power to restrain it. Therefore (...) should be our
daily task to implore help from that Majesty, that can with more ease give it,
then we desire it, whereby we may be enabled in some good measure to set limits
to our craving minds; that they may not hurry us on to such a prodigious
Excess, which rather serves to increase our trouble, then give quiet to our
condition. When we observe a poor man (as the world accounts him) by his care
and industry, so to husband and manage one small patch or parcel of earth, as
to raise thence provision for all his household uses, with meat and medicine,
oil and honey; how can we with any face of reason or modesty desire to glut
our selves with such a confluence as would comfortably support many? Certainly
this is a crime of an higher consequence, then we are apt to imagine, and ought
to be overruled, before it grow too monstrous; otherwise it will be very
difficult to subdue. Let me add one supposition more to this particular, and
so leave it. Admit we had the actual possession of as much as our desires
extend to, and were withal denied hearts (which is the heaviest curse that can
be) to dispense it toward those that are reduced to extreme want; and suppose
them to be such, as may in many respects, deserve better then our selves, and
yet ready to perish for want of succor; Oh! then let us consider what an
insufferable burden this would be to a conscience that is not seared, to any
heart that is not totally obdura^^ and hardened beyond all degrees (...) sense
and commiseration. Besid^ how formidable is it to conceive what a vast
disproportion this carries to the sacred Will of the Almighty.

And how inconsistent it is, (...) that course a Christian should observe; and
how impossible it wi^^ be to give a just account at the la^^ and terrible day
of Judgment, wh^^ a Summons shall issue from the high^ Court of Heaven, to
require all (...) every corner of the World to attend before that Great
TR^BVNALL, and answer for a^^ things done and passed in their live^ where every
action that has stepped (...) silence, shall be discovered, and the secrets of
all hearts laid open.

11. PARAGRAPH.
FRom what I have said appears, how little may suffice: beyond which,
whatsoever we desire, renders us guilty of the sin of Excess. Now it may be
objected, that it is not so much the want of substance, as other crosses and
calamities, that disturb and perplex the condition of ^en in this life. To
which I answer, that (however we conceive) afflictions are absolutely necessary
to those that sojourn in this Tabernacle of clay; and the very observation of
God's ^ispencing them will tend much to ^atisfaction. He does it so seasona^ly,
and so intermixes them with ^is Favors, that none but ill-natured children can
grudge or repine at (...). Psa. 103.9.
He does not always chide us ^saies the Psalmist,) we have more ^^iles then
frounes from the beauti^^^ face of the Almighty. It was a most excellent
answer, (and tha^ which carried a most high evidence of Christianity) wherewith
Patien^ Job stopped the querulous mouth o^ his impatient wife. What! (says he)
Job 2.10.
shall we receive good at the hand of God and shall we not receive evil?
Suppose a man has for the greatest part (...) his life enjoyed health (which
is the sum of earthly blessings) and toward his declension may be sei^^ on
with some afflicting malady (...) distemper; shall this man add wra^ to the
measure of his misery? O^ no, let him rather kiss the rod, (...) acknowledge
all Gods dealings (...) be just, and account it a mercy the he has been
spared, till the eve^ing of his age. The very corrupti^^ we brought with us
into the wo^^ besides those daily actual enormi^^ whereof we are guilty, carry
(...) enough to reduce us to a conti^^ torment; so that we have very (...)
ground to bless God for those li^^ and short afflictions we are subjec^ to.
For they are a special mea^^ to give us a better understandin^ that overruling
hand, that wounds and heales, yea, even kills and cures at pleasure. They learn
us also more truly to know our selves, and to confess that we are but clay in
the hands of the Potter, who may fashion and mould us as he pleases; and make
us vessels of honor, or dishonor, happy or miserable, without the least check
to his justice, or prejudice to his Providence. Me thinks it is a great shame to
Christians, that they should be less sensible of Gods various actings and
dispensations, then the very Heathens, who by the glimpse of nature, and their
own experience, could in some measure observe the change and intercourse of the
Almighties proceedings, and make some use of them.

It is storyed of CAMILLVS, that after he had upon a tedious ten ^ears siedge,
taken the opulent City ^EJOS; prayed that some mis^ortune might befall himself
and ROME, the better to qualify and ^emper so great an happiness.

And ALEXANDER the Great, upon a Recount of those wonder ^^^ victories and high
Achievement wrought by his Armies, could c^^ to his JVPITER, to intermi^^ some
ill news with that which wa^ so happy. If such men as these, could through
their dark principles conclude it best, that blessings should b^ attended with
crosses; Then mud^ more we, that have a fuller degre^ of illumination.

Nor is it enough to endure cross patiently; but according to our Savior's
direction be ever ready t^ take up the cross, and account (...) our highest
happiness when we suffer, especially for the Testimony of CHRIST or a good
conscience.

Afflictions (if they be not of a overpressing nature) are an Excelled means
to keep the heart in order^ and to provoke us to a more stri^^ and frequent
course in our address to HEAVEN; where we shall me^^ with such a glorious
compensation for all our suffering, as no heart (...) able to conceive, nor
tongue express such a recompense (I say) to which all imaginary earthly
felicities, cannot carry the least equality or proportion. And that we may not
doubt of this, the blessed Apostle St. Paul, directly assures us, 2 Cor. 4.17.
That our light affliction that is but for a moment, works for us, a far
more exceeding, eternal weight of glory. I heartily wish that this expression
may be effectually thought on: for I never read any sentence in Scripture
fuller then this, or that carries such efficacy and power in every word: A
far more exceeding, eternal weight of glory. Do but observe, how every word
rises a degree higher then other, till it come to the height of Eternity it
self. This is a singular comfort for Christians, that though sorrow and
heaviness may seize on them for a night; yet joy comes in the morning, and
continues with them for a longer term; which ought to engage every heart to
over flow with thankfulness, and comfortably digest small troubles, out of a
lively sense of future blessings.

Why should we murmur at pe^^ grievances, when the Author to the Hebrews tells
us, Heb. 2.10.
the Captain (...) our salvation, (Jesus Christ) was (...) perfect through
sufferings? Heb. 12.2.
HE endure the Cross, and despised the shame for the joy that was set before
HIM. And that we which were fettered i^ chains of iniquity, and bond-sla^^ to
sin and Satan, might be fre^ from that thraldom, and delivere from
destruction.

12. PARAGRAPH.
FOr our further satisfaction, let consider what worthy example we may meet
with, that have be^ content in their greatest extremities Did not the Prophet 1
Kings 17.6.15. etc.
Elijah receive (...) food from Ravens, and after the his meat from the poor
widow (...) SAREPTA? Were not an 1 Kings 18.13.
hundred men of the LORD'S Proph^^ (when Jesehell endeavored to (...) them)
hid by fifty in a cave, and fed with bread and water? And was not a few barley
loaves and small fishes, a poor repast for our SAVIOVRS Company, (which were
four thousand upon record?) And was it not hard for that glorious Apostle St.
Paul, to apply his hands to Tent-making, to procure food for his belly? Yet in
all these we do not find the least repining, or any expressions of discontent.

Further let us fix our eyes upon the highest example that ever was, and that is
the Eternal SON of GOD, Who took upon him the form of a Servant, and became
poor that we might be made rich, suffered the most vile and ignominious death,
that we might enjoy Everlasting Life: HE that could command Heaven and Earth,
and all the Treasures and Precious things in them, that could by the word of
HIS Mouth have erected the Statelyest Magnificent Palace, that ever any Earthly
Monarch had, or any eyes beheld; yea he that could have brought down a
Celestial Tabernacle, and have pitched it here below, says to the certain
Scribe in St. Matthewes Gospel, Mat. 8.20.
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the aite have nests; but the SON of
M^^ (meaning himself) has not where (...) lay his head. This did our blessed
SAVIOVR suffer, that our wants might be sanctified to us, and that HE might
learn us contentation in our lowest condition.

If we cast our eyes upon Men merely moral, (whereof History makes large
mention) we may find to what an height they attained in this virtue, and how
they have run away with great losses and extreme poverty as inconsiderable
slight burdens, and out of a willing choice have freely embraced those
conditions, which others that perhaps have been esteemed more Christian, have
startled at and endeavored to avoid with much dreadfulnesse. Do not we then
deserve to have this recorded to our utter shame, that PAGANS should outstrip
us in those practices that so nearly concern us? Do we observe an ARISTIPPVS
drowning his Gold in the Sea, that it may not drown him? And do we hear a
DEMOCRITVS confidently affirm, that the way to be rich, is to be poor in
desires, and can we forbear to wonder? What an admirable saying, was that of
ONESICRITVS, a very Indian? The earth is to me (says he) as the mother to the
child; for the mother supples her Infant with milk: so the earth yields me all
necessaries. And when ALEXANDER the Great, would have given him Gold, Persuade
(said he) if thou can these Birds to accept thy silver and Gold, that they
may sing the sweeter; If thou can not do that, why should thou think me
worse then them? And further asserts, that our desires as to riches and the
like, proceed from the want on nesse of our own wills, to which no bounds can
be set, and not so much from any motion of Nature; and proves it by this
ARGUMENT: Natural hunger when we have taken Food, cease. And if our minds
did also naturally desire GOLD, then so soon as w^^ had received it, our
Appetites, (...) to that, would presently cease; (...) such a distance are we
from this Temper, that the more we have the more without intermission w^^
inordinately crave, and thi^^ after.

This was an Excellent DISCOURSE, if we consider it proceeding from an Heathen,
and indeed such as might very well become a CHRISTIAN. Hence I passionately
wish, that all (but especially those that make a Profession of HOLINESS) would
abhor to fix their sole affections, upon such worthless transitory things;
and be convinced ho^ unsatisfying they are, and learn to entertain afflictions
with joy.

13. PARAGRAPH.
HAving now run through most of those Grievances and perplexities, that are
apt to distract us in our lives, and also taken notice how frail and fading
all sublunary things are: And likewise having endeavored to raise some matter
for satisfaction in our deepest exigences, from the consideration of those
nobler things, that are of a more durable and heavenly concernment: I shall
next survey that condition which of all other seems most terrible, and is
therefore termed the KING of Fear, and that is Death it self, whose very name
is attended with trembling; in respect of which all the afflictive incidences
of man's life, carry little or no proportion. And so it is indeed more
formidable then I can express, to those that have not some assurance of a
better life, that are not furnished with spiritual Armor for this last
encounter. But I shall make it appear, it is much otherwise to those that have
an interest in CHRIST; who consider the unavoidable necessity of it; grounded
upon that unalterable Eternal Decree of Heaven; And, that Heb. 9.27.
all men are appointed once to die. They are so far from desiring an exemption
from that condition, that they are said in Scripture to wait and long for it.
There are two especial days, for which the Children of GOD are said to wait.

The first is the day of death, wherein they go to the LORD.

The second is the day of appearing, wherein the LORD shall come to them.

They sojourne in the body, more weary of it, then David was of his dwelling in
the Tents of KEDAR; they wait with patient Job 14.14.
Job, till the day of their change come, and desire with the Apostle to be
Phil. 1.23.
dissolved and be with CHRIST; yea they pray for it, so often as they mention
that petition: Mat. 6.10. and Lu. 11.3.
Let thy Kingdom come. They labor after death, so far, as it may be a means
to abolish sin, that CHRIST their KING may alone reign in, and over them. It is
nevertheless true, that wicked and irreligious persons, put the remembrance of
death far from them; yet for all that it comes upon them suddenly, as 2 Kings
23.24.
Jehu furiously came upon Jehoram, though they run to their Chariots, (that is)
their Refuges of vanity; Death's dart surely overtakes them. But the good
Israelites of GOD desire to be ever prepared, with their Exodus 12.11.
loins girded, and their staves in their hands, ready to take their journey
from EGYPT to CANAAN, whenever the Majesty of the Most High GOD shall command
them. As fowls desirous to fly, stretch forth their wings; so do these extend
their affections toward HEAVEN.

Genesis 18.1.
Abraham sat in the door of his Tabernacle, when the Angel appeared to him; 1
Kings 19.9.
Elias came out to the mouth of his Cave, when the LORD appeared to him: so
should we rejoice and be glad to come o^^ of the Cave and Tabernacle of th^^
wretched body, that we may me^^ with the LORD of Glory. This Messenger (DEATH)
cures all our Maladies, and rescues us from all our fears and dangers; This is
that Cherub, that stands Centinell at the Gate of Paradise: There Is no entrance
but under his hand. There^ no passage to those glories above, but through the
Gates of Death here below.

But that which renders death yet more desirous to the Godly, is the second day
(which they are said to wait for.) And that is CHRIST'S second coming. The
Apostle gives this as a Token of the rich Grace of GOD, bestowed on the
Gorinthians, 1 Cor. 1.7.
that they waited for the appearance of CHRIST, yea he gives it out as a mark
of all those that shall be glorified, when he says, 2 Timothy 4.8.
There is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, and not for me only; but
all those, that love Christ's second appearing. And again, Heb. 9.28.
CHRIST was offered to take away the sins of Many; and unto them that look for
HIM, shall HE appear without sin unto salvation. Amongst the Jews as the day
of Lev. 25.10.
Jubilee drew nigh: so the joy of those that were in prison increased; for that
it brought them an assurance of relief. Much more cause have we to rejoice, the
nearer the day of our Eternal Jubilee approaches, when all tears shall be
wiped from our eyes, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away for ever.

But to encounter a little further with this great Combatant; first I say, that
Death which the righteous suffer, is not total; for it can never strike the
whole man; but only the weakest part, his body: the more excellent part, the
soul, is partaker of Eternal Life.

Nor secondly is it perpetual; for our souls shall not abide under the Bonds
of Death: the spirit of Christ that dwells in us, shall raise us up, and cloth
us with Immortality. There is begun in the Children (...) Light, a life, which
no death is eve^ able to exstinguish; though it man invade the vital, natural
powers (...) the body, and suppress them one after another, and at last break
in upon this lodging of clay, and demolish it to the ground; yet that man (...)
GOD which dwells in the Body, shall escape with his life. Though the Tabernacle
is cast down, (which is the worst our enemy can do) ye^ he that dwelt in it is
removed to better. As the Bird escapes out o^ the snare of the Fowler: so the
soul i^ death flies away with joy to her Maker The dissolving of the body, to
the Children of GOD is but the unfolding of the net, and breaking open the
Prison wherein they have been detained, that so they may be delivered from that
Captivity. Here Is comfort in abundance, for all those, whose consciences can
give evidence of their well-led lives. And for those also whose peace is made
with GOD through CHRIST, by means of those two powerful Mediators, steadfast
faith, and unfeigned repentance.

The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, gives us this assurance, To.
5.1.
That being Justified by Faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ; The efficacy of whose death effectually applied to our souls, will
sufficiently season and sanctify death unto us. For how can we possibly fear
that enemy, whom our Redeemer has already conquered? As in the battle betwixt
our Genesis 3.
Savior and Satan, Satan's head was bruised, and he did no more then tread on
the heel of our Savior, so shall it be in the conflict of all his members. By
the power of the Lord Jesus, we shall be more then Conquerours. The To. 16.20.
God of our peace shall tread down Satan under our feet: There is a seed of
immortal life in our souls, which no power of the Enemy is ever able to
overcome. So soon as we lanch forth of this life, we arrive at the blessed
Haven of everlasting happiness, where there is a Glory for all those that are
heirs of the Promise, which is both infinite, and incomprehensible.

14. PARAGRAPH.
THus I have in some measure made it evident, how advantageous the day of
dissolution is to the Children of God; and therefore cannot but wonder, how
any, upon solid grounds, can desire a continuance in this valley of tears;
especially, if they consider also the many miseries and inconveniences, that
a^ incident both to soul and body i^ this life, and the irreconcilable enmity
that is betwixt them in the^ Conjunction; As the Apostle Paul of serves in his
Epistle to the Galation Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and (...) spirit against the flesh, and
these (...) contrary one to the other, so that (...) cannot do the things we
would such and so many continued jarr^^ are betwixt them, that they are ev^^
prone to exhibit Articles of impeachment against each other. The soul it
complains of that Original guilt and corruption, which was translated upon
humane nature, through Adams transgression, wherewith it was not tainted, nor
defiled, as it came only from the Immaculate hands of its pure Creator. And
then again, the soul says, had it been single without this earthly Partner, it
had never had that propension to sin, nor that inclination to rebellious
actings against the Majesty of Heaven; nor that aversnes and indisposition to
good; Nor had its understanding (as to those spiritual things which pertain to
God) been so eclipsed and benighted at the noonday of such Glorious
Dispensations; Nor had it been liable to such distracting cares, and such
discomposing passions, which bring forth storms and terrible Tempests that
daily threaten its ruin and destruction.

These and such like complaints has the soul against the body, the spirit
against the flesh. There is amongst many more, another particular which we have
just cause to resent with much reluctance.

This burden of flesh, this house of clay retards our glory, and for a time,
secludes us from our Celestial Mansion. 2 Co. 5.1. and 6.
For we know (says that Great Apostle) that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of GOD, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens. And a little after that, says, While we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; from that Lord which inhabites
that Celestial house (before mentioned) to all eternity. O! Of what excellent
use it would be, if we seriously considered that word ETERNITY! It is of that
extent, that no men, nor Angels, are able to express, being so far beyond
the reach of all conception. For if all men in the world were exact
Arithmeticeans, and were employed all their lives to add number to number, and
multiply years, the product of all their labors, and the total sum of all
their Accounts (in respect of time) would not carry the least proportion to
ETERNITY. Or if the mighty mass of whole earth, were contracted into one heap,
and all that translated into such sand as lies by the seashore, one single
small Bird would remove it all, grain by grain, before ETERNITY looks toward
an end.

Having already taken notice of those disadvantages, that unavoidably attend
us, during the time that our souls and bodies are conjoined, that is, our
pilgrimage in this world: We have so little cause to keep our desires at a
distance from our dissolution (especially if we have any comfortable assurance
of an interest in heaven) that on the contrary, we may justly rejoice, when
that day approaches, and the hour draws nigh, wherein we shall be happily
freed, not only from the guilt, but also (which to a good soul is fingular
comfort) the temptations and occasions of sin. Then shall that interposing
veil, be either made transparent, or drawn quite from our eyes, that we may
with clearness and perspicuity discern the glorious sunshine of God's favor,
and pass under the tender appellation of dear Children; and Romans 8.17.
if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, being
freed from the spirit of bondage again to fear, and filled with the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.

15. PARAGRAPH.
ANd that we may be capable of such a Celestial Estate, It concerns us first
to be truly humble, to harbor a mean esteem of our selves and to set a rich
value upon every mercy we receive; and let the leat mercy (which is more then
we deserve) be an engagement upon our souls to walk in a more constant course
of Holiness, to the Glory o^ HIM that is the Author of all ou^ good. That
spirit is far from Christian, that stands upon terms with his maker, that dare
look upon the least blessing with a disdainful aspect, or upon the greatest
cross with indignation. It is an humble soul and a meek spirit that are highly
acceptable to God, and where these dwell, Grace ever attends them, and that in
a full measure.

He that has a sense of his own unworthiness, and considers sin as it
offends the merciful God of Heaven; looks upon every exemption from evil, as
a mighty mercy, and every chastisement for sin as a blessing. And if precept
will not engage us to be humble; we have the most powerful and prevailing
example, that ever was exposed to imitation, and that is our Savior Christ;
with what abundance of humility HE endured all HIS suffering, Holy Writ makes
plentiful mention. Who then would not be willing to tread in his Saviors
steps, as knowing that it is the surest way to glory? He that humbles himself
shall undoubtedly be exalted, as in the General Epistle of St. James: Jam. 4.10.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and HE shall lift you up. And
again, God resists the proud and gives grace to the humble.

And that which will further conduce to our happiness, is a state of
self-resignation. He that in the midst of all adverse conditions, can cast
himself into the hands of his God, shall not fail to find support and
comfort. HE best knows how to dispose of us. Natural men in their exigences
are prone to make application, and have recourse to those which have greater
Authority and power then themselves, though they have no assurance of relief
from them: but certainly they have no sense of their own happiness, that will
not trust themselves with the Lord, who does not only allow; but solicit their
relyance on him: Witness that Text in the Epistle to the Philippians, Phi. 4.6.
Be careful (says the spirit of God) for nothing; but in every thing by
prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto God. There is no affliction can possibly seize on us, whereof our heavenly
Father takes not strict notice, and weighs every dram thereof, in the scale
of his Divine Providence (which I have before more particularly insisted on)
which consideration alone is sufficient to preserve our spirits from sinking.
He that can steadfastly believe, needs not fear; for he shall have deliverance,
in the greatest extremity. And as the Author to the Hebrews observes, He.
11.1.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
It Is that by which deliverance subsists, in the womb or in the bowels of the
promise, before it be brought forth for our relief and succor. He that upon
Christian grounds casts his care upon God, shall never lose his reward. That
spirit shall not want support in the prossest occurences. It is not the
^everest persecution of our enemies; nor the sad desertion of our Friends and
humane confidence; nor disconsolate captivity; nor wandrin^ banishment; nor
pale-faced sickness^ nor the deprivation of all earth endearments, that can set
us at a l^^ with our God, Psalm. 68.20.
if we trust in him; (...) has the issues of death in his band, and h^
faithfully promised that He. 13.5.
HE (...) never leave us, nor forsake us, b^ compass us with his everlasting
kindness, and who will convert our dark est night into cheerful day, and e^^
greatest sorrow into refreshing joy Moreover if we can by faith man Christ
ours, we shall purchase tha^ whereof the world is not worthy but though I said
purchase, it sha^^ be without price, according to the remarkable place in the
Prophesy (...) Isaiah, that glorious invitation (...) all those that long after
Christ, th^^ Isa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye^ the waters, and he that has no money
come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wi^ and milk without money and without
pri^^ If we take this in a spiritual sens^ we shall find that Jesus Christ is
a^^ in all. HE is food, raiment, health^ liberty, protection, preservation
direction, provision, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Wisdom, strength, righteousness, sanctification, redemption and salvation
unto life. HE heales all our wounds, binds up all our breaches, cures all our
maladies, and by the effectual power of HIS spirit, crucifies our lusts,
regulates our wild affections, kills our base corruptions, and through his
mercy, restrains us from those nefarious actings, and rebellious courses, to
which our defiled natures prompt us. HE is that true riches in respect of which
all the riches of the world, are but contemptible dross, and carry no
comparison. The Heavens are His babitation, the Earth is His foot stool, and He
sits on that Celestial Throne with His Father, and there reserves seats for
all those that have an interest in him, to be everliving partners of his Glory.
Who then would not lay out all his stock to purchase this Pearl, spend all his
time, extend all his endeavors, and apply himself to the use of all possible
means, to arrive at this Haven of happiness, and become partaker of this
Everlasting Bliss?

16. PARAGRAPH.
THen let the consideration of the Glory hereafter, carry us on t^ an holy and
resolved acquiescency i^ that condition that our heaven^ Father appoints us in
this life, ^steeming it of all other the best. A^^ we low? Let not our envy
fee on those that are advanced to a^ higher pitch. Are we exalted? Let in no
measure contemn those tha^ live in a meaner state. Are we sick (...) Let Us not
quarrel with the Physitia^ Are we in health? Let Us not abus^ it. Are we in
outward distress? Let'^ patiently look up to him, that b^ his Providence orders
all Event^ Let our wills and understandings render an absolute submission to his
m^^ Sacred Will. We have no power a^ all to determine what is fittest for u^ in
our Pilgrimage. Flesh and blou^ are the most incompetent Judges in ^^e world,
as to that particular. It (...) only the infinite wisdom of the ^reat Arbiter
of the universe, that ^n best allot us our portions. He ^ely knows how, where
and when (...) dispense savours and inflict pu^shments. His heavenly will is
the ^ost absolute rule of justice. We ^ave not the least cause to complain,
(...) our outward Man suffer some cha^sement, so that the Inner Man may (...)
more thoroughly renewed. But ^as! Such is the temper of some ^en, that if they
enjoy all they wish ^r, they would be thence transport^ to such an imperious
height of ^ride and Prodigious Impiety, that the ^ry earth would groan to bear
^en; some there are likewise, that (...) they endured such an heavy mea^re of
affliction as others, would ^ow irrecoverably desperate. In this ^erefore, does
the great wisdom and ^ercy of God eminently appear, that he (...) every man
with such a condition, (...) is most agreeable and contributory (...) the
advancement of his Glory, and their own Good. And thou^ by reason of that thick
darkness (...) our understandings and the dimne^ of our apprehensions, we
cannot (...) perspicuously discern these vario^ dealings and distributions of
the A^ mighty; yet such they are, and do stri^ly challenge our serious
observa^ons; and whoever is negligent he^ in, betraies not only his gross
i^norance, but hateful ingratitu^

When on the other hand, he the diligently eyes the diversity of d^ pensations,
and with his whole he^ faithfully and savingly intends the has already
attained to a good in^ provement.

Therefore let not our wills, b^ God's be done; there was never a^ man unhappy,
that was contented disposed to be what God would ha^ him.

17. PARAGRAPH.
THere is another particular very necessary to be resolved on; that is, an
abatement of our desires, as to earthly things, especially in such a juncture
of time as this is; When the Captain General of heaven and earth, is in so deep
a contest with the whole world, and threatens to dash in pieces all sublunary
powers; how far his Divine judgments have already reached, experience in
some measure tells us; And how Epidemical that stroke may be, is beyond our
capacity to determine; Every day producing new pleadings, and controversies
betwixt God and the world; in so much that the foundation thereof shakes, and
all the dominions thereof, seem to have the mark of ruin stamped in their
aspects; and the Lord knows how soon (for our rebellions against heaven have
long since cried out for vengeanc^ it may be cast into a general conf^^
gration; so that it is palpably evide^^ we are even now cast upon the ve^ point
or crisis of deliverance, or d^ struction.

All this being considered, we ha^ little reason to advance our desire
(touching temporals) to such a sh^^ pendious height; but rather wi^^ Christian
discretion set down the^^ positive bounds, and say as the Almighty said to the
Sea, Job 38.11.
Hither to she you come and no further, and here she your proud waves be staid.
Let Us in the manner give check to our ambition thoughts, that they may not rove
a^ such a prodigious rate. For I a^ persuaded, could the vast desires (...)
some take effect, so exorbitant the are, that if possible, they would en^ slave
the whole world. Be more the^ the sea, which though a raging element, is
confined within his limits More then the heavens which never pass their
circumference: yea more then the Sun, which never travel^ beyond the
ecliptic. But sure w^ ought to be much otherwise minded, and strive to be of
St. Paul's temper, who (as one well observes) was the richest poor man that ever
lived, as having all things, yet possessing nothing. We have it from good
Authority, that there is neither safety, nor true pleasure in Excess, (as I
have formerly expressed.) Too much is troublesome; what a clogge was to SARENA
a Parthian Lord, (whereof History takes notice) that could never remove his
family, with less ^hen a thousand Camels? Satisfaction does not consist in
abundance; for a superfluity both of profits and pleasures, has commonly a
very ill influence upon the mind, and is apt ^o reduce it to a strange kind of
debauchery and insatiablenesse. Too ^arge a quantity of meat (though Good) does
as ordinarily offend (...) weak stomach, as that which is ^oth unsavory and
unwholesome. ^ome Appetites are sooner wearyed, ^en satisfied. He that feeds
spaingly, for the most part, is in a bet^^r state of health, then he that feed^
much; for the latter often gluts a^^ over-charges nature, so that inste^^ of
receiving nourishment, she beco^^ distempered, and runs forth in^ diseases.
This holds a direct par^^lel with the desires of men, as (...) other earthly
enjoyments. Therefore it justly concerns us, to gi^^ strict and severe
repulses to the f^^^ overtures and appearances of inordinate desires, and to
curb the u^ruly motions of our hearts in th^^ very infancy, otherwise they ^^^
grow too strong and incorrigib^^ and so carry us on to a wild Exce^^ which is
not only dangerous ^^^ destructive. But as to spiritual thi^^ our desires can
never be inordina^^ our thirstings and longings a^^^^ Grace and holiness, is
that sacri^^^ which of all other, is most pleas^^^ to God, and most benificial
to (...) own immortal souls. This (...) stand us instead when all transit^^^
trash, and vain delights vanish. (...) will be a means not only to suppo^^ us
here, but rejoice us hereafter. A^^ lastly, we have the greater cause, contract
and limit our desires in earthly things, for that the guilt of misinjoying
them, will attend us with sorrow to our graves, and after that to the
judgment seat, that Great Tribunal.

18. PARAGRAPH.
THerefore since it is necessary, that Nature be kept short of her Demands:
Let Us resolve first to deny her ^mall things, and so by degrees we shall be
able to overcome her in that wherein otherwise she would grow impetuously
violent, and less lya^e to subduction, (but observe I ^eak of her here in a
depraved con^tion.) We shall be in a far better ^pacity to encounter with
great ^^flictions, if we exercise our selves ^ith digesting small crosses. He
that ^^ath a distempered state of body, and ^^pplyes himself to the advice of
his ^^ysitian, will first take a preparative, before a strong Potion. It is
requisite (...) should observe the same course with the troubles that seize
upon the min^ petty grievances are endured wi^^ more ease, and open a way for
o^^ patience and further support, under those of a more pressing nature. (...)
that will not suffer a check, nor ^^ceive a frown, will hardly take (...)
blow, but retort it with vehemen^^. Nor will he endure the violence of
tempestuous storm, that will not (...) bide a little wet. Those that ha^^ lived
long in prosperity, and ha^^ been thence transported to the t^^ of worldly
pleasure, seldom or ^^ver meeting with the least gust, (...) counter-blast of
adversity; If af^^ all this, Providence surprise the^^ with some anxious sharp
affliction Oh! How it presses them down (...) the earth; and (unless they be
w^^ principled) distracts all their fac^^ties, works a strange discomposu^^ in
all their thoughts, destroies (...) their joy, and hurries them to a de^^
degree of impatience; and so e^gages them to quarrel with that i^^ resistible
Divine hand that strikes; whereby they add offense to their misery. And much
of this may be imputed to their non-acquaintance with former sufferings. He
that can discover a calm contented temper, when his friends and intimates
fail him, his dear relations disapoint him in those things wherein he promised
himself a satisfaction: If he can pass over these and such like occurrences,
so as not to be passionately concerned; certainly this man will be in a
comfortable capacity to entertain crosses of an heaviour consequence.

I have observed, those that desire to have their Children strong and active,
as a means conduceable thereunto; have inured them to pitch bars, to toss
ponderous weights, to handle foiles, and the like; which serves both to extend
and strengthen the Nerves, and gives an aptitude to exercises of that nature.
Truly, it is not unworthy our imitation in the course of our lives; for if we
acquaint our selves with a patient bearing of those lesser cross incidences,
that unavoidably attend (...) in our Pilgrimage; we shall have (...) greater
power to deal with, and more Christian fortitude to ove^ rule, the distracting
influences of the severest troubles.

It was an excellent use (and wor^^ our observation,) that Socrates ma^^ of the
sharp tongues of his wives, f^^ (said he) They prepare my patience (...)
public sufferings. It will very mu^^ avail us in this particular, if (...)
thwart our novile wanton appetit^ in those things wherein they pla^^ so much
pleasure, and do curb our ^^riosity with a delatory forbeara^^ of those seeming
contentment which we so fondly affect. Do va^^ (though pleasurable) delights
pro^ us to embrace them? Let Us de^^ our selves the liberty of compliance though
they earnestly importune (...) Let Us not gratify our curious hum^^ with the
taste of those endearing n^velties, that meet us with such in^^nuating
invitations. We have (...) very memorable Example in Dav^^ and that which
argued a Rare Regiment of his passions; That when he was in extremity of
thirst, and longed for refreshment, could say, 2 Sma 23.15.16.17.
Oh! that one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem,
which is by the Gate! But when he perceived that water was purchased with the
hazard of the lives, of three of his mighty men, which rushed through the Army
of the Philistines to draw it at the well; being brought unto him, he would
not drink it; but (says the Text) poured it unto the Lord. This was a
singular piece of self-denial in that Good King, to reject the benefit of that
he so exceedingly defired, in regard of his thirst; because it was obtained
with so much hazard and difficulty, as appears by the subsequent verse: Be it
far from me, O Lord (says David) that I should do this. Is not this the
blood of the men that went in jeopardie of their lives? Thus if we can hold a
resolution, to put a restraint upon our desires, in those things they so
eagerly affect; and with all digest Anxieties of a lighter stamp, and make them
preparatory to heavier afflictions, we shall find this course very conduceable
to our satisfaction.

19. PARAGRAPH.
NOw I arrive at the approved Antidote, and Sovereign Remedy for all our Evils;
and that is devou^^ prayer. Nothing under Heaven will state us in a peacable
quiet condition, if this fail us; without which all our possible endeavors and
actings for relief, are perfunctory, vai^^ and fruitless. It must be the
fervent and faithful supplications of ou^ souls, presented to the Majesty o^
the Most High God, through the precious merits of Jesus Christ, together with
the inoperation of that H^ly Spirit, Ja. 1.17.
from whom, every good gift and every perfect giving proceeds, tha^ can alone
both settle our inwar^ and outward peace, and free us from those disturbing
perplexities, and distractions, wherewith the world is apt to encounter us. Are
we environed, with temptations? Prayer repels their violent assaults. Are we
faint and feeble, and compassed about with infirmities? The To. 8.26
spirit of God in prayer, helps our infirmities, and makes request for us with
sighs, that cannot be expressed. It is that spirit of Adoption that instructs
us how to pray. Prayer is like that 2 Ki. 2.
Fiery Chariot, wherein Elijah was carried from earth to heaven: For by it, we
poor Mortals, are transported to have conversation with God, and to speak with
him in a familiar manner; and being in the body, we are carried out of the
body. This praying spirit, presents our sighs, enflames our affections, and
whispers words that we are not able to repeat. Whoever speaks against us, it
becomes our Advocate, and makes request for us, is a means to infatuate the
Counsels of all our adversaries, and to remove every prejudice that is cast
upon us. All the imaginable malice off men and devils, cannot cut off the
Intelligence of a Christian with the Lord: though he be separated from all
humane society here below, and locked up in some unaccessible cave; yet can no
man hinder his access to God, and his addresser to Heaven. If his tongue
should be cut forth of his head; yet his very sighs and groans (which trouble
may increase, but cannot destroy) will echo forth his humble requests to the
Almighty. This is singular comfort to the Children of God, that when they are
cast into that extremity, that neither eye, nor hand, nor tongue, can assist
them in prayer; they may consider Good King Ezekiah, who was so much weak'ned
with bodily diseases, and infirmities, that he could not express his mind, nor
pray distinctly to his heavenly Father; yet his Isa. 38.14.
mourning like a Dove, and chaffering like a Swallow, entered into the Lord's
ear, and brought him back a comfortable answer. The least word of God, in
return of prayer, has power enough to make the blind see, the lame walk, the
dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, and she that is sick of a Fever to arise up
and minister. We cannot want consolation if we can get grace to pray. For as
our supplications ascend, the multiplied mercies of God descend: light comes to
resolve our doubts, resolution to expel our fears, comfort to mitigate our
troubles, joy to seclude our sorrows, means to supply our wants, and strength
to sustain our weakness.

If we converse with Scripture, and Ecclesiastique story, we shall find, what
wonderful things have been accomplished by this incomparable Engine. Genesis
20.17.18.
Abraham's prayer opened the barren wombs of Abimilech's household; and Genesis
18. from 22. to 32.
closed up the hands of the Angels who went with a purpose to destroy Sodom
but could not bring down fire upon it, till righteous Lot was removed thence.
The prayer of Ex. 14.22, 23.
Mosos; parted the Red Sea, and was more forceable to overthrow the Army of Ex.
17.11.
Amaleck, then all the weapons of Israel. The prayer of Josh. 10.12.
Joshua made the sun stand still in the Firmament. 1 Sa. 7.9, 10, 11.
Samuell's prayer brought loud thunder, and heavy haile-stones upon the
Philistines. Ja. 5.15, 16, 17.
Eliah's prayer closed the heavens for the space of three years and six
months, and opened them again; and this Example St. James applies to every
Gooly man; That we should not think they did these things, by the privilege of
their persons, rather then the efficacy of their prayers: he shows that Eliah
was a man subject to the same infirmities, whereunto we are subject; and that
the prayer of any Godly man availes much; yea (if it be fervent) no less then
his. And though we work not by prayer such external miracles as he did; yet
thereby we draw down inward grace, bringing light to the blind, life to the
dead, and works an admirable change by repentance. It is storyed of Aurelius
Antonius, that in his expedition against the Germans, he had in his Army a
Legion of Christians, who by their earnest prayer unto God, obtained rain for
the refreshment of his Army, when it was like to perish by thirst; and likewise
brought down fearful thunderings upon their enemies: Insomuch that ever after,
he called that Legion, the (...). Fulminatrix.
Thundering Band.

Thus in all ages prayer has bin so powerful and efficacious, that it has
sometimes altered the very course of nature without, and at all times wrought a
change of corrupt nature within. Nor can it be otherwise, if we consider the
most effectual intercession of our great He. 9.11, 12.
High Priest, (Jesus Christ) who presents our prayers, our praises, duties,
services and all our spiritual performances unto God the Father, and procures
acceptance of him. At the very instant of our praying, he perfumes the
Mercy-Seat (having before sprinkled it with His blood) and mingles our duties
with His Intercessions, and together, carries them upon the Golden Censer into
the Holy of Holiest, and there presents them to his heavenly Father; unto whose
sacred presence He takes our persons (though not perceived by us) as knowing
that if they be not accepted, our prayers will not; for though by the Covenant
of works, God did first accept the work and then the person, yet in the
Covenant of Grace, he first accepts our persons(in His Son) and then our
performances. And that which is infinite comfort to every Christian, because
that in our best estate, in our most refined Condition here below, we are
subject to many failings and imperfections in our holiest duties: Therefore
does our Eternal High Priest, diligently observe what evils, or infirmities
attend our prayers, that may any ways interrupt their access to heaven, and
those he draws out, and takes quite away, before He present our petitions to
His Father. Here is mercy in such eminent manner, as cannot be sufficiently
expressed! And this is clearly held forth by that in Ex. 28 and Mal. 3.
Exodus, where the High Priest, after Moses law (who was a Type of Jesus
Christ) took away the iniquities of the Holy things of God's people.

To proceed yet further, there is not any thing that can be expressed, that is
so highly pleasing to God, as the fervent prayers of his Servants. He delights
to have his Holy Name called on, and to be conversed with inan humble
supplicatory way. We cannot be so ready to express our wants, as God will be
to relieve us. If we do in faith and humility, implore the throne of Grace,
Almighty God, does most certainly, either grant that which we humbly and
immediately desire, or in lieue thereof, something of an higher nature, that
may more advantage us, or else (that which is a greater mercy then either of
the former) he sanctifyes the want of those things to the satisfaction of our
souls.

Seldom or never did any faint under affliction that was attended with a
praying spirit; It is the most powerful help and surest support, that ever
Christian was acquainted with. Though all the inveterate persons in the world
were joined in a confederacy to contrive our ruin, and left no probable ways
unassayed, (...) accomplish and effect that end; ye^ such a regard has the
merciful Majesty of our God to the prayers o^ his Servants, that they shall
becom^ a rock to preserve us, and split ou^ enemies, such a rock, that all the
weapons and instruments which a^^ can imagine, (though put into the most
dexterous hands) shall never be able to hawe asunder. At the voic^ of prayer,
the very Gates of heaven fly open to make way for the ascension of our
supplications to the mo^^ High, at which all the blessed Angels in that
Celestial Mansion (to speak^ with reverence) even leap for joy. When we are at
the greatest loss either in respect of our spiritual o^ temporal estate,
prayer comfortably recovers us, renews our acquaintance with God, and so
enables us to encounter with the greatest difficulties^ to repel the fiery
darts of Satan, and to arm our selves against the destroying influence of his
subtle insinuations, whereby he daily endeavors to deceive us. It is a means
to frustrate the sinful contrivances of wicked men, and to make discovery of
their pernicious intendments, and clandestine practices against the righteous,
and so prevents them. It Is a special remedy against the insurrection of evil
^houghts, it crushes and destroies them in embrio, it strikes them with ^eath
before they can fully recover ^^fe; and kills corruptions in the ^^ud, before
they be full blown. And (...) regard the purest gold, may not (...) altogether
free from some dross, (...) effectually refines the earthly part ^^f a
regenerate man, that he may be ^holly fit for his Masters use. Oh! that we
could live and die upon this ^bject, in reference to which, time ^ould rather
fail, then matter to ^scourse of. Therefore since it is ^ident, how excellent a
means ^ayer is against all our inward and ^^tward evils, and what a comfort
(...) all distress, let our souls and spi^es give up themselves to a constant
^nscientious, practice in this sa^^ed acceptable duty, that God may have the
glory, and delight in the work of his own hands, so shall (...) be happyed to
all eternity.

20. PARAGRAPH.
NOW I come to the last particular I shall insist on, which (...) this; That we
endeavor by all p^^sible means, and resolve throu^^ Divine assistance to be
truly thank^^ to God in each condition, to re^^praise to His Glorious Name, in
w^^ state soever Providence has cast (...) If there were no other argumen^^
the world to engage us to suc^ course, this alone were sufficie^^ which the
Apostle Paul asserts in (...) of his Epistles, thus: 1 The. 5.18.
In e^^thing give thanks; for it is the will of (...) in Christ Jesus,
concerning you.

Who dares upon reading th^^ words, run into such a conte^^ as to violate the
Sacred Will of (...) Most High? It rather concerns to give up our lives in an
absolute conformity thereunto. Psa. 103.1.
Bless the Lord O my soul (says David) and all that is within me bless his
Holy Name. And in another place, Psa. 146.2.
While I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises to my God, while I
have a being. Psa. 145.2.
Every day will I bless thee; And I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. He
that peruseth the Psalms of this Sacred Penman, shall almost in every page of
that book find his earnest and pathetical exhortations to praise God for his
Divine love and care, his power and mercy, his Providence, his Word and
Ordinances, yea also for troubles, afflictions, and every thing. He exhorts all
Psa. 148.
Celestial, Rational, and Terrestrial creatures to this Duty; and to perform
it upon all kinds of Psa. 150.
Instruments. Never was any a greater Scholar in this School, nor a greater
Proficient in this work then David, and has left it as a Rule to all that
shall succeed him. Job was of an excellent temper too, who when he had ^ost his
estate, lost his children, and all Relations, that were near and dear to him,
could comfortably say Job 1.21.
The Lord gives, and the Lord take blessed be his name. Though his enemi^
increased, and his friends stood af^^^ off, and he himself almost given (...)
to the hands of Satan; yet for all th^^ he blesses the Lord. If we consider
th^^ excellencies of God, we have infin^^ cause to praise him, if we likew^^^
look upon the mercies and bene^^^ we daily receive, we have as mu^^ cause to
give thanks: There is (...) condition so disconsolated, but atte^^ed with some
good: No darkne^^ in that extremity, but has ^o^^ light: No affliction so
miserable but is mingled with mercy; therefore we are engaged to be thanke^^^
Our Savior Christ could say; wh^^ he had not where to lay his head, Ma. 11.25.
Fa^^ I thank thee. When he went to his (...) gony, and sweat drops of bloud^
There was (says the Text) a Psa^^ of praise. Who would not be willin^ to
follow such a glorious example. There is no affliction that can be^^ a
Christian (though never so sha^^ and grievous) but is usually atte^^ed with
this advantage, it gives an opportunity to exercise such graces, as patience
and the like; which a prosperous estate seldom or never takes notice of; so
that if our tribulation seem to deprive us of one mercy, it fits us with
another; which may justly call for our thankfulness. Though the children of
Israel lost their Moses, God gave them a Jo^hua; Though he took away Ely, he
raised up Samuel: so that this is but mercy exchanged, to the greater benefit
of those it respects. It is Gods way to examine what stock of grace we have,
and to make other provision for us accordingly. And if he observe that our
gifts, acquirements, and natural parts soar high, and grow strong, and are
unwilling to hold proportion with our stock of Grace; then does he mingle our
wine with water, and takes us a degree lower; yet nevertheless this loss
becomes our gain, and this weakness makes us strong: so that hence we have
abundant cause to bless God in this Condition. And though the malice of our
enemies pursue us with terrible persecutions^ Phi. i. 29.
To you it is given (says Paul) not (...) to believe, but to suffer;
whatsoever (...) given of God, deserves our thank^^^ It is a great privilege
to be kept pur^ and the people of God are never (...) pure then under
persecution. That truth to which we bear testimony, an^ for which we suffer,
increases an^ spreads it self the more through ou^ sufferings. Therefore let us
be advised by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.16.
That if (...) man suffer as a Christian, let him not (...) ashamed, but let
him glorify God in th^^ behalf. And although the sun-shi^^ of Gods beautiful
aspect, seem so eclipsed, that our spiritual condition is ove^ clouded, yet it
may be day when the beams of the Sun do not appear, an^ though it be dark
without, there m^^ be light within. And this for o^^ future comfort is certain,
that thoug^^ God may for a moment withdra^ His comforting presence from (...)
children, yet never his supporting presence; They still find that they ha^^
that interest in him and that depe^^ance on him, that they would no^ relinquish
for all the world; and though they seem low, even lost and forsaken, for all
this a gracious heart will not renounce the ways of his Savior; so that
here is plentiful matter for our praise and thanksgiving. And then further, it
is an infinite mercy and well worth our thanks, that in all our temptations
(though never so terrible and impetuous) we have a secure refuge to fly to,
where we shall undoubtedly be relieved; He. 2.18.
He was in all things tempted, (says the Author to the Hebrews) that he might
succor those that are tempted. Joh 16.33.
Christ bids be of comfort, for he has overcome the world, he has subdued
Satan, and bound him up in chains, that he cannot stir a foot without
permission from above, as is evident by that expression in St. Luke's Gospel,
Lu. 23.
Simon, Simon, ( says our Savior) Satan has desired thee that he may winnowe
thee as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. If he had
had power of his own, he would never have asked leave. Jesus Christ prays for
us at the very instant of our temptation, and is that brazen serpent, that
cures us when we are stung. And though he suffer us sometimes to be tempted, it
is that we may not be 2 Co. 12.7.
exalted above measure; to keep us humble, and preserve us from being split
upon spiritual Pride, (a rock that would soon dash us in pieces.) Temptation,
as one well observed, is the souls rape, it may offer violence, and deflour our
souls; but if we do not yield to it, it can never deprive us of our innocence.
And how eminent a mercy it is to be kept chaste unto Christ, let every
Christian judge. If then there be such just cause to praise God in these
extremities; Certainly we shall meet with much more, in the daily blessings and
favors that are dispensed to us, by the hands of our bountiful Father. But
above all that can be thought on, was that eternal mer-of God; in giving his
dearly beloved Son, to suffer death for our transgressions, and that in the
shamefullest, and severest manner that ever story made mention of, for no other
end, but that we which were dead in trespasses and sins, might be made alive;
that we which were bondslaves to Satan, might be released from that hellish
thraldom; that we which were vagabonds and aliens, might be made heirs of that
incorruptible and Celestial inheritance, that never was, nor ever will be
capable of diminution or decay. All our days are too few to spend in praise
for such a glorious endearment as this is; and yet we have many more of a very
transcendent nature to draw forth our hearts in thankfulness. As that precious
Gospel, and written word of God, that together with the Holy Spirit, conveys
the glad tidings of salvation to our souls; that serves as a light to our feet,
and a lanthorn to our paths, that searches the dark corners of our hearts, and
makes discovery of our gross corruptions, and so slaies them; that they may
not rise up in rebellion against us, to terrify us at that great and general
day of Judgment; whereto there will be an universal Summons, nor any ways be
able to contribute to our condemnation. It is likewise a great mercy and worth
our thanks, that our eyes behold our Teachers, that the doors of Gods
Tabernacle are not shut (...). That we have faithful Pastors, whole endeavors
are daily employed to gather us into that sheepfold, whereof Jesus Christ is
shepherd; and to break that bre^^ of life, wrapped up in the word and ordinance^,
and dispense it to our souls, for our spiritual nourishment, whereby we are
further enabled to grow in Grace and holiness from one degree to another, till
by that Celestial repast we attain in an higher improvement and perfection. In
may also call for our thankful acknowledgements that we are preserved from
peril and bodily danger, to which we are liable every moment. Should we be
dea^^ with according to our deserts, in respe^^ of our sins, every morsel we
eat might be mixed with poison, every shower that fall^ from heaven, instead of
rain, might he sulphur, and every flash of lightning, fire to reduce us to
ashes; The very earth whereon (...) tread, might open her bowels, and swallo^ us
quick for our rebellions, as it did Numb. 1631.
Core, Dathan and Abiram. If we cast our eyes into Holy Writ, and observe what
fearful judgments God has inflicted on sinners, and made them sudden example^
of his justice, as Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife for her looking back was turned into a pillar of salt; Genesis 19.24.
Sodom for her pride, was destroyed with fire and brimstone; 1 Kings 13.4.
Jeroboam for his burning incense, had his hand withered; 1 Samuel 4.18.
Ely for suffering his children to abuse the Priests office, had his neck
broke; The 2 Kin. 2.23, 24.
children for mocking Elisha, were devoured with bears; 2 Ki. 9.
Jesabel for oppressing Naboth, was eaten with dogs; Lev. 10.1, 2.
Nadab, and Abibu, for using profane fire upon the Altar, were consumed with
fire; 1 Samuel 15.28.
Saul for disobeying Samuel, lost his Kingdom, Lu. 1.20.
Zachary for his unbelief, was stricken with dumbness; Act. 13.11.
Elymas for hindering the course of the Gospel; with blindness; 2 Ki. 5.27.
Gehazi, for taking bribes, with leprosy; Dan. 5.30.
Balshazzar, for profaning the holy vessels; and Act. 5.10.
Ananias and Saphira, for telling a ly were struk with death; Yea and Deu.
32.48, 49, 50, 51.
Moses for trespassing at the waters of Meriba, was shut out of the Land of
Canaan; And that we which are guilty of as great enormities, and yet suffered
to live free from such punishments, is the mirror of mercy, and that which may
justly exact praise and oblige us to bless God, that he vouchsafes us an
opportunity for that purpose. Further, that we have liberty, and not only so;
but invitation and encouragement to pray and make known our wants, and
acknowledge our unworthiness, and solicit at the Throne of Grace for comfort
and relief, is all rich matter for our thankfulness. It were an endless task
to enumerate the multiplied occasions that are daily and hourly offered us, as
monitors to this duty. Therefore let us resolve by the assistance of the
Almighty, to draw forth our hearts and souls in all humble thankfulness, in
all estates, and in all our conditions. Do we pray God in adversity? It is a
means, to speak it with due reverence, to engage God to make us prosperous. Do
we praise him in prosperity? It Is a means to continue us in that state. Are we
low? He will raise us, up. Are we deserted? He will enlarge us and shine upon
us. He that can bless God, for that his eyes are opened to see his sins; God
will open those eyes to see their Savior. Do we bless God in affliction? He
will make those afflictions blessings to us. A Christian that can praise and
glorify God in adversity, shames Satan and utterly confounds that adversary: As
one very well observes, upon this occasion, and instances in that of Job, where
the devil says unto God concerning him; Job 1.11, 12. and 21.
Do but touch him and he will curse thee to thy face: he is in thy hand, says
the Lord, only save his life; so satan touched him. What then? The Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, says Job, blessed be his Name. So that we see here is
blessing instead of cursing. Job is of another temper then Satan thought him to
be of. Thus is it evident how advantageous a thankful heart is upon al al
occasions: and we shall more easily attain to that temper, if we first consider
the interest we have in a Savior, and endeavor to maintain the assurance of
our union with him; and to persuade our selves that all his dispensations
proceed from love, and likewise that all things work together for our good;
which is infallibly true in reference to all the Children of God. And lastly,
let us be sure to maintain the sense of our own unworthiness, both in respect
of our emptiness as creatures, and in respect of our sin as depraved
creatures. David was herein a very great Proficient: for there was never any
man more thankful then he, as is manifest by his whole book of Psalms, as
before observed, being as it were, composed and made up of thankfulness; yet
did never any one in the world express an higher sense of his own
unworthiness.

Therefore let his eminent example prevail with us; and engage us to a
conscientious Performance of this and all other Duties, that we have in Command
from that inviolable Supreme Authority of Heaven.

To close all, That the Dominion of JESUS CHRIST may be Advanced, the Great
Name of our GOD Eternally Glorified, and that our Immortal Souls may therein,
ever see themselves satisfied and saved, is and ever shall be the earnest
prayer of

From my Chamber this 7. of Aug. 1650. SIR, Your Devoted and most faithful
Servant R. WARD.

ERRATA.
PAge 24. line 4. for fragle read frail, p 34. l. 21. f. either r. rather: p.
44. l. 26. f. dever. r. never: p. 74. l. 24. f. does r. to: p. 87. l. 3. f. er.
be: p. 114. l. 28. f. confidence r. confiden s: p. 122. l. 10. f. was to, r.
was it to.


