The Young-Mans Complaint for The Loss of his Mistress.
Young Men you see my Fortune is such,
I have lost my Love by loving her too much:
My fortune's bad as other Young men's be,
Read but these Lines, and you shall Plainly see:
I being bashful, she was something coy,
I have lost my Love, which should have been my joy.
To an Excellent New Tune, I have lost my dear Mistress.






COme hearken Apollo my pitiful groan,
Of all loyal Lovers that is left here alone;
I Will fight for my true Love though Mars be my Foe,
For I Have lost my dear Mistress by being too Slow.
How Lovers are often tormented in mind
when as their own sweet-hearts proves to them unkind
Though many that hears me the same would forgo,
I have lost my dear Mistress by being too Slow.
I would I had never seen her, that I had never been,
That I for her Love now sorrow have seen:
But my heart it with sorrow my senses or'e-go,
That i have lost my dear Mistress by being too Slow.
When as we were Children we loved most dear,
But now of that Love I am never the near:
My heart is so sad and oppressed with woe,
That i have lost my dear Mistress by being too Slow.
When unto years elder our Youth did it spring,
Then to Complementing I straight did begin:
Yet bashfulness daunted and shamed me so,
That I lost my dear Mistress by being too Slow.
Quoth I my dear Honey though I cannot woo,
Yet slight me not for it for loving of you:
Entirely I Love thee, the truth it is so,
Then do not refuse me by being too Slow.
At Fairs and at Markets you know it right well,
that I in your Company still did excel:
Neither cared I for Money nor time it is so,
Then let me not loose you by being too Slow.
But she gave me Denial and bid me be gone,
For all I lamented and to her made moan,
^aying, I would not have you any more to do so,
For you have lost me plainly by being too Slow.
The Maidens Answer.
THough company together long time we have kept.
One another, my mind and my heart is set,
Though one not so handsome as your self must go
Away with me, and leave you by being too slow.
You are young and youthful, and may be may have
A mind on a woman, but do not deceive
Your self any more by neglecting it so,
For you have lost me plainly by being too slow.
I would have been married before now e're long,
At fourteen in truth I could wished had been done:
If thou would willing been then to Church with me go,
You need not have lost me by being too slow.
But you did neglect your time sore in that case,
For a woman can tarry but while time does last:
For at fourteen she is ripe, there is few but does know
So you fooled your self then by being too slow.
So adieu to you young men, you hear how it is,
And all the frail ways how my fortune I miss:
But it shall be a warning unto me I trow,
That i will never lose more by being too slow.
O Cupid thy Arrows are tip'd with pure Gold,
And it strikes me quite through when thee I behold;
But like to Amyntas, I made my Moan so,
When I lost my dear Mistress by being too slow.
But like to Leander i will mourn for my love,
Through new lands and countries, and constant i will prove
I Will Drink and i will Fuddle against who dares say no,
Since I Have lost my dear Mistress, by being too Slow.
You Godesses assist my Fortune being such,
For I have lost my Sweetheart by Loving too much:
But it shall never fret me although it be so,
That I have lost my Sweetheart by being too slow.
Good Cupid assist me that now I may mend,
And cause my heart strong to continue to the end:
And go along with me I will bear thy Bow,
So Cupid but hit them that they will with me go.
So Young Men if that they stand, you must strike,
Not one way in forty that more they will like:
That they will call you honey and with you will go,
And love you most dearly for useing them so.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


