The YOUNG-MANS Conquest Over the POWERS of DARKNESS. In a DIALOGUE, Between a
Virtuous Young Man, and the Subtle Insinuating Tempter Discovering the Baits
of SATAN, and the Strength of TEMPTATION: With the Christians Fortitude, and
only means of Overcoming, which is by Faith in Christ, and unwearied
Perseverance.
Ephesians. 6. chap. 11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that you may withstand the
wiles of the Devil.
Necessary to be set up in all Houses.
comic strip panel The Young Man at School.
The Devil Tempting him to neglect Learning, and to follow Pastime.



panel The Virtuous young Student.
The Devil Tempts him to ill company



panel The Heavenly Pilgrim.
The Devil Tempts him with Money, to hinder him in his way to Heaven.



panel The Armed Christian.
The Devil Shooting his Dart at him, are beat back.



Straight is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way, etc.

Tempter, YOungman, well met, but whither in such have,
Does fear surprise thee that thou mov'st so fast,
Whither art Running Youth, come prithee tell,

Youngman, To shun those Crooked Paths that Leads to Hell.

Tempter, Pish, talk no more of that, but tell me whither
Thou do intend, and we will go both together.

Youngman, A pretty motion, when I want a Guide
I Will send for thee, till then thou art denied.

T. Slight not the Courtesy which I have shown,
Such often mistake the way who go alone,
Thy Feet may slide, should thou my care neglect,
But I will Guide thee, and from harm protect.

Y. If Heaven will guide my Soul, I shall not stray,
Or fear the danger of a Slipp'^y way.
As for thy offers, I must borrow Leave
To say, such friendship's only to deceive.

T. Thy serious mind advise, and thou will see
My ways are best, be principl'd by me,
It Is I mistaken Soul, it is I alone
That can Conduct thee to the Sublime Throne.
Believe not those that tell thee Babbling Stories,
Of Endless, Boundless, unconceived Glories.
Believe me Youth, it is I that can Display
The Gospel Colors, better far then They.
I can do more, it lies within my Power
To make thee Poor, or Rich, in half an hour.
I Will make the swell with Riches, thou shall have.
All that thy Heart can wish, or Tongue can crave,
Come Gentle Soul, into my twining Arm's
I Will hugg thee, I Will delight thee with my Charms.

Y. Tempter withdraw thy Bates and Snares, and stay
The Progress of thy Tongue, and give me way
That I may vent my thoughts, you having spoke
At large already, and is this the Stroke
Which you intend shall wound me, be Assured,
The Blows but small, and may be well Endured.

T. What do thou think I am perfidious, Eye,
It Is folly to condemn before you Try.
Alas! alas! what profit can Accrue
To me, by wronging such a Youth as you,
I doubt these Weak, these Empty thoughts presage
A Tempest Guarded with a storm of Rage,
Well then Storm on, and when thy Storm is spent,
Sit down and Meditate, and then Repent.

Y. Repent, O happy word, although Expressed
(...) a foul Mouth, Those that repent are blessed.
^^on falacious wretch, I can not brook
^^ny Golden baits, I have descried thy Hook,
^oft thou believe that I can Entertain
Belief from thee, or do thou think to Reign
Within my Breast, no, no, thy Clowdy Powers
Are at the best but falcifying Showers;
Thou bidst me try, thy ways are so unjust,
That I resolve neither to try nor Trust.

T. Not try nor Trust, art-thou resolved to cross
My real motions, do, and see whose loss
Will prove most Weighty, if I lose the heat
Of thy weak Love, my loss will not be great.
Take my instructions Soul, it is I must bring
Content unto thee, it is a Glorious thing
To be Immortal, prithee Soul decline
Thy former ways, say, shall I call thee mine.
My Gates are always open, those that venture
To come to me, shall with a welcome Enter.

Y. It Is not thy charming tempting Tongue can turn
The Biass of my Soul, or make me spurn
At Holy Writ, it is not thy fond conceit
Of being good, shall make me to Retreat
From Heavens Commands, it is not thy promised joys
Can make me cheerful, or thy painted Toys
Can Lure me to thy Fist, it is not the Dart
Of thy vain Love can penetrate my Heart.
It Is not thy greatness that shall make me yield
To thy desires, Religion is my Shield.
I am advised to shun the broad path'd ways,
But to believe what Holy Scripture says,
The paths are Strait in which I ought to Run
The Course of Grace, until my days are done,
And those that change a Virtue for a Vice,
Deserve no Fruit from Heavens blessed Paradise.

T. Urge not the Scriptures, for I dare maintain
My paths are best, all other ways are vain,
Know that my real breast contrives no End
But what may profit thee, be thy own Friend,
Observe my Actions, pry into my parts,
Lets know each other by Exchange of Hearts,
I Will give the mine, and for my sake restore
Thine unto me, grant this I Will ask no more.

Y. Thou say you are great and good, if this be true.
I needs must call the Scripture false, or you,
Truth bids me tell thee boldly, when thou cry'st
You Are great, and good, and rich, and rare, thou lie,
If thou art great and good, then tell me why,
Thou will behold so vile a Wretch as I,
How can it be that thou will condescend
To feed my wants that am so mean a Friend;
Strange is that Charity which seems to shine,
From such a Diabolick breast as thine,
I will Implore Heavens aid, to keep me still,
From this most Vile Progenitor of Ill;
Lord let him not infould me in his Arms,
Or overcome me with his wanton Charms,
Be thou my Fort, and then I shall endure,
His furious onsets, and repose secure,
Give me thy Grace, then shall I be Content,
Make me as strong as he is Impudent.

T. What still refuse to do as I desire,
I Will make my Bellows to Advance the Fire
Of thy distress, and thy perpetual grief
Shall find a Voice, but ramble from Relief,
I Will gripe thee till I make thee understand
The Fiery Language of my furious hand.

Y. Do, let the Spring-Tyde of thy fierce desires
Flow to the height, thou shall not Quench my Fires,
Know, Tempter know, my Heart reserves no place
For thy Abode, I scorn thee to thy Face.
The well died Colors of my Soul declares
Defiance to thee, and my breast prepares.
To give the Battle, strike, I fear thee not,
Who Is Armed with Faith, needs fear no Cannon-shot.

T. What Impious Tongue is that which dares deny
My Power, with so much boldness --

Y. Wretch it is I.
It Is I infernal Traitor, that will spend
My strength to prove thou art a Flat'ring friend.

T. Move me to Anger, do, and thou shall find
A Courteous Friend at last may prove unkind,
Have I not would thee almost night and day
To go to Heaven, Youngman, The quite contrary way.

T. Have I not proffered all chat can be given
To a sick Soul --

Young. To draw my Soul from Heaven.

T. Did I not promise to be true and Just,

Y. Did I not say I Would neither try nor Trust,

T. Did I not promise I would make thee wise,

Y. Y. Did I not say thou were composed of Lies,

T. Did I not promise to Increase thy store,

Y. Did I not say such wealth would make me poor,

T. Did I not promise thee Eternal Glory,

Y. Did I not say that promise was a Story,

T. Did I not tell thee I was great and good,

Y. Did I not Answer, 'twas in Sheding blood,

T. Thus by fair Terms I Labored to obtain,

Y. Thus in fowl Terms I told thee 'twas in vain,

T. Then I began to Threaten thee with Grief,

Y. And then I fled to Heaven and found Relief.

T. Then here I Will leave thee to the Lawless power
Of thy own passion, cursed be the hour
That brought thee forth, if all this will not do,
May all Men curse thee, and I Will curse thee too.

Y. Begone, begone, but stay, hark Satan hark,
Boast, thou have shot, though thou did miss thy mark,

T. Why do thou bid me go, I hope thy words
Are such as mine, which only Jests affords.
Smile on me then, and cheerfully Impart,
The loving Childings of a tender Heart.

Y. Thou great Corrupter of Diviner parts,
Thou watchful Thief that steals into the Hearts
Of silly Mortals, think not to devour
My Armed heart, with thy pursuing power.

T. Will nothing move thee, will thou still mistrust
If fair means will not move thee, foul means must.

Y. I fear thee not, because I know thy power
Is Limited, and thou can not devour
Without Commission, therefore do thy worst,
And let thy Envy swell until it burst.
If words could kill, I had been e're this time
Worded to Death, but now I hope to Clime
Above the Reach of Words, in thy despite,
Where thou may Grumble at me, but not bite.
If thou art God, as thou pretends to be,
Why do thou suffer such a thing as me
TO expostulate so long, and do not show
Thy Judgments in my speedy overthrow.

T. It is my goodness, and not thy, desert
That breads forbearance in my tender Heart;
Alas! alas! What Honor would Accrue
To me in Conquering such a thing as you.

Y. Thy Threats nor feigned expressions cannot move
My Heart from God, nor nothing make me Love;
Thy wretched self, then be content and cease.
To Urge my mind, or interrupt my peace.
Now Gloriou^ God, be pleased to Inflame
My Heart with Raptures, to Exrol thy Name,
Lord, I am weak, and if thou should deny
To, give me Strength, how weak a thing am I,
Wean me, O wean me, from this Nursing Earth,
Make it my Sorrow, and thy Throne my Mirth;
When I am Tempted, make me understand,
Thou have a Storming and a Calming Hand;
Then shall my Ready Lips Express, and show
I know no more then thou would have me know;
My untied Tongue shall evermore Proclaim
Exalted Praises to thy Holy Name.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. Coniers at the Black-Raven in Duck-Lane.


