THE YOUNG-MANS VICTORY Over the POWER of the DEVIL. Or, Strange and
Wonderful News from the City of LONDON;


Being a full and true Relation of a Virtuous Young Man, who being but Fifteen
years of Age, living in the Parish of St. Giles's, was wonderfully tempted by
the Devil: Discovering the Baits of the Devil, and how he followed him from
place to place, wheresoever he did go, still tempting to leave his School, and
to fly from Godliness, and to follow him, and he would furnish him with Baggs
of Gold and Silver, promsing to show him all the Pleasures and Happiness that
this World could afford, if he would but agree to follow his ways and take his
Counsel. But this Youth having a steadfast Faith in Christ, made the Devil
this. Answer: Be gone from me thou wicked and infernal Spirit, and tempt me no
more, for I am sure I shall enjoy all the Pleasures and Felicties that Heaven
can afford, amongst all the Angels and Saints in Christ; therefore be gone from
me thou wicked Deluder of poor Souls: I value not thy Bags of Gold and Silver,
nor all the Pleasures thou can give me in this World, when thou, Like a false
deluding Serpent, would have me to burn in Hell flames with thee. Where upon
the Youth immediately fell down upon his Knees, praving to Almighty God, that
he might be able to overcome the Wiles and Temptations of the subtle Deceiver.

The Subtle Tempter fitteth his Temptations,
To the Degrees of Ages Inclinations.
1.
The State of Chiildhood he Allures with Play,
To cast both Book and Learning quite away.
2.
When Youth arrive unto a Manly Stature,
He baits his Hook after another Nature:
Women, Wine, Music, are the charms he finds
From Virtues Studies to attack their minds
3.
When Future State Man cast His thoughts upon,
And toward Heaven would be jogging on,
Satan before him Worldly Treasures throw,
To make the Heaven-bound Pilgrim move more flow.
4.
But if this fail, another cause he will try,
And lets his unrelenting Flames to fly
Stand fast by Faith left thou be over thrown,
The persevering Christian gains the Crown.
The Schoolmaster and Scholar.



The Virtuous Student



The Holy Pilgrim traveling to the New Jerusalem.



The Christian armed against SATAN.



N^ now (...) Way, and straight is the Gate, that leads unto Life.

Satan tempts him to neglect Learning; and follow Gaming



SATAN tempts him from his Study to evil company.



Satan tempts him with Bag of Gold and Silver.



Satan would tear him, but he is bound by Hell-flames.



Satan. WHither away young man? speak, let me know:
That thee and I may like Companions go,
Walk not so fast, but keep thou pace with me,
And I Will conduct thee to Felicity.

Young man. My meaning is to thee I plainly tell
To shun those Crooked paths that lead to Hell:
For I desire to come to Heaven at last
And that is the reason why I go so fast.

Sa. Pish, talk no more of that, but tell me why
Thou seemst not glad of my good Company?
Come, if thou can but take delight in me
I shall be pleased with thy good Company.

Y. But I Am a fraid that thou will me entice
To fly from Virtue and to follow Vice,
Which may my poor immortal Soul ensnare
Of which I ought to take a special care;

Sa. Slight not my kindness for I do protest
I Will thee conduct to everlasting rest;
What can then mere desire, or ask of me?
I Will be thy Guide to blessed Eternity.

Y. What thou pretends so, should I believe
I fear at last thou would my Soul deceive,
For those who do most kindness pretend
Do often prove deceitful in the end.

Sa. Be not so rash my Youth, but grave and wise
With Reason and Discretion still advice,
Believe my words and do not think I jest
When as I say my foot-paths are the best;
Do not mistake me, for it is I alone
Can make thee happy, (youth) and there is none
Can more advantage thee, they are but stories
That they then hearknest too, call endless Glories.
I say believe me, for I can display
Truths figures, better by a deal than they;
It lies within my power to deal with you
As I my self shall think most fit todo:
It Is I can make the Rich, or make the Poor
And send such pains thou can not well endure:
Or I can Crown thee with such joys that thou
Shall hug my Charms, what faist thou to me now?

Y. Tempter give over, thy crafty Wiles forbear
Such frothy promises cannot ensnare,
Nor win me to thy false deluding will;
With what thou seem to Cure, thou mean to kill:
build my Faith on a foundation sure
Firm as a Rock, and ever will endure.

Sa. What! do thou count me a Perfidious wretch
That seek by crasty wiles thy Soul to catch?
Alas! what profit can it be to me
By wronging such a silly youth as thee.
These empty thoughts, me thinks must needs presage
And show the weakness of thy tender age:
Thy time and breath thou idly have misspent
And for the same be sorry and Repent.

Y. Oh happy word that thou have now expressed,
Repentance is the Highway to be Blessed;
Deceitful Wretch begone, I cannot brook
Thy Golden Baits, nor yet thy Silver Hook:
Though thou pretendest to be good and wise,
I fear thou art the father of all lies,
Come for to try if thou can me deceive
As thou in Paradise betrayedst Eve.

S. Well, if thou will not my persuasions mind,
Twill be your loss you in the end will find,
For my part, I (...) so indifferent,
That losing thee I shall not much repent;
Take my instructions once I say again,
Lest of thy folly thou too late complain:
Say: shall I call thee mine, that thou may be
For ever blessed with immortality?

Y. It Is not thy charming tongue that can prevail
Over my armed ^oul thou do assail;
Gods Holy Word I Will strive for to fulfill,
And his Commands shall be my Bias still;
It Is not thy promises that I believe,
Nor painted joys wherewith thou would deceive;
It Is not the Venom of thy Poisoned Dart
Can hurt or penetrate my tender heart,
Religion is my Buckler and my Shield,
It lies not in thy power to make me yield,
The Paths are straight in which I ought to run,
Some use the broad ways till they are undone,
And those that Virtue leave to follow Vice,
Themselves bereave of Blessed Paradise.

S. Plead not Religion, for I dare maintain
That what thou seek for is all in vain;
And let me tell you, it is not right nor just
For to condemn me e're you try or trust;
Observe my Actions, mind but my design,
And in the end the profit will be thine;
Why to each other should we be so strange?
Be ruled by me, we hearts will interchange.

Y. Thou say that thou art good, but if thou be,
Why do thou strive thus to entangle me?
My Conscience bids me tell thee (when thou cryest
You Are great, and good, and real) that thou lie;
If thou were so, why do thou strive to bring
Me to destructive, poor and helpless thing?
What Charity can seem in thee to shine,
Or lodge within a Breast so cursed as thine?
Heavens help I will implore, then shall I be
From thee and all thy Stratagems most free.
Lord let him not conjure me by his Charms,
Whose courtefies are nothing less thaa harms,
Do thou protect me, I shall be secure
From his fierce on-sets that would me allure,
Give me thy Grace, then shall I happy be,
And over Temptation get the Victory.

S. What, still deny! will notihng thee engage
For to escape the fury of my rage;
Thou Wilt pull upon thee horror and distress,
Till thou cryest out that thou art pittiless,
And none shall come to ease thee of thy grief,
Nor shall thy mourning yield to thee relief,
I will aflict thee with such Judgments sore,
That thou in vain my pity shall implore.

Y. What though the Springtide of thy fierce desire;
Flow to the height, yet still my heart aspires
To Blessed Glory, where the Angels sings,
Great Hallelujahs to the King of Kings:
Thou Soul-deceiver my heart yields no place
But (no(...)ke) I scorn thee to thy race;
Thy well-Dy'd Coloars, which thy Art prepares,
Thy impudence sufficiently declares;
Now batter on, for I do fear thee nor,
My armed Soul does fear no Cannon-shot.

S. If thou do move my anger, thou will find
What it is to move a Friend that would be kind:
Haves not sought thee both by night and day
To go to bliss?

Y. The quite contrary way.
S. Have I not promised all hears can desire
To save thy Soul?

Y. No, no, thou art a Liar
S. Did I not promise to thee to be just?

Y. But who is so mad in thee to put their trust
S. Did I not promise that thou should be wise?

Y. Through grace I did thy promises despise.
S. Did I not promise to increase thy store?
Y Thou art a Liar, I replied before.
S. Did I not promise thee Eternal bliss?

Y. But who can give that which is none of his.
S. I by fair terms has labored though in vain?

Y. That which I hope thou never wilt obtain.
S. But what if I should threaten thee with grief?

Y. To Heaven I Would fly, and there should find relief.
S. Well then I Will leave thee since it is in vain
To strive to get that which I would obtain,
At my departure 'll give thee a Curse,

Y. And if thou do I shall be never the worse:
Satan be gone, for it is in vain to think
Whom Christ protects that thou can cause to sink.
S. Why do thou bid me go that fain would bless
Thy Soul with everlasting Happiness?
Come let us agree, and lend to me a smile,
That never sought thy Soul for to beguile.

Y. Thou art, and ever were a great Deceiver,
Striving to couquer every Just Believer;
And He will prove a Savior at the last,
Who through His Grace in Chains does keep thee fast.
S. It is my kindness, and not thy desert,
That makes me thus in Peace from thee to part;
Think not that I did seek thy overthrow,
I sought the good, though thou did say me no,

Y. I value not thy kindness, but desire
That God would save me from Eternal Fire;
So Satan now be gone, for I do trust,
After this Life, to live among the just,
Where thou were once, but by thy cursed Pride,
Eternal Misery did thee betide.

FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball near the Bear Tavern in Pye-Corner.


