The Young-Mans Complaint,
Or, An ANSWER TO The DAMSELS Tragedy.
When Friends deny, and will not comply.
but let them suffer smart,
We often see such Cruelty,
Will break a Lovers heart,
To the Tune of, Charon, etc.
This may be Printed,

R. P.









NOw for the loss of my Amorous Jewel,
I am surrounded in grief and woe.
It was thy Parents unkind and most cruel,
which did occasion thy overthrow:
For my dear Nell I did adore thee,
but we was too much kept apart,
There was no one that I e're prized before thee;
thy Death alone does lie near my heart.
Farewell the hopes af all peace, joy, and pleasure,
I have no comfort; but care and grief,
Often in private I weep out of measure.
it is Death alone must yield me relief:
Love, when I first heard of thy Dying,
though we had long been kept apart,
I tore my hair in a passion, and crying
this Damsels death will lie near my heart.
Down from his Eyes then the tears they did trickle,
with many sorrowful sighs, said he,
It is well known that I never was fickle,
for I loved none in the world but thee:
Had I been suffered to come near thee,
thou had not felt Death's cruel Dart,
I would have laid down my life for to cheer thee,
for thy Death now does lie near my heart.
For many months I did never behold her,
this was a sorrow that grieved me sore,
Her unkind Parents had oftentimes told her,
that she should never come near me more:
Thus did they soon blast all her glory,
for when she felt Deaths fatal Dart,
I never heard a more killinger story,
this Damsels death does lie near my heart.
Then in her absence my poor heart was wounded,
for I might not come anear my joy.
When I could see her we then was surrounded,
in the sweet Raptures of Love and joy:
But by her friends we were tormented,
so that we felt Loves fatal smart,
She by strong Poison her Passion has vented,
this Damsels Death does lie near my heart.
As she was dying, poor heart, she did blame me,
she knew not very well what she said,
Though with sad sorrowful sighs she did name me,
'twas not her Love that her life betrayed:
For If I might enjoyed the b^essing,
she should have never felt the smart,
Now am I nothing but torments possessing,
this Damsels Death does lie near my heart.
This sad Distration so much does inthrall me,
that I am restless both night and day,
Methinks I often hear my Lover call me,
saying sweet Johnny make haste away:
Let there be now no more delaying,
why should me still remain apart,
Where e're I wander, I fancy this saying,
her Death does now lie so near my heart.
Thou in thy lifetime did dearly adore me,
as by thy sorrow I well might see,
Though thou art gone hence a little before me,
Love, i will lie down in the Grave with thee:
Farewell my Friends and each Relation,
here with the World and you i will part,
For I shall be in a far better station
when I^m with Nelly my own dear heart.

