To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty
The humble Remonstrance, Acknowledgment, Protestation, and Petition of the
Roman Catholic Clergy of Ireland.
YOur Majesty's faithful subjects, the Roman Catholic Clergy of your
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, do humbly Represent this their present state and
deplorable Condition:

That being entrusted by the undispensable Commission of the King of Kings with
the Cure of Souls, and the Care of their Flocks, in order to the Administration
of the Sacraments, and Teaching the people that perfect obedience which for
Conscience sake they are bound to Pay to your Majesty's Commands, they are
Laden with Calumnies, and persecuted with Severitie.

That being obliged by the Allegiance they owe, and ought to swear unto your
Majesty To reveal all conspiracies, and practices against your Person and
Royal Authority that come to their knowledge, they are themselves clamoured
against as Conspirators, plotting the destruction of the English among them,
without any ground that may give the least color to so fowl a Crime to pass
for probable, in the judgment of any indifferent Person.

That their Crimes are as numerous and diverse as are the Inventions of their
Adversaries: and because they cannot with freedom appear to justify their
Innocence, all the fictions and allegations against them are received as
undoubted verities: and, which is yet more mischeivous, the Laity, upon whose
Consciences the character of Priesthood gives them an influence, suffer under
all the crimes thus falsely imputed to them: it being their adversaries
principal design That the Irish, whose Estates they enjoy, should be reputed
persons unfit, and no way worthy any Title to your Majesty's mercy.

That no wood comes amiss to make Arrows for their Destruction; for as if the
Roman Catholic Clergy, whom they esteem most Criminal, were, or ought to be a
society so perfect, as no Evil, no indiscreet Person should be found amongst
them, they are all of them Generally cried down for any Crime, whether true or
feigned, which is imputed to one of them; and as if no words could be spoken,
no Letter written, but with the common consent of all of them, the whole
Clergy must suffer for that which is laid to the charge of any particular
Person amongst them.

We know what Odium all the Catholic Clergy lies under, by reason of the
Calumnies with which our Tenants in Religion and our Dependence upon the Popes
Authority, are aspersed; And we humbly beg your Majesty's pardon to vindicate
both, by the ensuing Protestation, which we make in the sight of Heaven, and in
the presence of your Majesty, sincerely and truly, without Equivocation or
mental reservation.

We do acknowledge and confess your Majesty to be our true and lawful King,
Supreme Lord, and rightful Sovereign of this Realm of Ireland, and of all
other your Majesty's Dominions. And therefore we acknowledge our selves, to be
obliged under pain of Sin to obey your Majesty in all Civil and Temporal
affairs, as much as any other of your Majesty's Subjects, and as the Laws and
rules of Government in this Kingdom do require at our hands. And that
notwithstanding any power or pretention of the Pope or Sea of Rome, or any
sentence or declaration of what kind or quality soever, given or to be given by
the Pope, His Predecessors, or Successors, or by any Authority Spiritual or
Temporal proceeding or derived from Him, or his Sea, against your Majesty or
your Royal Authority, We will still acknowledge and perform to the uttermost
of our abilities, our faithful Loyalty and true Allegiance to your Majesty.
And we openly disclaim and renounce all foreign Power, be it either Papal or
Princely, Spiritual or Temporal, in as much as it may seem able, or shall
pretend to free, discharge or absolve us from this Obligation, or shall any way
give us leave, or license, to raise tumults, bear Arms, or offer any violence
to your Majesty's Person, Royal Authority, or to the State or Government.
Being all of us ready not only to discover and make known, to your Majesty and
to your Ministers, all the Treasons made against your Majesty or Them, which
shall come to our hearing; but also to lose our Lives in the defense of your
Majesty's Person and Royal Authority, and to resist with our best endeavors
all conspiracies and attempts against your Majesty, be they framed or sent
under what pretense, or patronized by what foreign power or authority soever.
And further, we profess that all absolute Princes and Supreme Governors, of
what Religion soever they be, are Gods Lieutenants on Earth, and that obedience
is due to them according to the Laws of each Commonwealth respectively in all
Civil and Temporal affairs. And therefore we do here Protest against all
Doctrine, and Authority to the Contrary. And we do hold it impious and against
the word of God, to maintain that any private Subject may kill and murder the
Anointed of God, his Prince, though of different belief and Religion from his.
And we abhor and detest the practice thereof as damnable and wicked.

These being the Tenants of our Religion in point of Loyalty and Submission to
your Majesty's Commands, and our Dependence of the Sea of Rome no way
intrenching upon that perfect Obedience which by our Birth, by all Laws divine
and humane we are bound to pay unto your Majesty our natural and Lawful
Sovereign, We humbly beg, prostrate at your Majesty's feet, That you would be
pleased to protect us from the severe persecution we suffer merely for our
profession in Religion: leaving those that are or hereafter shall be Guilty of
other Crimes (and there have been such in all times as well by their Pens as by
their Actions) to the punishment prescribed by the Law.

Fr. Oliver Darcy, Bishop of Dromore. Fr. George Dillon of S. Fran. Ord.
Guardian of the Irish Franciscans at Paris. Fr. Philip Rocb of S. Fran. Ord.
Reader Genesis of Divinity. Fr. Anthony Gearnon of S. Fran. Ord. one of Her
Majesty's the Queen Mother's Chapl. Fr. John Everard of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and
Preac. Fr. Anthony Nash of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preac. Fr. William Lynch of
S. Fran. Ord. Conf. Fr. Nicholas Sall of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Preac. James
Cusack. Doctor of Divinity Cornellus Fogorry Protonor Apost. and Doctor of the
Civil and Canon Law. Daniel Dougan, Divine. Fr. Henry Gibbon of S. Aug. Ord.
Conf. and Preac. Fr. Redmund Moore of S. Dom. Ord. Conf. and Pr. Bartholomew
Bellew. Denis Fitz Ranna. Bartholomew Flemming. Fr. Redmund Caron of S. Fran.
Ord. Reader jubilate of Divinity. Fr. Simon Wafre of the same Order, Reader of
Divinity. F. James Caverley of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Pr. Fr. John fitz
Gerrald of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Pr. Fr. Theobald Burk of S. Fran. Ord. Conf.
and Pr. Fr. Matthew Duff of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Proc. Fr. Peter Geogbegan
of S. Fran. Ord. Conf. and Pr. Fr. Peter Walsh of S. Fran. Ord. Reader of Div.
and Procurator of the Romans Cath. Clerg. both Sec. and Reg. of Ireland.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Above Remonstrance, etc. having been sent out of Ireland, some five weeks
past, from the poor distressed Ecclesiastics there of the Roman Communion, to
be presented to His Majesty in their behalf; but imperfect, or unauthentick, as
not being signed by any hand, in regard they that sent it did not reflect on
the necessity of Subscriptions; Such of the Irish Clergy of that Church, as
were then at London, understanding His Majesty would further expect the Paper,
and specially the Protestation therein contained, should be owned by all
concerned in it, and by their proper Signatures, or by the Signatures of such
at least, as being sufficiently Commissioned by them, would undertake for the
rest in this matter; and having seriously debated the tenor and true meaning
of all the said Remonstrance, Acknowledgment, Protestation, and Petition,
thought it part of their Duty to His Majesty, and Piety to their Country, and
Well-wishes to all Roman Catholics whatsoever, but more especially to those
under His Majesty's Government, To give a beginning here, as accordingly they
did on the 11. and 15. of Jan. 1661. to the Subscriptions: and, as well in
behalf of themselves, as of all the rest of the said Irish Clergy, until
their concurrence likewise by subscriptions come, To own all the above
Remanstrance, Acknowledgment, Protestation, and Petition, as to all parts and
clauses thereof: and thereby Endeavor, as much as in them lies, To assure His
Majesty of their faithful Allegiance, Vindicate their holy Religion from the
scandal of unwarrantable Tenets, and Move in His Majesty's Royal breast that
pity which the most forlorn, afflicted, and oppressed people this day in
Europe, the Roman Catholics of Ireland implore; the said Catholics being
nevertheless very certain their sufferings proceed not from His Majesty's
direction or knowledge. Behold in brief the reasons why this Remonstrance etc.
has been subscribed, as above, by these few Gentlemen of that Clergy, whose
names you see; the rest being expected as soon as the distance of places, their
dispersion into many foreign Countries, and the grievous persecution of the
remainders at home yet in Ireland (Some, and these even by dozens and scores,
and for many years many of them consined in the several Provinces to public
Goales, Marshalseas and Prisons of that Kingdom; and not a few, now of late,
to close restraint, and new additions daily made; others fliting and roaming to
hide themselves in Mountains, Woods, Rocks, Bogs, in Caves and horrid
Wildernesses, and searched for notwithstanding day and night, yea hunted and
chased like wild beasts; all weary of, and loathing even life it self: All
these, I say nevertheless, being expected, with those others in other
countries, as soon as their condition shall permit, or) shall give them the
opportunity of seeing this Paper, and transmiting their signatures. Of all
which, and of what else may be necessary, as relating to this matter, you shall
have suddenly a more ample account in another Paper; as likewise those other
rational Inducements (with Answers to such expressions as have been made by
some (not against the Catholicknesse of the Protestation in it self, or
Lawfulness to Subscribe it, but against the necessity or expediency of
Subscriptions by Them) which may be sufficient to persuade every one of that
Irish Clergy to Subscription without further delay. An Invitation moreover, to
the Roman Catholic Churchmen, both Secular and Regular of England Wales and
Scotland To Join, by their Subscriptions also, in the foresaid or like
Protestation. Which dutiful and charitable Concurrence of all, as well of those
as these, is in the mean time here, and in the name of the above Subscribed,
most humbly and most earnestly desired,

From London, this 3. of Feb. 1661, by Fr. P. W. Procurator of the said Roman
Catholic Clergy of Ireland.


