A young Man put to his Shifts: Or, The Ranting young man's Resolution,
Wherein is showd how young Wenches he does please
And of their heavy burdens does them ease,
With cunning tricks he their fancies up does feed
And they him relieve when he does stand in need.
To the Tune of, Cupids Trappan.
depiction of a woman with fan

depiction of a man, hat in hand

OF late did I hear a young damsel complain
and rail much against a young man,
His cause and his state, i will now vindicate,
and hold battle with Cupids trappan brave boys
and hold, etc.
Surely she thinks I am stark mad
to wed every Girl I do see,
No let her stay a while for I can make a fool
of twenty far better than she, braveboys
of twenty, etc.
For if I court a Maid she shall get nothing by it
for so soon as her money is gone,
And I have got her Rings, and other fine things,
then the devil may take her for John brave boys
then the, etc.
I can give them fair words but little good deeds
any girl of me shall find,
And if I see she will do it then I put her to it,
but strait I can turn with the wind, brave boys
but strait, etc.
He Is but a fool that will fawn of a Maid,
although she seem never so coy,
Make though you would be gone, she will bid you come on
if you tell her you will get her a boy, brave boys,
if you, etc.
But if she don't find thou can stir up her blood
she will laugh and jear thee to thy face,
But if she perceives thou can do her some good
then thy body she strait she will embrace brave boys
then thy, etc.
As for my own part I value it not a pin,
I care not what Girl does it know,
But the coyest lass I can easily win,
and bring her unto my own bow, brave boys
and bring, etc.
I drink off the best, and live at hearts ease,
for Money I take little care,
I can humor young wenches and have what I please
be it never so fine and so rare brave boys,
be it, etc.
depiction of a man and a woman in front of two houses

I Count him a noddy that cannot win a Maid,
to buckle to bow, and so bend,
And if he stands in need to do a good deed,
and to give him some money in hand, brave boys
and to, etc.
Tho maidens do seem coy on it they long till they have it
either Mary, Sue, Bridget or Nan.
If they were put to their choice for to ly alone
they had rather to lie with a man brave boys
they had etc.
For daily and hourly full often it is seen
what Maiden it is will lie alone.
If she has not a husband when she is fifteen,
she thinks she shall never have none brave boys
she thinks, etc.
So it does appear how hasty they are
the fruits of love for to taste,
It makes their great belly the truth for to tell ye
they have been a clipping a man about'h wast brave boys
they have, etc.
Their's choice of young damsels I have at command
that with money my pockets both fre
And if I want a bout, they will not stand out,
to help a good turn in my need, brave boys
to help, etc.
If I cheat a young damsel the faults none of mine
to her self she better may look,
For i will lay my bast by day or night,
be sure I take her of my hook, brave boys
be sure, etc.
And when I had caught her be sure she is my own
for a little we two do embrace,
But before we go to church I leave her ith lurch
thus I cheat her unto her own face, brave boys
thus I, etc.
I Will never be bound when I may live free,
nor i will never beside to a wife,
Their's soap fire and candle, a child for to dandle
which makes a man weary on's life, brave boys
which, etc.
So I get but the child let who will it keep
for my part I do mean to keep none,
So I have but the sport let them provide for it
for so soon as i have done I am gone, brave boys
for so, etc.
For if I should keep all the Children I get
I should have a great many lives,
I will take a halter and cut my own throat,
before i will have so many wives,
before, etc.
For Gentleman-like I live as I be
and am free from care and sorrow,
It never a penny I have over night,
be sure I have some the next morrow brave boys
be sure, etc.
So young men i will leave you make use of your time
for so long as my Codyiss does hold,
I am sure of this, let it hit or miss:
I shall want neither Silver nor Gold brave boys
I shall want neither Silver nor Gold.
London Printed for W. Thackeray, T. Passenger, and W. Whitwood.


