The Young Farmer's Answer TO HIS SWEETHEART NANNY.
WHO Much complained of her undergoing the weary Burden of a Troublesome
Maidenhead.
To the Tune of The Scotch Hay-makers.




What Is this my dearest Nanny, that fain would be a bride,
And Frank is pitched upon to lie by Nannys side:
In tenth my Love with thee, I do presently agree,
That thou art know^ in years full grown, a bedfellow to be:
Wherefore then should thy Mother deny,
That thou art old enough with a Bedfellow to lie.
Come Nanny, never fear, I Will rid thee of that care,
For the burden of thy Maidenhead no longer thou shall bear.
Nere mind thy mothers prating against a married life,
For she her self when single was mad to be a Wife,
Because that she was barred, till Nineteen ere she Married,
Yet every day, I dare to say, she thought a year she tarried;
Though now my Nanny she does advise
To live a single life if she means for to be wise:
Yet Nanny never fear, I Will rid thee of that care,
For the burden of thy Maidenhead no longer thou shall bear.
But now thy only Mother does give her free Consent,
That you as length should Marry unto your hearts content:
Then Nanny take the minute, while thy mothers Humour's in it,
Least like the wind she change her mind, and then she be again it.

Come then dear Nanny and go to bed,
I burn like Cole of Fire for want of being wed:
Therefore you need not fear, I Will rid thee of that care,
For the burden of thy Maidenhead no longer thou shall bear

NANNY'S Reply. But Francis, what if troubles should fall upon our head,
When we come to Housekeeping after that we are wed:
Let it be well or ill, I Am resolved to have my will,
And to morrow my Frank I Will be thine,
For we will go to church and be wedded all betime.
So Maidenhead adieu, no more I Will think of you,
But other pleasure out of measure, which I have to do.
But my dearest Francis one question I must crave,
The first night I am Married my Maidenhead to save;
It Is a vow I lately taken, yet I value not the same;
I Will leave't to you, what are you do, for you are not to blame,
Come then let us to the Parson away,
For this I do design shall be our wedding day.
So Maidenhead adieu, no more I Will think of you.
But in the night much more delight there is I have to do.

Frank Then Nanny here is my hand, and to Church I Will straight with thee
And William and brisk Iohnny they shall your bride-men be,
There Is Katherine and sweet Betty, who both are likewise pretty,
Will dance and sing, at night will fling the Stocking for to hit ye,
But why do I talk of such sport as this,
When I shall with them-farther that Nanny I may kiss,
Oh then my dear delight, I Will hug thee all the night,
And the burden of thy Maidenhead Girl soon shall take its flight

With that brisk Nanny smiled, and turned her head aside,
For blushes, like to Roses, appeared in the bride:
but the morning drawing on then to church went every one,
Since it was a fancy that dear Nancy should not lie alone:
And when the Parson had done the trick,
The bride-men were for Garters, and likewise for a lick;
And wished her joy good store, that she might never more
Complain o'th burden, heavy burden as she did before.
When Dinner it was over, and wine it went about,
With music and with dancing there was a heavy rout:
but when the day was spent to each Guesses hearts content,
About ten at night, with much delight to bed the Couple went,
Where they were lost for to ease the Pain.
Of a burden, which young Nanny did oftentimes complain,
but in the dead o'th^ night, to Nannys hearts delight,
This burden of a Maidenhead from Nanny took its flight.

London: Printed by and for A. M. 1696.


