THE Young-Mans Repentance,
OR, The sorrowful Sinners Lamentation;
Being the last Expressions of a Young Man, who having spent all his time in
Pleasure and Jollitry, was seriously sorrowful when he came to lie upon his
Deathbed, mourning for his misspent time, and advising all Young Men to be
mindful of their latter end.

Tune is, Aim not too high.
This may be Printed,

R. P.







YOu that have spent your time in wickedness,
Now mind the dying words I shall express;
Do not, like me, abuse your precious time,
Nor waste one moment when you are in your prime.
And do not promise to repent to Mo^row,
Least e're it comes you are overtook with sorrow;
Some are struck dead, you very well do know,
How can you tell but your case may be so.
See how I languish on my Dying-Bed,
To think upon what I have done or sed;
But let me now to you a Warning be,
Sin to forsake, and shun iniquity.
Frequent the Church, to which I once was strange
But now repent it, since I now must change
This wicked world, and for my Grave prepare,
To be where blessed, or cursed People are.
The sins that once were pleasant unto me,
To my poor Soul sad Torments now they be;
But he that did his Blood for sinners spill,
I hope he will have Mercy on me still.
His Mercies see by no means you abuse,
For Conscience at the last will you accuse
For your misdeeds, and in your Face will fly
And sting your souls when you shall come to dye.
To others do, as you would be done by,
This Reason is, and Justice certainly,
And pleasant is our Creators sight,
For he in Justice always takes delight.
Bad Company see you avoid and shun,
Thousands thereby have surely been undone,
And brought themselves to their untimely ends,
To the great grief and sorrow of their Friends.
Lewd Wom^n by no means do you come near,
Least for your pleasure you do pay full dear;
That is the Fountain of all Mischief, and
Bri^gs shame and sorrow to our Native Land.
But Gods commands obey in every thing,
Amongst the Saints then shall you praises sing;
Your Souls be happy when your bodies dye,
And you shall live with Christ eternally.
But now I Am almost ready to depart,
The guilt of Sin does pierce my tender heart;
I tremble when I think upon the bar
Where God and his dear Son the Judges are.
And if my Savior do not stand my friend,
On whom my faith and hopes do both depend,
My case will prove but bad and I shall be
Banished his presence to Eternity.
Amongst the wicked ones I shall remain,
In Flames to burn, and feel immortal pain;
Blessed God forgive my sins, that I
Be freed from pains that last Eternally.
O let thy sufferings for my sins suff^ce,
And pardon all my gross iniquities;
That after Death my Soul may fly to thee,
And with thy Saints for ever blessed be.
Thy Mercies do in number far exceed
The sins which make my dying heart to bleed:
And therein lies the very bounds and scope,
That thou will grant me that for which I hope.
My fainting spirits now I recommend,
Into thy hands for now my life must end,
And having gained pardon for my sin,
When life does end, my joys will then begin.
All you that read these Lines when I am dead,
Pray ponder well the words that I have sed;
For without doubt you will find them to be true,
And so I bid this sinful World adieu.
FINIS.

