The Blemish of Government, the Shame of Religion, the Disgrace of Mankind;
or, a Charge drawn up against Drunkards, and presented to his Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR, in the name of all the Sober Party in the three Nations. Humbly
craving, that they may be kept alone by themselves from infecting others;
compelled to work and earn what they consume: And that none may be suffered to
sell Drink, who shall either Swear, or be Drunk themselves, or suffer Others
within their Walls.
By R. Young of Roxwell in Essex.
1. BRANCH Of the Charge.

THat as the Basiliske is chief of Serpents: so of sinners the Drunkard is
chief. That Drunkenness is of sins the Queen: as the Gowt is of diseases: even
the root of all evil, the rot of all good. A sin which turns a man wholly into
sin. That all sins, all beast-like, all serpentine qualities meet in a
Drunkard, as rivers in the sea: and that it were far better be a Toad, or a
Serpent, then a Drunkard. That the Drunkard is like Ahab, who sold himself to
work wickedness. That he wholly dedicates, resignes, surrenders, and gives
himself up to serve sin and Satan. That h^^^ly imploiment is to drink, drab,
quarrel, swear, curse, scoff, slander and seduce: as i^to sin were his trade,
and he could do nothing else; like the Devil, who was a sinner from the
beginning, a sinner to the end. That these sons of Belial, are all for the
belly: for to drink God out of their hearts, health out of their bodies, wit
out of their heads, strength out of their joints, all the money out of their
purses, all the drink out of the Brewers barrels, wife and children out of
doors, the house out at windows, the Land out of quiet, plenty ou^ of the
Nation, is all their business. In which their swinish swilling, they resemble
so many frogs in a puddle, or water-snakes in a pond: for their whole exercise,
yea, religion, is to drink; they even drown themselves on the dry land. That
they drink more spirits in one night, then their flesh and brains be worth.
That more is thrown out of one swines nose, and mouth, and guts, then would
maintein five sufficient families.

2. Br. That it is not to be imagined what all the Drunkards in one shire or
County do devour, and worse th^^ throw away in one year: when it has been
known (if we may give credit to Authors, and the oaths of others) that two and
thirty in one cluster have made themselves drunk; that six and thirty have
drank themselves dead in the place with carowsing of healths; that at one
supper, one and forty have killed themselves, with striving for the conquest:
that two have drank each of them a peck at a draught: that your (...) have
drank four gallons of wine at a sitting: that one man has drank two ga^lons o^
wine; and two more three gallons of wine a piece at a time: that one Drunkard
in a few hours, drank four gallons of wine: that four ancient men drank as many
cups of wine at one sitting as they had lived years, which was in ^^ree hundred
cups of wine amongst four men: and lastly that three women ^^e into a Tavern in
Fleet street (when I was a boy take it upon Clap^^ns Oath and credit, who drew
the Wine) and drank forty nine quarts of Sack; two of them sixteen a piece,
and the third to get the victory, seventeen quarts of Sack. Which being so,
what may the many millions of these ding-thrifty dearth-makers consume in a
year in all the three Nations.

Nor need it seem incredible, that common drunkards should drink thus: for they
can disgorge themselves at pleasure, by only putting their finger to their
throat. And they will vomit, as if they were so many live Whales spuing up the
Occan; which done, they can drink afresh.

Or if not so, yet custom has made it to pass through them, as through a
tunnel, or streiner; whereby it comes out again as sheer wine as it went in, as
has been observed.

Nor has the richest Sherrie, or old Canarie any more operation with them,
then a cup of six has with me. And no marvel for if physic be taken too often,
it will not work like physic: but nature entertains it as a friend, not as a
Physician: yea poison by a familiar use becomes natural food. As Aristotle (in
an example of a Maid, who used to pick spiders off the walls and eat them,)
makes plain.

3. Br. That as Drunkards have lost the prerogative of their creation, and are
changed (with Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4.16.) from men into beasts, so they turn the
sanctuary of life into the shambles of death: yea thousands (when they have
made up the measure of their wickedness) are taken away in God's (...) ^^ath
in their drink; (as it were with the weapon in their bellies) it faring (...)
them as it did with that Pope, whom the Devil is said to have slain in the very
instant of his Adultery, and carry him quick to hell; being suddenly struck
with death, as if the execution were no less intended to the soul, then to the
body.

That by the Law of God in both Testaments; He that will not labor, should not
eat, Genesis 3.19. Prove. 20.4. 2 These. 3.10. because he robs the Commonwealth of
that which is altogether as profitable as land, or treasure. But Drunkards are
not only lazy get-nothings, but they are also riotous spendalls; and yet
these drunken drones, these gut-mongers, these Quagmirists, like vagrants and
vermin, do nothing all their life-long that may tend to any good, as is
storied of Margites, and yet devour more of the fat of the Land, then would
plentifully maintein those millions of poor in the Nation, that are ready to
famish. A thing not fit to be suffered in any Christian Commonwealth; yea far
filter they were stoned to death, as by the Law of God they ought, Deuteronomy. 21.20,
21. since this might bring them to repentance; whereas now they spend their
days in mirth: and suddenly they go down into hell, Job 21.13. Drunkards being
those swine, whom the legion carries headlong into the Sea, or pit of perdition.

4. Br. That every hour seems a day, and every day a month to a drunkard, that
is not spent in a Tap-house; yea, they seem to have nailed their ears to the
door of some Tavern, or Tap-hous, and to have agreed with Satan, Master, it is
good being here. That where ever the Drunkards house is, his dwelling is at the
Alehouse, except all his money be spent, and then if his wife will ^^^ch him
home with a lantern, and his men with a barrow, he comes wi^^ (...) ^^^^ll
image had

That the pot is no sooner from their lips, but they are melancholy, and th^^
hearts as heavy, as if a millstone lay upon it. Or father they are vexed lik^
Saul with an evil-spirit, which nothing will drive away but drink and Tobacco.
They so wound their consciences with all kind of prodigious wickedness, and
so exceedingly provoke God, that they are rackt in conscience, and tortured
with the very flashes of hellfire. That they drink to the end only, that they
may forget God, his threats and judgments; that they may drown conscience, and
put off all thoughts of death, and hell; and to hearten and harden themselves
against all the messages of God, and threats of the Law: which is no other in
mitigating the pangs of conscience, then as a saddle of gold to a galled-horse,
or a draught of poison to quench a man's thirst. That if they might have their
wills, none should refuse to be drunk unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded at the
common charge. As how will they boast what they drank, and how many they
conquered at such a meeting, making it their only glory* That the utmost of a
Drunkards honesty is good-fellowship: that temperance and sobriety with them
is nothing but humor and singularity; and that they drink not for strength,
or need, but for lust and pride; to show how full of Satan they are, and how
near to swine.

That though these swinish swill-bouls make their gullet their god, and
sacrifice more to their god-bellie, then those Babyloni^^^ did to their god
Bell, Bell and the Dragon, ver. 3. yet they will say, yea swear, that they
drink not for love of drink; though they love it above health, wealth, credit,
child, wife, life, heaven, salvation, all* They no more care for wine, then
Esau did for his pottage, for which he sold his birthright, Isa. 56.12.

5. Br. That Drunkards are the Devils captives, at his command, and ready to do
his will; and that he rules over, and works in them his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26.
Ephesians. 2.2. that he enters into them, and puts it into their hearts what he will
have them to do, John 13.2. Acts 5.3. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. opens their mouths, speaks
in and by them, Genesis 3.1, to 6. stretches out their hands, and they act as he
will have them, Acts 12.1, 2. Rev. ^.10. he being their father, Genesis 3.15. John
8.44. their king, John 12.31. and 14.30. and their god, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
And which is worst of all, that drunkenness not only dulls and dams up the
head and spirits with mud, but it beastiates the heart, and (being worse then
the sting of an Aspe) poisoneth the very soul and reason of a man, whereby the
faculties and organs of repentance and resolution are so corrupted and
captivated, that it makes men utterly incapable of returning, unless God
should work a greater miracle upon them, then was the creating of the whole
world. Whence Austin compares it to the very pit of hell, out of which (when a
man is once fallen into) there is no hope of redemption.

That Drunkenness is like some desperate plague, which knows no cure. As what
says Bafil, Shall we speak to drunkards? we had as good speak to
livelesse-stones, or senseless plants, or witless beasts, as to them; for
they no more believe the threats of Gods Word, then it some Imposter had spoken
them. They will fear nothing, till they be in hellfire; resembling the
Sodomites, who would take no warning, though they were all struck blind: but
(...) in their course, until they selt fire and brimstone about their (...)
That there is no washing these Blackmores white, no charming these dea^e
Adders; blind men never blush, fools are never troubled in conscience, neither
are beasts ever ashamed of their deeds.

That a man shall never hear of an habituated, insatuated, incorrigible,
cauterized Drunkard, that is reclaimed with age.

6. Br. That as at first, and before custom in sin has hardened these
Drunkards, they suffer themselves to be transformed from men into swine; as
Elpenor was transformed by Circes into a hog; so by degrees they are of swine
transformed again into Devils, as Cadmus and his wife were into serpents, as
palpably appears by their tempting to sin, and drawing to perdition.

That these Agents for the Devil, Drunkards, practice nothing but the Art of
debauching men; that to turn others into beasts, they will make themselves
devils, wherein they have a notable dexterity, as it is admirable how they
will wind men in, and draw men on by drinking first a health to such a man,
then to such a woman my mistress, then to every ones mistress; then to some Lord
or Lady; their master, their magistrate, their Captain, Commander, etc. and
never cease, until their brains, their wits, their tongues, their eyes, their
feet, their senses and all their members fail them: that they will drink until
they vomitup their shame again, like a filthy dog, or lie wallowing in their
beastliness like a brutish swine. That they think nothing too much either to
do or spend, that they may make a sober man a drunkard, or to drink another
drunkard under the table; which is to brag how far they are become the devils
children: that in case they can make a sober and religious man exceed his
bounds, they will sing and rejoice as in the division of a spoil; and boast
that they have drenched sobriety, and blinded the light; and ever after be a
snuffing of this taper, Psalm. 13.4. But what a barharous, graceless, and
unchristian-like practice is this, to make it their glory, pastime and delight,
to see God dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his Name blasphemed, his creatures
abused, themselves and their friends souls damned. Doubtless such men have
climbed the highest step o^ the ladder of wickedness; as thinking their own
sins will not press them deep enough into hell, except they load themselves
with other men's; which is Divel-like indeed! whose aim it has ever been,
seeing he must of necessity be wretched, not to be wretched alone.

That as they make these healths serve as a pulley, or shooing-horn to draw men
on to drink more, then else they would or should do: so a health being once
begun, they will be sure that every one present shall pledge the same, in the
same manner and measure, be they thirsty, or not thirsty, willing, or not
willing, able, or unable: be it against their stomachs, healths, natures,
judgments, hearts and consciences, which do utterly abhor, and secretly
condemn the same. That in case a man will not for company, grievously sin
against God, wrong his own body, destroy his soul, and wilfully leap into
hellfire with them; they will hate him worse then the hangman: and will sooner
adventure their blood in the field, upon refusing, or crossing their healths
then in the cause and quarrel of their Country.

7. Br. How they are so pernicious, that to damn their own souls is the least
part of their mischief; and that they draw vengeance upon thousands, by
seducing some, and giving ill example to others* That one Drunk^^^ (...) a
multitude; being like the Bramble, Judge. 9.15. which first set it self on fire
and then fired all the Wood. Or like a malicious man, sick of the plague, that
runs into the throng to disperse his infection; whose mischief out weigh's all
penalty. And this shows, that they not only partake of the Devils nature, but
that they are very devils in the likeness of men: and that the very
wickedness of one that fears God, is far better then the good entreaty of a
Drunkard.

That with sweet words they will tole men on to destruction, as we tole beasts
with fodder to the slaughterhouse; And that to take away all suspicion, they
will so mollify the stiffnesse of a man's prejudice, so temper and fit him to
their own mould; that once to suspect them, requires the spirit of discerning.
And that withal they so confirm the profession of their love with oaths,
protestations and promises, that you would think Jonathan's love to David
nothing to it. That these pernicious seducers, devils in the shape of men, have
learned to handle a man so sweetly, that one would think it a pleasure to be
seduced.

But little do they think! how they advance their own damnations: when the
blood of so many souls as they have drawn away, will be required at their
hands. For know this thou tempter, that thou do not more increase other men's
wickedness on earth, (whether by persuasion, or provocation, or example) then
their wickedness shall increase thy damnation in hell, Luke 16.27.28. Non
fratres dilexit, sed seipsum respexit. And this let me say to the horror of
their consciences, that make merchandise of souls; that it is a question when
such an one coms to hell, whether Judas himself would change torments with him.

8. Br. That the Drunkard is so pleasing a murderer, that he tickles a man to
death, and makes him (like Solomon's fool) die laughing. Whence it is, that many
who hate their other enemies (yea, and their friends too) embrace this enemy,
because he kisseth when he betraieth. And indeed what fence? for a pistol
charged with the bullet of friendship. Hence it is also, that thousands have
confessed at the Gallows, I had never come to this but for such and such a
Drunkard. For commonly the Drunkards progress is, from luxury to beggerie,
from beggerie to thieverie, from the Tavern to Tyborne, from the Alehouse to
the Gallows. Briefly; That these Bawds and Panders of vice breath nothing but
infection, and study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. That
the Drunkard is like Julian, who never did a man a good turn, but it was to
damn his soul. That his proffers are like the fowlers shrape, when he casts
meat to birds, which is not out of pity to relieve, but out of treachery to
ensnare them. Or like traps we set for vermin, seeming charitable, when they
intend to kill, Jer. 5.26. And thou may answer these cursed tempters, who
delight in the murder of souls, as the woman of Endor did Saul, 1 Samuel 28.
Wherefore seekst thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to die, Verse. 9.

That he is another Absalom, who made a feast for Amnon whom he meant to kill.
And there is no subtlety like that which deceives a man, and has thanks for
the labor. For as our Savior says, Blessed is the man that is not with their
wiles. For herein alone consists the difference, He whom the Lord loves, shall
be delivered from their meretricious allurements. Eccles. 7.26. And he whom the
Lord abhors, shall fall into their snares, Prove. 22.14.

9. Br. That Taverns and Tap-houses are the drinking schools where they learn
this their skill, and are trained up in this trade of tempting. For Satan does
not work them to this height of impiety all at once, but by degrees: When
custom of sin has deaded all remorse for sin; as it is admirable how the soul
that takes delight in lewdness, is gained upon by custom. They grow up in
sin, as worldlings grow in wealth and honor. They wax worse and worse, says
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.13. they go first over shoo's, then over hoots, then over
shoulders; and at length over head and ears in sin, as some do in debt. Now
these Tap-houses are their meeting-places, where they hear the Devils lectures
read; the shops and markets where Satan drives his trade; the s^hools where
they take their degrees: these are the Guild-halls where all sorts of sinners
gather together, as the humors do into the stomach before an Ague sit, and
where is projected all the wickedness that breaks forth in the Nation, as our
reverend Judges do find in their several Circuits.

That these Taverns and Alehouses (or rather hell-houses) are the fountains
and well-heads from whence spring all our miseries and mischiefs: these are the
Nurseries af all riot, excess and idleness, making our Land another Sodom,
and furnishing yearly our Jayls and Gallowses. Here they sit all day in troops,
doing that in earnest which we have seen boys do in sport; stand on their
heads, and shake their heels against heaven; where, even to hear how the Name
of the Lord Jesus is pierced, and God's Name blasphemed, would make a dumbe-man
speak, a dead-man almost to quake.

10. Br. That it were endless to repeat their vain babbling, scurrilous jesting,
wicked talking, impious swearing and cursing: that when the drink that once bit
them, and set their tongues at liberty, their hearts come up as easily as some
of their drink; yea, their limitlesse tongues do then clatter like so many
windows loose in the wind, and you may as soon persuade a stone to speak, as
them to be silent; it faring with their clappers as with a sick-mans pulse,
which always beats, but ever out of order. That one Drunkard has tongue
enough for twenty men; for let but three of them be in a room, they will make
a noise, as if all the thirty bells in Antwerpe steeple were rung at once: or
do but pass by the door, you would think your self in the Land of Parrats.
That it is the property of a drunkard to disgorge his bosom with his stomach,
to empty his mind with his maw: His tongue resembles Bacchus his Liber pater,
and goes like the sail of a Winde-mill: For as a great gale of wind whirleth
the sayls about, so abundance of drink whirleth his tongue about, and keeps it
in continual motion. Now he rayls, now he scoffs now he lies, now he slanders,
now he seduces, talks bawdy, swears, bans, foams, and cannot be quiet, till his
tongue be wormed. So that from the beginning to the end, he belcheth forth
nothing, but what is as far from tru^^ piety, reason, modesty; as that the
Moon came down from heaven to vi^^^ Mahomet: As oh! the beastliness which
burns in their unchaste and in ^ure minds, that smokes out at their polluted
mouths! A man would th^^^ his mouth run over with falsehoods against both
Magistrates, Ministers, and Christians* what speaks he less then whoredoms,
adulteries, incests at every word; yea, hear two or three of them talk, you
would change the Lycaonians lang^^^e, and say, Devils are come up in the
likeness of Men.

11. Br. that at these places men learn to contemn Authority, as boys grown
ta^l and stubborn, contemn the rod: Here it is that they utter swelling and
proud words against such as are in Dignity, as Saint Peter, and Saint Jude
have it. They set their mouths against heaven, and their tongues walk through
the earth, Psalm. 73.9. So that many a good Minister and Christian may say with
holy David, I became a song of the drunkards, Psalm 69.12. And in case any of
them have wit, here they will show it in scoffing at Religion, and flowting at
holiness. From whence it is, that we have so many Atheists, and so few
Christians amongst us (notwithstanding our so much means of grace); and that
the Magistracy and Ministry are so woefully contemned by all sorts of people.

That these tippling Tap-houses are the common Quagmires of all filthiness,
where too many drawing their patrimonies through their throats, exhaust and
lavish out their substance, and lay plots and devices how to get more. For
hence they fall, either to open courses of violence, or secret mischief, till
at last the Jayle prepares them for the Gibbet; for lightly they sing through a
red Lattise, before they cry through a Grate.

12 Br. I speak not of all, I know the calling to be good, and that there are
good of that calling, (and these will thank me, because what I have said, makes
for their honor and profit too) but sure I am, too many of these
drinking-houses are the very dens and shops, yea the thrones of Satan; very
sinks of sin, which like so many Common-shores, refuse not to welcome and
encourage any, in the most loathsome pollutions they are able to invent, and
put in practice. As did you but hear, and see, and smell, and know what is done
in these Taverns and Alehouses, you would wonder that the earth could bear the
howses, or the Sun endure to look upon them. That least they should not in all
this do homage enough to Satan, they not seldom drink their healths upon their
knees, as the Heathen Witches and Sorcerers (of whom these have learned it)
used to do, when they offered drink offerings to Beebzebub the prince of
Devils, and other their Devil-gods.

That these godless Ale drapers, and other sellers of drink, in entertaining
into their houses, and complying with those traiters against God, and in
suffering so much impiety to rest within their walls, do make themselves
guilty of all, by suffering the same; and that a fearful curse hangs over
their heads, so long as they remain such. For if one sin of theft, or perjurie
is enough to not the rafters, to grind the stones, to level the walls and roof
of any house with the ground; as it is Zech. 5.4. What are the oaths, the
lies, the thefts, the whoredoms, the murders, the damnable drunkenness, the
numberless, and namelesse abominations that are committed there. For these
Alehouse keepers are accessarie to the drunkards sin, and have a fearful
account to give for their tollerating such, since they might, and ought to
redress it: so that their gain is most unjust, and all they have is by the
sins of the people; as Diogenes said of the strumpet Phrine.

(...) of all seducing drunkards these Drink-sellers are the chief; their wh^le
^^e being naught else but a vicissitude of devouring and venting, and th^^
whole study how to toule in customers, and then egg them on to drink; (...) as
if drinking and tempting were their trade: they are always guzling wit^ in
doors, or else tempting at the door, where they spend their vacant hou^*
watching for a companion, as a spider would watch for a poor fly; or a^ the
whorish woman in the Proverbs laid wait for the young novice, unt^ with her
great craft, and flattertng lips, she had caused him to yield, Prove. 7.6. to
24. Though when he sees a drunka^d, if he but hold up his finger, the other
follows him into his borough, just like a fool to the stocks, and as an O^^ to
the slaughterhouse, having no power to withstand the temptation. So i^ he
goes, and there continues as one bewitched, or conjured with a spell; out of
which he returns not, until he has emptied his purse of money, and his head
of reason: while in the mean time his poor wife, children and servants want
bread.

That did sellers of drinkaime at the glory of God, and good of others, as they
ought, 1 Cor. 10.31. there would not be an hundredth part of the drunkards,
beggars, brawls, and famished-families there are: whereas now thousands do in
sheer drink, spend all the clothes on their beds and backs. As be they poor
laboring men, that must dearly earne it before they have it, these Alehouse
keepers, these vice-breeders, these soul-murtherers will make them drink away
as much in a day, as they can get in a week; spend twelve pence, sooner then
earne twopence, as S. Ambrose observes.

That thousands of these Laboring men may be found in the very Suburbs of this
City, that drink the very blood of their wives and children, who are near
famished, to satisfy the drunkards throat, or gut, wherein they are worse then
Infidels, or Cannibals, 1 Timothy 5.8. who again are justly met withal: For as if
God would pay them in their own coin, how often shall ye see vermin sacking the
drunkards blood, as fast as he the others.

14. Br. That these Drunkards and Ale-drapers are always laying their heads
together, plotting and consulting how to charm and tame their poor wives (for
the Drunkard and his wife agree like the harp and the harrow) which if maids
did but hear, they would rather make choice of an Ape-carrier, or a
Jakes-farmers servant, then of one who will be drawn to the Ale house. For let
them take this for a rule, he that is a tame Devil abroad, will be a roaring
Devil at home; and he that has begun to be a Drunkard, will ever be a
Drunkard. True, they will promise a maid fair, and bind themselves by an
hundred oaths and protestations; and she (when love has blinded and besotted
her) will believe them; yea, promise her self the victory, not doubting but
she shall reclaim him from his evil company; but not one of a thousand, scarce
one of ten thousand that ever finds it so, but the contrary. For let Drunkards
promise, yea and purpose what they will; experience shows, that they mend as
sour Ale does in Summer; or as a dead hedge, which the longer it stands is the
rottener. And how should it be other, when they cannot go the length of a
street, but they must pass by, perhaps an hundred Alehouses, where they shall
be called in. And all the while they are in the drinking-school, they are bound
by their law of good fellowship to be pouring in at their mouths, or whissing
out at their noses: one serving as a shooing-horn to the other; which makes
them like ratsban'd Rats, drink and vent, vent and drink, Sellengers round, and
the same again. Oh that a maids fore-wit were but so good as her after-wit!
then the drunkard should never have wise more to make a slave of, nor wives
such cause to curse Alehouse keepers, as now they have. And indeed if I may
speak my thoughts, or what reason propounds to me; drunkards, are such children
and fools (to what governors of families ought to be) that a rod is fitter for
them then a wife. But of this by the way only, that maids may not so miserably
cast away themselves: for they had better be buried alive, then so married, as
most poor men's wives can inform them.

15. Br. That to speak to these Demetriuses, that get their wealth by drinking;
yea, by helping to consume their drink, and that live only by sin, and the
sins of the people, were to speed as Paul did at Ephesus, after some one of
them had told the rest of their occupation. Yea to expect amendment from such,
in a manner were to expect amendment from a Witch, who has already given her
soul to the Devil. That to what has been spoken of drunkards and
drink-sellers, in the particular cases of drinking and tempting, might be added
seventie times seven more of the like abominations. For the drunkard is like
some putrid grave, the deeper you digg, the fuller you shall find him both of
stench and horror: Or like Hercules's monster, wherein were fresh heads still
arising one after the cutting off of another. But there needs no more then this
taste, to make any wise man (or any that love their own souls) to detest and
beware these Bawds and Pandors of vice, that breath nothing but infection, and
study nothing but their own, and other men's destruction. These Brokers of
villainy, whose very acquaintance is destruction: as how can they be other then
dangerously infectious? and desperately wicked? whose very mercies are cruelty.

16. Br. That I have unmasked their faces, is to infatuate their purpose: that
I have inveighed and declaimed against drunkenness, is to keep men sober, For
vices true picture, makes us vice detest.

O that I had dehortation answerable to my detestation of it! Only here is a
discovery how drunkards tempt: if you will see directions how to avoid their
temptations, read my Sovereign Antidote against the contagion of evil company.
Only take notice for the present, that the best way to avoid evil, is to shun
the occasions: Do not only shun drunkenness, but the means to come to it: and
to avoid hurt, keep thy self out of shot; come not in drunken company, nor to
drinking places: As for their love and friendship, consider but whose Factors
they are, and thou will surely hate them. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

POSTSCRIPT.
COnsidering the premises, if there were any love of God, any hatred of sin,
any zeal, any courage, any conscience of an Oath in most of our Justices of the
Peace, they would rather put down and purge out of their Parishes and
Liberties, this viperous brood of vice-breeders, and soul-murtherers (I mean
Alehouse keepers) then increase them as they do, when any Common Drunkard,
Cheat, or Witch may procure a License to sell drink, if they will but bribe
some one of their Clerks. But if it be left to them (if his Highn^^^ himself do
not by some other way redress it, as blessed be God he has alre^dy begun the
work in some Counties) I look never to see it mended, unt^^ Christ comes in the
clouds.

Only it is much to be feared, that as we turn the sanctuary of life into the
shambles of death: so God may send a famine after such a satietie, and
pestilence after famine. Or rather that our Land, which has been so long sick
(...) this disease, and so often surfeted of this sin, should spue us all out,
who are the Inhabitants.

Or in case God be pleased to dispense with the Nation, the wickedness that is
done by these drunkards and drink-sellers, shall be reckoned, unto those that
are the permitters, for their own. For Governors make themselves guilty of
those sins they may redress and will not. But I know to whom I speak, and my
hopes are depending.

In the mean time, it is sad to consider, how many Drunkards will hear this
Charge, for one that will apply it to himself. For confident I am that fifteen
of twenty, all this City over, are Drunkards; yea, seducing Drunkards, in the
dialect of Scripture, and by the Law of God, which extends even to the heart
and affections, Mat. 5.21, 22, 28. Perhaps by the Laws of the Land, a man is
not taken for drunk, except his cies stare, his tongue stutter, and his legs
stagger; but by God's Law he is one that goes often to the drink, or that
tarrieth long at it, Prove. 23.30, 31. He that will be drawn to the Tavern or
Alehouse by every idle soliciter, and there be detained to drink, when he has
neither need of it, or mind to it; to the spending of his money, wasting of
his precious time, neglect of his calling, abusing of the creatures (which
thousands want) discredit of the Gospel, the stumbling of weak ones, the
encouraging of indifferent ones, the hardening of his associates, and all the
truths enemies that know or hear of it. Briefly, he that drinks more for lust,
or pride, or covetousness, or fear, or good fellowship, or to drive away time,
or to still conscience, then for thirst, is a Drunkard in Solomon's esteem,
Prove. 23.30, 31. Perhaps thou do not think so, but can you produce that holy
man of God, that will not deem him a drunkard, who can neither buy, nor sell,
nor meet any friend or customer, but he must go the Tavern, or Alehouse,
perhaps six times in a day; and who constantly clubs it, first for his mornings
draught, secondly at Exchange time, thirdly at night when shops are shut in; as
is the common, but base custom of most Tradesmen; yea, and the Devil so
blindes them, that they will plead a necessity of it; and that it is for their
profit.

Nor can it be denied, but in cases of this nature, things are rather measured
by the intention and affection of the doer, then of the issue, and event. And
why should not a man be deemed a drunkard for his immoderate and inordinate
affection to drink, or drunken company? as well as another, an Adulterer, for
the like affection to his neighbors wife, Mat. 5.21, 22, 28. Yet these men are
in their own, and other men's esteem, not only good and civil men, but good
Christians forsooth. Certainly the more light we have, the more blind men are,
or else this could not be; For I would gladly ask such, Are you Christians? in
what part of the Word find you a warrant for it (...) Where find you, that
this custom was ever used, by any one of these (...) in former ages? Well may
you (with Agrippa) be almost Christians, but sur^ enough, you are not with
Saint Paul, altogether such: and then what will becom^ of you? For almost a son
is a bastard, almost sweet is unsavorie, almost hot is lukewarm; and those that
are lukewarm will God spue out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16.

A Christian almost, is like a woman that dies in travel, almost she brought
fort^ a son; but that almost killed the mother, and the son too. If thou
believ'st almost thou shall be saved almost; as we may say of a Thief that has
a pardon brought him whiles he is upon the gallows, he was almost saved, but he
was hanged; and hi^ pardon did him no good. To be almost a Christian, is to be
like the foolish Virgins that had ^amps, but without oil in them; for which
they were shut out of heaven though they came to the very door, Matthew. 25.10,
11, 12. Can the door which is but almost shut, keep out the Thief? Can the ship
that is but almost tite, keep ou^ the water? The soldier that does but almost
fight is a coward. And therefore (...) thou love thy self, look to it, and
that in time, least hereafter you most dolefull^ rue it^ For know this, that
you shall once give an account for every idle penie an^ hour you spend, and for
every cup of drink you shall spoil, or waste; and for ever^ one that is
encouraged to do the like by your example. For which see Matthew. 12.36. Luke 16.
2. Romans 14.12. 1 Pet. 4.5. Rev. 20.13. and 22.12.

That (by the blessing of God) our children, and childrens children may l^at
drunkenness, and love sobriety; let this be fixed to some place convenient
(...) every house, for all to read. The Persians, Parthians, Spartans, and
Lacedemonian^ did the like, and found it exceeding efficacious: And Anacharsis
holds it the mo^^ effectual means to that end.

Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMIE



FINIS.
Offer of Help to Drowning-Men.
Imprimatur,

THO. GATAKER.



SEeing, and foreseeing the sad effects of men's crying down Books, Learning,
th^^ Ministry, Sanctification, etc. if this their deep, and divellish design
do me^^ with no stop: and seeing we should specially prepare for defense, where
Sat^ specially prepares for offense. Considering also the numberless number of
tho^^ that by professing themselves Protestants, discredit the Protestant
Religion: Wh^^ because they have been Christened, as Simon Magus was, received
the Sacram^^^ of the Lord's Supper, like Judas; and for company go to Church
also as Dogs do, a^^ called Christians, as we call the Heathen Images gods:
yea, and ( being blinded (...) the Prince of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.4.) think to
be saved by Christ, though they ta^^ up Arms against him; and are no more like
Christians* then Michols Image (...) Goats hair was like David: Who make the
world only their god, and pleasure or pr^fit alone their Religion: Who are so
graceless, that God is not in all their though^ except to blaspheme him, and
to spend his days in the Divel's service: Who ^^ing Christians in name, will
scoff at a Christian indeed: Who honor the d^^^ Saints in a cold profession,
while they worrey the living Saints in a cruel persecuti^^ Who so hate
Holiness, that they will hate a man for it; and say of good living (...) of a
good man, as some stomachs will rise at the sight of sweet meats: Whose
^^ligion is to oppose the power of Religion; and whose knowledge of the Truth,
(...) know how to argue against the Truth: Who justify the wicked, and
condemne^^ just: who call Zeal, madness; and Religion, foolishness: Who love
their sins so m^^^ above their souls, that they will not only mock their
Admonisher, scoff at (...) means to be saved, and make themselves merry with
their own damnations; (...) even hate one to the death, for showing them the
way to eternal life: who (...) condemn all for Roundheads, that have more
Religion then an Heathen, or kno^ledg of heavenly things then a child in the
womb has of the things of this life or conscience then an Atheist; or care of
his soul, then a Beast, and are mocke^ of all that march not under the pay of
the Devil: Who with Adam, will becom^ Satan's bondslaves for an Apple; and like
Esau, sell their Birthright of Grace her^ and their Blessing of Glory
hereafter for a mess of Pottage: Who prefer the ple^sing of their palates
before the saving of their souls: who have not only cast of Religion, that
should make them good men; but reason also, that should make them men: Who
waste virtues faster then riches, and riches faster then any virtues ca^ get
them: Who do nothing else but sin, and make others sin too: who spend their
time and patrimonies in Riot; and upon Dice, Drabs, Drunkenness; who place all
their felicity in a Tavern or Brothel house, where Harlots and Sycophants ri^^e
their Estates, and then send them to rob: Who will borrow of every one, but
never intend to satisfy any one: Who glory in their shame, and are ashamed of
that which should and would be their glory: Who desire not the reputation of
honesty, but of good fellowship: Who instead of quenching their thirst, drown
their senses; and had rather leave their wits then the wine behind them: Who
place their paradise in their throats, heaven in their guts: and make their
belly, their god: Who pour their Patrimonies down their throats, and throw the
house so long out at windows, that at length their house throws them out of
doors: Who ^hink every one exorbitant that walks not after their rule: Who will
traduce ^ll whom they cannot seduce; even condemning with their tongues, what
they ^ommend in their consciences: Who, as they have no reason, so they will
hear ^^one: Who are not more blind to their own faults, then quick-sighted in
other ^ens: Who being displeased with others, will fly in their Makers face,
and tear their Saviors Name in pieces with oaths and execrations, as being
worse then any ^ad dog that flies in his Masters face that keeps him: Who swear
and curse even ^ut of custom, as Currs bark; yea, they have so sworn away all
grace, that they ^ount it a grace to swear; and being reproved for swearing,
they will swear that ^hey swore not.

Or perhaps they are covetous Cormorants, greedy Gripers, miserly Muck-worms;
^^l whose reaches are at riches: Who make gold their god, and commodity the
^^ern of their consciences: Who hold every thing lawful, if it be gainful: Who
^efer a little base pelf before God, and their own salvations; and who being
^^ted with Gods blessings, do spurn at his precepts: Who like men sleeping in a
^^at, are carried down the stream of this World, until they arrive at their
graves^^ [Death] without once waking to bethink themselves whether they are a
go^^^ [to Heaven or Hell].

Or Ignorant and Formal Hypocrites: who do as they see others do, without
ei^^^^ conscience of sin, or guidance of reason: Who do what is (...) for fear
of the Law, then for love of the Gospel: Who fear the Magistrate more then they
fear God or the Devil; regard more the blasts of men's breath, then the fire of
God's wrath; will tremble more at the thought of a Bayliffe, or a Prison; then
of Satan, or Hell, and everlasting perdition: Who will say, they love God and
Christ, yet hate all that any way resemble him; are flint unto God, wax to
Satan; have their ears always open to the Tempter, shut to their Maker and
Redeemer; will choose rather to disobey God, then displease great Ones; fear
more the Worlds scorns, then His anger, and rather then abridge themselves of
their pleasure, will incur the displeasure of God: Who will do what God
forbids, yet confidently hope to escape what He threatens: Who will do the
Devils work^ only, and yet look for Christ's wages; expect that Heaven will
meet them at their last hour, when all their life long they have galloped in
the beaten Road toward Hell: Who expect to have Christ their Redeemer and
Advocate; when their consciences tell them, that they seldom remember him, but
to blaspheme him; and mote often name him in their Oaths and Curses, then in
their Prayers: Who will persecute Honest and Orthodox Christians; and say, they
mean base and dissembling Hypocrites: Who think they do God service in killing
his servants, Joh. 16.2. Who will boast of a strong faith, and yet fall short
of the Devils in believing, Jam. 2.19. Who turn the grace of God into
wantonness; as if a condemned person should head his Drum of Rebellion with his
Pardon; resolving to be evil, because God is good: Who will not believe what is
written, till they feel what is written; and whom nothing will confute, but
fire and brimstone: Who think their villainy is unseen, because it is
unpunished; and therefore live like beasts, because they think they shall die
like beasts.

Considering the swarms, Legions, Millions of these, I say, and many the like,
which I cannot stand to repeat. As also in reference to Levit. 19.17. Isa.
58.1. And out of compassion to their precious souls; there are above twenty
several Books purposely composed, wherein are proper remedies (of the same
alloy) for each soul seduced, or afflicted; to be had without any expense:
which Books (like Glasses) will show them (from Gods Word) the very faces of
their hearts: And (like Peter to Cornelius, Acts 11.) tell them words whereby
(with blessing from above) both they, and their Associates (by their means) may
be saved. Verse. 14.

And that they might the better recompense the Readers pains; whether he
propound to himself pleasure or profit: they are (as many Reverend Divines
deem) a brief Collection of the most winning and convincing Arguments out of
the choicest Authors; very pithily, orderly, and elegantly conveyed, and
embellished; with much both variety of graceful and delightful illustration.
Yea, if such as they concern, shall be pleased to make use of them; they may
(with God's blessing) not only have their vices lessened, their knowledge
increased, and their minds cheered and comforted: but probably they shall
find in them the flower, cream, or quintessence, of what would otherwise cost
them twenty years reading to extract.

It remains only, that the Patients, for whom this Physic is proper, be
prevailed withal to take it. For although here is all necessary provision
made, and the Guests lovingly invited, yet (of themselves) they will refuse to
come, as in that Parable of the Lords Supper, Luke 14.16. to 25. Because, as
good meats are un^^^ (...) persons* so is good counsel to obstinate sinners.
Here is (...) but they love darkness rather then light; lest their deeds which
are evil, should be re^^ved. Only they that do well, and love truth, will come
to the light; that t^^ deeds may be made manifest, John 3.19, 20, 21. Also many
young novices in sin (...) entertain them as Lot did those Angels, that came to
fetch him out of Sod^ Genesis 19. And probably some Parents and Masters will
desire them, to preve^ the spreading of these Gangrenes in their Children and
Servants. But as for (...) parties principally concerned and invited, and that
stand in the greatest need, (...) are most to be pitied; they will even storm
at this very Offer of Help, and hiss (...) Serpents, because it troubles their
Nests. Being like him, Luke 8.27, 28. who l^ving been possessed with Devils a
long time, was at length very loath to part wi^^ his Guests.

Indeed, if some, whose hearts God has already changed, would put them i^ to
their hands, and use their best Art to make them relished: (For like Bab^^
^neat must not only be given them, but prepared too, and put into their mouths
some return of good might happily come thereof. As weak means shall serve the
^urn, where God intends success. Even a word seasonably spoken ( God blessing
i^ ^ike a Rudder, sometimes steers a man quite into another Course. Antiochus by
he^^ing from a poor man, all the faults which he and his Favorites had
committe^ carried himself most virtuously ever after. Antoninus amended his
future life an^ manners, by only hearing what the people spoke of him. The
very crowing of (...) Cock occasioned Peter's repentance. Augustine that famous
Doctor, was converte^ by only reading that Text, Romans 13.13. Let us walk
honestly, as in the day-time^ etc. Learned Junius, with reading the first
Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, was wo^^ to the faith of Christ. And Melancthon
much after the same manner. I have rea^ of two famous Strumpets, that were
suddenly converted by this only Argument^ That God sees all things, even in
the dark; when the doors are shut, and the curtains drawn. And Mountain tells
of a libidinous Gentleman, that sporting with a Courtizan in a house of sin,
happened to ask her name, which she said was Mary whereat he was so stricken
with reverence and remorse; that he instantly both cast off the Harlot, and
amended his whole future life. Bilney's Confession converted Latimer: yea,
Adrianus was not only converted, but became a Martyr too, by only hearing a
Martyr at the Stake allege that text, Eye has not seen, nor Ea^^ heard, etc. 1
Cor. 2.9. Yea, it was an observation of Mr John Lindsay, that the very smoke of
Mr Hamilton converted as many as it blew upon. Yea, even tho^^ Jews that
crucified the Son of God, were converted by hearing those few words o^ Peter,
Act. 2. And it pleased God, when I, my self, was in as hopeless a condi^ion,
as any of those Sensualists beforementioned; (I mean, as much fore-stalled
with prejudice against Religion, and the Religious) that a poor man's
persuading ^ne to leave reading of Poetry, and fall upon the Bible, was a
means of changing my heart, before I had read out Genesis, being but twenty
years of age: Who^ (...) more bless God for, then for my Parents from whom I
received life. And this (...) because I know no better way to express my
thankfulness to him, who has free^ ^^d me from frying in Hell-flames for ever
and ever, then by endeavoring to wi^^ ^^hers from Satan's Standart to Christ's)
makes me do the like to others. For (...) ^^^dom hear any one swear or scoff,
or see any drunk, or the like, but I prefe^ ^^em with one of these
forementioned Messages, from that God, whom they (...) ^^a^ingly and
audaciously provoke. Nor do I always miss the mark at which I (...) and I tell
it you, because many discreet ones are apt to wonder, that I for make my ^elf a
scorn and gazing stock to fools: Though I shall never think it a shame to me,
which was the only glory of him, that was a man after God's own heart, as you
^ay very often hear him profess, as in Psalm 50.15. and 71.17, 18, 19, 24. and
51.^4. and 119.171. and 22.22. and 35.18. and many the like; see Luke 8.38, 39.

I also mention it, that I may (if possible in this covetous, cold and dull
Age) ^rovoke others to do the same; or at least something for the saving of
these poor, ^gnorant, and impotent wretches; that are neither able nor willing
to help themselves. Though a one would think, (for I speak to enlightened souls)
they should ^ot need spurring, nor prompting to this Duty: For what heart would
it not ^ake to bleed, that has any Christian blood in his veins, to see what
multitudes ^^ere are, that go blinde-fold to destruction; And no man offer to
stop or ^heck them before they arrive there, from whence there is no
Redem^tion. Matthew. 7.13, 14. 1 John 5.19. Rev. 20.8. and 13.16. Isa. 10.22.
Ro^an. 9.27. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.1, to 4. Phil. 3.18. Joh. 8.44.
and 14.30.

Yea, how should it not make all, that are themselves got out of Satan's
clutches, ^lot, study, and contrive all they can; to draw others of their
brethten after them.

We read that Andrew was no sooner converted, and become Christ's Disciple, at
instantly he drew others after him to the same Faith, John 1.41. and the like
(...) Philip, ver. 45. and of the woman of Samaria, John 4.28, to 41. And of
Peter, ^uke 22.32. Acts 2.41. and 3 Chap. and 4.4. And so of all the Apostles.
Yea, ^oses so thirsted after the salvation of Israel, that rather then he would
be saved without them, he desired the Lord to blot him out of the Book of life,
Exodus 32.32. and Paul to this purpose says, I could wish my self to be
separated from Christ, for (...) brethren; that are my kinsmen according to the
flesh: meaning the Jews, Romans 9.3. and indeed, all heavenly hearts are
charitable. Neither are we of the Communion of ^ants, if we desire not the
blessedness of others: it being an inseparable adjunct, or ^ative to grace;
for none but a Cain will say, Am I my brother's keeper? Yea, where ^e heart is
thankful, and inflamed with the love of God, and our neighbor, this will (...)
the principal aim: As by my sins, and bad example, I have drawn others from
God, (...) now I will, all I can, draw others with my self to God. Saul
converted, will build (...) as fast as ever he plucked down, and preach as
zealously as ever he persecuted. And (...) are no whit thankful for our own
salvation, if we do not look with charity and (...) upon the gross
mis-opinious and misprisions of our Brethren. And what though (...) cannot do
what we would? yet we must labor to do what we can to win o^ers; not to merit
by it, but to express our thanks. Besides, it were very honorable to Christ not
to do so. Did you ever know that wicked men; Thiev^, ^^unkards, Adulterers,
Persecuters, false Prophets, or the like, would be damned ^^e? no, they
mis-lead all they can, as desiring to have companions. Yea, the (...) arisees
would take great pains, compass sea and land, to make others two-sold ^re the
children of hell then themselves, as our Savior expressly witnesses, Mat. ^^
15. which may cast a blush upon our cheeks, who are nothing so industrious
^^vin souls to God. And what a shame is it! that our God should not have as
^^ful servants, as he has unfaithful enemies: That wicked men should be at ^e
cost and and pains to please an ill master, then we can afford to please so ^^l
a God, so gracious, and so loving a Father? Shall they labor so hard, for
which will but inhance their damnation? and shall (...) think (...) ^^ch for
that, which will add to the weight of our eternal glory and salvation.

And what though their case be not only desperate, but almost hopeless? (as
^^ason, that sin is past cure, which strives against the cure: nor would these
drow^^ng men refuse help, were they not wilful murderers of their own souls)
yet the^ (...) a mercy due even to them: And it is our duty to use the means;
leaving t^ssue to him who is able to quicken the dead, and to make even of
stones children^ ^^oraham? Witness Manasses in the Old Testament, and Paul in
the New. Yea^ ^ippose, that this their sad condition, calls for our more then
ordinance compassion ^ince they have precious souls, that must everlastingly
lives (...) or woe. A^^ ^^ence it is, that the Angels are said to rejoice more
at the con^^^^^ of such a si^^ ^ier, then for the building up of ninety and
nine that are already converted, Luke 1^ because he to whom God has given a
new heart, and spiritual life, will be sure (...) seek out for, and use the
means of growing in grace, and in the knowledge of (...) Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Whereas the former, are not only dead in (...) but so buried in the
grave of long custom, that they cannot stir the least joint; (...) not so much
as feel their deadness, nor desire life; but resist all means tending the^
unto. Insomuch, that the conversion of such an one is held by Divines a great
work, or Miracle, then the creating of the whole World: For in every New
Cr^^ture are a number of Miracles; A blind man is restored to sight: A deaf
man to he^ing, A man possessed with many Devils, dis-possest, Yea, A dead man
raised from (...) dead; and in every one a stone turned into flesh: in all
which God meets with (...) thing but opposition, which in the Creation he met
not with.

Wherefore you, that (by calling to mind your own former blindness, and (...)
dage) are able to know how it fares with them; and accordingly to pity the you
that fear God, or have any bowels of compassion toward their precious s^ use
your utmost endeavor to reduce them; earnestly admonish them; draw the^^ hear
some Boanerges, that preaches with power and authority, and not as the Scri^
Persuade them also to read Books that are convincing, etc. So shall you disch^^
your Duty to God, show your love to them, your thankfulness to your Redeemer;
(...) not a little pleasure your selves. For if you do gain them, you shall
shine as the (...) in Heaven, for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Or in case you
cannot reclaim them (...) he who requires it at your hands, Will return the
same into your own bosoms, (...) 49.4, 5. Prove. 11.18. and 25.22.

But I were as good knock at a deaf man's door, as press or persuade the most
(...) duty, though thus necessary: for those two Idols, Discretion and cursed
Covetou^^ hear a greater sway with the common Prosessors of this Age; then
either their ker or Redeemer: Though confident I am, others will do more then I
say, Phile^^.

Melancthon having found the Word, most easily to prevail with him; dou^^ not
but his Preaching should do wonders upon others: but having trie^^ found and
confessed, That old Adam, was too strong for young Melancthon.

Many Lepers were in Israel, in the time of Elizeus the Prophet: but none of
(...) was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian, Luke 4.22. to 29.

Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 22.14.

FINIS.
Printed by J. Bell, and are to be sold by James Crumpe, in Little Bartholo^^^
Well-yard, who will also show the other Books, and tell the place whe^^ any one
may borrow them gratis. 1656.


