THE King and Northern Man: Showing how a poor Northumberland Man (Tenant to
the King) being wronged by a Lawyer (his Neighbor) went to the King himself to
make known his Grievance.
To the Tune of, Slut, etc.
Licensed and Entered.





TO drive away the weary day,
a book I chanced to take in hand,
And therein I read assuredly,
a story as you shall understand:
Perusing many a History over,
amongst the leaves I chanced to view,
The books name and title is this,
The Second Lesson, too good to be true.
There read I of a Northumberland Man,
that was born and brought up in the King's land,
He paid twenty shillings rent a year
to the King, as I do understand:
By him there dwelt a Lawyer false,
that with his farm was not content,
But over the poor Man still hanged his nose,
because he did gather the King's rent.
He told him he his lease had forfeit,
and that he must there no longer abide:
The King by such Loons has mickle wrong done,
and for you the World is broad and wide.
The poor Man prayed him for to cease,
and content himself, if he would be willing,
And pick no vantage in my lease,
and I shall give thee forty shilling.
It Is neither forty shilling, nor forty pound,
ise warrant thee, can so agree thee and me,
Unless thou yield me thy farm so round,
and stand to my courtesy.
The poor Man said, I may not do so,
my Wife and my Bearns will make ill work; mark.
If thou with my farm wilt let me go,
thou seem a good Fellow, ise give thee five
The Lawyer would not be so content,
but further in the matter he means to smell:
The Neighbors had the poor Man provide his rent,
and make a submission to the K. himsel.
He gat a humble staff on his back,
a jerkin, I wot, that was of gray:
With a good blew bonnet, he thought it no lack;
to the King he is ganging as fast as he may.
He had not gone a mile out of the Town,
but one of his Neighbors he did espy;
How far is it t'th' King, for thither i am bound;
as fast as ever I can hye.
I am sorry for you, Neighbor, he said,
for your simplicity I make moan,
I Will warrant you, you may ask for the King,
when nine or ten days journey you have gone.
Had I wist the King had wond so far,
ise never a sought him a Mile out of the town
He Is either had sought me, or we'd never have come near,
at home I had rather have spent a crown.
But when he came to the City of London,
of every Man he for the King did call:
They told him, that him he need not to fear,
for the King he lies now at the White Hall,
And with 'spying of Farues in the City,
because he had never been there beforn,
He lee so long a bed the next day,
the Court was removed to Windsor that morn.
You have lay too long, then said his Host,
you have lay too long by a great while:
The King is now to Windsor gone,
he is further gone by twenty mile.
I think I was cursed, then said the poor Man,
if I had been wise I might have consider,
Belike the King of me has gotten some weer,
he had never gone away, had not I come hither.
He fled nor for you, then said his Host,
but hye you to Windsor as fast as you may:
Besure it will require your cost,
for look what is past the King will pay?
But when he came to Winds^or Castle,
with his humble staff on his back,
Although the gates wide open stood,
he laid on them till he made 'um crack.
Why stay, pray Friend, art mad quoth the Porte^,
what makes thee keep this stir to day?
Why, I am a Tennant of the King's,
who have a message to him to say.
The King has Men enough, said the Porter,
your message well that they can say.
Why, there is never a Knave the King does keep,
shall ken my secret mind to day:
I were told e're I came from home,
e're I got hither it would be dear bought,
Let me in, ise give thee a single penny,
I see thou will have small, e're thou do it for naught.
Gramercy, said the Porter then,
thy reward is so great I cannot say nay:
Yonder Is a Nobleman within the Court,
I Will first hear what he does say.
When the Porter came to the Nobleman,
he said he would show him pretty sport,
There Is sike a Clown come to the gate,
as come not these seven years to the Court.
He calls all Knaves the King does keep,
he raps at the gates, and makes great din;
He Is passing liberal af reward,
he would give a good single penny to be let in.
Let him in, then said the Nobleman,
Come in Fellow, the Porter began say;
If thou come within thy self, he said,
thy staff behind the gate must stay;
And this Cuckold's cur must lig behind,
what a Deel, what a Cur have got with thee?
The King will take him up for his own sell,
Ise warrant when as he does him see.
Beshrew thy limbs, then said the poor Man,
then may thou count me a Fool or worse,
I wot not what Bankrupt lies by the King,
for want of money he may pick my purse.
Let him in with his staff and dog, said the Lord,
he gave a nod with his head, and a bend with his knee,
If you be Sir King, then said the poor Man,
as I can very well think ye be:
For as I was ^old e're I came from home,
you are goodliest Man that e're I saw beforn,
With so many jingle jangles about one neck,
as is about yours, I never saw none,
I am not the King said the Nobleman.
Fellow, though I have a proud coat.
If you be not the King, help me to the speech of him,
you seem a good Fellow, ise give you a Groat.
Gramercy, said the Nobleman.
thy reward is so great, I cannot say nay;
I Will go know the King's pleasure, if I can,
till I come again besure you stay.
Here Is sike a staying, then said the poor Man,
belike the King's better than any in our Country
I might a gane to the farthest nuke in the house,
neither Lad nor Loon to trouble me.
When the Nobleman came to the King,
he said he could show his Grace good sport,
Here Is such a Clown come to the gate,
as came not this seven years to the Court.
He calls all Knaves your Highness keeps,
and more then that, he terms them worse,
He Will not come in without his staff and dog
for fear some Bankrupt will piek his purse.
Let him in with his staff, then said our King,
that of his sport we may see some:
We'll see how he^ll handle every thing,
as soon as our matthew of Bowls is done.
The Nobleman led him through many a room,
and through many a gallery gay;
What a deel does the King with so many Houses,
that he gets them not filled with corn and hay?
At last they 'spied the King in a garden,
yet from his game he did not start;
The day was so hot, he cast off his doublet,
he had nothing from his wast but his shirt.
Lo yonder is the King, said the Nobleman,
behold, follow, lo here he goes:
Believ's he is some Unthrift, says the poor Man,
that has lost his money, and pawn^d his cloths.
But when he came before the King,
the Nobleman did his courtesy:
The poor Man followed after him,
and gave a nod with his head, and a bend with his knee:
And if you be Sir King, then said the poor Man,
as I can hardly think ye be:
Here is a good Fellow that brought me hither,
is liker to be the King than ye.
I am the King, his Grace now said,
Fellow, let me thy case understand.
If you be Sir King, I Am a Tenant of yours,
that was born and brought up in your own land:
There dwells a Lawyer hard by me,
and a fault with my lease he says he has found,
And all was for felling five poor ashes,
to build an house upon your own ground.
Have thou a lease here, said our King?
or can thou show to me the deed?
He gave it into the King's own hand,
and said, Sir, here it is, if that you can read.
Let Us see thy lease, then said the King,
then from his black box he pulled it out,
He gave it into the King's own hand,
with four or five knots, tied fast in a clout.
We'st never unloose these knots, said the King,
he gave it to one that behind him did stay.
It is a proud Horse, then said the poor Man,
will not carry's own provender along the highway:
Pay me forty shillings, as ise pay you,
I will not think much to unloose a knot;
I would I were so occupied every day,
I Would unloose a score of 'em for a great.
When the King had gotten these letters read,
and found the truth was very so,
I warrant thee, thou have not forfeit thy lease,
if thou had feld five Ashes mo.
Ay, every one can warrant me,
but all your warrants are not worth a flee,
For he that troubles me, and will not let me go,
neither cares for warrant of you nor me.
Thou'st have an Injunction, said our King,
from troubling of thee he will cease,
He Will either show the good cause why,
or else he will let thee live in peace.
What Is that Injunction? said the poor Man:
good Sir, to me I pray you say,
Why, it is a letter I Will cause to be written;
but art thou so simple as thou show it to day?
Why if it be a Letter, I Am never the better,
keep it to thy self, and trouble not me;
I could have had a letter written cheaper at home
and never a come out of my own Country.
Thou'st have an Atachment said our King,
charge all that thou see take thy part.
Till he pay thee a hundred pound,
besure thou never let him start:
If any seem against thee to stand,
besure thou come hither straightway.
Ay, marry, is that all ise get for my labor,
then I may come trotting every day.
Thou art hard of belief, then said our King,
to please him with letters he was willing,
I see you have taken great pains in writing,
with all my heart ise give a shilling.
I Will have none of thy shilling, said our King,
Man, with thy money God give thee win,
He threw it into the King's botom,
the money lay cold next to his skin.
Beshrew thy heart, then said our King,
thou art an Carl something too bold;
Do thou not see I am hot with Bowling,
and the money next my skin lies cold.
I never wist that before said the poor Man,
before sike time as I came hither,
If the Lawyers in our Country thought 'twas cold,
they would not heap up so much together.
The King called up his Treasurer;
and bad him fetch him twenty pound;
If ever thy errand lie here away,
I Will bear thy charges up and down.
When the poor Man saw the Gold down tendered
for to receive it he was willing:
If I had thought the King had had so mickle gold
beshrew my heart, i would have kept my shilling.
The poor Man got home the next Sunday,
the Lawyer soon did him espy;
O Sir, you have been a Stranger long,
I think from me you have kept you by.
It was for you indeed, said the poor Man,
the matter to the King, as I have tell:
I did as my Neighbor put into my head,
and made a submission to him my sell.
What a De'il did thou with the King, quoth Lawyer,
could not Neighbors and Friends agree thee and me?
The De'il a Neighbor or Friend that I had,
that would have been such a Day's Man as he:
He has gin me a letter, but I know not what they called.
but if the King's words be true to me
When you have read and perused it over,
I hope you will leave, and let me be.
He has gin me another, but I know not what too,
but I charge you all to hold him fast,
Till he pay me an hundred pound
I will go tie him fast tull a post.
Marry God forbid, the Lawyer said,
then the Tachment was read before them there,
Thou must needs something credit me,
till I go home and fetch some mear.
Credit, nay that is it the King forbad,
he bade if I got thee I should thee stay^
The Lawyer paid him an hundred pound
in ready money e're he went away.
Would every Lawyer were served thus,
from troubling poor Men they would cease;
They Would either show him good cause why,
or else they would let him live in peace.
And thus I end my merry song,
which shows the plain Man's simpleness,
And the King's great mercy in righting wrongs
and the Lawyer's fraud and wickedness.
London: Printed by and for W. O. and are to be sold by the Booksellers in
Pye-corner and London Bridge.


