Wanton wenches of Wiltshire
Being a Pleasant Discourse between Fo^r young Females, as they Sat together in
a convenient place to scatter their Water, who being overheard by Two
young men, occasioned the whole Discovery of their Discourse.

Tune of, The Maids a Washing.
This may be printed,

R. P.

depiction of a woman

depiction of a woman

depiction of a woman with bared breasts

depiction of a woman with flower

NOw young Batchelo^s all draw near,
And you a pleasant Discourse shall here:
Of four young Damsels all meeting and greeting
Each other together in fair Wilsthire:
All complained at a sorrowful rate,
Because they could not enjoy a mate
Whilst they made their sad pitiful moan
They thought they were private and all alone.
One said, I must depart a space,
For here I am in a woeful case,
I find I Am ready to scatter my water,
Therefore I must find a convenient place,
where no young man may see what I do,
And then i will straight ways return to you;
But unto this they would no ways agree,
They Would all go together for Company.
Hand in hand then a way they go,
Like loving Sisters all in a row,
Two young men hearing their tattle and prattle,
Resolved some more of this Gigg to know:
Therefore watching them whither they went,
These two young men by joint consent,
Both resolved in Ambush to lie,
Where both words and actions they might descry.
depiction of a man with bared chest

depiction of a man in an interior arch

depiction of a fortified house

My sweet Sister, says one I find,
Night and day such a pain in my mind,
Because I am not the blessing possessing,
Which I might enjoy if young men were kind,
How I tremble while here I reveal
The inward torments which now I feel,
But yet in vain do I utter my grief,
Since no one will yield me the least relief.
Once I heard of a woman old,
Whose face was wrinkl'd, and blood near cold,
But yet I tell ye, she crying, replying
The sorrow I suffer cannot be told;
You may easily guess at the cause,
And need not stand very long to pause:
Now if old Women such passion express,
I hope a young Damosel can do no less.
Said the Second, young sweet-fac'd John,
You know he is a young lusty-man,
I dearly love him, provoke him, and stroke him,
Yet he will not Kiss me do what I can
I have fed him with Custards and Cream,
And all things that can pleasant seem;
Nay, call him my honey, my love and dear,
And Yet I protest I am never the near.
Said the Third, I am pure Cole-black,
And that you know has a dainty Smack,
Besides, I know I am witty and pretty
Then why should not I have those joys I (...)
Being youthful, and just in my prime,
And loath to lose my Teeming time,
Yet brisk young Gallants no kindness will
What reason have I to be served so.
Then the fourth did begin to prate,
And that was bony, brisk bounsing Kate,
Who did with fury, behold 'um and told'
That she was stark mad, for a man-lik^ (...)
Though I Am shorter then others may be
Yet wherefore should this hinder me?
Behold I am of a delicate Brown,
No Color is better in all the Town.
Nay, the worst of us all might serve,
For surely Batchellors don't deserve
To have our Favor who spite us, and slight
And suffer poor Damsels to pine and starve;
But we will tattle no longer of this,
So every Sister sat down to P -- -- -- -- s,
But yet before they had perfectly done,
The Young Men they laughed, and the Wenches
Printed for J. Back, at the Black Boy on London Bridge near the Drawbridge.


