A Warning to the Court, Parliament, and Army. From a true Lover of his
Country, and of all that love the Truth in Righteousness. Heartily desiring the
Peace and welfare of these poor Nations, with Freedom and an Impartial
administration of Justice, that Righteousness might run down our streets like a
flood, and truth be exalted.
Then will our God crown the laborers in, and doers of his work, with glory
and honor, and at last Immortality.
LEt not any man's impatience, prejudice, or strong affection, carry him to the
practice of, or an endeavoring to a settlement of the Nations on such
Foundations, as may and will prove absolutely prejudicial to the safety, peace
and welfare of us, and our posterities.

We have for a long time prayed to our God in these words; Lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from all Evil; which is to be taken in a double
sense: As,

Not to act Iniquity, from or by a Law, but to prevent it: and to be upon our
watch, is in some measure, the answer of that part of the Lords Prayer.

Have not the English Nation, and the good, wise Senators therein experienced,
how a single Persons Government, has point blanck crossed their prayers, and
their good intents when they were ready to put them into Laws for the good of
posterity.

The whole prayer called the Lords Prayer, is not understood, nor do most men
understand what they do, when they use it: for if they did but once understand
what they pray for, they would act accordingly; Thy will be done O Lord, on
earth as it is in Heaven, etc. And yet men, nay wise men, that daily use thiss
prayer, will daily act contrary things, and lead themselve into temptations, to
act one part of the Lords prayer.

But they will thrust us into the highest temptations that posible can be on
earth, and cunningly creep after themselves: What greater temptation was ever
any man led into, than the late Protector was; was he not led from one degree
to another, till he grew so great and mighty, that his looks and threats could
fright all men but fools.

Was he not a dread and terror to that very Army, that raised him from the
mean condition he was once in, to all his greatness: What is the L.
Fawconbridge! and what has Thurloe done, but help subvert the Right, Liberty
and Privilege of the people of England.
And could he not reward men at his will and pleasure, some that never did the
least service for the Nation, nor ever did venture a hair of their heads, nor
spend a penny of money in the Parliaments Cause with great places of trust and
profit, others that ventured their lives and estates, and received wounds and
scars, First Mr. Hollis, Maj. Genesis Broun, Cor. Joyce M.G. Harrison, Quarterm.
Courtney, Mr. Can Sr. H Vain, M.G. Overton, Col. Ock^y, and many others.
did he reward with Ignominy and Reproach, Prisons, Banishment and great
threats to others, that did but speak for a righteous Government; What may
otherwise be now expected?

Was he not led into Temptations, when neither Law nor Justice could reach him.

Have men eyes and will not see, and ears and will not hear; and still go on in
hardening their hearts: Friends, My advise is, consider and take heed, least God
come unaware and smite us with a curse, and destroy our Nation for our
hypocrisy, and sinning against light and our own prayers.

Was not his case sad, when his temptations led him to sin against God, and his
own prayers; also the light of his understanding and conscience; his prayers
and appeals to the righteous God stands registered in Heaven and on Earth
also; and yet will men follow his steps, and lead themselves into temtation:
such men I would advise to leave of praying, and dissemble no more with God nor
your Countrie-men.

Was there ever any man in our days raised to that name and fame of Religion
and profession, and led into somany snares and temptations. Its true, Christ
Jesus was taken up to a Pinnacle, and showed all the glory of the Earth; Then
said the Devil, all this I will give unto thee, if thou wile fall down and
worship me, Its worth our remembrance at this time.

Who would now be led or thrust into temptation; Is it for naught, that God
raises up some poor worms to remind you of these things: Consider, ye wise in
heart, and prudent in understanding, and harden not your hearts in the days of
temptation, when your fathers tempted you, least Gods signal hand of judgment
follow you and yours.

Was he not fed by the subtlety and craft of some that knew his disposition
and temper, and heightened by them, For that was good Law and Justice, that
formerly was Treason, Injustice, and breach of Privilege, etc.
until his Kingly Domination and stroke fell on their heads.

And is not the like now in this our day, has not the subtlety of some
begotten Addresses from several parts; as if they were to the son of God,
whilst others nearer home are leading him into temptations, or thrusting him
upon them; remember what is said before: And it may be in time, you that are
most eager for a fingle Person, may feel the first stroke in body or soul,
if not in both. Princes enthroned, when once their turns are ended, hue down
those stairs by which themselves ascended.
It was the late Protectors own Distitch. Its true, if you can touch Pitch, and
not be defiled, you may do well; its a hard matter; did not the late great
Governor ensnare some of all sorts that ever came to him; and had he not a
kind of virtue that did run into men by his presence, and had not the late
King the same virtue, for no sooner had any man kissed their hands, and talked
with him, but presently cried him up; and is not the same virtue still in one
man when so lifted up; is he not cried up for a brave man and so forth, though
he may be a Devil at heart: Lead us not into temptation, nor your posterities,
I beg.

How many degrees beyond the ordinary sphere, Will you build again, that God
once destroyed.
have you thrust good nature into; and will you still go on, and bring him into
all manner of temptations, and hereby besot or bewitch the poor and ignorant
men, makes me wonder and ask what is God doing.

But its like you will set him as high as you can, and get gradually after him,
and at length teach him to do as bad things as the old man did and his
Predecessor, I mean the late King, until the poor Nation be in the like
condition, as it was, under Oppression and Tirannie, against which was much
blood and treasure spilt, and is like now to be contracted on them that did it:
And many of ^ou were Law makers for it.
by the craft and subtilty of such as would be above or beyond law and reason,
and unto this will the Lawyers lend their assistance; that so their work might
increase, For the greatest part of the Lawyers did assist the King against the
public interest of the good people; also they that pretended to the good old
cause, are since corrupted.
and will ere long draw up Indictments against all and every particular man
that fought against the late King, for and in the Cause of the late Parliaments
quarrel against him, there being law enough, say they, to hang every one of
those that so fought or lent moneies; and is not this the best that is like to
come to us, a setting men together by the ears, one family against another,
till at length we come to misery and confusion, ruin and desolation.

Lead us not into temptations, but deliver us from all evil O Lord.

And from a Lord above Law, though (never so just etc.) he pretend to protect
us; least his little singer prove heavier than his fathers hand, which was bad
enough.

The old man's principles, are not his sons; and that wise men see and know.
(...) am perswa^ed that the ^^e Protector ^as the wisest ^^d best that ^^er
England ^ill have.


Which makes men at this time strugle and strive, who shall lead him by -- one
is for this, and another for that; good reason will tell us, and also lead us
out of Temptation, and not put us further into it: I pray confider and agree,
put of the works of darkness and put on the Armor of light, who is for things
and not men.

My meaning is this: God has by a signal stroke of Justice taken away your
King; and by his divine hand of Providence your Protector; and yet will you
thrust your selves and one another into temptations, Make your heges and
diches, bars, gates and styles, never so strong, and he shall leap over them if
not wholly beat them down; and spoil the best laws you can make, and men will
be tempted to lift him up, (which need not) and he, when lifted up and settled,
will pull them after, which is no new thing: such is and will be our opression.

Your sons must go to Court for preferment, your daughters must do the like,
and does not this lead into temptations: Galantry is a snare, voluptiousnesse
is a snare; wantonness is a delight, and natural to a Court though of the
meanest rank or stamp, what iniquities is there, and you have not done it, and
led us into? Pray consider, before it be too late; time tarries for no man; do
not die while you are alive: I speak to all of all sorts and all Powers: Your
Fathers are dead, and some of us had been happy if we had never seen this day,
and had been taken away from the evil, that is and is like to come; but a word
to the wise is enough, only let me mind you of one thing more, and then I
shall by the mercy of God and his assistance be at rest, and wait Gods further
appearances and follow him.

The wise and praying man foreseeth an evil and preventeth it; also God has
said, the secrets of the Almighty are with them that fear him; and they shall
not fear what man can do unto them; nor create fears and jealousies to
themselves as some do, nor subtly make Bug-bears to fright poor ignorant
men, as some do while some great ones act Machivel, and turn Atheists under a
pretense of good, piety, and preservation of the Liberty of Gods people; which
Gods people hope they can trust God with all; and so must do when all vain
hopes fail and fair pretenses deceive us.

Let now our just Rights and Liberties be Asserted, and then no one single
Person can hurt another, then if he kill or hurt any, the law will hang the
Murderer, though he be a mighty man; and if he steal away our moneys and
estates the Law will defend us; and the true genuine Law is and ought to be
such, and so settled and secured, that no man should be above it, or out of the
reached thereof; but all men should be put into such a capacity, as he would
they should do to him, so he to do to others, rest.

Your true friend Gregory Trewman.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOr Zions sake, I will not hold my peace, nor can I be silent, when I see my
Countrymen like to be misled and hurried into a seeming settlement, such a one
as will destroy them, that carries on so horrible a design against God and
their own Consciences; And will not yield to be governed, as well as to govern:
which is the most Tirannical and destructive principle that can be in man; and
that all good men fought against; or else why was the King put to death? I
shall now put the Reader in mind of some notable and remarkable passages and
practices, that have not commonly been known nor heard of.

To prevent my Countrymen in Parliament and elsewhere, from further temptations
and snares, or thrusting others into slavery: take the King from his evil
Council, was our former Parliamentary, and Soldiers cry, also the Country cry;
but it seems now to be forgotten or asleep; also that Reformation, which was
once eminently pointed at, and hoped for, by all sober and good men. If a King
or chief Magistrate shall be mislead by a fine thing, or a Thurling crafty and
blustering sword, or by the cunning and craft of such Instruments; led into such
a deportment as some great ones once were, though it is more his dissition to
be Hawking, Hunting, etc.

My advise therefore is: See how angry that angry party is, which was against
bringing the King to Justice and had conjunction with Charles the Second.
be not cheated nor frighted; God is at work discovering men and things. If
this question should be asked, what is the man or his name, that goes about to
subvert the Liberties of the People of England, and would have Iniquity, or the
thing God has destroyed, settled by a Law? What service did he ever do for
this Nation, but wickedly help to break the late Protectors heart; and ever
more laid snares for men to destroy them; may, such men as had been as
eminently faithful to the Parliament and their Cause as any. Be warned ye
great ones, that have the least dram or spark of honesty, or fear of God before
your eyes, orlove to your Country. For the cunning and craft of some men, is to
do the Devils work, and to establish his Government and Kingdom, and to make
his visegerent on earth. God is making a further discovery of men and things,
and will break the hearts or necks of those that shall go on to settle Iniquity
by a law against light, nay against their own Prayers, and solemn Appeals made
to God in the days of old, when they were in distress, and knew not what to
do.

Your Iniquities were almost done away, and you were once a sweet savor in the
Nostrels of all good men, and the Lord owned you, and the hearts and prayers of
Gods people were the walls and bulworks, and God gave you great deliverances.

But now your iniquities begin to be like scarlet, double died in contracting
all the blood that has been spilt on your own and your posterities heads; and
putting your selves into a blood thirsting posture again; for the witness of God
and good people has been and is still going out against you and your acting,
and will not hold their peace, nor keep silence any longer. Your Idol when set
up must be worshipped and adored, your voluptuousness and wantoness must be
maintained, and all out of the peoples labors; you will first take their
moneys, then their goods, and lastly their flesh from their bones.

Who would not now be a Courtier, when he is like to be above all Law or
Justice, and out of the reach of both.

The Gentleman must think to breed his sons at no other place, nor to marry
his daughters to any other Trades men but Courtiers; and then see what glorious
reformation we are at last like to have.

I pray you my Lord Fleetwood and Major General Disborough, and the rest, leave
off praying, and dissemble no longer with God and your selves and good men, and
say to us in plain terms, you will have all our Estates, our Lives, our Wives
at your wills and pleasures: or be honest.

And remember that after a little while God will Call you to an account and you
must die as the late Protector did, and go to judgment, which I fear you
little think of.

Also God may suddenly say, bring those mine enemies before me, that would not
have Christ to reign over them, and slay them before my face.

Remember Gods appearance to Solomon once and twice; and he slighted the call
or voice of God, and see what followed: And when he was going to leave all his
glory and honor, which was much more than yours is or ever will be, he said
all was vanity and vexation of spirit: (some said with men in our days) and
hard to leave off and forsake; but I had rather be a door keeper in the house
of my God, than to dwell with the workers of iniquity (from whom good Lord
deliver me and all thy dear and precious ones) their snares, baits, and
temptations are many, and of the most glorious colors; golden baits, such as
the Devils instruments do fish with all to catch and bewitch men.

And were it not for some such smooth stuff, speciously gilded over with
glorious words, and fair pretenses, and sometimes with frights and Bugbears; A
great place and a gallant Incomb out of the poor country man's labors, whish
makes them forget God and oppress this Nation.
Gods work would go swifter on, and men would trust God more in the work of
God, while its called to day: For time tarrieth for no man, nor can this day be
to morrow, or another time; therefore up and be doing, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give the life and strength, if thou will but trust him in the
use of means; and in him I rest,

Thine for truth and Justice till death.


