AN ELEGY On the Death of the Reverend and Pious Mr. Thomas Wadsworth, Sometime
Preacher of the Gospel in Newington-Butts, and late of London, who departed
this Life the 29th. of October, 1676.
IS Wadsworth Dead! how can this be resolved?
We Will grant you the Compositu^ that is dissolved;
But for his Soul, it lives among the Blessed,
His Body's but asleep, and gone to Rest.
He Preached and Writ of the Souls Immortality,
Which Doctrine he finds true, now in Glory.
If Soul-sleepers could into Heaven peep,
They would convinced be, the Soul goes not to sleep.
For then and there, they quickly would behold
Holy Wadsworth's Soul, shine more bright than Gold.
Acting its Part among that Heavenly Quire,
With lively vigorous Zeal as hot as Fire:
Where living, He shall Live, and never Dye,
No more Tossed, nor Green through Pain and Cry;
For Kidney, Ulcer, and Stone in Bladder,
Has proved to him a Happy Jacob's Ladder.
Which thought 'twas painful for him to ascend,
Yet come to Top, it did in Glory end.
So Death to him, save One, proved his best Friend.
Which One is Christ, through whose Blood and Merit,
Alone it is that, He Is with God in Spirit.
Which Truth's believed, proves Souls Immortality;
Also disproves blind Popes Purgatory.
And what a joyful Meeting may one think.
Had this Blessed Soul, upon an Eye-(...) wink.
With that Blessed Company which is above:
Where met with Patriarchs, Martyrs, and Holy (...)
Also with Others of a later Date,
Who went to Heaven at a cheaper Rate;
As Golden Havilah and Holy Jesse,
Reverend Caryl, Venning, and blessed (...),
With Learned West, Pledger, and many more,
Who now shall have Pleasure for evermore;
And not to forget Reverend Mr. Well,
Who spent himself to save poor Souls from Hell.
But now himself to Heaven's gone from Earth,
And Blessed Wadsworth last has yielded up his breath,
And with them has had a happy Meeting,
And to each performed a joyful Greeting.
But what was Wadsworth that thus much is said
Of him whose Body now in Grave is laid.
Was he a Man who in his life deserved
To be at's Death so Honorably served?
Yea, He was a man, whose Life deserved it,
Let none therefore envy his Death has it,
The Honor now which he has with God in Spirit,
He has alone for the sake of Christ's Merit.
But, the Honor which to him's given at's Death,
His Life deserved in spending of his Breath,
For Welfare and the good of Men's Immortal Souls,
To^t, and them, prepare against the Bell touls.
When first He came from University,
At Newington-Busts he lift up his Cry,
To make Dead Souls to hear his Masters voice.
And so leave Sin and serve God our of Choice:
And so loud Cried to Sinners gone astray,
That many he brought back to Heaven's way.
Two Sermons he did Preach every Lord's day,
Each Morn in the Week he did Expound and Pray;
Besides he often visited his Flock,
And at their doors most frequently did knock,
To see and know each Soul's stare and condition,
In which he showed himself a good Physician,
And, cordingly his Remedy applied;
The Weak with Strength, the Sad with joy supplied.
And as hungry Souls by him was sad with Food,
So was hungry Bodies with that which was good
He sought the Flock more these he did the Place.
To do Them good was both is Joy and Peace.
He sought not as some their Silver but their Soul
What ere he lost, he would their Sin (...):
To Rich and Poor, he Preached (...)
^
Thus he served (...)
In Faith and Lore, and Godly Fear:
And when for (...) turned (...)
In Country Towns and City (...)
And though God gave him great Ability,
Yet still he showed forth as great Humility.
At length God's providence, which rules well,
At Tibbals placed him, to save some from Hell;
And there he did not Preach nor run in vain,
Some fruit God gave him to reward his pain;
For many there by him was converted,
Which from the Faith of Christ was much departed.
Keeping still his Flock he had at London,
Though for it he was like to be undone.
Yet when a place was here for him builded,
Yet still at Tibbals he as Pastor ruled;
Keeping Pluralities, but not for Gain?
But to save the more Souls from Eternal Pain:
And when the Persecution was most hot,
He neglected not to feed his Flock a jot;
But Preach he would by Day or by the Night,
Though sometimes rude Soldiers did him fright.
And thus he served both places, though by strealth,
Until he found it did impair his Health;
And then with Counsel did himself advise
How to escape being the Peoples Sacrifice.
One place he now must leave, though both loved him well,
He loved them again, therefore could not tell,
Which People to leave, both were to him so dear:
This thing to Decide cost him many (...).
Also both Flocks a Claim to him did lay,
Whose Shepherd to be, to guide them Heavens way:
From whence some small Contention did arise
'Tween both Flocks, yet both were Godly wise.
At length by counsel he did come to dwell
At Pickle-Herring, a place known full well;
But when Preached Two Sermons had at Dead-place,
His Master sent Grim Death to look him inth' Face.
Preaching the last, He made us all to wonder,
He did so long and loud against Sin thunder;
And before he ended, and went his way,
Did summon the World to meet him at Judge day.
And so it proved, for him they will see no more,
Till they meet to see him the Lord before.
For on Twenty ninth October, the Lord's own day,
'Bout two o'th Clock his Lord took him away.
He has sought his Fight, and run throughout his Race,
And now to Heaven's gone to take his place:
But what a great Loss this is, who can tell?
None till Experience to Us it spell.
Great loss toth' Church, no less to his Relation;
Yea a great loss toth' whole English Nation.
Therefore let all that does this sad News hear,
Endeavor to bedew it with a Tear:
Let Sinners all, them of their Sin Repent,
Which has provoked God to make this Rent.
Let all God's People in Love united be,
That he may not from them take their Ministry:
Let Magistry, Ministry, and People all,
Turn from their Sin, and upon the Lord call
For Mercy to be shown to this Nation,
That we become not a Desolation.
Let all that go hear at Dead-man's-Place,
Mourning, remembers Blessed Wadsworth's Face;
And pray his Death may Preach now he is Dead;
That Sinners dying may find the Grave a Bed,
That at the morning of the Resurrection,
May meet 'gain with him with a good Complexion.
Let Tibbals People improve this Loss so well,
As to come to Heaven and escape Hell.
HIS MOTTO.
HErs sleeps the Body of Holy Wadsworth Blast,
(...) him not; his Soul is gone to Rest.
And this his clay shall have a Glorious rising
When Christ comes at Resurrection Morning.
He (...) in Life, and he preaches now
(...) Vow,
^
(...)


