The Frantic Mother: OR, Cupid in Captivity.
To an Excellent New Tune.
Licensed according to Order.

^

^

I.
AS Cupid roguishly one day,
Had all alone stole out to play,
The Muses caught the little, little, little Knave,
And Captive Love to Beauty gave,
The Muses caught the little, little, little Knave,
And Captive Love to Beauty gave:
The laughing Dame soon mist her Son,
And here and there, and here and there,
and here and there, and here and there distracted run,
Distracted run, and here and there,
and here and there, and here and there distracted run:
And still his Liberty to gain,
And still his Liberty to gain,
offers his Ransom:
But in vain, in vain, in vain,
The willing, willing Priso'ner still hugs his Chain,
And vows he will never be free,
And vows he will never be free,
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
No, no, no, no, no, he will never be free again.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
No, no, no, no, no, he will never be free again.
II.
Though he in Fetter lies confined,
So pleasant is it to his Mind,
That ever while he waited, waited, waited still,
His Heart with Joys the Nymph did fill,
That ever while he waited, waited, waited still,
His Heart with Joys the Nymph did fill,
So that the pleasing pain he bore,
And would not wish, and would not wish,
and would not wish for Freedom more,
For Freedom more, and would not wish,
and would not wish and would not wish for Freedom more:
Because that charming Beauty bright,
Because that charming Beauty bright,
still he must adore;
For she is fair, she is fair, she is fair,
And never, never can he avoid the snare,
But must be still confined,
But must be still confined,
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now now,
Now, now, now, now, now, she is so charming fair,
Now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now, now,
Now, now, now, now, now, she is so charming fair.
III.
The smiling Mother when she found
Her Son was so encompast round,
She needs would help her little, little, little Boy,
And all the Charms of Love destroy;
She needs would help her little, little, little, Boy,
And all the Charms of Love destroy;
In vain she strove; for Beauty Bright,
Was evermore, was evermore,
Was evermore his Heart's delight;
His Heart's delight, was evermore,
Was evermore, was evermore his Heart's delight.
To the fair Saint on Wings of Love,
To the fair Saint on Wings of Love,
Often he takes his flight,
Where his thrall, his thrall, his thrall,
Is sweeter to him than the rich Honey fall;
There will he still reside,
There will he still reside,
For Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love,
Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, does Conquer one and all.
For Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, Love,
Love, Love, Love, Love, Love, does Conquer one and all.
FINIS.
Printed for B. Deacon, at the Angel in Gilt-spur-street.


