Balaams ASS Cudgeld: Or the Cry of TOWN and COUNTRY AGAINST Scandalous and
Seditious Scriblers.
WHat ailes the Ass? How comes the Beast to whine?
Has a been bred among King Pharaohs Kine?
Has the wet spring spoiled all the Corn and Grass?
that all the Country cannot keep an Ass?
He cries for bread, as if Duke Humphrey's Ghost
This twenty years and more had been his Host;
Will no man tic him up, but let him range,
Thus to disturb the City and the Change,
But this is a R^ligious Ass^, and cries
" O give him Bread of Life, or else he dies.
A subtle Ass, for well it is understood
He even thinks as much of Heavenly Food
As the poor Tailor, when he wants a Roll
To fill his belly, thinks upon his Soul.
You Ass in boots, if Cromwell or the Rump
Had given thee but a Living, had been plump,
Thou would have blessed 'em, and have been the man,
For maintenance to kiss the Alcoran.
I know not where a Homily is read
But, friend, a Homily is dainty bread.
^he Brewers grains out of a nasty Tub,
(...) fitter food for such a Swine or Cub.
Lawn Sleeves and Cassocks cannot please the Gizard
Of this seditious scandalizing Wizard;
Yet he pretends Canonical to be,
But Bell and Dragon is as much as he.
It Is not the Soul of this seditious sinner
That makes him bite, his belly wants a dinner;
And there is a reason for it I can tell ye,
Sometimes ill manners makes an empty belly.
To throw Seditious Scribles to the view
Of such a sick and giddy-headed crew,
As we have now amongst us, who by flirts
Change their Religions oftener than their shirts,
Does argue one that does employ his pate
To bring confusion on the Church and State.
The naked Indians would have scorned to be
So rudely barbarous to their Bramini.
The Ass, that State malevolence does brew,
Deserves a Bridle and a Halter too.
Are these the men of God? Does this behavior
Adorn the Gospel of our God and Savior?
Religious Renegados! Who to patch
Their broken desperate fortunes, daily watch,
Another opportunity, to bring
A second ruin on the Church and King.
You closely jerk at learned Laud, but see
All Laud is given to God, all shame to thee:
Had he but seen thy Crocodilian tears,
The Hang-mans Cat had eat thy Asses ears.
God save King CHARLES, and keep him from the sleight Of such Reformers as in Forty Eight.
Rob. Chamberlain.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1661.


