O Raree Show, O Pritee Show. Will you see my Fine SHOW.
I.
HERE be De ver pritte Show, just come from Parry;
Me show Shentlemen, to make you merry:
Here be De great Spring, Dat dance De Machine,
On which De Lovis Dors be de most plainly seen.
O Raree Show, O pritte Show.
II.
Here, first me present you vid, De dismal Disaster,
De Servant be hanga, for De serving De Master:
Here be De great Malbro who all De Vearld know,
Vas banished for sawcily beating De Foe:
O Raree Show, etc.
III.
Here be De great O -- d made General in Season,
Prohibit De Fighting, to bring France to Reason:
Here Britain, with Sacred Regard to Affiance,
Break Treaty, to strengthen the Band of Alliance.
O Raree Show, etc.
IV.
Here be De Vise Politician dispatched
To Parry; to treat a Peace Dey Der hatched:
Here be De Congress at Utricht, where noting is Brooded,
De Plenepoes meet, to agree what is concluded:
O Raree Show, etc.
V.
Here be De noter prittee Transaction,
To give Lovis all, gives Allies Satisfaction:
Here be De Politic Harlequin, mind him,
You never shall Twice in the same Posture find him.
O Raree Show, etc.
VI.
Here be De Addresses to De Trone of Great Britain,
Say Hereditary Right will make Hanover sit on:
Here be De good Protestant, who love no Priest Jerkin,
To save his Relishon looks to Lovis and Perkin:
O Raree Show, etc.
VII.
Here be De vise Politician Dat said it,
De sinking of Debts, be De restoring of Credit:
Here to preserve De Constitution of Britain,
A whole Dozen of Lords are made at a Sitting.
O Raree Show, O Prettee Show.
VIII.
Here be De Cabal of Whigs Dat are brought on
A hatching of Plots Dat no Soul ere tought on:
Here be de 500 l. for De taking Macartney,
Dis must be a Plot de Reward be so hearty.
O Raree Show, etc.
IX.
Here be De 50 l. for De Paul's Screws,
Which had Dey all gone had nere hurt De Pews:
Here be De Bandbox and Inkhorns, since the good Man survived it,
It Is not worth one Brass Farthing to know who contrived it.
O Raree Show, etc.
X.
Here be De Great D'Aumont's whole Cellar of Clarret,
Burnt by a Plot laid as high as the Garret:
Here be De 500 l. for De Letter Dat told it;
De Straw Garrateer can most likely unfold it.
O Raree Show, etc.
XI.
Here be De Skeleton, do no more Den his License intended,
By Advertisement, and Swearing is Nobly Defended:
Here be De go Volks, Dat of no Plot did tink,
Until Skeleton and Louis, first stirred up De Stink.
O Raree Show, etc.
XII.
Here be De Great Berwick just coming from Parry,
With a Damnable Plot to make De' Papists merry:
Now give De l'Argent; and when we have got 'em
Me show Chevelier de St. George at the Bottom.
O Raree Show, O Prittes Show.
O Raree Show, O prittee Show, Who see my Fine Show?


