A Song to his Excellency THE LD. GENERAL MONCK, AT Skinners-Hall on Wednesday
April 4. 1660. At which time he was entertained by that honorable COMPANY.
To the Tune of I Will never Leave thee more.
ADmire not noble Sir, that you should hear
B^asts echo out your acclamations here,
And those whom nature had tonguety'd, should break
There silent Chains your fulmouch'd praise to speak
It is no wonder Sir, since that to you
The admiration of a greaters due,
Whilst by your hands have curbed the furious rage
Of Steel, and have restored our golden age,
This British Isle by nature framed to be
Of the great World the grand Epitome
Whom Neptune circling in his briny arms
Has made secure from foreign foes alarmes,
And Providence so seated, that she seems
By her to prise all other Diadems;
And yet had she thus freed from foreign Wars
Rent her own Bowels with intestine jarres,
And when no force of supercilious Spain
Nor power of furious France could from her gain,
Her wealth and honor, she of both bereaves
Her self; and gives them to his basest slaves
He whose brave Heroes in the days of yore
Could beat down others Sceptors or restore
Them at her will: now did her own betray
And to her self, her self did make a prey.
Oh foolish Nation, whilst thou sought to bring
Subjection to thee from thy Sovereign King
Forgets in Bodies ruin must be red
When Members Rebels turn against the Head,
A people who turn Traitors to their King
Must needs themselves into destruction bring;
Most desperate is their case, nor can I rate
The mischiefs which succeed a headless State,
This you have proved, and now you sadly see
Rebellion recompensed with misery;
But i will be silent here, and will no more
Thus smartly rub you raw, and galled sore
Since here you came not to lament, or make
A Fast, but feast for your Redemptions sake,
And it was to you great Sir they did intend
And to your praise I should my Speeches bend
And think not Sir that your renowned name,
Receives detraction in the rols of fame
By being sung by me; for though that here
My guards and followers do not appear
To show my greatness yet at my Command
The Forests bow and as my Subjects stand
And though I boast my self a mighty King
My greatest Honor is your praise to sing
Let Rome no more her Fabius show or boast
His moderate prudence saved her being lost;
Since you have justly brag, your wife delays
Have saved a Nation Crowned your self with Baies.
Had you been furious any have cast the Dye
Of War, we now might all in ashes lie;
Triumphed one by our foes, when now we see
England restored to its Liberty
By this your prudence nothing now remains
But that you recompense our other pains,
And Crown your merits, whilst you and our strife
By giving Head as well as Body life.
The Members you have joined, yet they are but dead,
Whilst thus they stand dissever'd from the Head
Procyed then George, and as thou have brought down
The Traitors, so restore the lawful Crown,
That after ages may thee justly call
Restorer of thy Country, KING and all.
The Reader may take notice that this is the right Speech, sung by W. Yeokney.

LONDON: Printed for William Anderson, in the YEAR, 1660.


