Numb. 15 The Orange Gazette.
WITH ALLOWANCE.
From Friday February 22. to Tuesday February 26. 1688/9.
Paris, Febr. 26.
THis Afternoon the French King set forwards from Versailles, accompanied with
the Abdicated King of England, in order to visit his Maritime Towns in Normandy
and Picardy, taking with him his ablest Engineers, to strengthen and build
Forts on the Coast, to prevent, if possible, any Descent, which he fears will
be made upon the Country the ensuing War. And it is discoursed at Court, that so
soon as his Majesty has reviewed those Provinces, he will go in Person at the
Head of 80000 Men into Flanders, to act both against the Spaniard and Dutch.
Already the Dauphin has directions to hasten with 30000 Men thitherwards, and
take along with him for his Assistance the Mareschals de Humieres, and de
Duras, with instruction that he attempt no considerable Action without their
approbation and advice.

The King also appointed Monsieur the Duke of Orleans his Brother to move with
a considerable Force to the Rhine, and that the Mareschals Luxemburgh, de Lorge
and Bellefonds attend him thither. The Lord Dunbarton, it is said, will be made
a Marshall of France, and Command some part of the Army; he with Colonel
Sarsfield and other Officers, reported to be gone and Landed in Ireland, are at
present here: And upon the return of the Kings from Picardy, there is to be an
Extraordinary Council to carry on this Summers Expedition; and it is believed
the late King of England will be admitted therein.

Ditto. Two days before the French King set forward on his Journey, dispatched
away Count de Avaux, his late Ambassador in Holland, on some secret
Undertaking. And there be those at Court who conclude, that he goes for
Holland, to propose an Accommodation: But should it happen to be true, the
States General are too wise a People at this Juncture to hearken to any
Overtures of that Nature, well knowing, That his Gallick Majesty, who made War
for his Glory, would not offer Peace to his shame, if he were sensible he could
resist the powerful Torrent of all Christendom, his avowed Enemies that were
breaking in upon him. Since also the Prince of Orange, (now King of England)
which has done such a glorious Work for the British Nation, by rescuing it from
POPERY and SLAVERY, will undoubtedly perform the like to France, in conjunction
with the Confederates, restore his Highness of Lorrain to his Dukedom most
unjustly deprived, the Elector Palatine to his Principalities, all Germany to
their rightful Princes, (the Principaltiy of Orange to the Crown of England)
the French Nobility and Parliaments of that Kingdom to their ancient Splendour,
abolish the Gabels and prodigious Number of Taxes those miserable People labor
under, uninslave the Peasants, re-edifie the Protestant Churches, confirm the
Edict of Nants, and restore the true and ancient Gallican Liberties; and it is
not in the least to be doubted these things being premised, but the People of
that Kingdom will, with the same assurance, endeavor to accomplish the Work, as
those of England have done before them.

Ditto. The Dauphiness s^^t to the late Queen of England to desire her to
remove from her Apartment at Marli, and bring the Child she calls the Prince of
Wales along with her to Versailles; to be near her, during the Absence of the
Court. The late King has made the Count De Losun, who came lately in England to
Fight against the Prince of Orange, Steward of his Household: And his late
Majesty has dispatched Mr. Skeleton to the Emperor, to signify his Misfortune
Another Gentleman to the Pope, to endeavor to Compremize Matters between his
Holiness and the French King: But some believe it would have been more for his
Interest, and saved Charges, to have kept them at home.

Plymouth, Febr. 15.
We having this Afternoon received Advice of the Princess of Oranges's Landing
at Whitehall from Holland, fired 21 Guns from the City, and 9 from the Island,
and as many from the Dover Frigot riding in Port, who sails to morrow for
Portsmouth, to Convoy the Mary Ketch of London, John Holmes Master, bound from
New England with Masts for the Navy.

Ditto. The 19. The blessed News coming to us Yesterday, that WILLIAM and MARY
Prince and Princess of Orange were Proclaimed King and Queen of England, etc.
The Mayor, and Aldermen in their Formalities, with demonstration of their Joy
and Satisfaction, Drums beating, and Music playing before them, Proclaimed
them also this Morning, first before the Guild Hall, then on the New Key by the
Exchange, and afterward at the Barbican; and advancing to the Gate of the
Citadel, acquainted the Governor therewith, who immediately Fired all the
Cannon planted about it: The Island Seconded him, and all the Ships were not
wanting in doing the like, Displaying their Ancients as a Signal of their Joy.
This Day the Ship Ann of this Town, Henry Bastee^ Master, arrived here from
Majorca, and Sailed away for London forthwith. The French Banker of
Havre-de-grace some time detained, was cleared, and Sailed away for that Port.
Some Persons arriving here from that Place in France, Reports, That a very
great Consternation is all over the Country, upon the News of the Prince of
Orange being likely to be King of England, insomuch, that 1000 Men are Night
and Day at Work to strengthen our Fortifications, and more Cannon will be sent
to plant upon them.

Brumingham, Febr. 14.
This being our Market day, Mrs. Richardson, Housekeeper to Mr. Hicks
Schoolmaster in this Town, who has a great many Noblemen and Gentlemen's Sons to
Educate, bought 22 l. of Butter of a Popish Woman Higler, Tenant to our late
Popish High Sheriff Sh -- Esquire; and carrying the same home to expend in the
Family, cut one Pound thereof, and perceiving it discolored with yellow and
green spots, showed it to an Apothecary, who was of opinion it was poisoned;
which to prove, sent for two Dogs, and gave each the quantity of a Nutmeg, and
they both died within 10 and 14 minutes one of another. The Woman escaped out
of Town for the present, but we hear she is since apprehended for the same.

Black heath, Febr. 28.
This Morning his Majesty came early hither to view the Battalions designed for
Holland; and gave them his Thanks for the good Service they had rendered him in
England, ordering them, pursuant to the desire of the Honorable House of
Commons, a large Donative or Reward, which I am informed is in this following
Proportion, a Colonel 200 l. A Lientenant Colonel 150, a Major 100 l. a Captain
75 l. a Lieutenant 50. an Ensign 25 l. a Sergeant 12l. and every private
Sentinel 50 Shillings. The Horse and Foor are Embarquing at Greenwich, and will
Sail away forthwith.

Hampton Court, Febr. 23.
This Afternoon their Majesty's arrived here from Whitehall, designing to
remain in this place till Tuesday morning, taking a great good liking to the
situation and salubriousness of the Air, and walked out with Sir Christopher
Wren to view the Building, in order to make some Rep^^a^i^n therein. The next
day their Majesty's hear* Dr. Ll^yd, Bishop of St. Asaph, preach a Sermon in
the Chapel. In the Afternoon His Majesty rode out into (...) Park, and being a
glorious day alighted, and walked some considerable way on Foot. Sir. Heary
Hubbart this day kissed His Majesty's Hand, in order to ^^e Gentleman of the
Horse, the Here Overkerk being Master thereof.

London, Febr. 25.
This day we received a Spanish Post, which says, that the Queen of Spain was
dead, to the great Regret of the Court. A^^ that the King had ordered the new
^^^^ing of 4000 Foot, and 1000 Horse. And that 30 M^n of War, besides their
G^^^ies, be forthwith Equipped, to Cruise in the Mediterranean. And that a
Declaration of War against France was in the Press at Madrid, and already all
French Effects ordered to be s^iz^d (...) that Kingdom.

Francfort, Febr. 24.
The French has dec^ared and made out a List of 250 Towns, Burghs and Villages,
and added above 40 more to them, which they design to destroy on both sides the
Rhine, all the Villages about Manheime being included, have Orders to remove
their Effects in order thereunto. The Elector of Brandenburgh having received
Advice from his Minister at Ratisbonne, that the Dyer had fully resolved on a
War against France, ordered all his Forces, particularly those in Cologne to
all upon the French in any Quarter, by way of Reprizal, for the damage done by
them in the Durchy of Juliers, and Land of Bergues.

Brugz in Switzerland, Febr. 9.
The French having left off Fortifying of Greenezack during the Assembly of the
Cantons at Baden, had fallen to work again upon the separating of the Diet;
whereupon the Cantons of Basle finding themselves blocked up, represented to
the General Assembly how prejudicial it would be to their City in particular,
and all Switzerland in general: so they have unanimously in the Assembly come
to a Resolution to ra^e the said Citadel before it be advanced any further, and
also the Fortification the French have made at Huninghen; And that they will
execute this their Resolution by Force of Arms, except the French King, upon
their Application to him, will demolish them himself. And both the Evangelick
and Catholic Cantons are very Unanimous therein, Zurick having already got
together 6000 Men with Gannon, their Quota of Forces, in a readiness to march
upon the first occasion.

Whitehall, Febr. 23.
I am credibly assured, That his Majesty has appointed their Graces the Dukes
of Norfolk and Ormond, Earl of Oxford, Viscount Mordant, Lords Churchill and
Lumley, with the Here Benting, to be Lords of his Bedchamber: And the Earl of
Carberry, Admiral Herbert, Sir Tho. Lee, Sir John Louther, Sir Michael Wharton,
Sir John Chickley, and Mr. Sacheveril be Lords of the Admiralty: But the
Judges, Treasury, and Commissioners for the Great Seal, are not affixt, People
only Discoursing what these Phansies incline them to in the Matter.

St. James's Square, Febr. 23.
This Evening George Lord Savil, Younger Son of the Marquis Hallifax departed
this Life, after some days of Sickness, to the great Regret of that Honorable
Family, being a very Knowing and Promising Gentleman.

Advertisements.
This is to give Notice, That there is a small Number yet to be Sold of
Caryll's Exposition of JOB in Two large Volumes, Bound 40 s. Likewise a small
Number of Pool's Synopsis on the New Testament in Latin, in Two large Volumes,
was Printed above the Sets, for the Benefit of young Divines, are now sold very
cheap, the two Volumes in Quires 20 s. and well Bound 30 s. Likewise those that
want the whole Sets, or odd Volumes, may be supplied by William Marshall at the
Bible in Newgate-street, where those that have the First or Second Volume of
the Old Testament of the Synopsis, may receive money for them, or have them
supplied. Where you may likewise be supplied with Dr. Owen's late pieces, The
True Nature of a Gospel Church and its Government: And his Treatise of Sin and
Grace. And Mr. Knowles's Exposition on the whole Book of the Revelations.

A Pack of Cards, representing, in lively Cuts, the History of the late Times;
as of King William's coming to England. The Memorials and Invitation by the
Nobility. His whole Expedition. The Trials of the Bishops. The Birth of the
Child. The Earl of Essex's Death. Made and Sold by W. Bayley at the Sign of the
Knave of Clubs at the Bridge Foot in Southwark. And likewise Sold by Mr.
Vincent at the Temple gate, Mr. Mortlock in Westminster Hall, Mrs. Faltam at
the Parliament stairs, Mr. Scarsmeare in Cornhil, and most Booksellers at 12 d
a Pack.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, That in Grays Inn-Lane, in Plow-Yard,
lives Dr. Thomas Kirleus a Collegiate Physician, and his Late Majesty's sworn
Physician in Ordinary, who with a Drink and gentle Pill, hindering no Business,
Cures all Scabs, Scurffs, Itch, King's Evil, Leprosy, and Venereal Disease,
expecting nothing if he cures not. Of the last he has Cured above 500 Persons
in this City many after Fluxing. It quickly and safely Cures the Running of the
Reins, though with Sores and Swellings, which to do with Mercury is dangerous, if
not deadly. He uses outward means to all. The Drink is 3 s. a Quart. The Pills
1 s. a Box, which is Two Purges. They excel all Purges, in cleansing all
Impurities, and so prevent and cure many Diseases, and infallibly the Gout and
Stone, if taken as he shall direct. He gives his Opinion to all for nothing,
and his Medicines for little, but to the Poor for Thanks.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public Good,
That Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and
above 25 Years Practice, Lives at the Blue Ball in Whalebone Court, at the
Lower End of Bartholomew Lane, by the Royal Exehange. Who most Safely and
Expeditiously Cures Deafness, and Noises of the Ears in any, of what Age
soever, (if Curable) and at first sight, by Inspection, resolver the Patient if
so or not, as most Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Justisie. He
has likewise an Expeditious way in Curing all Pains of the Teeth, without
Drawing. He has likewise a most excellent Gargarism or Mouth-water, which
Cures any Canker, Ulcer, or Scurvy in the Mouth, fastening loose Teeth, and
making black ones as white as Ivory. His Pills only prepared for the French
Disease, and the Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several Prices,
with other Venereal Arcana's, as occasion require, with Directions.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridge. 1688/9.


