BRIEF MEMORIAL OF THE Loss of the Late Incomparable and Excellent Andrew Lord
Rutherford EARL of TEVEOT, etc. Killed by an Ambuscadoe of MOORS, May the 3d,
1664.


WE present the World with a draught of the fatal Field wherein to the grief
and unspeakable sorrow of all Men lies Carnaged the Body of that Illustrious
and most Heroical Person Andrew Lord Rutherford Earl of Teveot, together with
the Card of the Town of Tangier according to the exactest Delineation; wherein
he had the honor to command so successfully for his Majesty. The view will
contribute a great advantage to the piety of those Persons who would offer
their Tears at his Tomb, and the more unaffected be satisfied with the story
by these Particulars, which to a great expense we have caused to be Engraven.

As to the Relation of this sad story, the proceeding of it was thus. Upon May
the 3d. 1664. the Noble Governor calling to mind a brush he received from
Gayland that Day Twelve Month, and expecting an onset from him upon account of
that success, ordered the Doubling of the Guards of the Town, and a Company of
Foot to reinforce the Fort, having also received private Information from a Jew
of a part of the Moors in such a place, whither he would conduct him;
whereupon having left strict Orders concerning the Garrison, he advanced with
Five Hundred Men to the Jews River, (which you see in the Map) having the Jew
with him, and passing the said River, sent a Forlorn of Horse to secure the
Adjacent Fields, who seeing no Enemy alighted and fed the Horses, which the
Moors suffered from their Ambuscadoes, as sure of the whole Party; for upon
return of this Forlorn, with their News of no Enemy, my Lord marched forward,
and commanded his Party to fell down those Adjacent Woods where the Enemy had
lurked so often, and done so much mischief; but upon their approach the Enemy
issued our, and with great Numbers encompassed this small Party, and finally
butchered them all, very few escaping with the News: (...) And thus fell the
Most Excellent Rutherford by the Treachery of a damned Jew, whom the Power and
Force of no Enemy could Vanquish. Indeed no Fate could better suite his, nor
was any Place but the Field worthy of great Actions.

An ELEGY on His DEATH and Surprisal.
WE are not Conquered yet, the Sooty MOORE
Ere long will Veil, and give his Triumps over;
Yet we shall make this bold USURPER bow,
And fetch the Honor from his black eyed brow,
The LAUREL Crown for Warlike TEVEOT made
Snatched off by GAYLAND, withers in a shade:
Thy Valor is Eclipsed thou Son of Night,
Virtue from thy black Soul is darkened quite.
What Champion fought with greater bravery
Then fiery TEVEOT, which his Foes slavery
Could often manifest, each dreadful blow
Foretold the Enemy of his Overthrow,
In every Battle he would first engage,
The LIZBIAN Lion in his Rampant rage
Was his true EMBLEM, for his Enemies falls
His Warlike Drums beat doleful Funerals.
While thundering shot did fly back with the breath
Of fury, each Granado whispering death.
There in the clouds of Smoke with winged speed
DEATH galloped through the Army with a Reed,
To measure out the Graves, of them which he
Had sent to wander to Eternity.
But now the matchless TEVEOT is fallen down
Unto a Moore, for a more glorious Crown
Then that of LAUREL, not by VALOR KILLED
But treacherous AMBUSCADOES Hedges filled:
To Rifle this rich Cabinet of a Prize
More Good, more Glorious, then in India lies,
Then boast not Death, being slain by treachery
In this last Combat, he has conquered thee.
Jeremiah Rich.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1664.


