Dr. Wild's Poem. IN NOVA FERT ANIMVS, etc, OR, A NEW SONG TO AN OLD FRIEND
from an OLD POET, Upon the Hopeful New Parliament.
WE are All tainted with the Athenian-Itch,
News, and new Things do the whole World bewitch.
Who would be Old, or in Old fashions Trade?
Even an Old Whore would fain go for a Maid:
The Modest of both Sexes, buy new Graces,
Of Perriwigs for Pates, and Paint for Faces.
Some wear new Teeth in an old Mouth; and some
Carve a new Nose out of an aged Bum.
Old Hesiod's gods Immortal Youth enjoy:
Cupid, though Blind, yet still goes for a Boy;
Under one Hood Hypocrite Janus too,
Carries two faccs, one Old, the other New.
Apollo wears no Beard, but still looks young;
Diana, Pallas, Venus, all the throng
Of Muses Graces, Nymphs, look Brisk and Gay,
Priding themselves in a perpetual May.
Whiles doting Saturn, Pluto, Proserpin,
At their own ugly Wrinkles Rage and Grin;
The very Furies in their looks do twine;
Snakes, whose embroydered skyns nenew their shine;
And nothing makes Great Juno chafe and scold,
But Joves new Misses slighting her as Old.
Poets, who others can Immortal make,
When they grow Gray, their Laurels them forsake;
And seek young Temples, where they may grow Green;
No Palsie-hands may wash in Hypocrene;
'Twas not Terse Clarret, Eggs, and Muskadine,
Nor Goblets Crowned with Greek or Spanish Wine,
Could make new Flames in Old Ben Johnsons Veins,
But his Attempts proved lank and languid strains:
His New Inn (so he named his youngest Play)
Proved a blind Alehouse, cried down the first Day:
His own dull Epitaph -- Here lies Ben Johnson,
(Half drunken too) He Hickcupt -- who was once one.
Ah! this sad once one! once we Trojans were;
Oh, better never, if not still we are.
Rhymes, of Old Men, Iliack passions be,
When that should downward go, comes up we see,
And are like Jews-Ears in an Elder-Tree;
When Spectacles do once bestride the Nose,
The Poet's Gallop turns to stumbling-Prose.
Sir, I am Old, Cold, Mould; and you might hope
To see an Alderman dance on a Rope,
A Judge to act a Gallant in a Play,
Or an Old Pluralist Preach twice a day;
Of a Thin Tailor make a Valiant Knight,
Or a good Subject of a Jesuit;
As an old Bald-pate (such as mine- you know)
Should make his Hair, or Wit and Fancy grow
Nor is there need that such a Block as I
Should now be hewed into a Mercury.
When Winter's gone, the Owl his foot may spare,
And to the Nightingales resign the Air.
Such is the beautiful new face of things:
By Heavens kind Influences, and the Kings,
Joy should inspire; and all in measures move,
And every Citizen a Virgil prove.
Each Protestant turn Poet; and who not
Should be suspected guilty of the Plot;
If, now the day does dawn, our Cocks forbear
To clap their Wings and Crow, you well may swear,
It is their want of Loyalty, not Wit,
That makes them sullen, and so silent sit.
Galli of Gallick kind -- I Will say no more,
But that their Combs are Cut, and they are sore;
Yet to provoke them, my old Cock shall Crow,
That so his Echo round the Town may go.
Upon the New PARLIAMENT.
MY Landlord underprop't his House some years,
Was often warned -- 'Twould fall about his Ears;
For the main Timber, That above, and under,
By every Blast was apt to rend asunder.
This year He gently took all down, and then
What of the Old proved sound, did serve again.
May all the New be Heart of English Oak,
And the whole House stand firm from fatal strok,
And nothing in it, the Founder e're provoke.
My Grandam, when her Bees were old and done,
Burnt the old Stock, and a new Hive begun;
And in one year she found a greater store
Of Wax and Honey then in all before.
Variety and Novelty delights;
Old Shoes and Moldy Bread are Gibeonites.
When Clothes grow threadbare, and breeds Vermin too,
To Long Lane with them, and put on some new:
When Wine turns Vinegar -- All Art is vain,
The World can never make it Wine again.
It Is time to wean that Child, who bites the Breast;
And Chase those fowls that do befowl their Nest.
When Nolls Nose found the Rump began to smell;
He dock't it, and the Nation liked it well.
Cast the old-mark't and greazy Cards away,
And give's a new Pack, else we will not play;
Nothing but Pork, and Pork, and Pork, to eat!
Good Lanlord give's fresh COMMANS for our Meat.
Trent Council Thirty years lay sows'd in pickle,
Until it proved a stinking Conventicle.
And now Old Rome plays over her old Tricks,
This Seventy-nine, shall pay for Sixty-six:
Out of the Fire, like new refined Gold,
How bright new London looks above the Old,
All Creatures under Old Corruptions groan,
And for a New Creation make their moan:
The Phoenix (of her self grown weary) dies
Unto succession a burnt-sacrifice.
Old Eagles breed bad Hawks, and they worse Kites,
And they blind Buzzard (as Old Pliny Writes),
Deans, Prebends, Chaplains think themselves have wrong,
When Bishops live unmercifully long;
And poor Dissenters beg they may ascend
Into a Pulpit from the Tables end.
And who has not by good experience found
Best Crops are gained by new-broken ground,
And the first seed -- OATS sifted clean and sound?
But yet Old Friends, Old Gold, Old King, I praise:
Old Tyburn take them who do otherwise:
Heaven Chase the Vultur from our Eagles Nest,
And let no Ravens this March-Brood molest?
So Sings poor Robin Redbrest.
FINIS.

