The new PROJECTOR; OR The Privileged CHEAT: Who when Men do come to receive
Satisfaction, Does answer them all, I have got a PROTECTION.
I Am a Projector that always have thrived
by Sideing with every Faction;
I have to the bottom of Villianie dived,
and fitted my self for all Actions;
In every Corner my Springes I have set,
At Tennis, and Tables, and Billiards I Bet.
I Shuffle, and run into every Man's Debt:
But now I have got a Protection.
Since Sixteen hundred forty and two,
In the time of our first Distraction,
When paltrie People had nothing to do,
but Quarrel, and fall into Fraction;
The Caveliers Party I envyed most,
My Sanctified Zeal was as hot as a Toast,
We Fought for Religion until it was lost:
But now I have got a Protection.
I Canted in Scripture, I Taught in a Tub,
and gave them Divine Direction:
The Organ I turned into Dub, a dub, dub,
like a Babe of the new Election,
I reached at All, and every Thing
That would my own Advancement bring.
I aimed at the Bishop, and Shot at the King:
But now I have got a Protection.
I Preached, and Protested, I Plundered and Prayed,
and gave all the People Direction;
Who ever did Trust me, I always Betrayed
by civil and subtle Inspection.
When Oliver pulled the Long Parliament down
And set up the sign of the Red-nose and Crown,
I frighted the Caveliers dead with a frown;
Yet I have got a Protection.
But Oliver dyed, and I was to seek,
My spirits did suffer dejection:
I made my Address to his simple Son Dick,
A Prince of a frollick complexion;
A Man that loved Wine, and was given to Mirth
But had a small portion of politic Worth;
So down of a sudden dropped Richard the fourth:
And now he does want a Protection.
The Commitee of Safety I knew would not last,
It was of such cursed Confection;
The Weather I saw was so much over-cast,
That I looked for a Scottish Projection:
My fears come upon me, I sweat and I stunk,
And staggered in Judgment, like one that was drunk,
Then in came Pollitick General Monck,
And put me quite by my protection.
I smelt (by his drumming) that something was coming,
to purge all the Air of infection.
The Bonfires and Ringing, did usher the King in,
which altered the Zealots complexion;
Thought I; the Kings Party will be very strong
And therefore jle turn and be for him ding dong,
For I by my subtlety ere it be long,
shall get me a cheating protection
I mounted my Jennet to bring in the King
and rejoiced at his Resurrection,
My voice was well pitched, and my Hat I did fling,
in token and sign of Subjection;
I Capor'd, I Ranted, I Tipled for joy.
I called them all Roundheads that hindered my way,
I cast up my Cap, and cried Vive-le-Roy,
for which I have got a Protection.
I made a discovery of all that I knew,
who formerly were of my Faction:
I got me to Court, and in favor I grew,
amongst men of my own Complexion;
With Dice, Drink, and Drabb, I did swagger and roar,
And though I did cry Yea and Nay before,
Yet Damn me, Confound me, and Sink me I swore,
for then I had got a Protction.
My Debts were advanced to a terrible height,
which brought me so much in Subjection,
I should have been pressed to death with their weight,
if I had not used projection:
Cheapside and Paternoster-Row,
My crafty delusions do very well know;
For most of the Shops have my hand to show.
but now I have got a Protection.
The Draper, the Butcher, the Brewer and Baker,
are sensible of my Exaction,
The Presbyter, Brownists, and Seeker and Quaker,
are waiting for satisfaction:
But when in the streets they me espy,
They Will take an order with me they cry,
I swagger, and tell 'em all, damn me they lie
for now I have got a Protection.
You Merchants and Citizens that do live high
and are of a good Extraction,
Beware how you credit such Gamesters as I.
for Cheating is our Complexion:
The Court, and the City, and Country may rue,
The unfortunate season that ever they knew,
Such knaves as my self (give the Devil his due)
that Cosen men with a Protection.
London, Printed for William Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspur-street.


