A Song in Praise of the Leather Bottel.
Showing how Glasses and Pots are laid aside,
And Flaggons and Noggins they cannot abide;
And let all Wives do what they can,
It Is for the Praise and Use of Man;
And this you may very well besure,
The Leather Bottel will longest endure:
And I wish in Heaven his Soul may dwell;
That first devised the Leather Bottel.
To the Tune of, The Bottel-maker's Delight, etc.


GOd above that made all things,
The Heavens, the Earth, and all therein,
The Ships that on the Sea do swim,
To keep the Enemies out that none comes in;
And let them all do what they can,
It Is for the Use and Praise of Man:
And I wish in Heaven is Soul may dwell,
That first devised the Leather Bottel.
Then what do you say to those Cans of Wood?
In faith they are, and cannot be good;
For when a Man he does them send
To be filled with Ale, as he does intend;
The Bearer falls down by the way,
And on the ground the Liquor does lay;
And then the Bearer begins to ban,
And swoars it is long of the Wooden Can;
But had it been in a Leather Bottel,
Although he had fallen, yet all had been well:
And I wish, etc.
Then what do you say to those Glasses fine?
Yes, they shall have no Praise of mine;
For when a Company they are set
For to be merry, as we are met;
Then if you chance to touch the Brim,
Down falls the Liquor and all therein;
If your Table-cloath be never so fine,
There lies your Beer, Ale or Wine:
It may be for a small Abuse,
A young Man may his Service lose:
But had it been in a Leather Bottel,
And the Stopple in, then all had been well:
And I wish, etc.
Then what do you say to these black Pots three?
True, they shall have no Praise of me,
For when a Man and his Wife falls at Strife,
As many have done, I know, in their Life;
They lay their Hands on the Pot both,
And loath they are to lose their Broth;
The one does tug, the other does ill,
Betwixt them both the Liquor does spill;
But they shall answer another Day,
For casting their Liquor so vainly away:
But had it been in the Leather Bottel,
They might have tugged, till their Hearts did ache,
And yet their Liquor no harm could take:
They might have rugg'd, till their Hearts did ache:
Then I wish, etc.
Then what do you say to the Silver Flaggons fine?
True, they shall have no Praise of mine;
For when a Lord he does them send
To be filled with Wine as he does intend;
The Man with the Flaggon he does run away,
Because it is Silver most gallant and gay:
O then the Lord he begins to ban,
And swears he has lost both Flaggon and Man;
There is never a Lord's Serving man, or Groom,
But with his Leather Bottel may come:
Then I wish, etc.
A Leather Bottel we know is good,
Far better than Glasses or Cans of Wood,
For when a Man is at work in the Field,
Your Glasses and Pots no Comfort will yield;
Then a good Leather Bottle standing him by,
He may drink always when he is a dty;
It will revive the Spirits and comfort the Brain,
Wherefore let none this Bottle refrain:
For I wish, etc.
Also the honest Sith-man too,
He knew not very well what to do,
But for his Bottle standing him near,
That is filled with good Houshold-beer:
At Dinner he sits him down to eat,
With good hard Cheese, and Bread or Meat;
Then this Bottle he takes up amain,
And drinks and sets him down again;
Saying, Good Bottle, stand my Friend,
And hold out till this Day does end:
For I wish, etc.
And likewise the Hay-makers they,
When as they are turning and making their Hay,
In Summer-weather, when as it is warm,
A good Bottel full then will do them no harm;
And at Noon-time they sit them down,
To drink in their Bottles of Ale nut-brown;
Then the Lads and Lasses begins to tattle,
What should we do but for this Bottle?
They could not work if this Bottle were done,
For the Day's so hot with heat of the Sun:
Then I wish, etc.
Also the Leader, Lader, and the Pitcher,
The Reaper, Hedger, and the Ditcher,
The Binder, and the Raker, and all
About the Bottel's Ears does fall;
And if his Liquor be almost gone,
His Bottel he will part with to none,
But says, My Bottel is but small,
One Drop I will not part withal:
You must go drink at some Spring or Well,
For I will keep my Leather Bottel:
Then I wish, etc.
Thus you may hear of a Leather Bottel,
When at it is filled with Liquor full well,
Though the Substance of it be but small,
Yet the Name of the thing is all.
There Is never a Lord, Earl, or Knight,
But in a Bottel does take Delight;
For when he is hunting of the Deer,
He often does wish for a Bottle of Beer:
Likewise the Man that works at the Wood,
A Bottel of Beer does often do him good:
Then I wish, etc.
Then when this Bottel does grow old,
And will good Liquor no longer hold,
Our of the Side you may take a Clout,
Will mend your Shoes when they are worn out;
Else take it and bang it upon a Pin,
It will serve to put many odd Trifles in,
As Hinges, Awls, and Candle-ends,
For young Beginners must have such things:
Then I wish in Heaven his Soul may dwell,
That first devised the Leather Bottel.
London: Printed by and for W. ^. and sold by J. Walter, at the Hand and Pen in
High Holbourn.


