The False TEST Set in a TRUE LIGHT.
Being a full Confutation of Two Scandalous and Villainous Papers, [One
entitled, A TEST offered to the Consideration of the Electors of
Great Britain; the Other entitled, A LIST of the Honorable House of Commons
that voted for and against the Clause of the Hanover Succession in the Year
1702.] by Extracts made from the Journals of the Honorable House of Commons, (
attested by Paul Jodrell, Esquire) and from the London-Gazette of Thursday, March
18. 1702.
THE false and scandalous Papers abovementioned, having, with great Industry
and Malice been spread throughout this Kingdom, in order to asperse the
Characters of the several Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen therein represented
as Enemies to the Illustrious House of Hanover, and to hinder their being
elected Members of the ensuing Parliament: Therefore, for the right Information
of the Electors, for vindicating the Reputation of the Candidates, and for
giving a full, authentic, and satisfactory Answer to the said False,
Scandalous and Seditious Pamphlets, These Abstracts from the Gazette's are made
public.

Extract from the Gazette of Saturday, Sept. 30. 1710.
WHereas Two printed Papers, one entitled, A Test offered to the Consideration
of the Electors of Great Britain; and the other entitled, A List of the
Honorable House of Commons that voted for and against the Clause for the
Hanover Succession, in the Year 1702. are lately dispersed Abroad; wherein are
mentioned Amendments made by the Lords to the Bill entitled, An Act for
enlarging the Time for taking the Oath of Abjuration, and also for
recapacitating and indemnifying such Persons as have not taken the same by the
Time appointed: And that the House of Commons, the 13th of February, 1702, took
those Amendments into Consideration.

(Price One Penny.)

And whereas, after setting forth, verbatim, the Clause following, viz.

And for the further Security of Her Majesty's Person, and the Succession of
the Crown in the Protestant Line, and for extinguishing the Hopes of the
Pretended Prince of Wales, and all other Pretenders, and their open and secret
Abettors; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
or Persons, at any time after the first day of March, 1702. shall endeavor to
deprive or hinder any Person, who shall be the next in Succession (...) the
Crown for the time being, according to the Limitations in an Act entitled, An
Act declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and settling the
Succession of the Crown, And according to the other Act, entitled, An Act for
the further Limitation of the Crown, and better securing the Rights and
Liberties of the Subject, from succeeding after the Decease of Her Majesty
(whom God long preserve) to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and the Dominions
and Territories thereunto belon^ng, according to the Limitations in the
beforementioned Acts; that is to say, such Issue of Her Majesty's Body, as
shall from time to time be next in Succession to the Crown, if it shall please
God Almighty to bless Her Majesty with Issue; and during the time Her Majesty
shall have no Issue, the Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of
Hanover; and after the Decease of the said Princess Sophia, the next in
Succession to the Crown for the time being, according to the Limitations of the
said Acts; and the same maliciously, advisedly and directly shall attempt, by
any Overt Act or Deed: Every such Offense shall be adjudged High Treason, and
the Offender or Offenders therein their Abettors, Procurers and Comforters,
knowing the said Offense to be done, being thereof convicted or attainted,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, shall be deemed and adjudged
Traitors, and shall suffer Pains of Death, and all Losses and Forfeitures, as
in Cases of High Treason.

And also, after setting forth the Substance of other Clauses, (other of the
said Amendments) it is said in the said Printed Papers thus; After Debate, the
Question being put for agreeing with the Lords in these Amendments, the House
divided.

And at the end of the said Printed Papers it is said: To this happy Majority,
though but of one Vote, we owe so excellent a Law, so great a Strengthening to
the Protestant Succession in the Illustrious House of Hanover, upon the
supporting of which our Religion and Liberties, and all that is dear to any true
British Protestant, does entirely depend.

Now I (being required to certify the Truth of the Fact, as it appears by the
Journal of the House of Commons) do humbly certify as follows, viz.

That it does appear by the Journal of the House of Commons, of the Session of
Parliament begun in October, 1702 as also by the Original Minute Books thereof,
That the said Clause set forth at large as aforesaid, (and which was marked B)
was agreed to by the House of Commons, without any Division thereupon: And that
the Division that was in the House upon the 13th Day of February, ( upon which
the Number of the Yea's were 118, and No's 117) was upon a precedent Amendment,
viz. upon a Clause marked A, which is as follows:

Provided always, that no Person or Persons, who, by reason of any such
Mistake, Neglect or Omission, has or have left or forfeited and Office,
Benefice; Place, Dignity or Employment whatsoever, to which any other Person or
Persons has or have been preferred or promoted, shall be restored to such
Office, Benefice, Place, Dignity or Employment; Any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And the other Amendments made by the Lords to the said Bill were agreed to by
the House of Commons, without and Division.

PAVL JODRELL, Cler' Dom' Com'
29. Sep. 1710.
It appears by this Certificate of Mr. Jodrell, upon what Clause the Division
was not, and upon what Clause it was; and that the Clause, upon which the House
divided, had not the least relation to the Security of the Protestant
Succession. And it is evident, that had the Clause, upon which the Division
was, been rejected, the Protestant Succession had been equally secured by the
Clause upon which there was no Division, and which passed without any
Contradiction. All the Difference between those who disagreed, and those who
agreed to the Clause, was, that the Former would have the Benefit of the Act
for Enlarging the Time for taking the Oath of Abjuration, etc. extend to All
who had not taken that Oath within the Time limited, whether their Places were
filled, or not; whereas the Latter were for excluding all such from the same
Benefit, whose Places were filled: The Former were for granting the same Favor
to all Persons who had an Equal Pretension to it; the Latter for denying it to
those, whose Misfortune it was, but not their Fault, to have their Places not
only forfeited, but filled; that is, they were for denying Now (after this
Amendment was sent down from the Lords) that Favor to Some, which they
Themselves, as well as Others, had granted to All, before the Bill was sent up
to the Lords.

This is a plain and full Answer to all the Cavils and Artifices which have
been made use of, in order to evade a Charge of Malicious Forgery in framing a
List, whereby many Gentlemen of the greatest Families and Fortunes have been
basely traduced as Enemies to the Protestant Succession, and the Illustrious
House of Hanover.

This Attempt is the more scandalous and inexcusable, because when Mr. Dyer
had, in his News-Letters, affirmed, That the Commons had divided about the
Clause relating to the Succession, a Prosecution of him was ordered by the
House of Commons, as appears from this following

Extract from the Gazette of Thursday, March 18. 1702.
JOhn Dyer, a Writer of News, having in his Papers of the 18th of the last
Month, inserted the following Words, viz. The Commons today agreed to the
Amendments made by the Lords to the Abjuration Bill, but divided upon that
which relates to the Succession, but carried it. Yeas 118. Noes 117. whereas
there was no Division upon any part of the Bill which relates to the
Succession, or that makes it High Treason to alter the Succession, as it is now
established by Law; but the same passed WITHOUT ANY CONTRADICTION: The House of
Commons taking Notice of this false and scandalous Report, ordered the said
Dyer to appear at the Bar of the House; but he not appearing, and the Sessions
being near an End, they farther ordered he should be found out and prosecuted
for the same; and he being taken into Custody, is to make his Appearance at the
Court of Queen's-Bench, the first Day of next Term: And Her Majesty has been
pleased to give Directions to the Attorney General, to prosecute him according
to Law, for publishing the said false, scandalous, and seditions News.

Upon the whole; The Only Matter now in debate, is, Whether the Gentlemen
accused did Vote against the Clause for Securing the Protestant Succession, or
not? and by Consequence, Whether they are rightly represented as Enemies to the
Illustrious House of Hanover, or not? To this Question, the Authors, Spreaders,
and Abettors of this new Black List, have, in the Face of all the World, said,
Yea; they did Vote against the Clause, they are Enemies to the House of
Hanover: To the same Question, every British-Subject, to whom this Paper shall
reach, will be able, from Unquestionable Authority, to say, No; they did not
Vote against that Clause; they are not Enemies, but hearty Friends, to the
Illustrious House of Hanover: And, to do them Right, and to give them an
Opportunity of doing themselves Right, I will heartily espouse and vigorously
promote their Interest in the ensuing Elections.

Printed for Jonah Bowyer, at the Rose in Ludgate Street. 1710.


