An Exact Description of the Growth, Quality and Virtues of the Leaf TEA. BY
Thomas Garway in Exchange-Alley near the Royal Exchange in London, Tobacconist,
and Seller and Retailer of TEA and COFFEE.
TEA is generally brought from China, and grows there upon little Shrubs or
Bushes, the Branches whereof are well garnished with white Flowers that are
yellow within, of the bigness and fashion of sweet Brier, but in smell unlike,
bearing thin green leaves about the bigness of Scordium, Myrtle, or Sumack, and
is judged to be a kind of Sumack: This Plant has been reported to grow wild
only, but does not, for they plant it in their Gardens about four foot
distance, and it grows about four foot high, and of the Seeds they maintain
and increase their Stock. Of all places in China this Plant grows in greatest
plenty in the Province of Xemsi Latitude 36. degrees, bordering upon the West
of the Province of Honam, and in the Province of Namking near the City of
Lucheu, there is likewise of the growth of Sinam, Cochin-China, the Island de
Ladrones and Japan, and is called Cha. Of this famous Leaf there are diverse
sorts (though all of one shape) some much better than other, the upper Leaves
excelling the other in fineness, a property almost in all Plants, which Leaves
they gather every day, and drying them in the shade, or in Iron pans over a
gentle fire till the humidity be exhausted, then put up close in Leaden pots,
preserve them for their Drink Tea, which is used at Meals, and upon all Visits
and Entertainments in private Families, and in the Palaces of of Grandees: And
it is averred by a Padre of Macao Native of Japan, that the best Tea ought not
to be gathered but by Virgins who are destined to this work, and such,
Quaenondum Menstrua patiuntur: gemmae quae nascuntur in summitate arbuscula
servantur Imperatorie, ac praecipuis ejus Dynastis; quae autem infra nascuntur,
ad latera, populo conceduntur. The said Leaf is of such known virtues, that
those very Nations so famous for Antiquity, Knowledge and Wisdom, do frequently
sell it among themselves for twice its weight in Silver, and the high
estimation of the Drink made therewith has occasioned an inquiry into the
nature thereof among the most intelligent persons of all Nations that have
traveled in those parts, who after exact Trial and Experience by all ways
imaginable, have commended it to the use of their several Countries, for its
Virtues and Operations, particularly as follows, viz.

The Quality is moderately hot, proper for Winter or Summer.

The Drink is declared to be most wholesome, preserving in perfect health
until extreme Old Age.

See Lovell. Herbal.
The particular Virtues are these.

It makes the Body active and lusty.

It helps the Headache, giddiness and heaviness thereof.

It removes the Obstructions of the Spleen.

It is very good against the Stone and Gravel, cleansing the Kidneys and
Vriters being drank with Virgins Honey instead of Sugar.

It takes away the difficulty of breathing, opening Obstructions.

It is good against Lipitude Distillations, and clears the Sight.

It removes Lassitude, and cleanses and purifieth adust Humors and a hot
Liver.

It is good against Crudities, strengthening the weakness of the Ventricle or
Stomach, causing good Appetite and Digestion, and particularly for Men of a
corpulent Body, and such as are great eaters of Flesh.

It vanquisheth heavy Dreams, eases the Brain, and strengthens the Memory.

It overcomes superfluous Sleep, and prevents Sleepiness in general, a draught
of the Infusion being taken, so that without trouble whole nights may be spent
in study without hurt to the Body, in that it moderately heateth and binds
the mouth of the Stomach.

It prevents and cures Agues, Surfets and Fevers, by infusing a fit quantity
of the Leaf, thereby provoking a most gentle Vomit and breathing of the Pores,
and has been given with wonderful success.

It (being prepared and drank with Milk and Water) strengthens the inward
parts, and prevents Consumptions, and powerfully asswageth the pains of the
Bowels, or griping of the Guts and Looseness.

It is good for Colds, Dropsies and Scurveys, if properly infused, purging the
Blood by Sweat and Urine, and expels Infection.

It drives away all pains in the Colic proceeding from Wind, and purges
safely the Gall.

And that the Virtues and Excellencies of this Leaf and Drink are many and
great, is evident and manifest by the high esteem and use of it (especially of
late years) among the Physicians and knowing men in France, Italy, Holland and
other parts of Christendom; and in England it has been sold in the Leaf for
six pounds, and sometimes for ten pounds the pound weight, and in respect of
its former scarceness and dearness, it has been only used as a Regalia in high
Treatments and Entertainments, and Presents made thereof to Princes (...) a
Grandees till the year 1657. The said Thomas Garway did purchase a quantity
thereof, and first publicly sold the said Tea in Leaf and Drink, made
according to the directions of the most knowing Merchants and Travelers into
those Eastern Countries: And upon knowledge and experience of the said Garway's
continued care and industry in obtaining the best Tea, and making Drink
thereof, very many Noblemen, Physicians, Merchants and Gentlemen of Quality
have ever since sent to him for the said Leaf, and daily resort to his House in
Exchange-Alley aforesaid to drink the Drink thereof.

And that Ignorance nor Envy may have no ground or power to report or suggest
that what is here asserted of the Virtues and Excellencies of this precious
Leaf and Drink has more of design than truth, for the justification of himself
and satisfaction of others, he has here innumerated several Authors, who in
their Learned Works have expressly written and asserted the same, and much more
in honor of this noble Leaf and Drink, viz. Bontius, Riccius, Jarricus,
Almeyda, Horstius, Alvarez Semeda, Martinious in his China Atlas, and Alexander
de Rhodes in his Voyage and Missions in a large discourse of the ordering of
this Leaf, and the many Virtues of the Drink, printed at at Paris 1653. part.
10. Chap. 13.

And to the end that all Persons of Eminency and Quality, Gentlemen and others,
who have occasion for Tea in Leaf may be supplied. These are to give notice,
that the said Thomas Garway has Tea to sell from sixteen to fifty Shillings
the pound.

And whereas several Persons using Coffee, have been accustomed to buy the
powder thereof by the pound, or in lesser or greater quantities, which if kept
two days loses much of its first Goodness. And forasmuch as the Berries
after drying may be kept if need require some Months; Therefore all persons
living remote from London, and have occasion for the said powder, are advised
to buy the said Coffee Berries ready dried? which being in a Mortar beaten, or
in a Mill ground to powder, as they use it, will so often be brisk, fresh, and
fragrant, and in its full vigor and strength as if new prepared, to the great
satisfaction of the Drinkers thereof, as has been experienced by many in this
City. Which Commodity of the best sort, the said Thomas Garway has always
ready dried to be sold at reasonable Rates.

Also such as will have Coffee in power, or the Berries undryed, or Chocalata,
may by the said Thomas Garway be supplied to their content: With such further
Instructions and perfect Directions how to use Tea, Coffee and Chocolata, as
is, or may be needful, and so as to be efficatious and operative, according to
their several Virtues.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
That Nicholas Brook, living at the Sign of the Drying Pan in St. Tulies-street
against the Church, is the only known man for making of Mills for grinding of
Coffee powder, which Mills are by him sold from 40. to 45. shillings the Mill.


