The poor Man's Counselor, OR, The married man's Guide.
If God have blessed thee with a careful wife
Take my directions how to lead thy life,
Tho Riches thou do want yet thou shall find
Far greater wealth in a contented mind,
Thy honest labor shall thy charge maintain,
Being truly got, not by unlawful gain.
Tune of, The Poor Man's Comfort,






COme friend if thy leisure permit thee to stay,
I Will teach thee some precepts the same to obey,
Now thou have betaken thy self to a Wife
How thou may live happy all days of thy life,
Then take my directions tho thou art but poor
I Will learn thee to keep the wolf from the door.
It Is not all men's fortune great Riches to have
And they that have little have most need to save,
For Riches have wings and away they will fly
And leave them forsaken that once were so high,
A little is better with peace and content
Then wealth in abundance in misery spent.
The wealth of the world does too many bewitch
And they are too blame that make have to be rich
For goods ill gotten like snow-bals will wast
And he that was rich shall be poor at the last.
Therefore be content with a lowly degree
And God will provide in due time you shall see.
If thou have a wife that is loving and kind
Great comfort in her at all times thou will find
Whatever betide thee she will bear a share
And help to advize thee in woe or welfare,
Then strive not her patience at all to provoke
But freely submit to draw both in a yoke.


A wife that is froward I do not commend
What thou do take pains for she will lavishly spend
And do what thou can for to humor her still
She Will hold thee in scorn if she want of her will,
Make much of thy wife that is loving and chaste
For she will be saving and fearful to wast.
Each morning when thou do thy labor begin
Have God in thy mind 'twill keep thee from sin
A penny hard earned, since it is thy lot
Will do thee more good than a pound that's ill got,
Then labor to thrive by the sweat of thy brows
For that's the best way all honest men knows.
If God give a blessing that Children you have
The more you must labor in time for to save
And do not you murmr and count them a charge
The better you will thrive, and your stock will enlarge
It Will be a great comfort thy children to see
If that they obedient and dutiful be.
Let no man entice thee thy money to wast
Be careful to spare and lay up what thou have
Whoever shall ask thee, he is not thy friend
To go to the Alehouse thy money to spend,
Avoid such bad courses as bring men to want
And thou shall have plenty when others have scant.
Lewd houses and Gaming be sure that you shun
There Is many frequent them and so are undone
By such bad companions a man that is misled
May quickly be brought to a morsel of bread
A cup of good liquor at home with thy wife
Will cheer up your hearts, and prevent farther strife.
Be courteous and kind to thy neighbors abo^
And then they will love thee thou need not t^ (...)
Avoid all contention with strife and debate
For that will procure thee all honest men's h^^^
Be civil to all men as they are to thee
Then kindly respected thou surely shall be,
If times do prove hard and Money be scant,
Then labor for little before you do want,
And thankfully take whatsoever God sends
As times do grow better it will make amends
A dinner of Herbs with content serves as w^^^
As all the rich dainties which far does excel.
When thou for thy labor some Money have g^^
Be sure do not spend it in tossing the pot,
Make haste to thy wife and children small,
And that will supply when they for bread do c^^^
'Twould be a great grief to thee whilst thou d^ (...)
To hear thy Babes cry and have nothing to (...)
Whatever affliction befall thee or thine,
Yet do not thou murmur or seem to repine,
For God that has given thee mean to subsist
Can take it away whenever he list,
Therefore be contented whatever betide,
Submit with all patience and God will provi^^
Take care to remember what here I have told
And value it dearer then silver or gold,
When thou art inclined to wander astray
Perhaps it may bring thee into the right way
And by thy example all others may see,
It Is good to be careful and live honestly.

