An Amorous Dialogue between John and his Mistress.
Being a complete and true Relation of some merry passages between the Mistress
and her Apprentice, who pleased her so well, that she rewarded him with fifty
broad pieces for his pains.

Here by this Dialogue you may discern,
While old Cats nibble Cheese the young ones learn.
To the Tune of, Packington's pound, or, What should a young woman, etc. or,
Captain Digby.




^Ome John fit thee down I have somewhat to say,
In my mind I have kept it this many a day,
^ur Master you know is a Fool and a Sot,
^d minds nothing else but the Pipe and the Pot:
^ll twelve or till one he will never come home,
and then he is so drunk that he lies like a Mome:
Such usage as this would make any one mad,
But a Woman will have it if it is to be had.
It Is true forsooth Mistress, the case is but hard,
That a woman should be of her pleasure debarred:
But it is the sad fate of a thousand beside,
Or else the whole City is foully beli'd:
There is not a man among twenty that thrives,
Not ten in fifteen that do lie with their Wives,
Yet still you had better be merry than sad,
And take it where ever it is to be had.
But John, it is a difficult matter to find,
A man that is trusty and constantly kind:
An Inns-of-Court Gallant he cringes and bows,
He Is presently known by his Oaths and his Vows,
And though both his clothes and his speeches be gay,
Yet he loves you but only a night and away:
Such usage as this would make any one mad,
Yet a Woman will have it, if it is to be had.
What think you of one that belongs to the Court,
They say they are youthful, and given to sport:
He Will present you with bracelets, and jewels, and Rings,
With stones that are precious, and twenty fine things:
Or if you are not for the Court nor the Town,
What think you forsooth of a man with a Gown?
You must have a gallant, a good or a bad,
And take it where ever it is to be had.
The Second Part,
to the same Tune.
NO John, I confess that not any of these,
Had ever the power my fancy to please;
I like no such blades for a trick that I know,
For as soon as they have trod they are given to crow;
Plain dealing is best, and I like a man well,
That when he has kissed will be hanged e're he will tell:
My ^eaning is honest, and thou art the Lad,
Then give it and take it where it is to be had.
Alas! my dear mistress, it never can be,
That you can affect such a fellow as me:
Yet heaven forbid since I am but your man,
I should ever refuse to do all that I can;
But then if my master should know what we have done
We both should be blown up as sure as a Gun:
For after our joys, he would make us as sad,
For taking it where it ought not to be had.
But how should he know it thou scrupulous Elf,
Do think i am so silly to tell him my self?
If we are but so wise our own counsel to keep,
We may laugh and lie down while the sot is asleep:
Some hundreds I know in the city that use,
To give to their men what their masters refuse:
The man is the master, the Pren^ice the Dad,
For women must take it where it is to be had.
Some Prentices use it, forsooth, I allow,
But I am a Novice and cannot tell how:
However, I hope that I shall not be blamed,
For to tell you the truth I am somewhat ashamed;
I know how to carry your Bible to Church,
But to play with my mistress i am left in the lurch:
Yet if you can show me the ^ay good or bad,
I Will promise you all that there is to be had.
You quickly may learn it, my Iohnny, for* Thus,
Before you proceed we begin with a buss;
And then you must clasp me about with your arm,
Nay, fear me not Iohnny i will do thee no harm:
Now I sigh, now I tremble, now backwards I lie,
And now dear Iohnny, ah now I must dye:
Oh! who can resist such a mettle-some Lad,
And refuse such a pleasure when it is to be had.
Alas, pretty mistress the pleasure is such,
We never can give one another too much:
If this be the business, the way is so plain,
I think I can easily find it again:
'Twas Thus we began; and*. Thus we lie down,
And thus* Oh thus! that we fell in a swoun:
Such sport to refuse who was ever so mad,
I Will take it where ever it is to be had.
Now Iohnny you talk like an ignorant mome,
You can have such pleasure no where but at home,
Here Is fifty broad pieces for what you have done,
But see that you never a gadding do run;
For no new employment then trouble your brains,
For here when you work you will be paid for your pains
But should you deceive me no woman's so sad,
To lose all the pleasure that once she has had.
A mistress so noble I never will leave,
'Twere a sin and a shame such a friend to deceive;
For my Masters shop no more will I care,
It Is pleasanter handling my mistrisses ware:
A fig for Indentures for now I am made,
Free of a Gentiles and pleasanter trade:
I know when i am well, I was never so mad.
To forsake a good thing when it is to be had.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-ball, near the Hospital-gate, in
West-smith-field.


