Money makes the Mare to go, OR, An Excellent new Song of the subtle shirking
Sharpers, Mountebanks, Juglers, Gamesters, and many others of the like faculty.
To the Tune of Four-pence-half-penny Farthing.
This may be Printed, R. P.



It Is Money makes the Mare to go,
then who can live without it,
The Rich Men make a taring show,
but poor men they are flouted:
Rich Men get money still, they get money still,
when e're they get a bargain,
The poor may pine, for want of coin,
they value them not a farthing.
The farmer he does drudge and toil,
and so must all about him,
He rides to market many a Mile,
there is none can live without him:
If he gets money by it, he gets money by it,
he gets money by the bargain.
Through thick and thin, and wet to the skin,
he matters it not a farthing.
The Shopkeeper will cog and lie,
believe him, you are undone,
He Will vow such goods you cannot buy,
of never a one in London:
But he gets money by it, he gets money
he gets money by the bargain,
Though he tells ye a lie, with a reason why,
and vows he gets never a farthing.
The Mountebank upon his Stage,
declares his skill in Physic.
No Pill prepared in this our age,
like his to cure the Ptisick:
If he gets money by it, he gets money by it,
he gets money by the bargain,
For Twelve-pence still, he will sell you a Pill,
is hardly worth a farthing.




Besides there is a Perjured crew,
for Money, if you will crave it;
They Will swear the Crow is white or blew,
or what you will please to have it:
If he gets money by it, he get's money by it
he gets money by the, bargain,
Though falsely he swears, till he loose his ears,
he value's it not a farthing.
The Iugler he will Yawl aloud,
and make a thousand faces,
Then after he has called a Crowd
he will Spue up Ribbons and laces,
When he gets money by it, he gets money by it,
he gets money byt'h bargain,
To show you a trick with his Balls and Stick,
for every penny and farthing.
Besides there is a Theeving crew,
that Robs both late and early,
At length to give the Deel his due,
Jack Ketch he hangs them fairly:
Thus he gets money by it, he gets money by it,
he gets money by the bargain,
If they have no cole, they into the hole,
he vallues them not a farthing.
The Gamester must not be forgot,
for he above all other
When e're it happens to his lot,
he will strive to Cheat his Brother,
If he gets money by it, he gets money by it,
he gets money by the bargain,
He Will Ramble abroad to cheat and defraud,
yet vallue's it not a farthing.
The Buxome Lass she comes to town,
when Guinneys may bewitch her,
It Is ten to one er'e she goes down,
but she may crack her Pitcher;
Thus she gets money by it, she gets money by it,
she gets money by the bargain,
She often has said, that her Maidenhead,
she vallued not a farthing.
The force of money I have told,
and now my Songs here ended,
To whom those Ballads shall be sold,
by them I am befriended
Thus I get money by it, I get money by it,
get money by the bargain,
Come every one that I may have done,
their very well worth four farthings.
Printed for. I. Deacon, at the Angel, in Guiltspur-street, without Newgate.


