A Strange BANQUET: OR, THE Devil's Entertainment by Cook Laurel, AT The PEAK
in DERBY-SHIRE; WITH An Account of the several DISHES served to TABLE.
To the Tune of, Cook Laurel, etc.


COok Laurel would have the Devil his Guest,
and bid him home to Peak to dinner,
Where Fiend never had such a feast,
prepared at the charge of a Sinner;
With a hey down, down, a down, down.
His stomach was quesie, he came thither coach'd,
the joggings had caused his cruets to rife,
To help which, he called for a Puritan poach'd,
that used to turn up the white of his eyes;
With a hey, etc.
And so he recovered unto his wish;
he sat him down and began to eat:
A Promooter in blumb broth was the first dish,
his own privy-kitchin had no such meat;
With a hey, etc.
Yet though with this he much was taken,
upon a sudden he shifted his trencher,
As soon as he spied the Bawd and bacon,
by which you may know the Devil's a Wencher;
With a hey, etc.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
with Semsters and Tire-woman, fit for his pallet,
With Feathermen and Perfumer's, put
some twelve in a charger, to make a grand-salet;
With a hey, etc.
A rich fat Vserer stewed in his marrow,
with him a Lawyer's head and green sauce,
All which his belly took in like a barrel,
as though till then he had never seen sauce;
With a hey, etc.
Then carbonado'd and cooked with pains,
was brought up a Seajeant's cloven face,
The sauce was made of a Yeoman's brains,
that had been beaten out with his mace;
With a hey, etc.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board,
the feast had nothing been without them,
Both living and dead were foxed and fur'd,
and their chains like sassages hung about them;
With a hey, etc.
The next dish was the Mayor of the Town,
with a pudding of maintenance put in his belly,
Like a goose in her feathers, in his gown,
with a couple of Hinch-boys boiled to a jelly;
With a hey, etc.
Next came the overworn Justice of Peace,
with Clerks like gizzards stuck under each arm,
And warrants like sippets lay in his own grease,
set over a chaffing-dish to be kept warm:
With a hey, etc.
A London-cuckold came hot from the spit,
and when the Carver had broken him open,
The Devil chopped his head off at a bit,
but the horns had almost like to choked him;
With a hey, etc.
A fair large pasty of a Midwife hot;
and for col'd baked meat in this story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought,
long cof^in'd in crust till now she is grown (...)
With a hey, etc.
The loins of a Letcher then was roasted,
with a plumb Harlot's head and garlic,
With a Pauder's petitoes that had boasted
himself for a Captain that never was warl^
With a hey, etc.
Then boiled and stuck upon a prick,
the gizzard was brought of a holy Sister,
That bit made the Devil almost so sick,
that the Doctor did think he had need of a (...)
With a hey, etc.
The jowel of a Time-server for a fish,
a Constable sowced, pissed vinegar by,
Two Aldermen-lobsters laid it a dish,
a Deputy-tart, and a Church-warden-pye,
With a hey, etc.
All which devoured, then for a close,
he did for a draught of Derby call,
He heaved the vessel up to his nose,
and never left till he had drank up all;
With a hey, etc.
Then from the table he gave a start,
where banquet and whine was not to ^ee^
All which he blew away with a fart,
from whence it is called, The Devil's Arse
With a hey down, down, a down, down.
Licensed and Entered according to Ord^^

LONDON: Printed by and for W. O. (...) to be sold by J. Deacon, at the Angel
(...) Guilt-(...).


