Loves fortune. OR, A faint-hearted Soldier will never win the Field.
The Young-mans good fortune in wooing his Love:
She was Rich, and he but poor,
And she vowed she never would love him more,
Yet Day and Night he took great pain,
And for to love her once again.
Tune is, Sweet come love me once again.






WAlking most early in a morning fair,
I heard a young man thus did say,
O how do I live in despair,
for her that is sweeter than the May:
But I will to her once again,
to see if she will me entertain,
With kisses sweet I will her greet,
and for to love me once again.
Sweetheart, said he, tell me thy mind,
why thou should thus hard-hearted be:
Or why will thou prove thus unkind
to him that is so true to thee.
But for my part, I Am Royal in my heart,
and evermore will so remain;
Sweet kill not me with disloyalty,
but vow to love me once again.
Kind Sir I thank you for your love,
but you are very much to blame,
To seek my thoughts thus for to prove,
pish fie away be gone for shame.
For many a maid has been betrayed,
therefore in love I pray give over,
Hands off be gone, let me alone,
for I vow I never will love thee more.
Alas dear love some pity take
on me that loves you so entire;
My life lies bound unto a stake,
let me not burn in Cupids Fire:
My heart so free in loving thee,
blind Cupid has my senses taken:
Some pity move my dearest love,
and now, etc.
Content thy self love say no more,
for sure thou art no match for me,
My Parents Rich and thine but poor,
and that may cause great misery:
And thus I Will say both night and day,
a single life I Will never give over,
Therefore be gone, let me alone,
for I vow I Will never love thee more.
O be content my dearest love,
on worldly means set not thy mind,
Tho thou be Rich and I but poor,
O be not thou to me unkind.
No pains i will spare, but take great care,
thee for to please i will take great pain;
Be not unkind but change thy mind,
and now come love me once again.




KInd Sir, I thank you for your love,
and for the pains that you would take;
My mind you never can remove,
I pray you choose some other mate:
For words are but wind and may prove-unkind,
therefore leave off I pray give over;
To live with thee i will not combine
for I vow I Will never love thee more.
Hard hap had I to set my love
on one that cares so small for me,
No hopes have I but from above,
to change thy mind and fancy me;
But yet I stand at thy command,
sweet kill not me with coy disdain,
Some pity take and answer make,
that thou will love me again.
Sweet come tell me (if thou can)
the best way now this same to carry,
If I should yield both heart and hand,
to be thy Bride and for to marry:
For friends and kindreds love to get,
or surely it may breed great pain,
Procure the same, i will thee respect,
I vow to love thee once again.
My dearest dear take thou no care,
but mark the words that I do say,
What lies in me I will not spare,
if thou will love and fancy me.
Let Father frown, let Mother chide,
a heart that is true will never stain,
Come life or death i will stick to thee,
if thou will love me once again.
The Maid.
Five hundred pound my portion is,
and all this on thee I will bestow,
With heart and hand take here this kiss,
thou art my own and shall be so:
Come wealth or woe with thee i will go,
through England, Scotland, France or Spain
Cupid has told me it must be so,
and I vow to love thee once again.
All you true Lovers that hear this Song,
let this to you a pattern be:
Seek not your true Love for to wrong,
neither for Gold nor yet for fee.
He is my delight both day and night,
true love is worth a Golden Chain,
All you true Lovers is this not right,
to grant true love for love again.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clark, W. Thackeray, and T.
Passinger.


