THE MERCHANT A-la-mode.

To the Tune of Which no Body can deny.

LONDON: Printed by J. Read in White-Fryers, near Fleet Street.

Price One Penny.

THE MERCHANT A-la-mode, etc.
ATtend and prepare for a Cargo from Dover,
The Preludes of Peace with Duke d' Aumont's come over,
Which will the true Hearts of each Subject discover,
Which no Body can deny, deny, which no body can deny.
A noble brave Troop rode on Horseback before him,
The People Huzza'd and with Shouts did adore him,
Whilst the VVhigs were confounded to see such honorem,
Which, etc.
Their Hopes and Designs of a War is all blast;
Their Times of Insulting Authority's past,
Since deprived of all Places of Honor and Trust;
Which, etc.
A Dance by the Allies hand in hand was begun,
Till England was tired, and wished to sit down,
The rest being enraged, swore the'd Jigg it alone;
Which,
The Music struck up to the Tune as before,
Yet each said they never had such Partner's before,
For the Dutch figured in, whilst the Germains crossed over,
Which,
Then strait a Confusion and Uproar was made,
All Quondam Alliance and Friendship was void;
For the Germans a Farthing to Music ne'rt paid;
Which, etc.
Thus, thus we have carried the Jest on too Far,
Have paid all the Charge and Expense of the War,
Yet Ingratitude find for our Losses and Care;
Which, etc.
The German's Displeasure we have mourned by a Peace,
And lost that great Title of Mighty Allies,
Yet, thanks be to God, we have opened our Eyes:
Which, etc.
We thought that the Dutch would keep Touch to our Song
But they played on the Low Party's Viol so long,
The Strings proving false, all the Consort was wrong,
Which, etc.
Through mighty Intreatance at last they squeezed in,
And to enjoy a Peace their Alliance did join,
Whilst the Emperor's thresht on the Danube and Rhine,
Which, etc.
This greatly distrub'd all the Factions Train,
Since all other Projects and Counsels were vain,
And John their Protector crossed over the Main.
Which, etc.
They still had a Prospect, if War had gone on,
To Turn all the State and Prefer honest John,
But their Ministry changed, and their Captains forlorn.
Which, etc.
Thus, ashamed of their Guilt, with Envy and Hate
They burn in Revenge of their Dowfaal and Fate,
But their Malice, and Interest, and Power's too late;
Which, etc.
Their Secret Designs we have valued at naught,
For PEACE to a general Finis is brought,
And Lewis no more is our Enemy thought;
Which, etc.
With France open Trade and Commerce declare,
Forgetting all Quarrels, and Chances of War,
Since Glory in Peace we shall equally share;
Which, etc.
Thus long we have endangered our Fortune and Blood,
Yet where is the Ally which to their Text e're stood?
Which, etc.
Then Health, lasting Peace, and long Life to our QUEEN,
The happy Succession of the Protestant Line,
And all our Alliance in Union remain;
Which, etc.
Let Civil and Foreign Dissentions now cease,
Great Britain in Glory and Riches increase,
Still enjoying the Fruits of a Glorious PEACE;
Which no Body can deny, etc.
FINIS.

