(...) sweetest Margerie, AND
Margery her singing loath to depart,
Being very unwilling to leave her sweetheart.
To the tune of, I Will go through the World with thee.




Man? SWeet Margery I am pressed to the Sea,
with Gold and Silver in my hand:
I come to take my leave of thee,
and bid adieu to fair England.

Maid. But will thou be gone my Honey sweet,
and must I loose thy Company,
Me thinks for thee it is not meet,
to leave thy dearest Margery.

Man. Sweet Margery I must needs be gone,
alas there is no remedy:
But be I in company or alone,
I Will never forget my Margery.

Maid. I would thou could thy Voyage excuse,
for I am loath to part from thee.
When thy sweet presence I do loose;
I shall be a sorrowful Margerie.

Man. I prithee be not grieved so,
but take my absence patiently,
For wheresoever I come or go,
my heart remains with Margery.

Maid. A Bird in the hand's worth 2 in the bush,
and when thou once art gone from me:
I doubt thou will not care a rush,
what does become of thy Margerie.

Man. I prithee don't conjecture thus,
nor question my true constancy,
The Gordian Knot which tyeth us;
I Will never break from my Margery.

Maid. Well, if I thought thou would prove true,
and bear a faithful heart to me:
To Sorrows I would bid adieu,
as thou take leave of thy Margery.

Man. Do not mis-doubt my love at all,
nor vex thy head with jealousy,
What chance soever does befall,
i will never forsake my Margerie.

Maid. Excuse if I judged wrong,
it is my tender love to thee,
Least when thou have bin absent long,
thou might forget thy Margerie,

Man. That can I never for my life,
for I am thine until I dye:
And if I ever do marry a wife,
it shall be my sweet Margery.

Maid, I prithee do that before we part,
that joyful day might I but see,
'T would set all sorrows from my heart,
and none so blithe as Margerie.





Man. BE not so hasty rather stay,
for at this time it cannot be,
I must aboard this present day,
and leave my sweetest Margerie.

Maid. Then take front me a parting-kisse,
this point about thine arms I Will tie.
And when thou look upon thy wrist.
then think upon thy Margery,

Man. This point I will esteem more dear,
then all the jewels I shall see:
Pluck up thy heart and be of good cheer,
till I return to my Margerie.

Maid. When you do walk in the Spanish street,
and many Gallants pass you by,
Your Chamber decks and Music sweet,
then you will for get your Margerie.

Man. I prithee harp not on that string,
these words does touch my heart full nigh.
For I esteem no worldly thing,
so much as I do sweet Margery,

Maid. Sweet-Love forgive that word unkind,
'twas spoke thy patience but to try,
For I am persuaded in my mind,
thou love no Less but Margerie.

Man. I have seven Ships upon the Sea,
and all are laden to the brim,
I am so inflamed with Love of thee,
I care not whether they sink or swim.

Maid. Henceforth i will never mistrust thee more.
nor question thy true Loyallty,
Where ever thou art on Sea or Shore,
thou wilt think upon thy Margery.

Man* If any Knight or Gentleman,
do pass tho Seas to my Country,
I Will write a Letter with mine own hand,
and send it safe to Margery.

Maid. O, how I shall that Letter kiss.
so soon as ever I it spy,
It would present a world of bliss.
unto thy loving Margery.

Man. Margery i will a gallant prove,
and for thy sake my valor try,
Though all my kin seek to remove,
my thoughts from my sweet Margery.

Maid. If I had wished before I had kissed,
that love had bin so dear to win,
My heart I would, have closed in gold,
and pined it with a silver pin.

Man. The time sweet Margery calls a way,
I now must leave thy company:
For time and tide for none will stay.
once more farewell sweet Margery.

maid. Once more I Will kiss thy sugured lips,
and take thy absents patiently:
Heaven prosper thee and thy seven Ships.
and send thee safe to Margery.

Finis.
Printed at London by J. H. for Francis Coals, dwelling in the Old-Bailey.


