Nicotianae Encomium; Or, The GOLDEN LEAF Ta -- Ab Insula Tobacco ubi provenit
rectius (ni fallor) scribitur quam To --
TOBACCO Displayed in its Sovereignty and singular Virtues.
YE Hot! ye Cold! ye Rheumatick! draw nigh;
In this Rich Leaf a Sovereign Dose does lie
Will cure ye All; Physic ye need not want,
Here it is in the Gummy Entralls of a Plant.
To purge the Breast from Phlegm, to give a Stool
To costive Bodies, glowing Veins to cool;
To rouse up Spirits, and chill Blood to heat,
To raise the Pulse, and make it nimbly beat;
Each Joint and Nerve (from Head to Foot) to warm
With Active Vigor -- Here Is your Powerful Charm!
And if the Grand Bugbear-Toad, the Plague, ye fear,
Lo! under God, your Antidote is here.
Brave Leaf! thou act's the Able Doctor's Part,
In thee there is wrapped an Aesculapian Art.
Thou Vt Dei Ministra, non adulterata, and modice sumpta.
frights Infection, bribes our Fatal Doomes,
Prolongs our Lives, and saves us from our Tombs,
Persumes our Throats, our Mouths, our Clothes, our Rooms:
Thou Sleep procures, and rock'st our Cradle-Beds,
Still'st aching Teeth, and cures our aching Heads;
It Is Salve, no Smoke sure, which thy Chimney sheads.
Thy Juice ('it is said) Medicinal is found,
It heals (though poisoned) any bleeding Wound:
Then such as would Extemp're-Surg'ons be,
Must not Box-up, but only Bottle Thee;
Not dry thy Leaf, but Drain't (this understood
Prevents abuse) for them thy Liquor's good.
A Vomit-Broome made of thy Syrup, sweeps
(When foul) and clean the Stomack's Kitchen keeps:
Cooks! think of this; ye are by right (ye see)
No Smoakers, but as Chimny-Sweepers be;
To clear your Cook-Roomes from Diseased Dust,
Or make or buy Tabacco-Broomes ye must.
Now for your use, I think they might do well,
If some would Cry'om, others keep to Sell:
So 'bout this Oak, like Ivy might ye twist,
And each Bro' live on's Bro' -- Tabaconist.
Never fear to Break, ye 'Prentices to the Trade!
Your Leaf may Wither, but it cannot Fade:
By Wholesale, Re-tale vend your Herb; the while
Let some Sail over to the Tabakian I Will;
There Plant, and Reap, and fill their builded Cribbs,
And others mince Her Broad Transported Ribbs:
Here starts a Paradox; -- Thus some that do
No Purses take, may live by Cutting though.
Then fill your Boxes, store your Shops anew,
And Pipe, and Dance, and Sing, ye Jolly Crew!
For whilst ye join, and each Man drives his Trade,
Though your Leaf Wither, yet it shall not Fade;
But Coin shall Court y^, and ye shall go Brave,
As Merchants do that many Factors have,
And all have Cause to cry -- O Virtue rare!
What Other Leaf may with Our Leaf Compare?
Brave Leaf! thou acts the Able Doctor 's Part,
In thee there is wrapped an Aesculapian Art.
Thy Bowels Sovereign Balsame drop, when burned,
And thou art good to Dust and Ashes turned;
Thy Sneezing Powder has the art to drain
From all Rheumatick Humors, Head and Brain,
Which trickle down, as Water from the Rose,
Through the open Conduits of the Mouth and Nose.
Come Distillations! Tissicks! Coughs! Catharres!
All Colds, all Moisture's Offspring! that make Wars.
With Eyes, Gummes, Lungs; Diseases -- Hydra! bow
Thy Neck to th'Block, expect the Fatal Blow:
Tobacco! here behold this Monster lie,
With Apron and with Butcher-Sleeves draw nigh,
Strike with thy Smoakey Axe! Strike! strike! -- it is done!
The Blow is given, off the Heads are gone!
Great Creature-Word! Who can thy Letters tell!
Or knowledge has thy Syllables to spell!
Those choice Effects thy Virtue yet affords
Swell much beyond the narrow Graspe of Words:
I faulter here; -- Thy Depths are too profound
For Reason, and her Line too short to sound
Or fathome'om; how can my Heart endite
Thy hidden Secrets! or thy praises write
How can my ABC and short-sighted Quill!
This claims some Rabby's, -- yea an Angel's skill.
The Quickest Artist verst in Nature's Mine,
May sooner read a Sybil's Leaf than Thine.
If so, how high does Natures Folio swel!
If little Words, large pages sure excel
The strength and stature of the tallest Sage,
With which no Mortal's able to engage:
Sure these Goliaths with their Spear and Shield
Challenge the stoutest David into the Field.
What Is the Bark to the Tree! can none peruse or look
The Covers over! who then can read the Book!
What e're the Heavens contain, or Earthly Ball,
Perspectives are to view Man's All in All,
Fair Copys of that Great ORIGINAL:
Straight Lines which in this Center are connext,
Sermons that Comment on this Sacred Text.
Even here the Learned of Learning see their want,
By knowledge learn to know they are ignorant.
My Muse was nipt in the Bud; a Poet's Name
Belongs to such whose True-bred Genius flame,
As Lackey by His Side this Rush shall run,
Whose Taper-Muse is lighted at the SuN:
With brighter Beams some Noble Sol might grace
This Subject, and my Luna's spotted face.
Rise ^^^is Orb, Brave Luminary! mine
Shall quickly Set, and give You room to Shine:
Mean time, this Star, as Harbenger of Day,
Shall March before Your more Refulgent Ray.
(...)


