GOD Almighty's CALL To the Healthy and to the Sick, To which are added, The
Authors and a Renowned Bishops Verses upon the Holy Bible.
GOD Almighty's CALL to the Healthy.
O ye, whose Benefits from me are not Narrow,
Whose Breasts are full of Milk, and Bones of Marrow.
Quest. 1. Does Sloth become you, Sirs? Or don't you fear
The wicked slothful Servants doom to bear?
Q.2. Does luxury of Sleep become? O then
Of Life-time's shortness never complain again.
Q.3. Does Body-pampering you become? Alas!
Deny then if you can, your Flesh is Grass!
Q.4. Does Worldly Pomp become you? If it do,
Then Grace and Glory cannot become you too!
Q.5. Does Gluttony become you? Sirs, if so,
Say plainly you no GOD but Belly know!
Q.6. Does Idle Chat become you? VVon't your Lord
Require account, for every Idle Word?
Q.7. Does Company lewd become? Of such is Hell;
And would you choose indeed, with such to dwell?
Q.8. Does Gaming you become? O don't mistake,
Though Games make Sports, yet Sports do Torments make.
Q.9. Does Worldly Care become you? Sirs it is true,
That GOD and Mammon cannot be served too.
Q.10 Does use of Thoughts unbridled you become?
Is It nothing to be Divelish, so you are dumb?
Q.11. Does Reading paltry Books become? Your Eyes
Were made to Read the Books that make you Wise.
Q.12. O what becomes you! But to seek your Peace,
And Holiness, and Virtues true Increase.
Answer, O ye, whose Benefits are not Narrow;
Whose Breasts are full of Milk, and Bones of Marrow.
GOD Almighty's Call to the Sick.
O ye, whose strings of Eyes and very Heart,
Are, to your feeling, ready break apart.
Quest. 1. WHat say ye now? Is there a God or no?
Atheists, in dying hours, Believers grow.
Q.2. What say ye now? Are God and You now Friends?
For now the Reconciling Season ends.
Q.3. What say ye now? Is time a Price or not?
The truest Knowledge, is on Sick-beds got.
Q.4. What say now? Do not your Hopes now Shrink?
For Sick Men see, though Healthy use to wink.
Q.5. What say ye now? Is Sin a Load now Light?
Sin's least in Thought, when Death is least in Sight.
Q.6. What say you now? Is World Pearl in your Eye?
All dying Lips call world a deadly Lie.
Q.7. What say ye now? Now Is Godliness great Gain?
No dying Saint, e're thought his Labor vain.
Q.8. What say ye now? Now will ye shape to dye?
O where is your Plea! for Lo your Judge draws nigh!
Q.9. What say ye now? Now will ye Elders call?
When too much cannot be done; who'd not do all?
Q.10. What say ye now? Now list ye to Convert?
Repentance late, need be with all the Heart.
Q.11. What say ye now? Vows holy will ye make?
Sin most renounce; but very few forsake.
Q.12. This therefore say: Shall not these Vows be Vain?
If I shall Heal, and Raise you up again.
Answer O ye, whose strings of Eye and Heart,
Be, to your feeling, ready break apart.
Upon the HOLY BIBLE.
MEthinks 'twas witty that Minerva's Fowls,
The Greeks would make to be the very Owls;
Sure 'twas to show, that Natural Learning's blind,
Till Light from Revelation, it did find
Let other Merchants, into Toads-Heads look,
For Pearls of Wisdom: But give me God's Book.
Men's Books, the best, shall never fit my Head;
With God's, I Will Rise; with God's, I Will go to Bed.
Ah empty Bodley! Emptyer Vatican!
Bible makes Saint; your Books scarce make a Man;
God's Book's more Bright then Sun, more loud then Thunder;
It Is Light and Law from Heaven, to all that is under.
Gaze on Astronomers, on your splended Trains;
In Starry-Houses, Stable all your Brains!
My Bible's Sun and Moon and Stars to me;
The Star that Leads, to all I care to see!
Away, ye Sons of Physic! True, your Steel
Opens my disaffected Spleen, I feel!
Castoreum relieves my Brain when it aches,
And Sulphur from my Lungs their Loading takes:
But Bible's Food, and Feast, and Physic too;
Feeds, Chears, and Cures, as naught of yours can do!
Bible makes Lightsom still, and never Light;
Still Merry, never Vain; Down, and Upright!
Verses found written in the BIBLE of the Right Reverend Bishop Prideaux.
THis is the Volumn, in whose precious Leaves,
Mysterys of Heavenly Treasure, God bequeathes;
Objects and Subjects, of each Christian Eye:
By these who Lives, by Death shall never Dye!
Here Shines the Sun of Grace, diffusing wide
His Quickening Beams on all, from side to side!
Here God and Man do both Embrace each other;
Met in one Person, Heaven and Earth do Kiss:
Here a Pure-Virgin does become a Mother;
And bear a Son, that the World's Father is.
Here comes True Bliss (...), flying from on high;
To hale us out of Hells dar^^ Misery.
LONDON, Printed by George Larkin, at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate, 1687.
With Allowance.


