(...) F.H. Van. Hove. Scu^

To the T^ of Lilli Bullero.
The First Part
(1.)
COme all that wish well, to the Land where we dwell,
With Wool and Silk-workers, sing and rejoice;
While those ^y be sad, who have ruined our Trade,
With Thanks and great Praise let us lift up our Voice;
Our Voices let us raise, to the wonderful Praise
Of William our King, for his Royal Consent.
To this Happy Thing, for which we now sing
Praise God and our King, and our good Parliament.
(2.)
Let Hatters and Drapers, so down to Shooe-makers,
With all who sell Drink, or Provisions vend,
With Plowmen and Sailors, and all (except Goalers,
Or East India Traders,) Their Thanks to Heaven send;
For Passing this Bill, their Pockets will fill,
And Tenants will better pay Landlords their Rent;
Therefore let them sing, with us in this Ring,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(3.)
Ah, how many Years, have we been in Tears,
Greatly lamenting our Sorrowful State,
While the East India-Trade, great Spoil on us made,
And by our Undoing grew wondrous Great:
But now God be praised, we may see good Days;
Our Ruin we hope this Bill will prevent:
And therefore we sing, for this Happy Thing,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(4.)
This Nation now see, what great Misery
Is coming on them by this India-Trade;
That Two Millions's sent, in Two Years to be spent,
Which make our wise Senators strangely afraid,
Lest what they are doing, prove this Kingdom's Ruin,
Which Mischief this Bill is designed to prevent:
For which we now sing, Hi ding a ding ding,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(5.)
For this Bill being past, they will not send so fast,
Which Coin will increase, and encourage our Trade:
In Gratitude bound, we'll always be found,
To defend their just Rights against those that invade;
And from our good Prince, let never a Man flinch,
Or utter or mutter the least Discontent;
But in this round Ring, let us merrily sing,
Drink a Health to our King, etc.
(6.)
We remember with Grief, when we sought Relief,
Our Senators were well inclined to our Ease;
But some ill advised, in Tumults did rise,
Which certainly then did ruin our Case:
But since they are grown wife, such Riots despise,
For future such Meetings we'll strive to prevent;
For we hate that ill Thing, which much Sorrow did bring,
And displeased our King, etc.
(7.)
The Heavens now smile, on the Face of this Isle,
And Trading will flourish as it did before.
If our Ladies are kind, their own Intrest mind,
They Will soon give Employment to their own Poor,
And by it they will gain, as appear very plain,
When those are employed, will raise all their Rent;
For Lands more Rent bring, while w'eat, drink, and sing,
And praise our good King, and our good Parliament.
(8.)
Some Women, we are told, are angry and scold,
Resolve to buy up and wear India Stuff,
In 'spite of our Laws, and pitiful Cause;
Talk of Restraining, they are angry, and huff:
But we hope they will grow wise, in Time and despise
To use what destroy their Poor, Coin, and Rent,
And with us will sing, for this Happy Thing,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(9.)
But when all is said, we are yet much afraid
Their Fancies their Reasons will overpower;
So that they will still wear, what is far-fetched, though dear,
And our Wealth and Trade thereby much devour:
But if they are so vain, 'twill appear very plain,
They are on their Country's Ruin still bent;
And that it is a Thing, which great Loss will bring,
And displease our King, etc.
(10.)
Our Princess, Heaven praised, our Hopes has much raised,
Since, for Preventing so ill a Design,
She Is graciously said, she will encourage our Trade,
In English Silks then our Court will soon shine:
For which in Her Praise, while our Voices we raise,
Her Fame for this thing, through the World will be sent:
Her Glories we'll sing, drink her Health in this Ring,
And praise our good King, etc.
(11.)
And since She Is so kind, Her Example let us mind,
And firmly engage, by joining our Hands,
To Promote and Wear, what plainly appear
To be for the General Good of this Land.
Through the Land let it run, and the work is soon done,
And from such engagement let us never recant,
But stand to this Thing, which much Gain will bring
To this Kingdom and King, etc.
(12.)
In a Bumper of Beer, or such Drink as is here,
To conclude, let us drink-one General Health;
It Is a Health to all those, who are clad in such Clothes,
As encourage our Trades, and Old England 's Wealth;
And they that refuse, deserve Wooden Shoes,
Or else to go barefoot until they Recant;
While we merrily sing, and make the Skies ring,
With Long live our King, and our good Parliament.
The Second Part.
(1.)
HAv'ng in our First Part showed the Joy of our Heart,
For Passing this Bill, our Gratitude shown;
Let Us farther declare, to all that will hear,
Such Matters of Fact as are fit to be known,
That all Folk may see, the Necessity
TO use their Endeavors, and join to prevent
The wear of such Things, which great Mischief bring
TO this Kingdom and King, and our good Parliament.
(2.)
Long since we were told, how Silver and Gold,
And Bullion was sent out to purchase our Ruin;
How our Workmen went, and our Patterns were sent,
The better to bring on our utter Undoing:
To ease our great Grief, we often sought Relief,
And with Complaints to our Senators went;
But now in this Ring, we merrily sing,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(3.)
For they have heard our Case, and given us some Ease,
Our Hopes have revived, and mended our State;
While our Indian Foes, in Numbers up-rose,
With Noise and Clamor against us did prate,
Our just Case prevailed, and their Designs failed,
At which their Passion and Folly they vent,
Whilst we merrily sing, Hi ding a ding ding,
And praise our good King, etc.
(4.)
The French, Edicts made, to discourage this Trade,
So that they bring Home much Silver and Gold;
While we send our Bullion, to spoil Silk and Woollen,
They Will suffer no Printing, nor Printed Stuffs sold:
The Dutch too grow wise, this Trading despise,
Their Eight Ships brought less than One which we sent:
Did we the same thing, much Gain it would bring
To this Kingdom and King, etc.
(5.)
In King Charles's Reign, we then did complain,
For our Trade in his Time was often very dull;
But what we designed, they then undermined,
All we gained was an Act to bury our Wool;
Which small Relief yield, while the Nation they filled
With Silks and Chints, which at Court they present:
By Bribes or like thing, in Fashion they bring,
Which might please the King, though not Parliament.
(6.)
It has been declared, as we have often heard,
These Traders once feared to bring in Wrought Wares,
Or send out Bullion, to ruin our Woollen;
But now they are grown Great, and got over such Fears:
For they have sent Treasure, in wonderful measure
To bring Home such Goods as Trading supplant:
For stopping this Thing, we now merrily sing,
Great Praise to our King, etc.
(7.)
To get a Law made; the New Dons then said,
That the Old drove a Trade to this Kingdom's Ruin;
Since they have gained their Act, it is Matter of Fact,
They Are the like Method and Measures pursuing:
For the Eagle declare, how they were sincere,
What we must expect, if such Goods here be spent;
For the Cargoe she bring, put forward the Thing,
For which we praise our King, and our good Parliament.
(8.)
If a Million be sent, Yearly to be spent
In Wares that supplant our Silk and Wool Trade,
'Twill hinder of Poor, half a Million, or more,
Might be employed here, supported and fed,
Besides as great Train, these Workers maintain,
B' all the Provisions which by them are spent,
For stopping this Thing, which such Ruin bring,
We praise our good King, etc.
(9.)
While we joy for Relief, it is matter of Grief,
To think what great Numbers yet of our Poor,
As Makers of Fans, Pots, Tables and Stands,
Japanners and Limners, and Multitudes more,
Who will be undone, and their Country run,
If b' Law or Example, we do not prevent
The use of such Things, which such Mischief bring
To this Kingdom and King, etc.
(10.)
What troubles us more, is what is brought over,
Though it does not excel, or come near us in kind,
How fond of their Ware, though never so dear,
Are too great Numbers of our Women-kind,
Which shows very plain, they are still very vain,
Whose fanciful Humors are so much bent
On East India things, which such Mischief bring
To this Kingdom and King, etc.
(11.)
But e're we do end, our Song we intend
To remember all those, stood up for our Case,
With Zeal and Good Will, did bring in the Bill,
And the rest of our Friends that gained us this Ease,
And all those who wear, what plainly appear
To the advance of our Trade, and Lands in their Rent:
Their Praises we'll sing, drink their Health in this Ring,
And praise our good King, etc.
(12.)
And now we have done, to our Works let us run,
For fresh Supply let us work on our Trade;
If we spend our Store, we can work for more
To purchase good Drink, good Meat, and good Bread;
And as for all those, that do us oppose,
We wish them no ill, but hope they will repent,
And forbear to deal in, what such Ruin bring,
While we work, and sing, and praise our good King, etc.
Advertisement: England's Almanac: Showing how the East India Trade is
prejudicial to this Kingdom, etc. in which is represented, by a Copper Print,
the Weaver, Comber and Spinster at work on the one side, and the- East India
Ships on the other. And under the Copper-Print an account of 52 Ships sent to
the East Indies in Two Years last past with above Two Millions of Bullion. A
List of 26 Ships belonging to the Old East India Company, with their Tuns,
Guns, Men and Cargoes. A List of 52 Ships which were sent to East India in 7
Years, from 90 to 97, of which but 37 returned. An Account of all the Cloth
sent to the East Indies in 15 Years. An Account of all the Woollen Manufactures
made in England in one Year, with the value thereof. An Account of all the
Silver and Gold coined since January 95. Abstracts of Petitions, Decrees and
Chronologies, extravagant Rise and Fall of Stocks. Dreadful Account of
Burnings, occasioned by the Use of Callicoes. With a Calendar for the Year
1700, showing the New Moons, Sundays, Holidays, San-risings, etc. Calculated
for Information of the Public. by T. L.

London: Printed by S. Bridge, in (...)-Friars; and Sold by J. Nutt, near
Stationers' Hall. 1700.


