A short ACCOUNT OF THE Expiring Parl -- m -- nt.
SOme mighty Genius now my Breast inspire
With something more than a Seraph^ck Fire;
Bold shining Thoughts into my Soul infuse
Above the reach of every vulgar Muse.
They, who like me, Heroic Souls would praise,
Should rise above the pitch of common Lays:
'The noblest Subjects noblest Thoughts require,
My Subject's worthy the Angelick Quire,
Immortal Cherubs should their Praises sing,
And pluck their Quills forth from an Angel's Wing.
How large, how spacious is the glorious Scene,
No less than Britain's Happiness the Theme.
Her Rescue too from those designing Sons
Who their fond Mother had almost undone;
Sought out each treacherous undermining way
Their Country's Freedom basely to betray.
What then is to that Glorious SENATE due
That saved their Country and Religion too?
What Monuments, what Altars can we raise
To celebrate such God-like Hero's praise?
Their own immortal Acts sufficient are
Their Fame to future Ages to declare:
But yet it is just a grateful Sense to show
For all the Toll for us they undergo.
Long had the British Realm, by Faction rui'd,
Been cheated, bubbled, ridiculed and fooled:
The Reverence should their Sovereign been shown.
On Party Factions was bestowed alone;
To that alone the S -- te Homage paid,
And at the gilded Shrine their Queen enslaved,
For Pelf their Country and their God they sold,
And Loyalty a Tribute gave to Gold.
When Britain's Genius (though almost too late)
Aspiring rose, by the Decrees of Fate,
Her much loved, though her sinking Realm to save,
She could not see Britannia be a Slave.
Long had she found a subtle Factious Race
The noble Places they enjoyed disgrace.
At length the People sh' with just Rage inspired,
And every Breast with dire Resentment fired:
The Subjects mourned their long misguided Choice,
And gave at length for Loyalists their Voice.
Nor sooner had the worthy Patriots sat
But they revived the poor declining State;
Restored their ancient Liberty and Laws,
Justly asserting injured England's Cause:
Examined why, after great Battles won,
The Conqueror was always most undone?
Where the vast Sums of Treasure were conveyed
Were by the injured People yearly paid?
Why the poor Soldiers were so shortly fed
When England paid so many Pounds for Bread?
So far they searched into the dangerous Wound
Even the first Causes of the Sore they found,
And though no mighty Man a Victim fell
To the just Stroke of the revenging Steel,
'Twas Mercy, not Desert, the Villains saved
That had their Native Realm so far enslaved:
The Royal Goodness only stepped between,
And they were freed by their much-injur'd QUEEN.
This Point with ease the Loyal SENATE gains,
But a far greater Work there yet remains,
Her Freedom and her Credit to Restore,
And satisfy those Debts she owed before;
For which to distant Realms a Fleet is sent
To perfect the illustrious Intent:
Over the wide spacious Deep, secure they ride
Whilst their sharp Keels the swelling Waves divide;
The Southern World to ANNE does tribute pay,
And at her Feet the richest Product lay,
Which wi'l her Losses and her Debts defray.
In vain does Faction raise her snaky Head
And curse the approaching Happiness she dreads;
In vain at their wise Councils she repines
She cannot frustrate their brave Designs;
She grins to think the wished for Time draws near
Will free her from the Foes she most does fear:
She thinks her Empire to re-obtain,
And sway again with a Tyrannick Rein.
But Heaven, who has so often its Goodness shown,
Her Great Vicogerent will not cease to own;
And God, who ruled so late the Peoples Voice,
Will guide them to Confirm the worthy Choice.
For as for secret Causes Heaven ordains
The Phoenix should expire in spicey Flames,
But from the Ashes does the Bird restore
With far more Vigor than she had before.
Entombed she lies but for a moment's space,
Her Funeral Pile becomes a pregnant Place:
The wondrous Species does still revive,
And often though he dies, does always live.
Thus though by Custom this Great SENATE dies,
In spite of Faction 'twill again arise.
Brave and Resolved it will again appear,
Nor a declining Ministry will fear:
True to their Country's Interest they will move,
And show at once their Duty and their Love;
With greater Vigor they will again revive,
And in the Books of Fame for ever live;
And greater Blessings may they still possess,
Their every Act meet with desired Success.
And if Cabals or Plots their Peace annoy,
Short may their Trouble, lasting be their Joy.
London: Printed by R. Newcomb in Wine-Office-Court, Fleet Street, 1713.


