The Farthingale Revived: OR, More Work for the Cooper. A PANEGYRIC on the
late, but most admirable Invention of the HOOP-PETTICOAT: Written at the Bath
in the Year 1711.
-- Sileat Miracula Memphis.
Mart.
There Is scarce a Bard, that writ in former time,
Had ever so great, so bright a Theme for Rhyme;
The Mantuan Swain, if living, would confess
Ours more surprising than his Tyrian Dress:
And Ovid's Mistress, in her loose Attire,
Would cease to charm his Eyes, or raise Desire;
Were he at Bath, and had these Coats in view,
He Would write his Metamorphosis anew:
Delia, fresh-hoop'd, would over his Heart prevail,
To leave Corinna, and her tawdry Veil.
Hear, great Apollo, and my Genius guide,
To sing this glorious Miracle of Pride:
Nor yet disdain the Subject for its Name,
Since meaner things have often been sung to Fame.
Even Boots and Spurs have graced Heroic Verse;
Butler his Knight's whole Suit did well rehearse,
King Harry's Codpiece stands upon record,
And every Age will Precedents afford.
Then on my Muse, and sing in Epick Strain,
The Petticoat -- thou shall not sing in vain;
The Petticoat will sure reward thy Pain.
With all thy Skill its secret Virtues tell;
A Petticoat should still be handled well.
Oh Garment, heavenly wide! thy spacious Round
Does my astonished Thoughts almost confound!
My Fancy cannot grasp thee at a view;
None, at first Sight, ever such a Picture drew.
The daring Artist that describes thee true,
Must change his Sides, as modern Statesmen do;
Or, like the Painter, when some Church he draws,
Following his own, and not the Builder's Laws,
At once show but one Prospect to the Sight;
For North and South together cannot be right.
Hence ye Profane, -- nor think I shall reveal
The happy Wonders which these Vests conceal:
Hence your unhallowed Eyes and Ears remove;
It Is Cupid's Circle, it is the Orb of Love.
Let it suffice you see the unwieldy Fair
Sail through the Streets with Gales of swelling Air;
Nor think (like Fools) the Ladies, would they try,
Armed with their Furbeloes, and these, could fly:
That Is all Romantic, for these Garments show,
Their Thoughts are with their Petticoats, below.
Nor must we blame them, whilst they stretch their Art
T'adorn and guard the Fundamental Part;
For that, perhaps, may stand 'em more in stead
Than Loads of Ribbons fluttering on the Head:
And let Philosophers say what they will,
There Is something surer than their Eyes does kill.
We tell the Nymph, that we her Face adore:
But well she knows we aim at something more.
In vain the Ladies spend their Morning Hours
Erecting on their Heads stupendous Towers;
A Battery from thence might scare the Foe,
But certain Victory is gained below.
Let Damon then the adverse Champion be,
Topknots for him, and Petticoats for me.
Nor must he urge, it spoils the Ladies Shape,
Tho (as the Multitude at Monsters gape)
The World appears all lost in wild amaze,
As on these new, these strange Machines they gaze:
For if the Cyprian Queen from Paphos came
Attired, as we are told by antique Fame,
Thus would they wonder at the heavenly Dame.
I own, the Female World is much estranged
From what it was, and Top and Bottom changed:
The Head was once their darling constant Care,
But Women's Heads cannot heavy Burdens bear,
As much I mean, as they can do elsewhere.
So, wisely they transferred the Mode of Dress,
And furnished the other End with the Excess.
What tho, like Spires, or Pyramids, they show,
Sharp at the top, and of vast Bulk below?
It is a sign they stand the more secure;
A May Pole will not like a Church endure:
And Ships at Sea, when stormy Winds prevail,
Are safer in their Ballast, than their Sail.
Hail, happy Coat! for modern Dam'sels fit,
Product of Ladies, and of Tailors Wit:
Child of Invention, rather than of Pride,
What Wonders do thou show, what Wonders hide?
Within the Shelter of thy useful Shade
The pregnant Flora passes for a Maid;
Thin Galatea's shrivel'd Limbs appear
As plump and juicy as they did last year;
Whilst tall Miranda her lank Shape improves,
And, graced by thee, in some proportion moves:
Even those who are diminutively short
May please themselves, and make their Neighbors Sport,
When, to their Armpits harnessed up in thee,
Nothing but Head and Petticoat we see.
But Oh, what Figure fat Sempronia makes!
At her gigantick Form the Pavement quakes!
By thy addition she is so much enlarged;
Wherever she comes, the Sextons now are charged
That all Church-Doors and Pews be wider made;
A vast Advantege to the Joiner's Trade!
Ye airy Nymphs that do these Garments wear,
Forgive my want of Skill, not want of Care:
Forgive me, if I have not well displayed
A Coat, for such important Uses made.
If ought I have forgot, it was to prove
How fit they are, how apropo's for Love:
How in their Circles cooling Zephyrs play,
And what on balmy Wings they bear away
But there my Muse must halt, -- she dares no more
Than hope the Pardon which she asked before.
FINIS.
Entered in the Company of Stationers Book, pursuant to the late Act of
Parliament.

Sold by JOHN BAKER in Paternoster Row. 1711. Price Two Pence.


