The Blue GARTER No more a sign of Honesty Than a Gilded BUSH IS OF Good WINE.
INgratitude being so common in the Age we at present live in, it is no wonder
if Princes meet with the same usage that the Common People find, in being
slighted by those on whom they bestow their most signal Favors. That such has
been the Fate of Princes of late Days is so apparent, that there needs no
farther proof but an Inspection into the Actions of some Great Men, to make it
sufficiently plain and Evident: Nor has the greatest Honors could possibly be
bestowed by a Gracious Princess have the power to Bind some Persons to their
steady Duty and Allegiance: Some of which have even crept into the most
Honorable Order of the Garter; the Original of which take as follows:

IN Ancient Times when Britain's Warlike Sons
Half of the Universe had overrun,
And every Year, with Conquest fraught,
Fresh Laurels to their Monarch brought;
Each Fortunate Auspicious Day
New Victories did still display,
Conquest on England did seem to wait,
And Heaven still to smiled upon their happy State:
Nothing but Pleasure in the Court was found,
And Gaiety each blisful Moment crowned,
Mars's bold Sons still in the charming Fair
Met with complaisant, kind, obliging Air,
At their Mistresses Feet their Trophies laid,
Who all their Toils with pleasing Smiles repaid.
Thus Cytherea did on Ida meet
The God of War, and with soft Kisses greet
Her Love returning, softening by her Charms
The dire Remembrance of War's harsh Alarms.
Around his Neck her folding Arms she flung,
And with uncommon Transport on him hung;
The tedious Hours she kindly did beguile,
Whilst the glad Hero did forget his Toil;
Securely on her downy Breast he laid
And Homage to her Sovereign Beauty paid.
Nor could their PRINCE escape Love's fatal Dart,
Brave though his Soul, yet tender was his Heart;
He who still got new Triumphs from the Field
At Home to Beauty's Power was forced to yield:
Love to his Heart an easy Passage found,
Sure was the Stroke, though pleasing was the Wound;
For Love does soonest generous Minds enslave,
The Vulgar scorns, but Captivates the Brave;
For whilst a Nymph with graceful Gesture moved,
He gazed, he saw, and seeing Countess of Salis bury.
her, he loved.
The more he saw, the more he did admire,
Her every Action fanned the raging Fire,
When on a sudden on the Ground he 'spied
An Azure Ribbon, which the Nymph had tied
Around her Leg; straight he with eager Joys
Seizes the welcome, though a worthless Prize.
The Nobles smiled to see their Monarch stoop,
So small, so mean a Trifle to take up:
The Lady, conscious of the plain disgrace,
With crimson Blushes died her beauteous Face;
When straight the Edw. 3.
Monarch cried, I Will make this Thing
A Present fitting for the greatest King,
Heroic Souls it only shall adorn,
And by the bravest Generals shall be worn.
Nor was it given but to the Sons of Fame
Who by desert purchased a glorious Name;
Their Prince true Merit only did regard,
And gave to Honor only the reward.
Not so of late, when R -- s did receive.
The greatest Gift that Britain's Prince could give;
Who with Cabals and cheating Tricks repaid
The Sovereign Honor their Prince had on them laid.
But ANNA does its ancient Worth restore,
Exalt it too 'bove what it was before;
Never was it by more Worthy Patriots worn,
Nor ever did braver Englishmen adorn,
Witness Great Beaufort, whose Illustrious Birth
Is Honored by his Virtue and his Worth;
Wise, Prudent, Noble, Generous and Just,
Firm to his Country's Interest and his Trust,
Whose Loyalty in every Act is seen
A Subject worthy of so Great a Queen:
And Oxford, who so bravely has withstood
The base Attempts of a curss'd Factious Brood;
Did all their Plots with prudence undermine,
And wisely blast each traiterous Design.
And Strafford, who does zealously pursue
Britain's Happiness and Glory too.
By such the Garter credit will receive,
And all its ancient Glory will retrieve:
And long may they the Noble Ensign bear,
Long, long, the glorious Badge of Honor wear;
And Heaven their Loyal Councils always Bless,
And crown their Undertakings with Success,
LONDON: Printed Nowcomb in Wine-Court, Fleetstreet, 1713.


