SIONS SVVEETS: OR THE SPOVSES SPIKENARD; AND MYSTICAL MYRRH. BY THOMAS
BARNES.

Preacher of Gods Word at St Margretts in New-Fish-streete. LONDON.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathaniell Newbery: and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Star under St Peter's Church in Corn-hi l, and in Popes
head Alley. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, the Lady Barrington, Wife to Sir Francis
Barrington; the Lady Eliott, Wife to Sir T. E. the Lady Barnardiston, Wife to
Sir Nathan. B. and Mris Ioanna Mildmay, of Tarling-hall in Essex; the joy of
the justified, in Christ the justifier, wished.
WHen first I consulted with my self, under whose protection I might send
abroad these Sweets of Sion, [THE SPOUSES SPIKENARD, and MYSTICAL MYRRHE] my
thoughts fell (Right Worshipful) upon you four. And, after some conflicts
with inward cauills, I did resolve to make bold with all your names; and so
much the rather, both because, in another Treatise sent forth with this, I have
made as bold with your Worshipful yoake-fellowes: as also in regard, the
matter handled in these Sermons is such, as be useful to your souls, as well
as any of theirs, who are true members of that CHVRCH, and by faith made one
with that SPOUSE, whom the whole Book of Salomons Songs, (out of which I have
culled these Sweets) in a most sweet, and heavenly streine does treat of. I
dare say, that were it not for the Authors wants, here you should find, and
meet with that, which would be both for direction, and consolation; Direction
in your carriage, in respect of what you owe to Christ; consolation, for your
conscience, in regard of what you reap by Christ. For I am sure, that parcel
of Scripture, upon which these Meditations are, does afford such Rules, such
comforts pregnantly, plentifully. In it we have Christ his love, the Church her
loyalty. Christ his love unto his Church, sitting as a King at Table with her,
communicating his grace, and favor unto her, in the Ornaments, and Ordinances
wherewith he has endued her. The Church her loyalty unto her Christ: first,
presenting him with her Box of Spikenard, her faith and good Works: secondly,
praising him for his Bundle of Myrrh, the pardoning of her sins, the
refreshing of her soul: thirdly, professing she would never forget the
greatness of his love, and would endeavor to keep the sense of his kindness.
This love of that great husband I wish you the sweet of, with a daily increase
of it, more and more. This loyalty of the Spousesse I doubt not but has been
yielded by your Worships ere now, to Christ the head. The blessing upon these
labors, I crave of God; the Patronage, the acceptance, of these endeavors I
beg of you. Which (RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL) may I but obtain: GOD, for that his
blessing, shall have my praises, YOU for your acceptance shall have his
prayers, who is

Your Worships to be commanded in any Christian service to his power; THOMAS
BARNES.

THE SPOVSES SPIKENARD.
Canticles 1.12.13.14. 12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard
sends forth the smell thereof.

13. A bundle of Myrrh is my welbeloved unto me, he shall lie all night
between my breasts.


THree Works did Solomon Write, that the Church of GOD might be the better for
that Wisdom which the God of Wisdom bestowed upon him, Proverbiall
Sentences, Powerful Sermons, and Patheticall Songs: which Works in Canonical
Scriptures, are known by these names, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, each
of which contains in it most excellent and heavenly matter, but the sweetest
of all the rest is this Book of the Canticles. Wherein, under a continued
Allegory in the form of a Pastoral Elegy, this heavenly inspired Poet does
breath out the melodious strains and passages of love mutually interchanged
between the great Spouse Christ Jesus, and his best beloved Bride the Church.
Amongst which strains this Text is one, being a part of that heavenly Dialogue
betwixt Christ and his Church, comprehended in this Chapter. In which Dialogue,
two things (to make the parts of this Chapter) are considerable; first, the
Prologue or Entrance into the Dialogue, in the first six verses. Secondly, the
Dialogue it self, from the seventh verse to the end of the Chapter. In the
Prologue, the Church does two things; first, she expresses her ardent desire
of a conjugal communion with her husband Christ Jesus, in the second, third,
and fourth verses. Secondly, she takes away the scandal, partly, of the
cross which she is exposed unto, partly, of those infirmities which she is
inclined unto, both which might be cast in her teeth by false brethren, to
vpbraid her for too much sauciness, that she seeming so black, dares be so
bold as to desire communion with so beautiful an husband as Christ is; and
this she does in the fifth and sixth verses.

The Dialogue it self comprehends in it three particulars. First, a question
that the Church makes where she might find her Christ as a comforter in the
time of affliction, as an helper in the time of temptation, in the seventh
verse. Secondly, Christ his answer to this question, in the eight verse.
Thirdly, the excellent praises which they do mutually confer each upon the
other, from the ninth verse to the end of the Chapter. Christ praising the
Church in the ninth, tenth, eleventh, fifteenth, sixteenth, and seaventeenth
verses. And the Church commending her Christ, in the words of this Text, and
that from two properties which she perceived in him, 1. Greatness in the 12.
verse. 2. Goodness in the 13. verse.


The first of these, Order requires we should first deal withal.

12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof. BEcause the royalty of personage, Parts of the Text. The reason ^ the
division, because King in the 12. ve^ is a style of Greatness, and Well-beloved in
the 13. verse a title of goodness.
costlines of provision for his Bride, and stateliness of presence with his
Bride, do much set forth the Greatness of a Bridegroom: therefore the Church
here commends the Greatness of HER spiritual Spouse, from these three
particulars. 1. Regem non citra magnificentia^ nota appellatum sponsum Mercer.
ad locum. The first circumstance in the first part. The meaning.
the royalty of his person by the style (KING) that she gives him. While the
King. 2. The costlines of provision for her, by the Table which she speaks
of, calling it His Table. 3. The statelines of his presence, by his sitting at
this Table, While the King sits at his Table, amplified by the adiunct
sweetness, which her Spikenard did send unto him, while he was thus present
with her; My Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.

TO begin with the style royal which she gives him, While the King.
Howsoever Brightns.
One by King here, understands King Asa, spoken of 2. Chron. 15. and others
in the hystoricall sense, King Solomon, yet with Mercer. Piscat.
others I do rather mystically understand Christ Jesus, the spiritual
Solomon, and Isa. 9.6.
Prince of peace. And so our Observation must be this; That the husband of the
Church Christ Jesus is a King. This is a known Maxim, in the proof whereof
the Scripture is no whit barren. The Psalmist, Doct. 1. Christ the Churches
Spouse is a King.
speaking in the person of the Church, calls him Psalm. 47.7.
our King. Daniel calls him Dan. 9.25.
Messiah the Prince. And Chap. 12.1.
Michaell the great Prince. S. John in one place of the Revelation styles him
the Prince of the Kings of the earth Apoc. 1.5.
; and in another, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords Chap. 19.16.
. Herewith squareth that of Jeremy, Iere. 23.5.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and a KING shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice upon the earth. The same thing spoke the Angel to Mary,
concerning Christ, Luke 1.33.
He shall reign over the house of David, and of his kingdom shall be none
end. All these testimonies (with many other which might have been alleged)
do manifestly show this to be a truth, That Christ Jesus, Sions Spouse, is a
King.

How Christ is a King, two ways.
And if we would know how he came by this Kingly office (which must be answered
before the point be applied) we must understand, that he is a King two ways.

First, By dominion of himself. Secondly, By donation from another.
1. First, by dominion and authority of himself, and so he is Jehovah, God
equal with the Father, and the holy Ghost, in unity of essence, equality of
potency, majesty, glory, and soveraigntie over all creatures.

2. He is a King by donation and gift, receiving the kingdom (as he is (...))
or Mediator of the Church from the Father, in which regard he is called Messiah
in the old Testament, and Christ in the new, which signify Anointed, that
is, Anointed of the Father, and so much he testifies himself; Mat. 11.27.
All things, and Chap. 28.28
All power both in heaven and in earth, are given me of my Father. Thus the
point is made good and made clear. It is as useful as plain. the DAVGHTER of
the King Psalm. 45.13.
: to hear Solomon stiling her the Princes DAVGHTER Cant. 7.1.
, is to hear her dignity unmatchable; but to hear her, her self (as she is
the WIFE of Christ) stiling him the King in my Text, to hear Christ the King
calling her his Spousesse, his love, his dove, his undefiled one, etc. as he
does in more places of this Book then one; this is to hear her excellency to
be unutterable. What honor can be paralelled with it? What dignity is
comparable to it? Behold (says S. John) (to stir up attention) what manner
of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons
of God 1 Ioh. 3.1.
. Behold, (may I say, to stir up admiration) what singular kindness the son
has shown the Church, that she should be the Wife of God? If by the grace of
adoption, to be the BRETHREN of Christ, can command a Behold at our hands, then
by the virtue of an holy conjunction to be the BRIDE of Christ, must needs call
for a Behold and wonder at our hands. And (to speak truth) so wonderful is
this dignity, that except by an Allegory I cannot set it forth. We know that
that Woman which has an earthly King to her husband, excels all other
degrees of Women (though great and noble) in the Land where she lives, in
diverse particulars. For she has a more noble Guard to attend her, more royal
Garments to array her, more c^stly Jewels to adorn her, more stately Palaces
to inhabit in, more pleasant Galleries to walk upon, then they have, or at
least then its fit they should have. And does not that Apoc. 12.1.
Woman clothed with the Sun, I mean the So Paraeus, and others expound it.
Church, who is contracted to the Heavenly King, excel all other sorts and
societies of people in the like? Out of doubt she does: Emperors with all
their Monarchies, Nobles with all their dignities, Captains with all their
Victories, Papists with all their prelacies, Pagans with all their
excellencies, are not comparable unto her. Her guard are the Angels of Christ
Psalm. 34.7. Heb. 1.14.
; Her garments are the robes of Christ Apoc. 12.1.
; Her jewels are the graces or Christ; Her dwelling place is the kingdom of
Christ, of grace here, of glory hereafter; Her walking places are the ways of
Christ, for it is only the privilege of Christians to tread in the steps of
their sovereign and Savior. Well then might the Psalmist say, Glorious things
are spoken of thee thou City of God Psalm 87.3.
. I know what opinion the world has of the Church, deeming her of all people
to be the basest, O nunquam satis expensam credentium dignitatem. Muscul. in
Explana. Psalm. 45. v. 9. Obs. 2.
even the very scumme and refuse of men: I know also that her own members in
the time of temptation think more hardly of themselves, then there is either
cause or warrant; But whatsoever the world thinks of her, whatsoever poor
Christians in the times of distress think of themselves, yet it is a certain
thing, that great honor have all the Saints Psalm. 149.9.
; the point in hand informs us of no less, when it says, that Isreal's
husband is a King.

For the enemies of Sion.
For, first it may be bent AGAINST them by way of terror. Secondly, it may be
directed To them by way of counsel.

1. By way of terror.
First, I say, it may be a ground of terror AGAINST them, for the wrongs that
they offer to the members of Christ. Ah poor wretches, are they aware whom
they oppose! consider they whom they set against! they persecute, wrong,
oppugn, them who are the Wife of Christ Jesus, a glorious Bride, whose husband
is a King; King, not only by donation from the Father, but also by dominion of
himself. Mean men (ye know) if they love their Wives, will not see them
wronged if they can help it, much less will Kings brook the injuries that
are offered their Queens. That treason which is spoken or plotted against
them, they take as done to themselves, and will be revenged for it. And will
the King of Kings, that Great Prince, Christ Jesus, do less for his Wife* the
Church? No, no: he paid too dear a price for her, as not to maintain her
cause, and avenge her quarrel: and if he undertakes to defend her, then woe to
those that offend her; Better a Millstone were hanged about their necks, and
they cast into the midst of the Sea.

I remember in the Book of Joshua, how those Ios. 10.3-26 verses.
five Kings were served for Warring against the Gibeonites, that were entered
into league with Iosuah; the Captains trod upon their necks, they were hanged
upon five trees against the Sun: And will not the great Ios. 5.15.
Captain of the Lords Host tread upon THEIR necks, and punish THEM in his
wrath, that set against those that are entered not only into league, but also
into contract with Jesus, our spiritual Iosuah? Be but a man a Ios. 9.27.
Water-bearer to the Congregation of Israel, or a Psalm. 84.10.
Doore-keeper in the house of God, or like John Baptist Mat. 11.11.
least in the Kingdom of heaven, his wrongs shall be righted, his cause shall
be avenged. What became of them that set against Daniel? were not their bones
broken, and their bodies eaten with the teeth of Lions Dan. 6.24.
. How fared it with those that bound the three Children, and cast them into the
fiery Furnace? were they not scorched to death with the fl^me of the fire Chap.
3.22.
? Did not Act. 12.23.
Lice gnaw out the bowels, and does not a curse lie upon the name of Herod,
who murdered James, and imprisoned Peter, the Iam 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.1.
servants of the Lord Jesus Christ? What end came Nero unto, that unnatural
Monster, who imbrued his hands in the blood of his own mother, wife, kindred,
and others Sueton in vita Neronis. cap. 34. 35.
; that cruel Lion, as Paul calls him 2 Timothy 4.17.
, who murdered and massacred the poor Christians? If that be true, which is
storied of him, his own sword did he sheath in ^his own blood, and became his
own Butcher Auson de 12. Caesar Matricidaque Nero proprio se perculit ense.
. In times of later persecution amongst us, what fearful ends did those
butchers come unto, that slew the Saints. Some had their gutts carried about
the streets upon Bulls horns Fox Martyr: Olog. edit. Anno 1596. Page 712. Idem
ibid.
; others dyed mad Page 1904. Melanct. chron. l. 11 p. 20.
; others were struck dead with the immediate hand of God Fox. Mart. 1908. and
1417
as they have 3 Ioh. 9.
Diotrephes-like been prating and inveighing against the members of Christ, in
their Pulpits. And therefore I tell thee, it is dangerous meddling against the
Saints, it is fearful to flout at them, to backbite them, slander them, hate
them, devise and practice mischief against them. What? longest thou to have
Sions King to break thee in pieces, and the Revel. 5.5.
Lion of the tribe of Judah about thy ears? Alas man, if the rage of an
earthly King (as Solomon speaks) be like the roaring of a Lion Pro. 19.12.
, what shall Christ his wrath be against his own and his Brides adversaries?
Is he think thou a King only IN his Church, and To his Church, to rule it
by his Word, and guide it by his Spirit, and not as well a King FOR his Church,
to avenge the wrongs thou shall dare to offer unto it? Oh, fond wretch, do not
deceive thine own soul; Vengeance belongs to him and he will repay.

That therefore I may use this point by way of counsel, Deuteronomy. 32.35. 2. Part
of the use to Sions enemies, viz. Counsel or persuasion.
let me persuade a little with thee; Do no wrong to the Church of Christ, or
any member of the same. Remember the charge that the Lord himself gives;
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm Psalm 105.15.
. Touch them not with thy tongue, shoot not out bitter words against them.
Touch them not with thy Pen, frame no bitter writings against them; touch them
not with thy hand, offer no violence unto them; touch them not with thy head,
invent no ill against them. For what shall it avail thee to wrong them, when
as their husband Christ is a King. Motive 1. Against this cruelty the King
Christ bendes his wisdom and his power. Ledere servos Dei and Christi tuis
persecutionibus desine; quos laesos vltio divina defendit. Cypr. Tract. contra
Demetr. fol. 72. Motive 2. To wrong the Church is unequal and unjust dealing.
1. With Christ himself.
A King, I say, and therefore wants no wisdom, but is able to go beyond
thee, be thou as crafty in thy fetches as the Serpent was; A King, I say,
who wants no power, but is able to confound thee, were thou as mighty in thy
courses as ever proud Senacherib was: and both his Princely policy, and Kingly
potency, shall concur and meet together for thy ruin, rather then his Wife
shall suffer at thy hands any more then what shall turn to her eternal
welfare. Is it not a vain thing for thee to attempt that which both the
wisdom and power of Christ opposes it self against?

Besides, there is little reason, nay it is against all reason, that thou
should do harm unto the Saints, for neither does the Husband nor the Wife
give any just cause unto thee. First, for the husband and King himself. What
wrong did he ever do thee? Has he ever dealt unmercifully and cruelly with
thee? Is it not by HIS patience that thou art kept out of hell, so long ago,
so many ways deserved by thee? Is it not by HIS goodness and providence, that
thou have health, liberty, peace, prosperity, etc? Nay, does He not in the
motions of his Spirit, which thou quenchest, in the ministry of his Word, which
thou despisest, make most free and gracious offers of his own precious blood,
to save thy soul from everlasting damnation, and saved thou might be, if
thine impenitent and unbelieving heart did not reject and set light by these
offers? Answer me, by whom have thou, thy being, life, and moving, and every
good thing that thou do enjoy? and is this the recompense of his kindness,
to abuse and despise his Wife, his beloved Wife, and persecute him in his
members? What an unjust and unequal thing is this? What? Must HIS Wife of all
other in the world, be accounted factious, seditious, trouble-States, traitors,
that speak against Caesar, not worthy to live in a Commonwealth, etc? Seruest
thou this King thus indeed for his goodness? Oh injury most horrible, Oh wrong
most intolerable, which thou will never be able to answer, when he shall
Apoc. 1.7. Mat. 24.30.
come in the Clouds to avenge the blood of the Saints.

Again, 2. It is injustice to the Church also.
As Christ himself on his part gives thee no just cause to hurt his Church, no
more does she on her part; for what injury does she do thee? She refuses
indeed to run to the same excess of riot with thee. Accountest thou this a
wrong. In this (if thou had but eyes to see) she is more thy friend then
thine enemy, because she would not by any bad example hearten and harden thee
in the way to damnation; contrarily, by her good example she would allure thee
TO, and invre thee IN the way to salvation. Besides, By HER means thou do
enjoy much good. Were it not for HER, thy house would be burned over thy head;
for when there shall cease to be a Church upon the earth, all things thereon
shall be melted by fire 2 Pet. 3.12.
. Many a time does she confer with her Kingly Spouse for thy good; she
entreats him (if it be his blessed will) to turnr thee from thy sins, to
save thee in the heavens; By her prayers she stopps many a judgment from
lighting upon thee, she fetches many a blessing from heaven for thee. For Gods
sake then be not so unjust, as to harm those, for whose sake the very world it
self is vpheld and preserved, and by whose means thou thy self do enjoy a
great deal of good. Nature condemns injustice against the best friends. Let
me then beseech thee, (if thou be not altogether inexorable, inflexible) for
this cause not to offer such injury to the children of God, jest not at them,
rail not upon them, bend neither thy craft, nor thy cruelty against them.
Mot. 3.
They have buffettings and temptations enough within, they had need be spared
and freed from troubles without; Has thy malice then added to the measure of
their afflictions? Get thee upon thy knees for it, power out the songs of
complaint against thy self before the Lord fot it, meet her husband the King
in the way, make thy peace with him for the abuses thou have offered her his
Wife, be not said nay until a bill of pacification, and reconciliation be
sealed for thee; purpose thou and promise him never to serve him so in his
members any more; learn to love them as much as ever thou have hated them: and
do this speedily too, least that this great King and Bridegroom of the
Church, like a Hos. 13.7.8.
Leopard in the way, and a Bear robbed of her whelps, rise up against thee,
Psalm. 50.22.
tear thee in pieces and there be none to deliver thee.

Reproof of those that neglect an union with Christ.
who care not for, who seek not after, who like not of a matching and marrying
with Christ Jesus. He comes unto us as a Wooer, in his Word, with his mercies,
offering a large ioynture unto us in the possessions of grace here, in the
portion of glory hereafter, and feign would he have entertainment at our
hands, but we will none of him; just like Jerusalem, (against whom he takes up
a bill of complaint by S. Luke) I would have gathered you together as an hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, but you would not Luke 17.37.
? All the day long stretches he forth his hand Romans 10.21. Isa. 65.2.
, but we are a gainsaying people. If now and then we afford him a good look,
and a fair word, by hearing a Sermon upon the Saboth, by receiving the
Sacrament at Easter, by a little superficial attendance upon his ordinances,
(when we are urged to it) that's all he gets at our hands: To give him our
consent, to be content to be inuisibly contracted unto him, and to forsake all
other only to cleave to him, this we will not by any means grant him, the
greatest number of us. Oh that so royal a Suter, should be so basely served at
the hands of such base creatures. Would any poor man's daughter serve a rich
man's son after such a fashion? Would a mean subjects child deal thus with
a Prince, with a King? She would not, except she were a fool, or frantic.
Ah fools then, and unwise that WE are, to give this Princely Wooer so cold a
well-come. Have we no regard to our own good? can we not see when we are well
offered? What? think we that we are well enough, rich enough of our selves?
Alas we, ( Laodicea-like) Apoc. 3.17.
are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked, stripped and robbed of all the
wealth which once we had in our innocent condition; so mean, so beggarly, that
except we get him into union with us, to be our husband, and enrich us, it had
been good for us if we had never been: Why then should we be so sottish, so
envious to our own weal, as to reject those treaties of marriage with
himself, that he proffers us. I guess at the cause of this, Cavills of some
(now a reproouing) that care not for Christ.
and (I think) not amiss. We (like to some Wives that love to play rex, and
are loath to be under rule) deem the conditions too strict, which his Spouse
must conform unto, and this marr's the match. Oh! Oh! 1. That he ties to
unreasonable conditions.
First, he requires spiritual chastity at our hands. His Wife must be a
Virgin, Psalm. 45.14. Isa. 37.22.
have doves eyes, Cant. 1.15.
single and simple, not to admit of any Mate with him, Ezechiel's Ezech. 23.5.
harlot, and James his Iam. 4.4.
adulteress, he cannot away with. That we should part our love betwixt Mammon
and him, him and Belial, him and Satan, he will not tolerate, the whole man
must be kept chaste wholly for him: If we entertain either sensual pleasures,
or sinful profits, as our Paramours, we are no Bride for his fellowship.

Genesis 3.16.
Eve to her husband, does he look for indeed; he tells us if we will match
with him, our desire must be to him, he must rule over us, and of necessity
we must Psalm. 45.11.
reverence, (that is) be in submission unto him.

Psalm. 45.10.
forget our own people, and our fathers house too. Look as Israel must
forsake her idols which she worshipped in the time of Pagan idolatry As Cyrill
expounds it. Catech. 7.
; as the Gentiles must forget and leave the Jewish rites and ceremonies under
the Gospel So Lyranus.
; so must we forget our old country manners whatsoever Just. Mart. in Dialog.
cum Trypho. (...). Luke 14.26.
. Our teeth must not be set on edge with the sour grapes that our fathers have
eaten. That we should retain any dregs of the vain superstition, or keep any
smacke of the vile conversation of our forefathers, that we should follow the
evil customs of evil people amongst whom we live, will not he at any hand
yield unto: He that forsakes not father, mother, children, friends, and all
for Christ's sake; he that prefers the pleasing and imitating any of them
before him, is not worthy of him. Here is another condition.

There is another yet, which is not the least. They that fellow and follow him,
must take up their cross Luke 9.23.
: He tells us the hardest in Wooing time: if we be his Disciples, we shall be
Io. 15.19.21 Luke 21.17.
hated for his name sake, scoffed at with Isaac Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29.
, oppressed with Israel Ex. 5.5.6 etc.
, accused 1 Samuel 2.19.
, hunted 1 Samuel c. 24, 26. etc.
with David, imprisoned with Jeremy Iere. 32.2.
, stocked with Joseph Genesis 39.20.
, fettered with Paul and Silas Act. 16.23.
, fed with the bread of affliction with Micha 1 Kin. 22.27
, carried into Captivity with Ezechiel Ezekiel. 1.1.
, plunged into the den of Lions with Daniel Dan. 6.16.
, fired in the brazen Bull with Antipas See Paraeus in Apoc. 2.13.
, robbed of goods, spoiled of life with Polycarpus Apoc. 2.9.
. In a word, persecuted and opposed, and men of sorrows with himself Isa.
53.3.
. These indeed, are the conditions He ties his Wife unto, and these things, He
propounds unto us when he comes a Wooing us, and hence it is we are so loath to
be contracted unto him. Hard terms indeed to mere naturalists, who have no
eye to see the royalty of the person, nor the recompense of reward that he
brings with him: But to a man that has any sound judgment in spiritual
matters, these Articles are easy and reasonable enough, if we may take the
Bridegroomes own word Mat. 11. last. My yoke is easy, and my burden light.
The cavills quelled.
. Let us examine the case a little. Is it more then reason, that, a great
Prince (making choice of a peasants daughter to Wife) should request and
require a reservation and preservation of her chastity, love, and loyalty for
himself? Must Pharaohs daughter So literally the word reverence him,
imports. Psalm 45.11.
obey Solomon, and is it much for the Church to obey her Solomon, Christ Jesus?
To him only it is meet (says Beza. Paraphrase upon Psalm. 45.
one) thou should be subject, as to thy Lord; I would have thee to know
(says Johan. Compens ibid. Paraphrastice. Est autem vt scias hic rex dominus
tuus dignus cuitu in genua prouoluta supplex fias.
another) that this King thy Lord is worthy to have bended knees, and a bowing
heart. Again, shall Valeria, the wife of Seruius (of whom Hier. li 1. adversus
Iovin.
one of the Fathers reports) not consent to marry another, saying; Seruium
semper viuere.
Seruius my husband lives still: and shall Jerusalem play the Harlot,
suffering Egypt, Assyria, the world, the Devil, and corruption to Ezekiel. 23.3.
press and bruise the teates of her Virginity; as though her husband Christ
were quite dead, and without being? Must Sarah forsake her own Country Genesis
12.5.
, Rachell leave her fathers family Genesis 31.14.
, to follow their husbands? and may Sion stay in Sodom still, not leave the
rotten errors, and corrupt manners, of her old fathers house? May she say as
the Romanists do at this day, I believe as the Church believes, though they
know not how the Church believes; or as the Libertines do, We will do as our
fathers have done, as our neighbors do, we will play on Sundays, keep merry
company, love good fellowship, such do so, we will none of these precise
orders in our families, our fathers never taught us this, nor did this; shall
she (I say) say thus? Shall Michol incur the displeasure of Saul 1 Samuel
19.12.17.
for David's good; and shall the Church be loath to bear rebuke for Christ his
sake, and flinch back because of troubles? Is it too hard, for Christ to
require constancy and patience at her hands? What great thing I pray is
required, (says Musc. in Psalm. p. 357. A. Quaeso quid magni exigitur cum idem
coniugi suo debeat vxor.
one) when every Wife owes the like to her husband! What want of equity is in
these conditions? let any man judge. Or put case these terms were
unreasonable. Yet this husband is an heavenly King (you see) and that makes
amends for all, lighteneth the burden, and qualifieth the seeming tartnes of
these Articles. But its come to Calvin's saying; In Psalm. 45. v. 11.
Hereupon grows it, that we be so stately and proud (we will none of Christ)
because we consider not how precious a treasure God offreth us in his only
begotten son. If this unthankfulness let not, it would not grieve us
after the example of Paul, Phil. 3.8.
to account whatsoever we set most store by, to be but dung, and right naught,
that Christ might enrich us with his riches. Worthy therefore to be blamed, are
all those, who, (because they must keep themselves chaste from whooring after
their own pleasures, and profits, yield obedience to Christ's will* suffer
troubles for his name, renounce their superstitions and corruptions for his
sake) cannot, will not accept those treaties of communion with himself, which
in love he tendereth unto them. What said I? Worthy to be blamed? Nay (their
contempt of the royalty of his person, and richnes of his portion being
considered) they are worthy to be excluded from ever having share in that
excellent GLORY, which he has prepared for his own.

Isreal's Spouse an heavenly King? What reverent regard and good well-come ought
we (then) to afford Gods Ministers, Exhortation to make much of Levi, who
labors in matching us to Christ.
who come unto us and deal with us about a Match with Christ Jesus. We know
what respect Rebeccah gave Eliezer, Abraham's servant Genesis 24.31.32.33.
, when he came unto HER about a Match with the Patriarch Isaac his Masters
son: how much made on a Princes messenger to a poor man's daughter, about
such a matter should be, we may easily conjecture; and shall not we account
the Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
feet of them beautiful, that bring unto us the glad tidings of peace; and
that tell us, that the son of God would feign be married unto us? God forbid,
but we should. Alas, alas then what an heavy indictment at the day of
judgment, will be brought IN against the unthankful world, for the bad
entertainment that it yields unto the Lords Levites, and laborers in this
business. We come from the King of heaven, as his Ambassadors, we talk with
people about this Spouse, and (according to the talent which the Lord has lent
us) we acquaint them with the comelines of his feature, the statelines of his
person, the greatness of his portion, we direct them how to entertain him, show
them the way how to obtain him, etc. And yet (lamentable it is to consider)
some deride us, some disgrace us, and many deal unjustly with us. Men and
brethren, what shall we do? Shall we desist? Has the Lord taken an oath of
us (as Abraham of his servant) that we shall seek out a Wife for his son,
and shall we deal falsely and faithlesly in our errand? Oh, let us labor to
join still, even heaven and earth, Christ and the Church. We have not our
names* and offices of Levi signifies joined.
Levi for naught. Pray we for a blessing upon our travail, as Genesis 24.12.
Eliezer did; shun we not to declare all the counsel of God Act. 20.27.
, for any by-respect whatsoever; and then albeit our message be not entertained
by All, as we do desire, yet a good Rebeccah will make us well-come for the
tidings that we bring her of this heavenly Isaac, and the comfort we shall
reap in this, will countercheck the discomforts that may be occasioned by the
contrary. And as for the Egyptian Dames, Philistines Dalilahs, daughters of
Heth, and wicked ones, who care the less for us, by how much the more we urge
them to this Bridegroom; let them live single from Christ if they list; one
day they will curse the time, that ever they set so light by so weighty a
message, so Princely a marriage.

Advise to pray for the church in affliction.
a part of his Bride, who are under the rod, and the flaile, for the Gospells
sake. His Kingly office, is an argument, that there is neither want of
wisdom, nor defect of power, to bring to naught, the subtle policies, and
cruel practices of those Romish The Jesuits.
bloodhounds, and heathenish Atheists, who hunt after the ruin of Gods
Israel. Having then such an one to speak to, why should our prayers be either
few or cold? Nay, why not more then ordinary in extraordinary times of need?
What an heavy case is it, that in the Isa. 22.12.
day when the Lord calls us to mourning, to weeping, to baldness, and girding
with sackcloth, there should be Verse. 13.
joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking
Wine! Oh, that this principle could learn us better things. Needful it is
(now if ever) for us that we should; well it would be with us, if we would
even importune this Bridegroom for his church, with the Prophet David's
argument; Thou art my King, O God, command deliverances for Jacob Psalm. 44.4.
.

Comfort to the faithful.
Speak thou afflicted Christian, what is it that troubles thee? The Devil
dogs thee, does he not? Corruption clogs thee, does it not? Peradventure thou
think, thou shall not hold out to the end: It may be the reproaches of
neighbors, the malice of enemies, the fear of death, and the like, do
disquiet thee. Well, whatsoever it be that grieueth thee, prove but thou that
Christ Jesus has wooed thee, and won thee to himself, and this point will
glad thee and comfort thee.

Comfort, 1. Against Satan.
What though that Arch-adversary to thy peace, and thy soul, the Devil, will
not let thee alone, but is ever and anon molesting of thee, with such and such
assaults, setting upon thee. Remember, thy husband is a King: and this Genesis
3.15.
seed of the Woman has broken the head of that serpent, and victoriously
conquered this Prince of darkness, insomuch, that though he does nibble at thy
heel, yet this Prince, this God of Peace, shall Romans 16.20.
tread him down shortly under thy feet; And then all his darts that he has
shot out against thee, shall be retorted upon himself, to the wounding of his
own pate. Yea, and this be thou surely persuaded of too, for thy husband, the
great King, will have it so, such is his pleasure, and can have it so, such is
his power. So that the Devil cannot be so violent against thee, but Christ
will be as valiant against him for thee Quo impetu venerat, eodem impetu pulsus
est, and quantum fotmidinis, and terroris attulit, tantum fortitudinis inuenit
and roboris. Cyp. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 1.
.

2. Against the rebelling of nature against grace.
Secondly, Fear thou that thy corruptions will subiugate thee to their former
yoke, and prevail over thee, because they are continually stirring against
the work of the Spirit in thee? Consider still thy husband is a King; and by
consequent, he has mastered sin for thee, even in thine own flesh, Psalm.
68.19.
he has led captivity captive, he has laid chains upon thy lusts, and has
taken such order for the continual decrease of evil in thee, that (like as it
was fore-prophesied, the Israelites should the Babylonians) so thou shall take
those Corruptions captives, whose captive thou were, and thou shall rule over
those thy spiritual oppressors, and rest shall thou have from this thy sorrow,
and thy fear, and from the hard bondage, wherein (before conversion) thou wast
made to serve Isa. 14.2.3.
.

3. Against doubting of perseverance.
3. Stand thou in doubt, whether thou shall have grace enough to bring thee
to heaven, and is this a discomfort unto thee? still keep the memorial of
this point in thy thoughts. In this thy King Coloss. 1.19. Chap. 2. v. 9.
dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and the absolute riches of all
graces, which graces are the jewels that he minds to furnish and fill thee
withal continually. Will a Princely wooer be sparing in his gifts? will he
marry himself with one, whom he means to make a bill of divorce against,
after there has passed a most sweet Communion betwixt them for a time? Or
what? Can he not for want of might, or loves he not for want of will, to make
that good which he promised, when he said, Hos. 2.19.20.
I will marry thee to my self FOR EVER? yea, and that in righteousness, in
judgment, in faithfulness, and knowledge? When tookest thou him ever tardy, or
faithles? He would not be thy Prince, thy Sovereign, if he meant not to guide
thee by his law, and govern thee with his Spirit, until he even brings thee
to glory. Wherefore, if here be thy fear, comfort thy heart with that which
the Apostle has, Heb. 12.28. the kingdom which thou have received (yea, have
received already) cannot be shaken.

Fourthly, Does the world power contempt upon thee? 4. Against contempt.
Art thou set at naught? can not have that esteem amongst men, which thou
desire and deservest? I see little reason why this should trouble thee; If it
does, here is comfort against IT also. Thou have a KING, whom thou art married
unto, yea, the KING of heaven and earth, which if the world knew (as it does
not, in which thou live as a stranger, and unknown unto thee) it would be
twice advised, ere it would dare so much as to have any base thought, or
contemptuous conceit of thee. But the world knows none but her own bratts;
and thou (being of the offspring of God Act. 17.20.
, a member of Iehovahs family, yea, a Spouse made fit for the King himself)
she knows not thee, esteems not thee, any more then a fool does a prize,
put into his hand. Which contempt thou need no more care for, and at which
thou need be no more cast down, then a Noblemans Wife, or a Princes Bride,
when (being in a strange Country, and unknown what her house and husband is)
she is either despised, or not esteemed, according to her own, and Spouse his
worth.

Fifthly, Art thou not only despised, 5. Against persecution.
but also mis-vsed in the world? Do the persecuters of the truth, Ioh. 8.4^.
who are of the Devil their Father, go about to wrong thee any kind of way,
in thy name, state, person, life, or liberty. Here is thy Shield still against
discomfort. Thy husband is a King; and the time will come, when He will be
known to be a King in the midst of thine enemies: Told I not thee, that he
is Dan. 12.1.
Michaell the great Prince, that STANDS for the people of God. Never loving
husband stood more stoutly for his Wife, then he has stood and does stand for
his Well-beloued. Remember what he did for his ancient Israel, he reproved even
Kings for their sakes Ps. 135.136.
. What is become of Og, the King of Basan, and Sehon, King of the Amorites, who
were great and mighty Princes? Are they not perished long ago? Felt they not
the heaviness of his revengefull hand? And what is His hand shortened Isa. 50.2.
now, that it cannot redeem? or has it no power to deliver now as well as
then? Yes, yes, Isa. 43.13.
Before the day was I am he, (says the LORD, speaking of delivering Israel
from the hands of Babylon, and Babylon into the hands of Chaldea) and there
is none can deliver out of my hand. I will work, and who shall let it? The
Lord Psalm. 110.5.6
at thy right hand, (says David speaking of Christ) shall strike through Kings
in the day of his wrath, and wound the heads over diverse Countries. Wherefore
comfort thy self with these things, against trouble and persecution, be it
verbal and Ismaell-like, or real and Iesabell-like. For Isa. 43.15.
I am (says Christ) the Lord, your holy one, the Creator of Israel, your King.

6. Against the fear of death.
Lastly, if Death be the King of terrors unto thee: and thou doubtest how thou
shall well-come, and away with this pale Sergeant when he comes with heavens
fore-decreed Writ to arrest thee, consider, that this thy Christ, thy King,
has like a stout Commander, and vnvanquishable conqueror, charged this
Sergeant to do thee no hurt, trod this enemy in the dirt. He told thee he
would do it long before he came; Hos. 13.14.
Oh death, I will be thy death; O grave, I will be thy destruction: according
to his promise, he did do it when he came; for Col. 2.15.
he has spoiled principalities and powers, made a show of them openly, and
triumphed over them. And now, since he is gone into heaven, he has left thee a
Writ of assurance for it, enrolled in the Writings of that famous Doctor of
the Gentiles; 1 Cor. 15 25.26.
He must reign, till he has put all things under his feet; the last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death. God forbid then that this Apoc. 6.7.
Rider upon the pale horse, should upon the thought of his coming, either
drive color out of THY face, or courage out of THY heart. Let them fear
death, who are out of Christ, who fear not this King. But as for thee, whom
Christ has linked to himself, insult thou over Death, as Death does over the
sons of unbelief, 1 Cor. 15* 55.57.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Thanks be unto God
which gives me victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus (I say) whatsoever
the temptations be that trouble thee, the discomforts be that molest thee,
arising either from the thought of the Devils subtlety, from the sight of
thine own infirmity, from suspicion of the want of constancy, from the
contempt of neighbors, malice of enemies, or fear of death, tune but this
Text with the voice of faith; in this Text, strike but upon this string, harp
upon this point with the finger of faith, (That Christ the Spouse of the Church
is a King;) and it will make such Music to thy soul, that like as (when
David played before Saul 1 Samuel 16*23.
) the wicked spirit went from him, so the troubled spirit will go from thee,
or else at least that disconsonant, and disconsolate, noise betwixt faith and
fear, to disquiet thy conscience, will be well qualified, and allayed. And so
an end of the first point in the first part, let us now set upon the second.
Which is the royal provision that this royal person makes for his beloved
Bride. For as he is a King, so he has a Table, which Solomon here in my Text,
calls

His Table.] Or (as some Translations have it) his repast. The second
circumstanc in the first part. The Interpretation.
Either of which readings (as the learned observe) the original will bear;
but the former do I follow.

A Table, we know, in the proper, and native signification, is a frame of Wood,
made to eat meat upon, in which sense we cannot take it here; nor yet for
corporal meat, set upon the Table to refresh our bodies withal. For the
Kingdom of God consists neither in meats nor drinks, as the Apostle shows
Romans 14.1^.
. We must therefore understand it Metaphorically, and taking it so, I find
variety and diversity of Expositions amongst Interpreters.

R^b. Selomoh. Fol. 117. fac. 2
Some of the Jews, whom Genebrard quoteth, s think it to be Sinai, the mount
where the Law was delivered to Moses, and whence he descended in have when the
Israelites erected and worshipped the golden Calfe Exodus 32.
: But this cannot be, because it is a confining of this Text to the state of
the Jewish Synagogue at that time; when as yet the holy Ghost has a larger
aim then at that. Mr Brightman.
One of our own Countrymen, thinks it to be meant particularly of the
Congregation of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, etc. who gathered themselves together
at Jerusalem, in the third month of the fifteenth year of the reign of 2 Chronicles. 15.^.10.
Asa. This opinion I will not censure, yet I dare not subscribe to it. For this
also I take to be a setting too short bounds to the Text. We will walk in a
broader way, and allow larger limits (with other sound and learned Writers). I
know Saint Luke speaks of a Luk 22.30.
Table, whereat Christ promised his Disciples to sit and eat; and that
intimates the heavenly dainties they should partake off in his Celestial
Paradise, the Kingdom of glory: which some As Piscator. Merc.
do understand in this place. But with * others, I understand the Word and
Sacraments, the diet of the Church; wherewithal she is fed and refreshed
spiritually, as men are corporally with meats and drinks set upon their
Table; Neither does this swerue from the Canon of Scripture: For is not the
Kingdom of heaven, that is, the Word of the Kingdom compared to a Supper, and
to Ioh. 6.27.
Meat that perishes not? And does not the Apostle call the Sacrament of his
last Supper, A Table 1 Cor. 19.21.
? And whereas it is called here, HIS Table, it intimates, that HE is the
Founder of this Feast. For who gives the Word, the meat that endures to
eternal life, if not Ioh. 6.21.
the son of man, whom the Father has sealed: And the Sacramental Table, is
called the Table of the LORD In that place ^recited out f the Corinths.
. I know indeed that Christ feeds and feasteth his Church with the internal
graces, and comforts of his Spirit, but because these follow to be considered
off in His Sitting at this Table, therefore my intent is in this only, to
insist on the external dishes of his Ordinances: And so make this the Doctrine.

That this King Christ, spreades a Table, and makes provision of the Word and
Sacraments for his Church. This is one of the things which the Church sets
his greatness forth by in my Text, in so much that now, with the Prophet
David, every member of the same may say, Psalm. 23.2.
He makes me to feed in green pastures. This is that which our Author
signifies elsewhere, when he brings in Christ in Wisdoms name, not only
building her an house, and erecting a Church, but also making provision for the
inhabitants of that house. Pro. 9.2.
She has killed her victuals, she has mingled her wine, she has prepared
her Table. In another place, he is brought in under the similitude of a King,
making a marriage dinner for his son, and sending forth his servants, the
Ministers of the Gospel, to toll in guests, and tell them of the feast, both
how bountiful it is, and how ready it is; Behold I have prepared my dinner, my
Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready Mat. 22.23.
. And that this feast is peculiarly provided for the Church, it is plain in
the same Parable Verses 5.10.
. Where we may see, that they which did set light by the servants call, the
Ministers invitation (as they that are out of the Church do) are threatened,
not to taste of that Supper; and only those are admitted as fit guests, whom
the servants gathered out of the high ways, whom the Ministers of the Gospel
are made instruments to turn out of the high way of sin that leads to
hell, through the Preaching of the Word. And who are they, but the Church?
Herewith accords that of Esaias, Isa. 25.6.
Upon this mountain (meaning the Church) shall the Lord make a feast of fat
things, a feast of Wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of Wines on
the lees well refined. See Ezekiel. 16.13.
So then deny it we cannot, (truth evincing it) that Christ has a board spread
for his Bride, richly furnished with such spiritual dainties, as his Word and
Sacraments be. And not without cause.

in augmentation of graces; in multitude, and in measure. As therefore there is
need of temporal food for corporal growth, so of these spiritual
Ordinances, for this spiritual growth.

First, He would have it to grow in multitude: he would have such daily added
to the Church, as are ordained to be saved, that like as Ephraim, Manasseh,
Simeon and Benjamin fell from Israel unto Asa in abundance 2 Chronicles. 15.9.
; so there may be an access of Elect ones unto him out of Satan's hands, every
day more and more: and this causes him to give Ephesians. 4.8.11.
gifts unto men, and to appoint some to be Prophets, some to be Apostles, some
teachers, some Pastors, with this Commission, Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my Saints unto me, for the (...).
augmentation of my body, or addition of members thereunto.

Secondly, He would have his Church grow in measure, his Will is, that they
which are added to the Church, should have grace augmented in their hearts, to
be more fat, flourishing, and well liking in their age Psalm. 92.14.
; therefore he gives them the 1 Pet. 2.2.
sincere milk of the Word, that they may Dicimus quidem cibum omnem perficere
ea quae aluntur, etc. Dyonis. Areop. libro Epistol. fol. 183. b.
grow thereby. And gives he not also, not only Baptism, as the Sacrament of
Initiation, but also, The Lords Supper for confirmation? Nay, by the
administration of the one, and communication at the other, does he not seal up
remission of sins by his blood, to the conscience of the believer, for the
strengthening of his faith, increasing of his love, and bettering of his
obedience? So that the believer may have equal recourse to Water in Baptism
by meditation, Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, by participation, to stay
his faith on, to strengthen his faith by, when either the malice of Satan
against him, or the relics of unbelief in him, shall raise any storms of
Despair, to weaken the same.

Isa. 55.1.
Hoe, every one come ye to the Waters, Come, buy, Wine and Milk without
money, and without price,) they stop their ears against this call, make
excuses when they are bidden. One has a Farm, another has Oxen, another has
a Wife to please, another his Market to follow, another his Dice, another his
Dogs; one cannot tarry in the Church while the Sacrament of Baptism is
administering; another is at odds with his neighbor, and he cannot come to the
Communion this year: And thus while one feeds upon his pleasures, another
upon his profits, another on his beastly and revengefull lusts, the most having
the broth of abominable things in their vessels Isa. 65.4.
: This Table of Christ's spreading is not so frequented, so regarded as it ought
to be. Which contempt of Gods Ordinances, how worthy of reprehension it is,
this point declares.

Should some Prince, or Peer of a Kingdom, A similie.
make a great feast, furnish his Table with all manner of dainties, yea, with
such costly delicates, as he feeds his own Queen, or Spouse withal, and
should send forth his servants, to invite guests to that feast, bidding to come
who have a list and well-come; and they that are thus bidden, should make
excuse, and say; Alas, I have a poor neighbor dwells by me, he has invited
me to a cold Sallet, or a dish of herbs, in which regard I cannot come: were
he not worthy to be Chronicled for a man without wisdom? Might not his
friends that love him, well reprove him, for so careless contemning a Princes
call, and for preferring a dish of Pepons at a poor man's house, before the
royal dainties of a great man's Table? they might very well: In like manner,
may not they be as deservedly shent, that shall prefer their earthly
commodities, their fleshly vanities, nay, their diabolical impieties, before
these supernatural meats, and spiritual bitts of the Word and Sacraments?
Know thou of whose providing they are? art thou aware for whom they be
prepared? are they not of the King, Christ? are they not for the Church? and
can that be course fare, which is of so royal a preparer, and for so royal
partakers? Verily, I may say to thee, as Elihu to Job; Thy soul abhors
dainty meat Job 33.22.
. Let me expostulate a little with thee. Why can the doctrine of salvation,
relish no better in thy palate? How is it that the Temple cannot hold thee,
while the Child is a Baptizing, but out thou must be running, as if it were an
Ordinance concerned thee not? Why will thou choose rather to live in wilful
malice with thy brother, then come and partake of the Lords Supper? Or
wherefore art thou so seldom at it, when as thou may so often have it? If I
were but acquainted with thy malady, I would apply a remedy, according to the
skill the Lord has given me. Oh that I knew but what would get thee a better
stomach. If thou would but provoke thy self, to vomit out the love of the
world, and of thy lusts, which like poisonous crudities lie cloddering upon thy
stomach, thou would have a better appetite; and this honey-combe would not
be loathed by thee. But if thou be past cure, then I have done with thee;
Go thy ways to thy husks with the filthy Swine, to thy Venison with profane
Esau; sell thy birthright for pottage; make excuses; frame pretenses to keep
thee from this Feast, yet I must be terrible in my words unto thee, This King
that makes this Banquet, will be wroth with thee, Mat. 22.7.
and will send forth his Armies to destroy all such as thou art.

thee whom counsel is like (by the blessing of God) to prevail withal, thee
do I persuade, yea, earnestly entreat, to frequent this Table, these
Ordinances; neither thy age, sex, condition, gifts, inward or outward, can
excuse thy absence, or prejudice thy admittance. Hither thou must come, the
King does enjoin thee; hither thou may come, he will accept thee; on these
dainties thou may feed, thy meannesse need be no impediment to thee; on
these dainties thou must feed, thy greatness can be no plea for the contrary.
And for thy encouragement hereto, know thou:

Motive 1.
First, That Christ will set no base fare upon his Board, for his best beloved
Bride. If the Cooks do mar it sometimes in the dressing, (as Fryer-like
Preachers do, powdering the Word with the dust of their own inventions; or as
the Papist-like Prelates do, adding cream, salt, oil, spittle, and the like
trash to Water in Baptism, and defiling the Lords Supper with that abominable
idol of the Mass) yet the fault of that is not in the King, and Kezar of the
Church. It is sweet, it is excellent as it comes out of his hands, Psalm* 19.10.
sweeter then the honey; of Job 28.1^.
price above Rubies; more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold:
The costliest meats, the delectablest drinks that are, are but course in
comparison of it. God forbid then thou should abhor it. Get thee to a good
Cook; abhor the Mass; Baptize not thy Child by a Seminary; and come but to
this Table, stay but at this Table with a reverent regard, and thou shall find
that I tell thee no lie, such sweetness shall thou taste, such goodness shall
thou see in the meanest of these Ordinances, even by thine own experience.

Secondly, Consider, Motive 2.
that it cannot be said of this food as Paul spoke of indifferent meats and
drinks, 1 Cor. 8.^*
Neither if we eat, are we the better, nor if we eat not, are we the worse.
For thy admission to the Church, if thou be not yet called, thy growing up
in grace, if thou be converted, hangs upon these Ordinances, as upon
secondary necessary helps; Said I not before, this meat the Feast-maker
provideth for the growth of the Church? How can the Church then grow in number
one the more for thee, if thou despise Prophesying? How can thou grow in
measure, if thou carest not for Preaching, make no use of thy Baptism,
prouest a superficial and seldom guest at the Lords Table. As then thou
tenderest thy conversion to grace, thy confirmation in grace, so delight to be
a guest at this Board which Christ spreads, take pleasure to make use of
those Ordinances, which like spiritual provision, he has made ready for his
Church, in the Sermons which are Preached, in the Sacraments which are
administered amongst us; knowing that to be a truth, which a Father says;
Chrysostom. in Math hom. 70. Cum spiritualia, v^cant, nulla occupationis
excusatio est.
When spiritual things do call us, no excuse of subordinate business will
serve the turn.

may all Gods people, that are pinched with penury, assure themselves, they
shall never starve, for want of needful sustenance. He that can give the
Kingdom, with the righteousness of that, can cast all other outward
necessaries upon us: He that can and does spread his Table for the soul, will
prepare victuals for the body. He can provide a Table for his Israel in the
Wilderness. David's soul can he satisfy with Marrow and Fatness, in a dry
and thirsty Land Psalm. 63.15.
. It is his honor to be frank and royal to his own. And indeed he that has
bin so liberal as to give himself, must needs with himself give all things
else. Thou complainest thou have not so full a purse, so ouer-flowing a Table
as others have; know thou not that Sheep, when they go up to the belly in
pasture, are in danger of rotting, and that barer Common were better for them?
Thy Shepherd sees it is better safety for thy graces, to furnish thee with a
mediocritie, rather then fill thee with a superfluity of outward blessings.
Tell me, have thou not provision for the soul, the Word, the Sacraments? If
Yea; this is a Genesis 43.34.
Beniamins mess, five times better then thy brethrens messes, which have
nothing but the world in store for the time of life, and wrath in store against
the day of death. The fruition of the greater and better should always
counteruaile the want of the lesser, and worser. Brown bread and the Gospel
(said Mr Bradford) is good cheer. Say thou poor Christian, Is not thy body as
strong to labor, and thy children as well liking as theirs that have more
abundance? thou can not deny it. Pluck up a good heart then, and say with
David; Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my feeder, therefore I shall not want. He lets not my soul
starve, therefore he will not let my body famish. Resolve on this, I say. For
it is a greater dishonor to his bounty, then thou art aware off, to think
that he will withold any needful good thing from any that lead an holy,
pure, and upright life Psalm. 84. vlt. ver.
.

The third circumstance in the first part.
We have now done with the second thing, which the Church commends her
husbands greatness by. The last remains to be handled, which is his presence
and residence with HER, implied by HIS Sitting at Table.

While the King SITS at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof. THis circumstance subdiuideth it self into two members. 1. The
fruition the Church has of Christ's sight and sitting, couched under the term
of Sitting at Table. 2. The fruit She gets by it, and returns for it, in the
smell that her Spikenard sends forth.

We will set these joints together in the meaning, and not handle them apart,
because they come under the same particular head.

While the King Sits at his Table, my Spikenard, etc. Sitteth]. The
Rabbines, who (as I remembered before, The Interpretation.
by King, understand Jehovah, and by Table, Mount Sinai) do by Sitting at
Table, take to be meant, the presence or residence of the Lord upon that Mount
with Moses, when he delivered the Law unto him. Others, refer it to the
presence of 2 Chronicles. 1^*
Asa, when he was in the midst of the Israelites, congregated and gathered
together, to make a Covenant with the Lord. But thou know (READER) I have
shunned these paths from the beginning. Others, expound it of the presence of
Christ, alluding to the presence of Solomon with his Bride, on the day of his
marriage. And amongst these, I find some difference; one understanding his
glorious Piscator. Dun^ fruitur gaudijs Calestibus. Metaphora qualis. Mat. 8.11.
presence in heaven, where he Sits, partaking of caelestiall joys: Merc.
Another his gracious presence with his Church in this world. Now that the
presence of Christ is here signified, it is probable, yea, very probable:
Because a man cannot sit at the same Table with another, but they must enjoy
the presence of one another. But, whither his glorious presence alone, or his
gracious alone, or both be here meant, that is the question. For mine own part,
albeit I dare not peremptorily exclude his presence in glory, (because whiles
he is at Table with his Saints on earth, he is as well at repast with his
Saints in heaven, and whiles the one has his gracious presence here, the other
has his glorious there) yet I do rather incline to his presence by grace
here: And that for these reasons.

The reasons of the meaning of the word, Sitting.
First, Because it is held generally, that this verse is the speech of the
Church militant, speaking and showing what her husband is to her, and does for
her, even in this life.

Secondly, Because of the end of her speech, which is to invite the daughters
of Jerusalem, (that is) them that are without the Church, to come to Christ.
But what stronger argument, to this purpose, could she use, then one taken
from the enjoying of his presence, as well by grace here, as in glory
hereafter. For little courage to come to Christ would men have, if so be there
were no comfortable sight and presence of him to be had in this life, as well
as in that which is to come. So then by Table, being understood (as has been
already showed) the Word and Sacraments; by his Sitting at this Table, is
meant his presence by grace with his Church by his Ordinances.

My Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. One of the Jews by Spikenard
here, understands the worship which the Israelites did yield unto the golden
Calfe; and by the smell that it cast forth, the noisome savor that this
Idolatry sent up to the Lord, whiles he was with Moses on the Mount, which was
so strong and loathsome, that the Lord was feign in have to send Moses down
unto them. Another, by Spikenard, understands the covenant it self, which the
Tribes made before the Lord, in the 15. year of Asa's reign: and by the
sending forth the smell thereof, he means the sounding forth of that 2 Chronicles.
15.14.
Vow with a loud voice, with Trumpets and Cornets, and such like Instruments of
Music. But letting these pass, Ambros in Psalm. 119. Nunc autem redolet
fides: Ideoque dicit Ecclesia: Nardus mea dedit odorem suum.
others do by Spikenard understand Faith alone; P^sc.
others Good works alone; Mercer and Geneb.
others, both Faith and Good works. This last judgment I follow, in regard of
the resemblance betwixt Spikenard and Faith, betwixt Spikenard and Good works.
How Faith resembles Spikenard.
First, for the resemblance betwixt Faith and it. Spikenard is a very sweet
and fragrant herb, with a tender root, full of leaves upon the top, of which
ears spring forth, full of fruit; Of this herb an ointment is made, (which it
seems was in much use in Salomons time) which has a threefold, or rather
fourefold virtue, to comfort the heart, to help against the weakness of the
stomach, defects of the brain and Diosc. lib. 1. cap. 6.
eyes. And is not faith much like.

First, It is a very sweet and fragrant virtue, it perfumes whatsoever we do,
without which it is Heb. 11.6.
impossible to please God.

Secondly, It has a tender root, it springs up in a broken heart, in a
conscience wounded, bruised, and prepared Perk. Catechis.
.

Thirdly, It comfort the heart, by the apprehension, and application of the
promises.

Fourthly, It avails against the diseases of the stomach, it keeps from
casting up the spiritual food, as Dios. l. 1. c. 6.
Spikenard from casting up the corporal, it helps against carnal and
earthly diseases, it moderates the affections.

Fifthly, It is full of leaves, he that has it makes profession of Religion.

Neither is it, in the last place, void of fruit, for faith makes a man as well
to practice as profess.

Now as Faith in All of these, How good Works resemble Spikenard.
so Good works in Some of these things are like to Spikenard also: and
chiefly in respect of the comforting quality of it. For Good works do
comfort occasionally, not only the hearts of the doers themselves, as the
example of Job proves (who drew comfort from his holy life, when he was almost
at the door of death,) but also the hearts of others, who desire the glory of
God, and credit of the Gospel; as the fruits of love in doing, and patience in
suffering, amongst the Thessalonians, were a great refreshing and crown of
rejoicing to the holy Apostle, yea, made both Paul, Siluanus, and Timotheus, to
glory of them in the Churches 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.4.
. Thus we see, what is to be meant by Spikenard; so that [My Spikenard] is as
much as, The Faith and Good works of me the Church militant. Now in that she
speaks of Sending forth the smell thereof, we must know that Solomon alludes
to the custom of his days, in the Eastern parts of the world, where the
Hebrews were, whose manner was at their Nuptials and Banquetts, for the
Brides and Wives, to besweeten themselves with sweet ointments, whereof
Spikenard was one, that they might savor all over their Boardes, to give not
only other sitters by, but also (and that chiefly too) their husbands
content; and it seems, the abuse and excess of this the Prophet Amos taxes
very sharply; Amos 6.4.6.
Woe to them that eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the Stall, that drink Wine in Bowls, and Annoint themselves with
the chief Ointments. It seems (I say) that Solomon alludes to this, to note
out unto us, that the Faith and Good works of the Church, do smell sweetly in
Christ's nostrills, and cast forth a savor unto others. Will you now, at
length, have the sum of all in a word? take it thus.

Paraphrase.
So long as my Kingly husband, Christ Jesus, is present in his Ordinances, with
me the Church militant, the faith and good works of my members, do savor
sweetly before God, and amongst men. The points that offer themselves hence to
our consideration, are these three.

1. That in his Word and Sacraments, Christ is present with his Church.

2. That whiles he is so present with her, she sends forth the savor of
Faith and good Works.

3. That they which have sound faith, and bring forth good fruit, may lawfully
profess, and speak of the same.

Doct. 3. Christ is present with his Church in his Ordinances.
TO begin with the first; While the Church enjoys the Word and Sacraments,
she enjoys the presence of her Beloved. For as Table importes the provision
he makes for her, so does his Sitting at Table, his presence with her. He
deals not with his people as a man that invites guests to his house to a
feast, who, when they are come goes his way from them, bears them no company;
but as He brings them hither, so He is with them here. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst amongst them Mat. 18.20.
. In the Parable before cited, we read, that the King came in to see the
guests Mat. 22.11.
; not only (as it is likely) to mark their carriage, but also to bear them
company. It is the speech of the Church, in the mouth of the Prophet; Hos. 6.2.
The third day we shall live in his sight. Where, by the third day, some
understand, the time of the Gospel, and, by living in his sight, Christ his
presence in the Gospel, with the Spouses readiness to hear his sayings
Zarch. in Hos. ad loc. Praeste eius dictis audientes. Ioh.
. Look as Gods presence was in Israel with the Arc, so is it amongst his
people, with his Word, and Sacraments; I am with you to the end of the world,
as he told his Disciples, and can he be absent in his Ordinances?

But here the only Question is, Qu: 1. How Christ is present in the Word. Answ.
How he is present with his people in these Ordinances? How in the Word? How in
Baptism? How in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

For the first, follow but me in tracing out the Metaphor, and you shall have
satisfaction.

A King sits at Table with his Queen, not only to feed with her, but also to
carue to her, to confer, and to be merry with her. So Christ is present with
his own, in the Preaching of the Word. 1. as a caruer, 2. as a conferrer, 3.
as a comforter. First, (I say) as a caruer, for does not he proportion his
Doctrine in the mouths of his Ministers, to the capacity and necessity of
his hearers? Cutting such a bit out of such a Text, and such an one out of
another, directing his Stewards wisely, and aptly to apply their studies in
private, their Sermons in public, to the occasions of their hearers? He
carues resolution to her in her doubts, confutation in her errors, correction
for her disorders, etc. Secondly, does he not in his Word familiarly confer
with his Bride, revealing his mind plainly to her in those matters that are
mysteries to the world. A similie.
A man that sits at the upper end of the Table with his Wife, talks in her
ear, happily the rest hear the sound of his voice, but yet know not, conceive
not the scope of his speech, she only understands his meaning, and is
acquainted with his will; So, reprobates hear the Word as well as the elect,
but the elect have Christ whispering that in their ear out of his Word, that
the reprobate can never attain unto, though he goes as far as a temporary
faith can carry him, so that though both have the sound, yet but one has the
sense, the sense (I say) in a right apprehension of the meaning of it, in a
lively feeling of the operation of it. For (as Zanch. Tom. 5 in Epist. ad
Ephesians. p. 152. Verbum enim sinceris auribus auditum, imprimitur in cord
Electoru^ per Christum: b. e. per Spiri^um Christi.
One says) The Word which is heard with pure ears, does take IMPRESSION in
the hearts of the ELECT alone, by Christ, or the spirit of Christ. Thirdly,
Christ is present in the Preaching of the Word, as a comforter. For whiles the
Doctrine of the free favor of God in Christ, of reconciliation with God by
Christ, of the excellent privileges of the faithful, remission of sins,
salvation in the heavens, etc. is sounded and preached, are not the souls of
believers many times ravished, comforted, refreshed, by the invisible working
of the holy Spirit?

Qu: 2. How Christ is present in Baptism.
seal unto us our admission into the covenant of his grace, and communion with
himself, and with his Saints Act. 2.39. Gal. 3.27.
: Secondly, to represent unto us, and Sacramentally to show us, by the outward
washing of Water, the inward cleansing of our souls by his blood, that is, by
justification Polan. Synt. l. 6. c. 55.
, and by his Spirit, that is, by sanctification Id. ibid. Ablutio per sanguinem
Christi, est iustificatio. Ablutio per spiritum Christi est regeneratio.
. Thirdly, to put us in mind of our repentance, new obedience, courage, and
care, to show our selves his Soldiers, by warring and fighting against the
Devil, the world, and the flesh. So then, you see, that three ways Christ is
present in Baptism. 1. As a sealer of the mutual covenant betwixt Him and his
Church. 2. as a representer of the benefits he will bestow on his Church, if
she keep her conditions. 3. as a remembrancer of the duties she owes to him,
if she would have him keep his conditions.

Lastly, to answer the third Question, Qu: 3. How Christ is present in the
Eucharist.
How Christ is present in the Lords Supper? We must know, that he is not there
Transubstantially, as though the Bread and Wine were turned into the body of
Christ, flesh, blood, and bones, as our adversaries the Papists hold; nor yet
Consubstantially, Existentia ve^ absconsione corporis invisibilis in, sub, cum,
pane.
by an existence or hiding his invisible body, in, with, under the Bread, as if
there were no figure in the Sacrament, as the Vbiquitarians hold Chemnit Har.
Evang. cap. 83. col. 1586. At vero hinc infer velle. Ergo in Doctrina
Sacramenti, propositio (panis est corpus meum) etiam est figuratae, hoc vero
absurdissimu^, and Christi ingenio prorsus contrarium est. Vide etiam. Col.
1587. 1588.
; but these ways first to keep us mindful of his death, which he endured for
us, in which regard, some have called the Lords Supper, (...) Sacrificium.
a Sacrifice of remembrance. Secondly, to strengthen our faith, in the
assurance of the continuance of his love, and to ratify, the pardon of our
sins, our title of adoption, our interest in grace, our right to glory, to
our souls. Thirdly, to arm us against Idolatry, that partaking of the Lords
Table, we may not communicate at the Table of Devils 1 Cor. 10.21.
. Fourthly, to preserve us in the way of obedience. Fifthly, to assure us of the
resurrection of our bodies at the last day, according to Christ's own speech;
Ioh. 6.54.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him at the last day. And lastly, to signify unto us, and ascertaine us
of our union with himself, as Paul declares, when he says; The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the body of Christ 1 Cor.
10.16.
. Thus we see, not only THAT, but also HOW Christ is present with his Church
in his holy and sacred Ordinances. Let us now consider, to what end the
Doctrine serves, and what uses it affoordeth, which are diverse.

such places, at such exercises.

If a poor man, coming to a great man's house, finds the Master of the house
to bid him well come, to bear him company, to entertain him with good cheer,
merry talk, and kind invitations to come oftener; would you wonder to see that
poor man ever and anon at that rich man's Table? So it is with the children of
God. A great many marvel at them, what they mean to run so to Sermons as
they do; Once a day (say they) cannot content them, but they must hear twice;
(say they) the Saboth cannot suffice them, but they must out on the week day.
If Baptism be administered, they will not out of the Church by any means; If
there be a communion every month, they must be at it every time, as though
once, or twice in a year, were not sufficient, we wonder at it. Do you so?
it is because you know not, whom they see, whom they find present, whom they
meet withal here. They see the King here, even the King of heaven and earth.
And although they have his presence in their houses, shops, fields, walks, and
closets, yet they know here, He is present after a special and peculiar
manner, to confer with them about deep secrets, to carue bitts to them,
according to their necessities. If they be erroneous in their judgments, they
find him here to inform them, if scrupulous in their consciences, they find
him here to resolve them, if they be drowsy in his service, they find him
here to rowse them, if fallen into any sin, they find him here present to
raise them, if heavy in their hearts, here he is to accheere them, if they
have mistaken their way, here he is to direct them. In these Ordinances, they
find their faith strengthened, the covenant of Gods grace sealed, their union
with Christ ratified, their assurance of persevering in grace, of raising from
death, and reigning in glory, confirmed; and what not? Marvel you then, what
they do frequenting such places, where the Word is Preached, and the
Sacraments administered?

What wife that loves her husband, does not delight daily to converse with him
at his Table? Marvel therefore at thy self, rather that thou and thy
companions take no more delight in such places, at such exercises, then you
do: and cease wondering at them, who come hither to be recreated, and
accheered with the gracious presence of their great Bride-grome. Albeit, I deny
not, but some do (as the people in Christ's days did) follow him for the Ioh.
6.
loaves, some for his miracles, some for one corrupt end, some for another, yet
there is an holy and chosen generation, who follow him in his Ordinances,
because they know he Sits at Table in the same, and does communicate unto
them such gracious glaunces of his countenance, as Reprobates are like never to
partake off.

Compostella to see his holy coat (which they say is there, though no man
knows how it came there) and to Jerusalem, to visit his Sepulcher? Oh folly to
be pitied, if not to be derided. Think they to find Christ in his coat,
find his presence in the grave? Is this one of their meritorious actions? See
Christians, see their simplicity. Christ sits not there, is not so present
there, as he is in his Church, and with his Church. If Christians who go but
half a mile to hear a Sermon Preached unto them, to be made partakers of the
Sacrament, do not make a better Pilgrimage then this is, and meet not with
their well-beloued Spouse, Christ, sooner, then these simple deluded souls, by
making such superstitious Voyages can, then note me for a teacher of lies?

vnpreparedly they come to Gods public Ordinances, nor how irreligiously they
behave themselves at the same. A man may say (and say truly too) there is no
Table of mortal man more taken up with unmannerly guests, with rude, with
uncivil company, then this Table, whereat Christ sits, and affords his
presence.

First, Concerning the comers to his Word, 1. Vnreuerent comers to the Word.
it would make a Christian heart to bleed, to consider what manner of people;
and after what manner most people come to the Preaching of that. One comes with
his eyes scarce open, closed up with that excrementall moisture of ignorance,
which the spiritual sleep in sin breeds, with an understanding so
darkened, that let the King by his servants lay bitts before him, he cannot see
them, Preach as plainly as they can, he cannot understand them; Another comes
without his knife, and when he is at the Table here, his hand is in his Pocket,
and so benumbed, that he cannot pull it out, to take and cut the meat that is
set before him, I mean he comes without faith, without will to believe the
Word, without an heart to apply the same to his necessity, according to the
nature of the doctrine which is delivered. A third comes with the old Grecian
disease, the Athenian itch in his ears, that except the Preacher does amaze
his hearers with strange and uncouth strains, above the reach of plain
people, or tell of some strange thing, he is not for their humor; If he
strives with himself to speak to the capacity of the meanest hearer, and to
knock upon the conscience of the wickedest liver, in the plain evidence and
demonstration of the spirit, as, that learned Doctor of the Gentiles, Saint
Paul did 1 Cor. 2.1.
, how nestles he, how looks he on the glass? The itch does so trouble him,
his Athenian desires do so distemper him, that he thinks every quarter an
hour till the plain fellow has done: and it may be, he will have the manners
(as the manner of some is) to rise from the Board while the best dish is a
caruing, the best point in handling, which might do him most good, if he would
but stay and take it with him. A fourth comes with a dirtie face, and hands
imbrued in blood, a drunkard, a swearer, a liar, a deceiuer, an Usurer, a
merciless oppressor, and known to be so, as manifestly as the dirt is to
beseene upon the face, that it has defiled, and blood on the hands (without a
glove) that are besmeared with it. A fifth sort, come all unbraced before (I had
almost said, with breasts laid out like Whores and Iezebells) but I am sure,
with breasts open, with hearts naked, unarmed, unfenced against the least
assault, for want of due preparation; insomuch, that if the Devil does but
shoot the dart of pleasure, the world of vain profit, and the flesh play its
part, while the Minister is speaking and they hearing, they are so stricken, so
intoxicated, so vainly busied, that they get no more good to their souls,
then they to their bodies, who, sitting at a Kings Table, do so dream of
honors and preferments, which shall never be, that they mind nothing less
then the bits that are carved them, and the meat which is before them, and so
rise without tasting one bit of the feast. A sixth comes without his girdle,
without sincerity, hypocritically, formally, for fashion, company, and
custom. A seventh comes in the Devils habit (if the Devil has any
habit) in a strange dress, proud like the Devil, and crafty like the
Devil. So proud, that he thinks, he knows as much as any can teach him; and
therefore if the Preacher trips a little, and does not carry his matter
smoothly and Scholler-like before him (as all cannot, for all have not an
equal gift of Art and utterance) he laughs in his sleeue; or else so crafty,
that he comes to catch the Minister, as the Scribes to trap our Savior and
entangle him in his talk, not with a simple, and honest heart, to learn Gods
will, and to have a sight of Christ, to supply the necessity of his soul. And
lastly, who amongst us all do not come many times with dirtie feet, with
impure affections, into Gods Sanctuary, bringing a great deal of worldliness,
a great deal of drowsinesse with us. And albeit, we have smarted for it (in
being sent away from many a Sermon, without the sweet bits we were wont to
have, as a just desert of our negligence to prepare our selves) yet we have not
so shaken off our slightness of preparation as we should; Who, who of us (I
say) fail not this way? If our husband were not extraordinarily in love with
us, and willing sometimes to bear with us in our night-attire, as well as to
respect us in our handsomer dress, he might even say to us that are dearest
unto him; What do you here in my presence at my Word, so disordered, so
distempered, so unprepared?

As thus many come unmannerly to his Word, so as many come as rudely to, 2.
Irreuerence and irreligion at Baptism taxed.
and carry themselves as irreverently at his Sacraments. How many simple souls
bring their Children to Baptism, scarce knowing wherefore Baptism serves,
what use it ought to be off to themselves, what use in time it may be off to
their littles ones? How many are present at that Sacrament, when it is
administered, who neither can, nor care to meditate upon such things, as then
and there, are to be thought upon: their eyes are so taken up with gazing,
their tongues sometimes with talking with those that sit next them, and their
hearts with such wandering thoughts, that there is no room for diuiner
meditations, suiting the occasion, about the Vow made in Baptism, about the
benefits offered in Baptism, and the ends of Baptism; no faith, no prayers set
a work for the good of the party Baptized, and the like.

3. Abuse of the Lords Supper.
And lastly, for the Lords Supper, how many come to that, who are partakers at
the Table of Devils. It is lamentable to consider, what ignorant, unbelieving,
irrepentant, disobedient Communicants, thrust themselves upon this Ordinance,
that have neither skill, nor conscience, to examine and prepare themselves
before receiving; that know not what to do, how to behave themselves in the
time of receiving, not how to set their faith a work toward God, in the
apprehension of his love, not how to set their love a-worke toward believers,
whom they communicate withal, that know not what to do after receiving;
frequenting this feast for custom and fashion, partaking after a gross and
carnal manner, not discerning the Lords body, not making any difference
betwixt common Bread, and common Wine, and Sacramental. Well then, (beloved)
this irreuerent and irreligious frequenting of Gods public, sacred,
Ordinances, by such multitudes of people, duly considered, can a word of
reproof come out of season? I am sure, here wants no ground for it in the
Doctrine we have now in hand.

Are we well advised, who is here? who trow we is present at the Word, at the
Sacraments? Is not the King himself? And what King? Why, the King of glory,
the great magnificent Spouse, and Bride-grome of the Church; His royal, his
stately, his honorable, his comfortable presence is there; There he sits, and
there he communicates what ever he sees needful for his Brides salvation.
Shall we then dare to come so rudely, not fear to go so irreligiously into
HIS presence? Is he present while his Ministers Preach? and shall we come to
the Word with sleepie eyes, itching ears, dirtie faces, proud conceits of our
own knowledge, crafty intentions, to catch the Preacher, naked hearts,
without grace to believe, without will to apply the things that are taught us?
Come we hither like hypocrites? come hither to scoff, to sleep, to laugh? Is
Christ present in Baptism? and shall we presume to neglect all meditation for
our selves, all invocation for the party Baptized? Is he lastly, present in
the Eucharist? And dare we to go to that feast without our wedding garment,
without knowledge, faith, repentance, obedience, and love? dare we go to that
without any due examination of our souls before hand, concerning the forenamed
graces, whither we have them or no? dare we receive grossly and carnally at
that, and not show our selves thankful, by our new obedience, after we have
eaten of this Supper? Will these things (think we) be well taken at our
hands? Is it not greatly to the dishonor of the King? An earthly King will not
endure it, that any of HIS guests should come with dirtie shoes into HIS
DINING ROOM, less can he abide, that they should come unhandsomely, uncomely
to his own TABLE. Does not this heavenly King stand as much upon his honor as
an earthly? He does. Oh folly to be reproved, oh impudency to be condemned
then, to go so vnpreparedly to, to be so vnreuerent at, the Preaching of the
Word, and partaking of the Sacraments, which is the Table whereat Christ
sits. Verily, if this rebuke availes not with us, to humble us for the
dishonor thus offered to this Sitter at this Board with his Church, we may be
sure he will deal with us, as the King in the Gospel did with him whom he
found at the feast without a wedding garment: Bind us hand and foot, and cast
us into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth
Mat. 22.
.

Gentleman's house, if we know the master of the family will bear us company at
it, we are very careful to brush our garments, to robe our selves with our
holi-day clothes, to put on clean linen, to wash our face, eyes, and hands,
to scour and sharpen our knives, that so, for want of handsomnesse in our
attire, or by means of hackling our meat with blunt knives, we may neither
offend the guests that sit with us, nor grieve the master that bad us, nor
shame our selves; The like spiritual care let there be in us to fit our selves
when we come to Wisdoms dainties. When the Israelites were to have the Lord
to descend amongst them on Mount Sinai, I read Exodus 9.10.
they were to wash their clothes, and sanctify themselves. Their course must
we imitate when we ascend to Gods Mount, and go up to his house (where he is
present) to hear his Word, or receive the Sacraments. We must be cleansed, and
sanctified, that so when we are there, we may give him the honor of his holy
presence, and neither dishonor him, nor disgrace our selves.

That while Christ is present with his Church in his Ordinances, she sends
forth the savor of Faith and good Works. Compare a few places of Scripture
together, and you shall see this to be very firm. In the Acts of the Apostles
we may read, that Christ had been present by the Ministry of Paul at
Phillippi Act. 16.14.
, at Thessalonica Act. 17.2.
, at Rome Act. 28.31.
. And Saint Paul in his writings unto the Saints, in these places, speaks of
their Faith and good Works Romans 1.8. Phil. 1.7.9.16.11. 1 These. 1.7.8.
, which like a precious ointment, did diffuse themselves in their Odor over
the world.

Christ by his grace has been present with us in his Ordinances, has
contracted us unto himself, and given himself as an husband unto us, betwixt
whom and us, all the powers of darkness are not able to force a divorcement.
But if otherwise; though we have been never so often at this Bride-gromes
Table, heard hundreths of Sermons, often communicated at the Supper of the Lord,
yet we are but only visible members of the outward assemblyes, no spiritual
limbs of the mystical body.

their husband, and they be betrothed unto him, and yet are nothing, but full
of infidelity, and impiety, of unfaithfulness, and unfruitfulness in their
hearts, in their lives. Our days afford store of such, in whose vessels, there
is not one dram of Spikenard, to cast forth any sweet savor, either to GOD,
or godly men, but rather (with the people in Ioels time Joel 2.20.
) their stink goes up (into the nostrils of God) and their wormwood sends
forth the bitterness thereof: The stink of their sins diffuseth it self to
the offending of the children of God, to the infecting of the children of men.
A good man can scarce in any corner avoid the smell of their impious and
unrighteous fruits, of their lies, slanders, blasphemies, ribaldries, and
other idle speeches; but shall be compelled to sent them in every place, as
strong, as noisome, as Brimstone; to force sighs from his heart, and tears
from his eyes. And how odiously their UNBELIEF does affect the KINGS smell,
their distrust in Gods providence, their discontentednesse in prosperity,
their impatience in adversity, senselessness of, and utter carelessness for,
the comforts of the Spirit, do evidently and woefully declare; And yet these
people (forsooth) esteem themselves to be the Bride of Christ. But to
consider, how they are deceived, it pitties my heart. What? know they not, see
they not, that Christ his Bride is not (while her husband sits at Table)
without her perfume to please him, and affect the virgins that be her fellows?
Now alas, these vaine-boasters, are as empty of this perfume as the foolish
Virgins lamps were of oil. They have nothing but the ointments of Harlots in
their Boxes (their souls I mean) and about their bodies. And dare they
challenge Christ for their Spouse? As though he will link himself with such?
No, no. Let them with Barnabas get to be full of faith Act. 11.24.
, and with Dorcas to be full of good Works Act. 9.36.
, that God and man may smell the savor of their Spikenard, and then they may
be believed, when they affirm themselves to belong to Christ; but while then,
they do but flatter themselves, and deceive others.

Christians may sometimes lawfully speak of their own faith and good works.
The Church had Spikenard, and here she speaks of it, and of the sweet smell
it cast forth. How often does David speak of his faith, and his good fruits, in
the Book of the Psalms, sometimes reporting how he trusted in God Psalm 64.
, sometimes how he prayed unto him Psalm. 3.4.34.4.
, sometimes how he confessed his sins unto him Psalm. 32.5.
, sometimes how he loved him Psalm. 116.1.
, sometimes how he delighted in the Saints Psalm. 16.3.
, sometimes how he pitied his very enemies Psalm. 35.14.
, sometimes he speaks of his upright walking Psalm. 18.23.
, sometimes of his holy talking Psalm. 39.1.
, sometimes of his zeal for Gods glory Ps. 119.139.
, etc. Thus also did Job Job 29. c. 31.
, Ezekiah Isa. 38.3.
, Paul 2 Timothy 4.7.
, and others of the Worthies', whom the Scripture records. And good cause why.

David, which reported so much of his own graces, ever and anon, professing
his resolution, to sound forth the Lords praises.

may, yea, and they must make profession of their integrity, and faith. What
was it which moved Paul, to speak so of his honesty, as he did; We have
renounced the hidden things of dishonestie, not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the Word of God deceitfully. 2 Cor. 4.2. But this, that (as it seems)
in the former Chapter, certain false Apostles had slaundered him to be a
vainglorious fellow? Which imputation, to free himself from, he spoke so of
his own sincerity as he did.

see in them, partly, by reason of some troubles that fall upon them. And
therefore it is lawful, and sometimes needful for them, to speak of the good
things that God has wrought in them. If you ask, wherefore Paul speaks to
Timothy of his keeping the faith, and fighting a good fight 2 Timothy 4.7.
, Polan. Synt. Lib. 9. c. 8. Page 597.
One answers it, because the present trouble which he was in, by the means
of Nero, might occasion Timothy his Scholar, and others which had been his
hearers, to question the foundnesse of his faith, and honesty, which was so
rewarded wi^h affliction, and which faith of his was not like to procure such
temporal deliverances at the hands of God, as formerly it had done. So then,
partly, that Believers may honor their God, partly, free themselves from evil
reproaches cast upon them by the wicked, and partly, prevent uncharitable
conceits of themselves in their godly brethren, they may lawfully speak of
their own Spikenard, of that Faith and those good Works which the Lord has
besweetned, both their hearts, and their lines withal.

grace, no faith, no goodness at all in them. And yet their consciences can
tell them that such and such things the Lord has inwardly ingrafted in them,
such and such fruits the Lord has enabled them outwardly to bring forth in
their lives. They know that at such and such a Sermon, the Lord so and so
affected their hearts, at such a time gave them victory over such a temptation,
at such a time enabled them so and so to pray, yea, so and so answered their
prayers, to testify the acceptablenes of the same; At other times, so and so
accheered them with the assurance of his love, so and so enliued them in the
performance of such and such duties; yet because (forsooth) it is not always
alike with them, and the Devil tells them, they are dissemblers, they cry out,
I am an hypocrite, a naughty pack, a wicked creature, nothing but evil
lodges in me, no whit of goodness dwell; in me, I have no faith, I have no
zeal, I have no soundness, no honesty, etc. Is this to honor God with, and
for, the good things he has done for thee? wrought in thee? Nay, rather is it
not to dishonor him, in that thou do not take notice of his graces, which
he has given thee? This is enough to expose the Gospel to disgrace amongst
the enemies of the truth. This is enough to make Christians themselves think
more hardly of thee then there is cause. For, when as thou art so peremptory in
it, that thou art an hypocrite, a varlet, a wretch. What will the world say of
thee, and such as make profession with thee? Even THIS; See, see, what arrant
hypocrites these Gospellers are, their own consciences accuse them, their own
mouths condemn them, there is never an one of them ALL good. Thou art much too
blame then, whosoever thou art, that art so ready to take part with the Devil
against thy self, when yet the Lord in mercy, has anointed thy soul with
the Spikenard of heaven, when both thy faith and integrity of life, have sent
forth their sweet savor to God, and to men?

take notice of, and (when God may have any glory, others any good by it) make
report, of what the Lord has done for thy soul. Thou may lawfully do it,
yea, (and if need require) thou must do it. Yet with this caution, avoiding
pride as much as may be. Not vaine-gloriously, as Peter did, when he said,
Master we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what therefore shall be given
us Mat. 19.37.
? For this is a thing God would be displeased with, and it is the property of
worldlings and wicked ones so to speak, viz. of that which indeed they have
not, and do not.

But first in humility, as acknowledging all to come from God.

Secondly, with a desire to vindicate the Gospel from disgrace, when evil
mouths falsely do reproach thee.

Thirdly, with a desire to rejoice the hearts of thy godly brethren.

Fourthly, to draw on others to a love of that Word, whereby God has wrought
such good in thee.

And lastly, to clear thine own innocence, when that is called into question.

After this manner, and to these ends thou may make profession of thy
graces; and with the Church. thy Mother here, tell it abroad to others; My
Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof.

MYSTICAL MYRRH.
The second general part of the Text.
NOW commending to GODS blessing what has been spoken, touching the
Commendation which the Bride gives her Spouse from HIS Greatness, I proceed to
the praise of HIS goodness, or sweetness in the next words.

Verse. 12.A bundle of Myrrh is my well beloved unto me, he shall lie (or
lodge) all night betwixt my breasts. IN which words, we have two things to
consider, 1. What this sweetness is for the subject matter. 2. What this
sweetness works for the subsequent effect. The thing it self is a bundle of
Myrrh, in the former part of the verse; A bundle of Myrrh is my well-beloued
unto me. The following effect that it works, is a resolution of the Church,
to keep this sweetness, in the clause of the Verse; He shall lodge all night
betwixt my breasts.

Let us set upon the first; A bundle of Myrrh is my well beloved unto me.
These words would well admit of a subdiuision, if it were needful. But an
Interpretation will serve our turn well enough: that therefore the kernel may
appear, let us break the shell by giving the sense.

That R. Selo.
Author, Interpretation.
who expounds the former Verse by the sin of Israel, in erecting, and
worshipping the golden calfe, and by the displeasure that Jehovah conceived at
it, does expound these words, by the Lords pacification, or being pleased with
Israel after this their sin. As imagining the congregation of Israel to
speak thus; Though I the Synagogue of the Israelites, did cast forth a
stinking smell to the Lord by my Idolatry, in worshipping the Golden calfe, yet
NOW he is appeased with me, become sweet and gracious unto me, whereof a
bundle of Myrrh is a symbol and sign: But this Exposition is too Jewish.

He that applies the former Verse to the times of King Asa, Brig^stm.
and to the Vow that the Tribes made in the 15. year of his Reign, does apply
these words to the times of Iehosaphat, Asa's successor, according to the
story written 2 Chronicles. 17.7.8.9. etc. And by the bundle of Myrrh, he
understands, the sweetness of knowledge, which abounded in the days of
Iehosaphat, by the care which that good King had to send Priests and Levites,
with the book of the Law, through the Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin; as though
Solomon by the spirit of Prophecy should foreshew the Israelitish Church in
Iehosaphats time, to speak thus to the praise of God;

In the days of Asa, I made a vow unto thee, to serve thee, and for such a
King as HE was my Spikenard of Religion cast forth a smell unto thee: But now
thou have given me sweeter times, more abundance of knowledge, in bestowing
upon me so perfect, so upright, so careful a King as Iehosaphat is, in so much
that though I had sweet days before, yet these that now I see, do as much in
means excel the former, as Myrrh in sweetness does excel Spikenard. This
meaning do I like of neither, as confining the Text.

Others therefore (walking in a more spacious field) apply it to the Church of
every age, or to every particular believer: And amongst them, some say one
thing, some another. Soto. Mayor.
Some, by the bundle of Myrrh, understand the death and passion of Christ,
because Myrrh (as they say) was used in Burialls. Genebr.
Others, the immortality of the soul, because Myrrh is an Emblem of
incorruption.

The first reason, why by Myrrh is meant justification.
But I had rather understand, the benefit of Justification. And that first of
all, because at this Center, the somewhat differing opinions of Interpreters
do meet; For when as some expound it of the death of Christ, does not the
Church smell the sweetness of his Death by the benefit of Justification? When as
As Merc. and Piscator do.
others do mean a most excellent and sweet Odor which the Church does draw
from Christ, by the nostrils of faith, is not Justification the ground of this
smell? yea, the assurance of Justification is this smell it self.

Myrrh does symbolize and resemble Justification very fitly.

Di^scorid. li. 1. c. 67.
First, Myrrh distilleth from a tree full of pricks, much like the Egyptian
thorn. And whence comes our righteousness and justification, but from that
tree of Gods eternal planting, Christ Jesus, who was persecuted, thorned, and
pierced for our sins.

Impetigines purgat idem ibid.
Secondly, Myrrh is of sovereign virtue, to cleanse the Leprosy of the body;
so is Justification to purge our Leprous and sinful souls.

Horrores discutit, etc. id. ib.
Thirdly, It is good against trembling, and the shaking of the ague; so is
justification against a trembling heart, and horror of conscience.

We see then, what is meant by Myrrh. And Bundle here, is as much as a ball
of Myrrh, or a bunch of Myrrh; Mystically an Author of righteousness, or
Iustifier, [is my well-beloued] that is, Christ, so styled by a loue-title,
which the Church gives him, because that he sets his love strongly upon
her. [To me] that is, to me the Church militant; Paraphase.
I smell the sweetness of Justification out of the bundle of his merits, who
is my most loving and well-beloued Spouse.

Our conclusions from hence are these three. 1. That Christ alone is the
Iustifier of the Church, his love being the cause and ground of it. 2. That the
Church alone is justified by Christ. 3. That only believers do smell the
sweetness of this benefit of justification.

The first of these points has two parts. Doct. That Christ in love justifies
his people.
1. That Christians are justified by Christ Jesus alone; 2. That it is from his
mere love: 1. Part of the Doct. proved.
That Jesus is the iustifier of the Church, is as evident as can be, as from
hence, where the Church calls him Her bundle of Myrrh. So out of the
writings of the Prophets; My righteous servant shall justify many Isa. 53.11.
. Their righteousness is of ME, says the Lord Isa. 54.17.
. Is it not the Angel Christ, that takes away from Iosuah (the type of the
Church) his filthy garments, that causes his iniquity to pass from him, and
clotheth him with change of raiment. Even with his own righteousness, as
Zachary shows Zach. 3.3.4.
? It is plain also out of the writings of the Apostle. By the obedience of ONE
(meaning Christ) shall MANY (meaning the Church) be made righteous Romans 5.19.
. He made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him 2 Cor. 5.21.
. If while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are also found
sinners Gal. 2.17.
, etc. And still the Scripture runs upon this, that by Christ we are
reconciled unto God, cleansed from sin, redeemed out of the hands of our
enemies; He therefore is our Iustifier, and none other: not excluding the
Father, A caveat.
or the holy Ghost, who have a stroke in this Work, as well as the Son.

As for that other branch of the point, The 2. part of the Doct. proved.
that his love is the ground of this grace, the title Well-beloued, which the
church here gives him, will well carry it, and els-where the holy Ghost
confirms it. By MERCY and truth is iniquity purged Pro. 16.6.
, says the Wiseman. Being justified freely by his GRACE, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ Romans 3.24.
. That being justified by his GRACE, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life, says the Apostle.

Did not Christ alone satisfy the wrath of the Father? The Reason of both the
parts of the Doct. together.
did He not tread the Wine Press Isa. 63.3.
alone? What earthly man help him in his Active obedience, to perform, a
perfect, complete, and entire, service to every jot that the Law requires?
What mortal wight, nay, what creature in heaven or earth aided him in his
Passive obedience; had the whole wrath of the Father, due to the sin of man,
in full measure poured forth upon him? Speaks the Prophet of any else but
Christ when he says, Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him? And would he ever have undergone this,
endured this, had it not been for love? Doubtless, He would not. Very well
therefore does the Church here, to acknowledge her Well beloved to be this
Bundle of Myrrh, and to give to him, Objection. Answ.
and his love alone, the honor of her justification, when as He alone paid the
price to purchase it; and when as both the passion and compassion is his own.

Fide sola.
If any shall Object, that we are justified by Faith, or by Faith alone,
therefore not wholly, not only by Christ.

It must be answered, that this is to be understood in another sense. We are
justified by faith, as by an isntrumental cause; by Christ as an efficient and
fundamental. For no more is faith the primary cause of my justification, then
my hand is the cause of the supply of my wants, by a piece of money, which the
mercy of another furnishes me with. That proposition; Parae ad Heb. p. 460
Solafide, excluduntur vero no^ causae superiores, gratia Dei and meritum
Christi, sed etc.
We are justified by faith ALONE (a speech much used by Orthodoxall Writers)
does not exclude the causes of Justification without our selves, but it does
include only but Quotie dicitur, Solafides iustificat, ostenditur solamfide^
esse vnicum argumentum, and vnicam facultatem qua recipitur iustitia Christi.
Selnec. Tract. 3. de fid. and Sacram. These 1.
one faculty in our selves, by which alone we do apprehend that
righteousness of Christ, which the Lord does impute unto us for our
Justification. Whereupon, says one; By faith alone, are not excluded superior
causes, as, the grace of God, the merit of Christ, but middle causes, which are
coined by hypocrites, as, the strength of free will works, merits, etc. So
that by faith we are instrumentally justified, by the obedience of Christ
formally, as Tom 5 in epist. ad Ephesians p. 83. col. 2.
Zanchius shows. For in Justification, Bucer. in iustificatione fides nihil
dat sed tantum accipit, and quod accipit, eo ipso iustificamur.
Faith gives nothing, but only receives, and what it receives, (being Christ
and his righteousness) by that very same thing are we justified. So that it
may very well be affirmed, that faith justifies alone, and yet be a truth too
which (I am in hand withal) that by Christ alone we are justified.

Against the Papists.
were it not for Antichrist, and his Babylonish followers, of whom when I
thought, there came to mind a wise speech of a grave Tertull. Apol. p. 815.
Nisi homini Deus plaeuerit, deus non erit, homo iam Deo propitius esse debebit.
The Papists deny Christ to be our alone iustifier three ways. 1. By their
blasphemous Canons.
Father to allude to; God should be God, if man would let him, God now belike
must stand to man's courtesy for his superiority: So may I say of the Papists;
Jesus should be Jesus, if they would let him, the ALONE iustifier of his
people, if THEY would permit him, and belike, He must stand to THEIR caruing
for the honor of this Work: For they are very bold to rob him of his glory
which he deserves, and his Bride here gives him, and him alone for this grace.
Neither let any say, I do them wrong.

For, first of all, does not the Council of Trent In Decret. de iustif. Can.
10. and
, absolutely lay down this? If any shall affirm, that men are justified by
the righteousness of Christ formally, let him be accursed. And immediately
after; Canon. XI. Si quis dixerit homines iustificari vel sola imputatione
iustitiae Christi, etc. 2. By attributing of justification to the dignity of
faith.
If any man shall say, that men are justified either by the imputation of
Christ's righteousness alone, or that the grace whereby we are justified, is
only the favor of God, let him be Anathema.

Secondly, do they not ascribe Justification to the dignity of faith? What
means else that Position of theirs; That we are prepared by faith to some
meritorious act of love, which act of love does inform faith, and so dignifie
it, that then the person that has it, deserves acceptance at Gods hands. And
this Assertion, they are very stiff in, Object.
alleging for it the Apostles words, To him that believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, is his faith accounted for righteousness Romans 4.5.
Answ.
, that is (say they) God accounts that faith which he finds in a sinner, so
worthy thy that it does deserve an habit of righteousness, by which the
sinner may be justified. But (as the Proverb is) An ill gloss corrupts the
Text. For this Exposition holds neither with the analogy of faith, nor with
the scope of the place. Not with the analogy of faith, for it is directly
against the Scripture, that a man may be a wicked man, and yet have some thing
in him worthy of justification. Not with the scope of the place; For there the
Apostles aim is (being in disputation about justification) to show, that there
is an Antithesis, or contradiction betwixt the righteousness of Christ, and
the righteousness of a man out of Christ; and not to show, that faith informed
by charity, does by condignitie, merit the justifying of the sinner in the
sight of God.

3. By maintaining justification by Works.
Thirdly, how peremptorily do they stand for justification by Works, abusing
for their purpose many places of Scripture: as,

James, Iam. 2.24. Answ.
Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith alone;
when as (as it is well known) the drift of the Apostle is there to show, that
good works declare a man to be just before men, and do not make a man just in
the sight of God.

that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.20.24. Answ.
The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, and according to the
cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me. But alas, to little purpose;
For the Prophet in that place, as some observe, does not speak of
justification, but Certum est Dauidem hoc Psalmo, nihil aliud canere de Deo,
qua^ quod per illum liberatus fit ab hostibus etc. Muscul, ad loc.
only of the deliverance that God gave him out of the hands of his enemies;
which deliverance also, he does not attribute to the merit of his own
righteousness; (For that he disclaimes, verse. 19. saying; He delivered me,
because he had a FAVOR unto me) but only he acknowledges, that that
deliverance was a testimony of his integrity, how naught and unjust soever his
enemies falsely accounted and accused him to be.

Many of the like places do they thus abuse; abuse (I say) and whither I
speak right or no, I appeal not only to St Paul, whose drift is in the five
first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, to overthrow justification by
Works; but also to one of their own Aquin, Super Gal. c. 3. Lec 4. Opera non
sunt causa quod aliquis sit iustus apud Deum, etc.
Doctors, whose very words are these; Works are not the cause that any man is
righteous before God, but rather they are the fruits and declarations of
righteousness. And indeed how can we be justified by works, when as by the
confession of the Papists Caiet, in epist. ad Roman. c. 3. fol. 10.
themselves; the righteousness of Works cannot blot out sins, but leaves a
man in the same. Thus while the Papists do partly curse those that hold
justification by the free mercy of God, and partly ascribe it to the dignity
of Faith, and partly to the merit of good Works, do they not rob Christ of
that praise which his great kindness in justifying a poor sinner does
deserve? Dealing with this bundle of spiritual Myrrh, as some Petrus de la
Primaud. Franc. Acad. part. 3. c. 69.
report the Arabian followers of Mahomet to deal with that corporal Myrrh,
which they bring to Alexandria to sell, using a thousand deceits to
sophisticate it, and gull Christians with it, that buy it. So they (I say)
adulterate this precious Doctrine with their own deceipts and devices, and
would thrust it for good ware, and sound upon the common sort; But I pray God,
they may never have any vent for such deceitful Myrrh, and counterfeit
righteousness amongst us. I am sure, the Church entertaines no such stuff
here; but speaks all to the commendation of her Beloved, admitting of no
Myrrh, no righteousness, but his own, to praise him, and to commend by. But
to leave them as confuted, let us come to our selves.

Natures garden to smell on, some natural or moral plant of their own, to
put into this Bundle, to mingle with Christ's righteousness, to justify them
in the sight of God. Some good desires, deeds, devotions, which they much brag
off, and stand upon, for which God is forsooth bound to accept them, and to
like of them. To whom I may say truly, as Elihu in another case to Job;
Behold, in THIS thou art not just Job 33.12.
. It may be thou art of a gentle nature, of a courteous behavior, somewhat
disposed to liberality out of a vainglorious humor, can not away with the
company of the prodigal; must God of necessity justify thee, like of thee
for these things? Yes, that he must, and does too, I would be sorry else; I am
sure, he would not like of me, if I should swill, and curse, and steal, and
quarrel, etc. that's true; for he cannot away with these gross evils; the
committers of them are abominable unto him. Yet notwithstanding, to conclude,
that thy moral virtues can justify thee before him, is little differing from
plain Popery. And I tell thee in standing upon this thou do Papist-like rob
Christ of his glory, and deny him that praise which the members of the Church
do here give him, as his due in this Text. They say not here, A bundle of
Myrrh is my Well-beloued, and my Spikenard unto me, but my Well-beloued alone.
They acknowledge all in the matter of justification, to come from Christ Jesus,
issuing and springing from the fountain of his free love. They know, that the
best righteousness in themselves is (as the Prophet speaks) as an unclean
thing, and filthy rags Isa. 64.6.
: and that in the best actions they do, if their imperfections be not covered
in Christ, and sweetened with the Myrrh of his righteousness, there is more
cause of damnation to be found in them then salvation. It is by grace that we
are justified, not by Works. The very faithful themselves please God no
otherwise then in Christ. Neither their love, nor faith, nor good fruits, can
for the dignity of the same, deserve absolution before Gods tribunal. Now
then if the graces that are inwardly wrought, and the Works that do outwardly
appear in believers themselves, can procure no further acceptance at Gods
hands, then their persons stand justified, and their sins acquitted before
GOD in Christ, then questionles (as God once told the idolatrous Israelites)
neither thy Works, nor thy righteousness will profit thee Isa. 57.12.
, to justification, that art but carnal, but civil. That then I may cease to
confute thee, and be a counselor unto thee, Use 3. Exhortation to disclaim
our own righteousness.
let me exhort thee, willingly to give the Well beloved of the Church, the
glory of this grace alone. Mingle not thy righteousness with his in the matter
of justification; such a mixture, such a composition stinkes before the Lord. I
find in the old Exodus 30.34.35.38.
Law, how that the Lord commanded Moses to make a sweet perfume of Stacte,
Onicha, Galbanum, and Franckinsence, and to temper it after the art of an
Apothecary, holy and pure. Concerning which, he threatened that whosoever should
presume to make the like, to smell thereto, that soul should be cut off from
the Lords people. And has the Father commanded a greater then Moses, even his
only begotten Son, to temper an exact and most pure perfume of his own
righteousness and obedience for the Father to smell on, that he might be
pacified with the Elect, for the Elect to smell on, that they might be just
before GOD. And shall mortal, sinful, man (contrary to Gods charge) presume
to compose the like, out of his own righteousness, and yet the Lord endure it,
reckon that person amongst the number of his own people? No, no. The ciuillest
person that lives under the cope of heaven, shall greatly displease the Lord,
if he presumes to offer it. Did thou equal, nay excel the most virtuous
moralists that ever were, in justice, temperance, magnanimity, affability,
and the like, yet thou must esteem all these as naught in comparison of the
righteousness of Christ crucified. Learn therefore, learn, I beseech thee,
to disclaim thine own righteousness; Shuffle, oh shuffle not in the merit,
the dignity of any good deeds, or desires of thine own, into this bundle,
least like the mixture of Opocalpasum with Myrrh, it prove deadly to thy
soul, as that to the body As Mathiolus cites it out of Galen. Opocalpasum
exitiale est, multosque nos sort quadam vidimus nostrae aetatis de cursu mori
quod inscij Myrrham, cui Opocalpasum admistum erat, assumpsissent. Mathio.
Comment. in Dios. li. 1. c. 67. Page 77.
: and thou never smell the sweetness of the same, in assurance thou art
justified, to thy consolation here, and salvation hereafter.

Now to the end thou may learn to disclaim thine own righteousness
indeed. This threefold Meditation will be very availeable.

Three meditations, to further us in disclaiming our own righteousness.
First, that man's righteousness, cannot acquit him, discharge him, before the
Judge.

Secondly, that it breaks every way, that it can fulfill no way the Law of
God perfectly, and entirely; it omitteth much good, it commits much evil,
that good which it does, it does not aright, that evil which it escheweth, is
eschewed for by-respects.

Thirdly, Meditate, that the worthiest and holiest of the Saints of God, have
cried out of it, never looked to be justified by it. As David; In sin Lord
has my Mother conceived me Psalm. 51.5.
: and Job; The Angels are unclean before thee, how much more abominable is
man that is borne of a woman Job 15.15.16.
. And Paul; I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing Romans
7.18.
.

These three things, I say, feriously and wisely thought of, and paused upon,
will much further thee to think meanly of thine own righteousness, be
thou never so civil: Will thou know how? I will show thee. The first
Meditation, will drive thee to speak thus betwixt God and thy soul; Good
Lord, cannot all my righteousness clear me before thy Tribunal?
notwithstanding my civility, my fidelity in keeping my word, my gentleness of
nature, my abstaining from the gross, and enormious vices of the times, do I
not stand discharged before thee the most upright and impartial Judge? Lord,
why should I then stand upon my righteousness? Oh, cause me to abhor my
self in dust and ashes.

The second Meditation, will drive thee to this? What? and for all my
righteousness, do I break thy Law, transgress thy Commandments, in the
omission of good, in the commission of evil, in the doing of good, and
forsaking of evil, after a wrong manner? Lord, I perceive then by this, that I
cannot be justified in thy sight by my self; when as that righteousness which
justifies before thee, must perform an exact obedience to thy most righteous
Law, without sweruing one jot from the same.

The third Meditation will, by the grace of God, work, in some such wise, with
thee as this is; Lord, have the best that ever were cried out of their own
filthiness, complained of their native vileness, denied their own
righteousness? and shall I be puffed up with an opinion of mine own worth?
Did so holy a man as David was, so patient a man as Job was, so good a man as
Paul was, cast down their crowns before the Lamb, acknowledge that in
themselves was nothing but sin, no cleanenes, no good thing? and shall I, a
vile creature, far inferior to the least of them, stand upon my patience, my
honesty, my goodness? Lord, let it be far from me, etc. And when these
Meditations have brought thee to this pass, produced these effects; tell me
whither then it can be possible for thee, to sing any Song but this, in regard
of thy justification; None but Christ, none but Christ: His righteousness, his
righteousness alone, to discharge me before the Judge, to fulfill the Law for
me, to cure my spiritual sickness, to cover my natural filthiness.

If these Meditations were but duly made use of by our civil Iustitiarians
themselves, they would veil the Bonet, come down a peg lower in their own
conceits, and run altogether out of the garden of nature, into the garden of
grace for this Myrrh, and depend upon Gods love alone in Christ Jesus for
their justification. But alas, alas, they meditate not upon this, and hence it
is, that they stand so much upon their own worthiness, that the righteousness of
Christ, is neither thought on, nor sought for, by them, as it should be.

Advise to Believers, to be thankful to their Iustifier.
how thankful then ought this to persuade Believers to be, and how careful
to sing such a Song as the Church here does to the praise of their
Well-beloued. We use to say, a Nosegay is worth thanks, especially, when it is
given by a lover, as a token of love; and is not this bundle, this bunch of
Myrrh, Christ his righteousness, worthy of praises, being given by him as a
special token of his favor, to poor, miserable, and sinful creatures? Did
the Luke 17.16.
tenth Leper, return thanks for the cleansing of his body, and wilt not thou,
whom Christ has chosen as one out of ten, yea, of twenty, to purge thy soul,
return glory to his name? Mary Magdalen Luke 7.47.
loved Christ much, after He had forgiven her much: David resolved with
himself, that, on condition the Lord according to the multitude of his
mercies, would do away his iniquities, and purge him with Hysop, which was an
Emblem of his cleansing, and clothing with Christ's righteousness, his tongue
should sing aloud of his righteousness Psalm. 51.2.7.14. verses.
.

It is reported of Alexander, surnamed, The Great, that he acknowledged
himself to owe more to Aristotle his Master, then to Philip his Father,
because, from his Master he received his Well being, whereas from his Father he
had but his natural being Pet. Mart. in lib. 1. Ethic. Arist. p. 5.
. In like manner (I dare boldly say) thou that art a true Christian, owe more
to Christ thy Master, yea, thy elder brother, for giving thee through the merit
of his own righteousness, a spiritual being in grace, then to thy natural
Father or Mother, by whom thou have thy being in nature. Oh, therefore (owing
so much) pay him much, I mean, love him much, be much thankful unto him for
this his kindness. Let thy thankfulness to him know no limits; set no bounds
to thy obedience; let not much water quench the flame of thy love, thy zeal;
let not the very fire it self deter thee, scare thee, from sacrifice, from
his service. Propose the blessed Martyrs for thy pattern. The sweetness of
this bundle have so affected them, that rather then they would any way show
themselves ungrateful, they have not spared to be prodigal of their very
lives. Take, oh take then, the cup of salvation, and bless his holy name, vow
service, vow obedience to him, unto the very death; for his free mercy, in
justifying of thee, requires no less, deserves no less at thy hands. Leaving
this, I come now to the next point; which is

That as Christ alone is the Iustifier of the Church, Doct.
so the Church alone is justified by Christ. The true Church alone is justified
by Christ.
Justification is a benefit belonging only to the true members of the Church,
and to none else. TO ME, in my Text, implies as much; To me the Church alone,
not to you daughters of Jerusalem, Except you be Eloct.
not to you aliants and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel is my Beloved
a bundle of Myrrh, a bringer of righteousness. Ask Paul, whom he speaks of,
when he says; In grace HE (that is God) has made US accepted in the Beloved
Ephe. 1.6.
; (that is, justified through Christ) and he will answer, that he means US,
who are chosen in Christ, before the foundation of the world; US, who are
predestined to the adoption of children Verses 4.5.
; intimating, none to be capable of justification but such. The same thing, the
same Apostle proves in the eight of the Romans; Whom he predestined, them
also he called, and whom he called, them also he justified Romans 8.30.
. Now who are predestined, who are the called of God, but the members of the
Church? Verse. 3.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies, that is, it is God that justifies the Elect Zanch. ad Ephesians. c. 2.
p. 8. Tom. 5. i. e. Electosfolos.
. Methinkes, that of S. John in his Revelation, is very fit for this purpose,
where he says, not that he saw the Apoc. 13.1.
BEAST with seven heads, and ten horns (that is, the enemies of the Church,
who use their wit and authority against it) clothed with the Sun, that is,
with Christ's righteousness, but a Apoc. 12.1.
WOMAN so clothed, that is, the Church alone, or the company of the faithful.

The faith of Gods ELECT Tit. 1.1.
. Now if none have faith but the Church, then it must needs follow, that none
are justified, but the members of the Church.

How full of terror is this truth, unto all those that are out of the Church, I
mean, not only those who stand sunning themselves in the Churchyard, that
sit swilling in Alehouses, fulfilling their fleshly pleasures, following their
worldly profits, while the Word is Preaching, and people are praying upon the
LORDS day. I mean (I say) not only them, who are thus out of the material
Temple, which is made of Brick and Stone And yet I include them also, for
right Christians dare not do as they do.
, but also all others, that are no true members of Christ's mystical body, who,
though they hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, etc. yet are void of
saving grace, are no spiritual stones of the spiritual building, no Cant.
1.17.
Cedar beams in Gods house, that is, no For Cedar was used in cleansing,
Levit. 14. Notes of the false Church: Propounded by the way, to show whom this
terror belongs to.
purified, no sanctified ones in Gods family. To all of them, to every one of
them, here is (I say) a ground of terror. For (ah poor creatures) they are
not justified, they have no share in, no benefit by, the righteousness of
Christ. This bundle belongs not to them; It is peculiar to those whom they (for
their Religions-sake) hate, scorn, and malign. It appertains not to those
daughters of Jerusalem, spoken of in the fifth verse of this Chapter, who seem
to be of the Church, who brag they are of the Israel of God, and yet are not.
1. Particular love of false teaching and teachers.
Thou therefore that delightest in false Doctrine, and castest the Word of God
behind thy back Ier. 8.9.
; thou that with Ahab, had rather hear an hundred false Prophets, then one
sound Michaiah 1 King. 22.
; and with Jeroboam 1 Kin. 13.4.
, wilt not hearken to the faithful messengers of the Lord of Hosts; 2.
Neutralitie in religion.
thou that with the same Jeroboam 1 Kin 12.28.29.
, art ready to change thy Religion, and manner of worship, instituted by God
himself; 3. Defense and ripnes of sin.
thou that with the people in Ieremies time, wilt palliate and defend thy
sins, professing thou walk not after Balaim, when as yet the Lord sees thy
abomination in the Valley Ier. 2.23.
, being pure in thine own eyes, when as yet thou art not cleansed from thy
wickedness Prove. 30.12.
; 4. Blasphemy.
thou that with the covetous, whom David speaks of, Psalm. 10.3.
blessest thy self and blasphemest God, and with Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.9.10.
cursest God and his people: 5. Contempt of authority.
Thou that with the sons of Belial 1 Samuel 10.25
, contemnest the powers that be ordained of God: 6. Vain confidence.
Thou that trustest with Goliath 1 Samuel 17.45.
, in thy sword and buckler; with the wicked of David's time, in the Psalm. 49.6.
Psalm. 52.7.
multitude of thy riches; with the Isa. 43.14.
Chaldeans, in the treasures thy ships bring in by Sea; with the old
Israelites, in thy pleasant pictures Isa. 2.16.
, that is, in thy household furniture and riches So Scultet. expounds pleasant
pictures.
: 7. Hypocriticalnes.
Thou that can the Art of dissembling, having Butter in thy mouth, and war
in thy heart Psalm. 55.21.
; that can bless with thy mouth, but curse with thy heart Psalm. 62.4.
: 8. Love to and defense of bad company.
Thou that louect the company of the ungodly Psalm. 1.1.2.
, and magnifiest the wicked, which forsake the Law Pro. 28.4.
: 9. Malice to the Saints.
Thou that with the enemies of Gods Israel, treadest down the inheritance of
the Lord Isa. 63.18.
, circumventing them as the Sodomites did Lots house Genesis 19.
, spreading Net; for their feet Psalm. 140.
, rejoicing at their hurt Psalm. 35.15.
, drawing out the sword, and bending the bow, that thou may suddenly hit
them that are upright in heart Psalm. 37.14.32.
: 10 Carnal security.
Thou (finally) that art at ease in Sion, drowned in the depth of carnal
security, thinking thou shall never be removed Psalm. 10.6.
; who have made a covenant with death, and art with hell at agreement, thinking
that when the over flowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not touch
thee, and so making lies thy refuge, and vnderfalshood hiding thy self Isa.
28.15.
: Thou, I say, that carriest of all these, or any of these black brandes of
the false Church, these non evidences of the true Church, hear thou this word
of terror, thou art not justified by the Lord Jesus and not to be justified by
him, desperate and fearful must thy condition needs be: yea, so fearful,
that neither can my capacity reach it, nor my tongue relate it. For besides
the absence of those admirable soul rauishing effects, springing from
justification, which thou shall read off afterward Page. 67.
, it is an argument of Gods displeasure conceived against thee, it does
prognosticate, wrath abiding for thee: insomuch, that if the Beloved of the
Church, be not this bundle of Myrrh, TO THEE, TO ME, and become our
Righteousness, the stinch of our sins, will daily provoke the Lord; the
smell of our courses, will daily distaste him; the savor of our very
Sacrifices, are a burden unto him: neither are our sins remitted, nor our
suits received, nor our persons respected, nor our good deeds rewarded, nor
can our souls (if we so continue) be eternally saved. Judge thou then whither
this point (as sweet as it is to the godly) does not bring (if thou be not
altogether hopeless and helpelesse) a sound of terror to thy ears: and oh,
that it might but be a mean to produce an holy trembling in thy soul, upon
the thought of thy great misery.

Myrrh it self should not more refresh the smell, then the consideration of
this accheere their soul. And accheere them it does at sometime or other, let
the Devil do his worst, as the next Doctrine shall declare, which without any
longer delay, I come unto: And this it is:

That as the Church alone is capable of Christ's righteousness, Doct. Christians
alone have the joy of justification.
so she only is sensible of the sweetness of the same. Only Believers do
truly rejoice in the assurance of free justification by Christ. What says
David to this purpose? The RIGHTEOUS shall be glad in the Lord, and all the
UPRIGHT in heart shall glory Psalm. 64.10
. What says the Prophet Esaias also? The RANSOMED of the Lord shall return, and
come to Sion with Songs, THEY shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
sighing shall fly away Isa. 35.10.
. Again, My SERVANTS shall rejoice, my servants shall sing for joy of heart. I
create JERUSALEM a rejoicing, and HER people a joy Isa 65.14.15.18.
. Of whom speaks the Church when she says; We will be glad in the Lord, and
rejoice in his salvation Isa 25.9.
; I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for
he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the
robes of righteousness Isa. 61.10.
. Of whom (I say) speaks the Church there, but of her self? I confess that
literally those speeches of the Prophet, are to be referred to the rejoicing of
the Jews at their return from captivity. But mystically they are to be
interpreted, of the joy which believers alone conceive upon their return from
spiritual bondage, and upon their justification by the merits of Christ, and
free mercy of the Almighty. Wherefore it was not without cause, that Christ
said to the Man sick of the Palsy; Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee Mat. 9.2.
. And Elihu in Job; He that can say, I have found a Ransom (especially such as
Christ's righteousness has procured) shall see Gods face with joy Job. 33.24.
6. compared together.
.

Hand, to pluck this Myrrh, the means to apprehend the righteousness of
Christ, that it may become ours; but also it is the Nostrills, to smell the
sweetness of this Myrrh: Look as the nostrills do convey sweet odours to
the brain, to refresh the animal spirits, which are there, so does faith
convey the assurance of justification, to the rauishing, and delighting of the
soul. If the Church alone then has the nostrills of faith, no wonder is it,
if she alone be sensible of the sweetness of Christ's righteousness.

Nonne videis cum amicu^ lomi quispiam ^ccipit quom ^raese ferat ^atitiam? etc.
^hrys. in Johan. ^. 1. Hom. 19.
Do you not see if a man does but receive an ordinary friend into his house,
how joyful he is? how much more joyful then must we conceive them to be, who
have testimony in their consciences, that the Lord of glory has come in by
their gates, and taken up his lodging in their souls?

ones, who are no members of the true Church. For no sound joy belongs unto
them. Their abundance of wealth, their places of honor, their great friends,
their merry companions, etc. may peradventure give them some kind of
contentment and delight, but alas, it is but for a moment, and Namque mal^
quanquam interdu^ gauder^ videtur: Aesti^ at ipse tamen medijs vt stro^gylos
vndis. Marcell. Arie l. 1. p. 4.
mingled many times with much heaviness and sorrow; That joy which springs
from Justification is too sweet, too excellent for them to attain to; There is
no peace to the wicked, says my God Isa. 57.21
. That, that (I say) is Sions peculiar. An ungodly man, may indeed hear the
promises, have the sweet Doctrine of justification, by the free love of Christ,
sounded in his ears, and abuse the same he may (as those that make an idol of
Gods mercy) to further himself in his desperate disease of security, or a
kind of Mat. 13.20
hypocritical joy he may have, which a temporal faith may afford him: but to
draw out the right sweetness of this heavenly Doctrine, to the true comfort of
his soul, he wants nostrills, he has no true justifying and saving faith. Let
then an unregenerate person (be he what he will, or can be, for wit, learning,
wealth, friends, dignity, etc.) come and put forth that Question, which Ioram
put forth to Iehu; Is it peace Iehu, is it peace? It may be answered him, as
Iehu answered Ioram; What peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother
Iezebell, and her witch-crafts are so many 2 Kin. 9.22
. What peace so long as thy luxurious fruits, thy covetous fruits, extortions,
oppressions, vsuries, deceitful tricks, thy oaths, lies, enuyings,
backbitings, Sabbath breakings, neglects of Gods worship in the Temple, in the
family, in the closet, contempts of Gods servants, and Ordinances,
contentments with thy mere civil courses, etc. are so many? What peace, I
say, appertains unto thee, so long as these things remain in thee, as so many
testimonies against thee, that thou art not yet a true member of Christ's Spouse
the Church? Thou man, thou woman, art like those whom the Lord complains of by
the Prophet; Isa. 65.11.
Ye are they that forsake the Lord, and forget mine holy Mountain. Thou have
played the Harlot, and run away from Christ, and have Verse. 12.
chosen that wherein the Lord delighted not; And therefore must I conclude (to
the terror of thee, and all such as thou art) with that sentence which the Lord
denounces by the same Prophet; Isa. 65.13.14.
Behold, MY SERVANTS shall rejoice, but YE shall be ashamed. Behold, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but YE shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall howl for vexation of spirit.

Rachell refuse to be comforted, because their comforts are not, and in their
own apprehension, have no being, no existence; but let them be of good cheer.
The joy that springs from the root of justification, belonges unto every
member of the Church; As sure as can be, light is sown for the righteous, and
joy for all them that are of an upright heart. As they have this bundle of
Myrrh, this sweet-ball of Christ his righteousness, in free mercy bestowed
upon them, so the Lord in his due time, will open the nostrills of their faith,
and make them sensible of the sweetness of the same, and the time shall come
when in the sense and joyful persuasion of the same, they shall be able with
all confidence and boldness, to say, as the Church here does; A bundle of Myrrh
is my Well-beloued unto me, now I know it, find it, and feel it. Stay thy
self with this then, thou mourner in Sion; and go thy ways, Eat thy bread
with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy
Works Eccles. 9.7.
. Being a member of the Church, thou art acceptable to God in Christ Jesus, and
being acceptable to him, He will reveal his comfortable presence unto thee, be
thy distress what it can be. And let this suffice thee against despair, that
though heaviness may endure for a night, yet joy shall come in the morning.
Such joy is thy portion, such joy shall thou get into thine own possession,
when God sees fit. Wait therefore for it on the God of thy salvation, and be
not like a comfortles creature.



LET us now pass on to the effect which the sense of, The second branch in the
second part of the Text.
and joy from, this sweetness of justification works, in the desires and
vows of the Church. And that is a continuance of this benefit, in these words;
He shall lodge all night betwixt my breasts: or (as some read) It shall lodge
all night between my breasts: or (as others) Optatiuely. Oh, that he would
(that is, oh, that my Beloved) or, oh that IT may, (that is, this bundle of
Myrrh may) lodge all night betwixt my breasts. Howsoever the words be read, I
take the meaning to stand thus; It is the resolution of me the Church, that
this sweet bundle shall, or, It is my hearty desire, that my beloved Christ,
and the sweetness which I smell in his righteousness, may abide with me so
long as I am in the might of this world.

The reason of the Paraphrase.
For lodging, is a symbol of continuance, and breasts do note out the will and
affections, and so by consequent, the resolution and desire; and night, the
world. Therefore by lodging all night betwixt the breasts, is meant, the
abiding of Christ as a Iustifier, with the sweetness of his righteousness, in
the desires and resolution of a Christian, so long as he is in this world.

I could observe from hence, thus much; That they, that are once justified by
Christ, are for ever justified. Prove it I could out of Isa. 32.17. Hos. 2.
toward the latter end. Romans 11.29. And by occasion of this, I could tell the
doubting and perplexed soul, to its singular consolation, that though it be in
the night of tribulation, and temptation in this world, yet Christ Jesus will
never forsake it, but will pernoctare, lodge with it all night, nothing shall
separate it from the love of God in Christ Jesus. But there is another maine
thing I drive at; and this it is.

This was David's resolution; I will rejoice and be glad in thy mercy Psalm.
31.7.
. Mark, he contents not himself to speak in the time present, I DO rejoice,
but he speaks in the Future tense, I WILL rejoice, showing what his mind and
purpose was. This was also the DESIRE of that holy man; Psalm. 24.7.
One thing have I DESIRED of the Lord, that I will seek after; that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord. And ever and anon, you shall find that Prophet, crying; Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon me, and then I shall be safe, that
is, then I shall have what I would have Psalm. 4.
. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation Psalm. 51.
, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice V.
. Hence it is, that the joy of Gods people, is called an everlasting joy Isa.
61.7.
. The complaints of Christians, in the time of spiritual desertion, do
evidently show this. For look as Job in the time of his adversity, did
bewail the loss of his former prosperity, in these terms; Job. 29.2.3.6.
Oh, that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me:
when his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness. When I washed my steps in butter, and the rocks poured ryvers of
Oil. So complain Believers, when they are insensible of those inward
comforts, and sweet internal joys they were wont to have; Oh, that it were
with me as in times past, as in the days when God refreshed me, when the
candle of his bright countenance shined upon me, when by the light of his
sweet comforts, I did walk joyfully through the darkest temptations: Oh, that
it were with me as it was when the rock, Christ Jesus, poured out rivers of
joy unto me, to accheere me in the assurance of justification by his own
blood. Now what does this kind of complaint intimate unto us, but that the
Church is desirous to retain that joy which arises from the assurance which
she has of sharing in the righteousness of Christ.

sweetness, this joy, which springes from this root, is one of the most
infallible testimonies of the love of Christ; but choice loue-tokens (as we
know) are most desiredly kept and retained. Let a Wooer bestow upon his Love,
but a Nosegay or Muske-ball, as a testimony of his love; and (if she takes it
so) whatsoever she be careless of else, she will be very careful to keep
that, and still be desiring to recreate her self with the sweetness of that.
Inasmuch therefore as joy in the holy Ghost, is a special token of the Church
her beloueds good will unto her, she must needs be careful to keep that
(except she be very much out of tune) and still have that bundle between her
breasts, in the very night time, that is, that sweetness in her desires, even in
the deepest, and darkest affections.

and durable. It is not flitting, like the joy of the worldling; it is not
vanishing, like the joy of the hypocrite; it is not perishing, like the joy of
the Epicure. In Gods presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand (says
David in a Prophetical strain of Christ) are pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16.
. Now if in His GLORIOUS presence, there be fullness of joy, and everlasting
pleasures; then the joys of his gracious presence must needs be durable also,
being the taste and beginning of the glorious. I deny not, but that there is a
mixture of sorrows with their joys, because it is fit, and needful, that so
it should be; yet this does not nullify the perpetuity of them, because it
does not anibilate the essence of them. Though Christians have not always a
feeling of them, yet they have always the being of them. Myrrh, between a
man's breasts, has a sweetness in the night time, though whiles he sleeps, he
smells it not: So, assurance of justification is in the believers heart, and
the sweetness of it in his soul, though while he slippes into sin, and is
in some sleepie fits of carnal security, he be not sensible of the same. To
think then that the joy of Gods people, is a fading or transitory joy, is a
groundles conceit, and a wrong done the honor of Gods mercy, which is the
fountain of it. For what God gives his children an hearty desire continually
to keep, that will HE keep continually for them.

Exhortation to unbelievers to get this joy.
to seek after it, and to endeavor to attain it. Such earthly things as are
most permanent in their own kind, are most desired by them that enjoy them,
every one will labor after them. This joy is ever durable: They that have this
joy, do resolve and desire ever to keep it. Labor therefore, oh, labor (I
say) with might and main to get it, you that want it. And to help you hereto,
you must not think, that it can be gotten for gold, or that silver shall be
weighed for the price thereof Job. 28.15. Helps to true joy.
. But by these means.

Mary Magdalene was feign to stand behind Christ weeping, and to wash his
feet with her tears, before he had her Go in peace Luke 7.38.50.
. Peter's converts were pricked in their hearts, before they could eat their
meat with gladness Act. 2.37.46.
. The laylor trembled before he rejoiced Act. 16.26.
. They are the blessed ones which mourn, that shall be comforted Math. 5.4.
. Let not them think ever to come to this joy, who drive out of their own
hearts, all consideration of their own sins, which they have committed; of
Gods judgments, which they have deserved; of Gods justice, which is provoked;
of Gods majesty, which is offended; that their hearts may feel no smart,
their souls may be affected with no sorrow, for their transgressions. For if
ever thou have read the Psalms of David through, thou have found this to be
true, that they which sow in tears, shall reap in joy Psalm. 30.6.
. Oh, you hard-hearted, and impenitent ones then, who could never yet mourn for
your sins, hear what Saint James says, and be advised by him. Be afflicted,
mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your vain
joy into heaviness Iam. 4.9.
: that so mourning, you may be comforted, and (as they, who after they have
endured many a sore tempest by Sea, come to Arabia, where Myrrh grows, get
it, gather it, and smell on it) so you, after your souls have been truly
humbled within you, may apprehend the righteousness of Christ, and be
spiritually ravished with the sweetness of it, in such wise, that you may both
resolve, and desire, never to let it go.

2. Help to get true joy.
Secondly, Get a good conscience; for that (as Solomon says) is a continual
feast. Pro. 15.15.
. Well spoke an Ancient Aug. ad Fr. in Erem Ser. 10. Ad spirituale gaudium
hodierno die intendo, etc.
to this purpose; I intend, brethren, this day to inuit you to a feast of
spiritual joy, which joy neither the plenty of riches, nor the glory of the
world, nor greatness of posterity, nor health of body procures, but only
purity of conscience. And no marvel; for if an evil conscience begets a
timorous and trembling heart Mala conscientia cor tabescens, and trepidans
gignit, Muscut. in Psalm. 18 p. 182.
then a good conscience must needs produce a joyful and merry heart. Now how
to get a good conscience, I direct elsewhere Court of conscience. page 50.51.
etc.
.

3. Help to true joy.
Lastly, because worldliness is a great enemy to this joy, therefore take heed
and beware of covetousness Luke 12.15.
. Stop thy nostrills full of earth, and the sweetest Odours cannot affect the
smell; So, let a man hear the sweetest Doctrines of the Gospel, even of free
justification by Christ, etc. he can smell no sweetness in them, he can feel
no comfort by them, if his heart be stuffed, and inordinately affected with the
things of this life. As therefore thou would rejoice in the assurance of
Gods love, make not the world thy God to love.

shall, in desiring that this sweetness may, abide in her continually? Then
this should teach all those members of the Church, who have tasted of the joy
of Gods salvation, to endeavor to keep and maintain the same. The desires of
a good Mother, in good things (especially seconded with care and industry) must
be the pattern of the Childrens endeavors. If our Mother the Church has
desired, and endeavored in ALL ages to keep this joy; then WE, (members of
her body) in this age, must be careful not to come behind her in such
desires and endeavors. With how holy a vehemence does Paul enforce this upon
the Church her children, both at Philippi, and Thessalonica; Rejoice in the
Lord always, again, I say rejoice Phil. 4.4.
. Rejoice evermore 1 These. 5.16.
. In this joy as a man cannot be too excessive Pet. Mart. Eth. l. 1. p. 100.
^aec iocunditas ^itiosum ex^essumpati non ^otest.
, for the measure, so he cannot be too long, for the time.

Our Savior tells his Disciples, that he would have His joy REMAIN in them
Ioh. 15.11.
. Say therefore of this thy joy (thou Christian soul) as Job of his
innocence; I will not let it go until death.

Now that thou may have some directions in this case, these Rules will be
useful for thee.

How to keep spiritual joy. 1. Rule.
First, maintain thy joy in the Word, let that be the very joy and rejoicing of
thy heart. Let neither the pleasures of the flesh, nor the profits of the
world, nor the company nor counsel of carnal friends, make thee give over
thy private reading, study, and meditation, in that. Let neither the foulnes,
nor coldness of the weather, nor the length of the way, nor the shortness of
the days, cool thy forwardness, or quayle thy diligence in the hearing of
that. I am persuaded, that David did so much rejoice in the favor of God,
because he did so much delight in the Word of GOD. So much he seems to
testify in that 27. Psalm. verse. 4. I desire to dwell in the house of the
Lord all my days, that I may behold the beauty of the Lord; As if these words
were (after a sort) spoken of purpose, to show, that if we continue our
delight in Gods Temple, we shall continue our sight of Gods beauty, shining
upon us continually to refresh us. In the Word, we shall meet with such
sweet sentences, such gracious promises, as will strengthen our joy, as will
raise us up out of our heavy and disconsolate fits, as will show Christ unto
us, as will reveal the unspeakable goodness of God unto us. Experience in
the Church of Christ, proves, that many a man and woman, has gone with a
trembling spirit, with a perplexed conscience (because their joys were not as
they were wont to be) to the hearing of many a Sermon, about the reading of
many a Chapter in the Bible, or of some other sweet passages in good Books;
and they have met with that consolation, that satisfaction, that they would not
for any thing have missed off. Let but thy delight then in the Word of God
abate, and I dare boldly tell thee, thou shall find as much to do to
maintain thy joy in thy justification, as he, to continue the refreshing of
his brain with sweet flowers, that cares not to come into those Gardens where
they grow, or, that, having gathered them already, stops them in some corner
far from his nostrills. Be sure therefore still to rejoice in the garden of
the Scriptures, and be still plucking and sucking the sweetness of them, by
private study, and public hearing.

Again, a serious and frequent Meditation, upon the excellence of the benefit
of free justification by Christ, 2. Rule. To keep spiritual joy.
is a second help for a CHRISTIAN to maintain his spiritual joy. The deeper a
man dives into the nature of a thing, the more knowledge shall a man have of
the value of that thing, and suitable to his sight of the worth of it, will his
delight in it be. The more sweet flowers are rubbed, the more fragrant Odor
is extracted from them; yea, though these flowers seem somewhat dead, yet by
rubbing, the smell of them is revived; So, could but our faith ever and anon,
be rubbing out by divine Meditation, the marrow and spirits (as it were) of
this bundle of Myrrh, of this privilege, of partaking freely in the
righteousness of Christ Jesus, it is admirable to think what abundance of
sweetness, we shall draw out of the same, to the continual accheering and
refreshing of our souls.



effects of Justification, the Object, How by meditation to pull sweetness out
of Justification, viz. by meditating on the effect of Justification. 1. Effect.
of these thy Meditations.

First of all therefore think often with thy self, what an excellent thing it
is, of an enemy of God, to be made a friend of God; of one that Once were at
odds with him, to be set at one with him: but by virtue of the righteousness
of Christ, thou art at one with God, as the Apostle speaks; Being justified
by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord Romans 5.1.
.

2. Effect.
Secondly, meditate what a rare thing it is, that, whereas thou were once tied
to a most strict obedience to the Law of God (even in thine own person)
insomuch that for thy failing in the least tittle of that obedience, then
should have smarted for it for ever, now thou art freed from that rigor,
Christ has performed that perfect obedience for thee, and that Evangelicall
obedience, which now thou performest (being sincerely respective to all the
Commandments) is acceptable through Christ Jesus. But this also is an effect
of justification, as the same Apostle testifies, when he says; When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law Gal. 4.4.
. That is, they that have share in Christ, and his righteousness, they are
redeemed from the rigor of the Law.

Thirdly, think with thy self, what an excellent benefit it is to be freed
from the curse of the Law Gal. 3.^3.
, to be redeemed from condemnation, and from the wrath that is to come. But
this benefit belongs to them that are justified. Being now justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him Romans 5.9.
.

Fourthly, Meditate how great a privilege it is to be freed from the sting of
a tormenting conscience, which once thou did under go; What a liberty thou
have now ever what thou had then, when the Arrows of the Almighty did
drink up thy spirit; and a restless, terrified, soul was within thee; and
what great odds there is betwixt thine estate now, and thy case then. But this
freedom from terrors of conscience, comes from justification, as the Prophet
Isaiah signifies in the 41. Chapter of his Prophecy, the latter part of the
tenth verse, being compared with the first part of the foureteenth, where
Jacob, who is vpheld with the right hand of Gods righteousness, is wished (by
the Lord) not to fear, nor be terrified; as giving us to understand, that
terrors of conscience do not belong That is, as they did to Cain, and do to
Reprobates to drive them to desperation.
to them that are justified. And in another place of that Book, they that are
trees of righteousness, of the planting of the Lord. Isa. 61.3.
, or that are the righteous people Isa. 60.21.
, are promised to have (by Christ their Iustifier) their broken hearts bound
up, to have beauty instead of ashes, the oil of joy in stead of mourning, and
the garment of gladness instead of the garment of heaviness. Isa. 61.1.3.
.

Fifthly, Meditate what a singular prerogative it is to have hope in death, and
that, whereas they that tear and wear out their days in sin are like to
die, either ragingly and disconlol^tely, as, Saul, Judas, and Julian did; or
else blockishly, like a stone, as Naball did; thou shall die quietly, go to
thy grave in peace, and although it should be thy portion, to have sharp
encounters with the Tempter, yet that thou shall have victory, and confidence
in the greatest extremity. But this springs also from justification, as the
Wiseman speaks; The righteous (or the justified man) has hope in death Pro.
14.32.
.

Sixthly, Think often what a privilege it is to have comfort in the midst of
afflictions, and that, whereas outward troubles and crosses, are tokens of Gods
wrath and displeasure to the wicked, they are signs of his love and favor
toward thee. But this also thou have by the righteousness of Christ. Being
justified by faith (says Paul) we glory in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation works patience, patience experience, experience hope, and hope
makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
holy Ghost, which is given us Romans 5.1.3.4.5.
.

Lastly, consider seriously, what an inestimable blessing it is to have
everlasting bliss in the life to come; And, that, (whereas Reprobates shall
have that fearful sentence, denounced against them, Go ye cursed, etc.)
thou art like to hear that sweet voice, speaking to thee; Come thou blessed,
inherit the kingdom prepared for thee from the beginning of the world. But
this is another fruit of sharing in the righteousness of Christ, if St Paul
may be believed; Whom he has justified, them also has He glorified Romans 8.30.
; That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
RIGHTEOUSNESS unto ETERNAL LIFE, by Christ Jesus our Lord Romans 5.21.
.

Meditate upon these things, thou man or woman greatly beloved Dan. 10.11.19.
. I tell thee Christian, for want of this meditation, thou art much thine own
enemy. Thou spendest many a day vncheerefully, many an hour uncomfortably,
because thou do not so search into the worth of this bundle of Myrrh, by
such Meditations as thou should. Can the often ruminating on this, that, (by
virtue of Christ's righteousness) thou art at peace with God, freed from the
rigor of the Law, redeemed from the curse of the Law, quiet, truly quiet in
thy Conscience, that thou have right to comfort in afflictions, to hope in
death, to perfection of blessedness at the day of judgment; Can (I say) can
this choose, but preserve in thee, that spiritual joy the Lord has implanted
in thy soul? Give heed therefore, give heed to these privileges, and again
and again think upon them. So much for the second Rule.

Thirdly, A Christian shall preserve his joy, 3. Help to preserve joy.
by preserving his faith. Faith is the nostrill of the soul (as I told you)
which sends this joy to the heart, from the apprehension of Christ's
righteousness, look therefore how that is enfeebled, so will the joy be
extenuated. They, A Similie.
that would have sweet smells have free passage to the brain, to refresh the
animal spirits that be there, must have a care to prevent Ulcers from breeding
in the nostrills, by drying and strengthening the head, that no superfluities
(which are the cause of such Ulcers) flow out of the head into the nostrills.
So thou that would have the sweetness of this Myrrh, the joy of
justification to have passage by the nostrills of faith always to thy soul;
Keep thy heart with all diligence, watch, and observe that, that the
excrements and superfluities of unbelief, doubtings, distrust in Gods
providence, fleshly ease, giving way to the love of earthly things, like so
many Ulcers, may not breed in thy faith, and breath our such an unkind and
stinking Odor, as may stop the passage of those comforts to thy soul, with
which once thou were wont to be refreshed.

Fourthly, Take heed of sin against conscience. 4. Help.
The getting of a good conscience, is (as has been showed) a means to come
by joy. And the keeping of a good conscience is a means to conserve joy: How
did David eclipse his joy, and Peter his, when as the one defiled himself by
adultery and murder, and the other denied his Lord and Master, both against
the light of their own consciences.

And wherefore is it, that some Christians, who were once wont to rejoice in
the saving health of the God of Jacob, come to be plunged into deep fits of
distress, our of which they cannot so soon, and easily recover themselves,
but because they are somewhat more bold with their consciences then it is fit,
on lawful. If thou would walk then continually with the white garments of
gladness upon thy soul, beware thou do not wound thy soul, by giving way to
any sin, but endeavor to keep a clear conscience before God, and toward
men, holding (as the Apostle advises) the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience 1 Timothy 3.9.
.

5. Help.
To conclude all. In the last place, because a worldly, and carnal joy, is a
great enemy to the spiritual, and since it is as impossible for a man to
rejoice (as worldlings do) in the world, and the Lord, as to serve two Masters
Aug de verb. Dom. Ser. 37. Sicut non potest homo duobus dominis seruire, sic
and nemo in hoc seculo potest gaudere et in Domino.
: therefore take heed of a carnal and worldly joy. A caution.
Not that I would have a Christian, not take comfort in the outward blessings
that God has lent him; For, as he has best right unto them, so he has most
cause to take some comfort, in them: And not to do so, Solomon calls a vanity
under the Sun Eccles. 5
. But not only to rejoice in impiety against God, in iniquity against man
(as profane ones do) but also to rejoice in the outward good blessings of God
excessiuely or carnally, is that which I advise every believer to beware of. If
a man should mingle a bunch of Wormwood with a bundle of Myrrh, you cannot
make me believe, there will be so sweet a smell, as the Myrrh alone would
yield; Even so, he that admits any transitory, and worldly thing, at any time,
as an equal Object of his joy, with this transcendent treasure of
justification, let him tell me (be he never so dear in the eyes of God)
whither he depriues not his soul (for the present) of that abundance of
comfort, which once the thought of his discharge by Christ, did convey unto
him. When therefore thou art to solace thy self with the use of the creatures,
let thy joy know a measure, least the unmeasurableness of thy worldly joy,
lessen the measure of thy spiritual joy, which this Bundle of Myrrh, the
righteousness of CHRIST JESUS is the ground of.

These are the Rules by which thou may obtain thy joy in justification.
Think on them, make use of them. And heauens-blessing make them beneficial
unto thy soul.

AMEN.
LAVS DEO.

