THE TRIVMPH OF PEACE A Masque, presented by the Four Honorable Houses, OR
Jnnes of Court. Before the King and Queens Majesty's, in the Banqueting House
at White Hall, February the third, 1633.

Invented and Written, By James Shirley, of Grayes Inn, Gent.

Primum hunc Arethusa mihi -- LONDON, Printed by John Norton, for William
Cook, and are to be sold at his Shop, near Furnivals-Inne-gate, in Holborne.
1633.

TO THE FOUR Equal and Honorable Societies, THE JNNES of COURT.
I Want words to express Your cheerful and active desires, to present Your
duties to their royal Majesty's, in this Masque: to celebrate, by this humble
tender of Your hearts, and services, the happiness of our Kingdom, so blessed
in the present government, and never so rich in the possession of so many, and
great pledges of their Parents virtue, our Native Princes.

Your clear devotions already offered, and accepted, let not me want an Altar
for my Oblation to You. This entertaynment which took life from your command,
and wanted no motion, or growth, it could derive from my weak Fancy: I
sacrifice again to You, and under Your smile to the world, let it not repent
you to look upon what is the second time made Your own, and with it, the
Heart of the Sacrificer, infinitely bound to acknowledge your free, and Noble
souls, that have left no way for a Poet to satisfy his ambition, how to
thank you, but with thinking, he shall never be able to satisfy it.

I dare not rack my preface to a length, proceed to be Your selves (the
Ornament of our Nation,) and when You have leisure to converse with
imaginations of this kind, it shall be an addition to your many favors, to
read these papers, and obliege beside, the scales of Your other encouragement,

The humblest of your Honourers JAMES SHIRLEY.

The Masque of the Gentlemen of the four Honorable Societies, or Jnnes of
Court.
AT Elie and Hatton-Houses, the Gentlemen and their Assistants met, and in this
manner prepared for the Court. The Antimasquers were vsher'd by a Hornepipe, and
a Shalme, riding in Coats and Caps of yellow Taffata, spotted with Silver,
their Feathers red, their Horses led by men in coats of blew Taffata, their
wings red, and part of their sleeves yellow, Caps and Feathers: all the
torch-bearers in the same habit appointed to attend, and give plentiful light
to the whole train.

Fancy, in a suit of several colored Feathers hooded. A pair of Bats-wings
on his shoulders, riding alone as sole presenter of the Antimasques.

After him rode Opinion and Confidence together, Opinion in an old fashioned
Doublet of black Velvet, and truncke Hose, a short Cloak of the same with an
antique Cape, a black Velvet cap pinched up, with a white fall, a Staff in
his hand.

Confidence in a slashed Doublet parti-colored Breeches suitable with points at
knees, favors upon his breast, and arm: a broad brim'd Hat, tied upon one
side, banded with a Feather, a long Lock of Hair, trimmed with several
colored Ribbands, wide Boots, and great Spurs with Bells for rowels.

Next rode Iollity and Laughter. Iollity in a flame-coloured Suite, but tricked
like a Morise-dancer, with Scarfes and Napkins, his Hat fashioned like a Cone,
with a little fall.

Laughter in a long side Coat of several colors, laughing Visards on his
breast and back, a Cap with two grinning faces, and Feathers between.

Then followed variety of Anticke music after which rode six Proiectors, one
after another, their horses led by Torch-bearers.

The first a Iocky with a Bonnet on his head upon the top of it a whip, he
seeming much to observe and affect a bridle which he had in his hand.

The second a Country fellow in a Leather Doubled and gray trunk Hose, a
wheel with a perpetual motion on his head, and in his hand a flayle.

The third, a grimme Philosopicall faced fellow in his gown furred, and
girdled about him, a furnace upon his head, and in his hand a lamp.

The fourth in a case of black Leather vast to the middle, and round on the
top, with glass eyes, and bellows under each arm.

The fist a Physician, on his head a Hat with a bunch of Carrots, a Capon
perched upon his fist.

The sixth like a Seaman, A Ship upon his head and holding a Line and Plummet
in his hand.

Here variety of other Anticke music counterfeiting the voices of Birds, and
after these rode, a Magpy, a Crow, a Iay, and a Kite, in a quadrangular figure,
and in the midst an Owl, these were followed by three Satires, two a breast,
and one single, sided with torch-bearers. Then three Dotterels in the same
manner and attendance.

After these a Windmill, against which a phantasticke Knight with his Lance,
and his Squire armed seemed to make their attempts.

These moving forward in ridiculous show and postures, a Drummer follows on
Horseback, in a Crimson taffata coat, a white Hat and Feather, tip'd with
crimson, beating two kettle Drums.

Then 14. Trumpetors, in crimson Satin coats, white Hats and Feathers, and
rich Banners.

The Marshall followed these bravely mounted. attended with forty foot, in
Cotes and Hose of Scarlet trimmed with Silver-lace, white Hats and Feathers,
their Truncheons tip'd with Silver: these upon every occasion moving to and
fro, to preserve the order of their march, and restrain the rudeness of
people, that in such triumphs, are wont to be insolent, and tumultuary.

After these an hundred Gentlemen, gloriously furnished and gallantly mounted,
riding two and two a breast, every Gentleman having his two Pages richly
attired, and a groom to attend him.

Next after these a Chariot drawn by four horses, two and two together,
richly furnished and adorned with Gold and Silver, the Charioter in a Polonian
coat of green cloth of Silver. In this were advanced Musicians like Priests
and Sybills, sons and daughters of Harmony, some with Coronets, other with
wreathes of Laurel and Myrtle, playing upon their Lutes, three Foote-men on
each side in blew Satin wrought with Silver, and every one a Flambeaux in his
hand.

In the next Chariot of equal glory, were placed on the lowest stairs four
in skie-coloured Taffata Robes seeded with stars, Mantles ash colored,
adom'd with Fringe, and Silver-lace, Coronets with Stars upon their heads. In
a seat a little more elevate sat Geniu, and Amphiluchs.

On the highest seat of this Chariot, sat the three Hours, or Heavenly
sisters, Irene, Diche, and Eunomia. All whose habits shall be described in
their proper places: this Chariot attended as the former.

After these came the four Triumphals or Magnificent Chariots, in which were
mounted the grand Masquers, one of the four Houses in every Chariot, seated
within an half Ovall, with a glorious Canopy over their heads, all bordered
with silver Fringe, and beautified with Plumes of Feathers on the top.

The first Chariot, Silver and Orange. The second, Silver and Watchet. The
third, Silver and Crimson. The fourth, Silver and White.
All after the Roman form, adorned with much embossed and carved works, and
each of them wrought with Silver, and his several color, they were mounted on
carriages, the Spring trees, Pole and Axle-trees, the Charioters seat, and
standers, wheels, with the fellyes, spokes, and naves all wrought with Silver,
and their several color.

They were all drawn with four Horses a front after the magnificent Roman
Triumphs, their furniture, Harness, Headstall, Bits, Raines, and Traces,
Shaferon, Cronet, Petronell, and Barbe of rich cloth of Silver, of several
works, and colors answerable to the linings of the Chariots.

The Charioters in Polony-coates of the same color of the Chariots, their Caps
Feathers, and Buskings answerable.

The two out Horses of every Chariot led by two men in habits wrought with
Silver, and conformable to the color of the other furniture, four footmen on
either side of every Chariot, in rich habits also wrought with Silver
answerable to the rest, every one carrying a Flambeaux in his hand.

Between every of these Chariots four Musicians in their Robes and Garlands,
were mounted; riding two a breast, attended with Torch-bearers.

The Habit of the Masquers gave infinite splendour to this solemnity; which more
aptly shall be expressed in his Place.

TThis Masque was presented in the Banqueting House. At white Hall before the
King and Queens Majesty's and a great Assembly of Lords and Ladies, and other
persons of quality, whose aspect setting on the degrees prepared for that
purpose gave a great grace to this spectacle, especially being all richly
attired.

At the lower end of the room opposite to the state was raised a Stage with a
descent of stairs in two branches landing into the room. This Basement was
painted in rusticke work.

The border of the front and sides that enclosed all the Scene had first a
ground of Arber-worke entermixt with loose branches and leaves, and in this was
two Niches, and in them two great figures standing in easy postures in their
natural colors, and much bigger then the life, the one attired after the
Grecian manner held in one hand a Scepter, and in the other a Scrowle, and a
picked antique crown on his head, his curasse was of Gold richly enchased, his
robe blue and Silver, his arms and thighs bare with buskings enricht with
ornaments of Gold, his brown locks long and curled, his Beard thick but not
long, and his face was of a grave and ioviall aspect, this figure stood on a
round pedestall fained of white Marble, enricht with several caruings; above
this in a compartiment of Gold was written MINOS. The figure on the other side
was in a Roman habit, holding a Table in one hand, and a Pen in the other, and
a white Bend or Diadem about his head, his Robe was crimson and Gold, his
Mantle yellow and Silver, his Buskins watchet trimmed with Silver, his hair and
Beard long and white with a venerable aspect, standing likewise on a round
Pedestall answerable to the other. And in the compartiment over him was written
NVMA. Above all this in a proportionate distance hung two great Festons of
fruits in colors which served for finishing to these sides. The upper part in
manner of a large Freeze was adorned with several compartiments with draperies
hanging down, and the ends tied up in knots, with trophies proper to feasts
and triumphs, composed of Masking Vizards and torches. In one of the lesser
compartiments was figured a sharp sited eye, and in the other a Golden-yoke,
in the midst was a more great and rich compartiment on the sides of which sat
naked Children in their natural colors with Silver wings in action of sounding
Golden Trumpets, and in this was figured a Caduseus with an Oliue-branch all
which are Hierogliphicks of Peace Justice and Law.

A Curtain being suddenly drawn up the Scene was discovered representing a
large street with Sumptuous Palaces Lodges Portico's, and other noble pieces
of Architecture with pleasant Trees and grounds, this going far from the eye
opens it self into a spacious place adorned with public and private
buildings seen a far of, representing the Forum or Piazza of Peace. Over all
was a clear Sky with transparent Clouds which enlightened all the Scene.

The Spectators having entertained their eyes a while with the beavty and
variety of this Scene from one of the sides of the streets enters Opinion, etc.

Enter Opinion, Confidence meets him, they salute. CONFIDENCE, MOst grave
Opinion!

Op. Confidence most welcome,
Is Fancy come to Court?

Co. Breaking his way
Thorough the Guard.

Op. So violent?

Co. With jeafts Which they are less able to resist,
He Will crack a Halberd with his wit,

Op. A most
Strong Fancy, yet we have known a little Engine
Break an ingenious Head piece. But your Master --

Co. Companion sir. Fancy will keep no Servants,
And Confidence scorns to wait.

Op. Cry mercy sir,
But is this Gentleman, this Signior Fancy
So rare a thing, so subtle as men speak him.

Co. He Is a great Prince of the Air, believe it sir,
And yet a Bird of night.

Op. A Bird!

Co. Between
An Owl and Bat, a queint Hermophrodite,
Begot of Mercury and Venus Wit and Love.
He Is worth your entertainment.

Op. I am most
Ambitious to see him, he is not
So nimble as I wish him, where is my Wife,
My Lady Novelty?

Enter Lady Novelty. No. Your Wife? you might
Have framed a newer word, they can but call,
Us so in the Country.

Op. No exception
Dear Madam Novelty, I must prepare you,
To entertain a Gentleman, where is Admiration,
Our Daughter?

Enter Admiration. Ad. Here sir, what gay man is this?

Op. Please you honor us, and bring in your friend sir.

Co. I Will do it but he prevents me.

Enter Fancy, Iollity, and Laughter. Op. Sir I am ignorant
By what titles to salute you, but you are welcome to Court.

Ph. Save your self sir, your name's Opinion.

Op. And yours Fancy.

Ph. Right.

Iol. Mine Iollity.

La. Mine Laughter, ha, ha, ha.

No. Here Is a strange shape.

An. I never saw the like.

Ph. I come to do you honor with my friends here
And help the Masque.

Op. You Will do a special favor.

Ph. How many Antimasquesha they? Of what nature?
For these are Phansies that take most, your dull
And phlegmatic inventions are exploded,
Give me a nimble Antimasque.

Op. They have none sir.

La. No Antimasque? i would laugh at that in faith.

Iol. What make we here? No Iollity.

Ph. No Antimasque.
Bid'em down with the Scene, and sell the Timber,
Send Jupiter to grass, and bid Apollo
Keep Cowes again, take all their gods and goddesses,
For these must farse up this nights entertainment,
And pray the Court may have some mercy on 'em,
They will be jeerd to death else for their ignorance,
The soul of wit moves here, yet there be some
If my intelligence fail not, mean to show
Themselves jeere Majors, some tall Critticks have
Planted Artillery and wit murderers.
No Antimasque? Let 'em look to it.

Op. I have heard sir;
Confidence made them trust, you'de furnish 'em,
I fear they should have made their address earlier
To your invention, but your braine's nimble,
Pray, for the expectation that is upon 'em
Lend them some witty fancies, set some engines
In motion, that may conduce to the design.
I am their friend against the Croude that envy 'em
And since they come with pure devotions
To sacrifice the in duties to the King
And Queen, I wish em prosper.

Ph. You have charmd me,
I Will be their friend tonight, I have a Fancy
Already.

La. Let it be ridiculous.

Co. And Confident.

Iol. And Jolly.

Ph. The first Antimasque
We will present our selves in our own persons,
What think you on it? most grave Opinion
You shall do well to lead tho dance, and give it
Authority with your face, your lady may
Admire what she finds new.

No. I shall applaud.
The Novelties.

Ad. And I admire.

Ph. They tumble,
My skull's too narrow.

La. Now his Phansies caper.

Ph. Confidence, wait you upon Opinion,
Here Admiration, there Novelty,
This is a place for Iollity and Laughter
Fancy will dance himself too.

The first Antimasque, the dance expressing the natures of the Presenters. Ph.
How like you this device?

Op. It Is hansome -- but

La. Opinion will like nothing.

No. It seems new.

Co. It Was bold.

Iol. It Was Iocund.


La. Did not I do the fool well?


Ad. Most Admirably.

La. Nay, and the Ladies do but take
My part, and Laugh at me, I am made, ha, ha.

Op. I could wish something sir, of other nature
To satisfy the present expectation.

Ph. I imagine, nay, I Am not ignorant of proprieties
And persons, it is a time of peace, i will fit you.
And instantly make you a representation
Of the effect.

Op. Of peace? I like that well.

Ph. And since in nothing, they are more expressed
Then in good fellowship, i will present you with a Tavern.

A Tavern is discovered in the Scene. No. A spicke and span new Tavern.

Ad. Wonderful, here was none within two minutes.

La. No such wonder Lady, Tauernes are quickly
up, it is but hanging out a Bush at a Noblemans door,
or an Aldermans gate, and it is made instantly.

Co. Will It please you Ladies to except the wine?

Iol. Well said Considence.

No. It will be new for Ladies
To go to the Tavern, but it may be a fashion,
Follow me Admiration.

La. And the fool,
I may supply the absence of your Fiddlers.

Iol. If we can, lets leave Opinion behind us,
Fancy will make him drunk,

Exeunt to the Tavern. Another Antimasque of the Master of the Tavern, His
Wife, and Servants. after these -- A Maquerelle. Two Wenches. Two wanton
Gamsters.
These having danced and expressed their natures go into the Tavern. then --
A Gentleman. Beggars 4.
The Gentleman first danceth alone: to him the Beggars, he bestows his charity,
the Cripples upon his going off, throw away their legs, and dance.

Op. I am glad they are off, are these effects of peace?
Corruption rather.

Ph. Oh the Beggars show
The benefit of peace.

Op. Their uery breath
Has stifled all the Candles, poysond the
Perfumes, Beggars a fit presentment? how
They cleave still to my nosthrill, I must tell you,
I do not like such base, and sordide persons,
And they become not here.

Ph. I apprehend,
If these distaste you, I can fit you with
Persons more cleanly,
What think you of Proiectors?

Op. How Proiectors!

Ph. Here Is one already.

Enter a Iocky. This is a Iocky,
He is to advance a rare, and cunning bridle
Made hollow in the Iron part, wherein
A vapor subtly conveyed, shall so
Cool and refresh a horse, he shall nere tire
And now he falls to his pace.
Iocky dances. Op. This other?

Enter a Country fellow. Ph. His habit speaks him
A Country fellow, that has sold his acres
To purchase him a flayle, which by the motion
Of a queint wheel, shall without help of hands,
Thresh Corn all day, and now he lays about him.

The Country fellow dances. Enter another Proiector. This with a face
Philosophical and beard,
Has with the study of twenty years, found out
A lamp, which placed beneath a furnace, shall
Boil Beef so thoroughly, that the uery steame
Of the first Vessel, shall alone be able
To make another Pot above sees over.
Op. A most Scholasticke project; his feet follow
The motions of his brain.

The third Proiector dances. But what thing's this?
A Chimera out of Rablais?
Ph. A new project,
A Case to walk you all day under water.
So vast for the necessity of air,
Which, with an artificial bellows coold
Under each arm, is kept still from corruption,
with those glass eyes, he sees, and can fetch up
Gold, or what ever Jewels have been lost,
In any River of the World.

The fourth Proiector dances. Op. Strange Water-Rat!

Enter another Proiector. Ph. This grave man, some years past was a Physician,
A Galenist, and parcel Paracelsus,
Thrin'd by diseases, but quite lost his practice,
To study a new way to fatten Poultry
With scrapings of a Carrot, a great benefit
To the Commonwealth.

The fifth Proiector dances. Op. He will deserve a monument.

Enter the sixth Proiector. Ph. This is a kind of Seagull too, that will
Compose a ship to sail against the winds.
He Will undertake to build a most strong castle
On Goodwin sands, to melt huge Rocks to jelley,
And cut 'em out like sweetmeats with his keele,
And thus he sails.

All the Proiectors dance after their Antimasque, The Maquerelle. Wenches.
Gentlemen.
Return, as from the Tavern, they dance together, The Gallants, are cheated,
and left to dance in with a drunken repentance.

Op. I know not sir, how this may satisfy,
But might we be beholding to your fancy
For some more queint variety, some other
Then humane shapes, would happily delight,
And reach the expectation, I ha seen
Dainty devices in this kind, Baboones
In Quellios, and so forth.

Ph. I can furnish you.

Op. Fancy will much obliege us.

Ph. If these objects
Please not, Fancy can present a change,
What see you now?

The Scene becomes a woody Landschape with low grounds proper for hunting, the
furthest part more desert, with bushes and by ways representing a place fit
for purse-taking.

In the furthest part of the Scene is seen an Ivy-bush, out of which comes an
Owl.

Op. A Wood, a broad-fac'd Owl,
An Ivy-bush, and other Birds about her.

Ph. These can imagination create,
Silence, observe.

An Owl. A Crow. A Kite. A Iay. A Magpy.
The Birds dance and wonder at the Owl. When these are gone, enter A Merchant,
a Horseback, with his Portmantue. Two Thieves set upon him and rob him:
these by A Constable, and Officersare apprehended and carried off. Then Four
Nymphs enter dancing with their Iavelins. Three Satires spy them and attempt
their persons, one of the Nymphs escapes, a noise of Hunters and their horns
within, as at the fall of a Dear, then Enter Four Huntsmen and One Nymph.
These drive away the Satires, and having rescued the Nymphs, dance with them.

Op. This all you will present?

Ph. You speak as if
Fancy could be exhaust, Invention flows
From an immortal spring, you shall taste other
Variety, nimble as thought. We change the Scene.

A Landschape the Scene. and Enter Three Dotterells. Three Dotterell-catchers.
Op. What are these?

Ph. Dotterells, be patient, and expect.

After the Dotterells are caught by several imitations, enters A Windwill. A
phantastique Knight. and His Squire armed. The phantastique Aduenturer, with
his lance makes attempts upon the Windmill, his Squire imitates: to them Enter
A Country Gentleman, and his Servant. Bowlers, 4. These are assavlted by the
Knight and his Squire, but are sent off lame for their folly.

Enter Confidence, Iollity, Laughter, Novelty, Admiration. Op. Madam accuse
your absence,

No. We know
All your devices sir.

Op. Ha, what is the matter,
Confidence, Iollity, Laughter, Admiration,
And Madam Novelty, and drunk! these are
extremes indeed.

Ad. Admirable Opinion.

Co. Be confident.

La. And foolish.

Iol. I am as light now.

Ph. Let 'em enjoy their Phansies.

Op. What new change
Is this? these strains are heavenly.

Fancy and the rest go off fearfully. The Antimasquers being gone there
appears in the highest and foremost part of the heaven by little and little to
break forth a whitish Cloud bearing a Chariot fained of Goldsmiths-worke, and
in it fate Irene, or Peace in a flowery vesture like the spring, a Garland of
Olives on her head a branch of Palm in her hand, Buskins of green Taffata,
great puffs about her neck and shoulders.

She sings. Ir. Hence ye profane far hence away,
Time has sick feathers, while you stay,
Is this delight
For such a glorious night,
Wherein two skies
are to be seen,
One starry, but an aged sphere
another here,
Created new and brighter from the Eyes
of King and Queen?

CHO. Hence ye profane, far hence away,
Time has sick feathers while you stay.

Song 2.
Ir. Wherefore do my sisters stay
Appear, appear Eunomia,
It Is Irene calls to thee,
Irene calls;
Like dew that falls
Into a stream,
I Am lost with them,
That know not how to order me.

CHO. See there she shines, oh see
In her celestial gayety
Cround with a wreath of Stars to show
The Evenings glory in her brow.

Here out of the highest part of the opposite side came softly descending
another Cloud, of an orient color, bearing a silver Chariot curiously wrought,
and differing in all things from the first, in which sat Eunomia or Law, in a
purple Satin Robe, adorned with golden Startes, a mantle of carnation Laced,
and Fringed with Gold, a Coronet of light upon her head, Buskins of Purple,
drawn out with Yellow.

Song 3.
Eu. Thinks not I could absent my self this night,
But Peace is gentle, and does still invite
Eunomia, yet should thou silent be
The Rose and Lilly which thou strowest
All the cheerful way thou go
Would direct to follow thee.

Ir. Thou do beautify increase,
And chain security with peace.

Eu. Irene fair, and first devine,
All my blessings spring from thine,

Ir. I am but wild without thee, thou abhorrest
What is rude, or apt to wound,
Can throw proud trees to the ground,
And make a Temple of a Forest.

Eu. No more, no more, but join
Thy voice, and Lute with mine.

Both. The world shall give prerogative to neither
We cannot flourish but together.

CHORI. Cho. Irene enters like a perfumed spring,
Eunomia ripens every thing,
And in the golden harvest leaves
To every sickle his own sheaves.

At this a third Cloud of a various color from the other two, begins to descend
toward the middle of the Scene with somewhat a more swifter motion, and in it
sat a Person representing Diche or Justice in the midst in a white Robe and
mantle of Satin, a fair long hame circled with a Coronet of Silver Pikes,
white Wings and Buskins, a Crown imperial in her hand.

Song 4.
Dich. Swifly, oh swiftly, I do move to slow,
What holds my wing from making have
When every Cloud sails by so fast?
I heard my sisters voice, and know
They have forsaken Heavens bright gate,
To attend another State,
of gods below.
Irene chaste Evnomia.

Ir. Eu. We
Diche, have stayed expecting thee,
Thou give perfection to our glory,
And seal to this nights story.
Astrea shake the cold dew from thy wing.

Eu. Descend.

Ir. Descend.

Eu. Descend, and help us sing,
The Triumph of Jove's upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.

CHOR. The Triumph of Jove's upper Court abated
And all the Deities translated.

Eu. Now gaze, and when thy wonder will allow,
Tell what thou have beheld.

Dich. Never, till now,
Was poor Astrea blind, oh strange surprise,
That too much sight should take away my eyes,
Am I in Earth or Heaven?

Ir. What Throne is that,
On which so many Stars do wait?

Dich. My Eyes are blessed again, and now I see
The Parents of us three.
It Is Jove and Themis forward move,
And sing to Themis, and to Jove.

Then the whole train of Musicians move in a comely figure toward the King and
Queen, and bowing to their State, this following Ode is sung.

Song 5.
To you great King and Queen, whose smile.
Does scatter blessings through this I Will,
To make it best
And wonder of the rest,
We pay the duty of our birth,
Proud to wait upon that Earth
Where on you move,
Which shall be named
And by your chaste embraces famed
The Paradise of love.
Irene plant thy Olives here,
Thus warmed, at once, they will bloome and bear,
Eunomia pay thy light,
While Diche, covetous to stay,
Shall throw her silver Wings away,
To dwell within your sight.
The Scene is changed, and the Masquers appear setting on the ascent of an
Hill, cut out like the degrees of a Theater, and over them a delicious Arbor
with terms of young Men their Arms converted into Scrowles, and under their
wastes a foliage with other caruings to cover the joining of the term from the
naked, all fained of Silver, these bore up an Architraue, from which was raised
a light covering arched, and interwoven with Branches through which the Sky
beyond was seen.

The Masquers were sixteen in number, the sons of Peace Law and Justice, who
setting in a gracious but not set form, every part of the seats made a
various Composition, but all together tending to a Piramidall figure.

Their habits was mixed, between the ancient and modern, their bodies
Carnation, the shoulders trimd with Knots of pure silver, and scallops of White
and Carnation, under them the Labels of the same, the under-sleeves white, and
a puffed sleeve full of gathering, falling down to the elbow, about their waste
was a small scallop, and a slender Girdle, their under Bases were Carnation and
White, with Labels as at their shoulders, and all this in every part was richly
Embroydered with pure silver: their Hats Carnation low croun'd, the brimme
double, and cut into several quarters lined with white, and all over richly
Embroydered, as the rest, about their Hats were wreathes of Olive, and plumes
of white Feathers, with several falls, the longest toward the back; their
long stockings were white, with white shoes and Roses.

Beneath these a Genius or Angelical person, with Wings of several colored
Feathers, a Carnation Robe tucked up, yellow long hair bound with a silver
Coronet, a small white Rod in his hand, white Buskins, who descended to the
Stage, speaks,

Genesis No foreign persons I make known,
But here present you with your own,
The Children of your Reign, not blood
Of age, when they are understood.
Not seen by faction or Owls sight,
Whose trouble is the clearest light,
But treasures to their eye, and ear,
That love good for it self, not fear.
Oh smile on what your selves have made,
These have no form, no sun, no shade,
But what your virtue does create,
Exalted by your glorious fate,
Thei'le tower to heaven, next which, they know,
And wish no blessedness but you.
The Masquers move. That very look into each eye
Has shot a soul, I saw it fly.
Descend, move nimbly, and advance,
Your joyful tribute in a dance.

Here with loud Music, the Masquers descend and dance their entry to the
Violins, which ended, they retire to the Scene, and then the Hours and Chori
again move toward the State and sing.

Song 6.
They that were never happy Hours
Till now, return to thank the Powers
that made them so
The Island does rejoice,
And all her waves are Echo to our voice,
Which in on ages past, has known
such treasures of her own.
Live Royal pair, and when Your sands are spent
with Heavens and Your consent,
Though late, from Your high Bowers,
Look down on what was Yours,
For till old time his Glass has hurled
And lost it, in the ashes of the world,
We Prophecy, You shall be read, and seen,
In every Branch, a King or Queen.
The song ended, and the Musicians returned, the Masquers dance their maine
dance, after which they again retire to the Seen, at which they no sooner
arrive, but there is heard a great noise, and confusion of voices within, some
crying, they will come in, others knocke'em down, call the rest of the Guard:
then a crack is heard in the works, as if there were some danger by some
piece of the Machines falling, this continued a little time, there rush in A
Carpenter. A Paynter. One of the Black-guard. A Tailor. The Tailors Wife. An
Embroderers Wife. A Feather-makers Wife. A property-mans Wife.


Car. Do You think to keep us out?

1 Gu. Knock her down.

Tay. Knock down my Wife, I Would see the tallest Beefe-eater on you all, but
hold up his Halberd in the way of knocking my Wife down, and i will bring him a
button-hole lower.


Tay. W. Nay, let 'em, let 'em Husband, at their perrill.


2 Gu. Complain to my Lord Chamberlain.


Pro. My husband is somewhere in the works; I Am sure I helped to make him an
Owl and a Hobbihorse, and I see no reason but his Wife may be admitted in
Forma paperis, to see as good a Mask as this.


Bla. I never saw one before, I am one of the Guard, though of another
complexion, and I will see it now I am here, though I be turned out of the
Kitchen to morrow for it.


Pa. I, come, be resolute, we know the worst, and let us challenge a
privilege, those stairs were of my painting.


Car. And that Timber I set up: some body is my witness.


Fea. I am sure my husband sold 'em most of the Feathers; some body promised me
a fall too if I came to Court, but let that pass.


Emb. And mine embroidered two of the best habits, what though we be no Ladies,
we are Christians in these clothes, and the Kings subjects God bless us.


Tay. Nay, now I am in, I will see a dance, though my shop-windowes be shut up
for it, tell us? -- hum? dee hear? do not they laugh at us? what were we best
to do, the Masquers will do no feats as long we are here, be ruled by me,
hark every one, it is our best course to dance a figary our selves, and then
they will think it a piece of the Plot, and we may go off again with the more
credit, we may else kiss the Porters-lodge for it, let us put a trick upon 'em
in renenge, 'twill seem a new device too.


Om. Content.


Tay. And the Musicians knew but our mind now* The Violins play. Hark they are
at it, now for a lively friske. They dance. now, let us go off cleanely, and
some body will think, this was meant for an Antimasque.


They being gone, the Masquers are encouraged by a Song, to their Revells with
the Ladies.

Song 7.
Why do you dwell so long in clouds
And smother your best graces,
It Is time to cast away those shrouds
And clear your manly faces.
Do not behave your selves like Spies,
Upon the Ladies here,
On even terms got meet their eyes,
Beauty and love shine there.
You tread dull measures thus alone,
Not satisfy delight,
Go kiss their hands, and make your own
With every touch more white.
The Revels being past, the Scene is changed into a plain Champion Country
which terminates with the Horizon, and above a darkish Sky, with dusky clouds,
through which appeared the new Moon, but with a faint light by the approach of
the morning; from the furthest part of this ground, arose by little and little
a great vapor which being come a bout the middle of the Scene, it slackens its
motion, and begins to fall downward to the earth from whence it came: and out
of this rose another cloud of a strange shape, and color, on which sat a
young Maid, with a dim Torch in her hand, her face was an Olive color, so
was her arms and breast, on her head a curious dressing, and about her neck a
string of great Pearl, her garment was transparent, the ground dark Blue, and
sprinkled with silver Spangles, her Buskins white, trimmed with Gold: by these
marks she was known to be the forerunner of the morning, called by the
Ancients Amphiluche, and is that glimps of light, which is seen when the night
is past, and the day not yet appearing.

Song 8.
Am. In envy to the night,
That keeps such Revels here,
With my unwelcome light,
Thus I invade her sphere.
Proclaiming marres
To Cinthia, and all her Stars,
That like proud Spangles dress her azure Tresse.
Because I cannot be a guest, I rise
To shame the Moon, and put out all her eyes.

Amphiluche ascending, the Masquers are called from their Revels by other
voices.

Song 9.
1
Come away, away, away
See the dawning of the day,
Risen from the murmuring streams,
Some stars show with sickly beams,
What stock of flame they are allowed,
Each retiring to a Cloud,
Bid your active sports adieu,
The morning else will blush for you.
2
Ye featherd-footed hours run
To dress the Chariot of the Sun,
Harness the Steeds, it quickly will
Be time to mount the Eastern hill.
3
The lights grow pale with modest fears,
Least you offend their sacred ears,
And eyes, that lent you all this grace,
Retire, retire to your own place.
4
And as you move from that blessed Pair,
Let each heart kneel, and think a prayer,
That all, that can make up the glory,
Of good, and great, may fill their story.
Amphiluche hidden in the Heavens, and the Masquers retired. The Scene closes.

And thus concluded this Masque, which was, for the variety of the Shows, and
richness of the Habits, the most magnificent that has been brought to Court
in our time.

THe Scene and Ornament, was the act of Inigo Jones Esquire, Surueyer of his
Majesty's works.

The Composition of the Music, was performed by Mr. William Laws, and Mr.
Simon Ives, whose Art gave an Harmonious soul to the otherwise languishing
Numbers.

FINIS.

