King Appolyn of Thyre.
depiction of King Apployn on horseback flanked by knights

The prologue of the translatoure.
FOr that i^ time past hystoriagraphes daily wrote and dyurnally do the high
feats of nobles and chyualrous champyons of their marcyall deeds / of their
love / and of they adventures and fortunes happy and malfortunate to their
universal renownes by ye reason whereof their glory is eternally regystred in
the book of fame. Therefore to the end that their lawde may ye ferder sprede
amonde ye people it is co^uenyent that translacyons be used to our recreacyon
and exemplyfycacyon in the avoiding of osiuyte and ydlenes portresse of sin
doy^ge after ye good and eschewynge ye evil (All this considered) my
worshypfull master Wynkyn de Word having a little book of an au^cyent
hystory of a king sometime reygnynge in the country of Thyre called Appolyn
concerning his malfortunes and peryllous adventures right espoue^tables /
bryefly compyled and pyteous for to here. The which book I Robert Coplande
have me applied for to translate out of the Frensshe language in to our
maternal English tongue at thexhortacyon of my foresaid master / according
dyrectly to mine auctour. Gladly following the trace of my master Caxton /
beginning with small stories and pamfletes and so to other. Wherefore I beseech
all the reders and herers of this present hystorye if there be any thing amysse
in the translacyon to pardon mine ygnorau^t youth / and if it be fruytfull to
gader thereof to ye nourysshynge of their souls / tha^kynge our lord of his
grace / and to pray to him yt I may persevere to do some thing to his honor.
And I shall pray for the^ that they may come to his glory / to ye which he
bry^ge us all. Ame^

Explicit prologus.
Here after follows the table of this present book.
How ye king of Anthyoche begat on his wife a fair daughter at whose birth
his wife deyed. Ca. j. How by lechery and temptacyon of the devil ye king
Anthiogus vyoled his daughter. Ca. ij. How king Appolyn assoyled ye questyon
of king Anthyogus of Anthyoche. Ca. iij. How ye king of Anthyoche sent his
steward toward king Appolyn of Thyre for to put him to death. Ca. iiij How
king Appolyn mounted secretly on ye see. Ca. v. How king Appolyn aryued at ye
cite of Tarcye. Ca. vj How king Appolyn met with an aeged man and of their
deuyses. Ca. vij. How king Appolyn delivered the cite of Tarcye fro great
famyne and honger. Ca. viij. How king Appolyn sailed toward ye cite of Term
where as his ships perysshed nygh unto ye port and all his men drowned and
he only preserved. Ca. ix. How king Appolyn poorly arrayed entered within ye
cite of Term and played with the king. Ca. x. How king Appolyn dyned in the
kings hall. Ca. xj. How king Appolyn fell in co^ceyte with Archycastres the
kings daughter for playnge on the harp. Ca.xij. How Archycastres was love
seek for Appoly^. Ca. xiij. How two kings sons came for to have had fair
Archycastres in marriage. Ca. xiiij. How Appolyn bare letters unto the king.
Ca. xv. How king Appolyn espoused the fair damoysell Archycastres the kings
daughter of Term. Ca. xvj. How tidings came by a galey to king Appolyn yt
the king of Anthyoche was deed. Ca. xvij. How king Appolyn entered the sea
with his wife / and how she was delivered of a daughter. Ca. xviij. How after
that Archycastres was delivered was cast in to the sea in an arche of leed. Ca.
xix. How archycastres was found and made hole and after went in to a monastery
of Dyane. Ca xx. How king Appoly^ aryued at Tarcye and left his daughter with
Tranquylyte and Dyonyse his wife. Ca. xxj. How the nouryce recounted to ye
child Tharcye who was her fader and who her mother and tha^ deyed. Ca. xxij.
How Dyonysy Tranquyls wife ymagyned ye death of Tharcye king Appolyns
daughter. Ca. xxiij. How a galye came and socoured Tharcye as she should have be
slain. Ca. xxiiij. How ye galey me^ sold Tharcye to a ruffyen. Ca. xxv. How
Tharcye gave her money to ye ruffyen / and how he would have made his esclaue
to lie with her. Ca. xxvj. How king Appolyn came to the cite of Tharcie for to se
his daughter. Ca. xxvij. Of the lamentacyon of king Appolyn. Ca. xxviij. How
king Appolyn aryued at Mylytayne / and how his daughter luted before him / and
other matters. Ca. xxix. how Tharcye complained of her mysfortunes before king
Appolyn / for hurtynge of her knee. Ca. xxx. Of the Joy of king Appolyn and
Tharcye. Ca. xxxj. How ye ruffyen yt kept Tharcye was brent. Ca. xxxij. Of ye
marriage of Anthygoras prince and of Tharcye king Appolyns daughter. Ca.
xxxiij. how Appolyn and his daughter went to the temple of Dyane where as his
queen was abbess. Ca. xxxiiij. Of ye Joy that was between Appolyn and his
wife in the temple of Dyane. Ca. xxxv. How Appolyn was crowned in Anthyoche /
and after returned to Tharcye and caused execucyo^ to be done upon Tranquyle
and Dyonyse his wife. Ca. xxxvj. How Appolyn was crowned kyngd of
Penthypolytayne after his wyfes fader. Ca. xxxvij. How king Appolyn dysceased
and his wife also / and how their sone reigned after them. Ca. xxxviij.
Thus ends the table.
How ye king of Anthyoche begat on his wife a fair daughter / at whose
birth his wife deyed. Ca. j.
depiction of King Anthiogus, his deceased wife and newborn daughter

IN the autentyke and noble cite of Anthyoche in the parties of Syrye was
sometime a mighty king the which had to name Anthiogus. This king held under
his demayne many terryen sygnouryes and lordeshyppes as cytees / towns /
castles and many other fortresses / because of the which he was not only fered
and dredde of his subgectes of his realm / but also of other regyons thereto
adjacent. He had also unto wife in marriage a much fair and elygaunt lady
wise / eloquent and comen of noble lygnage by whom he had a daughter at whose
natuiyte or birth the noble lady and queen his wife deyed which was great
harm and dyspleasure to all the realm as here after is declared. The doole
was great among the people for the loss of their queen. The funeralles and
obsequyes ended of the queen / the king made his daughter well and ryally for
to be nourysshed and fostred as it appertayned unto the daughter of such a
king. This maiden increased and became so beautyfull that al they that saw
her Iuged her to be the fairest creature that was in all the world / for like
as ye reed rose and the lely passes all other natural flowers in beauty and
nobles so that maiden passed all other mayde^s and women in her time / for
nature had put nothing in oblyuyon at the fourmynge of her but as a chief
operacyon had set her in the sight of the world till ye enmy of goodness and
mankind by incessaunt envy had overthrown and cast her in his snare as here
after ensues in thy story.

How by lechery and tempta^cyon of the devil the king voyled his daughter.
Ca. ij.
Lucidas
Anthiogus
depiction of King Anthiogus in his daughter's bedchamber

AS this maiden was comen unto the age for to be married kings / princes /
dubes / earls / and many other great and noble estates came for to have her in
marriage. The king made his counseyle for to be assembled for to know what man
was most conuenable for to have his daughter. During this time ye king by
evil enchauffeme^t and by temptacyon of the devil fyxed and set his love on
his daughter / and by the inextynguybl persecucyo^s and prouocacyo^s of the
enemy he was moeued in his sleep / and arose in a morning at the spring of
the day and entered in to his daughters chamber and commanded all that were
there for to issue out in making semblaunt that he would speak with her in
secret for certain things to her be houe and prouffite. And he abydyng alone
with her of ardaunt desire put himself in bed with her / and she doubting
his inhumanyte durst not gaynsay him. And so much he did yt he not only
maculed her bed / but also he bereft the treasure of her vyrgynyte and left
her dystytute of all consolacyon tenderly weeping / and so issued out of her
chamber. Thus as she lamented and wept her nouryse entered in to the chamber
and found her in great desolacyon and demanded her the cause of her waylynge.
The poor lady durst not relate it for thabhomynacyon yt she had in the fayt.
The nouryse than began for to say. A my most honorable and of me so well
beloved lady and daughter know ye yt my lyege lady your mother left you unto me
wha^ she passed this life / and I that so much love you and have so derely
holden and tenderly nourysshed prays you for to tell me the cause of your
dyscomforte. Wha^ ye lady herd that she prayed her so swetely she said. A
right dear mother and nouryse this same day I have had ye gretest loss of the
fairest and rychest Jewel yt I had / that is ye treasoure of my chamber
vyrgynall / for it is corrupt and defiled or ever I had any treaty of marriage.
The nourysse than said / who is he yt has been so hardy such a thing to
undertake to ye dishonor of the king and of his realm / and began for to
cry / but the lady said. A my nourysse for god mercy / for if ye say any
thing I am but deed and you also For such has done it that it is not
conuenyent for to say And to the end that ye know: it was my lord my fader ye
which this day came hyder / and so she recounted all the manner and fayt unto
her nourysse / and prayed her for to hold it secret. And than ye nourysse
began for to appease ye lady showing her yt the king bare the culpe and sin.

AS this cursed king had accoplysshed this horrible sin as it is abouesayd
he showed semblaunce before his people as good and debonayre unto his daughter
/ and that he was in mind for to inquire for some noble man for to give his
daughter in marriage / the which thing he thought not / but he purposed that
his daughter should remain always with him in ye inhumayne syn^e. And to eschew
and cause that none should have her / and for to fere them that should demand
her he purpensed a falacious polycy and cautelous wyle / and made a preposycyon
in this wise. He that shall have my daughter to wife shall be called sapyent
and worthy to have a kings daughter / and he that feleth himself unable and
ygnoraunt in the solucyon of my questyo^ let him not prease to it / for I
shall do smite of his heed as naught worthy for to have a kings daughter. The
which preposycyon he did do set at ye gates of ye cite. For this preposycyon
(nevertheless) many kings / dukes / earls / barons / and other great lords put
them in danger for the beauty of his daughter dystytute of the solucyon of the
kings qestyon. And when they found not the solucyon of the questyon the king
made for to smite of their heedes without mercy according to his preposycyo^ /
and made them to be put out of the cite to the end that they which came for to
have his daughter might take example / and for to euyte the demand of her.

How king Appolyn assoyled ye questyon of king Anthiogus of Anthyoche. Ca.
iij.
depiction of King Appolyn and King Anthiogus

THe king of Anthyoche aforenamed led his life in that abhomynable syn^e of
lechery by ye space of long time. So it happened that ye renown of the beauty
of ye lady passed through ye regyo^s adjacent and neighbors till it came to ye
eeres of Appolyn king of Thyre which was a man fair / young / joyous /
eloquent / and a right good clerk / and also he was a bacheler. This king
herynge of the damoysell aforesaid took on him for to assoyle ye questyon. And
came tofore king Anthiogus and salued him honorably. Wha^ the king of
Anthyoche saw him he doubted him more than any of ye other (for his wisdom)
and to him said. Appolyn I know well wherefore you art come^ All they that have
wives ben acquyted. Appoly^ answered / that that ye say is the last end of
the cause / for I have no wife / but I desire for to have your daughter in
marriage. Wha^ the king herd Appolyn thus speak he was so abashed that he
wist not what to do / and tha^ he said. Appolyn thou know not the condycyons
to have my daughter. Appolyn said I have seen them wryte^ at the portall of
this cite / and therefore ye right shall be seen if it please god. The king of
Anthyoche than had great indygnacyon and evil will toward king Appolyn / and
unto him said. Appolyn take heed unto my questyon for it is doubtable / and
here it is. Great sin do I use / ye flesh of my mother I abuse. I demand
brother dear / if I touch my fader nere. I as husband to my wife bind / and
against nature I do kind.

APpolyn understanding ye questyon wtdrewe him a little praynge god with good
heart / and so much he did that he found the solucyo^ / and than came to the
king and said. King of Anthyoche herke^ to my solucyon. The king was right
dolente of his words / and Appolyn said. In that thou say that you use
syn^e you say sothe / for thou hold thy daughter in syn^e as I
understand. Anthiogus doubting yt by Appolyn his syn^e should be dysclosed he
said unto him furyously. Certes Appoly^ you art far fro my questyon / and
well thou have deserved for to lose thy heed / but of a special grace. I give
ye.xxx. days of respyte / and when you have found the solucyon you shalt have
my daughter / and if not certainly thou shalt lose thyn heed. And this said ye
noble king Appolyn returned to his realm of Thyre.

How ye king of Anthyoche sent his stuarde toward king Appolyn of Thyre for
to put him unto death. Ca. iiij.
depiction of King Anthiogus with his steward

NOt long after that Appolyn king of Thyre was departed from Anthyoche king
Anthyogus called unto him his stuarde the which was named Thalyarchy and said.
My^ own trusty and faithful friend and servant. Know thou for certain that
Appolyn king of Thyre has found and determined the solucyon of my questyon /
for the which I pray the and command the that you mount upon the sea as
shortly as thou may and pursue him in to his realm. And wha^ thou come
unto Thyre demand for thy most friend and for thy most enmye. And do so
much by any manner that thou slay him out of hands for good or for ill / and
by any machynacyon of treason / and here is great sum of money for to do thy
vyage / and wha^ thou retornest again I shall satysfy yt at thyn own desire
and pleasure. Than Thalyarchy took his leave of the king and went through the
realm of Thyre where as king Appolyn reigned.

How king Appolyn mounted secretly on ye see. Ca. v.
depiction of King Appolyn at sea

Soon after that king Appolyn was returned i^ to his realm gentle of Thyre
it befell yt as he was in his palace he began for to read i^ his books / and
wha^ he had read enough he found none other solucyon to the questyon of king
Anthyogus / and said to himself Ha Appolyn Appolyn and what menest thou / have
thou not found the solucyon / yes certainly. For the questyon of the king of
Anthyoche is paid and yet haste you not his daughter. Certes I trow that he
has lengthed the.xxx. days but for to put the to death within the said term.
And after he sat and studied a great while / and wha^ he came out of his study
he went unto an haven of the sea and spoke to some of the patrons / and made
them for to make ready three ships and charged them with corn and whete and
great habu^daunce of other vytayles with much treasure and few folk / and on
a night at mydnyght he entered in to ye see.

ON the morrow after yt king Appolyn was departed his me^ came in to his
chamber for to seek him but they found him not where of they were abashed and
meruayled where he was becomen. And the merchants and men of craft of the
cite were a certain time that they opened not their shoppes nor did no work
but wayled and mourned for their king that was gone they wist not whyder / and
were well ye space of three year making great sorrow for him. During this
pyteous season came Thalyarchy the king of Anthyoches stuarde in to the cite
of Thyre and saw how the people were so sorrowful. He demanded of a good
aeged man wherefore the people made such sorrow. The good man answered /
wherefore demand ye / for ye know well sith that our good and gracyous king
departed from Anthyoche we saw him never / nor we wot not where he is. When
Thalyarchy herd these tidings he was glad and Joyful and returned shortly
unto the king Anthiogus of Anthyoche. And when he was comen before him
recounted unto hy^ ye manner how he had seen and herd of king Appolyn of Thyre
/ ye which doubting your puyssau^ce and fyers courage is gone by see pryuely
without the knowledge of any of his realm / and is gone they can not tell where
/ wherefore they make great lamentacyon and waylynge for him.

King Anthyogus understanding the words of his stuarde would by no manner
hold him still but to him said that he would make a cry that who someuer he
were that brought the person of king Appolyn should have.l. besauntes of
gold / and who that brought his heed should have an.C. And than ye said
Anthyogus made for to make ready ships and he would be captain of them
himself. Now leave we to speak of king Anthyogus and return we unto king
Appolyn of Thyre being upon the sea.

How Appolyn aryued at the cite of Tharcye. Ca. vj.
Upon a day as king Appolyn was upon the sea in great heuinesse and thought
the patron said. Sir have ye no fere of our art. And Appolyn said. I have no
fere of your art nor of the sea / but I have fere of ye king of Anthyoche
that me pursues. The master of ye ship said / we have need of many things
yt unto us belongs wherefore go we and take port at the cite of Tharcye yt is
here by and than may we take fresshe water and all that we have need of. It
pleases me well said Appolyn. Than sailed they forth / and ye wind was good
that within short time they came to the said cite of Tharcye with their
ships / and than issued Appolyn and came upon the land and walked by the
ports side. And thus as he walked in great thoughts and heuynesses upon ye
ryuage of ye see there came a man unto him and said secretly God save ye
Appolyn king of Thyre. I pray ye sir king despise not my pouerte but harken
what I will say for peraue^ture thou know it not. Say on said king Appolyn.
Know thou for certain said the poor man that thou art banysshed out of thy
country and kingdom with cry and sown of trompettes. Appolyn answered / who
may banysshe me out of my country or out of any other also. Certainly said the
good man it was the king of Anthyoche for that thou would marye his daughter.
And he has said also that what man that brings the before hy^ shall have.l.
besauntes of fine gold / and he that brings thy heed shall have an hundred.
And therefore I pray the to depart and go ferder unto the time that thou know
a better end / and by ye grace of god it shall be otherwise to thy pleasure
and hertes ease in short time. This conforted well the sorrowful king / king
Appolyn / and he gave him an hundred besauntes of gold and said. Here is as
much as if thou had borne myheed to ye king of Anthyoche. The good man tha^
said / never will I take any salayre or reward of you for this cause / for to
a good man needs never no reward / and so the good man went his way and
left the king.

How king Appolyn met with an aeged man and of their deuyses. Ca. vij.
Tranquylle
King Appoly^.
depiction of King Appolyn and Tranquyle

AS soon as the good man was gone ye king Appolyn saw coming another good
ancient man with an hoore heed and a chere sad and steadfast that had to name
Tranquyle the which man king Appolyn knew well and said to hy^ / ye be right
welcome Tranquyle. And ye old man answered / ye be well found noble king of
Thyre. Tell me now by thy faith how thou art come^ in to these regyons / for me
thinks that thou art troubled in thy courage. Truly said king Appolyn I
shall tell it the. Know thou that I have paid and assoyled a questyon unto
the king of Anthyoche and demanded his daughter in marriage (the which he
entreteyneth for his paramours) and therefore he makes me to be pursued for to
make medye. Wherefore if thou may do so much that I may abide here a certain
space of time thou should do me a great pleasure. Sir said Tranquyle this cite
is so little and thy puyssaunce is so great that thou may not be lodged in
it. And an other cause is also / for the famyne and honger is so great that
none may exteme ye veheme^te pain that we endure and sustain / for we have
none esperau^ce nor no good trust for to have any adiutory and conforte / but
only in the course and torn of fortune. Than Appolyn answered and said.
Tranquyle my dear friend render graces and thanks unto our lord of the good
fortune that has made me for to aryue here at the port of this cite / for I
shall give unto this cite an ho^dred thousand charges of wheet and corn /
upon the condycyon yt ye hold me secretly within your cite. And when
Tra^quyle herd him say so he fell down prostrate at his fete and said. Lord
if thou give unto the poor cite famysshed for honger socours we not only
shall hold the secretly within the enclose of our said cite but we shall be
all well content for to live and deye with the. When ye noble king Appolyn
saw his friend Tra^quyle so lie grouelyng on the ground petyously weeping for
the persecucyon of the cite he like a curteys king and humble prince took him
up from the ground and set him on his fete co^fortynge him saying. Ha
Tranquyle mine old good friend be of good conforte and make glad chere for I
shall not fail you as long as I may live. Tha^ Tranquyle thanked him hyghly
and anon went and told unto the gouernoures of ye cite how king Appolyn of
Thyre was aryued at the haven and what he had said and promised.

How king Appolyn delivered the cite of Tharcye fro great famyne and honger.
Ca. viij.
depiction of King Appolyn and the lords of Tharcye

WHa^ the lords and chief of the cite herd this they were surprysed with
great Joy and anon they assembled together in counceyle for to wit what were
to be done / and than they concluded for to go in goodly ordinance to mete the
king / and when they came to his presence they fell too the ground gracyously
besechynge his highness for to help them and deliver their cite from the
mortal plage of honger / and he took them up promising help so that they
would keep hy^ in their cite secretly / which they promised to do. Than they
brought hy^ in to the cite with great honor and reverence. Appolyn tha^ in the
mids of ye cite in a place before all the people mounted upon a scaffolde and
said unto ye cytezyns of Tharcye which sustained and suffered great famyne of
honger. I Appolyn king dystytute of Thyre does you for to know and
understand yt I will fulfill and furnysshe your cite with wheet for ye same
price that I bought it in my realm to the end and on condycyon that ye hold
and keep me secret in your cite where as I am / and I think that in time
future ye will not put in oblyuyon if ever I have done you any good / and I
tell you that the king of Anthyoche pursues me of a pursuyte mortell and
therefore have I left my realm and am come hyder secretly with such ships as
ye se for to be socoured of you. Tha^ the cytezyns remercyed and thanked him of
ye great goodness that he them offered. So they gave him the price that he
demanded / and Appolyn gave them plente and habundaunce / and that none he
rendered to them their money to the end that it should not be said yt he were a
merchant and no king. And wha^ he had given all this frau^chyse and bou^te to
them they in remembrance of him and for an extreme colaudacyon made an image
or statue of clean gold unto his semylytude and semblaunce and situate it in
the mids of the cite upon an high colomne or pyler / ye which image or
statue held in his right hand a shefe of whete / and with his lift foot he put
corn in to the mesure. And at ye fete of the said image upon the pyller was
written in letters of gold a clause vercyfye^ge in this wise. Tharcye cite by
Appolyn king of Thyre was furnyshed / and by his fraunchyse it was releued /
with wheet and corn he has it fostred / and from the sword of honger he
has it delivered / and from the stroke of death he has it preserved.

How king Appolyn of Thyre sailed toward the cite of Term where as his
ships peryshed nygh unto the port / and all his men drowned and he only
preserved by a fyssher. Ca. ix.
depiction of King Appolyn saved at sea by fisherman

THan when Appolyn king of Thyre hadd so Iourned long time in the cite of
Tharcye it fortuned on a day that he was in company with the ancient man
Tranquylle and his wife named Dyonyse the which said unto king Appolyn that
it were thing vtyle and expedyent he for to withdraw him and retray in to
some other country / for long time it was sith he came thither / for long
contynuaunce in a place makes reuelacyon and knowledge to the persons adjacent
and neighbors. Appolyn herynge ye counceyle of them took leave ioyously of all
the cytezyns ye which were sorry for his departing / and entered in to his
ships and mounted on the sea for to goo to the cite of Term that was in ye
country of Pentapolytayns / thinking there to be sure / for the cite was
pleasant and strong. And when he was upon ye see with his three ships they
exployted so much that wtin three days they approached nygh to the cite of
Term. And they being there yt air changed / ye wyndes waxed furyous / ye
weder turned in to great tempests and blastes heuynge the fee rorynge with
tempestyous wawes and drove ye three ships here and there against the rocks
and sand / and all to roue and sparpeled the^ in thousands of pyeces / both
maste / sail / and stere / and drowned all within them both man and goods
without remyssyon saufe all only Appolyn yt saved himself upon a poost and
all naked came to the sea side. And when he was out of the peril of ye see he
turned him toward the place were as his ships and men were drowned and with
lachrymate chekes te^derly he said. O fortune ingenyous of me^ / falls / fekyll
/ and unsteadfast ever tornynge and varyenge as a feder in ye wind without
cease / haste thou abyden and waited this great peril for to do me so much
harm at one time / for thou have put me totally in extreme pouerte / and have
left me alone and all naked of goods and of all esperau^ce / cursed be thou.
Certainly if so were that king Anthyogus could do me no harm thou have done me
more than suffycyent for him / wors than enraged is he that trusts in thy
feate / alas. He being in this calamynous sorrow saw coming toward him a
fyssher poorly arrayed and ragged with a black mantell and gyrded with a roten
cord. Appolyn was in many tribulacyons and anguysshes for he had doubt /
thought / melancoly / heuines / sorrow / ho^ger / thyrst / and inward care /
he went and fell down flat at the fete of the fyssher and said. Dear brother
who someuer thou be I require the that you will have mercy on the poor naked
the which has lost all that he had in ye body of ye see. And to the^de that
thou may know what I am / know thou that I am named Appolyn king of Thyre
the which by fortune and the sea is brought in to perdycyon / wherefore I pray
the have compassyon over me and that thou give me some conforte and help of
living (This said) the fyssher beheld him long and saw him so fair and
gracyous and understood that he was a king pity moeued his spirytes by manner
of co^pulcyo^ to have compassyon upon him / and than he led Appolyn unto a
little house beside the sea where as he wtdrew him when he had fysshed and gave
hy^ of such poor meets as fysshers do ete when they ben hongry. And the
better for to accomplysshe his good deeds and for inward pity that he had of
him he gave unto him ye one half of his black mantell for to cover his body
with / and said unto him go in to the cite of Term the which is here by and
thou shall find some that will have pity upon the. And if thou find none that
will have pity upon the return again to me here / and for all my pouerte I
shall not fail the of such as I have / and if it so be we two shall take
fysshe for to get our living. But I pray the if fortune be and that god will
that thou remou^te unto thyn estate that thou despise me not of that the which
I have given to the yt is the one half of my mantell. Appolyn said / if I
think not on ye goodness that thou haste done to me an other time may I suffer
the dangerous perils of ye see and that I may never find any good person
that will have mercy upon me. Tha^ the fyssher showed him the way / and so
Appolyn went to the cite poorly arrayed as he was.

How king Appolyn poorly arrayed entered within ye cite of Term and played
with the king. Ca. x.
depiction of King Appolyn fencing with the king of Term

King Appolyn comen in to the cite he wyste not what to do / but beheld all
about to se the cite in abiding the conuercyon of fortune / and as he went
toward the kings palace he saw coming a young man that cried to the lords
/ cytezyns / pylgryms and all other of what estate or degree so ever they were
that would play with the sword rebated and at the shield let them appareyle
their feate ready and come to a place that he assygned. Wha^ Appolyn herd this
cry he becrye he began for to complain himself and said thus. Alas poor
caytyf and miserable king what shalt thou do / whyder shall thou go / thou
have great cause for to complain seeing that thou a king have not so much
as a poor beggar or pilgrim / where ben thy treasours and rychesses / where
ben thy precious vestures and clothes / where ben thy lords and servants:
thy great coursers and stedes for to ride upon thy footmen and pages to
co^duyte the where as thou would be / thou art dystytute and unpurveyed of all
things belonging unto the / for instead of treasours and rychesses thou have
pouerte and need / instead of precious vestures and clothes thou art wrapped
in a pyece of an old mantel or cloak / instead of lords and servants to
rejoice the thou art all alone in a strange regyon full of sorrow and dolor
of heart / instead of coursers and mighty stedes to ride upon thou ghost on
thy fete upon the bare stones in the fylthy streets and ways / instead of
footmen and pages to conduyte the thou have a staff for feere of beestes
going among poor pilgrims and beggars which take scorn of the / alas you
may well complain thy great mysfortunes yet nevertheless you shall not abide
behind but put thy self forth among the other poor pilgrims to se the
king and the manner of his realm (and if it happen) to play with some
person. In making these complayntes with many syghes and teeres the myddaye
passed. And after dinner the king named Archystrates and all the lords came
for to se ye play Than they began to play both lords and other gentylmen a
great while. When Appolyn had long beholden ye play he demanded of one and
of other of poor estate if they would play for to do pleasure to the company /
but of them all none there was that would answer him but dysdeyned to play with
him for his poor clothes and raiment This seeing the king Archystrates lord
of the cite he entered in to the play accompanied with many knights and
squyres and saw that there was none that would play against Appolyn / he took
up the sword and began to smite fast / and as evil clothed as Appolyn was he
returned to the king and held him right short. The lords seeing Appolyn so
poorly arrayed smite unto the king so hardely they would have chased him away
/ but the king commanded them to let him alone. The king played yet an
other torn / and Appolyn returned it more styfly. When the king saw him play
so he merueyled of him gretely / and swear to ye knights by his crown that
never in his days he had found none that played so nymbly and so expertly
as he did. When Appolyn herd how the king praised and commended his playenge
to the knights he rejoiced gretely / and in manner half shamefast and glad he
showed certain strokes of ye shield or bokeler which pleased the king much.
And when the play was fynysshed Appolyn took leave curtesly of ye king and
departed. When he was gone the king said unto his knights I twere to you by
my salvation that sith the day of my natyuyte I saw never a better and more
gentle player at the sword and shield than he is to my gre and pleasure / and
it dyspleaseth me that I know not what he is / for mine heart Iugeth him to be
extrayt of some noble house. And anon he called one of his gentylmen and badde
him for to go and se if he might find the poor man that played at the shield
him and bring him to the court. Than the gentylman departed and found
Appolyn / and when he saw him apparayled in so vile and poor vestures he
returned without saying of any word and went to ye king and said. Sir that
man that ye demand ought and seems to be a fyssher or else a rower in a
galey or else some ship swayne. How know thou it said the king. Certainly
his habyte or clothing demonstreth and shows it by reason. Ha said the king
the habyte makes not the relygyous man / and therefore incontinent return thou
to him and tell him that I demand him. Than the gentylman returned as the
king commanded him and found Appolyn sitting and weeping for his departing
from so noble a company and said to him. Arise and come and speak with the
king for he demands the. This herynge Appolyn he wyped his vysage / and for
to obey unto the king he arose all sorrowful and followed the gentylman unto
the gate of ye kings palace / and than he said unto the gentylman. Friend I
will not enter for any thing: for there within is none but men of worship and
great estates / and to me for to enter within a palace royal so evil arrayed
it were great scorn and shame. But goo unto the king and pray him to tell
the his will and I shall abide the here. The squyre went unto the king and
said. Sir the poor man yt ye demand is at the gate and will not enter / for
he says that he shall be ashamed for to come in to such a noble court as
yours is in so evil and foul clothy^ge Than the king commanded yt he should
have one of his robes and that he should be well clothed / and so it was done.
When king Appolyn was well appointed he entered in to the palace / and when he
came in to the hall he made reverence right honorably unto the king and unto
all the lords and assystentes. Then the king right curteysly welcomed him
and badde him sytte saying / thou shalt soupe this day with me among my
knights. Appolyn than being shamefast let himself somewhat to be prayed but
at the last he sat him down at the table / and without etynge he beheld the
noble company of lords and great estates for he had been accustomed for to live
in nobles and to be nourysshed in honor. Thus as be looked all about a great
lord that served at the kings table said unto the king. Certes sir this man
would gladly your honor for he does not ete but beholds hertely your noble
magnyfycence and is in point to weep. Certainly said the king peradventure he
has lost mo goods than these ben / and therefore he has remembrance of them
now.

How king Appolyn souped in the kings hall. Ca. xi.
depiction of King Appolyn dining in the king's hall

AS he sat and beheld the king bad him ete and be merry and better things
and greter give you god. And in saying these words came in the kings daughter
accompanied with many ladies and damoyselles whose splendente beauty were to
long to endyte / for her rosacyate color was meddled with great favor. She
drank unto her fader and to all the lords / and to all them that had been at
ye play of the shield. And as she beheld here and there she espied king
Appolyn and than she said unto her fader. Sir what is he that sytteth so hye as
by you / it seems by him that he is angry or sorrowful. The king said I can
not tell what he is my lefe daughter / but I saw never so nimble and pleasant
a player at the shield and therefore have I made him for to come and soupe with
my knights. And if ye will know what he is demand him / for peradventure he
will tell you sooner than me. And when he has told you ye may tell him some
thing and give him some good / for me think that he is departed from some
good place / and I think in my mind that some thing is be fallen him for the
which he is sorry. This said the noble damoysell went unto Appolyn and said.
Fair sir grant me a boon. And he granted her with good heart / and she said
unto him. All be it that your vysage be tryst and heavy your behauour shows
noblesse and facundyte / and therefore I pray you to tell me of your affayre and
estate. Appolyn answered / if ye demand of my rychesses I have lost them in
ye see. The damoysell said I pray you that ye tell me of your adue^tures yt I
may understood you plainly.

How Appolyn fell in conceyte with the kings daughter of Term for playenge on
the harp. Ca. xii
depiction of King Appolyn with the king's daughter, who is playing the harp

APpolyn herynge the will of the damoysell began for to tell his aduersytees
and unfortunate adventures had upon the sea and else where. And when he had
ended his parliament he began for to weep tenderly with many sad syghes. When
the king saw him so weep he said unto his daughter. Certainly ye have done
evil / for through your words he has renouelled and begone his dolours.
Wherefore I will that for to appease all his sorrows and persuacyons ye give him
of mine all that it pleases you. When the damoysell Archycastres understood yt
she had puyssaunce for to give him what she would she had great pleasure / and
anon she came unto Appolyn and said. Leave thy weeping from hensforthe / for
sith it has pleased unto my fader that I give the of his goods I shall make
ye rich. Appolyn all weeping thanked her humbly and said. Honorable lady I
thank you of the worship yt ye would me (more than I am worthy. During this
time ye king came to his daughter and said. Fair daughter I pray you play a
little upon your harp for to rejoice this gentyl man and bry^ge him out of his
heavy thoughts in to lyghter The damoysel anon sent for her harp / and when
it was comen she sowned so swetely as in the world had not ben her parayle.
Appolyn beheld her right amourosly and said never aworde. Than said the king
unto him. Gentylma^ what do ye think / each man rejoices of the feast of my
daughter and ye say nothing how say ye plays she not well. Sir said Appolyn
your daughter sowneth meruaylously well and syngeth armonyously. But yet for
feere of your dyspleasure and hers if I held the harp I could show you where
she fails. Than the maiden gave her harp unto Appolyn the which began to
sown to swetely that echone meruayled of his fair playenge sayng that he was
parfyte in the art. Than was the damoysell so amourous on Appolyn that it may
not be recounted / and than she said unto her fader. Ye have promised me that
all that I would give unto this gentylman should content you. Truly said the
king I am content that ye give hy^ what it pleases you. Than Archycastres
amourously beheld Appolyn and said. Dear friend for ye love yt I have unto you
/ and for your well playenge on the harp with the license of my fader I give
you.CC. be sauntes of gold / and xx. mark of silver / and cloth of gold to
clothe you with / and.xxiiii clothes of sylk for.xxx. of your men / and so it was
done: wherefore echone praised ye frau^chyse of ye king and his daughter.

How Archycastres was love seek for Appolyn. Ca. xiii
When the feast was fynysshed and done Appolyn took leave of the king and of
his daughter and thanked them right humbly of ye honor and worship that they
had done unto him. After that he had taken leave he took that yt was given to
him / and than he and his servants went their way together for to take their
lodgys in the town But when the damoysell saw that her well-beloved friend went
his way she doubted that she should never se him again and said unto her
fader. Fair fader sith that it has pleased your debonayre for to do so much
honor and goodness unto this gentle man I pray you let him not go out of your
palace for to lodge in the town / for unto you it should be great shame seeing
yt there is lodgis suffycyent for him within your court. And on the other part
he is a stranger not knowing the manner and condycyons of the people of this
your realm / wherefore some may do him such thing that ye should not be well
content. It pleases me well said the king that he abide in the court and
have a chamber for him and for his servants. The damoysell than had great
Joy and sent a squyre after Appolyn and made him for to return unto her /
and than she made for to apparayle a fair chamber nygh unto hers. King
Appolyn was so fyxed in ye heart of Archycastres that she might not forbere the
presence of him / ne suffer him to go out of the court / she might not sleep
nor take her rest / but always thought on the beauty and bounte of Appolyn /
and lay tornynge and walowynge without any repose or ease. For to tell the
sorrow that she made for Appolyn were to long for to recounte. On a morning
betyme as she lay in her bed and might not sleep for the thinking on king
Appolyn / she arose and as half amassed for love she went out of her chamber
and entered in to the chamber of the king her fader. And when the king saw
her he said. Fair daughter what eyleth you that ye be risen thus erly. When
Archycastres herd the voice of her fader as she had wakened out of her sleep
she gave a sterte / and suddenly al abashed she said. Right honored fader
know ye that the great voluute and will yt I have for learn the science of
this gentylman lets me for to sleep and to take my natural rest / and
therefore I beseech you yt it will please you for to speak unto hy^ / and yt he
show and teache me his art. The king right Joyous of the words of his
daughter and of her will arose and went unto the chamber of Appolyn whom he
found making a song of his mysfortunes and vnhappynesses / and song it with
many syghes and lamentacyons and played it on an harp sitting in his bed.
Than the king salued him / and Appolyn him again gyuy^ge him good day and
than Archystrates said. O ^entyll man the virtue of your affyled engyn and of
your armonyous science moeneth my daughter Archycastres incessauntly for to be
endoctryned of you. Wherefore I promise you upon the fydelyte and truth that I
owe unto ye dyademe of Term that if ye will do my volunty and heest for to
render unto you as much as ye have lost in the sea and upon the lord Appolyn
answered right humbly that he was ready and content for to fulfill and do therein
his commandment. Than Appolyn arose and made him ready and came in to
Archycastres chamber where he found her sitting sore studyenge. And when
Appolyn approached to her and that she espied him little lacked that she ne
swouned for Joy but she absteyned her courage and hid her chere as well as
she could / and than he salued her and she him again reverently and anon sent
for her harp and prayed him for to teache her of his art. And he showed her
dylygently so that within a while she became a good maystresse of his art. For
she had a parfyte style and an excellent wit / and many goodly words spoke
she unto him / and in no manner could she unto her gre show her love unto him
till on a day that she was so fervently taken in his love that she could no
longer bear it / and than she feigned an other accydent and laid her down seek
in her bed. And when ye king wist it he was sorry and sent for physycyens and
surgyens but they found no sekenes in her that they might remedy / and thus
was she long seek / and the king her fader was dolente / for he had no child
but her / the which was al his Joy.

How two kings sons came to have had Archicastres in marriage. Ca. xiiii.
depiction of two princes on horseback

Upon a day the king went out at the gate of the palace for to solace and
sport him in ye feldes / and when he had gone a while he espied coming two
kings sons the which often times had demanded his daughter in marriage. They
salued the king in the honourablest wise that they might / and he full
fre^dely and curteysly rendered the^ their salutacyon. And after many words
they entered in to ye palace with great solempnyte and tryumphe. When they had
soiourned there a certain time ye king demanded of them saying. How and
wherefore are ye comen hyder together. Certainly sir said one of them ye know
well that we demand and require your daughter to wife / we have been here
certain times and ye have always prolonged us with words / and ye know well
of what lygnage we ben comen / and therefore we ben hyder comen for to know
unto which of us both it pleases you best for to give your daughter. As for
that said ye king ye be right welcome / but ye ben comen in an evil season as
in yt point for my daughter lies seek and has done long which sore
dyspleaseth me. And for that ye say that I prolonge you by words write each of
you his name in a roll and I shall send it to my daughter / and when she has
read the rolls she shall chese one of you both the which her seems best to
her own pleasure / and as she cheseth I shall hold me content. And than each
of them wrote his name in a roll and gave them unto the king / and forthwith
he did send them unto Archycastres his daughter by Appolyn ye which after
salutacyon made presented them vnto-Archycastres saying. All the sovereign
celestyall gods give you good life and Joy. The king your most well beloved
fader greteth your ladyship by me simple and unworthy servant sendynge you
these rolls for to certyfye which of the two princes ye seem best unto your
honor and preemynence. And when the damoysell saw and herd the noble Appolyn
speak so demurely and saw the goodly countenance of him and his behauoure she
had great Joy and said. Gentylman how ben ye comen here al alone without
company or felawshyp. Madame said Appolyn. My lord the king your fader sent
me hyder with these two rolls and prays you that ye send bryefly ye responce.
Than the damoysell took the rolls of Appolyn and began for to read them / and
when she had read them she stood still and said no word / and than she
beheld Appolyn in casting a great sygh and after she said unto him. By the
faith of your body would ye not have great dolor in your heart if I took you
to husband and leave all other lords for your sake. Appolyn ye which thought
no harm answered and said. Certes madame I should have great Joy if ye had
such a prince to your make as unto your hyghnes apperteyneth for there can
none be to bountefull for your person / for year parfyte in beauty / bounte /
and science. Certainly said the damoysell Archicastres if that ye loved me as
much as I love you at the heart and courage ye would not say as ye do for
nothy^ge. And when she had fynisshed her words she took paper pen and ynke
and by great hardynesse of love that enbraced her heart toward Appolyn she
wrote a lettre containing the fervent desire and amourous prouocacions of her
mind and sealed it with a knotte of love / and than she gave it unto Appolyn
her love for to bear it to her fader / and the writing said thus.

MY most redoubted and of me most honored my lord my fader sith that it
has pleased your grace for to write your mind and voluntary goodness unto me
your humble daughter and handmayden for mine honor and felycyte that is for to
put me to ye choice of one of the two noble princes for to elect and take to
lord and make / (I indygne sauf only by ye feate of your hyghnes) whereof I
inwardly thank you. But know ye yt I will and if it please your haboundaunt
bounte have him the which has passed the dangerous vndes and perils of the sea / all other to refuse. And marvel you not of me so simple a vyrgyn
without shame and dyshonoure to have written unto you my will which I durst
not show by the relacyon of my tongue.

How Appolyn bare lettres unto the king. Ca. xv.
King Appolyn.
depiction of King Appolyn delivering a letter to King Archycastres

AS ye lettre was made and sealed Appolyn received it of the fair damoysell
Archycastres and took his leave of her right curteysly / and she of him full
amourously / and loathe for to have him out of her felawshyp. And when he came
before the king he delivered him the lettre. When king Archycastres had
received it he went a little aside and read it / when it was read he turned
him to the two princes and said. Which of you has passed the perils of the sea. Than answered one of them. I am he. The other prince this herynge was
moeued with anger and said. How dare thou say say such things before the
king and me. For thou and I have been nourysshed together all our life days
without separacyon and never we entered in to ye see / how may thou than have
passed the perils of it. When the king understood yt it was none of them
twain he said Appolyn. Read ye this lettre for to se if ye can understand
that the which I can not. Appolyn at the kings commandment read the lettre
and found that it spoke of him / than he waxed all reed and drew him aside.
Than the king said / have ye found the tenoure of the lettre / and Appolyn
answered never a word. The king beheld his countenance and saw that he
said no word / he aduysed him of the perils of the sea that Appolyn had
passed and than he knew perfytely that the lettre spoke of him and the love
that his daughter Archycastres had to him / whereof he had great Joy in saying
unto Appolyn / wherefore are ye ashamed of the endytynge of this letttre for I
have great pleasure of that that my daughter wylleth the thing that I desire.
Notwithstanding that I never showed nor durst tell ne make relacion to her of
it. When they had fynysshed their communycacyon the king went toward the
two kings sons and said. Truly I told you that ye were not comen in a good
season forcause of ye infyrmite and sykenesse of my daughter Archycastres /
wherefore ye may return in to your countrees / and when she is guarysshed and
hole I shall send for you for at this time ye can not speed. This heryng the
two princes they were not well content. And than they took leave of the king
honorably and returned in to their countrees unpurveyed of their entencyons.
Than the king Archycastres took Appolyn by the hand and entered ioyously in to
ye palace and so in to the chamber of the fair damoysell Archycastres And as soon as she espied her fader she salued him honorable / and he rendered her
salutacyon and said. My most well-beloved daughter whom have ye chosen for your
lord and husbonde. The damoysell herynge thexamynacyon of her fader
espouentably kneled down before him and said. O mighty king and fader sith it
has pleased you for to know my mind and femynyne volunte ye which is
reasonable / know ye therefore that I had lever have him the which has
passed the dangerous passages of ye see that is Appolyn than any king or
prince that lives in this world. And of one thing the which I shall tell
you I beseech you for to pardon me and that ye will accept my petycyon / that
is that if ye give me not unto him certainly ye shall lose me and never during
my life shall I have Joy and consolacyon without the presence of his person.
And for his love I have suffered many infyrmytees and grievous afflyccyons of
ardaunte desires of love sith ye first time that he played before the barony in
your presence upon my harp without that ever any knew it. The king herynge
the amourous and pyteous words of his daughter said. Ha well-beloved daughter
know you certainly that that ye which pleases you dyspleaseth me not / and
all your pleasure shall be fulfilled in this point at your own desire.

How king Appolyn espoused ye fair damoysel Archycastres the kings daughter
of Term. Ca. xvi.
depiction of King Appolyn's wedding to Archycastres

THan incontinent king Archycastres sent for all the barons and great lords
of his realm and said unto them. Lords and friends know ye that I will show
unto you mine intent and wherefore that I have sent for you. The cause is this
that I will give my daughter Archicastres unto Appoly^ in marriage. And therefore
dysplease you not / for it pleases me and my daughter also. And thanked be our
lord yt she has chosen a man so secret and so intellectyf as he is. When the
barons understood ye words of the king and the effect of his intent they were
accorded and were right Joyful of it. The noble king seeing the perfyte will
and true intent of his baronny he was right well pleased and thanked the^
saying that as true subgectes they had accorded unto their sovereign and lyege
lord. And that he assygned unto his barons a certain day for to come unto ye
spousayles of his daughter / for he would that they should be there in the
honourablest wise that might be ordained and had / and that they should spare
for none exspence / and so they did. When ye day of the spousaylles was comen
ye damoysell Archycastres was appareylled and aourned in the most tryumphaunt
manner that could be devised / in clothes of gold set with fine perles and
precious stones / and owches of great value. And ye noble king Appolyn was
clothed in the same suyte also. Than after that ye espousaylles was finysshed
they reentred in to the palace with great melody of mynstrelles and musycyens.
But for to recount of ye seruyces that day / ye tryumphe and noblesse of that
feast: ye games and deeds of worthynes that was there determined / of the rich
gifts that were given to lords and ladies it were to long for to recount.
What should I make long process all thing was done so nobly that no man was
myscontent / but rejoiced greatly of ye excellence thereof. And the feast
accomplysshed and done the lords and estates of the realm took their leave of
the king and at Appolyn and at the fair damoysell Archicastres and returned
with great Joy and tryumphe in to their countrees and lordshyppes.

How tidings came by a galey to king Appolyn that the king of Anthyoche was
deed. xvj.
depiction of King Appolyn and Archycastres receiving word by sea of her
father's death

A Certain time after the rich marriage and espousalles of the noble Appolyn
was acheued and done ye damoysell Archicastres waxed great of a daughter whereof
ye king her fader and Appolyn were right Joyous. Upon a certain day as Appolin
came from study / he and his spouse fair Archycastres went for to sport
them upon the ryuage of the sea / and as they walked under the shadow of ye
boughs they saw where as came swymmy^ge a mighty vessel that aryued at the
port or haven of ye cite. When Appolyn had seen and beholden it a while he
said fair love and lady let us go and se yonder fair vessel / with a good
will said Archicastres / so they went unto the galey. And when Appolyn had
long beholden it and aduysed ye manner and speech of ye galyotes and by many
other signs he knew that it was of his realm of Thyre. Tha^ he demanded of
the patron of whens the galey was / and wherefore it was so decked and arrayed with
black. The patro^ all sorowfully said / we ben of ye kingdom af Thyre.
Appolyn this herynge was glad / and in a manner sorry / for he wist not
wherefore it was come^ into ye country / whyder for his socoure or for to
dystroy him. And than Appolyn said / ye ben of my country. Dear sir said the
patron I know you not / but I pray you tell me if it please you if ye know
any tidings of the lord of Thyre. Certainly said Appoly^ I wot where he is.
Alas sir said the patron for god / if ye would show me him ye myhht do to him
great honor and to me great Joy and pleasure / for we ben comen hyder for to
feche him and to bring hy^ in to his realm royal of Thyre / for king
Anthiogus of Anthyoche and his daughter for who^ our noble king is out of his
realm and country ben deed wretchedly by ye thonder that fell upon them / and
all his kingdoms / lordeshyppes and treasoures be kept for our good king
Appolyn. Than was Appolyn glad and said unto his wife archycastres. Sweet
love now may ye know if ye adventures that I have told you ben true or not.
And I pray you hertely as ye love me that ye be not dyspleased of one thing
that is that I will go and receive my preteryte realm and the other the which
ben for me attendau^t and comen by right. The damoysell than weeping said.
Appolyn sweet lord and friend I think this that if ye were far fro me ye
would come unto mine enfaunteme^t and delyueraunce of child. Wherefore I pray
you yt you leave me not alone / but have me with you. Appolyn seeing and
understanding the parfyte love that she had unto him said. I am content if
it please my lord your fader. Than went the damoysell unto the king her
fader and said. Right honored and redoubted fader rejoice you and be merry /
for true it is that king Anthiogus of Anthioche and his daughter ben put to
death by thonder of ye heuens for that he enhabyted and kept her as paramours /
and all his kyngedomes and seygnouryes apperteyneth unto my well beloved
husband and lord Appolyn the which will go and received them / for a galey
of his country is aryued at an haven here by the which has denounced unto
him all the fayte / and abides till hy depart / wherefore I pray you if it
please you for to give me license to go with him / for though ye let go one
daughter with the grace of ye potencyall gods we shall return twain. The
king being glad and Joyful of the words of his daughter and of her
tidings he unto her and accorded in all that she would. And anon he made to
ordeyne and apparayle ships and dromo^des with all such things as to them
necessary was / and many ladies and damoyselles and her nouryce named Lycordes
for to help her if necessyte happened. And than Appolyn and Archicastres took
leave of the king and in goodly array they mounted upon the sea for to go unto
ye realm of Anthyoche and Thyre.

How king Appolyn entered the sea with his wife / and how she was delivered of a
daughter. Ca. xviij.
depiction of King Appolyn and his wife and daughter at sea

King Appolyn and Archycastres being on the sea sailed long with great
tryumphe and Joy and so long they exployted by their Iourneys that they came
in to the hye see / and tha^ the fair weder began for to change and the wind
arose making great noise and it thondred and lyghtned impyteously that all
they were sore abashed. Than on a day after great travail feere and pain
Archycastres began for to travail of child with great throws and dyseases
and was delivered of a fair daughter / but for coldenes and werynes wherewith
she was surprysed all ye veins of her body opened and the blood ran by all
the conduytes of the matryce that was newly opened so that the blood congyled
within her body that she lay as she had been deed. And all the damoyselles
and gentylwomen said yt there was no life in her and that they could not remedy
it for she had taken a surfyte of cold in her conceyuynge. Wha^ Appolyn saw
his wife thus tourmented and left for deed he took her in his arms kyssinge
her swetly and said. Ha my swear love ye only daughter of a king and mine
espouse the which from the perdycyo^ of the sea has me delivered and restored
/ which in one only hour I have lost. Alas what shall I say to ye king your
fader yt I have done with you / alas I wot not / whyder shall I go / or where
shall I rest that my heart be not sorrowful / certes I wot not. Ha
countreuerse fortune / varyaunt and unstable ye which persecuteth thus me poor
king. Suffyseth it not the to have chased me out of my realm and drowned my
ships and servants but that you must bereue me of my wife that I so much
loved / and yt was al my conforte and desire. Truly thou ponysshest me sore /
but nevertheless I am not the first nor the last that thou have had lust to
play ye fool with / but always thanked be god. In making these complayntes and
many other he enbraced her between his arms with so fervent affeccyo^ yt he fell
ouerth warte her in a swoune more tha^ half an hour / and when he came again
to himself he made ye pyteoust co^playntes yt any man might here. And thus as
he co^playned the patron came to him and said. Sir all that ye do and we also
avails nothing / for ye must cast this body in to the sea. Appolyn than
looked upon him furyously and said. O cursed man how art thou so hardy for to
tell me that I should cast in to ye see the corpse that has done unto me so
much honor and worship / the patron than said unto him again. But if ye
will that you and all we dye and perysshe in the water cast that body in to the sea. For ye know well that ye see bears no body that deed is. When Appolin
herd this he doubted ye perils that he had passed before time. And recou^ted
unto the patron the manner how he escaped the perils of ye fee / and of the
kyndenesses done to him by that damoysell.

How after that Archicastres was delivered she was cast in to the sea in an
arche of leed. Ca. xix.
depiction of King Appolyn and his wife and daughter at sea

AS Appolin had ended his tale and saw that he must needs cast his wife in to
ye see wit ye well he was sorry in his heart / and let make a fair arche well
leeded and surely / and made for to array his wife in the goodlyest and best
aournementes that she had / and set a rich crown upon her heed and laid her
so within the arche / and he put under her heed an hundred besauntes of fine
gold with a little breuet or lettre that said thus. Thou that find this
arche take ye half of the gold that is therein and with the other half let
this corpse be honorably sepultured and buried / the which thing if thou do
not I pray to the heavenly gods that thou may be the last of thy lygnage /
and that thou may dye as a cursed creature / and that thou may never find
any that will bury the / and this done they closed ye arche fast so that no
water should come therein / and with great sorrow and much lamentacyon and
weeping they let it fall in to the sea softely / prayenge unto the
sempyternal gods for to send her a good haven and buryell according to her
degree. Than king Appolin made his daughter curyously and rychely for to be
nourysshed thinking always that in time for to come to show her unto her
grantfader in the stead of his wife. Thus leave we Appolyn upon the sea making
great lamentacyon for his wife / and speak we of Archycastres that aryued in
the land of Ephesym.

How Archycastres was found and made hole / and after went in to a monastery
of Dyane. Ca. xx.
depiction of Archycastres being found at the shore and depiction of
Archycastres in a monastery

THe second day after that the queen was cast in to the sea she aryued in the
land of ye Ephesyens. Tha^ it was so that a physycyan called Cyromon dwelled
nyghe to the ryuage of these where as ye arche aryued. This physycyan upon a
day sported him upon the sea strong and saw this arche the which came
tombelynge and rollyng in the wawes of the water that kest it upon the land.
Tha^ he made his servants for to take it up and bear it home to his house
thinking to have found therein great treasoures and made incontinent for to
open it and found the lady within it having ye vysage as well colored as
ever she had / and he thought that by false death she had been cast in to the sea. And tha^ he said. Ha sweet lady ye have made to cast many a teere of your
friends / and than they found the byll yt was under her heed and wha^ they had
read it they thought yt the best remedy was to bury her Thus as they were
thinking and deuysynge there came in one of his prentyses right expert and of
good wit the which incontinent took of the best oyntementes that he had and
said. We must se if this lady have any life or not Than he enbawmed all her
body softely and dylygently / and wha^ he had done his felawes and his master
tasted ye pou^ces of her arms / and her nose / and they could find no heet
and they all said that she was deed / but ye apprentyse said. Certes I have
good esperau^ce that she is alive / and if ye will suffer me this night with
her I shall enforce me to socour her from death. His demand was allowed of all
his felawes / and his master accorded / and than he put her in a fair soft
bed and warmed great foyson of oils and dystylled waters and wrapped her
body in warm shetes so that within a while ye conduytes that were shytte began
for to open and flow / and ye blood that was congyled began for to run in to
every vain and ye Joints and synewes began for to wax souple ye tofore was
styffe and cold / and her color came more and more. And when the hour of
mydnyght came ye lady began to speak and said. What so ever thou be touch me no
more for I am a kings daughter. Wha^ the young physycyan herd her speak for
Joy that he had he ran to his master and said. I require you come and se
my cure. Wha^ his master entered in to the chamber and herd the lady speak yt
he held for deed he said. Certainly I love and praise thy cure / and more
conuenyent it were for yt to be a master than apprentyse / wherefore I pray ye
that thou leave her not for fault of silver for she has brought enough with her
/ and than they ordained her metes and drynkes and all things that was
necessary for her / so that within short space she was parfytely hole / and
than they demanded her what her entencyon was to do. And she prayed them for
to enquere where any monastery were where as honorably she might dwell / and so
they did. And she paid them with such gold as she had brought at their own
pleasure / and than they led her unto a monasteri of women whereas the
goddess Dyane was adoured and worshypped. And there abode all women that would
keep chastity. And they did her this honor because she said always that she
would keep chastyte.

How Appolyn aryued at Tharcye and left his daughter with Tranyuyle and Dyonyse
his wife. Ca xxj.
depiction of King Appolyn leaving his daughter with Tranquyle and Dyonyse

When Appolyn had cast the queen his wife in to the sea he sailed so long with
many dolorous complayntes that he aryued in the cite of Tharcye ye which he
had delivered from honger. And anon he went to the house of his friends
Tranquyles and Dyonyse his wife whereas he was honorably received / and unto
the^ he recounted his paynfull adventures whereof they had great doole. And
tha^ Appolyn said unto them. Friends sith I have lost my most well-beloved lady
and wife in this manner I pray you that ye have this young maiden my daughter
and her nourysse for recommaunded / and that it will please you for to hold my
daughter at whom with you for to be endoctrined and taught in good manners and
thewes. For I have esperau^ce that she shall have goods and come to great
dominacyons. And I will that she be called and have to name after your cite
that is Tharcie. And here is gold and silver / perles and precious stones /
clothes of gold and sylkes / to the end that she be well and honestely retained
and besene as apperteyneth to her estate / and in time to come I shall render
the goods that ye do to her. And thus the gods have you in keeping for I
will go and receive the realms that been ordained for me. And I make a vow
unto god that I shall never shave my berde unto the time that my daughter be
married. And I promise you wha^ she is of aege to be married that I shall come and
se you and not before. And than either took leave of other / and Appolyn
remou^ted upon the sea making great sorrow for his wife. Now leave we Appolyn
upon the sea taking his course toward the country of Egypt / and speak we of
his daughter that he left with Tranquyle and Dyonyse his wife for to be
instruct and learned.

When the maiden was of the aege of.v. years Tranquyle set her to scole with a
young mayde^ his daughter yt he had. When she was of the aege of.xiiij. year
she was so well taught in all nurtures and scye^ces and of so good behauour
that each person spoke of her beauty / bounte / and curteysye. Upon a day as
she came fro the scole she found her nouryce seek / and she went and sat her
down by her for she loved her much / and she demanded her what she eyled and
conforted her in ye best manner that she could. Her nouryce herynge the
confortable words / and perceiving the goodly mayntene and amyte of ye maiden
that was so tender of aege said in this wise. Right honored and most
excellent maiden and daughter I am sore seek. Wherefore I pray you give to me
audye^ce and understand well my words for they shall be to your salute and
health in time coming. Say me fair maiden who think ye is your fader and
your mother / of what country ye be and of what lygnage. This herynge ye maid
she was sore abashed for she went that Tranquyle had been her fader and Dyonyse
her mother and said. Certainly my sweet nouryse I think that Tranquile is my
fader and Dyonyse his wife my mother / and that I am borne in this cite of
Tharcye whereof I bear the name / for I was never in no strange countrees or
regyons / ne I never knew that I had other fader and mother. The nouryse
herynge and knowing the ygnouraunce of the maiden began strongely for to weep
in saying unto her. Dear daughter herke^ unto me to the end that no person bear
shame ne damage neither to you ne to your fader I shall show and declare unto
you who is your fader and who is your mother and the lignage out of the which
ye be abstracte and spronge.

How the nouryce recounted to the child Tarcye who was her fader and who was
her mother and how her nouryce dyed. Ca. xxij.
depiction of Tarcye and her nurse

Certainly your fader was named Appolin and is king of Thyre and of many other
realms / and your moders name is archicastres daughter of Archycastres king
of ye cite of Term and ye were borne upon ye see / and your fader kest her in
too the sea in an arche of leed full of gold and silver and a rollet or lettre
that said / who that should find her should bury her honorably. When your
fader had this done he took all his confort in you / and delivered you unto
me and unto Tranquyle and Dyonyse his wife / and left with them great rychesses
for to mayntene you with and for to endoctryne and teache you manners. And when
he departed he made auowe never to shave his berde unto the time yt ye were
married. And he promised Tranquyle for to return wha^ ye were of the aege to be
married. But sith it is that he is abyden so long and that he has sent no
mesenger I think that he be deed / and therefore advise you. For after my death
they that ye think for to be your fader and mother would do against your
honor and therefore I will that ye goo in to the market place of this cite /
and there ye shall find on a pyler the image and semblaunce of your fader /
take it by the hand and declare unto the people all that I said unto you. And
when ye cytezyns shall here you they will remember ye goodness that I have herd
say that your fader did to them in time past. Than ye maiden thanked her
nouryse debonary rely saying. Dear mother and nouryse if that ye had dysceased
or ye had showed me this I should not have known who was my fader and mother
/ and in saying these words the nouryse gave up the ghost. And than yt maiden
wept and complained pyteously and began for to cry so hye that all they that
were in the house had marvel what it might be and came in to the chamber and
found her nouryse deed therefore they were greatly abashed and sore dysmayed /
and they found Tarcye that made ye pyceoust co^playntes that any might make /
for all her affyaunce and trust was in her. Tha^ after the custom they wound
her and entyered her by the sea side. And by the commandment of them of the
cite of Tharcye was made a monument of coper for remembrance of king Appolyn.
When the maiden had worn the doole as long as she ought for to do she left
it and than went unto ye scole. And always as she came homewarde she took a
bacyn full of water and went and washed the tomb of her nouryce and kept it
contynually fair and clean.

How Dyonyse Tranquyls wife ymagyned the death of Tarcye king Appolyns
daughter. Ca. xxiij.
depiction of Dyonyse and Tarcye at the shore

Upon a day Dyonyse Tranquyles wife her daughter and Tarcye went for to sport
them And as they passed through the streets / some young cytezyns or bachelors
began for to say that well happy were he yt might have one of yonder two
damoyselles unto his wife / and more of Tarcye than of the other. When Dyonyse
herd the people praise Tarcie for her beauty and semelynesse more than her
daughter she thought a great velany and contracte against ye same maiden saying
within her self. It is all ready.xiiij. year passed sith her fader saw her /
and on the other side her nouryse is deed / and now has she none to keep her
but I / certes I shall find ye means to be dysacombred of her and put her to
some secret death / for if she live she will have the good renown and report
of ye people / and moreover she shall get her a rich marriage / and my daughter
shall be set at naught. Wha^ she had ended her malycyous thought and purpose as
an unreasonable and enuyous be she sent for an esclaue and drudge of hers
named Theophyle ye which dwelled without ye cite / wha^ she was comen Dyonyse
said. Thou know well that thou have served me long / and I have well
rewarded the / and for the I took never none other in to my service / wherefore
if thou will keep my counceyle secret yt I shall tell ye truly I shall make
ye rich and I will do for the that thou shall be content. The esclaue or
bondwoman answered / all that lies in my power is ready for to do you service.
Certes said the cursed woman I will that thou go and put this maiden to death.
Wha^ she herd her maystres speak so she said. Wherefore will ye put to death
this fair damoysell in whom all excellent beauty resplendyssheth / what harm
has she done unto you when the cursed woman herd that thesclaue petyed her
she as furyous and half enraged said. How dare thou be so hardy and
counterdysaunt for to contrary and gayn say my commandment and will. Certes
if thou do not as I have boden the I shall show ye that it dyspleaseth me. Now
auaunce the shortly and go and sle her incontinent. And when thou have slain
her I promise the that I shall make the fre of thy seruage. Thesclaue than
anon took a knyfe and went and hid it by the tomb of ye nouryse to the end
yt when the maiden came as she was accustomed she than to slay her. When the
maiden came as tofore is said for to wasshe the tomb of her nouryce ye esclaue
took her and had her to the sea side / and said to her. I will cut of thy heed.
When the maiden herd her say so she was all afraid of her words and
countenance and in weeping tenderly she said. A sweet friend Theofyle what
harm have I done unto the that thou wylt sle me and defyle thy hands in my
simple and virgynall blood I pray the have mercy upon me. When Theophyle herd
her speak so pyteously she wept and said. I know well that ye never did harm
unto me / but I shall tell you ye cause wherefore I will sle you. It is true
that your fader left you well adoubed and rychely arrayed and a right fair
damoysell the which is the cause of your death. Wha^ the maiden herd
thesclaue say so she said. I require ye sith that I must dye that you suffer
me to make my prayers and commend my spyryte unto god the fourmer of all
creatures. Thou may pray enough said thesclaue / but needs must thou dye /
and this that I do is by force and constraynt. And therefore think not that I
have ye culpe for putting of the to death / but I pray the pardon me. Eue^ so
as she made her prayers there came a galey swy^mynge between two waters that
apperceyued well that she would put the maiden to death. And than they began for
to cry as loud as they might. Traytresse traytresse leave that damoysell for
if we may get the you shalde deye and not she. When ye esclaue herd how they
of ye galey cried and saw that they approached the land she left there the
mayde^ and ran away as fast as she might / and they of the galey came and
took Tarcye and had her with them / and demanded her wherefore she would have put
her to death And she answered that she could not tell.

How after that the galey had away Tarcye ye esclaue told Dyonyse that she had
slain her / and of the feigned sorrow that Dyonyse made. Ca. xxiiij.
depiction of Dyonyse faining sorrow to King Appolyn

When the esclaue saw that they led her away / she returned to Dyonyse and
said. I have done your mau^dement. And therefore hold that ye have promised me.
Why said her maystresse have you commysed murdre and yet demaundest grace.
Certes thou have well deserved death / and therefore speak thereof no more / but
return shortly to thy labor without delay. The esclaue tha^ all angry
returned unto her work in prayeng god for to show some example unto that
cursed woman / and rendered graces unto him that he had not accomplysshed the
sin of homycyde in that mayde^ and was right Joyous of yt the galey had saved
her. The cursed and abominable woman Dyonyse for to hyde and cover her
cursednes and ye death of the damoysell sent for all her kynnesmen and fre^des
and some of the cytezyns of Tharcye. And wha^ they were comen she with feigned
semblaunce came out of her chamber all clothed in black / vnhosed and vnshodde
in her here making semblau^t for to be doleful and sorry and began for to say.
My kynnesmen and friends know ye ye Tarcye daughter of king Appolyn dyed this
other day of sudden death whereof we ben in great sorrow / and in dyenge she
prayed me that she might be buried and entyered beside her nouryce / and so I
have buried her there. And therefore I have sent for you to the end that we do
some honors unto her for the love of her fader the which has done so much
good for this cite in time paste / when they herd these tidings they had
great doole for they wend that that she had said had been verytable and
true. So they ordained for her a fair sepulture and monumente of silver
curyously and rychely wrought as it apperteyned unto the daughter of a king and
that she should be entiered and laid at ye fete of her nouryse as she had
desired / and so it was done honorably and put in writing. Tarcye vyrgyn
daughter unto king Appolyn for the goodness that her fader has done to this
cite in time passed has full well deserved thus to be buried. And when all this
was done they let enclose ye two tombs with walls of fair marble. Thus
stynte we to speak of the cytezyns making great lamentacyon for the death of
Tarcye / and let us show of them that had her in the galey.

How the galey me^ sold Tarcye to a ruffyen in the cite of Mylytayne. Ca. xxv.
depiction of galley-men selling Tarcye to ruffian

THe galey in the which Tarcye was aryued at a cite named Milytayne and there
they led her for to sell as an esclaue and bondmayden / There was a ruffyen
yt was master of all ye impudyke women and harlottes / and held many wenches
and women in publyke and open place. And wha^ he saw Tarcye so fair he
thought that she should wyn^e more than any of ye other. And so he offered an
hundred besau^tes of fine gold. But Anthygoras that was prince of the cite
set her at fyfty to the end that he should leave her / and because he saw her
so fair he thought ye it should be great pity that she were put in such a
shamfull place. And the ruffyen said yt he would give always.x. besauntes more
than any other. Anthygoras yt herd him thus speak said unto himself. What may
I avail to strive against this meschau^te and unthrifty man for I may
nothing win / for when I se that he has her I may be the first that shall
have to do with her if it please me / and as good shall she be to me as if I
had bought her with mine own money. And thus she abode unto ye ruffyen ye
which did led her in to ye bordell and publyke place and put her in to a
chamber wherein was an image over detestable and abhomynable for to se / and he
badde her to worship yt image. But Tarcye yt was sore dyspleasaunt to se it
said. Never be god pleased if I adoure and do honor unto such an image. Thou
know not said the ruffyen that I have bought the but know thou that I have
bought the for to put yt in this place publyke for to win thy life among
other women / and to occupy thy body as they do. When ye damoysell herd the
ruffye^ speak thus she fell down unto his fete and said. A good sir I pray you
have mercy on me / and yt I lose not thus my vyrgynyte and mayde^hede and not
to be put in so abhomyble sin. Tha^ ye ruffyen said in mocking her. Rise up
lady for wepy^ge before a ruffyen ben but teeres lost. And than he called an
esclaue that mynystred to all the other women and said. I will that thou make
ready a fair chamber in ye bordell for this maiden and that she be curyously
clothed / and that thou go and make a cry through ye cite that of all men that
shall enhabyte with her carnally ye first shall give me a pound of gold / and
after that echo ne a penny of gold. When the third day came yt the cry was
made Tarcye was led in to ye bordell with sownes of taboures and trompettes.
Than anon as Anthygoras prince of the cite it wyste went and he dysguysed
himself and went to the bordell where as Tarcye was and when he came there he
sat him down by her and would have kyssed her and done his pleasure. But the
maiden anon fell down to his fete and sore weeping held up her hands
saying. Sir what so ever ye be have pity and compassyon upon me / and take not
fro me in this wise my vyrgynyte / for ye know not what I am nor from whens I
come. And to the end that ye know / I am daughter of ye king of Thyre named
Appolin / and than she recounted unto him all her adventures and fortunes. Wha^
Anthigoras herd the damoysell speak in yt wise he was moeued with mercy and
pity and said unto her. Fair damoysell rise up for by me ye get no manner of
harm ne dyshonoure but all ye pleasure and service that I may do shall be at
your good commandment. And abasshe you nothing for every person must pass
his good or evil fortunes and predestynacyons even so as the celestyall god
has ordained unto his pleasure. It is not long sith my wife dysceased and
has left me a daughter ye which god may in likewise dyspose if it be his
will. And therefore dysconforte you not and here is forty pe^s in gold more
tha^ your vyrgynyte is sold for. And therefore give it to them that shall come
to you in prayenge them for to save your honor and keep your madenhene / and
when ye have given all ye shall have more of me. The damoysell thanked him
right humbly prayenge him that he should say nothing. And than she said / I
beseech the hye god that he have myserycorde upon you as ye have had compyssyon
over me. Than Anthygoras full of pity returned in ye cite all sorrowful for ye
poor damoysell that was in so foul mysery and perplexyte / that is being in
feere for to be lost in carnal concupyscence and to lose yt treasoure of her
vyrgynyte. Than as soon as Anthygoras was gone ye sclaue that received the
wynnynges of ye pudyke women entered in to ye chamber of Tarcye and said unto
her. Me thinks that he which gooth away has not habyted with the for he gooth
weeping. Thou have not well aduysed him said Tarcye / but nevertheless here
is.xl. pe^ce of golge yt he has given me. And thus as they were spekyng
another man entered in to the chamber and thesclaude departed. And ye man yt
abode with Tarcye said. Tell me by your troth what he has given you yt came
to you first. Forty pens said Tarcye. I know well nay said ye man for he would
have had shame to have given so little / for he is prince of this cite and is
named Anthygoras / and to the end that ye know that I love you better tha^ he
here is fyfty. Anthigoras was hid in a place whereas he herd and saw all yt
ever they did and said. And tha^ he said secretly unto himself / the more
that I should give yt more should I lose. When he had spoken enough the young
man would have done his will with her and gave her.xl. pence of gold / but
she anon kneled down and cried him mercy / and told to him her adventures as
she had done unto Anthigoras. When the young man herd and under stood her
reason he had great pity in his heart / and said to her. Fair sister arise ye
up / for by me ye shall neither have dyspleasure ne shame / and weeping for
pity went his way. When Anthygoras saw hy^ out he went straight unto him and
said. I trow that thou and I ben felawes in this affayre / tell me by thy
faith what it seems the. Certes it is great pity for to here her speak /
there they abode long beholdy^g the^ yt returned with their purses empty.

How Tarcye gave her money to the ruffyen / and how he would have made his
esclaue to lie with her. Ca. xxvj.
depiction of Tarcye giving her money to the ruffian

AS soon as ye night was come^ Tarcye went unto ye house of her ruffyen and
gave his wife all the money that she had received in saying / have here the
price of my vyrgynyte and maydenhede. The ruffyen said I can not tell how thou
art so Joyous of this taking / it behooves ye to take more largely than this
/ and so she brought every day more. Upon a day the ruffyen said unto
thesclaue ye kept her / certainly I know well that Tarcye is yet a maiden /
wherefore I will that thou go and lie with her this night for to bereue her of
her maydenhede. Tha^ the esclaue at night led her in to a fair chamber
whereas he thought to have had his pleasure / and wha^ he had made him ready
and would have gone to bed with her he said. Tell me by thy faith if thou be
yet a maiden or not. And she answered / what would ye if. I be or not.
Certainly said he for I will know / for if thou be a mayde^ thou sai^e be none
or it be the morning. Tarcye this herynge was right pensyf and mysco^tent /
and with a meke and sorrowful he^^e said. Verily a maiden I am and shall be as
long as my creatoure will give me grace for to keep me so. The esclaue tha^
said. I have great marvel how thou getest so many pyeces of gold every day
and art yet a maiden as thou say. By my health said she a maiden am I / for
wha^ any man comes hyder unto me they give me it / and than I fall down upon
my knees and cry them mercy and unto them show and reherce mine estate and
adventures whereof they have great pity and compassion / and they go their way
and leave their money with me the which I give unto your master. And tha^ the
esclaue said. Know you that our master has sent me hyder and has
commanded me for to sleep with the this night and to take away thy maiden head
/ wherefore haste the and make the ready and go to bed that I may accomplysshe
and fulfill his commandment. Tarcye tha^ all ferefull and espouented of his
words fell prostrate at the fete of the esclaue and cried him mercy in
prayenge unto god devoutly saying. Fair fader fourmer of ye heuens and
preseruatour of people I repete and pray ye for to preserve and keep ye
vyrgynal body of me thy poor ancylle and handmayden / and deliver me that I be
not thus vylaynously defouled and corrumped in this horrible vice of lechery /
and reconforte me poor desolate and dystytute kings daughter. When theselaue
herd yt she said yt she was a kings daughter he was sore admeruayled and
said. Art thou a kings daughter for very certaynte / ye sir in good faith
said she that am I. And than she began for to weep and showed and declared unto
him her unfortunate adventures as she had done unto the other aforesaid. Than
thesclaue had great pity on her and said. In an evil hour was our master
borne for to hold and retain such a noble damoysell in such a foul and
dyshonest place for to be defloured in this vile sin / and I doubt me much
of one thing that is that ye may not long keep your pusyllage or vyrgynyte.
It shall be kept said she as long as it pleases my creator yt it be so. But
would god that I had a lute for to play on for by the means of a lute I
think for to keep my maydenhede well / for I shall make such a melody with it
that all that shall here it shall have great marvel and delight in ye sown of
it. Damoysell said thesclaue give me money and I shall bye you one / and so she
did. And he went in to the cite and bought a fair lute and forthwith he
brought it unto her saying. God give the grace to play with it according to thy
desire. And wha^ she had it she was right Joyous / and than she began for to
play on it so melodyously and so meruaylously well that a man would have left
his mete and dry^ke for to here her melody / wherefore the people were sore
admeruayled and came from all parts of the cite for to here and se her play.
And the more ye she saw the people come ye more she sowned hye / and loud and
the faster and better she played. And when that she had played enough upon
the lute she began for to sing balladdes and rondelles that it was Joy for to
here / and in singing she began for to recount and tell her adventures in
such wise that the people had great pity and lamented her much. And than
they took her in to so great love for her behauour and gracyous mayntene that
they gave her more than she demanded for to give unto her ruffyen to the end
that she should not lose her vyrgynyte. And in this manner she lived without
sin by the space of longetyme keeping her body pudyke and clean from ye
abominable and fylthy sin of lechery. Anthygoras ye prince of the cite had
so great feere that she should lose her vyrgynyte that he gave her every day
more than she ought to give unto her ruffyen.

How king Appolyn came to the cite of Tharcye for to se his daughter. Ca.
xxvij.
Dyonyse.
Tranquylle
King Appolyn.
depiction of King Apployn with Tranquyle and Dyonyse

THis time during king Appolyn aduysed him of his daughter Tarcye / and said
in him self that he would goo and se her / and anon he made for to make ready
a fair ship with all such things as longed thereto and as it appertayned
unto so noble a man. And than he mounted upon the sea and within short space
they aryued at the cite of Tharcye / and Appolyn went into the town so
secretly that none of the cytezyns knew of it / and went and lodged him in
the house of Tranquyle and the cursed woman Dyonyse his wife ye which mysknewe
him long time till that Tra^quyle espied that it was he / and than he said
unto his wife secretly. Cursed and meschaunte woman thou said that Appolyn ye
king of Thyre was deed and he is now here / tell me now what reckoning we
shall give hy^ of his daughter Tarcye. Certes said Dyonyse I shall find a good
excusacyo^ / for we shall clothe us with black and say yt his daughter is deed of
the colyke passion or sickness of the womb. And thus as they were speaking
Appolyn entered in to the hall whereas they were And when the cursed malycyous
woman espied him she took of her spattle and instead of teeres she wette her
eyes and her husband also / and in that manner they came before king Appolyn
making the gretest co^playntes and lamentacions that might be seen or herd.
And when that Appolyn saw the^ in that plyght he said. What meneth this that
at my coming hyder ye make these sorrows and lamentable complayntes. Certes
said Dyonyse the great dolours yt we have makes us thus to weep. And I shall
tell you wherefore. It is truth that your daughter Tarcye is dysceased and
deed this other day of sudden death When Appolyn herd these tidings it
needs not for to be demanded if he were sorrowful or not for forthwith he fell
in a swoune on the earth / and was a great while that he might not speak / and
when he came again to himself he said. A my friends the anguysshe and pain
yt streyneth my heart no man can tell. Alas what may I do / cursed be fortune so
unsteadfast and moenable. I pray you give me her Iewelles that I may have
remembrance of her / and than anon they were delivered unto him. And tha^ the
cursed woman said unto him. We and all ye cytezyns have had great dole for the
death of her / and for the goodness that ye have done in time past unto this
cite they have made for her a fair monumente or sepulture all of fine silver
to entyer your daughter and have laid her at ye fete of her nouryce as ye
shall se. Than the cursed wife doubtyng yt he would go and se the tomb of his
daughter advised her of a cautelous wyle / for in yt house was a sheep that had been deed four days yt stanke right sore which she took and bare to Tarcyes
tomb to the end that Appolyn should think that the stynke came from her / and
than she returned without making semblaunce of any thing.

Of the lamentacyon of king Appolyn. Ca. xxviij.
depiction of King Appolyn lamenting his daughter's death

AS king Appolyn had abyden there a while he said that he would go and se the
monument of his dear and tender dougther Tarcye and took two or three of his
most secret men for to go with him / and commanded his other servants for
to take the Iewelles and bear them to the ship / and so incontinent they
did. Than he went to ye see side and found the sepulture of his daughter /
and than he foundred in teeres and all weeping with a grievous pange of trystres
of heart he said. O fortune. And than with out power to pronounce one only
word he stood still / and with a right sorrowful courage he beheld the
superscrypcyon that the cytezyns had made upon the monument. And know ye
that there was a great stynke about it forcause of the deed sheep that the
cursed wife had put there / and when he had read it he said with an hye
voice. O mal heurous and unhappy eyes how may ye give me sight to se and read
the dyscrypcyon and remembrance of ye death of my daughter without source of
lacrymous sprynges. O unhappy tongue how may thou pronounce the fynall
memoryall of my daughter. O unfortunate body how and in what manner may thou
be vpholden and sustained with thyn other corporal members / without trembling
and falling down prostrate with anguysshous sorrows making lamentacyon for thy
natural child / seeing that she that was so fair delectable and sweet lies
here foul abhomynable and stynkynge as a rotten be or caryon. Alas my
daughter that sometime was named the fair Tarcye / now art thou foul /
lothely / and ferefull to look upon I am come out of my realm noble of Thyre
with great bobaunce to fetch the and to mary the unto a king or to some other
pote^cyall man with hye magnyfyce^ce / and now I must leave the dystytute of all
beauty bounte and suauytude in a strange regyon far from thy friends and
parents. And tha^ in manner of taking his leave he said. Farewell my daughter
Tarcye ye only fode of my life corporal. Farewell the Joys of my days /
farewell my comfort and consolacyon / farewell farewell for never shall I se ye
more. And in making these complayntes with many other he fell down in a swoune
/ and when he reuyued and came again to himself he went to the monument of
his daughter and taking his leave he kyssed it. And in that melancoly and
dystresse he mounted upon the sea saying that he would never have Joy ne
consolacyon. Than he purposed for to go in to his realmd of Thyre for to
perform his days in dolourous and lamentable sorewynges. And when they were
nygh unto Thyre al suddenly ye wind reuerted against them so impyteously that
they were co^streyned to aba^don their vessel and let it follow the course of
the water and wind. When Appolyn saw ye weder so impyteous and stormy and
pondred his countreuers fortunes for very pure anguysshe he left ye rest of
his caban and for no man he would return in to it but went byneth under the
batche where as was no manner of clerenes nor light of the day / and there he
lay weeping and sobbing making his regretes and bewaylynges / and he was
dryue^ from cost to cost till all weary they were driven unto the cite of
Mylytayne where as his daughter Tarcye was / but he knew nothing of it. Thus
they aryued upon the feast of saint Johan on the which day the patron of the
ship and all the company rejoiced them for the good days sake. Appolin was
under ye hatche in great doloure / and when he herd the chere that they made
he had great marvel and demanded them wherefore they made such Joy and
revel / and the patron answered. Sir we rejoice us for the high and solemn
feast and for the love of saint Johan for whom this day is made celebracyon and
solempnyte. Than Appolyn sore syghynge unto the said. I pray you that ye
euerychone assemble together and make you merry for my sake. And than he called
his treasourer and commanded him for to give unto each of the maryners five
pens of gold and a mark of silver for to rejoice them with that day / and
than he said to them. I require you that ye pray all for me unto our lord that
it may please him for to send me Joy and conforte and releas of my bitter
sorrows / and than all weeping he made for to cover ye hatche above his heed
where as he said that he would led his life in tenebrosite and derkenes to the
time that god should send him Joy and co^solacyon. Tha^ the patron descended
from the ship for to go and puruey for all such things as to them was
behouable. And when he was returned he apparayled ye ship ryally / and
dysplayed the baners that were fair and bright for the honor of the good day
/ and as the custom is of maryners / and than he made for to apparayle their
dinner and covered the tables.

How king Appolyn aryued at Mylytayne / and how his daughter luted before him /
and other matters. Ca. xxix.
depiction of King Appolyn arriving at Mylytayne

ANthygoras prince of the cite of Mylytayne went sporting him by the ryuage of
the sea for his recreacyon and sport and saw ye ship of king Appolyn / and
he thought that it was the fairest ship that ever he had seen to his advise
/ and he said unto his chyualry. Certes lords the beauty of this ship pleases
me much. The patron tha^ being nygh unto him said. Sir the ship is at your
commandment and good pleasure / and sith that ye are so nygh / come aborde
and se it / and if it please you dyne with us. The prince was right well
content of the words of the patro^ and said. Sith ye say it with so good heart
here is v. besau^tes of gold and certainly I will dyne with you. And inco^tynent
they took a barge for him and aborded the ship wha^ he was entered he saw the^
ete their mete all heuely whereby he thought yt the master of ye ship was
not there. And tha^ he demanded of ye maryners for the master of the ship /
and the patron answered to him and said. Our master is in wepynges and
waylynges / for he has lost his wife on the sea and his daughter that he had
on land. Than ye prince said to the patron / here is two pens of gold and go
unto your master and tell him / that here is the prince of the cite yt will
speak with him / ye shall pardon me said the patron for he has said that the
first that were so bold for to speak to him should lose his heed. Now than
said Anthygoras sith ye dare not go to him show me his name and of what
country he is. Truly said ye patron he is named Appolyn and is king of ye
land of Thyre. When Anthygoras herd him speak of Appolyn of Thyre he had
great marvel and thought upon Tarcye his daughter ye which he knew in ye
cite and how she had told him that king Appolyn of Thyre was her fader / and
anon he went to the hatche as ye maryners had ensygned him and entered to him
in calling him by his name saying. Hayle Appolyn king of Thyre. Appolyn the
which knew him not answered never a word. When Anthygoras herd yt he gave
him no responce ne re^dred his salutacyo^ he said again. Appolyn speak unto me
for know thou yt I am prince of this cite and am hyder comen for to behold ye
beauty of this vessel / and your maryners of their fre volunte prayed me yt I
should come dyne with them and so I have done / and I demanded them where
their master was / and they answered that ye were in great wepynges and
waylynges ye which dyspleaseth me sore. But of one thing I pray you that ye
will issue out of this derstenes and rejoice you in esperaunce that god shall
help you. And Appolyn answered weeping. Dear friend what so ever ye be that
ye make good chere and rejoice you with my folk / and show no semblaunce of
Joy ne mirth unto me / for I am evil fortuned and void of all consolacyon
and comfort. Than Anthygoras said / ye must if it please you issue out of this
tenebrous and obscure place. Appolyn said pardon me for this time / and than he
turned him aside sore syghynge. And Anthygoras returned to them that dyned and
said that he might not retray their master fro that derke place that he was in
/ for gladly he would have found some means to have withdrawn hy^ thens. And
than he said secretly to one of his servants. Go in to the bordell and say
unto the master of the ruffyens that he come and speak with me / and that he
bring Tarcye with him with all her musycall instruments / for she is a parfyte
maystresse in all manner of Joyous plays and melodyes / and we shall se if by
case of adventure she may rejoice him. Than the servant went as his lord had
commanded him. And when the ruffyen understood the tidings of the servant it
grieved him much for to have Tarcye thither / but force it was so to do for to
obey unto his sovereign. When Tarcye was comen to the ship Anthygoras said.
Fair damoysell ye must show here your science / for it is of necessite for to
rejoice the master of this ship the which has lost his wife on the sea and
his daughter on the land / he is here benethe in tenebres and obscurete / and
for nothing that I may do he will not issue out of the place where as he is.
And if ye may do so much as to make him issue here is thyrty pens of gold for
your labor / and.l. other for to keep your vyrgynyte. Than incontinent she
went went to the har^he and said unto Appolyn. Sir god send you salute and
Joy. I desire and require you that ye will rejoice you at my coming hyder /
for ye are not vesyted of a woman corrupt and defouled / but of a maiden chaste
and vyrgyn / for like as the rose grows among thorns and sharp pryckes and
is not of it self prycky^ge all in semblable wise is it of me / for I remain
among people infect and unchaste / and yet nevertheless I have observed and kept
my vyrgynyte hyderto with all my dylygence. And therewith I have a special
confydence and trust in god / for I think that when it lyketh him he shall
deiecte and deliver me from that vylenes / and so he will wha^ he thinks time.
And therefore fair sir conforte your self. Appolyn than lift up his heed and
said unto her. Fair damoysell I pray you speak not to me of consolacyon and
conforte / for I desire them not / nevertheless me think yt ye be exstrayte of
some noble place / but I require you go your way and that ye pardon me of that
ye desire / all be it I beseech almighty god that he send me Joy or I return
in to my realm. And certainly ye have done me more pleasure than if ye had
made me for to come out of this place. And for your good will and love I give
unto you two hundred pens of gold for to keep your vyrgynyte / and I beseech
you that ye travail no more for me / for your tender and amyable words
renews my dolourous anguysshes. The maiden took the gold that he had given
her and thanked him hyghly prayenge god to send him his hertes desire and
would have issued out of the ship / but Anthygoras returned her and said.
Fair sister have ye helped the poor dyscomforted for to leave and cease of his
sorrows and lachrymous lamentacyons. Certes fair lord said Tarcye I have done
all thereto that lies in my power but nothing it avails / and he has given
to me two hundred pens of gold and prayed me to go my way and let him alone
for my words renouelleth his doloures. Than Anthygoras said I shall give you
four hundred pens of gold so that ye return to him and show hy^ that ye
desire nothing of him but his welfare and health Than the maiden mekely
returned at his commandment straight to Appolyn and said to him. Sir I will
sytte me down by you if it please you / and if ye can show to me the solucyon
of a questyon or twain I shall go fro you / and if ye can not than must ye
rejoice you by some means / and here is your pens for I will nothing but your
salute and welfare and that ye enjoy in my saynges / and anon she began her
questyon in this manner. There is a lodges in the earth that souneth with an hye
voice / ye host that enhabyteth in it is dombe and says no word / and yet
nevertheless the lodges and the host enter ensues together / now answer
dyrectly unto this question. Appolyn incontinent answered / the lodges that ye
say souneth with an high soune is the sea / the host therein enhabytaunt and is
dombe without saying of any word and that enter ensues ben the fysshes ye
which follows the course and rennynge of the sea / and that is the solucyon of
your question The maiden than preposed an other questyon saying in this manner
In the water of the floode that renneth by the brymme spryngeth that of the
which musyke and sweet song is made / and is not of color sable / the
messenger of allegraunce by touching. Than Appolyn answered that ye spry^geth
in the bry^me of the flode ben ye redes whereof music is made and sweet soune
wha^ one makes a pype or other instrument of read / for it is not of black
color / but it is white / messenger of allegrance when it is touched upon the
pertuys and holes / for it is made to give what soune that one will. The maiden
preposed an other questyon in saying. All about gooth the fire in the house and
does no harm / and makes so great light in the mids of the house that
with great pain it may be endured / and ye host is naked within the house.
Appolyn answered and said The house is a bayne in to the which the fire enters
all about and makes great here and may do no harm / the host is naked for he
has no need of clothing in a bayne. The damoysell than preposed an other
questyon the which is this. Within this monster shynynge / approaches always an
ending / the moon often resembles the son / and shows nothing but that
that is to come. Appolyn tha^ remembrynge his dolours fell to weeping again.
When the damoysell had made her questyons and that Appo- had soyled them all
save the last whereto he said nothing she had marvel / and in beholdynge him
she saw that he wept / wherefore she wist not what to do but went and took him
in her arms saying. Alas it is great damage that a man of so great nobleness
as you be should use his life in such doloures and anguysshes / I pray you be
of good conforte for when it pleases our creator he will render unto you your
wife and your daughter / and than she took him by the goune making semblaunt
for to draw hy^ out from under the hatche. Appolyn seeing that she would have
had him out drew backewarde / and they pulled so between them that her hold
slypped and she fell to the ground and hurt her knee sore. When she felt
that she was hurt she began pyteously to weep saying.

How Tarcye co^playned of her mysfortunes before king Appolyn for hurtynge of
her knee. Ca. xxx.
A Gracyous god fourmer of things interyour and exteryour of naught and
suffers al operacyons for to be thought and determined / how may thou suffer
that thy simple and humble handmayden not culpable of any malice to endure so
many grievous perils and mysfortunes / for sith the hour that I was borne I
have had but aduersytees and trybulacyons / for of the dolor that my mother
had with me in my natyuyte she departed out of this life / and was casten in
to the sea in an arche leeded / and afterward I was brought in to the cite of
Tharcye of the which I bear the name / and was delivered and reco^maunded unto
a cytezyn of that same cite named Tranquyle / and unto his wife named Dyonyse /
and unto a nouryce admytted by my fader the which right well and dylygently
kept me. And when that she lay upon her deed bed she recounted unto me
before her death all mine exstraught and lygnage / and all the adventures which
I had passed in mine adalescency / and if she had not told me than I had not
known who was my fader ne who was my mother / for I had wend before that
Tranquyle had been my fader Dyonyse his wife my mother / by the which Dyonyse
I was prepayred to be slain of her esclaue upon the sea side / but it happened
that a galey came swymmynge thereby that took me and delivered me from the
hands of the esclaue / and the men of the said galey sold me in this cyce
unto a ruffyen which has kept me by force in the place publyke for have made
me enclyne to that most vile syn^e of luxurye / but graces be given to our
lord by whose power I have kept my vyrgynyte unto this hour. Alas my lord my
fader was named Appolyn and was king of ye land of Thyre / and than she began
for too complain in saying with a pyteous voice. Ha my right dear fader where be
ye now / in what land ben ye remaining yt ye come not for to se me / and
deliver me from this pain and shame full scandalyzacyon in the which I am /
and where I have so long abyden without conforte sauf only of the curteys
prince of this cite whom our lord reward.

Of the Joy between Appolyn and Tarcye. Ca. xxxi.
King Appolyn heryng ye words of his daughter in that manner was so fervently
taken and surprysed with Joy and gladness that of long time he could not speak
and pronounce a word / but when his speech came without advise he began for to
cry. O all ye my servants leave your heaviness and make Joy. Than all they of
the ship ran unto him wenynge that he had been from his wit. And when they
came they found him holding his daughter between both his arms / and than
he said unto them. Certainly my dear friends here is my daughter Tarcye for
whom I have had so much travail and endured so many sorrows. Than he and she
devised and talked of many things and of their strange adventures / and after
he issued with great Joy. Than Appolyn clothed his daughter with rich
aournementes and clothes and apparaylled himself at al points. And Anthygoras
had great pleasure to se that adventure. Than she began for to tell her fader
how she was sold unto the cursed ruffyen the which would have maynteyned her
in sin and voluptuousnes / and what pain she had for to keep her vyrgynyte
/ and how the prince Anthygoras had aided and socoured her for to to keep her
vyrgynyte and to save her from that horrible sin of carnal concupyscence. So
after the complayntes made of the one and of ye other they demeaned great Joy
between them of their sudden encountrynge. And at the last Anthygoras prayed
king Appolyn instauntly that he would give unto him his daughter Tarcye in
marriage / the which Appolyn him ottroyed and granted for ye pleasure that he
had done to her in helping her for to keep her body immaculate and
vyrgynall / and than he said to Appolyn. I require you to give me a gift / and
Appolyn granted him / and the prince said. I demand of you vengeance to be
executed upon this cursed and meschaunt ruffyen which in this wise has
withholden your daughter / to the which request Appolyn accorded lightly Than
anon Anthygoras led Appolyn and his daughter Tarcye in to ye cite with great
magnyfycence and tryumphe. And when they were entered and had abyden awhyle
Anthygoras the prince commanded that all the cytezyns should be ready in goodly
ordinance for to assemble before king Appolyn and his daughter Tarcye And as
soon as they were comen he mounted upon a scaffolde among them and said as
here after follows.

How the ruffyen that kept Tarcye was brent. Ca. xxxii
Tarcye.
The ruffyen
Appoly^.
Anthygo
depiction of ruffian being burnt at the stake

O Ye cytezyns of this cite of Mylytayne I Anthygoras prince of the same and
gouernoure for the well publyke or comune do you for to know and understand
that ye and I ben in great peril sith a little space. For Appolyn ye mighty
king of Thyre and Anthyoche is aryued with an huge nauye of men arms for to be
avenged upon us and to put our cite to mortal ruin for cause of this cursed
ruffyen the which has holden his daughter Tarcye in ye bordell publykely and
openly in the most shameful wise as esclaue and common woman. And therefore I
let you wete to the end that our cite be not dystroyed for such an evil man.
And anon all the cytezyns said. Lord we will yt he given to Appolyn / and that
he take vengeance on him at his pleasure rather tha^ he should make our cite
to be dystroyed. Than incontinent ye ruffyen was brought before the prince
Anthygoras his hands bounden behind him and there was apparayled a fair
chair in the mids of the cite / and Appolin was made for to sytte therein
holding his daughter by the hand and than he said to all the people there
being in presence. Citezyns of Mylytayne by your great goodness and gentylnes
ye ben here assembled for to se the Joy and solace that I have of my daughter
the which I verily supposed had been deed in the cite of Tharcye whom I have
this day found / ye which this cursed ruffyen has holden for esclaue and
bonmayden. And yet it suffysed him not so to do / but he has holden her in the
publyke bordell as impudyke for to dishonor and shame her for ever / but yet
notwithstanding his cruel malice by the grace of god and adiutory of you and
other lords here present she has preserved and kept her maydenheed whereof I
thank you cordyally. And for yt I and my daughter shall be beholden unto you
for to render unto you as great a pleasure / wherefore I require in the way of
ryghtwysnes that ye do such Justice upon him as belongs to such a cursed
and meschau^t man for the retaynynge of my said daughter. Than all the cytezyns
said with one voice / we will that he be brent in ye mids of the cite. Than
anon a great fire was made in ye market and the ruffyen was bound to a pyler
in ye mids thereof / and so with great pain and shame he fynysshed his days
before all the people. Tha^ said Tarcye to the esclaue that had kept her
vyrgynyte and bought her lute / for the well and service that thou have done to
me I make ye free of all seruage and thraldom / and here I give the an hundred
besauntes of gold to make the a good man. Than she gave to all the women yt
were in the bordell great fynaunce and riches to the end that they should leave
their sin and go out of that place. After all these things done Appolyn
arose out of his chair and said to the prince of ye cite. O Anthigoras prince
of great virtue and replete with bou^te I thank the of ye great goodness and
honor that thou have done to me. For by the I have gotten my most well-beloved
daughter. And also all you noble cytezyns of mylytayne I thank and remercy you
of the great debonayrte and fre^dshyp that ye have done unto me and unto my
daughter / for by the grace of god and you she has yet her vyrgynyte and
maydenhede. And for the goodness that ye have done to me and to her I give you
freely fyfty charges of silver. They sey^g his fraunchyse and good will thanked
him gretely / and for his sake they did do make an image or statute too his
semblau^ce all of fine silver / and set it in ye middle of the cite The which
statue held in his hand a ship / and between his arms his daughter Tarcie
/ and under his fete he held ye ruffyen in whose hands was a writing in
golden lettres that said thus. Appolin the noble king of Thyre by his
lyberalyte and frau^chyse has made of new the walls of the cite of Mylytayne
/ and fortefyed it with plente of treasoures and rychesses / for whose love and
his daughter Tarcye vyrgyn pudyke and chaste ye cytezyns of ye said cite has
do to be made this present image or statue.

Of the marriage of Anthygoras prince of Mylytayne and of Tarcye king Appolyns
daughter. Ca. xxxiij.
depiction of wedding of Anthygoras and Tarcye

A Certain time after that Appolyn had given his daughter Tarcye unto
Anthigoras for to be his wife as is aforesaid he anounced it to all the
cytezyns / whereof they had great Joy and tha^ he prepayred and apparaylled all
such things as to the marriage apperteyned / and tha^ with great magnyfyce^ce
and glory the espousaylles were made and the feast endured.viij. days which
were to long to tell. And wha^ ye feast was determined Appolyn desired sore
for to return in to Thyre / and would pass through the cite of Tharcye for
to be aue^ged on Tranquyle and Dyonyse his wife. He being in this purpose on a
night he had a vysyo^ ye said if he sacryfied not to ye goddess Diane he
should never return on live to Thyre / for she had kept ye vyrgynyte of
Tarcye. Tha^ Appolyn showed it to Anthygoras / and he said yt it were well done
to make oblacyon to Dyane / and for to lead with him his daughter Tarcye. Anon
he went and made for to prepayre and array ships and set him on the way / and
so long they sailed yt they aryued in the lord of Ephesym / and when they
were in the cite they demanded of ye people where ye temple of Dyane was / the
which anon they showed / and when they came to the temple they found a nonne
at ye entering of the gate the which said unto Appolyn and his company. Lords
I pray you for to pardone me for none may enter in this temple without the
lyce^ce of my lady the abbess. But if it please you for to remain here a
while I shall go and anounce her of your aduenyment.

How Appolyn and his daughter went to the temple of dyane where as his queen
was abbess. Ca. xxxiiij.
depiction of King Appolyn and Tarcye arriving at temple of Diana

IN this foresaid temple ne dwelled none other but ladies and damoyselles the
which had made ye vow of chastity / and at that time Archystrates king
Appolyns wife was chosen abbess that he held for deed. And it was.xiiii.
passed sith she had been therein. The portresse went to the abbess and said unto
her that at the gate was a king that was rychely arrayed and precyously besene
and accompanied with great chyualry and other people the which king is come
for to make oblacyon and prayer unto the goddess Dyane. When the abbess
understood that it was a king she made for to bring a chair in to the quere
of the church / and when it was brought she did sytte her down therein. And
than she commanded the portesse for to open the gate / and Appolyn entered in
to the temple holdinge his daughter by the hand and all the chyualry followed
after them. And when he saw the lady in the chair so curyously and so
rychely besene he wend that it had been Dyane the goddess and would have
kneled down, before her for to have made his prayer and oblacyon according to
his pilgrimage / but it was told him that it was thabbesse / and than he went
toward the awter / and she made for to open all the tabernacles of Dyane. And
than king Appolyn fell down upon his knees right devoutly and made his
deuocyons / and than he presented his daughter tofore the trone of Dyane to
the end that each might know wherefore he was comen thither / and in presentinge
her he made this complaynt. O Dyane relucent goddess the which illumyneth the
superior parties of the terryen mancyon with thy splende^t leames enclyne thyn
humblenes unto the co^templatyfe orayson of me Appolyn king of Thyre thyn
oratoure the which has suffered so many euyls and great trybulacyons during
my life. For when I was of the aege of.xv. years I was introducte and
endoctryned in all the arts and scyences that a young man ought to have / and
for that I found the solucyon of a questyon that the king of Anthyoche made
unto me for the demaundinge of his daughter which he occupied carnally he
procured the means for toss me / for the which I was constreyned for to leave
my realm and fled by the sea toward the cite of Tharcye which I delivered
from honger / and than dredynge to be known I remounted upon the sea / and
sailed toward ye cite of Term where I lost all yt I had and naked I entered
into the said cite in the which reygneth the good king Archystrates of whom
I was received / and at the last of his great fraunchyse and noblesse he gave
to me his daughter in marriage. And it befell so yt I had tidings how the king
of Anthyoche was deed / wherefore I concluded for to go and take possessyon of
his realm the which unto me belonged. And when I was on the sea and my wife
with me the which was great with child / she had not ben long upon the sea but
for fere and disease yt she suffered she was delivered of this my daughter
which I present here unto the / at the birth of whom my wife deyed / whom
god pardon / for whose sake to me is comen the great sorrow which I have
suffered And yet moreover I was constreyned for to close her in an arche leeded
with plente of gold and silver for to burye her with as to a kings daughter
apperteyned and after that to cast her in to ye see. And afterward I gave my
daughter in the cite of Tharcye unto a man whose cursed wife had commanded for
toss her by her esclaue the which led her to these side for to do her to
death / but of adventure there came a galey that led her to the cite of
Mylytayne and sold her to a ruffyen with whom she was long time with great
pain to keep her maydenheed / whereas I did find her sith. And when I
returned thither for to mary my daughter they told me that she was deed and
buried beside ye tomb of her nouryce nygh to the sea side. And when I saw my
self so dyspoyled and void of al welthe and dystytute of my wife / and of my
daughter I was so surprysed with sorrow that I had lever have deyed than lived.
And now gracious goddess you have given me so much grace yt I have found my
child yt I present the here.

Of the Joy that was between Appolyn and his wife in the temple of Dyane. Ca.
xxxv.
depiction of King Appolyn and his wife reunited in the temple of Diana

When the abbess Archycastres herd and understood all these things she was
enspyred with so great Joy that she might not absteyne her self till he had
made his oblacyon or sacryfyce but ran unto Appolyn with her armed stretched
and enbraced him by great fervor of love and kyssed him mo than an hundred
times / and after she said with an hye voice. Ha Appolyn king of Thyre have
thou no recognysaunce ne knowelege of me. When Appolyn had well herd her and
saw her demeanor he was gretely astonyed and said. Of the knowledge of you I am
vnpuruayed for I was never in this place. Than she perceiving that he mysknewe
her said all wepy^ge. Certainly I am Archycastres your own espouse that ye
kest in to the sea in a leeded arche / and that ye so much have desired. Than
Appolyn and Tarcye took herin their arms and enbraced her sore wepy^ge for
Joy so that all they about them wept for pity. And there they recounted their
fortunes and meruaylous adventures. O what Joy and consolacyon had that noble
king for to be first restored in to his realm out of the which he was deiect
/ and secondaryly to find his natural child the which he thought had been
buried at the cite of Tharcye / and thyrdly how great Joy had he to find
his most beloved wife and espouse on live the which with his own hands he
had casten into the sea / well may ye think that he had great lyesse and
Joy / his sorrows were turned to myrthes and consolacyons. He first was
unfortunate and lost lands / rychesses / wife / daughter / and al his other
goods / and now he has found all again. Thus the Joy was so great among
them yt it can not be esteemed / and anon it was spredde over all the country
that ye abbess had found her husband / whereof they of the cite had great Joy
/ and put an other abbess in her place. And there they soiourned a certain
time and after they took their leave thanking the cytezyns and so departed and
mounted upon the se.

How Appolyn was crowned at Anthyoche / and after returned to the cite of
Tharcye and caused execucyon to be done upon Tranquyle and Dyonyse his wife.
Ca. xxxvi
Dyonyse.
Tranquyle.
depiction of Dyonyse and Tranquyle being burnt at the stake

APpolyn being upon the sea with his wife and his daughter exployted so much
that they arrived at the cite of Anthyoche / in the which cite ye crown of the
realm was kept for Appolyn. And there he was crowned with great solempnyte
and tryumphe and was honorably received as to a king apperteyneth. And than
he departed thens and returned to his own realm of Thyre where as he was also
received with great reverence / and the feestes endured.viii. days for the
love of the queen and her daughter. And for his welcome home he gave unto
Anthygoras ye said country. Than afterward they returned upon the sea and
went so long by their Iourneys that they aryued at the cite of Tharcye / where
as they were welcomed with great Joy And than Appolyn sent for Tranquyle and
Dyonyse his wife / and when they were comen he went in to the mids of the
cite and stood under the image yt was made to his symylytude / and turned him
to the people and said. O you cytezyns of Tharcye ye have caused me to endure
many trybulacyons. And they answered all nay lord / but we always have said
yt the crown of this cite should remain to you for the benefaytes that in time
past ye have done unto us / and we ben all content for to live and deye with
you. And yt image shall be for ever a memoryall of your goodness. Therefore I
said it said Appolyn / for when I went last out of your cite I left and gave my
daughter with great riches to nourysshe unto Tranquyle and Dyonyse his wife and
when I returned to fetch her they would not render her to me. Dyonyse yt
herynge began for to say. How should we have rendered her to you when she was
deed / and your own self felt the savor yt came from her when ye read the
superscrypcion of the monument that the cytezyns did make for the honor of
her and the love of you. Than Appolyn was somewhat moeued with impacyence when
he herd how falsely she made her excuse and made to call forth his daughter
Tarcye tofore all the people / and than he said to her. My fair daughter now
must ye bear witness and record of your death. Than the maden came tofore
Dyonyse and said. God save the Dyonyse I am Tarcye which is risen from death
unto life. When the cursed woman herd her speak thus she began for to tremble
for feere and wist not what to say. Than Tharcye commanded for to bring
forth thesclaue that should have put her to death. And as soon as she was
comen Tarcye said to her. Theophyle know thou that I am Tarcye of whom thou
would have smyten of the heed / wherefore I am comen hyder for be avenged and do
ye same to the. And therefore tell here openly who commanded the so to do. And
thesclaue said / certainly it was Tranquyle and Dionyse his wife / and so
tofore the cytezyns he recounted al their fayte and false preposycyon of them.
When the cytezyns herd and understood this they cried all with one voice
brenne them / brenne them. And incontinent without longer abydyng was made two
great fyres and in ye one they put Tranquyle / and in the other Dyonyse his
wife / and thus they fynysshed their days for their falsenes. Than they would
have brent thesclaue / but Tarcie saved her life and said. For that thou
suffered me to say my prayers I was delivered from death / and therefore I will
that thou be saved / and also I give the an.C. besauntes of gold / and make
the fre of all seruage / whereof she thanked her / and went her way making
great Joy yt she was so escaped.

How Appolyn was crowned king of Penthypolytayne / after his wyfes fader. Ca.
xxxvii.
depiction of King Appolyn crowned king of Penthypolytayne

AFter al these things abouesayd Appolyn thanked humbly the cytezyns and abode
there half a year / and he took his leave honorably and mounted upon the sea
and came to ye cite of Term where as his wifes fader reigned. And when he
knew that his sone Appolyn and his daughter Archycastres came to him he went
and met them with a great company of lords and welcomed them hyghly. And
there they abode a year in great Joy and solace. And at the end of the year
king Archystrates deyed for aege / and Appolyn honorably made him to be
entyered. But or he deyed he gave to Appolyn the cite and dyademe of Term
which he received and was crowned with great nobles and magnyfycence / and the
other part of his realm he divided after his pleasaunce / and gave the one
half thereof unto Archycastres his daughter / and the other half he gave to
Tarcye ye wife of Anthygoras / and after yt the doole was made a year. And at
the end of the year every person began for to rejoice them. And upon a day
as Appolyn and his wife were talking of one thing and other done in times
past he bethought him on the poor fyssher ye which had given him the half
of his mantell / and forth with he sent for him. The poor man was sore
afraid when he herd ye maundement of the king for he thought no more on it /
and so he came all heuely before him / and tha^ Appolyn said to the queen. Here
is the man by the occasyon whom I recouerd that which I had lost in the sea
For he gave me the one half of his mantell / and showed me the way for to come
to this cite / where as I was well received of my lord your fader whom god
pardon. And than he took the fyssher by the hand and said. Be ye not remembered
how ye saved me and conforted me when I had lost my ships and was cast
naked on the sea side / and the poor man said yes my lord. Certes said
Appolyn I said to you yt if ever I came to mine above I should think on you /
and incontinent he gave him.i. besauntes of gold / and three fair houses in
the cite / so that he that was ye poorest was made the rychest. Than he sent
for him yt had brought him tidings from Anthyoche that king Anthyogus was
deed / and made him rich in likewise as he did the other.

How king Appolyn dysceased and his wife also / and how their sone possessed
their realms. Ca. xxxviii.
depiction of King Appolyn and his wife on their deathbed

BY process and length of time king Appolyn had a sone by his wife
Archycastres the which was king and reigned after them in the realm of
Thyre. Than they returned in to Anthyoche and lived there the space of.lxxiiii.
year in great Joy and noblesse / peace and tranquylyte. And thus in his life he
was king of Thyre of Anthyoche / and of Term / and of diverse other realms
the which he held and mayteyned in good peace during his life. And during
his days he wrote and put in remembrance the fortunes and peryllous
adventures the which unto him were happened and comen / and he compyled.vi.
volumes of books / of the which one remained in the temple of Dyane in the
land of Ephesym. The second in the cite of Term. The third in the cite of
Anthyoche. The fourth in the cite of Mylytayne. The fyfth in the cite of
Tharcye. And the syxte in his realm gentle of Thyre. After all these things
and many other he dysceased out of this world / and in deyenge he enbraced his
wife and kyssed her in taking his love. And she for very pure sorrow and love
enbrac d him and making great lamentacyons and complayntes she gave up her
spyryte with him / wherefore the realms made great doles and sorrow And than they
were both taken up and laid in an arche of gold and they were sepultured
according to their estate. And thus it pleased almighty god to call them to
his reygne and to fynyss^^ their regal nobles which might not always endure.

Thus ends the most pytefull hystory of the noble Appolyn sometime king of
Thyre newly translated out of frensshe in to english. And enprynted in the
famous cite of London in the Fletestrete at ye sign of the son by Wynkyn de
word. In the year of our lord.M. d. and.x. the.xxviii. day of the month of
February. The first year of the reygne of the most excellent and noble prince
our right natural and redoubted sovereign lord king Henry the.viii.
wynkyn.de. word.
printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


